Contentment IN GODS GIFTS OR Some Sermon Notes leading to equanimitie and
contentation.

BY HENRY MASON Parson of S. Andrews Undershaft London.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN CLARKE, and are to be sold at his shop under S.
Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1630.

CONTENTMENT IN GODS GIFTS.
JOHN 20.3, 4, 5, 6. Peter therefore went forth, and that other Disciple, and
came to the Sepulcher.

So they ran both together, and the other ^^sciple did out-runne Peter, and
came first to the Sepulcher.

And he stooping down and looking in, saw the linen clothes lying, yet went
he not in.

Then comes Simon Peter following him, and went into the Sepulcher.


THis chapter does especially co^taine the Manifestation of Christ's
Resurrection: and that is here set out by 3 sorts of proofs. 1 By sensible
Tokens; 2 by the Testimony of Angels, and 3 by the Apparitions of our Lord
himself.

The sensible Tokens, which are one proof of Christ's Resurrection, are these
(1) The stone rolled away, (2) the grave open (3) the body removed, and (4)
the linen clothes left behind in the grave: and these are described in the ten
first verses. Where we may more particularly consider, how they were
represented, first to Marie Magdalen, in the two first verses; and then to
Peter and John, in the eight verses following: which is that parcel of
Scripture, which I have now taken for my Text.

And herein we may note four things concerning these two Apostles. (1) Their
diligence in seeking after Christ. v. 3, 4, and part of the 5. (2) Their
happiness in finding clear Tokens of his Resurrection, He sees the linen
clothes lie, etc. v. 6, 7, and part of the 8. (3) Their belief as touching
Christ's Resurrection, And he saw and believed: for as yet they knew not etc.
v. 8, 9. and (4.) The Consequent or conclusion of this passage, Then the
Disciples went away again to their own home.

Thus ye have the analysis and coherence of this Text. I now go back again to
consider more distinctly of the particulars, and first of the d^ligence of
these Disciples in seeking after Christ, expressed in these words; Peter
therefore went forth, and that other Disciple, etc. In which words I consider
again two things. 1 Their joint and agreeing endeavors; Peter went forth and
that other Disciple, and came to the sepulcher: so they ran both together. 2
Their several and disagreeing performances; The other Disciple did outrunne
Peter and came first, etc. The sum and scope whereof is this, that John ran
faster, and came sooner; and Peter went further in, and considered better of
the things that had happened.

In all which passage the words are so plain and easy, that I may say of
them, Aug. de Te^pore. Scr. 205. page 324. C.
as S. Augustine did of another Text of the Gospel [ Auditarem magis atque
factorem, quam Expositore^ desiderant] they need no exposition to unfold them;
they require rather uttent on to mark them, and obedience to do that which we
are taught by them. And therefore without insisting on the words, I come to
consider of some Notes.

1 And first, difference of gifts; and though they were but two, and both of
them Apostles, yet they were not qualified alike. The Text says, that John did
out-runne Peter, and came sooner to the sepulcher; but that Peter went further
in and observed all things better: and from hence learned men do gather, that
John was more quick, but Peter more stayed: and out of other Texts of the
Gospel I may add further, that John was the beloved Disciple, and one of
Christ's kindred; but Peter was the head scholar, and is named first among the
Apostles. And from hence I observe,

Good men are not alike endued with all good parts. And herein I say two
things, 1 That good men are not alike qualified among themselves, as in this
place Peter was not so quick as John, nor John so solid as Peter was. 2 That
one man is not alike qualified with all gifts; as here John was very speedy in
running to the Sepulcher, but not so wary in observing what had happened. Of
both these severally, and by themselves.

1 Good men are not alike qualified, other is. For confirmation hereof my
proofs shall be of two sorts, 1 From particular examples: and 2 from general
testimonies.

I. And first for particular examples, Judah, but none like Josiah and
Hezekiah. 2 King. 18.5. and 2 King. 23.25. and many meek men no doubt there
were among the Prophets and people of God, but none like unto Moses. Number. 12.3.
and many perfect and upright men in the world, but none like unto Job nall the
earth. Job 1.8. and many sincere and well minded in the Christian Church, but
none like minded to Timothy. Phil. 2.20. And so when the Lord speaking of his
fierce anger against the land, says that if Noah, Daniel and Job were in it,
they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness: Ezekiel. 14.14.
he implies that these were three principal men, such as the world had fe^ like
them in righteousness and holiness of life. And when S. Paul says of James,
Peter and John, that they were esteemed pillars in the Church: Galat. 2.9. he
implies, that they were principal Teachers, and prime Apostles, and men of
special worth and account. And when S. Luke says, that the Apostles and
Elders did send chosen men of their company, namely Barsabas and Silas, who
were chief among the brethren: Act. 15.22. he means that they were known
to be men of special fidelity and trust. And by these and such like examples
it appears that all good men are not qalified alike.

II. Secondly, To every one of us is given grace according to the measure of
the gift of Christ: Ephesians. 4.7. and that of our Savior Mat. 25 15.
in the Parable, where it is said, that the Master of the house, (in whose
person God Almighty is deciphered) gave to one servant five Talents, to another
two, and to another one; to everyman according to his several ability. In
these passages I note three things. 1 The several persons, to whom God
conferreth his gifts, to one, and a second, and a third, to every one of them;
says our Savior: or (as the Apostle speaks) to every one of us, who be
Gods servants. 2 The different gifts bestowed on these persons, To one he
giuethone Talent, to another two, and to another five, and to everyone a
measure of grace and of good things. 3 The proportion, that God observes in
bestowing these gifts of his: it is, says the Apostle, according to the
measure of the gift of God..i. According to that measure, which God is pleased
to give: (or as our Savior speaks) it is according to every man's several
ability.i. He gives such and so much as he sees everyman is fit to make use
of for Gods glory, and the common good. Both proportions are just and right,
and both of them should be joined together in this sort: God bestows his
gifts upon men in a different kind and measure, even according as himself
pleases; and so he pleases to bestow them, as he sees men are able to use
them for the good of his Church and the glory of his name.

These briefly be the proofs: by which it appears, that as the Apostle
says of Stars in heaven, though all be glorious in their kind, yet that one
star differs from an other star in glory: 1 Cor. 15.41. so we may say of
the Saints upon earth, that though all of them be holy and righteous, yet one
differs from another in graces and goodness. And so much for proof and
declaration of the first point.

2 The second is,

I. There are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit: and there are
differences of administrations, etc. and verse, 8. 9. etc. To one is given the
word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge, etc. and verse 17. If the
whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole were hearing,
where were the smelling? and verse 29. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? etc.
In these words the Apostle does at large set down the point in hand: but more
particularly we may note that he declares it three ways, 1 Affirmatively,
when he says, There are diversities, etc. 2 Negatively, when he says, Are
all Apostles, etc? 3 By way of comparison or similitude, when he says, Verse.
12.
For as the body is one, and has many members, etc. and, If the whole body
were an eye, where were the hearing? etc. which is, as if he should say, It is
in the mystical Body of Christ, as it is in the natural body of a man. In
the natural body there are many members, and every member has its several
office, differing and distinct from other, for the eye has the faculty of
seeing, but not of hearing or smelling; and the ear has the faculty of
hearing, but not of seeing, or speaking; and the nose has the faculty of
smelling, but not of seeing, or hearing, or tasting, etc. And so in the body
mystical; the offices of men are different, one is a Minister, another is a
Magistrate, another is a Merchant, and another a Tradesman, etc. 2 Their
intellectual gifts are different, one has a good wit, but not so good a
judgment; another has a sound judgment, but not so ready a wit; and a third
has wit and judgment, but wants memory and utterance. And lastly their
graces of sanctification are different: one is more zealous, another is more
settled, a third is more undainted, a fourth is more freehearted, etc. and every
where we may see that verified which the Apostle has said, Every man has his
proper gift of God; one after this manner, and another after that. 1 Cor. 7.7.

II. A second proof may be from experience, and examples of all ages. In
Scriptures we find that Rachel was fair, but not fruitful, and that Leah
was fruitful, but not fair, Genes. 29.17, 31. And so Moses was prudent, but
not eloquent. Exodus 4.10.16. And Solomon was wise, but not chaste. 1 King. 3.12.
and 11.1. Again Nabal was a rich man, but he was a fool. 1 Samuel 25.2, 25.
Iephtah was a man of valor, but he was a bastard. Judge. 11.1. and Naaman was
a great and an honorable man, but he was a Leper. 2 King. 5.1. And in our
days, we see some are rich but foolish; and some are wise, but unfortunate,
and some are witty, but unsettled: and some have one gift, and some another,
but no one man has all.

These be the proofs: the point will yet be more plain, and more fit for use
and application, if we consider the reasons, why God has thus disposed of his
gifts. And they be these and such like.

Reason. 1. One reason, why God does thus differently distribute his gifts, may
be, because he would show himself as a free Doner, so a wise Disposer of all
things. For if one man should have all abilities, and others few or none of any
worth; or if all men should have the highest and best places, and the other
gifts should lie undisposed of: the world might seem to be guided either by
blind fortune, or fatal necessity; but providence and wisdom in fitting all
things, one for an others use, there could none be seen. For as the Apostle
says, If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? and if the whole
were hearing, where were the smelling? so if all the commonwealth were Kings,
where were the kingdom to be governed by them? and if the whole Church were
Bishops, where were the Pastors, or where the flock that should be fed by
them? and if all Citizens were Aldermen, where were the Common^ers? and if
every freeman were a Merchant, where were the shopkeeper, and the Shoemaker,
and the Tailor, and the Water-bearer, and the Seavenger? For there is not the
meanest and most despicable of all these, but has his necessary use, so that
the greatest or the wealthiest Potentate cannot tell how to be without them.
But now that men have their love all offices and their sever all abilities, by
which they are fitted each for another service, and all for the beauty and
benefit of the whole frame, it is a plain argument, that the hand of Divine
providence had the disposing of these things; and that God it was, who has
thus Divided to every man severally, as he will, as the Apostle speaks 1 Cor.
12.11.

Reason 2. A second reason may be, because God would have men to take notice
both of their gifts and of their defects; that by the one they might learn
humility, and by the other thankfulness. For if any man had all good parts,
he would be too proud of his perfection. And as Nebuchadnezzar, when he was
become strong, and his greatness reached unto heaven, and his Dominion to the
end of the earth: then he exalted himself against God, as if all his greatness
had been of his own procuring: Is not this (says he) great Babylon, that I
have built for the house of the kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the
honor of my Majesty? Dan. 4.22.30. and 5.18, 19, so, if any of us had all or
the most abilities, we would presently conceit, that we had no great need of
any further help; and that we needed not to pray for supply of Gods favor,
who had so much of our own already. Again, if any man were destitute of all
Gods Mercies among his neighbors; he would want matter to bless God for. But
now that God has given unto men a measure of good things; and has tempered
their gifts with many other defects: it is easy to see, that they are both
indebted to God for that which they have, and stand in need of his daily
favor for supplying of that which they want. And consequently, this different
disposing, of Gods gifts, may teach us both to think humbly of our selves, and
thankfully of God.

3 A third reason may be, because God would give men occasion of mutual love
and charity each to other. For if one man had all things, he would neither
have need to receive help from others, not care to do good unto the^, of
whom he had no need. But now that one man has one ability, and another man
another ability; and no man has all, nor any man nothing: men are hereby made
fit, both to do good to others, and to receive good from them back again. This
the Apostle observed in the parts of man's body: that the eye cannot say to the
hand, I have no need of thee; nor the head to the feet, I have no need of you:
but that God has so tempered the body together, that there should be
noschisme in the body, but that the members should have the same care, one for
another. 1. Cor. 12.21, 24, 25. And so we see it is: for the eye sees, not for
it self only, but for the whole body, and the ear hears, not for it self,
but for all the other members; and so the stomach does concoct meat, and the
liver makes blood, and the heart engenders spirits, and the feet move
themselves, and each one does his proper office, not for his own use but for
the use of all the other parts: and by this means every one enjoys all the
perfections that all the rest have. And so it is in the civil body: The King
enacteth Laws, constituteth Judges, mustereth soldiers; it is not for his
own safety only, but for the safety of the whole Realm, without whose
welfare he could not long enjoy his Crown. And so the Preacher studieth the
Scriptures, not only to inform himself, but to instruct others; and the
Counselor studieth the Law, not only that he may plead for himself, but
more especially for his Clients, and the Shoemaker makes shoes, and the
Tailorgarments, and each artificer the work of his calling, that when they
have done their work they may disperse their own commodities abroad, and by
the sale of them supply themselves with the commodities of other Trades,
wherein they have no skill.

And hereby it appears that there is great reason and much wisdom to be
seen in this variety and difference of Gods gifts: it remains now only,
that we make a right use of it. And it may serve us for two uses: 1 We may
learn contentation with our own place and gifts: and 2 We should set a due
valuation of the gifts bestowed on other men, without grudging or repining.

I. We should hence learn to be contented with that place in which God has
set us, and with those gifts, which God has bestowed upon us. For if God have
disposed his gifts in different manner for such good and important reasons, and
more especially in such provident sort, as is most for our own advantage; then
we have great cause to let God alone with his own both wise and gracious
dealing. This lesson is most applicable to Murmurers and impatient people, such
as are discontented with their own lot, and grumble at the welfare of others.
Such were those Laborers in the Gospel who having received their full pay, yet
murmured against the Master of the house, Mat. 20.11
because he had given as much to them that wrought hut one hour, as he had
done to themselves; who (as they say) had borne the burden and heat of the
day. And such are they in our days, who grudge to see their equals preferred,
and themselves sit still, where they were; or to see their neighbors thrive in
wealth, and themselves to go slowly forward, or to see others respected
abroad, when themselves are passed by and neglected. And not unlike to these
are they also; who grudge against God, because their places are mean, and
their maintenance too small for men of such parts and abilities. Such men for
stilling of their querulous natures, should consider these three things.

1 That they have no right to that; which they do so greedily desire: For all
things are Gods, and he may dispose them at his pleasure. The earth is the
Lords, and the fullness thereof. Psalm. 24.1. Every beast of the forest is his;
and the cattle, that be upon a thousand hills. Psalm. 50.10. The silver is
mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord of hosts. Hagg. 2.8. And, thine
(says David) O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the
victory and the Majesty: for all that is in the heavens and in the earth is
thine: thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all. 1 Chronicles. 29.11. And if all be Gods, why does man lay claim to any thing, as his
due? Or, if nothing be due to him, why should he grudge for want of that,
whereto he has no right? Sure it was a reasonable speech of the good man of
the house, when he answered the grumbling Labourer, Is it not lawful for me to
do what I will with mine own? Mat. 20.15. And so if any of us shall murmr,
because others are advanced to offices, when we sit still in our place below;
God may answer us with the like reason, Is it not lawful for me to do what I
will with mine own preferments? And if any grumble, because others grow rich,
when themselves remain poor, God may answer them, It is not lawful for me to
do what I will with mine own riches? And if again they shall grudge, because
others are esteemed and themselves are neglected, he may answer, Is it not
lawful for me to do what I will with mine own honors? And finally, if our
present state content us not, but that we grumble for more, then God has
thought good to give; he may still reply, (and the answer is full of equity
and reason) Friend, I do thee no wrong: may not I do what I will with mine
own? And sure every man would think him a proud and presumptuous Beggar, that
should prescribe to his Benefactor, what and how much he should bestow upon
him. And therefore if any should grudge, because he has no more, God may
challenge him as an Incrocker upon his right.

2 Malcontents should consider, that the things which they have, how small so
ever they seem, are the free gifts of Gods mercy; the least whereof themselves
did no way deserve, and for every one of them they owe praises and
thankesgiving. For what have thou (says the Apostle) that thou have not
received? 1 Cor. 4.7. and David when he and his people had given liberally to
the building of Gods house, All things (says he) come of thee, O Lord, and of
thine own have we given thee. 1 Chronicles. 29.14. And if all the good things, which
we have already, be the gifts of Gods free bounty; then in all reason we
should rather give thanks for what we have, the^ grudge for that which we
want. With this consideration Moses repressed the murmuring of Korah and his
company, Seems it but a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel has
separated you from the Congregation of Israel, to bring you near unto
himself, to do the service of the Tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before
the Congregation, to minister unto them? And he has brought thee near unto
him, and all thy brethren, the sons of Levi with thee: and seek ye the
Priesthood also? Numb. 16.9, 10. And so if any shall murmur for want of greater
preferme^t, I may say unto them in the phrase of Moses, God has done well for
you already: he has put you into a calling among his people, in which ye may
live like honest men, and by serving God therein may obtain eternal life. Is
this but a small thing? will nothing content you, unless you may be
Counselors, or Barons, or Justices, or some great Commanders? And if any
grudge for want of greater wealth, I may say, God has given you competent
means, ye want not bread and water to feed you, nor clothes to hide your
shame. And think ye this but a small thing? will nothing content you, unless
ye may have a Gentleman's Lands, or an Aldermans wealth? And again, if any
shall repine, for want of more health and strength of body; I may tell them, God
has given you your life, and preserved you many days, and continued unto you
your senses and memories. And seems this but a small thing? will nothing
please you, unless ye may have the strength of a soldier? And the like may be
said of all other the like cases: so that if any grudge for want of greater or
better gifts, God may challenge him, as a neglecter of greater mercies then he
is any way worthy of.

3 Such men should consider that God bestows his blessings, as with great
difference, so with much wisdom and mercy. And 1. with much wisdom, because
he so orders them, as that each one serves for the good of another; so that
it is far better there should be some Artificers, and some Laborers, and some
Servants, then that all should be Gentlemen, or Officers of State. And 2. in
great mercle, because he has not only given us the use of other men's gifts,
but also because he does fit us with those gifts for our selves, which are
most convenient for our condition. We read of the great householder (and this
householder is the Lord of heaven:) that having called for his servants, that
he might deliver to them his goods to trade with; he gave to one five talents,
and to another two, and to another one, and to every one according to his
several ability, Mat. 25.15. which speech implies thus much, that he that
received one talent, was not able to employ two to his Masters profit; and he
that received two, was not able to deal with five: for every one had his
measure according to his ability. And the meaning of this parable is to teach
us, that God deals so with us in disposing of his gifts. He storeth his
servants with gifts, according as he sees they are fitted to use them. For
example, He gives to some men, great wealth and much riches, as he did to
Abraham and Job; and to others much honor and authority, as he did to Joseph
and Daniel; and to others much strength and valor as he did to Sampson and
Ieptah; and this he did in great wisdom and mercy, because he saw these men
were fit to do good with these gifts; Job. 29.12, 13, 15, 16. and 31.16, 17,
19.20.
as namely Job with his wealth, fed the poor, clothed the naked, made the
widows heart to rejoice, etc. And Genesis 41 56, 57. -- 47.25. -- 50.20.
Joseph by his authority was a means to save much people alive. And Judge. 15
18.
Sampson by his great strength wrought great deliverance for Israel. And so now
a days when God gives wealth, and honors, and strength unto men; we may
well suppose, that he had made those men able to use these gifts to good
purpose, saving that men out of their corrupt hearts do many times pervert the
right use of Gods gifts. And so on the contrary, God gives to some men but
little wealth; and he has reason for it, because if they had much they would
abuse it to pride or to oppression, or to hinder themselves in holy duties. To
others he gives a low or a mean place among their Neighbors, and it is,
because if they had a place of authority, they would abuse it, either to serve
great men's turns, or to oppress poor men in their causes, or to do injustice
to their Neighbors. And to others God gives a weak constitution, and a sickly
body; and it is, because if they had greater strength, they might abuse it to
intemperancy, or unclean lusts; or would take occasion by it to grow
presumptuous of long life, and careless of heaven and salvation, or to
challenge the field upon every idle quarrel. Now, if in such case God deny us
these things of the world, because he means us more good by the want of them,
then we could have had by their use: then we have great cause to bless God, as
for giving the other good things which we do enjoy, so for denying us these
seeming good things, which we did desire. Thus David did, It is good for me
(says he) that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. Psalm.
119.71. and so should every one of us think and say; It is good for me, that I
am a private man, that so I may serve God and be free from the tentations of
greater places, and it is good for me that I have a mean estate, that so I may
serve God without the cares and distractions that great riches do bring with
them. And, It is good for me that I have a sickly body, that so I may remember
mine end, and prepare for my departing out of the world. And so in all other
cases: if we do not neglect our own mercies, that state is best for us,
which God does allot unto us: and if our provision had been better in the
world, our condition might have been worse toward God.

Thus much for the first use of these Doctrines.

2 The second is, is herein, we may learn by S. Peter. He, when the Jews,
out of their zeal to their own Nation, conte^ded with him for that he had
conversed with Cornelius and his company, saying, Thou wentest in to men
uncircumcised, and did eat with them: Peter made this Apology for himself,
That God by a vision and a voice from heaven had taught him, that himself had
cleansed those men, and that Peter therefore should not esteem them as polluted
and unclean; and that for further proof hereof he had powered on them the Holy
Ghost, as he had done upon the Apostles in the beginning: and then he adds,
Forasmuch then, as God gave them the like gift, as he did unto us, who believed
on the Lord Jesus Christ; what was I, that I could withstand God? Acts 11.17.
In this passage we may note three things. (1) That God had showed
extraordinary mercy to these Pagans. They were aliens from the Common wealth
of Israel, and strangers to the Covenant of grace; and yet God had not equalled
them to the best of his servants: he gave them the like gift of the holy
Ghost, as he had done to his Apostles. (2) That S. Peter seeing this gracious
gift of God toward them, acknowledged them for his brethren, partakers of the
same grace; though this were a disparagement to his own Nation, whose glory
it was to be Gods peculiar people. (3) That if S. Peter had done otherwise, if
he had still accounted them Aliens, and forborne their company, as Infidels,
and denied them baptism, the seal of Gods covenant, in so doing he had
withstood God. And the like should be our resolution also. If God have given
any gifts or graces to any of our neighbors; whosoever the men, or whatsoever
the gifts be, though they breed us prejudice in our credit, or in our estate,
or in our preferment; yet if we slight, or debase, or deny them, we do what
in us lies, oppose and withstand God in his gracious proceedings. And
therefore, as it is said of those Jews, who at first contended with Peter; that
when they had heard his defense, they held their peace, and glorified God for
his mercy to the Gentiles, so should we do, if it do appear, that God has
enabled any, though one of our inferiors, with some eminent gifts, we should
cease grudging; we should rather glorify God for his mercy toward the^. A
duty, which if it were well learned by us all, it would preserve our neighbors
from wrong, and our selves from sin. And that we may both learn and
perform it the better, I commend both to you and my self these three rules
following.

1 Rule. If God have bestowed any singular blessing on any of our brethren,
though the height thereof may over-shadow us; yet we should readily acknowledge
it, to Gods glory who gave it, and to the praise of them that do enjoy it. Thus
the people of the Jews did in our Saviors time. For when they saw Christ to
heal a Palsy man by his bare word, they marvelled, and glorified God, who had
given such power unto men, Matt. 9.8. and Matthew. 15.31. when the multitude saw
the dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the blind
to see, they glorified the God of Israel. And in the Christian Church, when the
Disciples heard, that Saul of a persecutor was become a Preacher, they
glorified God in him, Gal. 1. ult. and Gal. 2.9. when the Apostles, Peter, and
James and John perceived the grace that was given to Paul after his conversion,
they, though this might obscure their own glory, yet gave him right hand of
fellowship, and joined with him in the work of the Ministry. And so should
we do also. If we know of any man, who out of his learning and depth of
knowledge is able to unfolde obscure points in Divinity; we should acknowledge
his gifts, and praise God, who has given such a gift unto men. And if we
meet, with another, who though he have no deep learning, yet has a ready
tongue, and can apply Scriptures to the stirring of the conscience, we should
acknowledge that gift, where we find it, and give God the praise for bestowing
such gifts upon men. And if we happen upon a third who has a ready wit to take
the present occasion of doing good, or a steedie memory, that can readily
recount what he has heard or read; we should acknowledge his happiness that
has it, and praise Gods bounty that did give it. And so, if we see a
Magistrate, who has wisdom to discern the truth, and conscience to judge
aright; or if we meet with an Artificer that is pregnant in his Art, or any
professor that has skill in his profession; we must not deny or diminish Gods
blessings in them, for fear lest they disparage us; but rather bless God, who
has given such gifts unto men.

And this indeed is our duty, but what is our practice? Surely Moses and Aaron
were appointed by God to be Governors to his people; the one for ordering the
Church, the other for governing the Commonwealth; and both for the safe leading
of the people into the promised Land: but Korah and his Company grudged them
this pre-eminence. Moses and Aaron, ye take too much upon you, all the
Congregation is holy as well as ye. Number. 16.3. And so in our days, some will
acknowledge no Bishop in the Church, nor scarce any King in the Commonwealth;
but, as if they were men that had no master, they reproach the one, and
contemn the other. But if we descend lower, Jacob obtained a better blessing
then his brother had, and Esau hated him for it. David had more honor given
him, then Saul had, and Saul eied him and envied him for it, And Joseph was
more favored of his father, then his other brethren were, and they maligned
him, and stripped off his coat and sold him into Egypt. Nay, (which is yet
more, and more wicked) Abel offered a more excellent sacrifice then Cain did,
and was better accepted then he was; and therefore Cain hanged down the head,
and was wroth with his brother, and in the end murdered him? And wherefore slew
he him? says S. John: and he answers the question with his own words,
because his own works were evil, and his brothers righteous 1 Io. 3.12. And
so is it among us. The Courtier envieth his fellow, if he stepp into an office
sooner then himself: The Citizen envieth his neighbor if by good husbandry
he grow richer the^ himself. The Rich man envieth those of his own rank, if
they be more liberal and free-hearted then himself, yea and the Parishioner
envieth his or her pew-fellow, if they be taken up to an higher Seat then
themselves. And (which exceeds in impiety and sin) the profane man hates
every man about him, if he be more charitable in doing good, or more
conscionable in catechizing of his children, and more constant in holy duties
with his family. And why, but because his own works are evil, and his
neighbors good? And what then may we say of such men, but that if God be good
in bestowing his gifts, these men are wicked that malign and debase them. Our
rule is, If any man excel in any gift, in sharpness of wit, in readiness of
speech, in uprightness of life etc; we should bless God, who has bestowed
such a gift on one of our brethren, the benefit whereof may redound to our
selves also.

2 A second rule is, If we see any, though otherwise much our inferior, yet
that he is gifted in some one kind better then our selves; we should
acknowledge him therein to be our superior, because God has pleased to make
him so: and not disdain to receive help from him in that wherein he is above
us. Thus Apollos did, of whom S. Luke relates thus; A certain Jew named
Apollos, an eloquent man and mighty in the Scriptures, came to Ephesus. This
man was instructed in the way of the Lord, and being fervent in the Spirit, he
spoke and taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only the baptism
of John. And he began to speak boldly in the Synagogue: whom when Aquila and
Priscilla had heard, they took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way
of God more perfectly. Act, 18.24, 25, 26. In this passage we may consider (1)
the faculty or ability of this man, He was an eloquent man, mighty in the
Scriptures, fervent in the Spirit, and one that taught Christ diligently and
boldly: great blessings and principal gifts of God. (2) We may consider this
defect, notwithstanding his great gifts. He knew only the Baptism of John.i.
he had not been taught, nor did know more of Christ, than what John B. was
wont to teach them that came to his baptism: and that was but a little in
co^pariso^ either of that which Christ himself did teach while he was on the
Earth, or which the holy Ghost had infused into the Believers, after Christ's
Ascension into heaven: so that Aquila and Priscilla, a plain couple of
Christians, brought up at an handiecraft; knew more of the grounds of
Christianity, then this learned man did. Apollos was otherwise of far better
parts; yet in this point he came short of an Artificer and his wife. (3) We
may note the behavior of these good people in this case. Apollos joined
himself to Aquila and Priscilla, and they expounded unto him the way of God
more perfectly. Though he were a learned Divine, yet he scorned not to learn
more from them that were much short of his learning. And so should we do. The
deep Scholar should not disdain the plain Preacher: but rather learn of
him, if he can apply a Scripture better then himself. And the popular Preacher
that carries multitudes after him, should not malign the better learned, but
rather learn of him, if he can dispute more solidely then himself. And the
rich Citizen and the great Merchant, may not contemn the direction of his
poor neighbor, but learn from him, if he have more skill in some cases then
they, which be his superiors, have.

And this is our duty in this case: I would I might say that so is our
practice also. But Solomon tells us, that when a City was besieged, without
strength to hold out, a poor man by his wisdom delivered the City: but
withal that there was none that remembered that poor man: and then he adds
further, as a daily experiment, that the poor man's wisdom is despised, and
his words are not heard. Eccles. 9.15, 16. implying hereby that the poor man's
wisdom, is not only forgotten, when he has done good by it; but that it is
neglected also, when he gives good counsel for the present occasion. And so
we find in the Gospel, that Christ's Doctrine was contemned because his
parentage was mean, Luke 4.22, 24. And just so it is now a days, many a man's
good counsel is despised, because himself is of mean place, and despicable
condition. And in this respect we have just cause to blame many men: but their
pride is intolerable, who think they may reproach their Reverend fathers,
because God is no Accepter of persons; and yet despise their brethren because
they are somewhat younger in years, though no whit their inferior in gifts.
Our rule is, that though a man be otherwise our inferior, yet if he have some
one ability in which we come short of him; we should therein acknowledge him to
be our better, and not scorn to make use of his gifts for our own good.

3 A third rule is, If any man be much our inferior either in calling or in
graces; yet we may not despise his meandness, because of our greater and
better endowments. For if God in wisdom did see it fit, and in mercy has so
appointed it for the common good, that one should have both a lower place, and
some meaner gifts, and another should have both an higher calling, and better
endowments: it will be our wisdom; I am sure, it is our duty, to acknowledge
Gods providence and goodness, as well in the meaner, as in the greater and
more honorable callings. My meaning is not, that the labourer should be
equalled with the Master workema^, nor the serving man with his Lord or master,
nor the artificer with the Mercha^t, nor the Commoner with the Alderman. No;
God (as I said before) has made a difference, and set a distance between
them: and far be it from me, to break down Gods pale and partition wall. I
wish that every one may enjoy the emine^cie, that God has bestowed upon him:
but I say withal that the poorest has his station and his place among his
neighbors, which because God has invested him into, men may not without sin
thrust him out of it. For example, the poorest man that is, has three
prerogatives given him from God. 1 God has made him a man, endued with a
reasonable soul, and portraied out after Gods own Image; and we may not
deny him a right in those things, which belong to life and livelihood, and are
due to the nature of mankind. Secondly, God has made him a Christian, and
has imparted unto him the merits and the redemption of Jesus Christ: and we
may not deny unto him a right to the word and to the Sacraments and salvation.
Thirdly, God has made him a member of the Commonwealth, and has appointed him
a Calling, in which he may do service for the common good; and we may not
deny him the protection of laws, and the right of a subject. And therefore if
we despise any such man, as if he were nobody, and stood only for a Cipher in
the account; we shall thereby dishonor God, who with much wisdom, and in
great mercy, has appointed him to be what he is. To this purpose Solomon
says, He that mocketh the poor, reproacheth him that made him. Prove. (...),
that if any man contemn the poor, because he is poor, or of low degree, the
reproach cast against the creature, lights upon the Creator, who has made
him to be such. And so, and by the same reason I may say, If any man contemn a
plain Christian, because he is not quick-witted; or an honest meaning man,
because he is not hot-spirited; or a country bred man, because he is not
civilized; or a Citizen, because he is not of a Gentle race; or an Artificer,
because he is not in place of command; or a Daylabourer, because he is not
free of the City, etc. every such scorner of his poor neighbor, reproacheth
God himself, whose good pleasure it is, as well that some should be in mean
places, as that other should have higher; and all for the good of the Church,
and the honor of the Almighty. And from hence it is, that Job says, that he
despised not the cause of his manservant, nor of his maidservant, when they
contended with him. Job 31.13. And ver. 15. he gives a reason for it. For
(says he) did not he that made me in the womb, make him? and did not one
fashion us in the womb? And in like sort should we say and do. We may
despise no man's place or calling, as long as it is of Gods making. But if we
have to deal with a servant, or the poorest boy about the streets; we must
acknowledge him not only a creature, whom God has endued with an
immortallsoule; nor only respect him as a Christian, who^ God has appointed
to be heir of eternal life; but also as a member of the commonwealth or
church, who in his place may do service for the common good. And consequently
we may deny no man the right, that belongs to such a place and calling.

And this again is our duty; but where is our practice answerable thereunto*
Surely Ahab thought Naboth unworthy of so good a vineyard, as might be fit to
make a Kings gardon. And therefore he and his Queen turned Naboth out of his
inheritance, nay took him away out of the world, that they might enjoy his
possessions. And so now a days, there be men, that think lands and
inheritances to be too good for an Hospital; and Lordships and Honors not to
be sit for a company of Students: and what (say they) should Almesmen do with
such dignities as may better beseem a Lord or a Gentleman? And so they do, at
least they would turn them out of their inheritances to feed upon the bare
Common. Again, the Prophets complain of the Judges of their time, that they
did not judge, no^ not the cause of the fatherless and the widow. And so among
(...), if a poor neighbor should have a controversy with a rich merchant, or
a shopkeeper with an Alderman, or a common subject with a Lord or a Privy
Counselor, ye would easily guess which way the balla^ce would be swayed. It
is seldom seen, but that the greatness of the person weighs down the goodness
of the cause; and the poor man is not permitted to enjoy the benefit of the
Law, and the liberty of the Land, where he lives. Again, Nathan tells
David in a parabolicall resemblance, that a Rich man took away, the only lamb
which a poor man had; that therewith he might give entertainment to his
friend. But in our days we find it in real performance, that Great men do
not seldom take away the poor man's right, to defraie their own charges. Nay,
our age proceeds yet further in this impiety. It may be seen in more
Parishes then one, that Great men think their poor neighbors unworthy of any
seat in the Church; and thrust them out of their fathers house, that
themselves may be placed alone in the chiefest rooms: a parallel example
whereto I have not yet found either in Scriptures, or in humane stories; and I
pray God, it may spread no further, the^ to the distempered people of this
corrupt age. But howsoever, our rule is; If God have given us superiority or
emine^cie above others; we may enjoy it, with Gods good will and liking: but so
as that we forget not, that our poorest neighbors are men, are Christians,
are members of the civil Body: and therefore we cannot without wronging of
men, and dishonoring of God, deny them those privileges, which belong to such
places. And thus much for the first Note, and the two points of doctrine
arising from it.

Secondly, Peter and John had their several gifts, and each not a little
differing from other; yet they quarrelled not one the other, nor did one seek
to outvie and obscure his fellow; but like friends, with one heart and mind,
they went out together, they ran both together, and both of them came to the
sepulcher, and looked in, and beheld what had happened; and having done what
they came for, they departed, like loving friends to their own home. By all
which it appears, that though they had differing gifts, yet they had agreeing
minds; and did join together in seeking after Christ. And hence the
Observation is, that

Good Christians and true disciples of Christ must not break the unity of the
Spirit,

The proofs that I will bring for further confirmation of this point, are of
two sorts: (...) such as conclude the point in the general extent: and 2 such
as prove it by several and particular instances.

I. proofs, we have a plain place in the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.24, 25. The
words are, God has tempered the body together, having given more abundant
honor to that part, which lacked, that there should be us schism in the body,
But that the members should have the same care one for another. In these words
we may note three things for our purpose. (1) Gods workmanship in framing the
natural body, he has tempered it together, says the Apostle: he means
that as God has made several parts, each of which has its different office,
so he has fitted and (if I may so speak) has sodered the^ together in such
sort, as every one does serve for the use and benefit of another. (2) Gods
wisdom in framing this temper; and that is, he has so tempered it, that he
has given the more abundant honor to that part which lacked.i. whereas some
parts were of meaner use, or less comely feature, he has withal graced them
with some other privilege, that may procure them as much honor. For example,
If any part be noisome and unseemely to look on, he has set that in such a
corner, as where it may be hid and removed from the senses. And if any part
be made to serve for a base or mean office, he has made it to be of so much
the more necessary use: so that a man may better spare an eye, or an hand or an
ear, the^ the smallest sinke-hole, by which the filth of the body is purged.
Thus God showed great wisdom, in tempering the whole body with some
proportionable respects, that might commend it. Thirdly, we may note the end of
this temperature: and that, as it is set down in the Text, is twofold. 1
Negative, that there shoud be no schism or no disagreement among the members.
And 2 affirmative, that the members should have the same care one for another.
Now (to make application of this) long discourse to our purpose) we must not
think, that when the Apostle does thus particularly set down the nature of man's
body, with the several offices and uses belonging unto it, that he meant to
read us an Anatomy lecture, or to teach us principles of Philosophy; as
Aristotle when he wrote de partibus animalium: but that by a comparison from
the natural body of man, he meant to teach Divinity lessons concerning the
Mystical body of Christ; as may and does appear by the direct scope and
intendment of this Chapter. And if thus we understand the text (and so in all
reason we must;) then we have this Doctrine from it, that in the mystical
body which is the Church, several men have their several gifts and their
distinct functions, yet so tempered and fitted together; as that there need
not, nor there ought not to be any schism or discord among men, because of
their diverse and disagreeing gifts: Nay rather the difference of gifts is a
good reason to stablish the agreement of their minds: because every one having
use of another, and benefit from the gifts of another, all should have a joint
care to uphold and preserve each other. And so in conclusion, diversity of
gifts is so far from causing of distraction, that it ought in all reason, to
breed unity of affections. And this for the first kind of proofs.

II. difference of opinions. 2 difference in Christian virtues: and 3
difference in growth and in degrees of grace.

I. The first is Difference in knowledge and in opinions: for God does not give
a like measure of knowledge unto all men. Some are Babes, and have need to be
fed with milk; and others are grown men, and can digest stronger meat: as
the Apostle distinguishes Hebr. 5.12, 13, 14. And his meaning is, that some
Christians were so unskilful in the Christian faith, that they had need to be
taught their first principles; and others were so well grounded, that they
could understand deep and dark Mysteries. Besides, among men, who are equal
in habitual skill, yet God sometime reveals a truth to one, which he
imparteth not unto another: and hence it happens, that though men's habitual
knowledge may be alike, yet they are not equal in the actual apprehension of
some truths. And by reason of this difference in men's knowledge, there grows
a difference in their opinions also: as the Apostle observed it in his own
time, that those who were strong in the faith,.i. who knew their Christian
liberty, and what it imported; these believed that they might lawfully eat of
such meats as Moses had forbidden, but they who were weak in the faith, and
did not fully understand the freedom that Christ had obtained for us; these
did content themselves to eat herbs, rather then to touch any thing, which
the Law did not allow, as appears in the Apostles Text Romans 14.2 etc. These
and such differences in opinion, as these be, there are many times found among
the best and best learned of Gods servants. And these differences in opinion,
do many times breed discord in affection; and cause endless strife among men
of the same Church; each side striving more for victory then for truth: and
neither side enduring his company, who crosses them in the least fancy. But
the Apostles rule is to the contrary; Let not him that eats despise him that
eats not; and let not him that eats not, judge him that eats, Romans 14.3.
In which words it is worth our noting, to see, how the Apostle does fit his
lessons or rules to the condition of the differing and dissenting parties. For
he that eats in the Apostles phrase, is such a one, as being well instructed
in the use of his Christian liberty, was well assured that he might lawfully
eat of things forbidden by the Law, because Christ had freed him from that
legal bondage. Now such a man, so well grounded in the rules of faith, would
be apt to despise others, who knew not so much, and to esteem them as shallow
and soft-witted men. And therefore the Apostle fitteth him with this lesson,
Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not. Contrariwise, he that did
think himself tied to observe Moses his Law, and therefore out of tenderness
of conscience; and for fear of offending God, did abstain from the prohibited
meats: this man would be apt to censure others, who did eat of those meats,
as Libertines and loose livers, and men of large consciences. And therefore the
Apostle fitteth him with an answerable lesson, Let not him that eats not,
judge him that eats. So in conclusion, though the one side had the truth, yet
the Apostle will permit neither side to quarrel or censure the other for
differences in opinion. And the like rule the same Apostle gives us, Philip.
3.15. Let as many, as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in any thing ye be
otherwise minded, God shall reveile it unto you. Nevertheless, whereto we
have attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing. In
which words I note two things: (1) That the Apostle voucheth the truth of his
doctrine to be such, as that no well grounded Christian can deny it to be
true; Let as many, as be perfect, be thus minded. (2) He directs us what to
do, in case any man do dissent from us in this truth: and that is first to
expect till God do enlighten him and show him his error: and secondly, to
keep friendship and communion with him, and to join with him in serving God
according to those common truths, wherein both sides agree. This is the
Apostles charitable and peaceable advise, in case that men, agreeing with us in
the maine grounds of faith, do dissent from us in some other opinions. Which
rule of charity, if it were followed in these quarrelling days, the peace of
the Church would not be so rent in pieces, as each day it is by factious and
censorious spirits. But ye my Brethren, that ye may love peace the better,
consider, I pray you, that the Apostle permits not them, who have the truth
on their side, to break the bond of peace, no, not with them, whom they know
to be in an error. And how much more unsufferable then is it, if they who are
erroneous in their opinions, and idle in their proofs; be withal both
obstinate and censorious? And yet usually so it is. For we find, that the
Egyptians were scrupulous of eating with the Hebrews, when the Hebrews, for
ought we read, were not afraid of eating with them, Genesis 43.32. And John.
9.22, 23. and 12.42. and 16.2.
the Scribes and Pharisees excommunicated Christ, and all that acknowledged him
to be the Messiah. But Matt. 23.2, 3.
our Lord acknowledged the Scribes and Pharisees, though corrupt. Teachers, yet
to sit in Moses his chair, and to be lawful pastors of the Church, whom men
were bound to obey. And in aftertimes, the Donatists were so fierce and violent
against the Catholics, that In baresin schisma verterunt, tanquam Ecclesia
Christi. de loto terraru^ orb perierit, ubi futura promissa est: atque in
Africa and Donati part re manserit. -- Audent rebaptizare Catholi os, ubi se
amplius baereticos esse firmarunt: quum Ecclesiae Catholicae universae
placuerit, nec in ipsis baereticis baptisma communc rescendere, Aug. de haeres.
cap. 69.
they would not allow them to be a Church, or to have any true baptism: and
therefore, if any one fell from the Catholics to the Donatists side, they
baptized him over again, as if his former baptism were nothing worth. But the
Catholics acknowledged the Donatists, though heretics, yet to have a Church
in which true baptism was administered. And Quid vobis vultis saciamus, qui
quando vobis dicimus, ut causam nostram and vestram patienter audiatis, no^
nostis nisi superbire and insanire? Aug. epist. 166. ad Donatistas page 257. C
and ibid. page 258. G. Vestri Episcopi conventi a nobis, nunquam nobis^um
pacifice confer vol^erunt, quasi fugientes cum peccatoribus loqui.
when the Catholics offered them a quiet and Christian Conference, they
insolently rejected them, as unworthy to be talked with. Yea and when the V.
Opratum adv. Parmen. lib. 1 in principio: and August, in Psalm 32. Conc. 2. Page
81. and cont. Gaudent. l 2. c. 11 p. 243. C.
Catholics called them Brethren, they scornfully refused the name of
brotherhood at their hands. In all which who does not see, that pride and
error did still go together; and that the true believers showed charity
toward their Adversaries, when the enemies of Gods truth were implicable and
peevish, and would accept no terms of pacification and concord? And just so is
the case now a days between us and our Adversaries in religion.

For first, they of the Roman Church do condemn us for miscreants and
Castawaies; and allow us no place neither in heaven nor in the church: but we,
as the true Catholics were wont to do, grant the^ to be a Church, though it
be a bad one; and confess that in that Church there is See the learned answer
of R. B. to Fishers Relation of his third Conference page 67, 68, 69.
a possibility to be saved, though it be with difficulty and much danger. They
again cast out our name as abominable and unworthie their naming: but we say
of them as S. Augustine did of the Donatists, We will Tune esse desine^t
fratres nostri, si desierint dicere, Pater noster, Aug. in Psalm. 32. concio. 2.
page 81. A.
not cease to call them brethren; as long as they do not cease to say, Our
father. And as Optatus said of those heretics, so we say of these, Sunt sieve
dubio fratres, qua^ vis non boni Optat adu: Parme. l. 1 in prine. fol. 2.
They be our brethren, though they be but bad ones. But what? And do we
hereby give any such advantage to the Adversaries, as that either our brethren
at home should blame us for our lenity, or our enemies abroad should glory in
our testimony? Surely, all the advantage, that the Romanist gain by this, is
the same, that the Aeygptians had against the Hebrews, and the Jews against
Christ, and the Donatists against the Orthodox Church. And if they will glory
herein, they shall glory in their pride, which wise men will say, is all one
as to Ioh. 13.35.
glory in their shame. As for us, we hold it more honor, to glory in our
Masters livery, which is to show charity toward all that profess his name.
But yet somewhat to mitigate their pride, we tell them further that if any of
them be saved, it is by virtue of that common truth wherein they agree with us;
it is not by that peculiar faith, which they hold of their own. And if they
will renounce those errors, which they have mingled with this truth, their
faith will be the more pure, and their salvation not so doubtful. Howsoever
we are still resolved to keep the Apostles rule, which is, Ephe. 4.15.
to follow the truth in love: that is, so to defend the truth as that we do not
break the bond of peace, where we have any means to keep it.

Secondly our unkind brethren of the German Churches, though they agree with
us in the maine points of faith, yet do scornefully reject our desire of their
friendship and brotherhood. Audio Lutherum cum at^oci invectiva. no^ ta^ in
vos, quam in nos omnes prorupisse. Calvin ad Bullinger. Epist. 57.
Luther began with bitter invectives against Calvin and his fellows; but Saepe
dicere solitus s^, Etiasi me Diabolu^ vocaret, me tamen hoc isti honoris
habiturum, ut insigne^ Det, servum agnoscam. Calvin. ibi.
Calvin did give so in (...) respect to Luther, as that beside the esteem of
his gifts, he was wont to say of him; Although Luther should call me Devil,
yet will I do him the honor to acknowledge him for an excellent servant of
God. Thus these two Chiefetaines began; and their followers continued to tread
in their Leaders steps. In the conference at Mompelgart (where Beza, Musculus,
and others did appear for the French Church, and Iacobus Andreae and Lucas
Osiander with their Associats for the other side) when after some time spent in
disputation, the differences between the^ could not be accorded; Beza Rogat
ut Bezam cum suu Su^mystis profratribus agnoscant, and dextra sfraternitat is
ifsis porrigere velint. Colloq. Mompelg. in fine page 566.
desired of the Divines of Wittenberg, that they would acknowledge him and his
fellow Ministers for their Brethren, and would give them the right hands of
brotherhood; the other Divines made them a churlish and uncharitable answer,
-- eos profratribus agnoscere non possint. ibid. page 667.
that they could not acknowledge them for their brethren. And in after times,
others of each side, have showed the like temper: as whosoever shall desire to
see, needs no more but to read the bitter writings of Meisner. Philos p.
Sobrit par. 1. Sect. 2. cap. 3. pa. 547.
Meisnerus, and the temperate and charitable judgment of Vedel. Kational.
Theolog. l. 1 c. 7. pa. 67, 68. and ca. 9 page 84.
Vedelius; the one professor in Wittenberg, and the other in Geneva. I say no
more, but only wish that they who approve the faith, that is taught in the
French Church, would imitate the moderation and sobriety of the learned Doctors
who have taught and maintained it. And so I leave this first difference, which
is in Opinions and judgment.

II. The next is, a difference in Christian virtues. For though all true
Christians be sanctified in every part, and have a portion of all necessary
graces yet God distributeth these graces in such a different manner and
measure, that in several men some are eminent and glorious, and other are
scarce conspicuous or to be seen. For example, to one man God gives a good
measure of patience, but not so much courage; to another he gives courage for
the truth, but not so much moderation or judgment; and to another he gives
mildnes of spirit, but not so much zeal in Gods service: so that we may say of
one, that he is patient, or moderate, or of a meek mind; but not so fitly,
that he is zealous, or courageous, or constant in his purpose. And in this case
I say, that difference of such virtues should not cause distraction of mind;
but in this diversity of graces we should serve God with unity of mind. To
this purpose S. Augustine has a good note upon the stories of Zaccheus and the
Centurion, both of them mentioned in the Gospel. Of the Centurion we read;
that when Jesus was coming to his house, he sent friends to stop him by the
way: for (says he) Lord I am not worthy, that thou should enter under my
roof. Luke. 7.6. But for Zaccheus, Christ had no sooner called to him,
Zaccheus make haste, and come down; for to day I must abide at thy house: but
he made have, and came down, and received him with joy. Luke. 19.5, 6. In
which stories we may note, that these two, both of them good men, did show two
diverse, and in some sort contarie virtues: The Genturion hindered Christ from
coming to his house, because he thought himself unworthie of his presence: and
herein he showed much humility and reverence to his Savior. But Zaccheus at
the first word received Christ into his house, Neque litig^ve^unt interse ant
quisquam little se alteri praposuit, Zacchaeus et ille Centurio, quum alter
little gandens in domum suam susceperit Dominu^, alter dixerit Nosum dignus, ut
intres subiectu^ meum. Amho Salvatose bonorificates diverse and quast,
contrary ^odo, ^mbopecc^tis miseri, ambo misericordiam coaseqanti. Aug epist
118. ad Ianuar. ca. 3. page, 190
and entertained him with all readiness and by this he showed great affection
and love to his Lord. Now concerning the difference in their affections, S.
Augustines observation is this; [ Neque litigaverunt inter se, etc.] These two
good men, for all their difference in honoring Christ did not contend the one
against the other, nor did either of them prefer himself before his fellow.
Had they been like some hot spirits in our days, Zaceheus might have blamed
the Centurion either for incivilitie, or for lack of faith, that he would
forbid Christ to come into his house: and the Centurion might have condemned
him again for his boldness or want of due reverence that he durst receive the
Lord of glory into a sinful cotage. But non litigaverunt, they strove both of
them how they might best honor their Redeemer; they did not one strive against
another for honoring him in a different manner. No, says this good father,
both of them did honor Christ in a diverse, and in some sort contrary manner;
and both of them being miserable by reason of their sins, did both of them
obtain mercy to free the^ from their sins. This is the note of S. Augustine
upon the different qualities of these holy men. A like, but more direct note
may be observed in the different and contrary behavior of John the Baptist,
and Jesus our Savior. Of them both we thus read in one place; John came
neither cating nor drinking; and they say, He has a devil. The Son of man
came eating and drinking; and they say, Behold, a man gluttonous and a
wine-bibber, a friend of Publicanes and sinners. Matt. 11.18, 19. But what said
they two, that lived in this so different a manner? What said John and Christ,
the one of the other? Why, John said of Christ; Behold the Lamb of God, which
takes away the sins of the world. And This is he, of whom I said, There
comes a man after me, who is preferred before me, etc. John 1.27, 29. the
latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose. Mar. 1.7.
And Jesus contrarily, he said of John; He is a Prophet, and more then a
Prophet. -- and, among the^, that are borne of women, there has not risen a
greater, then John the Baptist. Matt. 11.9, 11. In which passages, we may for
our learning consider three things: (1) The different practice of John and
Jesus, and their contrary course of life; John came neither eating nor
drinking, and the Son of man came eating and drinking. The meaning is, that
John lived an austere life, and kept a kind of continual fast, as became him
who was the Preacher of Repentance: but Jesus lived a sociable life, and kept
company with men in a friendly manner, as was fit for him who brought the glad
tidings of the Gospel. Such was their different and contrary course of life.
(2) Note, the Censure which the Jews gave of the^ both. They were pleased with
neither of them: John for his austerity lived not like a man; he doubtless had
a devil: and Jesus for his familiarity, lived not like a sober man, he was a
glutton and a wine-bibber. This was their Censure. (3) Observe the mutual
testimony, that Jesus and John did give, the one of the other: Jesus said of
John, He is more then a Prophet, and the chief among the sons of women: and
John said of Jesus, that he was more then a man, and so far above himself,
that he was not worthy to untie his shoes. [ Non litigaverunt inter se] These
two rare men of very different qualities and conditions, yet did not strive
one against another; they strove how each might most honor the other. And this
may teach us, what we should do. If we cavil at other men's virtues, and
deprave their doings, when they agree not to our fancy, we are not like either
Jesus or John: we resemble rather the Scribes and Pharisees who were pleased
neither with fulness nor fasting. But if we will imitate John and Jesus, then if
we see in diverse men different virtues, we must acknowledge God in them all.
And if one man be sociable like Christ, when we are severe like John; and if
another be humble like the Centurion, when we are hearty like Zaccheus; and if
a third be meek like Moses, while we are zealous like Phineas: we may not
judge them, because they agree not with us; but rather we should praise God,
who by such different te^pers, has found the more ways to set forth his own
glory.

And thus much for the second Difference.

III. The third is difference in perfection or growth in grace. For among
Christ's Scholars, some are children in understanding, and others are of ripe
age; and, some are babes in Christ, and in great part but carnal still, and
others are spiritual, and well grown Christians: as the Apostle also has
observed 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. Heb. 5.13.14. And this difference though it make a
plain distinction in the graces of God, yet it should make no distraction in
the minds of men, For so the Apostle says, Him that is weak in the faith,
receive, but not to doubtful disputations. Romans 14.1. and, Brethren, says
he, if a man be over-taken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such
a man in the spirit of meekness. Gal. 6.1. And of our Savior it is said, A
bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench. Mat.
12.20. The meaning is, that our Lord does not contemn the smallest sparks of
grace, nor despise the least degree of goodness, wheresoever he finds it. And
agreeably hereunto S. Augustine gives his counsel. For being requested by a
godly Matrone to give her some rules of prayer, for her self and her family;
in which there were diverse others of the same sex: among other things he
tells her, Aug epist 121. ad Probum. cap ult page 214.
that fervencie in prayer is much helped by fasting and chastening of the body;
for the right use whereof he gives her this caveat, [ Faciat quaeque vestrum,
quod poterit,] Let everyone of you do, what she shall be able. Some can fast
more, others who are of a weaker constitution, cannot do so much: let every
one do as she may, without harm to her health, which God desires not. He
adds further, (which is most proper to this purpose) [ Quaeminus valet, non
impediat plus valentem; and quae plus valet, non urgeat minus valentem.] Let
not her, that is less able, pull her back that can do more; and let not her,
that is more able, press her forward, that cannot do so much.

This was the wise counsel of that learned Father: which if we would embrace
and follow, it would increase our piety toward God, our charity toward men,
and our own contentation and peace. For so we should serve God with united
hearts, bless God for his mercies bestowed upon our brethren, and possess
that peace in our own souls, which would not only make us content with our
own gifts, but would teach us to make use of other men's also. And so the
difference of Gods blessings, distributed among his servants, would be as so
many distinct voices, which make the better melody, and the sweeter music.

I beseech you then, let no diversity of Gods gifts cause any distraction in
your minds: but especially, let not frivolous respects of greatness, or idle
conceits of your own worth, or selfe-liking co^parisons about trifles, hinder
your mutual accord in Gods service. A thing which I do the rather admonish you
of: because I hear, that abroad among our neighbors, and I see that at home
among our selves, there is sprung up a profane kind of pride, which like that
of the Pharisees, makes some brethren, but more sisters to strive for the
uppermost rooms in our Churches. One thinks her self good enough to sit
with her betters; and another thinks her self too good to sit with her
fellows; and a third is not content to sit aloft, unless she may sit alone;
as if she were sorry to have any body to accompany her toward heaven. Yea and
many of inferior sort profess their discontent, because they are not placed
according to their worth; as if they meant to tell the world, that they think
better of themselves then all their neighbors do besides. But I beseech you,
lay aside these great thoughts, at least when ye come into Gods house; and
consider a little what Peter and John did. They had their different gifts, both
of mind and of body and of place; and yet they ran together to seek Christ,
do ye think that there is so much distance between you and your next
neighbors, that ye will not sit together to hear Christ while he is teaching
you the way of salvation? Again, considerwhat David said; I was glad (says
he) when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord. Psalm.
122.1. Good man! he rejoiced to have the company of his neighbors in serving
of God: and if we had his spirit, we would be of his mind. We would be
glad if we might have our neighbors to bear us company in Gods house, and
glad if we had any spare room in our seats to entertain them in: that so
we might sit together, and hear together, and pray together, and go
cheerfully together toward heaven and eternal happiness. For surely, none
shall ever enter into heaven, but they which have so much humility, as to
think that their neighbors may be their fellows in this journey, and so
much charity, as to desire their company to go with them thither. And so I
have done with these Meditations: I only now pray, The God of peace grant us to
be like-minded in Christ Jesus. Amen.

Page 48. Line. 16. for not equalled r. now equalled 58.16. and more r. or more
61.10. this defect r. his defect 97.6. implicable r. implacable 98. in the
margin fine r. sine 99.4. Romanist r. Romanists 107.7. the difference r. this
difference.


