The dysclosi^g of the Canon of the popysh Mass / with a sermon annexed unto
it / of the famous Clerk / of worthy memory.D. Marten Luther.

Apocal. xviii. Come away from her my people, that ye be not partakers i^ her
sins, yt ye receive not of her plages

All honor, praise and glory be given only to God.

To the Reader
From the beginning or at the first e^traunce, Genes. 1.
after the creacion (good christian reader) God in him self, foreseing the
wardnes of man's heart, John. 2.
and how prone and ready it was unto wyckednes, and how oblyuious of ye
benefytes that he received of his lord Gods hands, Esaias. 1.
became not thankful unto his mighty God: Roman. 2.
But vanysshed in the Imagynacions of his froward fromake, Jeremy. 3.
and worshipped the workmanship of the hands of a caranous carcas, subdued to
all vanytie, and forgot his creator: the which vngentelnes has been of al
other vices, Exodus 32.
most earnestlye reprehended by the mouth of God even from the begi^ning, and
not only reprehended, but also with sharp threats and co^mynacions, of his
most sacred word, Roma. 1.
appoi^ted to eternal dampnacio^. Besides that he gave them up to their hearts
lusts: Sentere. 28
and plaged them with swearde, famyne and pestyle^ce. Therefore (good christen
reder) lift up thine eyes, ande behold, the abhomynacyon of Idolatry,.1.
John. 2.
so shamefullie used in these days of our time:.1 Thessalonians. 2.
and not only used, but with force and main fortefyed ande vpholden, Psalm.
2.
with fire and faggot, crudelytie and strength: and yt so sore vpholden, Math.
15.
that the eternal word of God, is clerelie banysshed, exyled and put too
bed. How sayste thou to this detestable, and among all other, the most
shameful mase and gasi^g stock, Sapien. 14.
the wicked mass the vpspryng of Satan, the inuencio^ of the deuel, the fair
fruit of the Roomysh raueni^g Antechryst, Daniel. 9.
and the laderhous of all his shaven posterity? Hieremy. 15.
Behold it, and abhor it: or else take it for a warni^g, God will abhor
the, and can the into ye lake that burns with fire and brymstone. Apocal.
20.
Wherefore I heart lie beseech the, with all brotherly affection, Phill. 2.
mark in this little volume or few lines, the tail of the Dragon, of Gog and
Magog, the wasters of ye pore flock of Christ, Ezechiol. 3^
the maynteyners of myschefe, the studyers of supersticyon, the fortefyers of
the malignaunt Church, ye gylders of the triple Crown: Psalm. 26
and thou shalt playnelye parceiue in an hondreth words, Coloss. 2.
the shameful legerdemayne and crafty Iuggli^ge, that cost the^ the study not
of a few ho^dreth years, Math. 13-
and the sweat of many brows: for the which both their pot and spitte,
walk the merelier, Exodus 16.
unto this hour. It is called the Canon of the myscheffat (of the Mass I
would say) that is to say, the rule and order that they have taken to fynish
their slain sacrifyce; and too bring it to an end. But what turmoyling,
struggling, wrastlinge, Luke. 11.
quid pro quo, with my ways is best, hold thy hand fro my throat, there was
till they had brought it to ye mysshapen form, that it is now in: Polidorus
Virgilius does playnelye manifest. Lib. 5. Cap 10.
Wheru^to also you have a sermon a^nexed, of ye famous Clerk, and discloser of
ye Popes Iuggli^g box, and of worthy memory. D. Marte^ Luther. Read it (I
pray ye) with a sober Judgment. And confer ye Idolatries of ye old time, with
the abominable Idolatry in our time, after the coming of Christ, the pure and
true light: and you shall se it far pass. Math. 6.
Oh most mighty father, for ye tender love yt thou barest to ye wholl world,
John. 3.
in that thou delyueredst thyn only and sweet son Jesus Christ, Hebr. 10
that holy and sufficient sacryfice, Math. 21.
for the life of the whole world. Have mercy upon us and deliver us, from ye
snares of Satan, and from the deuelysh yoke of this detestable Idolatrye: and
open the eyes of our Magystrates, Psalm. 45.
that they may prosperously, Coloss. 4.
fortefie thy blessed word (as theye have bego^ne gracyouslie) and to deface
the bloudye kingdom of Antechryste. And send the co^munaltie obedient
stomachs and hearts, Apocal. 18.
to fortefye their Princes quarrel, Roma. 13.
in all godlynes and right. And that all christian reames, Timoth. 1.
may accord in peace and unity, and so to be incorporate in ye mystical
body of God almyghtye, Roma. 12.
whose head is christ Jesus. To whom I co^mytt ye, with the increase of his
knowledge, Amen.

Read, and then Judge.

The dysclosynge.
We hu^blie pray and beseech ye most gracious fayer, yt you accept and bless
these gifts these rewards, here the Priest kisseth ye Altar, and yen makes
ye Crosses.
these holy untasted sacrifices, Chefely which we offer unto ye for thy holy
catholyke church, yt thou myghtest vouchesafe too pacify, keep, set together
and govern it through ye wholl world, we thy servant our pope (and name him)
and our bishop (named) and our king (named) and with all faithful me^ and
lovers of the catholic and apostolic faith. Remember lord thy seruau^ts me^ne
and women (he names whom he will) and all that stand here about, 2. here he
prays for the lyui^g and says no word, but thi^keth them yt he prays for.
whose faith and devotion is known to the, for who^ we offer, or themselves
offer this sacrifice of praise, for the^ and theyrs, for redemption of their
souls, for hope of their own health and prosperity: and pay their vows to
the eternal, lyuinge and true God: taking part, and worshyppyng the
remembrance specially, of the glorious and perpetual vyrgin Mary, mother of
our God and lord Jesus Christ. Yea, and of thy blessed Apostles and Martyrs
also, as Peter, Paul, Andrew, James, John Thomas, Iams, Phillip, Bartholome,
Mathye, Simon and Jude, Line, Clete, Clemente, Sixth, Cornele, Cipryan, Laurens,
Grysogon, John and Paul, Cosmas and damian, and of all thy Saints, through
whose merytes and prayers, grant thou that we may i^ all things be defended
by the help of thy protection, by the same Christ our lord. Amen

We beseech the therefore, (O lord) to be pacifyed, and too accept this
oblacyon. here he lokethe on the host with great devotion.
and too bounden duty, yea and of thy household also, and to dyspose our
days, in thy peace, and grant that we may be delivered from eternal
dampnacion, and be no^bred in ye flock of thyn elect through Christ our lord,
Amen.

Which oblacion. here he must look on it again.
vouchsafe thou God almighty, to make thoroughly (we beseech ye) blessed, her he
makes. 5. Crosses.
the appointed, ratefyed and acceptable, Here he stands up and Joins his
hands together, wepeth his fingers lifts up his sacrifice and says. 6.
yt it may be made to us ye body and blood of thy dear son Jesus Christ. 6.
who ye day before he suffered took bred i^ his holy and worshipful hands and
lifted up his eyes into heaven, he casts up his eyes.
to the, God his father almyghtie, he gave thanks to the, and blessed it,
brake it and gave it to his dysciples, sayi^g, take and eat of this all, for
this is my body. he makes obeysau^ce and then lyfteth it up over his head


In like manner after supper was done, he took this noble cup in his holy
and worshipful hands, and gave thanks to the, he makes curtesye.
and blessed. he Crosses ones.
10. and gave his dysciples, saying, take ye, and dri^ke of it all, he lifts
the Chalyce up a little.
for this is the Cup of my blood of ye new Testament, the mystery of faith,
which shall be shed for you and for manny, for the remyssion of sins. he
lifts up ye Chalice over his head
As often as ever ye do this, ye shall do it in the remembrance of me. Whereby
both we thy servants remember Lord, and so do thy holy people remember the
same Christ thy son our lord God: as well his blessed passion, as his
resurrection, yea, and also his glorious ascencion into heaven: and offer to
thy noble Majesty, of thy presents and gifts, a pure. he crosses his gear.
5. times.
sacrifice a holy sacrifyce, an unspotted sacrifice: the holy bread of
eternal life, and the Cup of ever lastyng salvation. Over which, vouchsafe
thou to look with a merciful and clear countenance, and accept it, even as
thou dydest vouchsafe too accept the prese^tes of thy servant Just Abell:
ande ye sacryfyce of our high father Abraham and that which thy high priest
Melchisedech offered a holy sacrifice, an unspotted host. We humbly desire ye
almighty God, co^naund these things to be borne, by the hands of thy holy
Angel, i^to thy Altar above, in ye sight of thy Godly Majesty, yt as many of
us, as have taken part of this Altar, and have received the holy hallowed body
and blood of thy son, may be replenysshed. he Crosses his face.
with all heavenly blessyng and grace, thorough the same Christ our lord Amen

Remember abso lord thy servants, men. N. and women. N. which are gone before
us. he prayath for ye dead and speaks never a word, butt remembers who^ he
lift
with the sign of faith, and stepe in the stepe of peace, we beseech ye lord
to pardonne them and all that rest in Christ, and give them a place of
refresshi^g, light and rest: through the same Christ our lord, Amen.

To us thy serua^ntes also, he knocks him self on the breast.
16 hopi^g on the multitude of thy mercies: vouchsafe to give so^me part and
feloushippe, with thy holy Apostles and Martirs, with John, Stephen, Mathias,
Barnabas, Ignacius, Alexander, Marcelline, Peter, Felicitas, Perpetua Agatha,
Lucie, Agnes, Cecilye, Anastaseus: and with all thy seints among whose co^pa^y we
beseech ye admit us, not estemi^g our deserui^g, but by ye grant of thy pardon,
through Christ our lord, Amen is not spoken here.
By whom O lord all these good things you allwayse createst sanctyfiest
quickenest blessest ande geuest the^ tobs. he blesses the Chalyce with 5 crosses.
By him and with him and in him, be to ye God the father almighty, in the
unity of the holy ghost, all honor and glory. he speaks alowd
for ever woorlde without end, ye Clerk a^swereth.
Amen. We being warned by wholesome precepts, ande infourmed by the institucion
of God, dare boldly say. he holds up his hands.
Our father which art in heaven, holowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespass, as we forgive the^ that trespass against us. And
let us not be led into tentacion. the Clerk says.
But deliver us fro^me evil, the priest says secretlye.
Amen. Deliver us Lord, we beseech the, from all euelles past, present and for
too come, and by the intercession of the blessed and glorious perpetual virgin
Marye the mother of God, and thy blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul and Andrew,
with all thy Saints. He kisseth the paten, the^ puts it to his right eye,
then to his lift eye, then he crosses his crou^e and lays it dou^e again.
Be merciful and give peace in our days, that we (being helped, by the help
of thy mercy) may be always both free from sin, and safe fro^me all
trouble. He breketh the Host in iii. parts first i^ ii. saying.
by the same our lord Jesus Christ thy son. Here he makes it iii. pieces.
which with the lives and reygneth, in the unity of the holy ghooste. He
speaks alowde.
for ever ande ever, The clerk says.
Amen. The peace of. He crosses ye Chalice. iii. times with one piece of the
Host.
the lord he ever with you. O la^be of God, which take away the si^ne of ye
world, have mercy on us. O la^be of god which take away ye si^ne of the
word, have mercy on us. O lamb of God which take away the sin of the
world, give us peace. He crosses the Chalice with one piece of the host and then
puts it into ye Chalyce


This holy mengli^g together of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ be
to me and to all that receive it, saluacyo^ of mind and body, and a healthful
preparacyon to deserve ande receive everlasting life, trough ye same Christ our
lord Amen.

O holy lord, father almighty eternal God, grant me to receive this holy body
and blod of thy son our Lord Jesus Christ so worthily: that I may deserve by
it to receive remyssion of all my si^nes, and to be replenisshed with thy holy
spyrit and to have thy peace: for you art god alone and there is none other but
you, whose ki^gdo^ and i^pery lasts glorious, without end for ever and ever
Ame^. he kisseth the paxe.
Peace be to ye and to ye Church of God. The clerk says.
and to thy spyrite

O God the father, fou^tayne and begi^ning of all goodness, whch by mercy we
rest led, and would that thine only begotten Son, should comme down,
too the loweste parts of the woorlde, and take flesh, which I unworthy hold
here in my hands. He kneleth down to the Host.
I worship the, I glorify ye, yea with all thi^te^t of my heart I praise the: and
beseech the, that thoue forsake not us thy servants, butt forgive our sins,
so that we may be able, too serve the, the only living and true GOD, with
a pure heart and a chaste boddye. Thoroughe the same Jesus Christ our lord,
Ame^. Let the obseruau^ce of my service please the, After this Colet, he makes
a cross on the Altar, kisseth it and puts of his upper vesture.
O holy trynytie, and grant that this sacrifice, which I unworthy have offered
to the eyes of thy Majesty, may be acceptable to the: and propiciatorie too me
and to all them that I have offered it for, through thy mercy, which live and
reignest GOD, woorlde wtoute end Amen.

A sermon made by the famous Clerk of worthy memory, Doctor Marten Luther, of
the great blasphemy against God, which the Papystes daily do use, readyng
this Antechristian Canon in their Masses
Before we take on, to view or survey that horrible abhomynacion, of ye most
fylthy Idolatry against God, of the most cursed Canon (which the sluggish
papystes call the mass) in which they with cruel mouth daily beslauer the
high Majesty of God: we thynk it best, that we (...)


