GRIEVING OF GODS SPIRIT.

Containing the sum of a Sermon preached at Saint MARY'S in OXFORD.

The chief points entreated on are, Viz. I. Of grieuing of Gods Spirit. II. Of
resisting of Gods Spirit. III. Of blaspheming of Gods Spirit, in the highest
degree commonly called, The sin against the Holy Ghost.


By Radford Mauericke, Minister in DEVON.

Read iudiciously, but judge charitably.

MATTHEW. 7.2. For, with what Judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged, and with
what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. LONDON, Printed by
William Stansby. 1620.

blazon or coat of arms

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, GEORGE Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan; And one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council: All saving graces, wished in this life, and all
during Glory in the life to come.
MOST REVEREND,
HOw much the Ministers of the Gospel within your Graces Province, have and
do continually rejoice of your preferment to this place, and how many zealous
Prayers are made unto God, for your Graces long and happy continuance therein,
I the least, and one of the lowest among them, can partly report: But my
purpose is not to praise, but in all humility to pray your Grace, so far to
be pleased, as to permit with your accustomed favor, This poor Mite, of a
Ministers good meaning, to be cast into the rich Treasury of our English
Church; And with more special regard, to suffer these two first Sermons,
preached long sithence in your Graces presence, to pass under the wings of
your favorable protection, being not only imboldned hereunto by your Graces
late remembrance of them, but even encouraged to publish them in print, which
the importunity of some this long time could hardly gain at my hands.

But now old age having taken hold on me, and my self having no children, by
natural generation, I have thought it meet to collect together, into one
Country, or Continent, my little Babes or Books, which yet wander abroad in
the wide World, single by themselves; with such other, as my little leisure,
and less learning could bring forth, to keep them company: hoping they may
yield me some comfort, in the shutting up of my days, as well as profit others
(if please God) so long as this day of salvation lasts.

Thus commending my poor endeavors to Gods rich blessing, and your worthy
Grace, to Gods gracious protection; with bended knees, I most humbly take my
leave; and ever remain,

Your Graces, in all humble duty at command, RAFFORD MAVERICKE.

THE GRIEVING OF GODS SPIRIT.
EPHESIANS. 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God.
FOr as much (Men, Exordium.
Brethren and Fathers) as this sentence is allowed off, Verbum sapienti sat
est, I should much forget my self, If I did not well consider, as before whom
I speak, the supremest Majesty, so unto whom, as grave, learned, and iudcious
Auditorie (as England or all Europe yields.)

The consideration whereof (I thank God) does much comfort, but not discourage
me at all; for speaking before God, his divine Grace being implored, shall (I
trust) guide and direct me, to speak as of the Word of God; And speaking unto
judicious but charitable hearers, they will rather conceive what I mean, if
desire of brevity, cause any obscurity in my speech; rather then rashly
condemn any thing that shall be spoken, so that it be not against the grounds
of Learning or Religion.

Leaving therefore to hinder your attention, from the matter intended, we will,
(God-willing) proceed on with our Text, Containing a very grave dehortation, of
a matter of some great consequence, or importance, which may be dilated on,
without any division at all, Consisting as it were but of one particular
branch, or member: howbeit for orders sake, and for the better help of
memory, (for, Confusio est and intelligeutiae, Three parts of this Sermon.
and memoriae, inimica) I have purposed to pursue this Text, in this manner.

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Grieve not the holy Spirit, of God.
TO grieve the Spirit of God, The first part. What is meant by grieuing of Gods
Spirit.
is a figurative phrase, or speech (humanitus dictum) spoken for man's capacity,
for truly and indeed the Spirit of God, as God himself, can be no more
grieved, then he can be either wounded or killed; but this phrase of speech is
here used by our Apostle, to aggrauate the greatness of sin, seeing by
sinning, we do as much as in us lies, even grieve the holy Spirit of God,
that is, grievously offend Gods Spirit, whose special office is to work
sanctification in the hearts of Gods Children.

This speech therefore is not used, as one very well observes, Quod vllam
perturbationem sentiat diuinitas, sed vt indignitatem prophana vitae, magis
intelligamus. It is not spoken (I say) to make us imagine, That the divine
Essence is, or can be subject to any perturbation, but to make us the more and
more to conceive the indignity, and vileness of sin; and how odious sin
is, in the sight of God.

The similitude of this speech, A Simile.
may seem to be borrowed from a honest Oast, that has received a good Chest
into his house, to whom for a while he has given very good entertainment, but
soon after, forgetting both his own credit, and his Chests comfort, suffers
wittingly and willingly, many disorders to be committed in his house, to the
great grief and discontent of that Chest, which at the first was so
courteously entertained; by means whereof the good Ghest, does seem to make
offer, that he will forsake his lodge, and seek a new Oast, saving that his
gentle nature is such, that he every day hops, and expects, (as he is
oftentimes promised) reformation, and amendment of all that is amiss.

Right so it falls out, between Gods Spirit and a Christian man, 1. Cor.
6.19.
who in the Scripture is called The Temple of the Holy Ghost, This holy and
blessed Spirit as the good Ghest, does with the Hammer of Gods Word, knock at
the door of our hearts to seek entertainment.

Behold, I stand (says the Spirit) at the door and knock, Renel. 3.20.
If any man hear my voice, and open the door (for there be many that hear
his voice who will not open the door) I will come into him, and sup with him.

Now when any faithful Christian, has thus received this good Ghest, and
given him entertainment to his content, soon after forgetting both himself
and this his Chest, he suffers other unruly Ghests, which were in that house,
before this good Ghest came thither, (the lusts and affections of the flesh I
mean) to bear rule, and to keep a stir in that house, to commit many
shameful and ungodly prankes, by means whereof the good Ghest, the good
Spirit of God, is not only disquieted and troubled, but let and hindered,
from doing that good which he came to do; being woarie as it ware to tanie any
longer in that House or June, and therefore sometimes does hide himself close
in some corner of that House, like fire covered in the Embers, or ashes, not
making any comfortable meal, with his Oast in many days and weeks together.
^. Sam. 11.12
And if the disorders be very great, such as the Adultery and Murder of
David were, he will hardly be found out in a whole year together; so greatly
is this good Ghest, this holy Spirit of God, offended and displeased with
sin, or at least so odious and offensive is sin in his sight.

Nay (which more is) many times he will not be found out at all, before every
corner of our hearts, souls and consciences be clean washed with bitter
tears of Repentance, and these unruly affections, which made all the former
disorders, be in some sort tamed and subdued, yea and until the Oast himself
who suffered these parts to be played, be severely punished in the House of
GODS correction, Psalm. 6.6. Luke 7.38.
where he must daily wash his wounds with the water of contrition; As David
washed his Couch with tears, as Mary Magdalene washed the feet of Christ, Mat.
26.75. What it is to grieve the holy Spirit of God.
and as Peter went out and wept bitterly.

By this similitude so opened and explayned, the very simpliest I suppose, may
soon perceive, what it is to grieve the holy Spirit of God, namely, after that
by the preaching of Gods Word, we have received Faith, and in some measure the
sanctifying Spirit of God, and have entertained him with joy and gladness; yet
notwithstanding, many times and often, through to too much security,
carelessness and negligence, and sometimes through bold presumption, and
wilful wickedness, we suffer the unruly lusts of the flesh, to sway and to
bear rule in us, so long, till as length we break out into gross sins and
enormities, whereby we do even grieve the holy Spirit of God, or as our
Apostle seems to expound himself in another place, 1. These. 5.^^.
We do quench the Spirit of God, and as much as in us lies, labor to
extinguish and clean put one the fire of Gods Grace, with the cold water of
sin and ungodliness, which water of wickedness, if it be not in time dried
up again, by Faith and true Repentance (as it is evermore in the elect
Children of God) it would needs drown our souls, in that bottomless pit of
destruction.

The use then that we should make hereof is this, Constritare spiritum, Grieve
the holy Spirit, and as one well notes upon that place, quasi ex suo hospitio
eum eijcimus, even cast him out of his own habitation.

Contrariwise, we are here taught,

Therefore it is well said of one, Oportet nos operam dare, vt spiritus
sanctus, libenter in nobis habitet, vt in domicilio laeto ac iucundo nec vlla
tristitiae materia illi detur. That it behooves all Christians to give all
diligence so to live, as the holy Spirit of God may take delight for to dwell
and remain in us, as in a most pleasant Pauilion; and that no cause of grief
be given unto him through our carelessness and continual custom of sinning.
So should it come to pass, that as God takes delight in us, so should we have
comfort in him, he through our holy obedience, and we through peace of
conscience to our endless joy and consolation.

Thus we see, what it is to grieve the holy Spirit of God in our selves, or to
quench the good gifts and graces of Gods holy Spirit within us; which sin, I
take to be proper to Gods Saints and Children; and therefore think it good to
distinguish the three sins before named, that is, Grieuing, Resisting, and
Blaspheming of God Spirit; in this manner.

First, For those whom God once loves, to the end he loves them. John 13.1.
Romans 11.29.
And the gifts and calling of God are without Repentance. Therefore it is
observed in King David, after his fearful falls, That he prays to have this
holy spirit renewed within him: Psalm. 51.10.
having layen still as it were a while without any comfortable motion, but was
never utterly taken from him. And this note I give by the way the rather lest
any of Gods Children, that are to too much cast down already, with the
feeling of their sins, shoul be ouer-whelmed with too much heaviness: as
also to teach, that they may be daily renewed by Repentance, for their daily
relictions, contrary to that old Heresy of the Nouatians, The Nouatian
Heresy.
which held the contrary. For though to grieve the Spirit of God by sinning,
be a great aggravating of sin, yet being many times, the sin of Gods Elect
Children, it is pardoned and forgiven in Christ; And albeit some have thought
that those places of Scriptue in the sixth and tenth to the Hebrews have
pointed at this sin, of grieuing of Gods Spirit; Heb. 6. and 10.
and therefore could not be renewed by Repentance, yet it is certain, that in
those places That great sin against the Holy Ghost is touched upon, whereof
we have promised and purpose God-willing to speak in its own place. I say
therefore, for the comfort of the godly afflicted in conscience, but to flatter
none in their sins, That to grieve the holy Spirit of God, or sometimes by
sinning to quench as it were the good gifts and graces of Gods Spirit, is a
sin oftentimes committed by the Children of God, that are called by the
preaching of the Gospel, justified by Faith, and in some measure sanctified by
the holy Spirit of God, this I say is the sin many times of Gods Children,
against which sin, as against all sin, they do much labor and strive, and
daily, yea, almost hourly they do repent for the same.

To resist the Spirit of God, being the second pont,

But to blaspheme the Spirit of God in the highest degree, which is called the
sin against the Holy Ghost,

Now there is moreover, A second sort of Greiuers of Gods Spirit.
another sort of grieuers of Gods Spirit, but not in themselves, but in others
and these are far different, from the former, and without speedy Repentance,
may come near to the latter: Such were many sinful sinners of the old World,
who did grieve the holy Spirit of God which was in Noah; and such as Saint
Peter says vexed just Lot, 2. Pet. 27.
with their uncleanly conversation: And such as grieved Saint Paul when he
said, Phil. 3.18.
Many walk of whom I have told you often and now tell you weeping; And such as
David complained of, when he said, Mine eyes gush out with tears because men
keep not Gods Law. Such grieuers of Gods Spirit in others, we have but too
too many in our days, and this Age is full of such ungodly persons, which take
pleasure to mock and scoff at all virtuous and godly exercises in others,
making but a past-time of sin in themselves, and the more they are reproved,
the more sinful they are, and the more outragiously they run into all
mischief, to the high dishonouring of Almighty God, even in contempt of God
and all goodness, to the disgrace of Christianity, and finally to the great
grief of the godly, specially of those, who have the cure and charge of their
souls committed unto them.

But for so much as those grieuers of Gods Spirit in others, do resist the
same Spirit of God against themselves, we will here conclude our first
proposed part of grieuing of Gods Spirit, and so come to the next, to show what
it is, and who they are, that do resist the holy Spirit of God, observing this
not by the way, that GODS Spirit is called the holy Spirit of God, not because
he is holier then either the Father or the Son, but because his proper
office is, to sanctify and to make holy the Elect Children of God.

So come we now to speak of Resisting of Gods Spirit, being the second
general part of our Text.

TO resist the Holy Ghost, The second part of this Sermon, of resisting of Gods
Spirit.
is on the one side, to despise, or to make little account of the good gifts
and graces of Gods Spirit, and of those good means, which God has appointed
to bring us unto Salvation. As the despising of Gods Word, Sacraments, and
Prayer, profaning of the Lords Sabbaths which he has sanctified, and
especially ordained for holy exercises, to mock or jest at the preaching of
the Word, and of the Preachers thereof.

These are great sins, and to be repented off above many other sins,
because they manifestly fight against the first Table of Gods Law, and against
the whole worship and Service of God.

Furthermore, to resist the Holy Ghost, is to harden our hearts, and to stop
the ears of our souls against the Word of God, (as some Recusants will stop
the ears of their bodies with Wool, when some inforcement brings them to
Church) To day, says the Holy Ghost, Psalm. 95.7.
if you will hear my voice, harden not your hearts.

This was the sin of the Israelites, in the Wilderness, when God proved them
forty years, whether they would obey him, and hear his voice, but they would
not, at length God swear unto them in his wrath, that they should not enter
into his rest, that was into the Land of Canaan,

But behold a fearful Judgment of God, of six hundred thousand (no small
number) there were only two persons, Caleb, and Joshua, Numb. 14.30.
that entered into that Land of Promise, The rest were overthrown in the
Wilderness.

These, says Saint Paul, are examples unto us, 1. Cor. 10.6.
and are written to admonish us, upon whom the ends of the World are come.
That we should not lust after evil things, as they lusted, nor tempt God, as
they tempted him; nor murmur, as they murmured, nor harden our hearts against
the Word of God, as they did, lest the Lord swear in his wrath, as he did unto
them, that we should never enter into his eternal rest, the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Yet surely, this is the great and grievous sin of too too many in our Land,
The hardening of their hearts against the voice of God as the Jews did in
Ieremies time, Ier. 18.28.
to whom they said, Let us not give ear to any of his words. Let the Law and
Curse of Gods Judgments, by the mouth of Gods Ministers be thundered against
obstinate and rebellious Sinners never so terribly, nay, let God himself
thunder from Heaven never so hard and fearfully, let fire and flashes of
Lightning fly over them and upon them. Let Houses, Towns, and Villages with
extraordinary fire be quite burned into ashes, let War, Famine, Plagues, and
Pestilences pursue us and almost ouer-take us; Let some of this wicked sort
escape these or any other Judgments of God but one inch, they will care for no
more, their hearts shall never be the softer, nor yet their lives one whit the
better.

They will be as sinful as ever they were, as unmerciful as ever they were,
as full of malice and disdain as ever they were, as hard-hearted as ever they
were, and will not stick to say, Tush these things shall never come near us.

On the oath otherside, let the glad tidings of the Gospel be preached unto
them, never so often and so comfortably, let the sweet Mercies of God in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, be offered unto them never so freely, let the windows
of Heaven be set wide open, not forty days, but twice forty years, and all
the Blessings of God be powered down upon them never so bountifully, yet there
will no remorse of conscience move them, to consider as they ought, of these
innumerable benefits of God bestowed upon them.

And what is the cause of all this deadness and dullness in them, is it not
the hardening of their hearts, against the Word of God? whereby they do as much
as in them lies, resist the Holy Ghost, in contemning and despising those good
gifts and graces, which he offers unto them.

Wherefore, it may not unfitly be said unto many of them, as blessed Steven
said unto the Jews, Ye have always resisted the Holy Ghost. Acts 7.51.
But take they heed, this sin as I said is a great sin, and if it be
continued in, without Repentance, a very fearful sin, and such a sin, as
from whence they may ascend, or rather descend (for in sinning we rather
descend then ascend) unto the highest degree of sinning which is the sin
against the Holy Ghost.

Of which sin, (coming now to our last point or part) that I may speak
truly, religiously, and soundly, I most humbly bessech the most holy and
blessed Spirit of God, to guide me with his grace.

THe sin against the Holy Ghost, The third part of this Sermon, viz. of
Blaspheming of Gods Spirit Matthew. 12.31. Mark 3.28. Luke 12.10.
is that kind of sin or blasphemy, whereof our Savior speaks plainly in
his Gospel, and is recorded at large by three Evangelists: Matthew brings in
our Savior saying, But I say you, Every sin and and blasphemy, shall be
forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, shall not be
forgiven unto men. And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son ^f man,
it shall be forgiven him, but whosoever shall speak against the Holy Ghost,
shall not be forgiven, neither in this World, neither in the World to come:
that is, as Saint Mark says, shall be culpable of eternal damnation.

Here then there are two things to be noted out of this Text, and generally to
be observed in this Discourse. Two Observations.


The first is, that there are many kind of Blasphemies.

Secondly, what is the greatest, with the reason thereof.

That there are many sorts or kinds of Blasphemies, Many kinds of Blasphemies.
Every Sin or Blasphemy; so that in a generality we may say, there is
Blasphemy against God, and Blasphemy against men, created after the Image of
God.

Blasphemy against men, as against Magistrates, against Parents, against good
men, and against the whole Church of Christ.

Magistrates and Parents are blasphemed, not only when they are not obeyed and
honored as they should; but also rather when they are slandered, cursed, or
evil spoken off.

It is written in the Law,

Thoushalt not speak evil of the Ruler of the people. Exodus 22.28. Exodus
21.17.
He that curses Father or Mother, shall dye the death,

Good men in particular, or the whole Church in general, are blasphemed:

The whole Church in general, When she is called, the ungodly Syuagogue,
impious, foolish, seditious, sacrilegious or the like.

The Saints either living or dead may be blasphemed, when they are called
Seducers, Disturbers, Schismatikes, Heretics, and such like.

Blasphemy against God, may be,







God the Father is blasphemed many ways.



This was the sin of the Pharisees, and now of the Papists; therefore that
Beast of Rome, is marked and branded in the Renelation, Revel. 13.1.
with the Name of Blasphemy.

Secondly,

Shall God promise, Numb 23.19.
and not perform? Has he spoken, and shall he not accomplish it?

Is the arm of the Lord shortened; Esaias 59.1.
that it cannot help?

This was the Israelites sin, in the Wilderness; Can God provide flesh and
bread for his people? Psalm. 78.20.
It was the sin of that Noble man in Samaria, Who said (after the Prophet had
prophesied of that plenty of Come) Though the Lord would make windows in the
Heavens, 2. King. 7.2.
could this thing come to pass?

Lastly, God the Father may be blasphemed, when any are brought into so great
extremity, that they fall into Cursing and Blaspheming of the Name of God;
This was the sin that the foolish Wife of Job persuaded her Husband to
commit, (...)
Curse God, and dye. For though the word (Curse) in the original do signify
sometimes to bless, yet Jobs reproose of his Wife does argue, that she meant
it in the worse sense.

So much for blaspheming against God the Father.

Next, the Son of God, Jews, but of many of them no doubt ignorantly, not
knowing that he was the Son of God.

This Blasphemy against the Son of God, is as if one should see the Kings
eldest Son and Heir apparent to the Crown, clothed in poor and vile
rags, and not knowing who he is, should call him beggarly Rogue or the like,
this is blasphemy against the Kings Son, but is pardonable, because it
proceeded of ignorance.

So Paul, or rather Saul, was a Persecuter, and a Blasphemer of Christ and his
Church, but found pardon, for that he did it ignorantly, as himself
coufesseth.

For this cause Christ prayed for some of his Persecutors, Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do. 1. Tim. 1.13.


Therefore Saint Peter says unto some of the Jews, Luke 23.34. Acts 3.17.
that crucified the Lord of life, I know, Brethren, that through ignorance ye
did it.

Now come we to speak of Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, wherein we must
first observe, That every sin or Blasphemy, against the Spirit of God, is
not that sin against the Holy Ghost, which shall never be forgiven.

As namely, griouing, quenching, and resisting of the Hely Ghost, (whereof we
have spoken) though they are great sins, and some of them far greater then
the other yet are they such sins as are and have been pardoned, therefore
none of them are that sin, which we call, The sin against the Holy Ghost.

Moreover, there are greater sins then these, as denying of God or his known
Truth, through fear or any other infirmity: Also persecuting of Gods Church
and Children, through ignorance, yet neither of these is that sin against the
Holy Ghost, though they be very fearful sins, seeing they have been
committed by GODS own Servants, and also pardoned unto them; Example we have
of the one in Peter, Luke 22.61. 1. Tim. 1.13.
of the other in Paul, both great Apostles of Jesus Christ.

By this negation or opposition, What sins are not that sin against the
Holy Ghost, we shall, I trust, the better consider, and sooner find out, what
this peculiar sin against the Holy Ghost is; whereof we are now (God assisting
us) punctually to entreat. Two causes why the sin against the Holy Ghost
should be made known.


And seeing it is so great a sin, yea, the greatest sin; and such a sin,
as shall not be forgiven, it is most necessary that it should be
distinguished, and made known from all other sins, and that for two causes
especially.

The one to this end,

The other,

Wherefore in my poor understanding, they are worthy in this particular to be
blamed, who though they will not speak against preaching in general, yet will
they by no means allow all the Doctrine revealed in the Word of God, to be
taught and preached unto the people of God.

Some say, that Predestination (being a chief, if not the chiefest point in
all Divinity) ought rather to be concealed, then publicly to be taught and
preached unto the people.

Others hold, (and these are Papists specially) that many sentences of
Scripture, (which indeed are most sweet to repentant and sorrowful sinners)
as, At what time soever a Sinner does repent, and the like, are unfit to be
either read or preached to the people, for fear (forsooth) lest some will take
thereupon the more liberty of sinning, as though because Grace does abound,
therefore sin should abound which is only the fault of graceless persons, but
never of any of Gods Children.

Last of all, many are of opinion, that this sin against the Holy Ghost, is
not at all to be defined, at least not to be declared or spoken of in public.

I grant (Reverend Fathers) that these, as all other points of Divinity, and
some of these, above many other points of Divinity, ought very religiously,
and discreetly, to be taught and preached unto the people: but to hold opinion,
or to labor to maintain it which is worse, that any of these or other like
points of Doctrine must be concealed, which God of purpose has declared in
his Word, to be opened and revealed, is sarre from all Divinity, (to speak
the best of it) and nothing agreeing with the rule and practice of Saint Paul,
Acts 20.35.
that great Doctor of us Gentiles, Who boasted and took exceeding comfort
thereby unto himself, that he had revealed to his Auditorie at times, All the
Council of God; that is, not all that God has or does keep secret to
himself, but all that God has or had revealed unto the Apostle, either openly
in his Word, or by any secret Revelation from Heaven, which points so revealed
unto that holy Apostle, as likewise unto all the rest of Gods Prophets and
Apostles, they have publicly preached, and plainly left them in writing unto
posterity to be seen, read, and known of all, not only for their sakes
which are learned, but also for their sakes, which are more ignorant, to be
openly taught and preached unto them by the succeeding Ministers of Jesus
Christ.

Wherefore if we the Ministers of Christ will exspect, to have the same comfort
in our Callings that Saint Paul and the rest of the Apostles had, we must take
the same course in teaching which they have done, namely, to publish the
secrees of the Gospel, that is, all which God has revealed in his Word, so
far as our knowledge may attain unto.

And truly the confideration of the premises, did partly induce my mind at the
first to determine upon this Text, and to speak of this finne against the Holy
Ghost, for my Text directing me to speak of leffer sins, against the holy
Spirit of God, me thought, (and God I trust directed my thoughts) it should be
to some purpose, to speak of the greater or greatest of all.

Observing this not by the way, worthy to be remembered, that though the sin
against the Holy Ghost may be known and is revealed in the Scripture, yet the
Sinner is not easily, rather not at all, to be pointed at, nor to be judged of
men, but to be left to the just Judgment of God, one reason hereof may be,
because final impenitencie must accompany this sin, which cannot easily be
discerned of men.

One note more before we enter into the description of this sin, would be
observed, which a learned man has well noted, and therefore I will use his
own words.

Blasphemia in Spiritum Sanctum, non referri debet, ad Spiritus essentiam
simpliciter, sed ad gratiam qua donati sumus: which is, That this Blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost, is not simply to be referred to the Essence of Gods
Spirit, (nor to his person, for so in sinning against the Holy Ghost, we sin
in like manner against the Father and the Son) but it is to be understood,
that in so blaspheming, we sin against the good gifts and graces of Gods
holy Spirit, wherewith we have formerly been enlightened.

Now come we in Godsfeare, to speak of the sin it self.

What the sin against the Holy Ghost is not, we have already partly noted,
to wit, That it is not properly not only blasphemy against God the Father,
not against the Son, nor every Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, as grieuing
of Gods Spirit, nor refisting of Gods Spirit, nor backsliding or falling from
God and his Truth, through fear, or any other infirmity; nor persecuting of
Gods Church and Children, through ignorance, neither is it any particular fin
committed against the first or second Table, neither is it final impenitencie,
as some of the Fathers have affirmed, for there be thousands which never true ly
repent, which never yet commit this sin.

Therefore if one says well, Qui impenitentiam esse definiunt nullo n^g^tio
refelli possunt. But rather it may be said to be such a sin, which
contains in some sort, all these sins, and more too, because who so
commits this sin against the Holy Ghost, shall hardly acquit himself of
any sin; whereunto final impenitencie must be added; before this sin can
be judged by man to be at the highest. Now what this peculiar and proper sin
against the Holy Ghost is, shall best be discussed and defined, Mat. 12.31.
out of the Gospel where our Savior Christ speaks of the Son, if we duly
and thoroughly confider it as we should: And first we must note, and well
observe, who and what manner of persons they were, to whom our Savior
obiecteth this sin; which is easily to be collected out of the History it
self.

For there it appears, that they were of the worser sort of the Pharisees, to
whom Christ obiecteth this sin; for when Christ Jesus by his divine Power, had
dispossessed a Devil out of the dumb man, these worser, I mean, more
malicious sort of the Pharisees, being present, prying into his actions, and
being by no means able to reprehend him, yet to the end the people should not
believe in Christ, they coin a Blasphemy in the highest degree, of mere
malice and envy; and contrary to their own knowledge and conscience, they
spew out the same even in despite of Gods Spirit; saying, and affirming with
brazen brows, that Christ had cast out that Devil, Mat. 12.24.
through Beel^zebub the chief of Devils, which cursed calumny, and most
slanderous Blasphemy, after that our Savior had fully confuted, for the
godlies sake which stood by and heard him, he presently turns his speech to
those Blasphemers, And with stern countenance, no doubt, as in such a cause
was meet, he reprooueth them with a propter hoc, for this I say unto you,
Every sin and Blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the Blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost, shall not be forgiven unto men, and with all more
sharply reprooues them, calling them a generation of Vipers, as doubtless they
were of the vilest kind.

And Saint Mark in his discourse sets out their sin more plainly and
fully, Mark 3.36.
saying. For they said, He, that is, Christ, had an unclean or impure spirit,
whereby that Evangelist would intimate unto us, that it was they, Pharisees,
that had blasphemed, and so sinned against the Holy Ghost.

Howbeit we must observe, that our Savior Christ does not say openly and
plainly, though he gave them so much to understand closly by the conclusion of
his speech, that these Pharisees were sinners against the Holy Ghost. By whose
example we are admonished, as before I have noted, not rashly, rather not at
all to judge of such sinners, howsoever the sin do appear unto us what it
is, but our Savior like a sound Teacher and skillful Logitian, plainly puts
down the mayor Proposition, What the sin of the Holy Ghost is.

The minor they themselves knew, being convicted in their own consciences, that
they had committed the same sin.

The conclusion therefore followed of course, such a sin or blasphemy, says
Christ, is sin against the Holy Chost;

Such a sin or blasphemy, says their consciences, have we committed;

Therefore, surely, we have sinned against the Holy Ghost.

Moreover, we may not forget to note, that these filthy Pharisees, were before
this time enlightened with some external beams of Gods Spirit, yea, convicted
in their own consciences by former Prophesies, and by the Doctrine and
Miracles of Christ, concerning the Truth which he taught: yet notwithstanding,
willingly, maliciously, and of purpose, they did hate the known truth, fearing
or rather knowing, and sometimes confessing so much, that if Christ his Truth
and Doctrine should be once publicly received, then their Errors and
Traditions (like our Popish Traditions now) should be reproved, their
covetousness and Hypocrisy discovered, their credit and gain diminished, and
finally, all their worldly pomp and glory should utterly be extinguished, and
clean put out.

Rather then this should come to pass, they will even oppose themselves
(Gigantum more) to fight against God, and therefore with indurate obstinacy
renounce they the manifest truth, and withal their might and malice oppose
themselves against it, by blasphemous and sophistical cauilling, and that not
serving their turn, by most cruel threatenings, excommunicating and
persecuting unto death, even Christ himself, after him his Apostles, as the
Prophets before, with many other of Gods dear Saints and Children, professing
Gods Truth.

How near the practice of the Church of Rome, has and does agree, with the
Synagogue of these high Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, even a blind man may
well see and perceive?

Upon all this that has been said, and collected out of the Text and course
of Scripture, where Christ entreats of this sin, joined with the practice
of these proud Pharisees, It shall not be ouer-hard to define, what the sin
against the Holy Ghost is.

Peccatum in Spiritum sanctum (says a learned Divine) est veluntaria veritatis
euidenter cognitae, The fin against the Holy Ghost defined.
renunciatio and rebellio; ex odio veritatis nata, coniuncta cum tyrannica,
sophistica, and hypocritica oppugnatione.

Sin against the Holy Ghost, is a voluntary, or wilful renouncing and
rebelling against the evident and known truth, proceeding from hatred of the
same truth, joined with tyrannical, sophistical and hypocritical fighting
and striving against the same, and against the true Professors and Confessors
thereof.

This brief definition have I chosen among many other, both for the
persipicuity and plainness thereof, as also for the congruitie and agreement
that it has with that which has been before spoken of this sinae. They which
sin against the holy Ghost may be known by four marks


From which definition we may observe, that they which commit this sin against
the Holy Ghost, have four special marks to be known by.

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Lastly,

If any do think that no mortal man, would oner oppose himself with such
despite against God his Creator, we must yield that none will or dare so to
do, but only such graceless Cast-awayes, as through long custom of
presumptuous sinnings joined with double Hypocrisies, have their hearts
hardened, their consciences seared, and themselves altogether given up into a
reprobate sense. For that their so greut boldness, cannot but proceed from a
^r^^^ike blindness, where in malice and poysonfull fury has gotten the
victory.

Therefore we may see, that it is not without great cause that Saint Paul who
was once a Blasphemer, 1. Tim. 1.13.
but ignorantly, distinguishes, that his sin, from wilful Blasphemic, which
sin whosoever does wittingly and willingly commit, shall cuermore be barred
from Repentance, because he despises that Spirit of Grace, which should work
Repentance in his heart, turning the Gifts and Graces of God revealed unto him,
for the setting forth of Gods Glory, even to the hinderance and slander of the
same; and therefore for this his so great obstinacy and wilful Blasphemy,
shall be punished with most woeful and endless misery. For he is past all
hope of recovery, that turns the only medicine of his saving health, into
deadly Poison, and being once fallen into this gulf of Perdition, can never be
renewed again by Repentance: Heb. 6.5.6.
as the Holy Ghost in the Epistle to the Hebrews says, It is impossible, that
they which were once enlightened and have tasted of the heavenly gifts, and were
made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good Word of God
(making mention of tasting still, no eating or good digesting) and of the power
of the World to come, If they fall away (says the Text, meaning by falling,
final Apostasy, not falls of infirmity) it is impossible they should be
renewed by Repentance, seeing they crucify again to themselves the Son of
God, and make a make of him.

And after in the tenth Chapter of that Epistle, the Holy Ghost says.

If any sin willingly (meaning no doubt this sin against the Holy Ghost,
Heb. 10.26.
for every one of us commit other finnes, willingly and wittingly) If any so
sin, there remains no more sacrifice for (such a) sin; but a fearful
looking for of judgment, and violent fire, which shall denoure the Adversary.
And forth with the reason is yielded drawn a minore, ad maius; and applied by
way of comparison. He that despises Moses Law, dies without mercy of how much
sorer punishment. Suppose ye, shall he be worthy off, which treads under
foot, the Son of God, and counts the blond of the Testament an unholy
thing, where with he was sanctified, and does despite the Spirit of Grace? So
then to resolve our selves (drawing to conclusion) touching this point.

This sin against the Holy Ghost, must be a general, voluntary, total and
final Apostasy or falling from God, and all goodness, not through any
infirmity or weakness, but of mere malice and boldness, It is in a word
(for I desire to be understood of the meanest) a froward and wilful Rebellion,
striving and spurning against the known truth, and even against the knowledge
and conscience of him that does it.

Howbeit all this (in a sort) may be compared but to the root and stem of
this sin, the sap and natural fruit that it yields forth, is oftentimes
fearful swearing, voluntary perjury, wilful blasphemy, both in word and
writing, poisoned Hypocrisy, withal sinful pollution of the flesh, coupled
with most tyrannical crneltie (if there be power joined to the will) and
finally a hellish kind of fury, pointing out as it were with the finger, from
whence this sin ascends, and whether such finners must descend, even to the
bottom of Hell, to their cursed Captain the Devil, whom in this point they
have precisely imitated and followed.

Therefore some draw an example of this sin, from the Devil himself, who
albeit, he knew well enough, that Jesus was that Christ, yet never ceased with
all his might and power to impugn the sacred Majesty of God, together with
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and as far forth as he could sought utterly to
supplant the same,

Whose steps and traces these Pharisees which blasphemed Christ, did directly
tread on, upon the sent or savor thereof our Popish Pharisees, and
Pharisaicall Papists have most kindly hunted, not only to the utter perdition
of their own souls, but also by their sinful persuasions, and tyrannous
compulsions, they have and still do labor with all their might, to draw
thousands of souls with them unto Hell.

For how many multitudes of people since Popery first began, and fithence that
Mystery of Iniquity was first hatched, they have caused by tyranny to abjure
and renounce the known truth, contrary to their knowledge and consciences, is
most apparently to be proved, and more lamentable to be read in the several
Histor^es of many particular Nations.

Of whom I mean of such as have abiured, through Popish tyranny, we ought to
hope well, seeing they fell back of fear not of malice, and therefore there
sin was not the sin against the Holy Ghost.

Yet notwithstanding the malicious cruelty of so cursed a crew, is
nevertheless to be detested, because they do as much as in them lies,
endeavor not only to draw such silly souls into that sink of si^ne, wherein
themselves are plunged, but also into the same damnation, wherein they shall be
for evermore tormented or punished.

Neither is their Deuillish dealing even in one point (which I will briefly
touch) to be passed over in silence, namely that when these Popish
Persecutors, either through persuasion and fair promises, either through rigor
and threatenings, they had caused, (O cursed causers) many poor souls to deny
with their tongues the Truth of their Savior, and being thereupon escaped
their hands, have confessed Christ again, according to the intent and meaning
of their minds, These greedy Woolues have soon caught again those simple
Lambs, and after they have compelled them by a new kind of tyranny, the second
time to abjure, have presently (they being in such lamentable case) condemned
them for relapse as they call it, to be most cruelly burned, meaning thereby
(for what other meaning could they have) to send them through the fiery
torments of this life, to the flaming fire that burns for ever in Hell.

But the tender Mercies of our good God, through the rich Merits of their
Savior, in whom they might believe, and for their sins repent; did pardon (I
hope) the greatness of their sin committed, no doubt) through fear and humane
infirmity; and the same God (I fear) has or will double requite their
punishment upon the heads of those pestilent pesecutors, who sought not outly
the shedding of their blood, but the utter damnation of their souls and bodies
for evermore.

So that now to conclude with the time (with hearty thanks also unto God, for
inabling me thus far, and to you (reverend and worthy Auditorie) for your
patience in hearing me hitherunto) It is I trust very apparent, with what
Hellish Furies they are possessed, which are the persecutors of Gods Church and
Children, who if they have once tasted and confessed Gods Truth, and be after
Persecutors of the same Truth and the Professors thereof; as Julian the
Apostata, and many other have been, they shall never be able to acquit
themselves of this sinue against the Holy Ghost, nor shall ever be forgiven
thereof, but eternally shall be punished in the flames of Hell.

And so much for that sin, and the punishment thereof. Now let us all praise
God, for that which has been spoken at this time, and pray we his divine
Majesty for Jesus Christ his sake, to give us a true feeling of the same, and
grace to avoid those sins we have spoken off.

That we his Children, may not henceforth as heretofore grieve the holy Spirit
of God, by our sinful and careless living. That the wicked also who are not
yet effectually called, may now at the last, yield obedience unto Gods
merciful calling, and no longer to resist the holy Spirit of God, which daily
together with the preaching his Word calls them unto Repentance.

And finally that none may ever be given over into so reprobate a fense, as to
fall into small Apostasy, and so to commit that great finne against the Holy
Ghost, never to be forginen. Now to God our heavenly Father, who in his
Wisdom has created us. To God the Son who in great Mercy redeemed us. To
God the Holy Ghost who labors continually to sanctify us.

To God I say, immort all, invisible, and only wise, be rendered of us and all
Saints and Angels in Heaven and Earth, all Honor, Glory, Praise, Power and
Majesty through Christ Jesus, from age to age, and in all Eternity.

Amen.
FINIS.

