THE RENEGADO, A TRAGAE COMEDY.

As it has been often acted by the Queens Majesty's servants, at the private
Playhouse in Drurye-Lane.

By PHILIP MASSINGER.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for John Waterson, and are to be sold at the Crown
in Paul's Churchyard. 1630.

Dramatis Personae. The Actors names. ASAMBEG, Viceroy of Tunis. John Blanye.
MVSTAPHA, Basha of Aleppo. John Sumner. VITELLI, A Gentelman of Venice
disguised. Michael Bowier. FRANCISCO, A Jesuit. William Reignalds. ANTHONIO
GRIMALDI the Renegado. William Allen. CARAZIE an Eunuch. William Robins. GAZET
servant to Vitelli. Edward Shakerley. AGA. CAPIAGA. MASTER. BOT^SVVAINE,
SAYLORS. IAILOR. 3. TVRKES. DONVSA, niece to AMVRATH. Edward Rogers. PAVLINA,
Sister to Vitelli. Theo. Bourne. MANTO, servant to Donusa.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE HARDING, Baron Barkley, of Barkley Castle, and
Knight of the Honorable Order of the BATHE.
My good Lord.
TO be Honored for old Nobility, or Hereditary Titles is not alone proper to
your Self, but to some few of your rank, who may challenge the like
privilege with you: but in our age to vouchsafe (as you have often done) a
ready hand to raise the dejected spirits of the contemned Sons of the Muses,
Such as would not suffer the glorious fire of Poesy to be wholly extinguished,
is so remarkable, and peculiar ^o your Lordship, that with a full (...) it is
acknowledged that the (...) Protection of the Dramatique (...), is yours, and
almost without (...) pair not therefore, but (...) to present my (...) your
clemency (...) pretation. (...) Your gracious acceptance of this trifle, in
which if I were not confident there are some pieces worthy the perusal, it
should have been taught an humbler flight, and the writer (Your Countryman)
never yet made happy in your notice, and favor, had not made this an advocate
to plead for his admission among such as are wholly, and sincerely devoted to
your service. I may live to tender my humble thankfulness in some higher
strain, and till then comfort my self with hope, that you descend from your
height to receive.

Your Honors Commanded Servant PHILIP MASSINGER

To my Honored Friend, Master PHILIP MASSINGER, upon his RENEGADO.
DAbblers in Poetry that only can,
Court this weak Lady, or that Gentleman,
with some loose wit in rhyme;
others that fright the time.
Into belief with mighty words, that tear
a Passage through the ear;
or Nicer men,
That through a Perspectiue will see a Play,
and use it the wrong way,
(not worth thy Pen)
Though all their Pride exalt 'em, cannot be
Competent Judges of thy Lines or thee.
I must confess I have no Public name
To rescue judgment, no Poeticke flame
to dress thy Muse with Praise,
and Phoebus his own Bays;
Yet I commend this Poem, and dare tell
the World I liked it well,
and if there be
A tribe, who in their Wisdoms dare accuse,
this offspring of thy Muse,
let them agree,
Conspire one Comedy, and they will say
It Is easier to Commend, then make a Play.
JAMES SHIRLEY.
To his worthy Friend Master PHILIP MASSENGER, on his Play, Called the RENEGADO.
THE bosom of a friend cannot breath ^oorth
A flattering phrase to speak the noble Worth
Of him that has lodged in his honest breast,
So large a title: I among the rest
That honor thee, do only seem to praise
Wanting the flowers of Art, to deck that Bays
Merit has crowned thy Temples with. Know friend
Though there are some who merely do commend
To live i^th Worlds opinion such as can
Cen^ure with I^dgement, no such piece of Man,
Makes up (...) where desert does live,
There will I plant my wonder, and there give
My best endeavors, to build up his story
That truly Merits. I did ever glory
To behold Virtue rich, though cruel Fate
In scornful malice does beat low their state
That best deserve, when others that but know
Only to scribble, and no more, often grow
Great in their favors, that would seem to be
Patrons of Wit, and modest Poesy:
Yet with your abler Friends, let me say this
Many may strive to equal you, but miss
Of your fair scope, this work of yours men may
Throw in the face of envy, and then say
To those that are in Great-mens thoughts more blessed,
Imitate this, And call that work your best.
Yet Wisemen, in this, and too often, err
When they their love before the work prefer,
If I should say more, some may blame me for it
Seeing your merits speak you, not report.
DANYEL LAKYN.
THE RENEGADO.
The Scene Tunis.
Actus primus.
Scena prima.
Enter Vitelli and Gazet. Vitelli. YOu have hirde a Shop then?

Gazet. Yes sir, and our wares
(Though brittle as a maydenhead at ^ixteene)
Are safe unladen; not a Crystal cracked,
Or China dish needs sodring; our choice Pictures
As they came from the workman, without blemish,
And I have studied speeches for each Pe^^e,
And in a thrifty tone to sell 'em off;
Will swear by (...), and (...),
That this is Mistress to the great Duke of Florence,
That Niece to old King Pippin, and a third
An Austrian Princess by her Roman nose,
How ere my conscience tells me they are figures
Of Ba^des, and common Courtezans in Venice.

Vitel. You make no scruple of an oath then?

Gaz. ^ie sir
It Is out of my Indentures, I am bound there
To swear for my Masters profit as securely
As your intelligencer must for his Prince,
That sendes him forth an honorable spy,
To serve his purposes. And if it be lawful
In a Christian shopkeeper to cheat his father,
I cannot find but to abuse a Turk
In the sale of our commodities, must be thought
A meritorious work.

Vitel. I wonder sir
What Is your Religion?

Gaz. Troth to answer truly
I would not be of one that should command me
To feed upon poor John, when I see Pheasants
And Partriges on the Table: nor do I like
The other that allows us to eat flesh
In the Lent though it be rotten, rather then be
Thought superstitious, as your zealous Cobbler,
And learned botcher Preach at Amsterdam
Over a Hotchpotch. I would not be co^fin'd
In my belief, when all your Sects, ^^ect^ries
Are grown of one opinion, if I like it
I will profess my self, in the mean time
Live I in England, Spain, France, (...)
I am of that Countries ^aith,

Vitel. And what in Tunis,
Will you turn Turk here?

Gaz. No! so I should loose
A Collop of that part my D^ll in^oyn'd me
To bring home as she left it; it is her venture,
Nor dare I barter that commodity
Without her special warrant.

Vitel. You are a Kna^e sir,
Lea^ing your Roguerie think upon my business,
It is no time to fool now
Remember where you are too! though this Mart time,
We are allowde free trading, and with safety.
Temper your tongue and meddle not with the Turks,
Their manners, nor Religion.

Gaz. Take you heed sir
What colors you wear. Not two hours since there Landed
An English Pirates Whore with a green apron,
And as she walked the streets, one of their Mufties
We call them Priests at Venice, with a Razor
Cutts it of Petticoate, Smock and all, and leaves her
As naked as my Nail: the young Fry wondering
What strange beast it should be. I escaped a scouring
My Mistres Buskepoynt, of that forbidden color
Then tide my codpeece, had it been discovered
I had been caponde.

Vitel. And had been well served;
Haste to the Shop and set my Wares in order
I will not long be absent?

Gaz. Though I strive sir
To put of Melencholy, to which, you are ever
Too much inclinde, it shall not hinder me
With my best care to serve you
Exit Gazet.
Enter Francisco. Vitel. I believe thee.
O welcome sir, stay of my steps in this life,
And guide to all my blessed hopes hereafter.
What comforts sir? have your endeavors posper'd?
Have we tirde Fortunes malice with our sufferings?
Is she at length after so many frowns
Pleased to vouchafe one cheerful look upon us?

Fran. You give too much to fortune, and your passions,
Ore which a wise man, if Religious, tryumphs.
That name fools worship, and those tyrants which
We arm against our better part, our reason,
May add, but never take from our afflictions:

Vitelli. Sir as I am a sinful man, I can not
But like one suffer.

Fran. I exact not from you
A fortitude insensible of calamity,
To which the Saint's themselves have bowde and shown
They are made of flesh, and blood, all that I challenge
Is manly patience. Will you that were trained up
In a Religious School, where divine maxims
Scorning comparison, with moral precepts
Were daily taught you, bear your constancies trial
Not like Vitelli, but a Village nurse
With curses in your mouth: Tears in your eyes?
How poorly it shows in you?

Vi. I am Schooled sir,
And will hereafter to my utmost strength
Study to be my self.

Fran. So shall you find me
Most ready to assist you; Neither have I
Slept in your great occasions since I left you
I have been at the Viceroies Court and presde
As far as they allow a Christian entrance.
And something I have learned that may concern
The purpose of this journey.

Vi. Dear Sir what is it?

Fran. By the command of Asambeg, the Viceroy:
The City swells with barbarous Pomp and Pride
For the entertainment of stout Mustapha
The Basha of Aleppo, who in person
Comes to receive the niece of Amurah^
The fair Donusa for his bride.

Vitel. I find not
How this may profit us.

Fran. Pray you give me leave.
Among the rest that wait upon the Viceroy,
(Such as have under him command in Tunis.)
Who as you have often heard are all false Pirates,
I savv the shame of Venice and the scorn
Of all good men: The periurde Renegado
Antono Grimaldy;

Vitel. Ha! his name
Is poison to me.

Fran. Yet again?

Vitel. I have done sir.

Fran. This debauchde villain: whom we ever thought^
(After his impious scorn done in Saint Marks
To me as I stood at the holy Altar)
The thief that rauish't your fair sister from you,
The virtuous Paulina not long since,
(As I am truly given to understand)
Sold to the viceroy a fair Christian Virgin,
On whom, maugre his fierce and cruel nature
Asambeg dotes extremely.

Vitel. It Is my sister
It must be she, my better Angel tells me
It Is poor Paulina. Farewell all disguises
I Will show in my revenge that I am Noble.

Fran. You are not mad?

Vitel. No sir, my virtuous anger
Makes every vein an artery, I feel in me
The strength of twenty men, and being armed
With my good cause to wreake wronged innocence
I dare alone run to the viceroys Court
And with this Poniard before his face.
Dig out Grimaldies heart.

Fran. Is this Religious?

Vitel. Would you have me tame now; Can I know my sister
Mewde up in his Serragli^, and in danger
Not alone to loose her honor, but her soul,
The hell-breed Villain by too? that has sold both
To black destruction, and not haste to send him
To the Devil his tutor? to be patient now,
Were in another name to play the Pandor
To the Viceroyes loose embraces, and cry aim
While he by force, or flaterie compels her
To yield her fair name up to his foul lust,
And after turn Apostata to the faith
That she was breed in.

Fran. D'oe but give me hearing.
And you shall soon grant how ridiculous
This childish fury is. A wise man never
Attempts impossibilities; it is as easy
For any single arm to quell an Army.
As to effect your wishes; we come hither
To learn Paulinas faith, and to redeem her,
(Leave your revenge to heaven) I often have told you
Of a Relic that I gave her, which has power
(If we may credit holy men's traditions)
To keep the owner free from violence:
This on her breast she wears, and does preserve
The virtue of it by her daily prayers.
So if she fall not by her own consent
Which it were sin to think: I fear no force.
Be therefore patient, keep this borrowed shape
Till time and opportunity present us
With some fit means to see her, which performed,
I Will join with you in any desperate course
For her delivery.

Vitel. You have Charmde me sir
And I obey in all things; Pray you pardon
The weakness of my passion.

Fran. And excuse it.
Be cheerful man for know that good intents
Are in the end Crowned with as fair events.

Exeunt. Actus primus. Scena secunda.
Enter Donusa. Manto. Carazie. Donusa. Have you seen the Christian Captive,
The great Basha is so enamourd of?

Manto. Yes an't please your Excellency
I took a full view of her, when she was
Presented to him.

Donu. And is she such a wonder
As it is reported?

Mant. She was drowned in tears then,
Which took much from her beauty, yet in spite
Of sorrow, she appeard the Mistress of
Most rare perfections; and though low of stature,
Her well proportioned limbs inuit affection;
And when she speaks, each syllable is music
That does inchaunt the hearers. But your Highness
That are not to be parallelde, I yet never
Beheld her equal.

Donusa. Come you flatter me,
But I forgive it, we that are borne great
Seldom distaste our servants, though they give us
More then we can pretend too. I have heard
That Christian Ladies live with much more freedom
Then such as are borne here. Our jealous Turks
Never permit their ^aire wives to be leene
But at the public Bannias, or the Mosques
And even then vaylde, and guarded. Thou Carazie
Were borne in England, what is the cust me there
Among your women? Come be free and merry
I am no severe Mistres, nor ha^t thou met with
A heavy bondage.

Car. Heavy? I was made lighter
By two stone weight at least to be fit to ^erue you.
But to your question Madame, women in England
For the most part live like Queens. Your Country Ladies
Have liberty to hawk, to hunt, to feast:
To give free entertainment to all comers,
To talk, to kiss, there is no such thing known there
As an Italian girdle. Your City Dam^
Without leave wears the breeches, has her husband
At as much command as her Prentice, and if need be
Can make him Cuckold by her Fathers Coppie.

Donusa. But your court Lady?

Car. She, I assure you Madame,
Knows nothing but her will, must be allovv'd
Her Footmen, her Caroch, her Vshers, her Pages,
Her Doctor, Chaplines, and as I have heard
They are grown of late so learned that they maintain
A strange Position, which their Lords with all
Their wit cannot confute.

Donusa. What Is that I prithee?

Car. Marry that it is not only fit but lavvfull,
Your Madame there, her much rest, and high feeding
Duly considered, should to ease her husband
Be allowed a private frien^. They have drawn a Bill
To this good purpose, and the next assembly
Doubt not to pass it.

Donu. We enjoy no more
That are of the Oth^man race, though our Religion
Allovves all pleasure. I am dull, some Musicque
Take my Chiapines off. So, a lusty strai^e
(a Galliard. Who knockes there?

Mant^^ It Is the Basha of Aleppo
Who humbly makes request he may present
His service to you.

Donu. Reach a chair. (...)
Receive him like our self, and not depart with
One piece of Ceremony, stare, and greatness
That may beget respect, and ^^^erence
In one that is borne our Vassal. Now admit him:

Enter Mustapha, puts of his yellow Pantophles. Musta. The place is sacred, and
I am to Enter
The room where she abides, with such devotion
As Pilgrims pay at Macha, when they visit
The Tomb of our great Prophet.

Donu. Rise, the sign
(The Eun^ch takes up the Pantophles. That we vouchafe his presence.

Musta. May those Powers
That raised the Othoman Empire, and still guard it,
Reward your Highness for this gracious favor
You throw upon your servant. It has pleased
The most invincible, mightiest Amurath
(To speak his other titles would take from him)
That in himself does comprehend all greatness,
To make me the unworthy instrument
Of his command. Receive diuinest Lady
(Delivers a letter. This letter signed by his victorious hand,
And made Authentic^ by the imperial Seal.
There when you find me mentioned, far be it from yo
To think it my ambition to presume
At such a happiness, which his powerful will
From his great minds magnificence, not my merit
Has showrd upon me. But if your consent
Join with his good opinion and allowance
To per^it what his favors have begun,
I shall in my obsequiousness and duty
Endeavor to prevent all just complaints,
Which want of will to serve you, may call on me.

Donu. His sacred Majesty writes here that your valor
Against the Persian has so vvonne upon him
That there is no grace, or honor in his gift
Of which he can imagine you ^nworthy.
And what is the greatest you can hope, or aim at,
It is his pleasure you should be received
Into his Royal Family, Provided
For^so far I am vnconfind, that I
Affect and like your person. I expect not
The Ceremony which he uses in
Bestowing of his Daughters, and his neeces.
As that he should present you for my slave,
To love you, if you pleased me: or deliver
A Ponyarde on my least dislike to kill you.
Such tyranuie and pride agree not with
My softer disposition. Let it suffice
For my first answer, that thus far I grace you.
Gives him her hand to kiss ^ereafter some time spent to make enquire
Of the good parts, and faculties of your mind
You shall hear further from me.

Mus. Though all torments
Really suffered, or in hell imaginde
By curious fiction, in one hours delay
Are wholly comprehended: I confess
That I stand bound in duty, not to check at
What ever you command, or please to impose
For trial of my patience.

Donu. Let us find
Some other subject, too much of one Theme cloyes me^
Is It a full Mart:

Mus. A confluence of all nations
Are met together? There Is variety too
Of all that Merchants trafficque for.

Donu. I know not.
I feel a Virgins longing to descend
So far from mine own greatness, as to be
Thoughnot a buyer, yet a looker on
Their strange commodities.

Mus. If without a train
You dare be seen abroad? I Will dismiss mine.
And wait upon you as a common man,
And satisfy your wishes.

Donu. I embrace it.
Provide my veil; and at the Posterne Gate
Convey us out unseen: I trouble you.

Musta. It is my happiness you daine to command me.

Exeunt. Actus primus. Scena tertia.
A shop discouerde, Gazet in it. Francisco, and Vitelli, walking by. Gaz. What
do you lack, your choice China dishes, your pure Venetian Crystal, of all
sorts, of all neat and new fashions, from the mirror of the madam, to the
private vtensile of her chamber-maide, and curious Pictures of the rarest
beauties of Europa: what do you lack Gentlemen?


Fran. Take heed I say, how ere it may appear
Impertinent, I must express my love:
My advise, and counsel. You are young
And may be tempted, and these Turkish Dames
Like English mastiues that increase their fiercenes
By being chainde up, from the restraint of freedom
If lust once fire their blood from a fair object
Will run a course the fiends themselves would shake ^
To enjoy their wanton ends.

Vitel. Sir, you mistake me
I am too full of woe, to entertain
One thought of pleasure: though all Europes Queen^
Kneeled at my feet, and Cour^ed me: much less
To mix with such; Whose difference of faith
Must of necessity: (or I must grant
My self forgetful of all you have taught me)
Strangle such ba^e desires.

Fran. Be constant in
That resolution, I Will abroad again,
And learn as far as it is possible
What may concern Paulina? Some two hours
Shall bring me back.
Exit Francisco.
Vi. All blessings wait upon you.

Gaz. Cold doings, Sir, a Mart do you call this? Slight
A pudding wife, or a Witch with a thrumbe Cappe
That sells Ale under grownd to such as come
To know their Fortunes, in a dead Vacation
Have ten to one more stirring.

Vitel. We must be patient

Gaz. Your seller by retayle ought to be angry
But when he is fingering money.

Enter Grimaldy, Master, Botes^aine, Saylors, Turks. Vi. Here are company;
Defend me my good Angel, I behold
A Basiliske!

Gaz. What do you lack? what do you lack? pure

China dishes, clear Crystal glasses, a dumb Mistres to
make love too? What do you lack gentlemen?

Gri. Thy Mother for a Bavvde, or if thou have
A hansome one thy sister for a Whore,
Without these do not tell me of your trash
Or I shall spoil your Market.

Vitel. -- Old Grimaldy?

Gri. Zoundes wherefore do we put to Sea, or stand
The Raging winds aloft, or piss upon
The Fomie waves when they rage most? deride
The thunder of the enemies shot, boorde bold^ly
A Merchants ship for prize, though we behold
The desperate Gunner ready to give fire
And blow the deck up? Wherefore shake we off
Those scrupulous rags of charity, and conscience,
Invented only to keep Churchmen warm,
Or feed the hungry months of famished beggars;
But when we touch the shore to wallovve in
All sensual pleasures.

Master. I but Noble Captain
To spare a little for an after clappe
Were not improuidence.

Gri. Hang consideration:
When this is spent is not our ship the same?
Our courage too the same to fetch in more?
The earth where it is fertillest returns not
More then three haruests, whilst the glorious Sun
Posts through the Zodiac, and makes up the year:
But the Sea, which is our Mother, (that embraces
Both the rich Indies in her outstrecht arms)
Yeeldes every day a croppe if we dare reap it.
No, no my Mates, let Tradesmen think of thrift,
And Usurers hoord up, let our expense
Be as our commings in are without bounds:
We are the Neptunes of the Ocean,
And such as trastique, shall pay sacrifice
Of their best lading; I Will have this Canuas
Your boy wears linde with Tissue, and the cates
You taste, serude up in gold; though we carouse
The tears of Orphans in our Greekish vvines,
The sighs of undone Widows, paying for
The music bought to cheer us; rauishde Virgins
To slavery sold for Coin to feed our riots,
We will have no compunction.

Gaz. Do you hear sir,
We have paid for our Ground?

Grim. Humh.

Gaz. And humh too,
For all your big words, get you further off,
And hinder not the prospect of our shop
Or --

Gri. What will you do?

Gaz. Nothing sir, but pray
Your worship to give me hansell.

Gri. By the ears,
Thus sir, by the ears.

Master. Hold, hold.

Vitel. You'^ still be prating.

Gri. Come let us be drunk? then each man to his whore,
Slight how do you look, you had best go find a Corner
To pray in, and repent. Do, do, and cry
It will show fine in Pirates.
Exit Grimaldi.
Master. We must follow
Or he will spend our shares;

Boteswaine. I fought for mine.

Master. Nor am I so precise but I can drab too:
We will not sit out for our parts,

Bot. Agreed.

Exeunt Master, Boteswaine, Saylors. Gaz. The devil gnaw off his fingers, if
he were
In London among the clubs, up went his heels
For striking of a Prentice. What do you lack,
What do you lack gentlemen.

1 Turk. I wonder how the Viceroy can endure
The insolence of this fellow.

2 Turk. He receives profit
From the Prizes he brings in, and that excuses
What ever he commits? Ha, what are these!

Enter Mustapha, Donusa, vayld. 1 T. They seem of rank and quality, observe
'em.

Gaz. What do you lack! see what you please to buy,
Wares of all sorts most honorable Madona.

Vitel. Peace sir, make no noise, these are not people
To be iested with.

Donu. Is this the Christians custom
In the venting their commodities.

Mus. Yes best Madame
But you may please to keep your way, here is nothing,
But toys, and trifles, not worth your observing.

Donu. Yes, for varieties sake pray you show us, friends,
The chiefest of your Wares.

Vitel. Your Ladyships servant;
And if in worth or Title you are more,
My ignorance plead my pardon.

Donusa. He speaks well.

Vitel. Take down the looking glass: here is a mirror
Steelde so exactely, neither taking from
Nor flattering the object, it returns
To the beholder, that Narcissus might
(And never grow enamourd of himself:)
View his fair feature in it.

Donusa. Poetical too.

Vitel. Here China dishes to serve in a Banquet,
Though the volouptus Persian sat a guest.
Here Crystal glasses, such as Ganymede
Did fill with Nectar to the Thunderer
When he drank to Alcides, and received him
In the fellowship of the gods: true to the owners^
Corinthian plate studded with Diamonds,
Conceald often deadly poison; This pure metal
So innocent is, and faithful to the Mistres
Or Master that possesses it: that rather
Then hold one drop that is venomous, of it self
It flies in pieces, and deludes the Traitor.

Donu. How mouingly could this fellow treat upon
A worthy subject, that finds such discourse
To grace a trifle!

Vitel. Here Is a Picture Madame
The master pecce of Michael Angel^,
Our great Italian workman; here is another
So perfect at all parts that had Pigmalion
Se^ne this, his prayers had been made to Venus,
To have given it life, and his Carved iuory Image
By poets nere remembered. They are indeed
The rarest beauties of the Christian world
And no where to be equaled.

Donu. You are partial
In the cause of those you favor I believe,
I instantly could show you one, to theirs
Not much inferior.

Vitel. With your pardon Madame
I am incredculous.

Donu. Can you match me this!

(Vnvailes her self. Vitelli. What wonder look I on! I Will search above
And suddenly attend you.
Exit Vitelli.
Donu. Are you amazde
^e bring you to your self.

Breaks the glasses. Musta. Ha^ what is the matter!

Gaz. My masters ware? We are undone! O strange!
A Lady to turn rorer, and break glasses
It Is time to shut up shop then.

Musta, You seem mou'de.
If any Language of these Christian dogs
Have called your anger on, in a frown show it
And they are dead already.

Donusa. The offense
Looks not so far. The foolish p^ultrie fellow
Showed me some trifles, and demanded of me
For what I valew'd at so many aspers,
A thousand Ducats. I confess he moved me;
Yet I should wrong my self should such a beggar
Receive least loss from me.

Mus. Is it no more?

Donu. No, I assure you. Bid him bring his bill
To morrow to the Palace and enquire
For one Donusa:
That word gives him passage through all the guard;
Say there he shall receive full satisfaction.
Now when you please

Mus. I wait you.

Exeunt Mustapha, Donusa, 2. Turks. 1 Turk. We must not know them, lets shift
off and vanish.

Gaz. The swines Pox overtake you, there is a curse
For a Turk that eats no Hogs flesh.

Vitel. Is she gone:

Gazet. Yes you may see her handy-worke.

Vitel. No matter.
Said she ought else?

Gaz. That you should wait upon her
And there receive Court payment, and to pass
The guards, she bids you only say you come
To one Donusa.

Vitel. How! remove the wares
Do it without reply. The Sultans niece!
I have heard among the Turks for any Lady
To show her face bare, argues love, or speaks
Her deadly hatred. What should I fear, my fortune
Is suncke so low: there cannot fall upon me
Ought worth my shunning. I will run the hazard:
She may be a means to free distres'd Paulina.
Or if offended, at the worst, to die
Is a full period to calamity.

The end of the first act.
Actus Secundus
Scena prima.
Enter Carazie, Manto. Car. In the name of wonder! Manto, what has my Lady
Done with her self since yesterday.

Manto. I know not.
Malicious men report we are all guided
In our affections by a wandering Planet?
But such a sudden change in such a person,
May stand for an example to confirm
Their false assertion.

Car. She Is now pettish, froward,
Music, discourse, observance tedious to her.

Manto. She slept not the last night: and yet prevented
The rising Sun in being up before him.
Called for a costly Bath, then willd the rooms
Should be per^um'd; Ransackde her Cabinets
For her choice, and richest Jewels: and appear^s now
Like Ci^^hia in full glory, waited on
By the fairest of the Stars.

Car, Can you guess the reason,
Why the Aga of the Ianizaries, and he
That guards the entrance of the inmost port
Were called before her.

Manto. They are both her creatures,
And by her grace prefer'de, but I am ignorant
To what purpose they were sent for.

Enter Donusa. Car. Here she comes.
Full of sad thoughts: we must stand further off.
What a frown was that!

Manto. Forbear.

Car. I pity her.

Donu. What Magicque has transformed me from my self?
Where is my Virgin pride? How have I lost
My boasted freedom? what new fire burns up
My scortched intrailes. What unknown desires
Invade, and take possession of my soul;
All virtuous objects vanished? Have I stood
The shocke of fierce temptations, stopte mine ears
Against all Siren notes lust ever sung,
To draw my bark of chastity (that with wonder
Has keept, a constant, and an honored course.)
Into the gulf of a deserude ill fame?
Now fall vnpittied? And in a moment
With mine own hands dig up a grave to bury
The monumentall heap of all my years,
Imployde in Noble actions? O my fate!
But there is no resisting. I obey thee
Imperious god of love, and willingly
Put mine own Petterson, to grace thy triumph;
Twere therefore more then cruelty in thee
To use me like a tyranne. What poor means
Must I make use of now? And flatter such,
To whom; till I betrayde my liberty,
One gracious look of mine, would have erected
An altar to my service. How now Manto!
My ever careful woman, and Carazie
Thou have been faithful too.

Car. I dare not call
My life mine own since it is yours, but gladly
Will part with it: when ere you shall command me,
And think I fall a Martyr, so my death
May give life to your pleasures.

Manto. But vouchsafe
To let me understand what you desire
Should be effected: I will undertake it
And curse my self for Cowardice if I pausde
To ask a reason why.

Donu. I am comforted,
In the tender of your service, but shall be
Confirmed in my full joys, in the performance
Yet trust me: I will not impose upon you
But what you stand ingagde for, to a Mistres,
(Such as I have been to you.) All I ask
Is faith, and secrecy.

Car. Say but you doubt me,
And to secure you I Will cut out my tongue
I am libde in the breech already.

Manto. Do not hinder
Your self by these delays.

Donusa. Thus then I Whisper
Mine own shame to you. -- O that I should blush
To speak what I so much desire to do!
And further --

Whispers, and uses vehement actions. Manto. Is this all.

Donusa. Think it not base
Although I know the office undergoes
A course construction.

Car. Course? it is but procuring
A smock imploiment, which has made more Knights,
In a Country I could name, then twenty years
Of service in the field.

Donu. You have my ends.

Manto. Which say you have arriu'de at, be not wanting
To your self, and fear not us.

Car. I know my burden
I Will bear it with delight,

Manto. Talk not, but do.

Exeunt Carazie, Manto. Do. O Love what poor shifts thou do force us too!
Exit Donusa.
Actus Secundus, Scena Secunda.
Enter Aga, Capiaga, Ianiz^^es. Aga. She was ever our good Mistres, and our
maker,
And should we check at a little hazard for her,
We were unthankful.

Capiaga. I dare pawn my head,
It Is some disguised Minion of the Court,
Sent from great Amurath, to learn from her
The Viceroys actions.

Aga. That concerns not us:
His fall may be our rise, what ere he be
He passes through my guardes.

Cap. And mine, provided
He give the word.

Enter Vitelli. Vitel. To ^aynt now being thus far,
Would argue me of Cowardice.

Aga. Stand: the word.
Or being a Christian to press thus far,
Forfeits thy life.

Vitelli. Donusa.

Aga. Pas^e in peace.

Exe^nt Aga, and (...) Vi^ What a privilege her name bears.
It Is wondrous strange!
(The Captine of the Ianiz^^ies,) If the great Officer
The guardian of the inner port deny not,

Cap, Thy warrant: Speak,
Or thou art dead.

Vitel. Donusa.

Capiaga. That protects thee, without fear, Enter.
So: discharge the watch.

Exit Vitelli, Capiaga. A Secundus Scena tertia.
Enter Carazie, Manto. Car. Though he has past the Aga, and chief Porter
This cannot be the man.

Manto. By her description I am sure it is.

Cara. O women, women^
What are you? a great Lady dote upon
A Haberdasher of small vvares^

Manto. Pish, thou have none.

Cara. No, if I had I might have served the turn:
This it is to want munition when a man
Should make a breach and Enter.

Enter Vitelli. Manto. Sir, you are vvellcome:
Think what it is to be happy and possess it.

Car. Perfume the Rooms there, and make way.
Let Music with choice notes entertain the man,
The Princess now purposes to honor.

Vit. I am ravished:

Exeunt. Actus Secundus Scena Quarta.
A Table set forth, Ie^^els and Bags upon it: loud Music^ Enter Donusa,
takes a chair, to her Carazie, Vitelli, Manto. Donusa, Sing ore the Dittie,
that I last composde
Upon my Loue-sicke passions suit, your Voice
To the Music that's plac'de yonder, we shall hear you
With more delght and pleasure.

Car. I obey you.

Song. Vitel. Is not this Tempe, or the blessed shades,
Where innocent Spirits reside? Or do I dream,
And this a heavenly vision? Howsoever
It is a sight too glorious to behold
For such a wretch as I am.

Stands amazde. Car. He is daunted.

Mant. Speak to him Madam, cheer him up, or you
Destroy what you have builded.

Car. Would I were furnishde
With his artillery, and if I stood
Gaping as he does, hang me.

Vit. That I might ever dream thus.

kneeles. Donu. Banish amazement,
You, wake; your debtor tells you so, your debtor,
And to assure you that I am a substance
And no aaeriall figure, thus I raise you.
Why do you shake? My soft touch brings no Ague,
No biting frost is in this palm: Nor are
My looks like to the Gorgons head, that turn
Men into Statues, rather they have power
(Or I have been abusde) where they bestow
Their influence (let me prove it truth in you)
To g^ue to dead men motion.

Vitel. Can this be?
May I believe my senses? Dare I think
I have a memory? Or that you are
That excellent creature, that of late disdain'de not
To look on my poor trifles.

Donu. I am she.

Vitell. The owner of that blessed name Donusa,
Which like a potent charm, although pronounc'de
By my profane, but much vnworthyer tongue,
Has brought me safe to this forbidden place,
Where Christian yet never trod.

Donu. I am the same.

Vitell. And to what end, great Lady pardon me,
That I presume to ask, did your command
Command me hither? or what am I? to whom
You should vouchsafe your favors; nay, your angers?
If any wild or vncollected speech
Offensiuely delivered, or my doubt
Of your unknown perfections, have displeasde you,
You wrong your indignation, to pronounce
Your self my sentence: to have seen you only,
And to have touchde that fortune-making hand,
Will with delight weigh down all tortures, that
A flinty hangmans rage could execute,
Or rigide tyranny command with pleasure.

Donu. How the abundance of good flowing to thee,
Is vvrongde in this simplicity: and these bounties
Which all our ^asterne Kings have kneeld in vain for,
Do by thy ignorance, or vvilfull fear,
Meet with a false construction. Christian, know
(For till thou art mine by a nearer name,
That title though abhord here, takes not from
Thy entertainment) that it is not the fashion
Among the greatest and the fairest Dames,
This Turkish Empire gladly owes, and bows to:
To punish where there is no offense, or nourish
Displeasures against those, without who^e mercy
They part with all felicity. Prithee be wise,
And gently understand me; Do not force her
That never knew ought but to command, not ere read
The elements of affection, but from such
As gladly sude to her, in the infancy
Of her newborn desires, to be at once
Importunate, and immodest.

Vitel. Did I know.
Great Lady your commands, or to what purpose
This personated passion tends, (since twere
A crime in me deserving death, to think
It is your own: I should to make you sport
Take any shape you please to impose upon me:
And with joy strive to serve you.

Donu. Sport? thou art cruel,
If that thou can interpret my descent,
From my high birth and greatness? But to be
A part in which I truly act my self.
And I must hold thee for a dull spectator
If it stir not affection, and inuit
Compassion for my sufferings. Be thou taught
By my example, to make satisfaction
For wrongs unjustly offered. Willingly
I do confess my fault; ^ iniurd thee
In some poor petty trifles; Thus I pay for
The trespass I did to thee. Here recei^e
These baggs stuffed full of our imperial coin,
Or if this payment be too light, take here
These Iems for which the slavish Indian diue^
To the bottom of the Maine? Or if thou scorn
These as base dross (which take but common minds)
But fancy any honor in my gift
(Which is unbounded as the Sultans Power)
And be possessed often.

Vitel. I am ouerwhelm'd:
With the weight of happiness you throw upon me.
Nor can it fall in my imagination,
What wrong I ere have done you: and much less
How like a Royal Merchant to return
Your great magnificence.

Donu. They are degrees,
Not ends of my intended favors to thee.
These seeds of bounty I yet scatter on
A glebe I have not tried, but be thou thankful
The harvest is to come.

Vitel. What can be added
To that which I already have recieu'd,
I cannot comprehend.

Donusa. The tender of
Myself. Why do thou start! and in that gift,
Full restitution of that Virgin freedom
Which thou have robbed me of. Yet I profess
I so far prize the lovely thief that stole it,
That were it possible thou could restore
What thou unwittingly have ravished from me,
I should refuse the present.

Vitelli. How I shake
In my constant resolution^ and my flesh
Rebellious to my better part now tells me,
As if it were a strong defense of frailty.
A Hermit in a desert trenchd with prayers
Could not resist this battery.

Donu. Thou an Italian?
Nay more I know it, a natural Venetian,
Such as are Courtiers borne to please fair Ladies,
Yet come thus slowely on?

Vitel. Excuse me Madame,
What imputation so ere the world
Is pleased to lay upon us: in my self
I am so innocent that I know not what it is
That I should offer.

Donusa. By instinct I Will teach thee,
And with such ease as love makes me to ask it.
When a young Lady wrings you by the hand thus,
Or with an amorous touch presses your foot
Looks babies in your eyes, plays with your locks,
Do not you find without a tutors help
What it is she looks for.

Vitelli. I am grown already
Skillful in the mystery.

Donu. Or if thus she kiss you,
Then tast's your lips again.

Vitel. That latter blow
Has beat all chaste thoughts from me.

Donu. Say she points to
Some private room, the Sun beams never enters,
Provoking dishes, passing by to heighten
Declined appetite, active Musicque vshering
Your faynting steps, the wayters too as borne dumb,
Not daring to look on you.

Exit, inuiting him to follow. Vitelli. Though the Devil
Stood by, and rorde, I follow: now I find
That Virtue's but a word, and no sure guard
If set upon by beauty, and reward.

Exeunt. Actus Secundus, Scaena Quinta.
Enter Aga, Capiaga, Grimaldi, Master, Boteswaine, etc. Aga. The Devils in him
^ think.

Gri. Let him be damned too
I Will look on him though he stard as wild as hell,
Nay I Will go near to tell him to his teeth
If he mends not suddenly, and proves more thankful,
We do him too much service, were it not for shame now
I could turn honest and forswear my trade,
Which next to being trust up at the maine yard
By some low country butterbox, I hate
As deadly as I do fasting, or long grace
When meat cooles on the table.

Capi. But take heed,
You know his violent nature.

Gri. Let his Whores
And Catamites, know it, I understand my self,
And how unmanly it is to sit at home
And rail at us, that run abroad all hazards:
If every week we bring not home new pillage,
For the fatting his Serraglio.

Enter Asamb^^g, Mustapha. Aga. Here he comes.

Capi. How terrible he looks?

Gri. To such as fear him:
The viceroy Asambeg were he the Sultans self
He will let us know a reason for his fury,
Or we must take leave without his allowance
To be merry with our ignorance.

Asam. Mahomets hell
Light on you all, you chrouch, and cringe now, where
Was the terror of my just frowns, when you suffered
Those thieves of Malta, almost in our harbor
To board a ship, and bear her safely off,
While you stood idle lookers on?

Aga. The ods
In the men and shipping, and the suddenness
Of their departure yielding us no leisure
To send forth others to relieve our own,
Deterd us mighty Sir.

Asam. Deterde you cowards?
How durst you only entertain the knowledge
Of what fear was, but in the not performance
Of our command? in me great Amurah spoke,
My voice did echo to your ears his thunder,
And wild you like so many Seaborne-Tritons,
Armed only with the Trumpets of your courage,
To swim up to her, and like Remoras.
Hanging upon her keele, to stay her flight
Till rescue sent from us, had fetched you off,
You think you are safe now; who durst but dispute it
Or make it questionable, if this moment
I charged you from you hanging cliffe, that glasses
His rugged forhead in the neighbor lake,
To throw your selves down headlong? or like fago^s
To fill the ditches of defended Forts,
While on your backs we marched up to the breac

Gri. That would not I.

Asam. Ha?

Gri. Yet I dare as much
As any of the Sultans boldest sons,
(Whose heaven, and hell, hang on his frown, or smile,)
His warlike Ianisaries.

Asam. Add one syllable more
Thou do pronounce upon thy self a sentence
That earthquake-like will swallow the

Gri. Let it open,
I Will stand the hazard, those contemned thieves
Your fellow Pirates Sir, the bold Malteze
Whom with your looks you think to quell, at Rhodes
Laugh'de at great Solymans anger: and if treason
Had not deliuerde them into his power,
He had grown old in glory as in years.
At that so fatal siege, or risne with shame
His hopes, and threats deluded.

Asambeg. Our great Prophet
How have I lost my anger, and my Power^

Grima. Find it and use it on thy flatterers:
And not upon thy friends that dare speak truth,
These Knights of Malta but a handful to
Your armies that drink rivers up, have stood
Your fury at the height, and with their crosses
Struck pale your horned moons; These men of Malta
Since I took pay from you, I have met and fought with.
Upon advantage too. Yet to speak truth
By the soul of honor, I have ever found them
As provident to direct, and bold to do
As any trained up in your discipline:
Rauishde from other nations.

Mus. I perceive
The lightning in his fiery looks, the cloud
Is broke already.

Gri. Think not therefore sir,
That you alone are Giants, and such Pigmies
You war upon.

Asam. Villain I Will make thee know
Thou have blasphemde the Ottoman power, and safer
At noone day might have given fire to St Marks
Your proud Venetian Temple. Ceize upon him;
I am not so near reconcild to him
To bid him die: that were a benefit
The dog's unworthy off, to our use confiscate
All that he stands possesde of: Let him taste
The misery of want, and his vain riots
Like to so many walking Ghosts affright him
Where ere he sets his desperate foot. Who is it
That does command you?

Grimal. Is this the reward
For all my service, and the rape I made
On fair Paulina.

Asam. Drag him hence, he dies
That dallies but a minute.

Botes. What Is become

Grimaldi dragde off, his head covered. Exeunt Master and Boatswaine. Of our
shares now Master.
Must. Would he had been borne dumb:
The beggars cure, patience is all that is left us.

Maust. It Was but intemperance of speech, excuse him

Let me prevail so far. Fame gives him out
For a deserving fellow.
Asam. At Aleppo
I durst not press you so far, give me leave
To use my own will and command in Tunis
And if you please my priuacie.

Musta. I will see you
When this high wind's blown ore.
Exit Mustapha.
Asam. So shall you find me
Ready to do you service. Rage now leave me
Stern looks, and all the ceremonious forms
Attending on dread Majesty, fly from
Transformed Asambeg, why should I hug

plucks out a guilt key. So near my heart, what leads me to my prison?
Where she that is inthrald commands her keeper,
And robs me of the fierceness I was borne with.
Stout men quake at my frowns, and in return
I tremble at her softness. Base Grimaldi
But only named Paulina, and the charm
Had almost chok'd my fury ere I could
Pronounce his sentence. Would when first I saw her
Mi^^ eyes had met with lightning, and in place
Of hearing her enchanting tongue, the shrikes
Of Mandrakes had made music to my slumbers,
For now I only walk a loving dream
And but to my dishonor never wake,
And yet am blind, but when I see the object,
And madly dote on it. Appear bright spark
opens a door, Paulina discouerd comes forth. Of all perfection: any si^ile
Borow'd from Diamonds, or the fairest stars
To help me to express, how dear I prize
The unmatched graces, will rise up and chide me
For poor detraction.
Pau. I despise thy flatteries
Thus spit at'em, and scorn 'em, and being armed
In the assurance of my innocent virtue
I stamp upon all doubts, all fears, all tortures
Thy barbarous cruelty, or what is worse, thy dotage
(The worthy parent of thy jealousy)
Can shower upon me.

Asam. If these bitter taunts
Ravish me from my self, and make me think
My greedy ears receive Angelical sounds,
How would this tongue tunde to a loving note
Invade, and take possession of my soul
Which then I durst not call mine own.

Pau. Thou art false,
Falser then thy religion. Do but think me
Something above a beast; nay more, a monster,
Would fright the Sun to look on, and then tell me
If this base usage, can inuit affection?
If to be mewde up, and excluded from
Humane society; the use of pleasures;
The necessary, not superfluous duties
Of servants to discharge those offices,
I blush to name.

Asam. Of servants? can you think
That I that dare not trust the eye of Heaven
To look upon your beauties, that deny
My self the happenesse to touch your pureness
Will ere consent an Eunuch, or bought handmaid
Shall once approach you? there is something in you
That can work Miracles, or I am consende,
Dispose and alter sexes. To my vvrong
In spite of nature. I will be your nurse,
Your woman, your physician, and your fool,
Till with your free consent, which I have vowde
Never to force, you grace me with a name
That shall supply all these.

Paul. What is it?

Asa. Your husband.

Pau. My hangman when thou please.

Asam. Thus I guard me,
Against your further angers.

Puts to the door and locks it. Paul. Which shall reach thee
Though I were in the Center.

Asam. Such a spirit
In such a small proportion I nere read of
Which time must alter, ravish her I dare not
The magique that she wears about her neck,
I think defends her, this devotion paid
To this sweet Saint, mistress of my sower pain
It Is fit I take mine own rough shape again.
Exit Asambeg.
Actus Secundus, Scaena Sexta.
Enter Franciso, Gazet. Fran. I think he is lost.

Gazet. It Is ten to one of that,
I nere knew Citizen turn Courtier yet,
But he lost his credit, though he saved himself
Why, look you sir, there are so many lobbies,
Out offices, and disputations here
Behind these Turkish hangings, that a Christian
Hardly gets off but circumcised.

Fran. I am troublde

Enter Vitelli, Carazie, Manto, Troublde exceedingly. Ha! what are these?
Gaz. One by his rich suit should be some french Ambassador
For his train I think they are Turks.

Fran. Peace, be not seen.

Cara. You are now past all the gards, and vndiscouerd
You may return.

Vitel. There Is for your pains, forget not
My humblest service to the best of Ladies.

Manto. Deserve her favor sir, in making haste
For a second entertainment.

Vitel. Do not doubt me,

Exeunt Carazi, Manto. I shall not live till then.
Gaz. The train is vanished
They have done him some good office he is so free
And liberal of his gold. Ha, do I dream,
Or is this mine own natural Master;

Fran. It Is he,
But strangely metamorphosde. You have made sir.
A prosperous voyage, heaven grant it be honest,
I shall rejoice then too.

Gaz. You make him blush
To talk of honesty, you were but now
In the giving vain, and may think of Gazet
Your worships prentice.

Vitel. There Is gold, be thou free too
And Master of my shop, and all the wares
We brought from Venice.

Gaz. Riuo then.

Vitel. Dear sir
This place affords not priuacie for discourse
But I can tell you wonders, my rich habit
Deserves least admiration; there is nothing
That can fall in the compass of your wishes
Though it were to redeem a thousand slaves
From the Turkish galleys, or at home to erect
Some pious work, to shame all Hospitalls,
But I am master of the means.

Fran. It Is strange.

Vitel. As I walk I Will tell you more.

Gaz. Pray you a word Sir,
And then I will put on. I have one boon more.

Vitel. What is it? speak freely^

Gaz. Thus then, as I am Master
Of your Shop, and vvares, pray you help me to some trucking
With your last she customer, though she crack my best piece
I will endure it with patience.

Vitel. Leave your prating.

Gaz. I may, you have been doing, we will do too.

Fran. I am amazde, yet will nor blame, nor chide you,
Till you inform me further. Yet must say
They steer not the right course, nor traffic well,
That seek a passage to reach Heaven, through Hell.

Exeunt Actus Tertius.
Scaena prima,
Enter Donusa, Manto. Donusa. When said he, he would come again?

Manto. He swore,
Short Minutes should be tedious Ages to him,
Until the tender of his second service,
So much he seemde transported with the first.

Donu. I am sure I was. I charge thee Manto tell me
By all my favors, and my bounties truly
Whether thou art a Virgin, or like me
Have forfeited that name.

Manto. A Virgin Madame?
At my years being a wayting-woman, and in Court to?
That were miraculous. I so long since lost
That barren burden, I almost forget
That ever I was one.

Donu. And could thy friends
Read in thy face, thy ma^denhead gone, that thou
Had parted with it?

Manto. Noe indeed. I past
For current many years after, till by fortune,
Long and continewed practice in the sport
Blew up my deck, a husband then was found out
By my indulgent father, and to the world
All was made whole again. What need you fear then
That at your pleasure may repair your honor
Durst any envious, or malicious tongue,
Presume to taint it?

Donu. How now?

Enter Carazie. Cara. Madam, the Basha
Humbly desires access.

Donu. If it had been
My neat Italian, thou had met my vvishes.
Tell him we would be private.

Cara. So I did,
But he is much importunate.

Manto. Best dispatch him
His lingering here else will deter the other,
From making his approach.

Donu. His entertainment
Shall not inuit a second visit, go
Say we are pleased.

Enter Mustapha. Musta. All happiness.

Donu. Be sudden
It Was saucy rudeness in you sir to press
On my retirements, but ridiculous folly
To vvast the time that might be better spent
In complementall vvishes.

Cara. There Is a coolling
For his hot encounter.

Donu. Come you here to stare?
If you have lost your tongue, and use of speech,
Resign your government, there is a mutes place void
In my uncles Court I hear, and you may work me
To write for your preferment.

Musta. This is strange!
I know not Madam, what neglect of mine
Has calde this scorn upon me.

Donu. To the purpose
My will's a reason, and we stand not bound
To yield account to you.

Must. Not of your angers,
But with erected ears I should hear from you
The story of your good opinion of me
Confirmde by love, and favors.

Donu. How deserved?
I have considered you from head to foot,
And can find nothing in that waynscote face,
That can teach me to dote, nor am I taken
With your grimme aspect, or toadepoole-like complexion,
Those scarres you glory in, I fear to look on;
And had much rather hear a merry tale
Then all your battayles won with blood and sweat,
Though you belch forth the stincke too, in the service,
And swear by your Mustachios all is true.
You are yet too rough for me, purge and take physic,
Purchase perfumers, get me some French tailor,
To new create you; the first shape you were made with
Is quite worn out, let your barbar wash your face too,
You look yet like a bugbeare to fright children,
Till when I take my leave, wait me Carazie.

Exeunt Must. Stay you my Ladies Cabinet key.

Donu. Car. Mant. How Is this sir?

Must. Stay and stand quietly, or you shall fall else,
Not to firke your belly up flounder like, but never
To rise again. Offer but to unlock
These doors that stop your fugitive tongue (observe me)
And by my fury, I Will fix there this bolte
To bar thy speech for ever. So, be safe now
And but resolve me, not of what I doubt
But bring assurance to a thing believed,
Thou make thy self a fortune, not depending
On the uncertain favors of a Mistress,
But art thy self one. I Will not so far question
My judgment, and observance, as to ask
Why I am slighted, and contemnde, but in
Whose favor it is done. I that have read
The copious volumes of all women's falsehood,
Commented on by the heart breaking groans
Of abusde lovers, all the doubts washde off
With fruitless tears, the Spiders oobweb veil
Of arguments, allege in their defense,
Blown off with sighs of desperate men, and they
Appearing in their full deformity:
Know that some other has displanted me,
With her dishonor. Has she given it up?
Confirm it in two sillables?

Manto. She has.

Musta. I cherish thy confession thus, and thus,

gives her jewels. Be mine, again I court thee thus, and thus
Now prove but constant to my ends.
Manto. By all --

Must. Enough, I dare not doubt thee. O land Corcodiles
Made of Egyptian stime, accursed women!
But it is no time to rail: come my best Manto.

Exeunt Actus tertius, Scaena Secunda.
Enter Vitelli, Francisco. Vitel Sir, as you are my confessor, you stand bound
Not to reveal what ever I discover
In that Religious way: nor dare I doubt you.
Let it suffice, you have made me see my follies,
And wrought perhaps compunction; For I would not
Appear an Hyppocrite. But when you impose
A penance on me, beyond flesh, and blood
To undergo: you must instruct me how
To put off the condition of a man:
Or if not pardon, at the least, excuse
My disobedience. Yet despair not sir,
For though I take mine own way, I shall do
Something that may hereafter to my glory,
Speak me your Scholar.

Fran. I inioyne you not
To go, but send.

Vitel. That were a petty trial
Not worth one so long taught, and exercisde
Under so grave a master. Reverend Francisco
My friend, my father, in that word, my all;
Rest confident, you shall hear something of me
That will redeem me in your good opinion,
Or judge me lost for ever. Send Gazet
(She shall give order that he may have entrance)
To acquaint you with my fortunes.
Exit Vitelli.
Fran. Go and prosper,
Holy Saints guide and strengthen thee. Howsoever
As my endeauours are, so may they find
Gracious acceptance.

Enter Gazet, Grimaldi, in rags. Gaz. Now you do not rore sir
You speak not tempests, nor take eare-rent from
A poor shopkeeper. Do you remember that sir,
I wear your marks here still.

Fran. Can this be possible?
All wonders are not ceased then.

Grimal. Do, abuse me,
Spit on me, spurn me, pull me by the nose,
Thrust out these fiery eyes, that yesterday
Would have lookde thee dead.

G^az. O save me sir.

G^i. Fear nothing,
I am tame, and quiet, there is noe vvrong can force me
To remember what I was. I have forgot,
^ere had irefull fierceness, a steelde heart,
Insensible of compassion to others,
Nor is it fit that I should think my self
Worth mine own pity, Oh.

Fran. Grows this deiection,
From his disgrace do you say?

Gaz. Why he is cassherde sir,
His ships, his goods, his liuery-puncks confiscate,
And there is such a punishment laid upon him,
The miserable rogue must steal no more,
Nor drink, nor drab.

Fran. Does that torment him?

Gazet. O Sir!
Should the State take order to bar men of acres,
From those two laudable recreations,
Drinking, and whoring, how should Panders purchase,
Or thrifty Whores build Hospitals? slid if I
That since I am made free, may write my self,
A City gallant, should forfeit two such charters
I should be stoned to death, and nere be pitied,
By the li^eries of those companies.

Fran. You Will be whipped sir,
If you bridle not your tongue. Haste to the Palace
Your Master looks for you.

Ga^. My quondam Master,
Rich sons forget they ever had poor fathers,
In servants it is more pardonable; as a companion,
Or so, I may consent, but is there hope sir,
He has got me a good chapwoman? pray you write
A word or two in my behalf.

Fran. Out rascal.

Gaz, I feel some insurrections.

Fran. Hence.

Gaz. I vanish.
Exit Gazet.
Gri. Why should I study a defense, or comfort?
In whom black guilt, and misery if balanced,
I know not which would turn the scale, look upward
I dare not, for should it but be believed,
That I (did deep in hells most horrid colors,)
Should dare to hope for mercy, it would leave
No check or feeling, in men innocent
To catch at sins, the devil nere taught mankind yet,
No, I must downward, downward, though repentance
Could borrow all the glorious wings of grace,
My mountainous weight of sins, would crack their pinions,
And sincke them to hell with me.

Fran. Dreadful! hear me,
Thou miserable man.

Grima. Good sir deny not,
But that there is no punishment beyond
Damnation.

Enter Master, Boteswaine. Master. Yonder he is, I pity him.

Botes. Take comfort Captain, we live still to serve you,

Gri. Serve me? I am a devil already, leave me,
Stand further off, you are blasted else, I have heard
Schoolmen affirm man's body is composed
Of the four elements, and as in league together
They nourish life; So each of them affords
Liberty to the soul, when it grows weary
Of this fleshie prison. Which shall I make choice of?
The fire? n (I shall feel that hereafter)
The earth will not receive me^ Should some whirlewind
Snatch me into the air: and I hang there,
Perpetual plagues would dwell upon the earth.
And those superior bodies that power down
Their cheerful influence deny to pass it,
Through those vast regions I have infected.
The (Sea) I that is justice there, I ploude up
Mischief as deep as Hell there: there l'le hide
This cursed lump of clay may it turn Rocks
Where plummets weight could never reach the sands.
And grind the ribs of all such barks as press
The Oceans breast in my unlawful course.
I haste then to thee, let thy ravenous womb
Whom all things else deny, be now my tomb.
Exit Gri.
Master. Follow him and restrain him.

Fran. Let this stand
For an example to you. I Will provide
A lodging for him, and apply such cures
To his wounded conscience, as heaven has lent me.
He Is now my second care: and my profession
Binds me to teach the desperate to repent
As far as to confirm the innocent.

Exeunt. Actus tertius, Scaena tertia.
Enter Asambeg, Mustapha, Aga, Capiaga. Asambeg. Your pleasure,

Mus. I'will exact your private ear,
And when you have receiude it, you will think
Too many know it.

Exeunt Aga, Capiaga. Asambeg. Leave the room, but be
Within our call. Now sir, what burning secret brings you
(With which it seems you are turnde Cynders)
To quench in my advise, or power?

Mustapha. The fire
Will rather reach you.

Asam. Me?

Musta. And consume both,
For it is impossible to be put out
But with the blood of those that kindle it:
And yet one vial of it is so precious,
It being borrowed from the Ottoman spring,
That better it is I think, both we should perish
Then prove the desperate means that must restrain it,
From spreading further.

Asam. To the point, and quickly.
These vvinding circumstances in relations
Seldom enuiron truth.

Musta. Truth Asambeg?

Asam. Truth Mustapha. I said it, and add more
You touch upon a string that to my ear,
Does sound Donusa.

Musta. You then understand
Who it is I aim at.

Asam. Take heed Mustapha,
Remember what she is, and whose we are;
It Is her neglect perhaps, that you complain of,
And should you practice to revenge her scorn,
With any plot to taynt her in her honor,

Musta. Hear me.

Asam. I will be heard first, there is no tongue
A subject owes, that shall out thunder mine.

Musta. Well take your way.

Asam. I then again repeat it
If Mustapha dares with malicious breath
(On jealous suppositions) presume
To blast the blossom of Donusas Fame
Because he is denide a happiness
Which men of equal, nay of more desert,
Have su'd in vain for.

Musta. More?

Asam. More. It Was I spoke it,
The Basha of Natolia and my self
Were Riualls for her, either of us brought
More Victories, more Trophies, to plead for us
To our great Master, then you dare lay claim to,
Yet still by his allowance she was left
To her election, each of us owed nature
As much for outward form, and inward vvorth
To make way for us to her grace and favor,
As you brought with you. We were heard, repulsed
Yet thought it no dishonor to sit down,
With the disgrace; if not to force affection,
May merit such a name.

Musta. Have you done yet?

Asa. Be therefore more then sure the ground on which
You raise your accusation, may admit
No undermining of defense in her,
For if with pregnant and apparent proofes^
Such as may force a judge, more then inclined
Or partial in her cause to swear her guilty;
You win not me to set off your belief,
Neither our ancient friendship, nor the rites,
Of sacred hospitality (to which
I would not offer violence) shall protect you:
Now when you please.

Must. I will not dwell upon
Much circumstance, yet cannot but profess
With the assurance of a loyalty,
Equal to yours, the reverence I owe,
The Sultan, and all such his blood makes sacred;
That there is not a vein of mine which yet is
Vnemptied in his service, but this moment
Should freely open, so it might vvash off
The staynes of her dishonor, could you think?
Or though you saw it credit your own eyes?
That she, the wonder and amazement of
Her sex, the pride, and glory of the empire,
That has disdained you, slighted me, and boasted
A frozen coldness which no appetite,
Or height of blood could thaw, should now so far
Be hurried with the violence of her lust,
As in it burying her high birth and fame,
Basely descend to fill a Christians arms
And to him yield her Virgin honor up,
Nay sue to him to take it.

Asam. A Christian?

Must. Temper
Your admiration: and what Christian think you?
No Prince disguised; no man of mark, nor honor,
No daring undertaker in our service,
But one whose lips her foot should scorn to touch,
A poor Mechanicke-Pedler.

Asam. He?

Must. Nay more,
Whom do you think she made her scout, nay baude,
To find him out but me? What place makes choice of
To wallow in her foul and loathsome pleasures,
But in the palace? Who the instruments
Of close conueyance, but the captain of
Your guard the Aga, and that man of trust
The warden of the inmost port? I Will prove this,
And though I fail to show her in the act,
Glew'd like a neighing Gennet to her Stallion,
Your incredulity shall be conuinc'd
With proofs I blush to think on.

Asam. Never yet,
This flesh felt such a fever, by the life
And fortune of great Amura'h, should our prophet
(Whose name I bow to) in a vision speak this,
It Would make me doubtful of my faith: lead on,
And when my eyes, and ears, are like yours, guilty,
My rage shall then appear, for I will do
Something; but what, I am not yet determined.

Exeunt. Actus Tertius, Scaena Quarta.
Enter Carazie, Manto, Gazet. Carazie. They are private to their wishes,

Mant. Doubt it not.

Gaz. A pretty structure this! a court do you call it?
Valted and arched: O here has been old iumbling
Behind this arras.

Car. Prithee let us have some sport,
With this fresh Codshead.

Manto. I am out of tune,
But do as you please. My conscience^ tush the hope
Of liberty throws that burden off,
I must go watch, and make discovery.
Exit.
Cara. He Is musing,
And will talk to himself, he cannot hold,
The poor foole's ravished.

Gazet. I am in my masters clothes,
They fit me to a hair too, let but any
Indifferent gamester measure us inch, by inch,
Or vvaigh us by the standard, I may pass
I have been proved, and proved again, true metal.

Car. How he suruayes himself.

Gaz. I have heard that some
Have feol'd themselves at Court into good fortunes,
That never hoped to thrive by wit in the City,
Or honesty in the Country. If I do not
Make the best laugh at me, he weep for my self,
If they give me hearing. It Is resolu^d I'^ try
What may be done. By your favor ^ir, I pray you
Were you borne a Courtier?

Cara. No sir, why do you ask?

Gaz. Because I thought that none could be preferred,
But such as were begot there.

Car. O sir! many, and howsoere you are a Citizen borne,
Yet if your mother were a handsome woman,
And ever longed to see a Mask at Court,
It is an even lay but that you had
A Courtier to your Father; and I think so;
You bear your self so sprightly.

Gaz. It may be,
But pray you sir, had I such an itch upon me
To change my copy, is there hope a place
May be had here for money?

Car. Not without it
That I dare vvarrant you.

Gaz. I have a pretty stock,
And would not have my good parts vndiscouer'd,
What places of credit are there?

Car. There Is your Beglerbeg.

Gaz. By no means that, it comes to near the beggar
And most prove so that come there.

Car. Or your Sanzacke.

Gaz. Saus-iacke fie none of that.

Car. Your Chiaus.

Gaz. Not that.

Car. Chief Gardener.

Gaz. Out upon it,
Twill put me mind my Mother was an herb-woman,
What is your place I pray you?

Car. Sir an Euenuch.

Gaz. An Euenuch! very fine, I faith, an Euenuch!
And what are your employments? neat and easy.

Car. In the day ^ wait on my Lady when she eats,
Carry her pantophles, bear up her train
Sing her asleep at night, and when she pleases
I am her bedfellow.

Gaz^ How? her bedfellow,
And lie with her?

Car. Yes, and lie with her.

Gaz. O rare!
I Will be an Eunuch, though I sell my shop for it
And all my wares.

Car. It is but parting with
A precious stone or two. I know the price on it.

Gaz. I Will part with all my stones, and when I am
An Eunuch, I Will so toss and towse the Ladies;
Pray you help me to a chapman.

Car. The court Surgion
Shall do you that favor.

Gaz. I am made! an Eunuch!

Enter Manto. Manto. Carazie, quit the room.

Car. Come sir, we will treat of
Your business further.

Gaz. Excellent! an Eunuch!

Exeunt. Actus Tertius. Scaena Quinta.
Enter Donusa, Vitelli. Vitelli, Leave me, or I am lost again, no prayers,
No penitence, can redeem me.

Donusa. Am I grown
Old, or deformed since yesterday?

Vitel. You are still,
Although the sating of your lust has sullied
The imaculate whiteness of your Virgin beauties,
Too fair for me to look on. And though pureness,
The sword with which you ever fought, and conquered,
Is ravished from you by unchaste desires,
You are too strong for flesh and blood to treat with,
Though iron grates were interposed between us,
To warrant me from treason.

Donusa. Whom do you fear?

Vitel. That humane frailety I took from my mother,
That, as my youth increased, grew stronger on me,
That still pursues me, and though once recouer'd
In scorn of reason, and what is more, religion,
A gain seeks to betray me.

Donusa. If you mean sir,
To my embraces, you turn rebel to
The laws of nature, the great Queen, and Mother
Of all productions, and deny allegiance.
Where you stand bound to pay it.

Vitel. I will stop
Mine ears against these charms, which if Ulysses
Could live again, and he are this second Siren,
Though bound with Cables to his Mast, his Ship too
Fastened with all her Anchors, this enchantment
Would force him in despite of all resistance,
To leap into the Sea, and follow her,
Although destruction with outstretch'd arms,
Stood ready to receive him.

Donusa. Gentle sir,
Though you deny to hear me, yet vouchsafe
To look upon me. Though I use no language
The grief for this unkind repulse, will print
Such a dumb eloquence upon my face,
As will not only plead, but prevail for me.

Vitelli, I am a cowar'd, I will see and here you,
The trial else is nothing, Nor the conquest,
My temperance shall crown me with hereafter,
Worthy to be remembered. Up my virtue
And holy thoughts, and resolutions arm me,
Against this fierce temptation; give me voice
Tuned to a zealous anger to express
At what an ouerualue I have purchased,
The vvanton treasure of your Virgin bounties,
That in their false fruition heap upon me
Despair, and horror; that I could with that ease
Redeem my forfeit innocence, or cast up
The poison I received into my entrayles,
From the alluring cup of your inticements
As now I do deliver back the price,

returns the Casket. And salarie of your lust: or thus unclothe me
Of sins gay trappings, (the proud livery
Throws off his cloak and doublet. Of wicked pleasure) which but worn, and
heated
With the fire of entertaynement, and consent,
Like to Alcides fatal shirt, tears off
Our flesh, and reputation both together,
Leaving our vlcerous follies bare, and open,
To all malicious censure.
Donu. You must grant,
If you hold that a loss to you, mine equals,
If not transcends it. If you then first tasted
That poison as you call it, I brought with me
A palate unacquainted with the relish
Of those delights which most (as I have heard)
Greedily swallow; and then the offense
(If my opinion may be believed)
Is not so great: how ere, the wrong no more
Then if Hippolli^^ and the Virgin Huntresse,
Should meet and kiss together.

Vitel. What defenses
Can lust raise to maintain a precipice

Asambeg and Musta. above To the Abisse of loosenes? but affords not
The least stayre, or the fastening of one foot,
To reascend that glorious height we fell from.
Musta. By Mahomet she courts him.

Asam. Nay kneeles to him;
Observe the scornful villain turns away too,
As glorying in his conquest.

Donu. Are you Marble?

kneeles If Christians have mothers, sure they share in
The tigresse fierceness, for if you were owner
Of humane pity, you could not endure
A Princes to kneel to you, or look on
These falling tears which hardest rocks would soften,
And yet remain unmoved. Did you but give me
A taste of happiness in your embraces
That the remembrance of the sweetness of it
Might leave perpetual bitterness behind it?
Or showed me what it was to be a wife,
To live a vvidow ever?
Asam. She has confessed it;

Enter Capiaga, Aga, with others. Ceise on him villains. O the furies.
Donusa. How!
Asambeg and Mustapha descend. Are we betrayed?

Vitel. The better, I expected
A Turkish Faith.

Donu. Who am I that you dare this?
It Is I that do command you to forbear
A touch of violence.

Aga. We already Madam
Have satisfied your pleasure further then
We know to answer it.

Capi. Would we were well off,
We stand too far engaged I fear.

Donu. For us?
We'll bring you safe off, who dares contradict
What is our pleasure?

Enter Asambeg, Mustapha. Asam. Spurn the dog to prison,
I Will answer you anon.

Vitel. What punishment
So ere I undergo, I am still a Christian.

Ex. with Vitel. Donu. What bold presumption's this? under what law
Am I to fall that set my foot upon
Your Statutes and decrees?

Musta. The crime committed
Our Alcoran calls death.

Donu. Tush, who is here
That is not Amurahs slave, and so unfit
To sit a judge upon his blood?

Asam. You have lost
And shamed the privilege of it, robbed me to
Of my soul, my understanding to behold
Your base unworthy fall, from your high virtue.

Donu. I do appeal to Amurah.

Asam. We will offer
No violence to your person, till we know
His sacred pleasure, till when under guard
You shall continue here.

Donusa. Shall?

Asam. I have said it.

The Guard leads off Donusa. Donu. We shall remember this.

Asam. It ill becomes
Such as are guilty to deliver threats
Against the innocent. I could tear this flesh now,
But it is in vain, nor must I talk but do:
Provide a well made galley for Constantinople,
Such sad news never came to our great Master;
As he directs, we must proceed, and know
No will but his, to whom what is ours we owe.

Exeunt. The end of the third Act.
Actus Quartus,
Scaena Prima.
Enter Master, Boteswaine. Master. He does begin to eat?

Botes. A little, Master,
But our best hope for his recovery, is that
His rauing leaves him, and those dreadful words,
Damnation, and despair, with which he ever
Ended all his discourses are forgotten.

Mast. This stranger is a most religious man sure,
And I am doubtful whether his charity,
In the relieuing of our wants, or care
To cure the wounded conscience of Grimaldi,
Deserves more admiration.

Botes. Can you guess
What the reason should be that we never mention
The Church, or the high Altar, but his melancholy
Grows, and increases on him?

May. I have heard him
(When he gloried to profess himself an Atheist,)
Talk often and with much delight and boasting,
Of a rude prancke he did ere he turned Pirat,
The memory of which, as it appears,
Lies heavy on him.

Botes. Pray you let me understand it.

May. Upon a solemn day when the whole City
Joined in devotion, and with barefoote steps
Passed to S. Marks, the Duke and the whole Signiory,
Helping to perfect the Religious pomp,
With which they were received; when all men else
Were full of tears, and gron'd beneath the weight
Of past offenses (of whose heavy burden
They came to be absolu'd and freed,) our Captain,
Whether in scorn of those so pious rites
He had no feeling of, or else drawn to it
Out of a wanton irreligious madness,
(I know not which) ran to the holy man,
As he was of doing the work of grace,
And snatching from his hands the sanctifide means
Dashed it upon the pauement.

Botes. How escaped he?
It being a deed deserving death with torture.

Mast. The general amazement of the people
Gave him leave to quit the Temple, and a Gundelo,
(Prepared it seems before) brought him aboard,
Since which he nere saw Venice. The remembrance
Of this, it seems, torments him; aggrauated
With a strong belief he cannot receive pardon
For this foul fact, but from his hands against whom
It was committed.

Botes. And what course intendes
His heavenly Physician, reverend Francisco,
To beat down this opinion.

Mast. He promised
To use some holy and religious finenesse,
To this good end, and in the mean time charged me
To keep him dark, and to admit no visitants
But on no terms to cross him. Here he comes.

Enter Grimaldi, with a Book. Gri. For theft! he that restores trebble the
value,
Makes satisfaction, and for want of means
To do so, as a slave must serve it out
Till he has made full payment. There Is hope left here
O with what vvil ingnesse would I give up
My liberty to those that I have pillaged
And vvish the numbers of my years though wasted
In the most sordid slavery might equal
The rapines I have made, till with one voice
My patient sufferings, might exact from my
Most cruel creditors, a full remission,
An eyes loss with an eye, limbs with a limb,
A sad account! yet to find peace within here,
Though all such as I have maimed, and dismembered
In drunken quarrels, or overcome with rage
When they were given up to my power, stood here now
And cride for restitution; to appease 'em,
I would do a bloody justice on my self;
Pull out these eyes that guided me to ravish
Their sight from others; lop these legs that bore me
To barbarous violence, with this land cut off
This instrument of wrong, till naught were left me
But this poor bleeding limblesse truncke, which gladly
I would divide among them.
Ha! what think I
Of petty forfeitures, in this reverend habit,
(All that I am turned into eyes) I look on
A deed of mine so fiendlike, that repentance,
Though with my tears I taught the sea new tides,
Can never wash off; all my thefts, my rapes
Are venial trespasses compared to what
I offered to that shape, and in a place too
Where I stood bound to kneel to it.

kneeles Enter Francisco in a C^pe like a Bishop. Fran. It Is forgiven,
I with his tongue (whom in these sacred vestments
With impure hands thou did offend) pronounce it,
I bring peace to thee, see that thou deserve it
In thy fair life hereafter.

Gri. Can it be!
Dare I believe this vision, or hope
A pardon ere may find me?

Fran. Purchase it
By zealous undertakings, and no more
It Will be remembered.

Gri. What celestial balm
I feel now poured into my wounded conscience?
What penance is there I Will not undergo
Though nere so sharp and rugged, with more pleasure
Then flesh and blood ere tasted, show me true sorrow,
Armed with an iron whip, and I will meet
The stripes she brings along with her, as if
They were the gentle touches of a hand,
That comes to cure me. Can good deeds redeem me?
I will rise up a vvonder to the world,
When I have given strong proofs how I am altered,
I that have sold such as professed the Faith,
That I was borne in, to captivity,
Will make their number equal, that I shall
Deliver from the oar; and win as many
By the cleerenesse of my actions, to look on
Their misbeleefe, and loath it. I will be
A conuoy for all Merchants: and thought worthy
To be reported to the world hereafter,
The child of your devotion, nursed up
And made strong by your charity, to break through
All dangers Hell can bring forth to oppose me;
Nor am I though my fortunes were thought desperate,
Now you have reconciled me to my self,
So void of vvorldly means, but in despite
Of the proud Viceroyes, wrongs I can do something
To witness of my change; when you please try me,
And I will perfect what you shall inioyne me,
Or fall a joyful Martyr.

Fran. You will reap
The comfort of it, live yet vndiscouer'd,
And with your holy meditations strengthen
Your Christian resolution, ere long
You shall hear further from me.
Exit Francisco.
Grimal. I Will attend
All your commands with patience; come my Mates,
I hitherto have lived an ill example,
And as your Captain lead you on to mischief,
But now will truly labor, that good men
May say hereafter of me to my glory,
Let but my power and means, hand with my will,
His good endeavors, did weigh down his ill.

Exeunt Grimaldi, Master, Boteswaine. Enter Francisco. Fran. This penitence is
not counterfeit, howsoever
Good actions are in themselves rewarded,
My travails to meet with a double crown,
If that Vitelli come off safe, and prove
Himself the Master of his vvilde affections,

Enter Gaz. O I shall have intelligence, how now Gazet,
Why these sad looks and tears?
Gaz. Tears sir? I have lost
My worthy Master, your rich heir seems to mourn for
A miserable father, your young vvidow
Following a bedrid husband to his grave,
Would have her neighbors think she cries, and rores,
That she must part with such a goodman do nothing,
When it is because he stays so long above ground,
And hinders a rich suitor: all is come out sir,
We are smok'd for being cunnicatchers, my master
Is put in prison, his she customer
Is under guard to, these are things to weep for;
But mine own loss considerd, and what a fortune
I have, as they say, snatched our of my chops,
Would make a man run mad.

Fran. I scarce have leisure,
I am so wholly taken up with sorrow,
For my lou'de pupil to enquire thy fate,
Yet I will hear it.

Gaz. Why sir, I had bo^ght a place,
A place of credit to, and had gone through with it
I should have been made an Eunuch, there was honor,
For a late poor prentice, when upon the sudden
There was such a hurleburley in the Court,
That I was glad to run away and carry
The price of my office with me.

Fran. Is that all?
You have made a saving voyage, we must think now,
Though not to free, to comfort sad Vitelli,
My grieved loule suffers for him.

Gazet. I am sad too;
But had I been an Eunuch

Fran. Think not on it.

Exeunt. Actus Quartus, Scaena Secunda.
Enter Asambeg. unlocks the door, leads forth Paulina. Asam. Be your own
guard; obsequiousness, and service
Shall win you to be mine. Of all restraint
For ever take your leave, no threats shall awe you,
No jealous doubts of mine disturb your freedom,
No fee'd spies, wait upon your steps, your virtue
And due consideration in your self,
Of what is Noble, are the faithful helps
I leave you as supporters to defend you,
From falling basely.

Paul. This is vvondrous strange
Whence flows this alteration?

Asam. From true judgment,
And strong assurance, neither grates of iron,
Hemde in with vvalls of brass, stricte gards, high birth,
The forfeiture of Honor, nor the fear
Of infamy, or punishment, can stay
A woman slaude to appetite from being
False, and unworthy.

Paul. You are grown Satyricall
Against our sex, why sir I durst produce
My self in our defense, and from you challenge
A testimony not to be denied,
All fall not under this unequal censure,
I that have stood your flatteries, your threats
Bore up against your fierce temptations; scorned
The cruel means you practiced to supplant me,
Having no arms to help me, to hold out
But love of piety, and constant goodness,
If you are vnconfirm'd, dare again bouldly
Enter into the lists, and combat with
All opposites man's malice can bring forth
To shake me in my chastetie built upon
The rock of my religion.

Asam. I do vvish
I could believe you, but when I shall show you
A most incredible example of
Your frayletie in a Princess, su'de and sought to
By men of worth, of rank, of eminence; courted
By happiness it self, and her cold temper
Approou'd by many years; yet she to fall,
Fall from her self, her glories, nay her safet,
Into a gulf of shame, and black despair,
I think you will doubt your self, or in beholding
Her punishment for ever be deterde
From yielding basely.

Paul. I would see this vvonder;
It Is sir my first petition.

Asam. And thus granted;
Above you shall observe all.

Paul. steps aside. Enter Must. Must. Sir I sought you
And must relate a vvonder, since I studied
And knew what man was, I was never witness
Of such invincible fortitude as this Christian
Shows in his sufferings, all the torments that
We could present him with to fright his constancy
Confirmed, not shook it; and those heavy chains
That eat into his flesh, appeared to him
Like bracelets made of some loved mistrisse hayres
We kiss in the remembrance of her favors.
I am strangely taken with it, and have lost
Much of my fury.

Asam. Had he suffered poorly
It had called on my contempt, but manly patience
And all commanding virtue, wins upon
An enemy. I shall think upon him, ha!

Enter Aga with a black box. So soon returned? this speed pleads in excuse
Of your late fault, which I no more remember.
What Is the grand Signiors pleasure?
Aga. It Is enclosed here
The box to, that contaynes it, may inform you
How he stands affected: I am trusted with
Nothing but this, on forfeit of your head
She must have a speedy trial.

Asam. Bring her in
In black as to her funeral, it is the color
Her fault wills her to wear, and which, in justice
I dare not pity, sit and take your place,
Howeuer in her life she has degenerated
May she die nobly, and in that confirm
Her greatness, and high blood.

A solemn musicque. A guard. The Aga, and Capiaga, leading in Donusa in
black, her train borne up by Carazie, and Manto. Musta. I now could melt;
But soft compassion leave me.

Fran. I am affrighted
With this dismal preparation. Should the enjoying
Of loose desires find ever such conclusions,
All Women would be Vestalls.

Donu. That you cloth me
In this sad livery of death, assures me
Your sentence is gone out before, and I
To late am called, for, in my guilty cause
To use qualification, or excuse --
Yet must I not part so with mine own strengths,
But borrow from my modesty boldness, to
Enquire by whose authority you sit
My judges, and whose warrant digs my grave
In the frowns you dart against my life?

Asam. See here
This fatal sign, and warrant this brought to
A General fighting in the head of his
Victorious troops, rauishes from his hand
His even then conquering sword; this shown unto
The Sultans brothers, or his sons, delivers
His deadly anger, and all hopes laid by
Commands them to prepare themselves for heaven.
Which would stand with the quiet of your soul
To think upon, and imitate.

Donusa. Give me leave
A little to complain, first of the hard
Condition of my ^ortune, which may move you
Though not to rise up intercessors for me
(Yet in remembrance of my former life,
This being the first ^pot, tainting mine honor)
To be the means to bring me to his presence;
And thou I doubt not, but I could allege
Such reasons in mi^e own defense, or plead
So humbly (my tears helpinge) that it should
Awake his sleeping pity.

Asam. It Is in vain.
If you have ought to say you shall have hearing,
And in me think him pre^ent.

Donusa. I would thus then
First kneel, and kiss his feet, and after tell him
How long I had been his darling, what delight
My infant years afforded him; how dear
He prizde his sister, in both bloods, my mother;
That she like him had frailety, that to me
Descends as an inheritance, then conjure him
By her blessed ashes, and his fathers soul,
The sword that rides upon his thigh, his right hand
Holding the Scepter and the Ottoman fortune,
To have compassion on me.

Asam. But suppose
(As I am sure) he would be deaf, what then
Could you infer?

Donusa. I then would thus rise up,
And to his teeth tell him he was a tyrant,
A most voluptuous, and insatiable Epicure
In his own pleasures: which he hugs so dearly,
As proper, and peculiar to himself,
That he denies a moderate lawful use
Of all delight to others. And to thee
Unequal judge I speak as much, and charge thee
But with impartial eyes to look into
Thy self, and then consider with what justice
Thou can pronounce my sentence. Unkind nature,
To make weak women servants, proud men Masters
Indulgent Mahomet, do thy bloody laws
Call my embraces with a Christian, death?
Having my heat and May of youth to plead
In my excuse? and yet want power to punish
These that with scorn break through thy Cobweb edicts
And laugh at thy decrees? to tame their lusts
There Is no religious bit, let her be fair
And pleasing to the eye, though Persian, Moore,
Idolatresse, Turk, or Christian, you are priueledg'd
And freely may enjoy her. At this instant
I know, unjust man, thou have in thy power
A lovely Christian Virgin; thy offense
Equal, if not transcending mine, why then
We being both guilty do thou not descend
From that usurped Tribunal and with me
Walk hand in hand to death?

Asam. She raues, and we
Loose time to hear her: read the Law,

Donusa. Do, do,
I stand resolved to suffer.

Asa. If any Virgin of what degree or quality soever, borne a natural Turk,
shall be convicted of corporal looseness, and incontinence, with any
Christian, she is by the decree of our great Prophet Mahomet to loose her head.


Asam. Mark that, then tax our justice.

Aga. Ever provided that if she, the said offender, by any reasons, arguments
or persuasion, can win and prevail with the said Christian offending with her,
to alter his religion, and marry her, that then the winning of a soul to the
Mohammedan sect, shall acquit her from all shame, disgrace and punishment
whatsoever.


Donu. I lay hold on that clause and challenge from you
The privilege of the Law.

Musta. What will you do?

Donu. Grant me access and means, I'^l undertake
To turn this Christian Turk, and marry him:
This trial you cannot deny.

Must. O base!
Can fear to die make you descend so low
From your high birth, and brand the Ottaman line
With such a mark of infamy?

Asam. This is worse
Then the parting with your honor, better suffer
Ten thousand deaths, and without hope to have
A place in our great Prophets Paradise,
Then have an act to after times remembered
So foul as this is.

Musta. Cheer your spirits Madam,
To die is nothing, it is but parting with
A mountain of vexations.

Asam. Think of your honor;
In dying nobly you make satisfaction
For your offense, and you shall live a story
Of bold Heroicke courage.

Donu. You shall not fool me
Out of my life, I claim the Law and sue for
A speedy trial; if I fail, you may
Determine of me as you please.

Asam. Base woman!
But use thy ways, and see thou prosper in 'em
For if thou fall again into my power
Thou shall in vain after a thousand tortures
Cry out, for death, that death which now thou fliest from
Unloose the prisoners chains, go lead her on
To try the Magique of her tongue; I follow:
I am on the rack, descend my best Paulina.

Actus Quartus. Scaena Tertia.
Enter Franciso, Iaylor. Fran. I come not empty handed, I will purchase
Your favor at what rate you please. There Is gold.

Iaylor, It Is the best oratory. I will hazard
A check for your content below there?

Vitelli, Welcome.

Vitelli under the Stage. Art thou the happy messenger that brings me
News of my death?
Iay. Your hand.

Vitelli plack'd up. Fran. Now if you please,
A little priuacie.

Iay. You have bought it sir,
Enjoy it freely.
Exit Iaylor.
Fran. O my dearest pupil,
Witness these tears of joy, I never saw you
Till now look lovely; nor durst I ere glory
In the mind of any man I had built up
With the hands of virtuous, and religions precepts,
Till this glad minute. Now you have made good
My expectation of you. By my order,
All Roman Caesar's, that led kings in chains
Fast bound to their triumphant chariots, if
Compared with that true glory, and full luster
You now appear in, all their boaste^ honors
Purchased with blood, and wrong, would loose their names
And be no more remembered.

Vitelli. This applause
Confirmed in your allowan^e joys me more,
Then if a thousand full crammed Theaters
Should clap their eager hands to witness that
The Scene I act did please, and they admire it.
But these are (father) but beginnings, not
The ends of my high aims. I grant to have mastered
The rebel appetite of flesh and blood
Was far above my strength; and still owe for it
To that great power that lent it. But when I
Shall make it apparent, the grimme looks of death
Affright me not, and that I can put off
The fond desire of life (that like a garment
Couers, and clothes our frailty) hastening to
My Martyrdom, as to a heavenly banquet,
To which I was a choice invited guest.
Then you may boldly say, you did not plough
Or trust the barren, and ungrateful lands
With the fruitful grain of your religious counsels.

Fran. You do instr^ct your teacher. Let the Sun
Of your clear life (that lends to good men light)
But set as gloriously, as it did rise,
Though sometimes clouded) you may write ^il vltra
To humane wishes.

Vitel. I have almost gained
The end of the race, and will not ^aynt, or tire now.

Enter Aga and laylor. Aga. Sir by your leave (nay stay not) I bring comfort;
The Viceroy taken with the constant bearing
Of your afflictions, and presuming to
You will not change your temper, does command
Your irons should be taken off. Now arm your self
With your old resolution, suddenly

the chain taken off. You shall be visited, you must leave the room to
And do it without reply.
Fran. There Is no contending,
Be still thy self my son.
Exit Francisco.
Vitel. It Is not in man

Enter Danu. Asam. Musta. Paul. To change or alter me.
Paul. When do I look on?
My brother? it is he! but no more my tongue,
Thou will betray all.

Asam. Let us hear this temptresse,
The fellow looks as he would stop his ears
Against her powerful spells.

Paul. He is undone else.

Vitel. I Will stand th'incounter, charge me home.

Donu. I come sir,

bows her self. A beggar to you, and doubt not to find
A good man's charity, which if you deny,
You are cruel to your self, a crime, a wiseman
(And such I hold you) would not willingly
Be guilty of, nor let it find less welcome
Though I (a creature you contemn) now show you
The way to certain happiness, nor think it
Imaginary, or fantastical,
And so not vvorth th'acquiring, in respect
The passage to it is nor rough nor thornie;
No steep hills in the way which you must climb up;
No monsters to be conquered; no enchantments
To be dissolved by counter charms, before
You take possession of it.
Vitel. What strong poison
Is wrapped up in these sugared pills?

Donu. My suite is
That you would quit your shoulders of a burden
Under whose ponderous weight you vvilfully
Have too long groaned, to cast those fetters off,
With which with your own hands you chain your freedom
Forsake a severe, nay imperious mistress,
Whose service does exact perpetual cares,
Watchings, and troubles, and give entertainment
To one that courts you, whose least favors are
Variety, and choice of all delights
Mankind is capable of.

Vitel. You speak in riddles.
What burden, or what mistrisse? or what fetters?
Are those you point at?

Donu. Those which your religion,
The mistress you too long have served, compells you
To bear with ^laue-like patience.

Vitel. Ha!

Paul. How bravely
That virtuous anger shows!

Donu. Be wise^ and weigh
The prosperous success of things, if blessings
Are donatiues from Heaven (which you must grant
Were blasphemy to question) and that
They are called down, and powered on such as are
Most gracious with the great disposer of 'em,
Look on our flourishing Empire; if the spl^^dor,
The Majesty, and glory of it dim not
Your feeble sight; and then turn back, and see
The narrow bounds of yours, yet that poor remnant
Rent in as many factions, and opinions,
As you have petty kingdoms, and then if
You are not obstinate against truth and reason,
You must confess the Deity you worship
Wants care, or power to help you.

Paul. Hold out now
And then thou art victorious.

Asam. How he eyes her!

Musta. As if he would look through her

Asam. His eyes flame too,
As threatening violence.

Vitel. But that I know
The Devil thy Tutor fills each part about thee,
And that I cannot play the exorcist
To dispossess thee, unless I should tear
Thy body limb by limb, and throw it to
The furies that expect it, I would now
Pluck out that wicked tongue, that has blasphem^
That great omnipotency at whose nod
The fabric of the World shakes. Dare you bring
Your i^gling Prophet in comparison with
(...) inscrutable, and infinite essence
(...) made this all, and comprehends his work?
The place is too profane to mention him
Whose only name is sacred. O Donusa!
How much in my compassion I suffer,
That thou, on whom this most excelling form
And faculties of discourse, beyond a woman,
Were by his liberal gift conferred, should still
Remain in ignorance of him that gave it?
I will not foul my mouth to speak the Sorceries
Of your seducer, his base birth, his vvhoredomes,
His strange impostures; nor deliver how
He taught a Pigeon to feed in his ear,
Then made his credulous followers believe
It was an Angel that instructed him
In the framing of his Alcoran. Pray you mark me.

Asam. These words are death, were he in naught else guilty.

Vitelli. Your intent to win me
To be of your belief proceeded from
Your fear to die. Can there be strength in that
Religion, that suffers us to tremble
At that which every day, nay hour we have to?

Donu. This is unanswerable and there is something tells me
I err in my opinion.

Vitelli. Cherish it
It is a Heavenly prompter, entertain
This holy motion, and wear on your forehead
The Sacred badge he arms His servants with,
You shall, like me, with scorn look down upon
All engines tyranny can advance to batter
Your constant resolution. Then you shall
Look truly ^ayre, when your minds pureness ^^wers
Your onward beauties.

Donusa. I came here to take you,
But I perceive a yielding in my self
To be your prisoner.

Vitelli, It Is an overthrow
That will outshine all victories. O Donusa,
Dye in my faith like me, and it is a marriage
At which celestial Angels shall be vvaiters,
And such as have been Sainted vvelcome us,
Are you confirmed?

Donu. I would be; but the means
That may assure me?

Vitelli, Heaven is merciful,
And will not suffer you to want a man,
To do that sacred office, build upon it.

Donu. Then thus I spit at Mahomet.

Asam Stop her mouth:
In death to turn Apostata! I Will not hear
One syllable from any; wretched creature!
With the next rising Sun prepare to die.
Yet Christian, in reward of thy brave courage,
Be thy faith right, or vvrong, receive this favor.
In person I Will attend thee to thy death,
And bouldly challenge all that I can give
But what is not in my grant, which is to live.

Exeunt. The end of the fourth Act^
Actus Quintus,
Scaena Prima.
Enter Vitelli, Francisco. Fran. You are wondrous brave, and iocound.

Vitelli. Welcome Father.
Should I spare cost, or not wear cheerful looks
Upon my wedding day, it were omenous
And showed I did repent it, which I dare not,
It being a marriage, howsoever sad
In the first ceremonies that confirm it,
That will for ever arm me against fears,
Repentance, doubts, or iealousies, and bring
Perpetual comforts, peace of mind, and quiet
To the glad couple.

Fran. I well understand you;
And my full joy to see you so resolved
Weak words cannot express. What is the hour
Designed for this solemnity?

Vitel. The sixth,
Something before the setting of the Sun
We take ^ur last leave of his fading light,
And with our souls eyes seek for beams eternal,
Yet there is one scruple with which I am much
Perplexed, and troubled, which I know you can
Resolve me of.

Fran. What is it?

Vitelli. This sir, my Bride
Wh^m I first courted, and then won (not with
Loose lays, poor flatteries, apish complements,
But Sacred, and Religious zeal^) yet wants
The holy badge that should proclaim her fit
For these Celestial Nuptialis; vvilling she is,
I know, to wear it, as the choicest jewel
Or her fair forehead; but to you, that well
Could do that work of Grace, I know the Viceroy
Will never grant access. Now in a case
Of this necessity, I would gladly learn,
Whether in me a layman, without orders,
It may not be religious, and lawful
As we go to our deaths to do that office?

Fran. A question in it self, with much ease answered;
Midwiues upon necessity perform ^t,
And Knights that in ^he ^oly-^and fought for
The freedom^ of Jerusalem, when ful^
Of sweat, and enemies blood, have made their Helmets
The fount, out of which with their holy hands
They drew that heavenly liquor, 't was approved then
By the Holy Church, nor must I think it now
In you a work less pious.

Vitel. You confirm me,
I will find a way to do it. In the mean time
Your holy vows assist me.

Fran. They shall ever
Be present with you.

Vitel. You shall see me act
This last Scaene to the life.

Fran. And though now fall,
Rise a bles'd Martyr.

Vitel. That Is my end, my all.

Exeunt. Actus Quintus, Scaena Secunda.
Enter Grimaldi, Master, Boteswaine, Saylors. Botes. Sir, if you slip this
opportunity,
Never expect the like.

Mast. With as much ease now
We may steal the ship our of the harbor, Captain,
As ever Gallants in a vvanton bravery
Have set upon a drunken Constable,
And bore him from a sleepy ruggown'd vvatch:
Be therefore wise.

Gri. I must be honest too
And you shall wear that shape, you shall observe me,
If that you purpose to continue mine,
Think you ingratitude can be the parent
To our vnfayn'd repentance? do I owe
A peace within here, Kingdoms could not purchase,
To my religious creditor, to leave him
Open to danger, the great benefit
Never remembered? no, though in her bottom.
We could stow up the tribute of the Turk,
Nay, grant the passage safe too: I will never
Consent to weigh an Anchor up, till he,
That only must, commands it.

B^sw. This Religion
Will keep us slaves and Beggars.

Mast. The Fiend prompts me
To change my copy: Plague upon it, we are Seamen,
What have we to do with it, but for a snatch, or so,
At the end of a long Lent?

Botesw. Mum, see who is here?

Enter Francisco. Grim. My Father!

Fran. My good convert. I am full
Of serious business which denies me leave
To hold long conference with you: Only thus much
Briefly receive; a day, or two, at the most
Shall make me fit to take my leave of Tunis,
Or give me lost for ever.

Grim. Days, nor years,
Provided, that my stay may do you service,
But to me shall be minuits.

Franc. I much thank you:
In this small scrole you may in private read
What my intents are, and as they grow ripe
I will instruct you further. In the mean time
Borrow your late distracted looks, and gesture;
The more dejected you appear, the less
The Viceroy must suspect you.

Grim. I am nothing,
But what you please to have me be.

Franc. Farewell sir,
Be cheer^full Master, something we will do
That shall reward it self in the performance,
And that is true prize indeed.

Mast. I am obedient.

Exeunt. Grimaldi. Botesw. And I, there is no contending.

Mast. Botsw. Fran. Peace to you all.
Prosper thou great Existence my endeauours,
As they religiously are undertaken,
And distant equally from servile gain,

Enter Paul. Carzi. and Manto. Or glorious ostentation. I am heard
In this blessed opportunity, which in vain
I long have waited for. I must show my self.
O she has found me. Now if she prove right
All hope will not forsake us.
Paul. Farther off,
And in that distance know your duties too.
You were bestowed on me as slaves to serve me
And not as spies to pry into my actions,
And after to betray me. You shall find
If any look of mine be vnobseru'd,
I am not ignorant of a mistress power,
And from whom I receive it.

Cara. Note this, Manto.
The pride, and scorn, with which she entertaynes us
Now we are made hers by the Viceroyes gift.
Our sweet conditioned princess, fair Donusa,
Rest in her death wait on her, never used us
With such contempt. I would he had sent me
To the Galleys, or the Gallows, when he gave me
To this proud little devil.

Manto. I expect
All tyrannous usage, but I must be patient;
And though ten times a day, she tears these locks,
Or makes this face her footstool, it is but justice.

Paul. It Is a true story of my fortunes, father,
My chastity preserved by miracle,
Or your devotions for me; and believe it,
What outward pride so ere I counterfeite,
Or state to these appointed to attend me,
I am not in my disposition altered,
But still your humble daughter and share with you
In my poor brothers sufferings, all bells torments
Revenge it on accursed Grimaldies soul
That in his rape of me gave a beginning
To all the miseries that since have followed
Be charitable, and forgive him gentle daughter;
He Is a changed man, and may redeem his fault
In his fair life hereafter. You must bear too
Your forced captivity (for it is no better,
Though you wear golden fetters) and of him,
Whom death affrights not, learn to hold out nobly.

Paul. You are still the same good counselor.

Fran. And who knows
(Since what above is purposed, is inscrutable)
But that the Viceroyes extreme dotage on you
May be the parent of a happier birth
Then yet our hopes dare fashion. Longer conference
May prove vn^afe for you, and me, howeuer
Perhaps for trial he allows you freedom.

delivers a paper. From this learn therefore what you must attempt,
Though with the hazard of your self, heaven guard you,
And give Vitelli patience, then I doubt not
But he will have a glorious day since some
Hold truly, such as suffer, overcome.
Exeunt. Actus Quintus, Scaena Tertia.
Enter Asambeg, Mustapha, Aga, Capiaga. Asam. What we commanded, see performed,
and fail not
In all things to be punctual.

Aga. We shall sir.

Exeunt Aga, Capiaga. Must. It Is strange that you should use such circumstance
To a delinquent of so mean condition.

Asam. Had he appeared in a more sordid shape
Then disguised greatenes ever dain'd to mask in,
The gallant bearing of his present fortune
Aloud proclaims him noble.

Musta If you doubt him,
To be a man built up for great employments,
And as a cunning spy sent to explore
The Cities strength, or weakness, you by torture
May force him to discover it.

Asam. That were base;
Nor dare I do such injury to Virtue
And bold assured courage, neither can I
Be won to think, but if I should attempt it,
I shoot against the Moon. He that has stood
The roughest battery, that captivity
Could ever bring to shake a constant temper,
Despised the fawnings of a future greatness,
By beauty in her full perfection tendered;
That hears of death as of a quiet slumber,
And from the surplusage of his own firmness
Can spare enough of fortitude, to assure
A feeble woman; will now, Mustapha
Be altered in his soul for any torments
We can afflict his body with?

Musta. Do your pleasure,
I only offered you a friends advice,
But without gall, or envy to the man
That is to suffer. But what do you determine
Of poor Grimaldi? the disgrace called on him
I here has ran him mad.

Asam. There weigh the difference
In the true temper of their minds. The one,
A Pirat sold to mischiefs, rapes, and all
That make a slave relentlesse, and obdurate;
Yet of himself vvanting the inward strengths
That should defend him, sinckes beneath compassion
Or pity of a man; where as this merchant,
Acquainted only with a civil life,
Armed in himself; entrenched, and fortifide
With his own virtue, valewing life and death,
At the same price, poorly does not inuit
A favor, but commands us do him right,
Which unto him, and her (we both once honored
As a just debt I gladly pay'm; they enter,
Now sit we equal hearers.

A dreadful music, at one door; The Aga, lanizaries, Vitelli, Francisco,
Gazet: at the other, Donusa, Paulina, Carazie, Manto. Musta. I shall hear
And see, sir, without passion, my wrongs arm me.

Vitel. A joyful preparation! To whose bounty
Owe we our thanks for gracing thus our Himen?
The notes though dreadful to the ear, sound here
As our Epithalamium were sung
By a Caelestiall quire, and a full Chorus
Assurde us future happiness. These that lead me
Gaze not with wanton eyes upon my bride,
Nor for their service are repayde by me
With iealousies, or fears; nor do they envy
My passage to those pleasures from which death
Cannot deter me. Great sir pardon me;
Imagination of the joys I haste to,
Made me forget my duty, but the form
And ceremony past, I will attend you,
And with our constant resolution feast you,
Not with course cates, forgot as soon as tasted,
But such as shall, while you have memory,
Be pleasing to the palate.

Fran. Be not lost
In what you purpose.

Exit Francisco. Gaz. Call you this a marriage?
It differs little from hanging, I cry at it.

Vite. See where my bride appears! in what full luster?
As if the Virgins that bear up her train,
Had long contended to receive an honor
Above their births, in doing her this service.
Nor comes she fearful to meet those delights,
Which once past ore, immortal pleasures follow.
I need not therefore comfort, or encourage
Her forward steps, and I should offer wrong
To her minds fortitude, should I but ask
How she can brook the rough high going Sea,
Over whose foamie back our ship well rig'd
With hope and strong assurance must transport us.
Nor will I tell her when we reach the Haven
(Which tempests shall not hinder) what loud vvelcom^
Shall entertain us; nor commend the place,
To tell whose least perfection would strike dumb
The eloquence of all boasted in story,
Though joined together.

Donu. It Is enough my dearest;
I dare not doubt you, as your humble shadow
Lead where you please, I follow.

Vitelli. One suite sir,
And willingly I cease to be a beggar,
And that you may with more security hear it,
Know it is not life I Will ask, nor to defer
Our deaths, but a few minutes.

Asam. Speak, it is granted.

Vitel. We being now to take our latest leave
And grown of one belief, I do desire
I may have your allowance to perform it
But in the fashion which we Christians use
Upon the like occasions.

Asam. It Is allowed of.

Vitel. My service; haste Gazet to the next spring,
And bring me of it.

Gazet. Would I could as well
Fetch you a pardon, I would not run but fly,
And be here in a moment.

Musta. What Is the mystery
Of this? discover it?

Vitel. Great sir, I Will tell you,
Each country has it is own peculiar rites,
Some when they are to die drink store of wine,
Which powered in liberally does often beget
A bastard valor, with which armde, they bear
The not to be declined charge of death
With l^sse fear, and astonishment; Others take
Drugs to procure a heavy sleep, that so
They may insensibly recei^e the means
That casts them in an everlasting slumber;
Others -- O welcome.

Enter Gazet with water. Vitelli. Now the use of yours?
The cleerenesse of this is a perfect sign
Of innocence, and as this washes off
Stains, and pollutions from the things we wear,
Thrown thus upon the forehead, it has power
To purge those spots that cleue upon the mind,

(Throws it on her face. If thankfully received.
Asam. It Is a strange custom!

Vitel. How do you entertain it my Donusa?
Feel you no alteration? No new motives?
No unexpected ayds that may confirm you
In that to which you were inclinde before?

Donu. I am an other woman, till this minute
I never liu'de, nor durst think how to dye.
How long have I been blind? Yet on the sudden,
By this blessed means I feel the filmes of error
Taken from my souls eyes. O divine Physician,
That have bestowde a sight on me, which death,
Though ready to embrace me in his arms,
Cannot take from me. Let me kiss the hand
That did this miracle, and seal my thanks
Upon those Lips from whence these sweet words vanishde
That freede me from the cruellest of prisons,
Blind ignorance, and misbeliefe: false Prophet,
Impostor Mahomet.

Asam. I Will hear no more;
You do abuse my favors, sever 'em:
Wretch if thou had another life to loose,
This Blasphemy deseru'de it, instantly
Carry them to their deaths.

Vitelli. We part now, blessed one,
To meet hereafter in a Kingdom, where
Hells malice shall not reach us.

Paul. Ha, ha, ha.

Asam. What means my Mistres?

Paul. Who can hold her spleen,
When such ridiculous follies are presented,
The Scene too made religion: O my Lord,
How from one cause two contrary effects
Spring up upon the sudden.

Asam. This is strange.

Paul. That which has foolde her in her death,
Winnes me, That hitherto have barde my self from pleasure,
To live in all delight.

Asam. There Is Music in this.

Paul. I now will runn as fiercely to your arms
As ever longing woman did, borne high
On the swift wings of appetite.

Vitel. O Devil!

Paul. Nay more, for there shall be no ods betwixt us,
I will turn Turk.

Gazet. Most of your tribe do so
When they begin in whore.

Aside. Asam. You are serious Lady?

Paul. Serious? but satisfy me in a suite
That to the world may witness that I have
Some power upon you, and to morrow challenge
What euer's in my gift, for I will be
At your dispose.

Gazet. That Is ever the subscription
To a damned whores false Epistle.

(Aside Asam. Ask this hand,
Or if thou will, the heads of these. I am rapt
Beyond my self with joy, speak, speak, what is it?

Paul. But twelve short hours repriue for this base^ couple.

Asam. The reason, since you hate them?

Paul. That I may
Have time to triumph ore this vvretched woman:
I Will be my self her guardian. I will feast,
Adorned in her choice and richest Jewels,
Commit him to what gards you please. Grant this,
I am no more mine own, but yours.

Asam. Enjoy it;
Repine at it who dares: bear him safe off
To the black Tower, but give him all things useful,
The contrary was not in your request.

Paul. I do contemn him.

Donu. Peace in death denied me?

Paul. Thou shall not go in liberty to thy grave,
For one night a Sultana is my slave.

Musta. A terrible little tyranness.

Asam. No more;
Her will shall be a law. Till now nere happy.

Exeunt. Actus Quintus, Scaena quarta.
Enter Francis. Grimal. Mast. Botesw. and Sail. Grim. Sir, all things are in
readiness, the Turks
That seas'd upon my Ship stowed under hatches,
My men resolved, and cheerful. Use but means
To get out of the Ports, we will be ready
To bring you aboard, and then (heaven be but pleased)
This for the Viceroyes fleet.

Fran. Discharge your parts,
In mine I Will not be vvanting; fear not Master,
Something will come along to fraught your Bark,
That you will have just cause to say you never
Made such a Voyage.

Mast. We will stand the hazard.

Fran. What Is the best hour?

Botes. After the second vvatch.

Fran. Enough; each to his charge.

Grim. We will be careful.

Exeunt. Actus Quintus, Scaena quinta.
Enter Paulina, Donusa, Carazie, Manto. Paul. Sit Madam, it is fit that I
attend you;
And pardon, I beseech you, my rude language,
To which the sooner you will be invited,
When you shall understand, no way was left me
To free you from a present execution,
But by my personating that, which never
My nature was acquainted with.

Donu. I believe you.

Paul. You will when you shall understand, I may
Receive the honor to be known unto you
By a nearer name. And not to wrack you further,
The man you please to favor is my brother,
No Merchant, Madam, but a Gentleman
Of the best rank in Venice.

Donu. I rejoice in it
But what is this to his freedom? for my self,
Were he well off, I were secure.

Paul. I have
A present means, not plotted by my self,
But a religious man, my confessor,
That may preserve all, if we had a servant
Whose faith we might rely on.

Donu. She that is now
Your slave was once mine, had I twenty lives
I durst commit them to her trust.

Manto. O Madam,
I have been false, forgive me. I Will redeem it
By any thing howeuer desperate
You please to impose upon me.

Paul. Troth these tears
I think cannot be counterfeit, I believe her,
And if you please will try her.

Donusa. At your peril;
There is no further danger can look toward me.

Paul. This only then, can thou use means to carry
This bakemeate to Vitelli?

Manto. With much ease,
I am familiar with the guard; beside,
It being known it was I that betrayde,
My entrance hardly will of them be questioned?

Paul. About it then, say that it was sent to him
From his Donusa, bid him search the midst often
He there shall find a cordial.

Manto, What I do
Shall speak my care and faith.
Exit Manto.
Donu. Good fortune with thee.

Paul. You cannot eat.

Donu. The time we thus abuse
We might employ much better.

Paul. I am glad
To hear this from you. As for you Carazie,
If your intents do prosper, make choice whither
You Will steal away with your two Mistresses
Or take your fortune.

Cara. I Will be gelded twice first;
Hang him that stays behind.

Paul. I wait you Madame,
Were but my brother off, by the command
Of the doting Viceroy there is no guard dare stay me.
And I will safely bring you to the place
Where we must expect him.

Donu. Heaven be gracious to us.

Exeunt. Actus Quintus, Scaena Sexta.
Enter Vitelli, Aga, and a Guard. Vitel. Paulina to fall off thus? it is to me
More terrible then death, and like an earthquake
Totters this walking building (such I am)
And in my sudden ruin would prevent,
By choking up at once my vital spirits,
This pompous preparation for my death.
But I am lost; that good man, good Francisco
Delivered me a paper which till now
I wanted leisure to peruse.

reads the paper. Aga. This Christian
Fears not, it seems, the near approaching Sun
Whose second rise He never must salute.

Enter Manto. with the Bak't-meat. 1. Guard. Who Is that?

2. Guard. Stand.

Aga. Manto.

Manto. Here Is the Viceroyes ring
Gives warrant to my entrance, yet you may
Partake of any thing I shall deliver;
It Is but a present to a dying man
Sent from the princess that must suffer with him.

Aga. Use your own freedom.

Manto. I would not disturb
This his last contemplation.

Vitel. O it is well!
He has restored all, and I at peace again
With my Paulina.

Manto. Sir, the sad Donusa
Grieved for your sufferings, more then for her own,
Knowing the long and tedious pilgrimage
You are to take, presents you with this cordial,
Which privately she wishes you should taste of,
And search the middle part, where you shall find
Something that has the operation, to
Make death look lovely.

Vitelli. I will not dispute
What she commands but serve it.
Exit Vitelli.
Aga. Prithee Manto
How has the unfortunate Princes spent this night
Under her proud new mistress?

Manto. With such patience
As it orecomes the others insolence
Nay triumphs ore her pride. My much have now
Commands me hence, but the sad Tragedy past,
I Will give you satisfaction to the full
Of all has passed, and a true character
Of the proud Christians nature.

Exit Manto. Aga. Break the watch up,
What should we fear in the midst of our own strengths?
It Is but the Bashas jealousy. Farewell soldiers.

Exeunt. Actus quintus. Scaena Septima.
Enter Vitelli, With the bak't-meates, Above. Vitelli. There Is something more
in this then means to cloy
A hungry appetite, which I must discover.
She, willed me search the midst. Thus, thus I pierce it:
Ha! what is this? a scrole bound up in packthread?
What may the mystery be?
The Scrole. Son, let down this packethread, at the West window of the
Castle. By it you shall draw up a Ladder of ropes, by which you may descend,
your dearest Donusa with the rest of your friends, below attend you. Heaven
prosper you.


Francisco. O best of men! he that gives up himself
To a true religious friend, leanes not upon
A false deceiving reed, but boldly builds
Upon a rock, which now with joy I find
In reverend Francisco. Whose good vows,
Labors, and watchings in my hopd-for freedom
Appear a pious miracle. I come,
I come, good man, with confidence, though the descent
Were steep as he^l, I know I cannot slide
Being called down, by such a faithful guide.

Exit Vitelli. Actus Quintus, Scaena Vltima.
Asambeg, Mustapha, Ianizaries. Asam Excuse me Mustapha, though this night to me
Appear as tedious as that treble one
Was to the world, when ^oue on fair Alcmena
Begot Alcides. Were you to encounter
Those rauishing pleasures, which the slow paced hours
(To me they are such) bar me from, you would
With your continued wishes strive to impe
New feathers to the broken wings of Time
And chide the amorous Sun, for too long dalliance
In Thetis watery bosom.

Musta. You are to violent
In your desires, of which you are yet uncertain
Having no more assurance to enjoy 'em
Then a weak woman's promise, on which wise men
Faintely rely.

Asam. Tush she is made of truth
And what she says she will do, holds as firm.

The chamber shot off. As laws in brass that know no change, what is this?
Some new prize brought in sure. Why are thy looks
So ghastly. Villain speak.
Enter Aga. Aga. Great sir hear me
Then after kill me, we are all betrayde,
The ^alse Grimaldi suncke in your disgrace
With his confederates, have seas'd his ship
And those that guarded it stowed under ha^ches
With him the condemned Princess, and the Merchant
That with a ladder made of ropes descended
From the black Tower in which he was enclosed,
And your fair mistress,

Asam. Ha!

Aga. With all their train
And choysest jewels are gone safe aboard,
Their sails spread forth and with a fore-gale
Leaving our cost, in scorn of all pursuit
As a farewell they showed a broad side to us.

Asam. No more.

Musta. Now note your confidence.

Asam. No more.
O my credulity! I am too full
Of grief, and rage to speak. Dull, heavy fool
Worthy of all the tortures that the frown
Of thy incensed Master can throw on thee
Without one man's compassion, I will hide
This head among the deserts, or some cave
Fi^'d with my shame and me, where I alone
May dye without a partner in my moan.

Exeunt. FINIS.

