THE CVRE OF CARES. OR A SHORT DISCOVRSE, declaring the condition of worldly
Cares; with some Remedies appropriated unto them.

Penned for the use of all, but is most proper for such as be distressed.

BY HENRY MASON Parson of S. Andrews Undershaft London.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN CLARKE, and are to be sold at his shop
under S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1627.

THE CVRE OF CARES. OR A short Discourse, declaring the condition of worldly
Cares, with some remedies appropriated unto them.
THere is no man, I suppose, so happy, but may have some crosses that may breed
him cares, and some cares that may require a cure. For say that a man has
wealth, and honor, and authority, and abundance of all things; so that
neighbors, who look upon his outward state, do think him an happy man, and
will say of him, that he needs not care; yet the same man lightly either
has an unquiet wife, or disobedient children, or unfaithful servants, or
contentious neighbors, or unnatural kinsmen; that do both wrong him and
disquiet him. Or if he be free from all these (as few men are,) yet the frown
of a Great man, or a loss in his estate, or a miscariage in some suite, or one
sudden accident or other may befall him to his grief. And as Est. 5.11, 12, ^3.
Haman in the midst of honors met with a disgrace that damped all his joy: so
he who is most happy for the world, either has, or yer long will meet with one
cross or other, that may fill his head with careful and discontented
thoughts. And these cares, as they do disquiet the man, so they do offend God,
and are therefore condemned Mat. 6.25. etc. Luke 12.22. etc. Philip. 4.6.
in Scriptures. In respect whereof I think it will not be without use, to take
a view of the nature of these cares, and to assay, whether such remedies may be
found out, as may serve either to cure or to ease them. And for that end, these
particulars seem in mine opinion, not to be unfit, nor unworthy of
consideration.

1 What kind of Care it is, that is here to be treated of.

2 What signs or marks there be, by which sinful Cares may be discerned from
those that be lawful and faultlesse.

3 What evils or inconveniences sinful Cares do breed or produce.

4 What remedies may be used to redress them.

CHAP. I. What kind of Care it is whereof here we seek the cure.
EVery cure presupposes a malady; and therefore when we seek a cure of Cares,
it is supposed to be of such only as are evil. And yet it cannot be denied,
but as carelessenesse is vicious, so some care may be lawful and virtuous: and
therefore it will be necessary in the entrance, for avoiding of confusion, to
difference them, each from other. And for that purpose we may first consider
the uses of the word, and then the diversities that are found in the thing; and
from either of them select that which may fit the purpose in hand.

I. And first for the word, we may note two things.

1 That Care in propriety of speech is an applying of the mind to think on
some object, which application we may also call a regarding of it. And in this
general acception it answers to the Latin word [ cura,] and to the Greek
words [(...)] and [(...)] or rather to the substantive noune included in these
verbes. As Mar. 12.14. the Pharisees and Herodians say unto Christ, Master, we
know that thou art true, and carest for no man, [(...)] and they give a reason
of their saying so, for thou regardest not the person of men; implying in this
speech, that not to regard men, is as much as not to care for them. And so is
the word used Mar. 4.38. Luke 10.40. Io. 10.13. Act. 18.17. 1 Timothy 3.5. etc.
elsewhere often. But yet many times the English word [ care,] as also the
Latin [ cura,] from whence it is derived, does signify and import an earnest
and vehement intention of the mind; and is the same with the Latin [
solicitudo,] and the Greek [ 2 Cor. 7.12. and 2 Cor. 8.16.
(...), and Matt. 6.25, 28, 38. Luke 10 41.
(...):] in which sense our English Bible does sometimes translate these words
[ earnest care,] as 2 Cor. 8.16. and sometimes [ carfulness,] as 1 Cor. 7.32.
and 2 Cor. 7.11. And in this acception we take the word in this place, that is,
for carfulness, or an earnest care.

2 We may note that properly the word [ care] does import an applying or
bending of the mind about some future thing, that we may obtain our intent or
desire in it. For in orderly proceeding, all care or study of mind is for
effecting something, that we do desire to bring about. And therefore Aquinas
says, that Solicitudo importat studium quoddam adhibitum ad aliquid
consequendum. Aquin. 2.2. q 5 s. art. 6. C.
Care is a study applied to the obtaining of some thing. But yet sometimes
through the corruption of men, who not seldom do pervert the right order of
things, care and study is employed about that which is past, and things that
are impossible, and such as cannot be ordered or procured by us: as when a man
bends his thoughts, and beats his brains with musing and idle thoughts
about some mischance or accident, which he knows cannot be amended, nor does
ever fall into the deliberation of a wise man. In this place I extend the word
to both; our care being then the more vicious, when it is the more disorderly.
And so much be noted for the word.

II. Secondly for the thing signified by this word, we must note three
distinctions; and out of them select that which may serve our turn.

Distinct. 1. There are three sorts of care answerable to three sorts of
objects, to which it may be applied. For some things are holy, or such as God
has commanded; and some things are sinful, or such as God does condemn; and
some things are of a middle or indifferent nature, neither commanded nor
forbidden, but may as occasion does require, either be done or left undone
without sin. And men may be careful about all these things. For good men are
careful to perform good duties. So S. Paul says of the Corinthians, that 2
Cor. 7.11.
godly sorrow wrought carfulness in them: and of the 1 Cor. 7.32.34.
unmaried man and woman, that they care for the things of the Lord, how they
may please the Lord, and may be holy both in body and in spirit. And of
himself he says, that upon him lay the care of all the Churches. Secondly,
wicked men are careful about their evil intentions and desires. So Micah
says of them, that Micah 7.2, 3.
they lie in wait for blood, and that they do evil with both hands
earnestly: and Solomon says, that Prove. 4.16.
they sleep not, except they have done mischief; and their sleep is taken
away, unless they cause some to fall. Thirdly, all sorts of men are careful
about the things of this life. Luke 10.41
Martha was careful and troubled about many things: all of them belonging to
provision for the body, and entertainment of friends. And 1 Cor. 7.33.34.
he that is married, cares for the things of the world, how he may please his
wife: -- and she that is married, cares for the things of the world, how she
may please her husband. The first sort is a godly care, the second is a
devilish care, and the third is a worldly care; and that is it whereof now we
do enquire.

Did. 2. Secondly, this worldly care, or care for the things of this world, is
of two sorts: it is either a regular and orderly care, or an irregular and
exorbitant care.

The regular care is, when according to the rule of wisdom and Gods word, we
forecast and study how to procure our lawful ends and desires. Now the rules
prescribed by Gods word for this purpose, are three. 1 That the desire of our
ends be moderate. 2 That our pursuit of the means conducing to these ends, be
lawful. And 3, that there be a patient submission of our desires and endeavors
to Gods will and pleasure.

1 That our desires of worldly blessings be moderate; seasonable hours, and
without taking up that time, which is due to better things. This I call a
moderate desire of our ends: and it is ever necessary in seeking for worldly
things. This rule is prescribed by our Savior, when he says, Matt. 6.33.
First seek the king dome of God and his righteousness: and was practiced by
the Apostle, when Philip. 3.8.
he suffered the loss of all things for Gods cause, and counted them but dung,
that he might win Christ.

2 The next rule is, lawful means for attaining of our ends, so that we do
not do any thing for procuring of them, which is contrary to Gods word or
will. This rule the Apostle prescribes, when for seeking of worldly wealth he
gives this direction; Ephesians. 4.28.
Let him that stole, steal no more; but rather let him labor, working with
his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him that needs.
In this passage we may note three things for our purpose: (1) The end that is
desired; and that is, that a man may have sufficiency, not only to supply his
own wants, but to relieve the wants of others also. (2) The means, that is
forbidden to be used for this end; and that is stealing, and whatsoever other
unjust dealing. And (3) the means that is commanded; and that is labor and
paines-taking, by doing some work that is lawful and good. This is the
Apostles rule in seeking for wealth: and the same should be ours in our desires
and cares for all other worldly things.

3 The last rule is, submit our desires to Gods will, and leave our endeavors
with patience, to be ordered by his providence. This rule was given by our
Savior, when he taught us to pray, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in
heaven. And himself did practice it, when he said, Matt. 26.39 and Luke 22.42.
O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless,
not as I will, but as thou will. For here he earnestly desired preservation
from death, and yet patiently submitted himself to Gods pleasure, either for
life or death. And so David first gives the rule, Psalm. 37.5.
Commit thy way unto the Lord: trust also in him, and he shall bring it to
pass: and then followed it in his own practice, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26.
If (says he) I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me
again, and show me both it [the Arke] and his habitation. But if he thus say,
I have no delight in thee: behold, here am I, let him do to me, as seems
good unto him. And thus the Disciples at Cesarea, Act. 21.1^, 14.
did beseech Paul not to go up to Jerusalem, where they knew that he was to
be persecuted: but when he would not be persuaded, (because he knew it was
Gods will to the contrary) they ceased and said, The will of the Lord be done.
And thus must we do: though our desires be most reasonable, and our means
most warrantable; yet after all, we must submit our selves to God, and with
patience and contentedness refer all to his providence, either for the
granting, or for the denying of our desires. Now if these three rules be
observed in our seeking of worldly things, if our desires be moderate, and our
means lawful, and all left with due submission to Gods will and pleasure;
then our care for these things is orderly and regular. And this care is both
allowable and commendable. First, it is allowable, because S. Paul says, 1
Cor. 7.33, 34.
He that is married, cares for the things that are of the world, how he may
please his wife: and she that is married cares for the things of the world, how
she may please her husband. For by this speech he meant not to tell us, what
married people might unjustly practice against Gods Law, but what they were
occasioned to do by virtue of their calling. For else in all estates of life,
men and women may deal corruptly, and dishonor God: and the single life might
be subject to the like cumbrances, that the married estate is. Secondly, I say
further, that this kind of care is commendable, because it is that means, by
which God has appointed us to serve his providence. For to trust to Gods help
without using our own care, is not so much to trust God, as to tempt him. And
therefore Solomon sends the sluggard to the Pismire, to learn care and
providence of her, in that Prove. 6.8.
she provideth her meat in the summer, and gathers her food in the harvest.
And S. Paul tells us, that 1 Timothy 5.8.
if any man provide not for his own, and specially for those of his house; he
has denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel. This care then is a thing
both allowed and commended in Scriptures: and therefore is not that care, for
which we need to prescribe any cure.

But now in the second place there is an irregular and exorbitant care: and
that is, when contrary to the former rules of Gods Law we seek after our
wished ends. 1. If we desire things of the world too immoderately or too
eagerly: as if we prefer them before Gods service, or so seek for them,
that we neglect good duties, or any way affect them more then according to
their worth and value. In this sort Esau offended, when he Heb. 12.16. and Genesis
25.31, 32, 33.
sold his birthright for one morsel of meat. Nor was Rachel free from this
sin, when she said, Genesis 30.1.
Give me children; or else I die. For the one preferred his belly before his
right to the blessing: and the other desired children with impatiency against
God. 2. If we use evil means for the effecting of our desires; then is our
care irregular and unlawful; because sin is no orderly or fit way to procure
Gods blessings by. This was the sin of Saul, 1 Samuel 28.6, 7.
who when God would not answer him, went to a witch for counsel: and the sin
of Ahaziah, who in his sickness, 2 King. 1.2.
sent to Baalzebub, to enquire whether he should recover of his disease: and
the sin of all those, that lie for advantage, or use spells for recovery of
health, or commit any sin for gaining of this worlds goods. 3. It is irregular
also, if we distrust Gods providence for the success of our lawful endeavors,
or if we do not submit our businesses to Gods pleasure. Thus the King of
Israel sinned, when being distressed with famine, he said in his fury, 2 King.
6.33
This evil is of the Lord: what should I wait for the Lord any longer? And
the Noble man of the same King, when he distrusted Gods word delivered by the
Prophet, and said, 2 King. 7.2.
If the Lord would make windows in heaven, might this thing be? And so do all
they sin, who think (as Job says the wicked say) Job 21.15.
What is the Almighty --? and what profit shall we have, if we pray unto him?
And they who think, if besides their labor and paines-taking, they do not use
shifts and deceitful dealing, they may become beggars, for all the promises of
Gods blessing upon their endeavors. In these three respects our care may become
irregular. And in the first respect it may properly be called an immoderate
care, because men do excessively desire their ends. In the second, it is
properly an inordinate care, because thereby men pursue their ends in a
disorderly manner. And in the third it is properly called a diffident and
anxious care, because it is joined with anxiety of mind, and distrust in Gods
providence: But commonly all these properties go together, and all of them may
be indifferently called by any one of these names. For he that desires or
cares for the world immoderately, will not stick at the means, nor trust God
with the success, or with patience expect the event. And if our care for the
things of this life, have any of these sinful conditions; then it is an
irregular and unlawful care. And that is it which is forbidden by our Savior,
when he says, Matt. 6.25.
Take no thought (or (...)
be not careful) for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink;
nor for your body, what ye shall put on: and by the Apostle, when he says,
Philip. 4.6.
Be careful for nothing. And it is the care that is here propounded, and is to
be spoken of in this place.

Distinct. 3. This irregular care for things of the world, may be of two sorts.
1 If we do disorderly desire to obtain some worldly good. As for example, the
covetous man, when he has too much already, yet wearieth and wears himself
with caring for more; and the Ambitious man, when he has greater places of
honor, then he can manage or discharge, yet striveth to come higher still:
yea and the poor man does sometimes too eagerly and too immoderately desire a
competent means of living in the world. And all of them do unlawfully care and
seek for a worldly good. 2 This irregular care may be, by seeking to avoid
some worldly evil. As namely those that be in prison, may take too much care,
how they may be freed: and those that be in want, how they may be relieved:
and those that be sick, how they may be recovered. In the former kind Rachel
sinned, when she did immoderately desire to bear children: and in the later
kind Esau sinned, when he did excessively desire the satisfying of his hunger.
And both of these are within the compass of the subject, here to be spoken of.
The conclusion then is, All care for things of this life, whether it be for
obtaining of some good, or for avoiding of any evil, if it be irregular in
such sort as has been formerly described; is that which the Scriptutes
condemn under the name of worldly cares, and is the thing to be enquired into
in this ensuing Treatise.

CHAP. II. What signs or tokens there be, to discern this sinful care by.
HItherto we have considered the nature of worldly cares, as they are condemned
in Scriptures, and have thereby differenced them in good part from such cares
as are lawful and allowed by Gods word: but yet because men are willing to
flatter themselves in those things which they delight in, and will thereupon be
apt to deceive themselves, in judging their care of the world to be a moderate
providing for their estate, when it is indeed an irregular and excessive
carking for the world: it will be necessary in the next place, to set down
some fensible marks and signs, whereby sinful cares may be more easily
discovered and discerned to be such. And for that purpose we may take notice
of these tokens following.

I. If cares do fill the head and heart of a man at unseasonable times; that is
a sign, that they are immoderate and excessive. For the moderate and provident
care makes a man diligent about his work, when opportunity serves for his
benefit and advantage: but if a man take care, when the time serves not, and
then be thinking on the world, when he should be busied about other matters,
that is too much care, and exceeds due proportion and measure. And such are
the cares of those men, who mind earthly things. For they fill the head with
thoughts, and the heart with fears, even then, when a man intends other
occasions, and both should and would be thinking on better things. If he go
another way, and leave them (as he thinks) behind him, they will attend him
still: they will follow him to his bed, and to his board, and to his closet.
They are at his heels, or rather in his head, when he walks in the fields
for his recreation; and when he is disposing of his household for their
employments, and when he is in the Church about his devotions, and when he
goes to bed to rest and refresh himself: and if he be in bed, yet he
sleeps not; if he be in the Church, he prays not; and if he hear a
Sermon, he understands not what is said. And all this, because the mind
being full of thoughts already, has no room for other things to enter in. And
this, all men will say is too much and without reason: and therefore if we
observe our selves, and find our cares thus possessing our heads, we may
resolve, these be very irregular and unlawful cares. This is the first sign.

II. A second is, These cares may be known to be irregular, if they busy and
take up a man's thoughts about such things, as are not in his power to order or
dispose or alter any way for his advantage. For the regular care makes a man
diligent to use good means for his honest ends, and when once he has done
what is in his own power, and belongs to his duty to do, he leaves
caring for that which he cannot compass. But excessive and immoderate care
does not only busy men about the means, which themselves may use, but about
the event and success of their labors, which is in Gods hand only, either to
grant or to deny. When they have done all that they can do, yet they rest not
there; but they fear and doubt, and forecast dangers and difficulties, and
muse with themselves what the event may be; and if any thing fall out amiss,
they take thought for that which is already past, and cannot be recalled: as
if the Husbandman, when he has plowed and sowed and weeded, and done all that
belongs to the art of tillage, should afterward beat his brains, and busy
his mind with thinking, how the corn will grow, and how the weather will
prove, and what a croppe he may have at the harvest. And this is evident to be
foolish and superfluous: and therefore if we find thoughts of of things
without our compass, we may know that to be an irregular and unlawful care.

III. A third sign of a sinful care, is; if it vex the mind and disquiet
the man, and bereave him of his inward peace and contentment. For the orderly
care, makes a man to advise, and provide, and labor for that which may avail
him; and when he has once done working, then he leaves caring, glad that
his work is at an end; Yea, and he comfort himself with the conscience of
his well doing: and because he has done his own endeavors, he lays
himself down in peace, and with patience expects Gods blessing according to
his promise. But anxious and distrustful cares, they work upon the man, when
they cannot work about the thing: they do not only fill the head with
thoughts, but the heart with heaviness; and breed sorrow, when they cannot
further the success. For which cause the Greeks call this care [(...)]
because it does (...) cut and divide the mind in pieces. And the Latins call
it [cura,] because it does cor edere, feed upon and consume the heart. And in
the Hebrew tongue the (...)
same word signifies both to take thought or to be careful, and to sorrow or
be grieved: and our English Bibles do sometimes render it the 1 Samuel 9.5
one way, and sometimes the other 1 Samuel 10.^. Psalm. 38.18.
; the unity of the word implying a near affinity in the things. And we in
our English tongue when we see a man pine and waste and wear away without
apparent cause, we say, He takes ear, or He takes thought for some thing;
meaning that his cares breed sorrow, and his sorrow sickness. And this must
needs be a great deal too much, when that which should help to speed our
business, does serve to consume our selves.

IIII. A fourth sign may be this: If our care for earthly things do breed
fears and suspicions without cause, that is a sign that it does affect us
over much and above measure. For ordinate care as it uses helps to effect his
ends, so it provideth against lets and dangers that might hinder them; but both
of them with moderation, and as reason does require. But if a man's heart be set
on the world, his love to earthly things, and the care that he has of them,
does make him fear every shadow, and suspect every fancy; much what like a
skittish jade, that starteth at every straw. And as Cain said out of his
discontent and diffidence, Genesis 4.14.
Every one that finds me, shall slay me; when as there was never a one in
the world, but his own father and mother: so these men doubt lest every great
man that they meet with, will oppress them; and every poor man will steal
from them; and every passenger, will rob them; and every chapman or customer,
will overreach the^; and every man that they deal with will one way or other
deprive them of their commodities and riches: nor dare they trust any man
further then they see him. For according as any man's love is to the world, so
will his fears be, lest he lose that which he loves.

These be the signs and symptoms of an anxious, diffident, inordinate and
immoderate care. If any man feel them in himself or find the^ in others, he
may be sure that such men are distempered with this sickness of worldly cares:
and therefore have need to seek for, and to make use of whatsoever cure, may
be prescribed for their better ease and recoverie.

CHAP. III. What evils accompany this irregular care.
CAres, such as have been already described, have many ill consequents and
companions; which may justly move us with all care to remove them, and to rid
our selves of them. For example these.

I They busy and vex men with excessive toil, and yet they no way help him,
or make him any recompense for his pains. And this appears by two things: 1
because they are needless and without use: and 2, because they are fruitless
and without effect.

First, they are needless and without use. For if men would do their parts,
God will be sure to do his: that is, if they use honest means, as he has
appointed; he will procure a happy issue, as himself has promised: This the
Apostle teaches us, 1 Pet. 5.^
Cast all your care upon God; for he cares for you. And David, Psalm. 37.5.
Commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him; and he will bring it to pass.
And our Savior, Mat. 6.33
Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things
[of the world] shall be added unto you. And if God do take care of us, and will
bring to pass our desires, and cast upon us all needful things, when we have
done our duty, and do rest upon his providence: what a vanity, nay iniquity is
it, to beat our brains about those things, which, if we would leave them to
Gods disposing, would without our care be better done to our hands?

Secondly, they are fruitless and without effect, and do no way help forward
or further the thing which we care or labor for. For Matt. 6.27. Luke 12.25.
which of you (says our Savior) by taking thought can add one cubite to his
stature? His meaning is, that no thought, nor care, nor anxietie of mind, can
effect our desires, or procure the success; which is only in Gods power to
give. And so, in like sort, we may reason of all other the like cases: Which of
us by sitting in a corner, (though we should weep our bellies full) can by
this carking care, either cure a disease in our bodies, or make up a breach in
our estates, or pacify the broiles in our house, or bring to life again a
deceased friend? No. These be things, which if God do not give them, we cannot
have them. Thus this care, and vexation of spirit, is both needless without
use, and fruitless without effect: and in both respects we may say that this
irregular care does cumber us and not help us.

II. Immoderate cares do make our life to be without comfort. For God Psalm.
104.15.
has given us both bread to strengthen us, and wine to make the heart glad,
and oil to make the face shine; as David speaks: and he it is that Act.
14.17.
fills our hearts with food and gladness. The meaning of which sayings is,
that God does not only bestow on us necessary things that may preserve life,
but comfortable things also, that may make it joyful; and would not only have
his servants to live, but while they live, to rejoice also. But cares take away
this joy: they are ever accompanied with sadness and sorrow; and Prove. 15.13. and
12.25.
by sorrow in the heart (says Solomon) the spirit is broken, and a Prove. 17.22.
broken spirit dries the bones: so that all the days of the afflicted
[spirit] are evil; but a merry heart is a continual feast. In respect whereof
we may say of such a man, that he enjoys not life, while he possesses it:
and that his very soul does but serve to make his pains sensible. Nay, sorrow
does not only deprive man's life of the comfort which God has given him; but
does even deprive the man of life it self. For to say nothing of those, who
being oppressed with cares, do with their own hands hasten their death; this
sadness in the soul, does by degrees shorten our time, and that when we think
not on it. 1 Samuel 1.7, 8
It made Hannah to weep, and to forgo her food. 1 Kings 21.4, 5.
It made Ahab sick, and betake himself to his bed. And (as the Apostle says)
in the end, 2 Cor. 7.10.
it works death. And thus cares do make the life uncomfortable, and without
joy.

III. Immoderate cares do make men unfit for Gods service: and that in two
respects. 1 Because he that is dejected with grief, cannot be cheerful
about any work: much less, can he that is grieved with worldly cares, be
free hearted to so contrary a work, as is Gods service. But as 2 Kin. 3.15
Elishah was then fit to prophecy, when the minstrell played before him: so
men are then fit to hear and read and pray with devotion and zeal, when
their hearts are enlarged with joy and gladness. And therefore God requires,
Deuteronomy. 28.47
that when men have abundance of all things, they should serve the Lord with
joyfulnes and gladness of heart. 2, Cares make us unfit to serve God, because
the heart being taken up with earthly thoughts, has no leisure to attend to
heavenly things. But as he that is in a deep study, or is musing on some
matter with intention of mind, sees not the things that are before his eyes,
or if he see them, yet notes them not: so he whose mind is filled with
cares of the world, hears not what the Preacher says unto him, or if he
hears it, he observes it not: nay, when himself prays, his heart knows
not what his mouth speaks. And no marvel: for the heart is away all the
while, ranging here and there, where his thoughts be. Or if such a man fasten
upon any thing in the public ministry; Yet his care of the world carries him
from the Church to other affairs; and they do so wholly take up his thoughts,
that be thinks no more on that which he had once heard: and so the seed
that was sown, for want of watering it by meditation, never grows up into
practice. For which cause our Savior tells us, that Matt. 13.22
the care of this world does choke the word; and warns us to Luke 21.34.
take heed, lest our hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness and
cares of this life: and so that day [of the Lord] come upon us at unawares. In
which admonition we may consider these particulars. (1) What he warns us of,
and it is surfeiting and drunkenness and cares of this life: he joyneth these
three together, because though they differ in nature, yet they agree in one
work or effect. (2) What the effect is, which they cause, they overcharge the
heart, that is, they press it down to the ground with the heavy burden that
they lay upon it. Surfeiting burdeneth it with excess of meat; drunkenness
with abundance of drink; and worldly cares with anxious and distracting
thoughts: and all of them keep it down, and make it lie grovelling upon the
ground. (3) What the danger hereof is; and that is, men are unprepared and
unready for the coming of Christ unto judgment, so that that day comes upon
them at unawares: and he that is not prepared to give his account, will never
be able to abide the last sentence. Thus cares make men unfit for Gods
service, and consequently for their last reckoning.

IIII. Immoderate and distrustful cares, as they deprive our selves of
comfort, so they rob God of his honor. For if we will deal justly with God,
and devide aright between him and our selves, in the managing and ordering of
all our affairs and businesses, ours is the labor, his is the success: to us
it belongs to use lawful means, but to him to give a blessing, and to
prosper the means, that we have used. This the Psalmist teaches us, Psalm.
12^.1.
Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it: and,
except the Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain. And, it is
vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, and to eat the bread of
sorrows. And so the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.6.
I (says he) planted, and Apollos watered, but God gave the increase. And our
Savior says of the husbandman, that Mar. 4.26.
he casts seed into the ground, and sleeps, and rises night and day, and
the seed springs and grows up, he knows not how. And, 1 Cor. 15.37, 38.
Thou (says the Apostle) sowest not that body which shall be, but bare grain,
it may chance of wheat or of some other seed: but God gives it a body, as it
has pleased him; and to every seed his own body. By which sayings we may see
that the husbandman after his days labor may take his nights rest, and never
trouble himself about the springing of the seed; because that is a thing,
that is out of his reach, and it is God alone that does make the corn grow
without his thinking on it. But again, suppose the husbandman should be so
foolish, as when he has done seeding, to watch all night, and to toss up and
down upon his bed, and beat his brains in pieces with thinking on the growth
of his corn, and caring for a plentiful harvest; yet for all this, neither
would his corn grow the better, nor his barnes at the harvest prove ever a
whit the fuller. And thus it is in all other cases and businesses of the world:
The labor is ours, and our part it is to use the means; but the success is
Gods, and his part it is either to withhold, or to bestow a blessing. And
therefore, if any man take upon him to forecast and provide for the success
and event of things, otherwise then by using fit means for it; (as the
careful and anxious man does; who still continues his care after he has done
his work:) he does hereby encroach upon Gods right, and rob him of one part of
his glory, which he will not impart to any other.

V. Immoderate and distrustful cares will be a means to hinder our desired
ends, and will even deprive us of that success for which we take all the
care. For if with patience and submission we could leave things to be ordered
by Gods providence, he would not fail to effect our desires: but if we
distrust Gods providence, and dare not rely on his word; it will be just with
God to leave us to our selves, and to deny us his presence and protection: as 2
King. 7.2.
the Prince, that would not believe Gods word spoken by the Prophet, was made
to see the truth of it, but was denied to enjoy the fruit of it. This point, at
least for the former branch of it, has been in part confirmed already; and
may in both the branches of it, be further declared by two contrary examples:
the one in Peter the Apostle, and the other in the Patriarch Abraham. Peter
doubted of Christ's word, and thereby lost his protection: Abraham believed in
hope against hope, and was rewarded with a blessing. But to declare these
instances more fully:

Of Peter we read thus, Matthew 4.28. etc.
Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water. And he said, Come.
And when Peter was come down out of the ship, he walked on the water to go to
Jesus. But when he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid; and beginning to
sink, he cried saying, Lord save me. And immediately Jesus stretched forth his
hand and caught him, and said unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore did
thou doubt? In this example there are these things considerable: 1, We may note
Peter's confidence and steadfast faith: he offered and adventured on his Masters
word, to walk upon the Sea, without any other prop to uphold him. 2, His
doubting and diffidence. When he saw the wind boisterous, and the sea
swelling, and the billows ready to overwhelme him, then he was afraid of the
danger, and doubted lest notwithstanding Christ's promise, he might perish in
the water. 3, The event and success of all. And that is, Peter never began to
sink, till he began to doubt: he walked upon the waters as safely, as a man
may walk in a pathway. But when once he distrusted, then he sank downwards:
and but that Gods mercy was the greater, and Christ caught him by the hand, he
might have been drowned in the depth. And so it is with us; If we dare trust
God upon his word, we shall be safe in the greatest danger, though we were in
the midst of the sea, without any other stay, but the hand of Gods providence
to uphold us. But if we let go our hold upon Gods word, and dare not rely
upon his promise; it is no marvel, if we sink, like lead, and perish in the
waters. And no marvel then it is, that we do so often faint, and fail, and
fall down under the burden. For which of us would not do as S. Peter did;
fear to be drowned, if we were in the midst of the sea, and shaken with a
boisterous wind? Nay, which of us durst do as he did; adventure to go upon
the sea, when God should command it? Surely God has bidden us deal justly,
and to Heb. 13.5.
have our conversation without covetousness: and has promised, that he will
never leave nor forsake us. But we notwithstanding fear, and say, that if we
do not as others do, that is, shift and lie, and put off base wares, and
overreach in our bargaining, we may go a begging, and shut up our shop
windows. Again, God has commanded us, that if men oppose us, while we are
about his service, we should not Ier. 1.17. Ezekiel. 2.6.
be dismayed at their faces, nor afraid of their words: and he has promised
that in such a case he will Ier. 1.18, 19. Ezekiel. 3.8, 9.
make us a defenced city, and an iron pillar, and walls of brass against Kings
and Princes, and Priests and People: and though they fight against us, yet they
shall not prevail against us. But we, if a Great man require of us that which
is unjust to be done, and show us an angry face for doing of our duty; we
tremble at the sight, and our hearts quake within us, Is. 7.2.
as the trees of the wood are shaken with the wind. And again to take an
instance, which is more direct to the point in hand: God has commanded,
Philip. 4.6, 7
Be careful for nothing: but in every thing by prayer and supplication with
thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God. And he has promised
that if we obey, then the peace of God, which passes all understanding, shall
keep our hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. And again he has commanded,
Psalm. 37.5, 7, 9
Commit thy way unto the Lord, and rest on the Lord, and wait patiently for
him: and he has promised that he will bring to pass our desires, and that
they who wait upon the Lord shall inherit the earth. But we, if we meet
with a cross, sickness in our bodies, weakness in our estates, disgraces on our
persons, or any other misfortune or distress; we run to a corner, and weep
till our eyes be weary, and make our own hearts sad with musing on our
misery, and forecasting dangers of undoing.

Now while we thus distrust Gods word, we have no warrant to expect his help:
but if we fear with Peter, we must look to sink with him. And this shows
that distrustful cares prevent us of our desires.

The other example is in Abraham the father of the faithful. Of him it is
storied, that Genesis 22.1, 2 etc.
God tried him, and said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, who^ thou
love, and get thee into the land of Moriah: and offer him there for a burnt
offering upon one of the mountains, that I will tell thee off. And Abraham
rose up early in the morning etc. Then on the third day Abraham lift up his
eyes, and saw the place afar off: etc. And Abraham took the wood of the
burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac his son; and he took the fire in his
hand, and a knife, and they went both of them together etc. And they came to
the place: -- and Abraham built an Altar there, and laid the wood in order,
and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the Altar upon the wood. And
Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slaie his son. And
the Angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven, -- and said, Lay not thine
hand upon the Lad, neither do any thing unto him: for now I know that thou
fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy son, thine only son from
me. In this example of Abraham, we may note these particulars, and make use
of them for our direction. (1) What Abraham was commanded to do: and it was
that he should take his only son, the staff of his age, the hope of his
posterity, the joy of his life, and (which is most of all) the ground of Gods
promises toward him in Christ. For God had promised that in Abraham and his
seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed: and that seed he had
appointed Isaac to be. For Genesis 21.12
In Isaac (says God) shall thy seed be called. Besides, this son, whom
Abraham loved, and that deservedly for many respects, he was commanded to
carry three days journey off, and to kill him with his own hands, and to
offer him up in a burnt sacrifice unto God. An hard task, and a grievous
storm, by which Abraham was put to the trial, what he would do for God. (2)
Note, what Abraham in this case performed, and that was even all that was
required of him. He took his son, and carried the wood and the knife, and
went three days journey, and bound the child, and drew out the knife, and
fetched the blow, that should have bereaved both Isaac of his life, and Abraham
of his dearest son. A strong faith, and an undainted affiance in God, by which
Abraham has set us an example, which most would rather commend, then imitate.
For one of us, had we been in his place, would have thought thus; Lord, why
should God deal thus strangely with me? Was ever man brought to these
straights, that I am in? and, Is it possible, my heart should bear all this,
and not break? Or thus; Can God love me, that envieth me mine only child?
Will God provide me comfort, when he takes from me all the joy that I have?
and, Means he to perform his promise made in Isaac, when he designeth
Isaac to be slain, and his body to be burnt into ashes? Or thus; Will nothing
please God, but mine only son? and, Is it not enough, that I part with my
son, but I must murder him with mine own hands? and, May I not now at once,
make an end both of his life and my grief; but must I be acting it three days
together, that by prolonging the time, I may increase my sorrow? Thus or in some
such manner, as this we would have been ready to have complained against God:
Or if we had submitted against our minds, yet we would have wept and mourned
and wrung the hands, like Matt. 2.18.
Rachel, that wept for her children, and would not be comforted, because they
were not. But Abraham did neither so, nor so. He did what God commanded, and
hoped for that which God had promised; And therefore the Apostle says of him,
Romans 4.18.
Against hope he believed in hope: and Heb. 11.17.
He that had received the promises, offered up his only begotten son, of whom
it was said, In Isaac shall thy seed be called: accounting that God was able
even to raise him up from the dead. And this was that which Abraham performed
in the time of his trial. (3) Consider we how Abraham sped after all: and
that was, an Angel stayed his hand from killing his son, and God commended
his faith, that was so ready to obey, and now all ages acknowledge Abraham for
the father of the faithful. Nor is there any of us, but will think and say; O
happy man that had such a son to give, and such an heart to part with him at
Gods command, and such a faith to depend upon God when all things seemed
contrary, and such a blessing from God, when he was destitute of all help and
hope! But this is the end of those, that dare trust God in their trialls, and
with cheerfulness can follow him through their troubles. Let us then imitate
Abraham's faith, and we shall partake also of his blessing.

CHAP. IIII. What rules or directions we may follow to ease our selves of
these cares.
THe evils being such and so great which attend irregular cares: I suppose
every man will earnestly desire some remedies, that may either eure or abate
them. And no doubt but many would do their endeavor to be eased, if they knew
which way to go about it. And therefore it will be a seasonable and welcome
service, I suppose, if in the last place we can find some Rules that may
direct us in this work. And for that purpose I have thought on these following
directions.

I. When such thoughts do arise in our minds, divert our thoughts some other
way, and turn them on some better object. For as husbandmen, when their ground
is overflowed with much water, make ditches and water-furrowes to carry it
away: so if our minds be over-flowed with cares of the world; there is no
better way to draine them, then by making another passage for them, and by
diverting them upon some other matter, fitter to be thought upon; especially if
we set them on work about some such things as may either affect our minds
with some useful delight, or may tend to the mitigating or abating of these
cares. For which purpose, we may teach our hearts to meditate on the vanity of
worldly things; or on the comforts and peace of a good conscience, or on the
shortness of this life, or whatsoever other good matter that we can most
willingly receive and entertain. For such will find the easiest entrance, and
are likely to abide the longest with us. And if our former thoughts and cares
do interrupt us, and intermingle themselves against our wills, and so break
off, or hinder our meditations: yet we must then force our selves to call home
our wandering thoughts, and labor to drive out these fancies, as Genesis 15.11.
Abraham drove away the birds that lighted on his sacrifice. (2) We may for the
same purpose, betake our selves to good company, such as whose words may
minister grace to our hearts when we hear them; and whose savoury talk may
possess our minds with a love and liking of them. For look how much we give
our minds to mark such men's discourses, and so much we pare away or diminish
of our distracting thoughts. (3) We may, and it will be most availeable, if
we do bend and set our selves about the reading of Scriptures, or perusing of
some other wise and sober writings, which may both take up our thoughts, and
inform our minds. So it seems David did in the times of his distress, Psalm.
119.23
Princes (says he) did sit and speak against me: but thy servant did meditate
in thy statutes. And again, Psalm. 119.92
Unless thy Law had been my delight, I should then have perished in mine
affliction. By which speeches we may gather, that David did not sit down and
bemone himself with discontented thoughts, but he ran to Gods word, and did
meditate in his law, and had comfort from thence in all his troubles. And so
should we do; if any fears afflict our minds, we should go to the Book of
God, and busy our selves with thinking on the sweet sayings that be there
delivered and taught. (4) We should set our selves with as much cheerfulness,
as we may, about the businesses and works of our honest callings. For these are
duties that God requires at our hands, and they be employments that we are
well acquainted with, and such businesses withal, as new occasions every day
will put us upon: and in these respects it will be the more easy to busy our
minds about the ordering of them. And if these have their due place, careful
thoughts will have the less room. These are the diversions which we may use
in this case: and if thus, or, in any other the like kind, we set our heads
and hearts on working; we shall both busy our minds with good thoughts that
may profit us, and keep out worldly cares that would annoy us. But if when
cares and fears do seize upon us, we avoid action, and shun company, and
cast off the care of our callings, and get into a corner, that we may give
scope to our cares, and may invent arguments to amplify our misery; it is no
martiell, if our fears and cares, and unquiet thoughts get head against us,
when as our selves do uphold them with our own hands.

II. cause, that breeds these unquiet cares. For as in healing sick bodies,
Physicians never think the cure to be sound, till the cause of the disease be
removed: so it is in healing sick and distempered minds; there can be no
sound cure, till the cause, which first bred the disease, and afterward does
uphold it, be removed or taken away. Now the causes of this sickness, which in
this place we endeavor to cure, are especially these two; An immoderate love of
worldly things; and a fearful distrust of Gods providence and fatherly care
over us.

1 An immoderate love of the world is a cause of inordinate cares; because
Matt. 6.21.
where our treasure is, there will our hearts also be, as our Savior says. If
our treasure, that is, that which we esteem, and desire, and love, as some
special jewel of great worth, if it be in heaven; then our hearts will be in
heaven, ever thinking upon, and ever longing after the celestial joys, and
the society of the glorious Saints and Angels, and the presence of the blessed
Trinity; in the enjoying whereof is fullness of joy for evermore. And if our
treasure be upon earth, if we desire and love the things of this life, as our
greatest good; then our hearts will be upon the earth, still thinking on the
world, and ever reaching and gaping after it. We shall sometimes be studying
how to get them, and sometimes how to increase them, and sometimes how to
dispose of them; and when we have nothing to do about them, yet our hearts
will delight to look upon them, and to handle them, as the worldling often
tells over his gold and silver; not because he knows not the sum, but
because he delights in the sight and sound of it. And if once these things
be lost, which are so much loved; the heart follows after them mourning and
sorowing that his joy is gone, as when David took Michal away from Phaltiel
her supposed husband, 2 Samuel 3.16.
he went with her along weeping. For that which a man does love immoderately
when he has it; for that he will mourn immoderately, when he has lost it.
And hence it is, that because Rachel did too excessively desire children,
before she had them; therefore the Ier. 31.15.
Prophet does bring her in, as a pattern of them that mourn for their
children, when they are not. For as it fares with things that appertain to
the body, those that are loose from the flesh, as our clothes and armor are,
these we can put on and off without annoyance or pain; but that which
sticks to our flesh, as the skin does, if that be pulled or plucked from
us, it puts us to pain, and breeds smart and sorrow: so it is with the
things of this world, if they be unto us as our clothes, things without us, and
such as we desire only for our use; then we can both possess them and lose
them with patience and contented minds: as we see it was with Job, when he
had lost all that ever he had, Job. 1.20, 21.
he fell down upon the ground, and worshipped (or praised God) and said,
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither: the
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away: blessed be the name of the Lord. Job,
when he was stripped of all his goods, and servants and children, all the store
that he had in the world; he thought of himself no otherwise, then as of one
that is naked and stripped of his clothes: and therefore he endured the loss of
all with great patience, and praised God as well when he took them away, as
when he gave them. He remembered that he came without them into the world, and
must go without them out of the world: and therefore thought he might live
without them in the world. And so, if the things of the world be unto us as
our clothes which are without us, and not fastened to out flesh or glued to our
hearts; then with the Apostle, we may freely say of them Philip. 4.12.
Every where and in all things I am instructed both to be full, and to be
hungry, both to abound, and to suffer need. But contrariwise, if the love of
worldly things do enter into our hearts, and stick fast to our souls, as the
skin does to the flesh, every little pull, that draws away any of them,
will draw away so much blood from our hearts vein. See the truth of this in an
example or two. The Mar. 10.17. etc.
young man, who as he had great riches, so he loved them too much, came to
Christ resolving to do any thing, that should be required, for inheriting of
eternal life: but when Christ once bad him, go and sell all that he had, and
give it to the poor, and he should have treasure in heaven: he was sad at
that saying, as loath to lose heaven, but more loath to part with his lands. And
1 King. 21.4
Ahab was sick and would eat no bread, when he was denied Naboths vineyard,
which he did so much desire. And 2 Samuel 17.23
Achitophel was so weary of his life for the disesteeme of his counsel, that
he went and hanged himself. And so all those that love the world, and mind
earthly things, who make their belly their God, or have their portion in this
life; lose all their joy, and are even weary of their lives, if once they be
deprived of that which they love. And consequently, such men can never be free
from these immoderate, anxious and tormenting cares. And therefore if any man
desire to ease himself of the cares of the world, he must first empty his
heart of the love of the world.

2 A second cause of inordinate cares, is a fearful distrust of Gods
providence, and his promises made unto us. For if we durst trust Gods word,
when Heb. 13.5, 6.
he says, I will never leave thee, neither will I forsake thee: then as the
Apostle infers in the next verse, we might boldly say with our selves, The
Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me: not fear,
if he should take away my goods, or stripp me of my dignities, or deprive me
of my liberty, or bereave me of my limbs and life. And again we might say
with David; Ps. 46.1, 2,^
God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. There fore
will we not fear though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be
carried into the midst of the sea: etc. Such a man, is like a shipp at anchor,
which the waves and storms may beat and batter, but cannot move out of his
harbor or station: nor needs such a man to be disquieted with anxious and
distracting cares, because he has fast hold on God, who is the rock of his
salvation and will not fail him. But if a man dares not rest upon Gods
providence, nor rely on his promises; it is no marvel, if he cling fast to
the world, because he has no better stay to hold by. And therefore take away
his goods, or his health, or his liberty, or his preferments; etc. and he
will think as Micah said to the Danites, Iud. 18.24.
Te have taken away my Gods; and what have I more? For his worldly goods, they
be his God, in whom he does trust, and whom he does adore. And therefore if
we will be eased of immoderate and anxious cares, we must accustom our
selves to depend and rely upon God, and to put our trust in him; and then the
peace of God will preserve us in all crosses.

III.

1 If we consider the sweet providence of our good God, Moses tells the
people of Israel, that Deu. 8.15, 16.
God led them through the great and terrible wilderness, wherein were fiery
serpents and scorpions, and drought, where there was no water, but he brought
forth water out of the rock of flint, and fed them with Mannah; [that is, there
was no water, but such as God brought them out of the flint, nor no bread but
such as he rained down out of the clouds unto them:] and all this was, that
he might humble them [with their wants] and prove them [in their wants,] to
do them good at their later end. And God himself says of those that were
carried away captive, that he Ier. 24.5.
had sent them into the land of the Chaldeans for their good. In which examples
we may see, that God turned the penury and the captivity of his people into
their greater good. And so he does still, by the greatest crosses he works us
the greatest comforts: And that he does two ways, or in two respects:

(1) Because he makes temporal crosses to be spiritual cures unto us: and
by the smart which he lays on the outward, he preserves the soundness of
the inner man. For as a skillful Physician can by his art so temper rank
poisons, that he makes them serve for wholesome medicines: so Almighty God,
by his great wisdom does so order our crosses, that he makes them to be
medicinal unto us. Sometimes he makes them like purgations, to evacuate our
pride and profaneness, and worldliness, and vain glory, and such like
corruptions of our souls. And sometimes he makes them like preservatives, to
keep us from falling into those or the like sins. And sometimes again he
makes them like cordials, to strengthen our decaying graces, and to animate us
to holy duties, to pray more fervently, and to read and hear Gods word more
attentively, and to bear the rod of God more patiently, and to perform all
holy duties with the more life and alacrity. And for these and such like
respects David said, Psalm. 119.71
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
statutes. And, Psalm. 119.67
Before I was afflicted I went astray: but now have I kept thy word. And so,
every one of us, may say of the afflictions that we have suffered, if we make
a right use of them, It is good for me, that I was dejected with sickness, or
disgraced by slanderous tongues, or wronged by unjust neighbors, or vexed with
an unquiet wife, or endamaged in mine estate, etc. For by this means I have
learned to love God the more, and the world and mine own sins the less. And
if we make such wholesome medicines for our souls out of the calamities that
befall us in the world, we have little cause to vex our selves with care, for
that which does do us so much good.

(2) God does many times make our present crosses, to be means to prevent
future evils, which otherwise might do us greater prejudice in our worldly
estate and condition. For example, Ier. 24.8, 9.
the Jews in Ieremies time, which escaped the captivity, remained at home for
their greater hurt. For they were driven into all the kingdoms of the earth,
and were so tortured and consumed there, that they became a proverb, and a
taunt, and a curse in all places: but those that were taken captives, escaped
these greater evils, and at length were restored home again, and enjoyed their
former liberties and lands. And in the like manner God does many times deal
with us also. For whereas we grieve at the untimely death of our children,
which we hoped should have been the staff of our old age, and should have
inherited both our names and houses: yet we may observe, that many children of
as good hope, as they ever were, have proved such crosses to their parents, as
that their fathers or mothers have not stuck to say of them: Would God he had
never been borne, thus to afflict his friends, and undo himself: or, I would
I had carried him to his grave, when I brought him to his nurse. Surely Rachel,
who out of her desire of children said, Genesis 30.1.
Give me children, or else I dye: did afterward Genesis 35.19.
die indeed by childbearing. And that son which she Genesis 30.24.
joyed to think on aforehand, proved afterward a Genesis 35.18.
Benoni, a son of her sorrow. And so the children, whose life we do so
immoderately desire, and for whose death we grieve without measure, had they
lived, might have proved sons of sorrow, and such as we would have wished,
that they had been buried long before. And again, we think it an heavy case,
if a man be diseased or dismembered, and either full of pain, or deprived of
some limme: and yet it is not unusual, that strength of body, and soundness
of limbs, do give occasion of a far greater mischief; so that we may
sometimes hear men say, Would God I had been sick in my bed, or I would I had
lost a leg, or an arm, when I went to such a place, or began such a work.
Thirdly, we count it a lamentable thing, if a man be robbed by thieves, or
impoverished by ill debtors, or undermined by cunning Lawyers, or any way
brought to penury or distress: and yet we may note it in the world, that many
times riches prove Eccles. 5.13.
the hurt of the owners of them: either they embolden them to some desperate
attempt that may be their ruin, or they whet others with envy to lay snares
for their life, or one way or other they breed men such woe, that they will say
of them, Would God I had been borne to never a foot of land, or, I would I had
lived as such a Cobbler or Water-bearer does; for then I had escaped these
mischiefs, and might have had some comfort in my life. And the like may be
said of other the like cases; concerning all which we must consider, that what
we see afterward, and wish for it, when it is too late; that God sees
aforehand, and provideth for it, before it come. And hence we may have a good
meditation to comfort us in all distresses. For if God do take away our
children that are dear unto us, as our life's, we should think, It is perhaps
because he foreseeth, that if they should survive, they would work either woe
to us, or ruin to themselves. And if he lay sickness, or lamenesse, or
maimednesse upon our bodies; it may be he does it, because he foreseeth that
if we had health and strength, and soundness of limbs, they would be an
occasion of some greater mischief. And if he send us want and poverty, and
losses in our estates and dealings, it is because he foreseeth that wealth
would breed us more woe, then it is worth. But sure it is, that most times God
does lay afflictions, either because he will procure us some good, or prevent
some evil by them. And if so, why should we mourn or take thought for that
which tends to our welfare and greater comfort?

2 A second meditation, times and seasons that God takes for delivering and
relieving of his servants. And that is this, that when all other helps fail,
then God is most ready to help: and then is he nearest to relieve, when men are
nearest to despair. 1 Samuel 2.6.
He (says Hannah) brings down to the grave, and brings up again. And
Deuteronomy. 32.36
God (says Moses) will judge his people, and repent himself for his servants;
when he sees that their power is gone, and there is none shut up, or left. And
he (says S. Paul) 2 Cor. 7.6.
comfort those that be cast down. And he (says Psalm. 68.5. and Psalm.
10.14.
David) is a Father of the fatherless, and a Judge of the widows. And, Psalm.
27.10.
When my father and mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up. In all
which sayings we may consider two things: (1) Gods great mercy in helping the
distressed: he brings men up out of the grave, he judges his people, that
is, he righteth them from their adversaries, and he is a Father to pity them,
and a Judge to defend their just cause. (2) The objects of this mercy, or who
they be that God sends such help unto; and they be those who are brought down
to the grave, that is, who are in the deepest misery: and, those whose power is
gone, that is, who have no means to help themselves; and those, who are cast
down, who are fatherless or widows, and who are forsaken of their parents
and nearest kindred, and are destitute of all friends and helpers. And hereby
we may see, that God does especially show mercy, when men are in the greatest
misery. And that he does upon three grounds, or for three causes. (1) Because
he delights to show mercy, and mercy still has misery for its object, and is
then most ready, when there is the greatest need. And from hence it is, that
when the Israelites were oppressed by the Egyptians, and Exodus 2.23.
sighed by reason of the bondage, and cried; then their cry came up unto God by
reason of the bondage. That which made them to cry, made him to help; that is,
the sore bondage which they suffered. And Exo. 22.23.
If thou afflict the widow and the fatherless (says God) and they cry unto
me; I will surely hear their cry. And it is given for a reason of Gods
special mercy toward Israel, 2 King. 14.26.
because he saw the affliction of Israel, that it was very bitter: for there
was not any shut up, nor any left, nor any helper for Israel. The meaning is,
as I take it, that there was none left and reserved from the common calamity,
nor any other that might help them in this misery. (2) Because God has a
special communion with his people, so that Isay 63.9.
in all their affliction he professes himself to be afflicted: and that Acts
9.4.
he that persecuteth them, persecuteth him: and that Zach. 2.8.
he who touches them, touches the apple of his eye: And therefore, the more
they are afflicted, the more himself suffers in them: and consequently, the
readier he will be both to succor them, and to ease himself. (3) Because when
men are destitute of all help and hope, and have neither friends, nor means;
then God may gain the greatest honor by their deliverance: for it will then
appear to be his work. So S. Paul says of himself and Timothy, that they
were 2 Cor. 1.8, 9
pressed out of measure, above strength, in so much that they despaired even of
life; and that therefore they had the sentence of death in themselves, that
they should not trust in themselves, but in God, which raises the dead. And
the same Apostle says of himself, that God resused to free him from the
buffettings of Satan at the present, because 2 Cor. 12.9.
his strength was made perfect in weakness. And we read of Gedcon, that God
would not save him from his enemies by an army of two and thirty thousand men,
but he did save him by three hundred. And the reason is given in the text,
Judge. 7.2.
Lest Israel should vaunt themselves against God, and say, Mine own hand has
saved me. The meaning is, that if they should have conquered, when they had a
great army, they might have ascribed the victory to their own strength: but
if with an handful of men, they should overcome a great host of enemies; all
men might see that it was Gods doing, and not their own endeavor that got them
the victory. And thus God does use to do still; he leaves men to struggle
with the cross, when their wants are but small, and the means competent to
provide against them: but man's extremity is Gods opportunity; when they have no
power, then he shows his; and when all helps and hopes from men do fail
them, then is he ready with relief from heaven, that his power and strength
and mercy may be seen. And hence we have an excellent meditation of great
comfort. For if our distress be small, our care for it should not be great:
and if our case grow desperate, and remediless in respect of humane help; then
the Judge is at the doors, and then God is even at hand, to relieve us, and
then may we comfort our drooping souls, as the Apostle did the afflicted
Hebrews; Heb. 10.37.
Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come and will not tarry.

3 Thirdly, of cares, if amidst the evils that we suffer, we call to mind the
good things, which by Gods mercy we do enjoy: and if, as we weigh our crosses
by thinking on the greatness or grievousnesse of them; so we lay in the other
scale over against them, the mercies that are still continued unto us. For so
we may find perhaps, that our blessings do overweigh our crosses; and
therefore that we have greater cause to praise God that we are so well dealt
with, then to grudge or grieve that we are no better. For example, say that we
are sick, or sore, or maimed: yet we have meat, and physic, and attendance,
and a soft lodging, which many others as good as our selves do want. Or, we
are oppressed with great ones, or undermined by Conie-catchers, or slandered by
foul mouths: yet we have some kind friends to comfortus, and an obsequious
family to observe us, and a commodious house to dwell in; al which may refresh
us at home, when we have been molested abroad. Or again, we are impeverished
in our estates, and want means and maintenance, and we are crossed in our
preferments, and suffer repulse in our suites, and are destitute of friends to
supply us: but we have soundnes of limbs, health of body, and a right and
ready use of our senses; so that we can endure labor, or serve in some
places of employment, and work for the getting of an honest living. Or yet
again, say we have all these crosses, and none of the other comforts (though
who can say so truly?) yet we have the comfort of Gods word, and peace of
conscience, and hope of eternal life, and we have God our father to protect
us, and Christ our Redeemer to pray for us, and the holy Spirit of them both to
comfort us, and the blessed Angels to pitch their tents round about us, and to
guard us: Or if we have not these for our comfort, it is our fault alone that
we want them; and then we have greater cause to be solicitous and careful
for the obtaining of these spiritual mercies, then for the repairing of our
worldly wants. And hence we have a meditation of great comfort: For if we
consider our worldly state, we are not without the testimonies of Gods love
toward us in many things: but if we look upon our means of grace, and our
hopes of glory, and Gods eternal favor in Christ, then we have greater cause
to cheer our selves against all worldly troubles. For then as God comforted
his people, saying, Isai 30.20.
Though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction;
yet shall not thy Teachers be removed into a corner any more; but thine eyes
shall see thy Teachers, and thine ears shall hear a word behind thee saying,
This is the way, walk ye in it. So may every afflicted Christian comfort
himself in the like manner, Though the Lord have given me, bread of
adversity, and waters of affliction, though he have laid on me sickness, or
wants, or disgraces, or such like; yet he has not taken from me his Word,
his Sacraments, his Ministers; means of grace, or peace of conscience, or the
light of his countenance: and so I may have these, it is no great matter though
I want all other things. For as David said, Psalm. 4.6, 7.
Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us: and then adds, Thou
have put gladness in my heart, more then in the time that their corn and their
wine increased: so the Christian soul may say, God has put more cause of
gladness in my heart, by the enjoying of his favor, and the expectation of his
glory, then if I had had corn and wine and oil, honors and offices and
preferments, health and strength and liberty, and whatsoever else appertains
to the outward man.

4 It may help to alaie our cares for the world, alaied and tempered these
very crosses, whereof we complain. For say, that God has stricken us with
sickness: yes; but he might justly have stricken us with death. Or he has
laid losses and wants upon us: yes; but he might have left us without any
ragge to our backs, or crumme of bread for our bellies, or a dropp of water to
relieve our thirst. Or he has suffered men to oppress us, and hale us into
prison: yes; but he might have given way to the Devil, to set upon us, and
hurrie us into hell. And finally, whatsoever we suffer, yet it is a great
deal less then we have deserved, and then God might have laid upon us, if
he had rewarded us according to our sins. And hence we may have a good
meditation for our comfort. For in what distresses soever we be, yet we may
be glad that they are no worse. And if our crosses seem grievous to be
borne, we may cheer our selves in the Apostles words, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9
We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not
in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed. When
Hezekiah considered this, he praised God for it: King. 20.19.
Good (said he) is the word of the Lord which thou have spoken: and, Is it not
good if peace and truth be in my days? which is as if he should have said,
God might justly have laid this punishment both on me and my children; and
his mercy it is that does spare me in mine own person, and defer his
judgment till afterward. And the Church in the Lamentations, Lam. 3.22.
It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not. And so considering that all our crosses are far less then our
sins, and that God has mingled much mercy in our afflictions, we have
great cause to bless God, that our sufferings are so casie, when our
deservings have been so badd.

5 Fifthly and lastly, taking thought for our souls, which yet does seldom and
little trouble our minds. For example, say we have lost our goods, or offended
some great man, or endangered our liberties and lives; and this fills us with
anxietie and care: Yea, but have we not lost some measure of Gods Spirit, or
offended the Lord of heaven, and endangered our souls and salvation? And where
is the thought that we take for these things? This Meditation may either serve
to shame us for our worldly mindednes, and that we have so much care about
these transitory things: or it may serve to work in us a greater care for our
souls; and if that once be increased, our care for the world will in a like
proportion be decreased with it.

These be the Meditations, with which if we busy our selves, when occasion
shall require; they may help to avert our minds from musing on our worldly
grief, and may mitigate those cares that do too much possess our hearts. And
thus much may serve for this third rule, which is to meditate on such things,
as may persuade to patience and equanimitie.

IIII. go to God for comfort, and still unloade our cares into his bosom by
prayer and supplication. For if we cast them upon God, God will ease us of
them. Nor will any man think, that has not tried it, how much this course may
avail to the quieting of a distracted soul; and that either because having
done his duty, he may comfort his heart with the conscience of it; or because
having referred himself to Gods mercy, he may well hope that God will
support him. But what ever the reason be, certain it is that Hannah gained
great ease by it. It is said of her 1 Sa. 1.6, 7, 8
that being upbraided by her adversary for her barrenness, she wept, and did
not eat, and her heart was grieved. Here was her care and thought-taking for
want of children. But then ver. 10, 11.
in the bitterness of her soul, she went and prayed unto the Lord, and wept
sore. Here Hannah cast her burden upon the Lord, and unloaded her cares into
his bosom. And then thirdly it is added after all, that having done her
prayers, ver. 18.
she went her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad. Where we
may see, that she had no sooner prayed, but she was cheared: she had cast her
burden upon God, and that cased her heart. And so if we by hearty prayer cast
our burden upon God, that will be a ready way to unburden our selves. And
therefore, when cares take hold on us, in stead of musing, we should fall to
praying. And then Philip. 4.7.
the peace of God, which passes all understanding will preserve our hearts and
minds through Christ Jesus.

These be the Rules; it now remains to applic and make use of them for our
selves. And that we may do two ways.

1 If we have any cares upon us already, we have hence direction how to
work them out: and that is by opposing them, as they do arise, and by
diverting our thoughts upon better objects, and by considering what end the
Lord makes of such occasions; and lastly by unloading our cares into Gods
bosom by supplication and prayer. And if thus we find not present ease, yet
we must still wait: for many have missed of help, because they have made too
much haste. Of Abraham we heard before, that he took his son, and the
knife and the wood and the fire, and went his three days journey, that he
might sacrifice his son, where God had appointed: and after he had gone all
the way, and stayed all the time, and was now at the last cast of killing his
son; then (and not till then) he found Gods help in the topp of the mount.
But now suppose, that Abraham, either wearied with the journey, or overcome
with grief, or despairing of future help, had turned back again after a days
journey or two; Or say, he had sat himself down at the foot of the hill,
and with impatient cries had bemoaned his uncomfortable condition, what may we
think would the issue have been? Sure, it may well be supposed, that by
detaining his son, he might have lost him: but certain it is, that by
staying at the foot of the hill, he had not found God in the topp of the
mount. And so, if we make too much haste, and will not expect Gods time, we
may outrunne Gods providence, and fail of his protection and mercy. But if
we hold on, in using the means, and resting on Gods word; we shall in the
end find the Proverb to be true, In the mountain will the Lord be seen.

2 If dangers be toward, (and when are they not?) we may hereby learn how
to prepare for them, and how to arm against them, that they may not affect us
with immoderate cares, when they come. And that is, that we setle our selves
aforehand so to deal in all our occasions, as the wise husbandman deals in
his business. He diggeth, and dungeth, and ploweth and sows; and when he
has done his days work, betaketh himself to his nights rest, and leaves
the growing of the corn, and the ordering of the weather to Gods care, and
providence. And so should we resolve to do. For example thus; If sickness
shall befall us, we will go to the Physician for counsel, and use such
druggs and diet as may be convenient, and provide such Attendants as may
supply us with necessaries; and this is as the sowing of our seed: and when
this is once done, then we have done our days work; and therefore will lay
our selves down in peace, and let God alone with the issue, in whose hands
only it is. And the like course we should resolve upon, in all other the like
cases; if we shall be slandered by foul mouths, undermined by cunning heads,
oppressed by potent neighbors, endamaged in our worldly estates, or whatsoever
other cross we shall meet with; we will first sow our seed, and then take
our rest; first use good means, and then trust God with the success: and he
that has promised help, before we did ask; will not fail to peforme it,
when we think not on it. And if thus we prepare our selves, before the
cross comes; we shall be the more free from cares, when it is come. For
nothing is more availeable, then courage in such cases; and a resolution
aforehand, will by Gods help make us steadfast, when the storm is upon us: nor
will God be wanting to afford us his help, if we be not wanting in using of
the means. For that belongs to us also, which was spoken to Solomon; Up and
be doing: 1 Chronicles. 22.16.
and the Lord will be with thee. Now the God of all mercy, and goodness,
guide our hearts in the doing of our duties, and bless our labors with
success and comfort, and so free us from cares of the world, that we may serve
him without distraction all our days. Amen.

FINIS.

