The Emperors Style and Titles, as he was proclaimed in Francfort: the 13. of
June 1612.

MATTHIAS, by the grace of God, of that name the first: the most high, most
mighty, and most sacred EMPEROR of Romans.

KING of Germany, Hungary, Bohemia, Dalmatia, Croatia and Sclauonia:

ARCHDVKE of Austria, DVKE of Burgundy, Stiria, Carinthia, Carniola,
Wirtenbergh, and of both high and low Silesia:

MARQVESSE of Morauia, and of high and low Lusatia: COUNT or EARL of
Habspourgh, Tirole and Tecce, etc. our most mild Lord.

NEWS From Francfort, Concerning the election of the most mighty Emperor
Matthias the first of that name, Who was elected and crowned in Francfort, in
June last, Anno. 1612.

Translated out of Dutch into English.

the double-headed eagle as German imperial device

LONDON Printed for Henry Holland, and are to be sold at his shop in Iuy lane
at the sign of the Holy-bush. 1612.

News from Francford ford concerning the Election of the most mighty Emperor,
Matthias.
RVDOLPHVS the second, Son of Maximilian, and of Mary Daughter of Charles the
fifth, borne in Vienna the 18. of July the year of our Lord 1552. was elected
Emperor the year 1576. at Ratisbone, and continued in his government until
this last year 1611.

Rudolphus was a Prince that took more delight light in rare work-manship and
artificial devices at home, then in warlike affairs abroad, contrary to his
poefie A.D.S.I.T which is, Adjuvante, Domino, Superabo, Imperatorem, Turcarum,
In English; by Gods help I will overcome the Emperor of the Turks.

His brother Matthias Archduke of Austria, etc. the third Son of Maximilian,
succeeded by Election in his steed the 23. of June 1612.

Matthias is a Prince of great experience and courage: for, since the year
1577. he has been trained up in the managing of great matters: He was
brought in secretly, and afterward publicly received to the Government of the
Low Countries, with certain conditions whereunto he agreed the 20. of January
1577. (the Prince of Orange remaining his Lieutenant General:) but seeing the
confusion which rose daily, he took his leave of them the 21. of October
1581. Having learned there, as in a School, many things whereof since he has
made very good use.

He did see of late, in the year 1608. what confusion did begin to rise in the
Empire, by the persecutions which were practiced in diverse places for the
reformed religions sake, and how that by the Council of Jesuits, Iesuited
Governors were brought in; whereby the ancient Privileges and liberties of
conscience were trodden under foot, and by their mutual strife the Turk
encouraged; and how the Archduke Ferdinand of Stiria was brought in to be
preferred before him at the Diet of Regensbourgh. Hence upon due confiderations
and consultations, showing himself less partial in Religion, and faithfuller
in mind, The Nobles and confederats of Hungary, Austria, Morauia, Silesia, etc.
did choose Matthias for their head, brought together a competent Army, and
established liberty of Religion, and the use of the ancient Privileges in all
those Countries: This Army being arrayed, Matthias marched with it toward
Prague in Bohemia, for to confer with the Emperor his brother, who by the
Jesuitical practices kept himself close, scarce knowing how matters went, yet
this Army brought unto them no small terror, and matters were thereby so
resolved upon, that Matthias, being the elder brother, should succeed in all
the Dominions of the Emperor, granting unto him the Crown of Hungary, and the
command of Austria, Morauia and other dominions, yet in his life time: unto the
which he had procured the peace with the Turk and the liberty of conscience,
giving a free passage unto the gospel.

The States of Bohemia did like so well of Matthias proceedings, that, they
opposing themselves against the wicked and sinister practices of Leopold, did
lik wise receive him for their king granting unto the Emperor his palace, and
a large revenue to end his days in peaceably, desiring not to be any longer
abused by those that crept in to the overthrow of their Estate. Matthias by
these aduancements was the next in hope and appearance to the Imperial Crown.
Therefore the Emperor Rudolphus the second his brother being dead, He as
first Elector, King of Bohemia, accompanied with the Queen his wife, met with
the other Electors, both spiritual and temporal at Francfort on the Main,
which is an ancient Imperial City, where the Election is accustomed to be
made, and by the way, He war royally entertained by all those Princes and
Cities which lay in his passage, the Bishop of Wirtzbourg did receive him in a
great Hall, garnished with red velvet, amounting to the value of 30000. Florins.

The King Matthias being arrived at Francfort the three and twentieth of May,
and the other Electors also in great state, with very fair horses and
Equipage. The Magistrate of Francfort caufed a proclamation to be made the 25.
Bourgomaister.
of May, and read at every street corner, whereby all the Citizens were cited
to appear the next day at a public and large market called the Romer, where
King Matthias and the other Princes came, Or Burse.
and in their presence did give their oaths, lifting up their fingers; first,
the Magistrate, and afterward the Citizens, to defend the Princes from all
invasions and tumults, according to their power; this being done, they went to
their several lodgings.

The ix. of June was the day appointed for the Election of a new Emperor, but
the Electors could not well agree amongst themselves for the time, and matters
were deferred until the Wednesday following; the occasion of their
disagreement, was because the three spiritual. Electors, Mentz, Trier, and
Colen, with the Duke of Saxone, whose mind was perverted by some sinister
means, did judge the Archduke Albert, younger brother of Matthias, fitter for
the Empire then King Matthias who is subject to the gout, they said, and not
like to live long: This project seemed very strange and unlooked for unto the
Duke of Zwebrough, administrator of the Palatinat, Dux Biponinus.
and unto Lord Putlitz deputy of the Duke of Brandenbourgh, holding with the
common opinion of the most part of all the Princes of Christendom, that
Matthias was far the fitter man, in regard of his understanding, experience,
courage and state, and that doubtless, some secret corruption did bend their
hearts and voice toward Albertus.

This delay being made, the Protestant Princes, in their meeting at Offenbach,
a Town near unto Francfort, having there also the Ambassador of France
Monsieur Ancell, for to confer with also, did discover the mischiefs which
were hidden under the desired election of Albert, being mere practices of the
Jesuits and their adherents: but all was overthrown: First, by the resolution
of the Protestant Princes, who were ready to set the Imperial crown on
Matthias his head, even with their swords.

Secondly, by a letter sent from the French King and Queen his Mother, whereby
Matthias was recommended unto the Electors, as the fitter man for the place.

This letter being read, and the resolution of the Prince of Anhalt, Lantgraue
of Hassen, Duke of Wirtenbourgh, Marquess of Baden, being known, the
plurality of voices in the next meeting, fell on Matthias.

The twelfth of June, the Bourgomaister of Francfort caused to be denounced
with the Drum the day of the Election, and commanded all strangers, (the
Electors only excepted) to void the City.

The xiii. day, about seven a clock in the morning, the Electors with King
Matthias went to the Council chamber, staid together one hour, did put on
their princely garments, and rode from thence to the Church of Saint
Bartholmew: First the Archbishop of Mentz and Trier rode together: then
followed the Archbishop of Colen, on the right hand, and Matthias on the left;
after him came the Duke of Saxone, with a bare sword in his hand, Dux Biponinus.
The Administrator of the Palatinat carried the Sphere of the World, and the
Lord Putlitz in the name of the Duke of Brandenb. bore the Scepter: they being
entered into the Church, every one took his due place, which was noted with
golden letters: the places for Mentz, Palatine, and King Matthias, were on the
right hand, for Colen, Saxone, and Brandenbourgh, on the left, Trier was in the
midst. Then began the Priests to say the Mass de Sancto Spiritu: The temporal
Electors during the Celebration of the Idololatricall Mass, retired unto a
Conclaue, or chamber, and it being ended, did return unto their rooms or
places, and thence went, as their order required, to the Altar, and took their
accustomed oath, the spiritual Electors swearing, held their hands on their
breasts, and the temporal on the Gospel. Thence they all went into a chamber,
where the Votes were collected, which fell on Mathias, vnanimiter. This being
performed, the new chosen King of the Romans, was brought again before the
Altar, and all the Electors round about him, then was sung Te Deum laudamus,
all the Bells were rong, and the Ordenance discharged, in sign of joy; from the
Altar he was led to a Royal Chair, and then was proclaimed King of the
Romans, and Emperor apparent, etc. and so being accompanied to his Court, the
gates of the City were opened, and xvi. of the chief Princes of Germany came
to congratulate unto him this dignity.

The Sunday following was the day of his Coronation, the Crown was fetched from
Ake^, Aquisgra^^
where it is kept in custody, and diverse relics were sent along with the
same, as, the blood of Saint Stephan, etc. leaving yet behind the breeches of
Joseph, and the smock of our Lady, which are held there in no small devotion.

In the Marker place of Francfort was roasted a whole Ox, whereof a piece
being cut off for the Emperor, the rest was given to the multitude, which did
so throng, that two men were smothered to death, and six more sorely hurt.
There was also erected an Eagle of a huge bigness, An Eagle being the Arms of
the Empire.
out of which did run both red and white wine in abundance. Finally, gold and
silver coins were dispersed amongst the people, in great measure, and there
followed very great feasting, banqueting, melodious Music, etc. These
solemnities being thus performed, as also the Coronation of the Empress his
wife: they returned toward Prague; being chiefly entertained and received
with great honor and triumph in Norembergh.

We cannot understand that the Popes Nuncio has had any thing to do with
this election, which doubtless his Holiness will not so well like of: But our
hope is, that according to the admonition of Laurentius Valla, Ann. 1420.
(speaking against that forged and supposed donation of Constantine, whereon the
Popes pride and usurpation is grounded,) The Emperor will one day remember his
ancient and lawful authority, whereby he was to choose the Romish Bishops, and
not they to choose the Emperors, that his seat ought to be in Rome, being
Roman Emperor, and not to leave it to the Usurper, calling the same Peter's
Patrimony. Constantine had no reason to give it to that Prelate, who had less
warrant to receive the same from him. Our Savior said to Peter, I will give
thee the Keys of Heaven: and it was the voice of Satan, I will give thee
these kingdoms with their glory.

Animaduertite Reges, eruditionem percipite O Iudices terrae.
FJNJS.

