Mulier timens Dominum ipsa ^^^^^bitur. THE HISTORY OF S. ELIZABETH DAVGHTER
OF THE KING OF HVNGARIE

Written in French by Peter Mathieu and translated into English by Sr T. H.

AT BRVXELLES By the Widow of HVBERT ANTONY called Velpius Ano. 1633

TO THE HONble. THE LADY ENGLEFIELD THE ELDER, all happiness temporal and
eternal.
MADAM,
I having bin entreated by a worthy gentleman, to reueivv this abstract of a
greater history, to the end it might pass to public use; And finding
(according to my slender skill in foreign tongues) that it punctually agrees
with the French, out of which it was translated into our vulgar: and judging
the subject proper to our times, wherein (as alvvayes) examples move more then
doctrine to acts of piety: I was Zealous to further the press, annecting an
Appendix or adioynder of mine own poor conceits, as I hope, not unprofitable
to the Reader. Which done, I easily resolved to beg your Lapps Patronage of
so pious a design, especially this great Princess, whose exemplar life is
here abbreuiated, being one of the first branches of that spiritual tree of
Seraphicall S. Francis, under whose shadows you have bin, and are virtuously
conducted, in a penitential way to your great home; where, by the infinite
merits of our blessed Savior, you hope to enjoy the revvard of your virtues,
with other great personages of your family, who have humbly passed their
pilgrimage under the same rule, not without note of sanctity. I omit my own
titles of obligation, which challenge both my pen and person in all duty to
your Lapp. begging of the divine goodness, who is the butt of your actions, his
blessing to all your good desires.

MADAM Your Lapps. humble beades-man. G. P.

A COMMONITORY TO THE READER.
MY intentions in exposinge to public veiwe the life of this glorious saint,
a known member of the Catholic church, is by facts to show the church, a
posteriori, by the effects to show the cause; For surely god would not have
been so solicitous to reduce these wandringe sheep to his sheepfold, as
himself in holy writ by public proclamation witnesses. With an Oportet
reducere etc. If he could have faintes out of it. Neither do I think that any
protestants, except either weak or malicious puritanes, will not find matter
of edification, and I hope much spiritual profitt, if piously, not curiously
they observe this great Princes virtues. yet its not obscurely known to men who
desire more unity of spiritts, especially in matter of Religion, that there
are too many, who so much delight in the breaches of the church, that they
will have noe Communion, even with the weary saints begotten in her. These are
they of whom Cassander says, that they so hate the church, that they hate
all good from her.

I must confess, I delight not much in the society of those soldiers, who
would have (though only) the upper garment of our savior divided amongst them,
which Euthimius calls his cloak, but I abhor from those, who will cut his
tunica in-consutilis inner-coate, which the Arabian interpretour calls his
shirte, or truet; which was in steed of a shirte being of wool according to
the ancient and mystically without seame, without schism, and so to be kept
according to the Prophett, and subject only to a Miserunt sortem, in so much
that the outrageous Jews themselves durst not adventure to cut it; yet I
know there are too many cloaked under the name of christians, who would
rathermake more holes then stop one, even in our saviors inner coat; of
whom our learned Countryman master Seldom in his Prolegomena de successionibus
hebraeorum; Sui duntaxat ingenij vi, sacras literas temere explicantes,
ridiculis atque impijs pacem Christianam nouationibus perturbare solere passim
videmus their factious wits are made the touchstone of our faith: what many
of them deny to the whole church, They arrogate to their own private spiritts,
which is, to have power to declare all dubious, and more hidden texts of
scripture, and out of them to frame new canons of belief.

Vincentius Lyranensis Chap: 26. tells you of them, and how to know them.
Audies etenim quosdam ipsorum dicere, verite, o insipientes, and miseri qui
vulgo Catholici vocitamini, and discite fidem veram, quam praeter nos nullus
intelligit, quae multis ante saeculis la^uit, nuper vero reuelata and ostensa
est: sed discite furtim and secretim, delectabit enim vos. Et item cum
dediceritis latenter docete, ne mundus audiat, nec ecclesia sciat: paucis
namque concessa est tanti mysterij capere secretum.

See there, how he prosecuteth it and when you have perused him well, judge if
it touch not to the quick those factious spiritts, that desire nothing more
then separation, then sedition in christ his common wealth: me thinks in
earnest, he has them at every tourninge, for their nouelty; for their
inuisibility, their singularity, their private spirit, their clanculare
conuenticles, their praeiudicate censures of all others, their refractary
resistance of peace in Religion.

Saint Hilarious de trin: lays open the ground of their vertigo. In deflexu
motu aduersandi studium persistit vbi non voluntas rationi subijcitur, sed his
quae studemus doctrinam coaptans. Truth and learning must besquared
according, to their inordinate affections, and not their affections by truth;
they wrest the scriptures and fathers to their contentious ends. Omnes tument,
omnes scientiam pollicentur says Turtullian, by their ouer-weeninge conceit
of themselves, they swell and must break out into botches, and infectious
gangrenes to the prejudice of the wholl body of the church.

Had there not been those turbulent spiritts in our country, guilty of more
will then wit, we might not in vain have hoped long since, that most desired
unity in Religion.

Had they reverently proposed venerable antiquity, they would have found all
the fathers most scrupulous in giving the least (I do not say) cut, but
stretch to our Blessed savior his mystically wholl coat, which is his church
according to all the fathers. Wittnes Tert: de praescriptionibus although
afterward he unfortunately cut it in pieces. Ireneus especially lib. 3.
Epiphanius de haeresibus throughout all, saint Hierome against the Luciferans
how zealously against Ruffinus, fearing least any breach should be made by
him, though indeed his flawes were not so dangerous. as for Patronizing Origin
too much, as saint Hierome notes, Apol: 2. and falsely attributing some ill
opinions of Sixtus the Philosopher to saint Sixtus Pope and martyr as saint
Hierome notes ep. ad Ctesiphontem whereby saint Augustine was deceived at the
first, as appears in his retractations li. 2. C. 46. and some other points.
How fervent against Vigilantius, though I know the Magdeburgenses Cent 4. C.
8. would plead a not guilty for him, yea to have bin too hard for saint
Hierome: but the truth is, he was faulty in denying all honor to relics as
saint Hier: there confutes him, and my Lord of Winchester against Peron.
Causabon against Baronius, super annum Domini 34. nu. 140. learnedly in the
name of all England, acknowledge a reverence due to them, as saint Augustine
relates of the miracles done by the earth of the holy land, which Hesperius
reverenced worthily, as S. Augustine notes. He was faulty also in denying the
saints in heaven to pray for us, for this all learned protestant divines
allow, as conformable to all antiquity. How careful was saint Cyprian in
this maine point, though once indeed he gave a scratch to our Blessed savior
his coat, yet he cut it not, and as saint Augustine says, he reunited it
again with his own blood. Saint Augustine in all places against all spiritts
of division. Shall we hear a dismal sentence of his li. 4. Contra donatistas
Cap. 8. Constituamus aliquem castum, continentem, non auarum, non idolis
seruientem, hospitalitatem indigentibus ministrantem, non cuiusquam inimicum,
non contentiosum, patientem, quietum, nulli aemulantem, nulli inuidentem,
sobrium, frugalem, sed haereticum; nulli vtique dubium est, propter hoc solum
quod haereticus est, regnum Dei non possessurum.

If he has cut our savior his wholl garment, he has no shelter for
nakedness, no defense against gods sentence of eternal death.

And hereupon we see, with how great care have general and Provincial
Counsels presently been conuocated, to cut of all springing haeresies at
their first buding. As of Arius the Nicen, in time of Siluester. Of Macedonius
the first Constantinopolitan, in time of Damasus. Of Nestorius the Ephesine, in
time of Celestinus. Of Eutyches the Calcedon, under Leo etc. In like manner we
might descend by all centuries. Oportet quidem haereses esse, saint Paul has
taught us, there has been and will be flawes in the church, but a heavy VAE is
adjoined to them that make them. My desire therefore is, where I see any
breaches not to stretch them so far till I make them greater, least saint
Paul his VAE should lay hold on me, rather, if I can sow them up again, this
I conceive to be opus sanctorum. This has been the employment of antiquity,
you know Solomon adjudged the child not to be hers, who unnaturally would
have had it cut in pieces, that she might have part; and the holy ghost
commends his wisdom. How much more will it argue the church, not to be his
mother, who would have her quartered? Vnum ouile says christ. Our labor
should be to keep it one; So he left it. The woe lights heavily upon those,
who first broke it, and much heavier on those who delight in the breach. I find
not our best Protestant divines to deny many saints to have bin, even in
latter ages begotten and perfected in the church of Rome as of saint Thomas of
Aquine, my lord of Chichester doubts not to style him saint, in his tracte of
invocation of saints. So Seldom de successionibus, saint Anselme so commonly
styled: S. Bernard, omnium calculo, noe man so far calling his own judgment
in question, as to doubt of it. So doctor white against white dyed black;
so my lord of Ely in his funeral sermon; my lord of Winchester in his sermon
of iustificacion frequently. Causab: in his exercitations. Whittaker de
ecclesia. Saint Francis by very many, Pantalion in Cron: P. 95. says he was a
glorious saint. melancthon with many learned divines in corpore doctrinae
lypsiae. Saint Bonauenture ofen so entitled by that learned divine, who put
out Dieta salutis and Catena aurea taken out of this learned and pious saints
greater volumes. Saint Brigitt by doctor Andrews against Peron.

I could enlarge my self, but I have made choice of these more eminent
divines, and those whom our country has reverenced as Illustrious Prelates.

I can not omit one more Master Hacclevvitt in his book of Nauigations
acknowledges saint Xauerius borne in these times, in this Centurie, to be a
very great saint, and discribes many particulers of his life.

I must stop in a subject so obuious. I could wish and so all good men,
that there were more departinge christians, saints, then to use the phrase of
the Machabees, we should have more lovers of the brethren, who would pray
much for the people, and for holy city.

That is the church of god; as Judas found a Jeremy. Mac. 2.15.14. for noe
doubt in heaven they assist us, and by their holy prayers, these divisions in
Religion would be cured, and an unity concluded.

Thus far antiquity and, consent of holy fathers assure us, as all learned
Protestants agree, and in deed the creed declares it, for there is, Communio
sanctorum, a fellowship betwixt the triumphant and militant church which, must
needs be by spiritual graces conferred By god upon us, by their prayers. So
saint Gregory Nazian: oratione 18. learnedly explicateth and piously
believes. Nay saint Nazianzen does not only acknowledge that the saints pray
for the church in general, but even for his particular flock, as there he
says of his deceased father. Which passage of his, I must needs say, pincheth
those who would have only a general intercession.

Neither is this all: Antiquity goes further, saint Ambros, To: 1. l. de
viduis says, Obsecrandi sunt qui nobis ad praesidium dati sunt, martyrs
obsecrandi quorum videmur nobis quodam corporis pignore Patrocinium vindicare,
etc. He says more to the same purpose there. Neither did I ever read any
learned man that doubted this book to be his, except Master Perkins in his
problemes, but without reason, only because there is a book fathered on him
upon the Romans, where in the first chapter he seems to teach the contrary.
But indeed it is clear that this book is not his but one Hilarious a
Luciferan heretic. I have read that saint Augustine cites that book by the
name of one saint Hilarious how ever it seems sure not to be his, and the
other sure to be his.

Saint Hierome in his funeral oration of saint Paula says, vale Paula and
cultoris tui vltimam senectutem adiuua orationibus. what can this be called but
invocation, saint Augustine de ciuit: Li: 21. C: 10. Vos non martyribus templa
sicut dijs, and sacrificamus and oramus sed vtrumque in ordine ad Deum, see how
warily and Religiously this great saint speaks, he denies us to pray to
saints as to gods, for so the gentills objected against christians as is clear
in him and in saint Cyrill against Julian li: 6. yet he grants expressly that
we pray to them in order to god, which passage or distinction of his, me
thinks has ended all the controversy betwixt us.

So that if any deny this I say as Causab: in his epistle to Bertius de
Apostasia sanctorum, in hoc video nostros docere contraria antiquis patribus:
for surely this is against them, and therefore my lord of Chichester in the
aforesaid tracte (a book generally received in England) strongly shows,
voluntary prayer to saints, not to be forbidden, and before him, Luther
himself in his epistle to Georgius Spalatinus and master Bilne as fox notes
462. and others.

These and many more points of difference, are now Ceased amongst the learned;
and indeed, I think many more, or all would Cease, if only Learned men should
examine them.

But they must not be such who in contempt of antiquity, can publishe without
blushinge a neglecte of the fathers, with Non ignoro aliter loqui Patres, as
Kemnitius confidently does. 1. P. examinus Trid. or the Non debetis credere
patribus. as Pomecanus upon Jonas. it is a gudgeon soon swallowed, but not
easily disgested. For surely in the judgment of the wise, it poysoneth the
whole cause in hand; if we believe Vincentius Lyrinensis in his 40. and 41. CC.
yet Calvin L. 3. C. 5. Contemnes them all, and C. 24. exclaimes against them
for giving pernicious doctrine of the uncertainty of election: and was not this
Nestorius his arrogance when he saw antiquity was against him, to brag that
all the doctors before him understood not scripture? as appears in the
council of Ephesus: and yet from him the french divines have Learned, not only
to neglect, but to brande their gray hairs with the note of superstition; as
you may see a whole tribe of them in Feuardentius in his Theomachia L. 11. de
Purgatorio. These are not they per quos fiet salus in Israel. they are too hott
spurred and therefore as Saint Paul says, prurientes auribus, unsettled in their
tenants. But mild and settled spiritts may find the truth, and by them we
shall hope for a reconciliation, to which we see many of the Learned happily to
incline.

Again to write the lives of saints, and so conueigh the memory of their great
virtues to posterity, the holy scriptures did it in all the historical parts,
and Eccles. 24. advises us to it, Sapientiam ipsorum narrent populi, and
lauds eorum nuntiet ecclesia, and it was the practice of antiquity. Did not
Saint Gregory Nissen write the life of Gregory Thaumaturgus? Athanasius and
Hierome of Saint Anthony the great? Seuerus Sulpitius of Saint Martine? Saint
Gregory of Saint Bennett? Saint Bonauenture that great and devout scholeman (as
Gerson styles him) of Saint Francis that stupe^dious co^te^ner of the world?

But peradventure it may be objected that we are not assured this Blessed
Queen to be a Saint. To this I answer, without all question she was a weary
holy woman, gave great testimonies of virtue, of the love of god and her
neighbor. And in these two are consummated, both laws and prophetts; all
Christian perfection if we may believe our Blessed savior. Thus the histories
witness of her; and what is most of all, its the esteem the whole church of god
had of her.

Which I therefore added, to prevent an objection (which might be made) of a
thief, who as it is recorded in Saint Martin his life, was, being dead,
esteemed a Saint, whereas he was indeed a wicked man: and to that text of Saint
Augustine (if it be Saint Augustines) multa corpora Sanctorum venerantur in
terris, quorum animae cruciantur in inferno. Many bodies are reverenced on
earth, whose souls are tormented in hell.

But this is by my former clause abundantly satisfied, for I beleene not that
god will permit the whole church, to err in so grave a point as to take a
devil for a Saint; though particular churches and provinces may be deceived,
as all divines agree, neither did saint Augustine there intend any more, as
Ambrosius Catharinus Couaruuias in his resolutions L. 1. C. 10. with Learned
Corduba in his questionary, truly expound him: or else you may with Bellar: not
improbably esteem that he means only those, whom the Donatists reverenced
as their Saints.

And indeed what wonder if we should attribute so much to the whole church in
so grave and important a business, since after others, Learned Cunaeus in his
Rep: Iudaeorum L. 1. C. 12. observes out of the Thalmudists that the Priests
in the council of Sanhedrim had infallible judgment to decerne an Adulteress
from the Innocent: and he adds the reason Sacrum quendam institutum non
defuisse 70. senibus, postquam solemni actu impositae manus illis essent.

Thus he, grounded upon gods promise in Pentateuch to the Synagogue; and can
we doubt of the certainty of gods assistance to the church his spouse in
decerning false and adulterate sanctity from feigned justice and innocence? is
the spirit of god less powerful, or careful to direct her in so maine a
point, as to know his heavenly guestes, from his, and her abiured enemies? or
is it less behouefull for her to have that sacred instinct or tincture of the
holy Ghost, since christ his hands were imposed upon her solemnly on the
Cross? especially in so dubious a case, as to know whether she should
celebrate the memory of the dead with thanksgiving, as antiquity did of
martyrs, or with horror as they did of Apostataes and the like? me thinks the
shadow should not exceed the substance; having larger promises of the
directive spirit of god then they, Paraclitus docebit omnia. is it not a good
Consequece, if all, then this? neither do I think my L. of Couentry and
Lichfeild will find difficulty in this: especially Thesi. 2. Fol. 365. se. 3. in
his grande Imposture. My Lord of Winchester deceased, plainly held it against
Peron in the end, and so does my Lord of London against Foster. and sure I am,
Saint Augustine would have presently subscribed to what the church so
generally should have received.

Thus you see my grownds (good christian reader), wherefore I have perused and
approved this history: my final motive was that we may be incited to virtue,
since it is an ornament for Princes Crowns.

And this is indeed the chiefest honor we can give to saints, as saint Nazian:
Oratione 18. speaking of Saint Cyprian. says, the blessed Martyr hoc dedit in
mandatis commanded by him that his honourers shall be his imitatours Chrysostom:
ser. 1. de Martyr: To. 3. has to the same purpose. Saint Augustine ser. 47. de
Sanctis, Solemnitates Martyrum exhortationes Martyriorum. the memories and
solemnities of saints, are the instructions of sinners; their lives, our
examples. Farewell. Let us follow Saint Paul his counsel, Pray for one
another, to be enabled to follow these Princely steps, this heavenly Kings
high way to eternal happiness.

Your Friend.

THE HISTORY OF ELIZABETH OF HUNGARY.
THERE was a time, when all the favors of fortune rested in the family of the
kings of Hungary, as all the fabulous Deityes were assembled together in the
Pantheon of Rome. It seemed she brake her wings, that she might not take her
flight to any other place, and forsook all the powers of the North to become
tributary to this Crown. But in the end the blind creature (not esteemed a
Goddess, but by men who have noe eyes in their souls) turned her back to the
Princes of this house, because they would not depart from the service they had
vowed to virtue.

To judge of the fall of this house by the height thereof, we must reascend to
this great king of Hungary, to whom in his life time trophyes were erected, and
after his death, altars: And from thence descend to that young prince who in
battle lost himself with his crown, and left the fields of Varna
perpetually dishonored with the infamy of his defeat.

But between these two extremes there are reckoned up great felicityes, and
among the most remarkable of them, this house is renowned for producing
Elizabeth a Princess, at this day waited upon by Angels in heaven, and sued
unto by men on earth.

There are noe perfect beautyes to be found, since he who undertook to take
the picture of one was enforced to draw the model of an hundred different
pieces.

But Elizabeth was fair, and in her all the exquisite and admirable
perfections of her sex were ordinary.

The beauty of the soul consists wholly in virtue, that, of the body
absolutely in grace, which depends not upon equal proportions of lineaments,
and colors of the face, but in a presence, which transporteth, and enforces
the eye to consider it as a visible effect, of an invisible power of the soul.

Elizabeth was excellent both in the one, and other beyond all example, but of
her self, to her self.

There was nothing so divine, as her soul, nothing so goodly as her stature,
nothing so royal as her garb, nothing so beautiful as her face, nothing
so amiable as her eyes, nothing so lovely as her heart: Lovely indeed, but not
with love which is the frenzy of thoughts, the plague of souls, a follye
invented by vain wits, and pursued by idle men; but with that love wherewith
Angels are inflamed, and Saints live, being the fire of the intellectual
world as the Sun is of the celestial, and the elementarie of ours.

But this being known that Elizabeth was admirable in the gifts of mind, and
beauty of body, it suffices to tell you she was the daughter of Hungary;
that France which adorned heads with the prime crowns of the earth, long time
mainteyned that of Hungary in the house of the Earls of Aniou, and that from
those Bela the Grandfather of Elizabeth is descended.

Bela the third King of Hungary married Agnes sister of Phillip the second
called Augustus, or Gods-gift, who espoused Alice of Hungary: From this
marriage issued Emerick and Andrew. Ambition which violateth laws of piety, to
mainteyne those of tira^nie, armed Andrew against Emericke, to bereave him of
the crown which the right of eldership, the law of the kingdom, the last
will of his father had set on his head, thinking that though nature had
created him second, she had afforded him courage, and merit enough to go
foremost.

God who defends kings, who has a particular care of their crowns, and who
takes their just quarrels upon himself, breathed the blast of his fury upon
the enterprises of Andrew. For on the day of battle agreed on by the way of
arms, to determine a difference, which reason could not resolve, Emerick
apeared in the head of his army, clothed with royal ornaments bearing on his
browe the crown of the first christian king of Hungary, and with it the
divine character which the finger of God had imprinted on the face of kings as
a ray of his divinity, to make them beloved of the good and feared of the
wicked.

This Hercules (which the Pigmies against whom he set forward, made appear
much greater) caused his army to march, not so much to fight, as to triumph.

His enemies; nay rather his mutiniers unable to continue in the agonyes, and
affrightments of their consciences, and having their eyes confounded and
exteriourly abashed at the presence of the lawful king, raised their pikes
upright which they had bent against him, laid down arms, and asked pardon of
him from whom they would have taken the crown. They abandoned the fortune of
Andrew, and submitted to the clemency of Emerick, who having vanquished them
without force would have preserved them with sweetness.

He was not willing to enter into his kingdom, otherwise then victorious:
esteeming the virtue very miserable, which is not waited on by envy, and
caytife the fortune that is without enimyes: he thought not his kingdom
happy unless clemency began it, imagining that he who takes that, from
the heart of a Prince, teareth the altar from the Temple.

The happy reign of so good a king worthy to have been immortal, lasted not
above eight years, seven months, and six days. Ladislaus his son
succeeded for sixe-monethes only. Andrew who could not gain it by force of
arms, arrived thither by order of succession, and was crowned in the great
Church of Buda.

He married Gertrude daughter of the Duke of Morauia, Carinthia, and Austria.
Edwig his Sister was married to Henry surnamed Long-beard, Prince of Silesia and
Polonia. By this his marriage he had four children Bela, Caloman, Andrew, and
Elizabeth. The two first came to the Crown one after another. Andrew deprived
by order, and the law of birthright from hope of the kingdom, wandered up and
down the world to seek a fortune for himself, and his.

He rested at Venice, matched in the house of the Moresini, had a son who more
courageous then his father that stood amused in a common wealth, (where poppies
are not suffered to grow one above another) came into France, did notable
services for the king, and those of the house of Croy constituted general of
their forces.

Elizabeth the only Princess made it appear in the first years of her
childhood, that she was chosen out by heaven to be one of the fairest flowers,
which should on earth receive the plenitude of its graces. At three years of
age she was espoused to Lewis son of Herman, Lantsgraue of Hesse and
Thuringia, who was said to descend from Charlemayne.

Promises were made with great ceremony to honor her who knew not what it
was, and, who knowing it, made no more account of it, then the wind to break
a rush. At four years of age she was led toward her espousalls, by the
Ambassadors of the king her father, and spent the years of her childhood in
the exercise of piety, whereby, they might make a true estimate of the rest of
her future life. It is a singular furtherance, and notable means for a
princess well borne, to receive and learn the precepts of carriage from the
hands of her mother; but Elizabeth, taken away so young into the house of a
stranger, was deprived of this happiness.

Notwithstanding she was there bred sutablie to the greatness of the place
from whence she came, and to the excellency of her wit she then learned that,
(the ignorance whereof proves ill for a Princess, who has thoughts beyond the
distaffe, and needle of ordinary women) and knew those things, wherein many
great Princesses of that name became so excellent, that they taught even kings
themselves to live.

Though she were young, she made her self deaf and indocible to all discourse,
but of heaven; she could not be drawn out of Churches, beginning early to
purify her heart from all earthly thoughts, as gould is cleansed from dross of
the mine. Then did her gouernesse tell her the world was not worthy of her,
that she was not made for the world, that her love not unlike the supreme
eleme^t, suffered not by Vapors, nor those infectio^s, which corrupt others.

When she was of riper years she framed unto her self a rule of life wholly
pious and devout, nor was it by precedent or imitation, as there are many, who
have noe other touch of virtue, and piety then conformity of example; but upon
her own choice, and the mere motion of the grace of God.

Her exercise was entirely religious so soon as she awaked, the first thought
her soul admitted, and which swayed throughout the whole day, was the
remembrance of death; then rising out of bed, she represented unto her self
the comfort, and infinite joy of those, who at the sound of the trumpet shall
rise again to glory.

As many pieces of attire as she putt on, so many virtues wished she, for the
beauty and ornament of her soul. When she was clothed, she prostrated her
self at the feet of a Crucifixe, renewing the homage of her heart to the
goodness of God, giving thanks for his benefitts, imploring his mercy for her
sins, and his holy spirit for her direction, protesting rather to die, then
to loose his favor, the very life of her life.

As in the morning she meditated on that she was to do, so in the evening she
required an account of her soul, of what she had done; she often fed it with
the blessed Sacrament, the bread of Angels, the Manna of heaven, the
restoratiue of life, the sovereign remedy against death, the admirable proof
of the love of God toward men; Who notwithstanding in stead of yiedling him
thanks for so great a benefitt received, do now dispute, whether it be true
that he gave it.

All the day long she stood upon her guard against the subtle snares of the
world, from which she sought to disengage her self; she auerted her eyes
as well as her thoughts from all illusions, keeping her self very carefully
from tasting the honey of pleasures and vanities of Court, more dangerous then
that which bewitcheth men. If at any time she approached, it was but as the
fly, which buzzeth about, and fears to rest upon it, least he loose his wings.

The marriage treated in her childhood was confirmed at such time as discretion
made her capable of choice, or refusal: but it was done with so much
coldness, that many thought, if she had not imagined, the dispose of her body
was due to her father, she no whit had feared to disobey him, to pursue the
holy inspirations, which she now intertayned of continuing a virgin.

Of three conditions of the feminine sex, there is not any one whose
contentme^t has not anxiety. If marriage have fruitfullnes, it has also
corruption; If widowhood enjoy liberty, it likewise suffers the sadness of
solitude: If virginity put on integrity, it lives with the grief of
sterility. But Elizabeth better loved to live a virgin then a mother, and
having dedicated all her thoughts to virginity, she held it sacrilege to
employ them on marriage; well remembering that many of her quality had gone out
of the palaces of kings their fathers; not being able to preserve this flower,
among the thorns, and briars of worldly vanities, and the nipping frosts of
its impietyes.

Transported then by two so powerful laws, the commandment of God, and
authority of her father, she gave consent to this match. The Landtsgraue
brought with him as many graces as he acknowledged and admired in her: she
likewise afforded him so much affection, that never were two hearts scorched
with more ardent flames. It was thought her marriage might cut of something of
the first severity of her life, and that she would begin to relish the
pleasures of youth. But her heart, like a lamp perpetually burning before the
face of God, shined not at all in the darkness of the brightest splendor of the
day. Her eyes were weary in behoulding things specious, her ears displeased
with harmonious, her taste with the most delicious, but her heart was never
satiated with the love of God.

This her triangle could never be filled, but by this triangle. She stole the
sweetest hours of the night from repose, to ly at the foot of the Cross, and
taste the bitterness thereof in the security of silence.

Sophia her mother in law, and Agnes her sister in law coniured her to
forsake her scrupulosity; And will you Madame (said they) perpetually use your
self so cruelly? Will you always prefer thorns before roses? Will you be
so sharp an enemy to your self, as to hasten your death at the time when you
ought to think upon life? Since life is so short, that if the world be not
seasonablie understood, we die before we know it.

Her silence answered for her, and her constant perseverance gave them
occasion to judge what they might hope from such discourse. She continued this
kind of life amidst all these impertinences; but avoided those devotions, more
feigned then holy, which seem to transport into ecstasy the minds of those
which use them to please the world, and to satisfy their own hipocrisy. They
are stars neither stable, nor fixed, in the firmament of true piety, rather
wandering fires, Comets, and exhalations of the earth, which dissolve into the
air of vanity.

The Court of this Princess likewise resembled not those, which were at that
time said to be seas of dissolution, and which, as the Sea, were swollen up with
pride, foaming with exorbitance, and where virtue was perpetually in torment.
Hers was a temple of piety, an Academy of honor: her example perfumed the most
corrupted air, and breathed into the most wavering affections firm thoughts
of virtue: with one glaunce of her eye, she led the rest along, and withdrew
them from error, which inticeth hearts to pleasure, has its carreere of Ice,
and in the end a precipice.

Her ladies and maids were bred without curiosity, vanity, or niceness; Their
eyes by a modest disdain mortifyed evil appetites. And because the best borne
natures by deprauation become worse then others (as the corruption of good
things is worst of all) she had an infinite care this first integrity might
never be dissolved. For which cause she exhorted them to hold the heart in
liberty, the body in servitude, and the conscience in repose; assuring them of
the infinite contentment they should one day have, in seeing their sowles in
heaven free from slander, and leaving their bodies on the earth without infamy.

She recommended nothing so much unto them, as to stifle wicked thoughts in
their birth; whilst the bramble is green it may be eaten, but when it becomes
bigger, it choketh. When the spirit is caught in those first persuasions of
love, it resembles the bird, which intangleth her self the more she
fluttereth and strives to be at liberty. How many times did she tell them, the
suits of men were to be suspected? that they were coals either burning, or
quenched, and that the least we might expect from them was either to inflame,
or besmeare: That the Panther was not sooner strangled in tasting Aconite, then
the Soul of a woman by harkning to the discourse of a passionate lover.

There are of them (said she) who boast to understand without yielding, and to
hear not delighting in what is said. If they be quick to desire, they are
very reserved in making their desires known, they mock at those, who have
neither eyes, nor ears to see or understand such, as conspire against their
honor under the shadow of affection. But the opinion they have of their own
strength is a false gate, a drowsy sentinel which betrayeth, and suffers
reason to be surprised. Ladies of this disposition ought to see them selves in
the eye and fortune of others, and to believe that which has happen^ed is nor
impossible to them, since they floate in the like Sea, and are tossed with the
same wind, and waves. And though they think their vessel stronger, and much
better appointed, yet may the storm perhaps be more violent, the tempest more
terrible, and the waves so redoubled, that not knowing how to make resistance,
they may be enforced to yield up their freight to the tempest.

Implacable enemy of vice! she would never look on those, who so much regarded
the beauty of the body, to deforme that of the soul; natures ready, and apt
for ill, stupid to good; that wound with eyes, deceive with the tongue, and who
are enforced by remorse of their consciences to become pale with grief, ruddy
with shame in good company; who (impudent as they are) set that to sale, which
admitts noe price, nor commerce in Souls that hold honor for the fifth element
of their life, and lastly who have sworn to this false opinion, that the law,
which obliges a woman to love but one man, is not made for those, who are
worthy to be loved of many.

But because the greatness of her quality, and the condition of Court
permitted not this Princess to be perpetually for her self, to be ever
retired, incessantly speaking to God, or hearing God speak, to her; yet did
not her heart endure, that any should enjoy her to prejudice the comfort and
contentment of her mind.

If sometimes the Landtsgraue needs would open his heart to give passage to
pensive imaginations, and to that end employed the charms of music, it was
but in singing some holy poem.

But in midst of most ordinary sollaces her heart perpetually turned toward
the North of the cross, her mind rested in the tranquillity of her thoughts;
This musk ceased not to smell sweetly, even in places least sauouring of
piety. She never appeared in public with ornaments suitable to a Princess, of
so noble and high extraction, that she promised not her soul, to avenge it in
convenient time at the charge of her body, for all these vanities.

Entering one day into the Church, upon some solemnity which by the custom of
the world permitted her not to be otherwise seen then well attired, casting
her eyes upon the Crucifixe, she said to her self; must my head sparkle with
diamonds and precious stones, my fingers with rings, and I behold on this
cross the head of my Savior crowned with thorns, and his hands pierced with
nails? Then prostrating her self on the earth, she besought God to do her
the favor she might intermingle the acerbityes of the Cross with all the
felicityes the world could afford her.

She knew heaven was to be opened with two keys; the one of gould, which is
prayer; the other of iron which is affliction: she carried them both all the
days of her life. Prayer was continually hanging on her tongue, and she ever
hanging on the Cross. The image of our lady of Hall near Brussells came from
her devotion, and it is said, was brought thither by Sophia her daughter
married to Henry the 2. Duke of Brabant.

As she was indefatigable in prayer, so was she invincible in afflictions: for
her courage went before them: she held them as Embassages sent from Heaven; she
received them answerable to the greatness and Majesty of such a Monarch of the
world, on whom all the earth depends who ill entreats an Ambassador,
plainly discovers a neglect of the Prince, that sent him.

The life, which tastes noe afflictions is a dead Sea, which produces
nothing. The Soul not visited, is as abandoned by the Physician. The land
where perfect contentment of mind grows, is ploughed up by the share of
torments, sowed with ashes, watered with tears and hedged round about with
thorns. And although she abode in the delights of the world, she no more
tasted of them, then the fish of the Seas brackishnesse. The brightest days
seemed duskie nights to her being rightly instructed, that he who will wear
Coronets of flowers in this world, bears those of thorns in the other, and
he who sows sorrows in this life shall reap comforts.

Her nature was too generous, and too good not to resent the cruel, and
tragical death of the Queen of Hungary her mother, who was slain by a hand
furiously transported with iealousy and revenge, which drenching the Court in
unspeakable amazement, made her see, that by how much the more violent the
heates are, so much the more impetuous are the winds; great afflictions fall
upon great prosperities.

It was in the time when all Europe stretched out a benign arm to Christians,
surcharged and oppressed in Soria by the arms of Infidells. The God of Hosts
had given two blows in favor of the truth of religion. One in Spain against
the Moors, who lost at the battle of Nauas two hundred thousand men
astonished upon the sight of the Cross borne by the Archbischop of Tolledo,
who marched in the front of the Christian army: The other a year after this in
France against the Abbigenses, that were defeated with the Count of Toulouse
their leader, and the king of Arragon their protector.

These two victories obtained, animated the Christian Princes to seek out the
common enemy at home, and to cast the fire of war into the entrayles of his
Empire. For which purpose, the Croisaide was resolved on and decreed in the
council of Lateran, one of the greatest and most eminent Assemblyes that ever
has been in Christendom: for besides the Ambassadors from all Princes, there
were two Patriarchs, seauenty Archbishops four hundred and twelve Bishops,
eight hundred other prelates.

First the zeal to the service of God, and next the compassion of the
miseryes, which Christians suffered in Soria obliged Christian Princes to
hasten to their aid, since Elephants draw their fellows out of the ditch, and
Gilt-heads free their companions from snares.

Desire of glory and reputation which is the spur wherewith these lyon-like
hearts awaken, and do incite their generous spirits, stirred up the most
religious princes to carry the Croisaide, esteeming it no less glory to raise
the tropheys of the cross on the frontiers of Egypt, then did Alexander by
erecting two altars in the utmost confines of the Indyes, and Hercules two
pillars on the bounds of his navigations.

It was desired this enterprise might have a Commander capable for the conduct
of a royal army, and to return victorious. Andrew king of Hungary, and
Transiluania by a common consent was chosen out for this charge, which he
accepted with that content, wherewith the hearts of great Princes are ever
possessed when they meet with occasions, which free them from parity or
corriuallship with others. It could not fall into better hands although in the
pursuites of ambition great honors willingly submitt to those, who go
slowest, as the Heart many times yields himself to the man, that least chased
him.

Having then taken away all affections from his own will, to become obedient
to that, which God discovered unto him by this election, he mustred all the
forces of his kingdom, and thereunto added those of his neighbors, to join
with the Christian Army at Constantinople. He left the Princes his sons under
the charge of the Queen his wife, and indeed all of them together under the
prudence and fidelity of the Count of Bankban, whom he made Lieutenant
General in high, and low Hungary.

His absence caused great grief in his Court, but the arrival of the prince
brother to the Queen sweetened them, that so they might be seasoned with a
strange bitterness. He was of an age wherein lust begins to war against
virtue, and where with Hercules was forcibly assailed by attraction of the one,
to forsake the other. His heart was a fortress which as yet had never received
garrison, he having preserved it in the first liberty of its birth-Loue
surprised it by gayning the eyes, which were the sentinells.

He saw among the Ladies of Court attending on the Queen his sister the
Countess of Banckban: He judged her the fairest, and found her one of the
wisest: Her beauty was not an uncomely hostess in an handsome house; For she
obeyed virtue which held it in propriety, and nevertheless fell into discord
with her honor. Love against her liking and with out her consent made use of
her eyes, for all manner of artillery. They were fires to burn, arrows to
wound, burning mirrours to turn the vessels of those into cinders, who
undertook to sail on this sea of the Court, and love. Yet never durst he
attempt this Minerua, it being impossible to find her idle. The prince who
ever had been for him self, was now for her, so soon as ever he beheld her.

This passion forcing with its violence, those things which cannot be enforced,
commanded its liberty to manifest its servitude. He thought himself too
courageous not to tell her of it, and her too courteous not to hearken to it.
Princes, though all things stand fair for them, are not free from trouble in
these first circumstances; for indeed they think ceremonies are not made, but
for such as are on equal terms; if they use them, they vould have them
accounted an honor, that their intreatyes may command, and that noe favor be
so great, which they must not buy at a costly rate.

The torment of the prince which should be less cruel discovered, then
concealed, redoubled the violence there of, so soon as his tongue had unfolded
to the Countess the evil which his eyes had done to his heart. For this first
view, which was but a single desire became all love, and by these approaches,
he turned into fury, and an unjust conspiracy against her honor.

The Countess in stead of accepting the power which the Prince offered her
over his heart, made it appear unto him she neither regarded his suite, nor
affection, though it were the most ardent, which true love might tender to a
heart well beloved, and that hers could not receive any impression, then of the
lawful love of her husband.

The Prince meeting with such and so courageous resistance, and despayring to
overcome this resolution discovered to his Sister all the wounds of his soul,
found noe comfort but in her affection, who showed her self not insensible of
his torment.

We have often seen servants, who have betrayed their Mistresses, but it is a
prodigious thing, when we behold servants betrayed by their mistresses. She
conspired in favor of the Prince her Brother against the honor of the
Countess, and promised him to gain her to his desire, either by love or force.

The next ensueing night the conspiracy was executed, the body vanguished the
heart invincible. There was but one night between this injury, and the
revenge, which, transported the Count of Banckban in to such fury, that early
in the morning he stabbed his dagger into the bosom of the Queen, who had bee^
a bad Mistress to be a good Sister.

Here it is where humane judgment must strike sail, and cast it self into
the vast Ocean of those of the living God, in comparison of which, the most
clear seeing eyes are Owls in the rays of the sun.

Of one same mother were borne two Sisters, Gertrude, who turned away from the
fear and love of God, and Hedwige, whose life was so replenished with piety,
and adorned with so many virtues, that she has been canonized for a Saint;
Sorrows violent and unexpected are not for simple discourses. Those are not
great which can be expressed. This accident by some esteemed parricide, by
others justice, offended and scandalized the whole Court, and laid incurable
wounds on the Soul of the Princess Elizabeth, but she for all that murmured
not against God, whose wisdom she adored with all humility, having her eye in
this mishap, noe more troubled, then her heart.

Time and patience, which cure all disturbances nourished, and gave increase to
hers

She not so much reflected on the death of the body, as she entered into
strange apprehensions for the health of the Soul.

The Count of Banckban having set the affairs of the kingdom in good order,
his wife and Family into safeguard, went to Constantinople to cast himself at
the feet of the king, making him both judge and auenger of the fact, which he
confessed to have committed by a powerful instigation, and for the which he at
the least much repented him.

Tears hastened in aid of the words, which sorrow stopped in his breast.

Yet for all this, amazement could not seyze on the kings heart, If he in
midst of arms shedd tears, to vapor out his grief by them the sorrow to
have lost a good wife and his children a good mother, would make them to power
them out in abundance.

He patiently heard the Count of Banckban and prudently, answered, that at his
return he would understand the truth of this matter; That those who are
present never want excuses, and the absent ever suffer wrong. That he would
hear his brother in law and the allies of his wife. He sent him back again
to continue his service. Although he were co^uinced by his own confession, and
that so strange an act required some exemplar punishment, yet he would not
dishonor the happy beginnings of his voyage, by acts of such severity, nor
leave the army to return into Hungary.

The rendeuous was in Cyprus, all the ships arrived there: It was advised on
what side the enemy should be assailed.

Particulier interest enters into consultation with the principal of them.
The king of Cyprus desires it may be upon on side, He of Jerusalem has
designs upon another.

The king of Hungary that knew a General of an army ought to have eyes in his
shoulders, to leave nothing behind, which might hinder him to proceed any
further, was of opinion the fortress of Mount Thabor should be besieged. The
Count of Tripoly diuerteth this resolution and caused the Army to march before
Damiatta, having first attempted to surprise the Fort of Thabor, where blows
were given and taken at so small a distance, that the Infidells might see, not
only flies, but even the little Crosses, which were upon the Christians
Targetts.

The king of Hungary seeing the enterprises were managed without judgment,
and that private passions ouerthrewe the best Counsels intended for the
public good; that the most valiant stood more in need of a Buckler, then a
sword, grew into distaste, and having left among the knights of Saint John of
Jerusalem great proofs of his bounty, as he from them had received of their
valor and affection, he returned into Europe, and left the charge of his army
to those who resembled the province in which they fought, exteriourly hott, as
being one of the nearest to the torrid Zone, and within extremely cold.

After a ten months siege the Christian army entered Damiata, the first
Standard which appeared on the wall was that of Florence, which at that time
was a white lilly in a red field. The Conquerors for all their booty found
nothing, but rivers of blood, and heaps of the dead; for of seauenty thousand
who defended this City there were reckoned up, but three thousand meager
discomfited Creatures, that looked like frightnig Ghostes.

The Christians kept not this City so long time as they had spent in taking
it: For besieging grand Cairo, in the season when Nilus over flows, they saw
them selves so assailed by waters, that their victual and munition being
drowned, they could find no safety, but in a happy composition to depart, and
yield up Damiata.

As Nilus took from them all means to draw near to the town, so the Sultan
of Egypt cut them of from all passages of retreat. Those, who heretofore
commanded without condition are enforced to receive law of the enemy, who
left them noe other fruit of their conquest, but the shame not to be able to
keep what they had gotten.

The king of Hungary, who could not triumph over his enemies in the holy land,
served as a Trophey to the Princess of Ferrara: For passing through this City
to Venice, and from thence to Insprucke, he saw in her, perfections of beauty
so admirable, and wonders of love so absolute, that he submitted all his
affections to her power. His eyes had no other object, his fantasy no other
imagination, his mind no other discourse, his heart no other conference, his
mouth no other name, then of the Princess. His memory was so replenished with
her meritt, that it noe longer would admit any thoughts of the tragical death
of his first wife.

He unfolded his heart unto her; Saying, his affection was such, that he was
wholly unable to stir any further, but to enjoy the contentment of her
company. Kings are never refused; He spoke of it to the marquess of Ferrara,
and entreated he would give him the Princess his daughter to succeed, not to
the unhappiness, but to the dignity of Gertrude his first wife. Hearts
consenting, bodies were quickly united, and the King of Hungary entered into his
kingdom, with the sole triumph of the love, and beauty of a worthy Princess.

The first act after his marriage, and return, was the process against the
Count of Banckban. The opinions of his Counsel being better pondered, then
resolved, he was freed, but in such sort, that the rest of his life was to him
but a living death; for those who either through duty and affection were
obliged to the memory, and honor of the Queen prosecuted him in his person,
his fortune, and his family as an execrable parricide, yea even they, who had
promised the king never to search any further into the matter, redoubled their
prosecution, thinking oaths might be broken without perjury, and benefitts
forgotten without ingratitude, to maynteyne points of honor.

The king, who for the love of the living had almost blotted out the memory
of the dead, disposed his thoughts to congratulations of joy upon the Queens
entrance into his capital City of Bude, which was at that time the theater of
Northern magnificence, a City fair rich and great, bearing the surname of
Attilaes brother, who caused it to be built on the banck of Danubius.

This joy which so puffed up many hearts, shrunck up with sorrow the heart of
the Princess Elizabeth, who was sent for by the king her father to entertayne
the Queen, and to augment by her presence the comfort of his return from the
Eastern wars. She enforced her self, and accommodated the temper of her
countenance to the humors, and contentments of the king her father, but in
secret she still had in store new tears to bewail this old grief for the
death of her mother.

It is not untruly said, that one sorrow ordinarily serves as a medicine for
an other; she stayed not long in Marpurg, but returned thence to meet the
Landtsgraue her husband, at which time her constancy was assailed by a new
affliction.

Death jealous of the long peace, and concord of their marriage, conspired with
fortune to separate them, and not daring to undertake it without the help of
virtue, they agreed to add an occasion, in the pursuit whereof it was more
glorious to dye, then to live in distance.

All Europe was terrifyed with the happy success of the Infidel army in
Egypt. The Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, who had married the daughter of the
king of Jerusalem was humbly besought and entreated together with all the
Christian Princes to succor the Christians. He appointed a great part of them
to meet at Cremona, there to advise upon means to secure the affairs of
Christendom against the attempts of Pagans, and to Save Jerusalem from their
tyranny. All said they must hasten thither but few were willing to be present
in so perilous, and tedious a voyage. The Landtsgraue animated them all to so
holy a war, and offered himself to follow the Emperor thither. He was
reputed able to lead the wholl Army, and to be General of it.

The king of Jerusalem pressed so much to have it set forward, least delay
might render it unprofitable, that the La^dtsgraue being enforced to depart,
had not leisure to return into Thuringia, preferring the advancement of the
public cause before his own affections. The adieu which he sent by writing
to the Princess Elizabeth his wife, served him then for a voyage into the
other world.

The army was mustered at Brindisi, where the Emperor fell sick. It was
assaulted by so many storms and tempests, that diverse advised for the return
of it into Europe. The Landtsgraue caused the chief of them to assemble
together, to let them know it was more shameful to retire back, then
perilous to pass on. He spoke to them in this manner: The time (Sirs) we
loose in consulting upon our return, will condemn us of cowardice if we
pass noe further. Words are unnecessary, when there is question, not to live,
but to march on. I lead not fresh water soldiers: passed dangers ought to
make these to be scorned, which are before us; More glory may be found in the
truth of that, which we now are, then in the vanity of what we have been.
We are not upon the Sea, but to go on courageously in the face of death, when
it is presented; and to expect it with a firm constancye. Follow me, for you
shall never bear the first brunt, nor will I withdraw my self from dangers,
to thrust you upon them.

All with gestures, vows, and voices seconded the brave exhortations of the
Landtsgraue, and every one protested either to leave his head in Asia, or to
return with it into Europe crowned with laurel, not any of them but much
desired to gather the Palms, which Palestine produces.

But this first fervor became a gross surge of smoke, which vanished in an
instant: For the army being ready to assault, saw it self assailed by a
malady, winch contagiously dispread thoroughout all the Nations and several
bands. The Emperor Frederik grew very sick, and the voyage absolutely
fruitless.

The Landtsgraue dyed there and with him the hope of the Christians to advance
the triumphs of Godfrey of Boulon.

He dyed for grief to behold his hopes stopped in the midst of their
carreere. False hopes of the world They lift men up like young Children to the
branch of a Tree and in an instant take their shoulders away, which supported
them, and leave them hanging in the air. He commanded his body to be laid
in the tomb of his Ancestors in Thuringia, and forgot nothing necessary for
the good of his estate. His memory and judgment being vigorous to set all in
order, made it appear, that those neglect not them selves in death, who forget
not God in their life.

The news of his death was instantly carried to the Princess Elizabeth who
found her self drenched in an Abisse of sorrows, when she read those express
dead words of the lively affection of the Landtsgraue, written by him a little
before his death, in these terms.

Madame, I am not in a condition eyher to counterfeit, or disguise my thoughts,
since so little time is left me to render them pure and sincere to him, who
knows them. Living with you the dear moity of my self, I have desired
nothing so much, as the study of truth, nor will I admit that my end
contradict my life: to give you assurance, that as I have not sought to
preserve it but for you, so it troubles me not to dye, but absented from you.
The Sun shows himself more lustrous when he setts, the love I bear you
was never more perfect, then in the period of the occident of my life, which
opens unto me the day-breake of immortallity. Farewell (sweetest); I should
grieve for the sorrow you will entertayne, did I not know you have
wherewithal to defend your virtue from the outrages of fortune.

Lo, a stroke of dolor and affliction, which shook, but overthrewe not the
co^sta^cy of Elizabeth, God was pleased the temptation should not exceed the
power of her resistance.

Her good nature having powered out a torrent of tears of sorrow, her heart
afforded on Ocean of joy, considering the Landtsgraue was freed from the
miseryes of life more brittle then glass, lighter then smoke, swifter far
and more empty, then the wind. Then lifting up her hands, and eyes to heaven,
she gave God thanks for this affliction, by which he had restored her to the
liberty she so much desired, to be wholly consecrated to his service.

Now it is (o lord) now is the time (said she) that I with more liberty will
wait on thee, behold me free, that I may forsake these lower playnes, and with
alacrity ascend up to Mount Thabor. Behold me discharged from that, which was
most dear unto me in this life, I have nothing else to loose, and who knows
whether I had not been undone, without this loss.

The comforts of her marriage, and the greatness of her condition had not at
all extinguished in her the true contentments she proposed to her self in a
private, and solitary life. She often said, her husband was the flower of
the field, that could not be found in Cities. That the Temple of repose was
built in the Suburbs. That the honey of the Soul was made in the hyue of
solitude.

This death brought that life to her, which she desired, and that she might
wholly and entirely vow her self to it, she disarrayed her self from all
pleasures of the world. she gave to Churches, Colleges and Hospitalls, all
which she in her Cabinet had of most price: much more esteeming the charity of
alms then the gift of miracles, because (said she) man is bound to God by
miracles, and God to men by alms. She cheerefullie gave, not with a
countenance denying what she had presented. She gave speedily, neither wearying
patience, nor intreatyes. Tears (said she) which avail little with men, are
very powerful with God, to gain heaven.

She daily fed nine hundred poor people, and this largess was accounted
prodigality by those, who judged her devotion to be hypocrisy, her zeal and
humility, gross folly. Henry Brother of Lewis hearing of his death, seized on
the fortresses and banished the Princess, who found no retreat: so much the
fear to displease the strongest, and awe of the most powerful does oversway
affections.

She went to a Church and there caused the Canticle of triumph, and joy to be
sung, for the favor which God had done, by setting her into a Course of life,
that she by the law of her condition expected not, having ever desired poverty
without hope to attain it.

Yet for all that, she lost not the generosity of her birth; Riches could not
make a Coward of the valiant, nor poverty a magnanimous heart, to become
sordid; for she was not ashamed at all, but of those who lived ill, and of
such as were only poor against their wills.

Fortune could not take that away which she gave her not. The greatness of
her courage is exalted, and continues green among iniuryes, as Iuy in ruins.

She persisted in this patience till the arrival of the Landtsgraues body at
the meeting of which, reason that excuses tears in evils remediless,
dispensed not with her without abundance. Many great Lords of Germany and
Sicely, who had performed this last office to this great Prince, seeing his
widow was reduced to straights unworthy the House from whence she sprang,
gave Henry to understand they would not depart the Country, until she were
restored to an estate suitable to her worth, and that they resolved to enforce
him thereunto. He allowed her one of the good lie houses of the Country for
her habitation, whereof she made use not to live, but that she might learn to
dye therein. Piety which with her was of more value then life, changed this
Castle into a monastery, where she lived with unspeakable austerity.

Good blood makes not more have to the wounded part, then the king of Hungary
advertised of the Landtsgraues death, did to the sorrows of his daughter to
comfort her. He dearly loved her, and although he had other children, he
kept most love in store for her, as the Eagle ever affects one of her young
more then the rest. But being informed she despised the world, he dispatched a
principal lord of his Court to entreat her (and, if commands were not
powerful enough, to add thereunto the authority of a king to cause her,) to
return into Hungary, as also in the mean time to assure her, that as the
glory and meritt of the services, which the Prince her Husband had done to
Christendom remained for a Comfort, and increase of state and patrimony to his
children, so it inclyned his disposition to let her see this accident should
not in any sort impair her condition.

But he found her nothing flexible to his persuasions, nor well pleased with
his propositions. Her eyes were too clear, not to know that the gould of
worldly promises is sophisticate, and that as the Sun cannot be better seen,
then in clear and pure water, so true content of mind, may not rightly be
estimated, but in Souls purged and purifyed from the cares and embroylments of
the world.

Behold her Fathers letter.
Daughter, Fortune assayleth, not for slight causes the courages of those who
are of your quality: she has invaded you on that side where she thought to
overcome your constancy, and triumph over your virtue. It is the death of the
Landtsgraue which extremely grieves me, because you have lost a good Husband,
and the Christian world a great Captain. My affliction is so much the more
harsh and insupportable to me, in that I heard of his death before his malady,
and that one and the same instant saw me to applaude the success of his
voyage, the miracles of his life, and to bewail the accident of his death. I
should wrong your judgment to comfort you, in matters, which you understand to
be remediless. I had rather assure you, that he who called your Husband to
heaven, reserueth a Father for you on earth, more desirous then ever, to make
you so happy by a second marriage as you had occasion to be pleased with your
first. Abillity in me shall not be more difficult, then will. But I shall ever
leave your disposition at liberty, most confident you will not inclyne it to
resolutions contrary to the age wherein you are, nor to the counsels of those
who loved you before you were capable of love. Come hither then to reap the
fruits, and afford this contentment to the desires, and prayers of your father.

Andrew.


SHe was not much troubled what answer she should make to this letter; with
the same hand wherewith she received it, she wrote these lines, saying as
Olympius, that if God had been pleased she should have continued in the company
of a man, he never had bereaved her of a husband.

S.r (said she) I cannot think God has called one moity of my self to
heaven, to suffer the other any long time to languish here, and though for his
justice sake, and the punishment of my sins, it should please him to prolong
my days, it will not be to reduce me back again into the servitude from
which I am freed. As to satisfye you, I loved no man but my Lord the
Landtsgraue, so for his love none living shall be affected by me, to possess
either my heart, or body. I gave unto the world the flowers and fruits of mine
age, you ought not to think it amiss, if I reserve for heaven the last honor
of the tree, and that poor verdure which in the springtide thereof already
begins to wax pale, and withered; an evident sign that the immutable
renouation, which I heartily wish, is not far of. If you hinder the vows I
have made of perpetual continency, you shall be the sole author of my death,
as you were one of the causes of my life. Your Court whereu^to you inuit me
shall be to me a death, life a prison, the world a hell; you shall change the
name of a Father into that, which can noe way belong to you, but by forcing a
will which God him self permitts to be free, in her who remaining his
faithful servant, desires also to rest your most humble Daughter.

Elizabeth.


The king of Hungary hearing this resolution, did all he could to divert her
from it. Many Princes upon the bruit of so abundant perfections, wherewith
she replenished all Europe sought her in a second wedlock. She continually
expressed she neither could, nor would marry. That if her excuses were not
taken for denyalls, and her resolutions for reasons, she would slitt her nose,
thrust out her eyes, so disfigure her self, that not any should desire her.
From that time forward she became the fable, and floute of the world, the
scorn of great ones, the shame and rebuke of her nearest Allies, her zeal was
accounted folly, her devotion hypocrisy, her simplicity sottishness her
retiredness melancholy. Some said unto her she did well to live more
virtuously and piously then the rest of her sex, but to live less nobly was
baseness, and in this extraordinary manner mere giddiness.

Another life, another manner of living. We must in matter of religion, as in
navigations beyond the Pole arctique, have another heaven, other stars,
another Pole. When one is arrived to this point of forsaking the world, another
science must be learned, another spirit, another intention, when we loose the
North star of will, we must take unto us, that, of obedience. The life of
those great souls, which live in Heaven although they breath on earth, has a
course much contrary to that of the world as the stars.

All the actions of this Princess directed to the honor of God, stood out the
shot of the arrows of envy and Calumny. She no whitt regarded, what the
people (bad censurers of good works) said of her. She rejoiced when those
bladders of slander emptyed them selves on her of the poison, wherewith they
were filled.

Besides her heart was so large and ample, that these petty iniuryes were
quite lost upon her, her Soul only living on wormwood, had noe gall in it.

The innocence, and simplicity of her life had the same virtues against
calumnyes, which the little stones of Nilus, that keep dogs from barking.
The wicked in the end were constrained to change their scorn into admiration
of a life, more like to that of Angels then of mortals.

She raised her arm to the highest triumph whereunto virtue might reach, not
only tollerating iniuryes, but doing good to any that wronged her. Some
maleuolent tongues thinking to fix the sting of their slanders upon her
memory the more to afflict her, spoke ill of her, and touched her to the
quick, although the innocence of her life, and the purity of her actions made
her insensible of such wounds: but naturally, falsehoods vex and penetrate
the Soul more then truths. All her revenge was to pray to God for the
calumnious, and in this her oraison, she heard a voice from heaven, assuring
her that of so many prayers as were made by her, that, which she offered in
the behalf of her enemies had been the most acceptable.

Every one saw the evil she suffered, and not any the good she did, her night
watchings and austerityes. Such holy actions are lighted torches, suddenly put
out with the first blast of vanity, and presumption, if humility cover them not.

In this long and tedious way she never looked backward, nor stayed at the
golden apples, to slacken her speed. The more she drew nigh to her end, the
more she desired to attain it. The nearer she approached to the center, the
more stable she became. She was a widdowe at twenty years of age, she vowed
her self to the third order of Saint Frauncis at twenty one, wherein she lived
and died happily. She went out of the world, as out of a Babylon, finding
nothing therein to satisfye her soul, nor to ease the langours, or shorten the
length of the miserable condition of life, where the most prosperous wax old,
rather with anxiety, then years.

A resolution truly worthy of a heart so resolute. It only appertains to
generous hearts to resolve upon so violent chaunges, and to make such leapes
from earth to heaven.

She lived and died so blessedly, and the sanctity of her life was testified by
so many miracles, that Pope Gregory the nynth in full Counsel declared her a
Saint, and ordained the 27. of November for her festival. Her body four
years after her death wholly entire, and odoriferous, was taken out of the
earth, and set upon the Altar of a Church dedicated to her name by the
Archbishops of Colen, Mentz, and Breme. The Emperor was present at the
ceremony, and to this Princess (who living despised regal crowns, for that
of thorns) he presented a triple crown of gould, as a witness of the
perfections which had crowned the three conditions of her life. She had three
children, Herman who succeeded his Father, and dyed at the age of Eighteen
years, Sophia that was married to the Duke of Brabant, and another Sophia, who
following the piety of her mother became religious at Kitzing in Franconia.

Behold how impossible it is to speak ill of those who have lived well.

FINIS.

