THE TVRKE.

A Worthy TRAGEDY.

As it has been diverse times acted by the Children of his Majesty's Revels.

Written by John Mason Master of Arts.

Sum superbiam quesitam meritis Horat.

LONDON. Printed by E. A. for John Busbie and are to be sold at his shop in S.
Dunstons Churchyard in Fleete-streete. 1619.

Scaenarum Personae.
Mulleasses the Turk Borgias Governor of Florence. Duke of Venice. Duke of
Ferrara. Bordello an humerous trauellour. Pantofle his Page Eunuchus servant to
Borgias Lord of Florence. Phego a gentleman usher. Philenzo a gentleman of
Ferrara: Prusias. a gentleman of Venice A Friar Iulia Duchess of Florence.
Timoclea Borgias wife Amada his daughter Madam Fulsome an old Gentlewoman
Prologus
THe marks and notions extant in each spirit,
Sealed by the industrious hand of art and merit,
Me thinks appear transparant (as the mind
By sense were bounded and might seem confind
In th'externall eye) nor shall our tragic muse,
(If strong hope fail not) need a coynd excuse
But to those marginall noates of yours do bring
(In following nombers from the learned spring)
Matter instructiue to enrich their parts
Where knowledge reigns crowned with it own deserts,
Let such with serious and impartial hearing
Sound sense, quick sight and judgment never erring:
Suruay and censure the mineruall frame
Of his elaborate work: and if his name
Merit regard, and you vouchfafe to grace him
With eminent love, or among those lawreats place him,
That with the magic of sweet poesy,
Transfer Pernassus into Brittany,
He shall digest the Chaos of his brain,
To tunefull order and acquire a strain,
Near to the music of the heavenly spheres,
To fit Times guard and rawish choysest ears.
FINIS.
Epilogus.
FAme and Opinion like the two vvingd cap
On Hermes head, do lift all Poets up:
Some, though deserving, yet abo^e the Sphere
Of true impartial censure, whose tuned ear
Listens to all and can with judgment say,
Others sing well, though Thracian Orpheus play.
Our Muse affects no excellence: if Fame tell
And through her shrill trompe at the Muses well
(Where the thrice trebled bench of learning sits
In strict examination of others wits)
Sound ours, though humbly strains, whose infant growth
Nor dares, nor will, with times hugd darlings quarrel,
Nor stand the lightning with the sacred Laurel)
We rest content: yet thus far may conceit
Carry each laboring Artist, where the weight
Of his ovld task is over, that his tongue
May like a father of his tender young
Speak natures lauguage and not be withstood,
When with our Muse he says, that This is good.
FINIS.
This Epilogue should have been printed at the end of the book, but there was
no spare place for it.

Mulleasses the Turk,
Actus primi. Scaena prima.
Enter aloft Iulia, and Amada. Iul. HOw sweet are things known in their
contraries
When only apprehension, and sick thoughts
Foster a gredy longing Amada?

A. Madame you breath: no covetous hand
Takes the air from you: no contrariety
Bandy's against your rest: as I am modest,
My fathers seeming harsh ungentleness
Is but a misty policy, to be guile some time.
Then be your self and Iomiall:

Iul. Yet why should I repine,
At this my foret restraint of liberty?
Our life is but a sailing to our death,
Through the worlds Ocean: it makes no matter then
Whether we put into the worlds vast Sea,
Shipped in a Pinasse or an Argosy:

Amad. No Matter: when we hope for change of vessels Lady
And in that hope beguile your passions:
Give your sight freedom over the city walls
And see what worthy obiectsmeete your eyes:
See where two Dukes, each like a god of war,
Lie both entrench't against the gates of Florence
To gain your love: on the west side, there is
Ferrara hangs his scarlet ensigns forth
And wooes in blood: then from the East behold
In a white ensign filled with stars of gould,
Burns the Venitians love: the morning Sun
Courts not the world more amorously: he as mild
As Mi^^has boy does prove that lou's a child,
Not techy if not wronged. The other like Mars
Hemms in his Venus in his arms of steel.
Enter the Duke of Ferrara at one door and the Duke of Venice at another door
and meet at the midst of the stage. And vows a conquest: Se where they
appear:
Madame your love, which hand for a Dukedom?
Were I an Orator I could praise Ferrara,
He like the marble statue of some God,
Carries command in his proportion,
In him love seems a warrior for the fire,
Of best affection burns in hot desire.

Iul. And yet me thinks the smooth Venitian
Should more contenta Venus:
In him love seems as he is, calm and mild,
Pleasing and sportfull: things rough and violent
Dye like abortiue fruit before perf^ction.
They Are pursy and short breathd: th'ardor of true love
Burns in a calm breast: in him affections
Are not like tempests raging: yet of force
Like an even gale of wind to bear loves ship
Unto the port of happiness: his fire
Burns, and consumes no^, but maintain desire.

Ven. Give over my claim: that should argue,
A too cold temperature in love: besies
It would disable the Venetian power
Not to make good his challenge: I dare not.

Ferr. Why she is mine by promise.

Ven. I grant, that Borgias her Uncle and Protector
Promisd you that which he cannot perform.
But know Ferrara that my claim takes root
And grows upon the promise of the State,
I by the Senate was assured her love,
And on that ground the justice of my cause
Pleads. Thus in arms against the city walls.

Ferr. Herein you err: for know the Florentine
Dying a Prince powerful and absolute
(Not countermanded by a popular voice
Or by the ambitious factions of a Senate)
Leaves the Protector in his daughters nonage
Free like himself, and absolute: of power
To promise and perform: on his assurance
Lives my loves right: then were you both
Direct opposers of what I claim, by heaven
And by that influence that made me great
I would pursue my challenge through your bloods.

Ven. Give not such passage to your heat my Lord

Ferr: Then give my power a passage to my Love:

Ven: That I demand of you.

Ferr: And I command:
That without stay you raise your powers
And leave this cities siedge unto our arms,
Or what we aimd at them we will turn on you.

Ven. Although your power we are equal with your pride
I would dare stay Ferrara, and proclaim
Thy title weak, thy claim litigious:
Mine only just, apparent, righteous.
Yet let not fury so empeach our wisdoms
To jar for her another does possess,
And make our follies laughter to our foes:
Will then Ferrara make his passions subject
To an indifferency that I shall propound?

Fer. If the indifferency you shall propound
Deuides not me from Iulia:

Ven. She Is the maine claim of both our armed loves.

Fer. And with out her there is no indifferency.

Ven. You Are ^riuolous:
Why know Ferrara, thy prerogative
Extends no further then thy sword can reach:
Then when thy conquests has confirmd thy will
Thou may capitulate with ^ude commands,
Ti^l when proud Prince, stoop at imperious chance:
For did no other title then my sword
Make my claim righteous: yet the doubtful lot
Cast on the ends of war, carries my fate
Even with thy pride: the Lady as mine own
To show an eminence that over looks thy hope,
I chalendge and auerre the right of war
Due to my sword.

F^rr. Vnsheath it then.

V^n. Yes at thy bosom. Sound Cornets: they stay.

Fer. What means ^his sudden parley from the walls?

Iul. What are the Dukes at odde^?

Am. Hark Madam from the walls -- Sound again.
A sudden parley speaks unto the Dukes

Iul. Was that that staid their swords.

Amad. I would feign have seen,
how like Esops warrior they could have fought,
For that a third carries away.
Some new devise of policy has cau^d
This vnexepected change: not long since
I^ was resolved in council to maintain
The siege against the hottest opposition.

Iul. Did I not think my fortunes ebb at lowest?
It might amaze me.

Amad. My liberty
May soon give notice to you: then lets away:
A Sun may rise to mak't a happy day. Exeunt.

Enter aloft Borgias and the Senate. Ven. To whom speaks Borgias?

B^r. Dukes to you both.
The present and unlooked for cause of grief,
That now has took possession on our breasts,
Cuts of the feeling of all outward fear:
Our private griefs were desperate: did there not
A pubike care of others burden us
We think you wronged, I and the Senate here,
Causes of both the nonsuites of your loves,
Appeal unto remission.

Fer. But whether bends your far-fetcht Oratory?
Restore the Lady unto me: and on my honors pawn
I Will free your City from the arms of V^nice.

Ven. Senate, and you on whose authority,
And pawn of honor I engagde my love,
Slau'd my affections, and did prostitute
The freedom of my soul to Iulia:
Slight not your wisdoms and your worths in counsel^
To serve the ends of hidden policy:
Make good your words engagde, and as I live
A Prince vnstainde in honor, I will free
Your City from Ferraras hottest fury.

Borg. Alas my gracious and renowned Lords,
I grieve to see your passions,
Emptied of th'obiects that ^hey wrought upon:
I am the Ambassador of heavy news,
To you I am sure as heavy as to us.

V^n. Speak it.

Borg. O it does press the Organs of my speech,
And like a lethargy does numbe those motions
should give it utterance.

Ferra. Hold the Protector there from falling.
Some standersby help to unlade his bur^hen.
The Camel else will sink down under it.

Borg. Scoff not my gracious Prince: the grief I see^
Will be as heavy on ^hy now light head,
As it is on mine: the Lady whom you love --

Ferr. Why what of her?

Ven. Where is she? speak:

Borg. Singing with Angels in the quire of heaven,
The Requiem o^ Saints.

Ferr. She Is dead!

Ven. She Is dead!

Borg. I Lords unto your loves.

Ven. O my Loves hard fate.

Ferr. Dead!

Borg. And now my Lords, seeing that she is dead,
For whom you raisd these arms against our walls,
I hope your furious angers live no longer.

Ferr. We are appeasd: Venice I thus salute thee,
and reconcile my fury in thy arms.
God's Death dead?

Ven. Descend Protector, with her our arms are dead.

Ferr. I am amazd: possess me patience, Descend.
Credulity F^rrara is a virtue,
I believe it: Borgias: oh my sple^ne,
That he should think me so rediculous,
To fasten any faith on policy,
The stateliest general prop is jealousy,
On all men and their actions: I know it not.

Ven. Should I think her murdered, or that she still does live?
And feed some hope by deeming him a villain,
That sooths this sorrowful news into our ears?
I might herein seem polliticke, and nurse
Some mischief in my bosom for revenge,
Of that wherein I b^t suspect a wrong.
The tricks of State-moules that work under Princes,
Are at the best, but like the vipers young,
That how-so-ere prodigious and hurtful,
To many open and secure passengers,
Yet do they never live: without the death
Of him that first gave motion to their breath.
This keeps me honest still, the heavens and fate
Are the best guardians to a wronged s^ate.

A short flourish. Enter Borgias and the Senate. Borg. Laying aside all fear
of what you may,
Thus to your powers we do ^xpose our lives,
Your wrongs we do confess might speak revenge,
Did not this flood of sudden grief, take up
All passion in it self: speak mighty Dukes,
Lives Florence in your loves? with Iulias death
Dies the memorial of your former wrongs?

Ven. I forget them all.

Ferr. I take no pleasure in revenge.

Borg. Then are our City gates open to your loves,
And beg a favor due unto the dead:
This night the funeral hearse of Iulia,
(I know that name is dear unto you both)
Returns again to her creation.
This night the ravenous mother of the world,
(The all corrupting earth that eats her young)
Swalloweth the body of your Iulia.
This night she takes a farewell of us all:
Then let it be a witness of your loves,
To give her hearse an honor with your presence.

Ferr. Should we not grant this, we might be taxt
Of much dishonor.

Ven. I were not worthy that it should be said
I leuyed arms for love of Iulia,
Should I deny my presence at her hearse.

Borg. My love, the near alliance to her blood,
The dear remembrance of my Sovereign dead,
Whose love committed her unto my care,
Makes me accept this honor done to me:
And I stand bound in bonds of gratitude
To both your princely worths: in lieu of which,
Let my emboldned weakness mighty Lords,
Presume t'inuite you to a funeral supper,
A banquet forced by ceremonius custom,
As a due obsequy.

Ven. The love of Iulia
Exacts from me all rights of custom.

Ferr. I yield my presence.

Borg. Your guards shall be my honor for this night,
Your several armies during your stay in Florence,
Shall be maintained at our Cities charge,
In recompense of love to Iulia.

Ten. We thank you.

Fer. We thank yous

Borg. Nor give we expectation of proud pomp,
Of shows, or Pageants, for your entertainment:
Our bells ring forth our sorrows in sad peales,
No pleasant changes to give Princes welcome,
Our Churches stand not garnished with pictures,
To please devoted superstition with,
But mourn in black. Our Church men
Leave their chaunting Antheams, and their daily Mass,
To sing continual requiems to her soul.
Sorrow sits sad and weeping in our streets,
All eyes are wet with tears, save those where grief
Has dried all moisture up. Our sucking infants
Are pale and lean with hang^ng on the breasts,
Of griefe-spent mothers: If these may welcome you,
W^e'le give you prodigal welcome to our City.

Ven. Such welcome fits the death of Iulia.

Ferr. So should all mourn and weep for Iulia.

Borg. So do we mourn and weep for Iulia.
Lead on unto the City: how slow paced is sorrow?
Grief is a Tortoyse to the nimble sense,
And chils their motions, the officers of love,
Live at our funeral, and in death do move. Exeunt.

Scaena secunda.
Enter Amada and Eunuchus. Ama. Eunuchu^?


Eunu. Madam.


Ama. What solemnity is that the City celebrates?


Eunu. The Dukes of Venice and Ferrara,
Are with your father entered the walls
Unto the funerals of Iulia.

Ama. Why, is Iulia dead?


Eunu. I hope your Ladyship --


Ama. I cry thee mercy: the remembrance of her
Makes me still think she lives.
And that's the cause they parleyed on the walls.

Eunu. True Madam.


Ama. Remove a while.


Eunu. At your service Lady. stand aside.


Ama. Iulia given out for dead,
And live in durance at my fathers will?
It Is strange: the Dukes invited to her fu^nerall.
More mists of policy? O simplicity!
The clue of reason cannot guide the fate,
Of this Dedalion maze: were not profane
In me to question nature for my birth,
And quarrel with my stars for being daughter
To him whom I suspect to be a villain:
Some inspiration of religious thoughts,
Make nature less in me, and bear my duty
Even with his awe whose uncontrolled command,
Frees our obedience from our impious parents.
My father Borgias left in charge with me,
That I should keep fair Iulia: I am her Iaylor,
To whom, both he and I do owe alleagiance.
Distracted du^y, how should I bestow thee?
On the right owner, Justice I adore thee.

Enter Borgias. Borg. Amada.


Ama. My love and duty.


Borg. Alone?


Ama. My mothers Eunuch^


Borg. How fares Iulia?


Ama. Lives as you commanded, unseen and private.


Burg. Thy mothers dead.


Ama. Defend it heauens^


Borg. Dead: no more: Eunuchus?


Ennu. My love and service.


Borg. You gave it out last night as I commanded
Timoclea my wife was sick.

Eunu. I did and't like your grace.


Borg. When sets the Sun?


Eunu. Some six hours hence.


Borg. To night will be to soon: to morrow morning
Rumour't about the City, my wife is dead,
Say abroad she is dead.

Eunu It shall be done.


Borg. So shall thy duty keep me bound to thee.
Amada: some thing more I have to say,
Prepare for marriage.

Ama. For marriage?


Borg. Question me not, thou must be married,
Mulleasses is thy husband, my word has sealed it.
Be still my Argus, and keep Iulia.
Death to my soul! Eunuc^us
Can thou unknown (to any save thy self)
Poison a groom to stuff a coffen with?

Eunu. I can to please your Lordship:


Borg. O thou shall please us highly! I have great use
Of such a thing, I prithee do it:
My wife last night was poisoned, her body
The world believes is Iulias, supposed dead.
Now for the second funeral of my wife.
Her coffin must be filled up with some slave,
He shall be hono^d princely to his grave.
The funeral stays my presence: Amada
See to my Iulia, if Mulleasses move,
Be kind and gentle to his proffered love. Exit Borgia^.

Ama. Here Is a distracted labori^th of wit,
Iulia alive, and yet her funeral kept:
My mother dead and never Sick: it is true:
To many, death is sudden and unlooked for:
So't was to her: and in the midst of death,
I must be married: death take me to,
Let me not live to see those tapers burn,
That lead me to his bed: where is sanctity?
Religion is the fools bridle, worn by policy:
As horse wear trappers to seem fair in show,
And make the worlds eye dote on what we seem.
Be silent yet for duty stops thy mouth,
I Will in to Iulia, it is she and I,
That must be Chorus in this Tragedy. Exit Amada.

Eunu. How so'ere my fortunes make me now a slave
I was a free borne Christians son in Cyprus,
When Famagusta by the Turk was sacked:
In the division of which City spoils,
My fortunes fell to Mulleasses lot:
Nor was it Tyranny enough that I was Captive,
My parents robbed of me, and I of them,
But they wronged nature in me, made me an Eunuch,
Disabled of those masculine functions,
Due from our sex: and thus subjected,
These sixteen years unto the vilde command,
Of an imperious Turk, I now am given
To serve the hidden secre^s of his lust,
Unto Timocl^a, the wife of Borgias,
Whose private mixtures I am guilty of:
Betwixt ^hese three I stand as in a maze,
I^ eg'd to al their sins, and made a baud
To lust and murder: Mulleasses first
Gives me unto Timoclea, that without suspect
I might procure their loves sec^rity:
For which they promise me my liberty.
Eut Borgias whether jealous of his wife,
Of reaching at some further policy,
Binds me with golden offers to his trust,
And first comaunds me rumor it abroad
Timoclea his wife was sick, when at that instant
She was in health and dancing with her Turk^.
Now I must second that report with death,
And say abroad Timoclea is dead:
Short warning for a journey unto heaven:
But (which amaz^th most) I must provide
The body of some groom to stop a coffin with.
This is a riddle of some Sphinx, let Oedipus
Unfold the meaning: I leave it to the event,
And think most safety in not knowing it.
I must provide some groom, that's my command.
Prosper me Saturn, and those stars of sin,
Whose influence makes villains fortunate.
^He kills by law that kills men for a state.
Enter Bordell^ and Pan^ofle his Page. But who comes here? oh my spruce he --
letcher
That makes his boy save him the charges of a bawdy house,
Fore Mahomet an excellent fellow for my Lords coffin:
Assist me power of wit.

Board. Pantofle.


Pan. At your pleasure sir?


Board. Thou have been at my pleasure indeed P^ntofle, I will retreat into the
country, hate this amourous, Court and betake my self to obscurity: I tell thee
boy I will return by this Ci^cyan Isle without transformation since Hebe has
discovered her secrets I will turn I^p^ter, hate the whole sex of women, and
only embrace thee my Gammede.


Pan. Sfoot sir you are as passionate for the disloyalty of your Sempstresse as
some needy knight would be for the loss of some rich magnificos widow: do
you not see how the supporters of the Court, the Lady of the labby gape after
your good parts like so many grigges after fresh water, and can you withhold
the dew of your moyster element?


Board. I tell thee should the Lady Iulia when she was alive have proffered me her
cheek to kiss, I would not have bowed to that painted image for her whole
D^kedome: Mercury h^d no good aspect in the horoscope of my nativity: women and
lotium are recip^ocall, their savor is noisome.


Eun. Why here is a slave in folio will seem to slight the love of a P^inc^sse,
when he would willingly spend his talent on an oyster wi^e.


Bor^. Sir Pantofle trusse up my wardrobe: but withal publish my departure, I
would willingly put my creditors to the chardge of garding me out of town.


Pan. ^ ^ill much scandalize your reputation for to depart indebted: you will
be cursed heavily.


Board. To depart in debted boy, is the only way to be praid for, seeing they
know it is my prosperity and welfare that must make them satisfaction.


Eunu. Before heaven an excellent reason.


Pant. Pray Sir make even with your Tailor, he is poor.


Board. Most willingly, for I am not possessed of a pennikin, and if he be not
before with me, I take it we are even, and may walk in campage. Pantofle
vanish.


Pant. I go Sir.


Eunc. I have it, thanks sweet Thalia, thou have begot a child of mirth in my
brain, I will put it to this creature of Florence to n^rse: Saucy Seignior.


Board. Eunuchus, Venus restore thee to thy generation: what doings are now in
your quarters?


Eun Doings: in faith courtly and weak: Cupid help the poor Ladies.


Board. you are above me, I mean not their ingenys or upper galleries:


Eun. Nor I neither: and yet I speak of their understandings, which by reason
of a general spring, halt and debility in their hamms (heavens know) are most
falteringly feeble: but to present the message I am sent for: to your worthiest
self, from my Lady and mistress the protectors wife: you are intelligent?


Board. The beauteous Timoclea.


Eun. Heavens grant she may have the virtue of attraction: for she has laid
open, the luster of her best parts to your grace Sir: nay make not retreat
Sir: she knows you disdain her love.


Board. The truth is I am earthly, and like not to participate with the element
of the fire: good Eunuchus commend me to your Lady, and tell her by importuning
my affection, she seeks the fall of an innocent.


Eun. True Sir, but with a firm belief of your rising again.


Board. I see no hope of it.


Eun. The harder is her fortune: but hear me, me thinks reward should prick
you on with more courage, to such an honorable encounter.


Board. Faith Eunuche I have made a vow not to uncase my self to any of that
sex.


Eun. It may be you grounded your oath upon the uncleanness of your shirt.


Board. Verily since the relapse of my Sempstresse, I have not addicted my self
to that neat and cleanly carriage^


Eun. Sfoot I thought some soul cause or other, interposed it self twixt you
and my Lady: But sir, I Will see all wants supplied, thy debts satisfied, thy
fortunes eternally mounted: only be tractable to my poor loue-sicke Lady and
mistress, just and loving.


Board. As I am, so fates assist me: and Eunuchus here is my hand thou shall have
ample share in my fortunes.


Eun. By this hand sir but I will not: do not fail sir at eight of the clock
to meet me here, where I Will deliver you the key of my Ladies chamber: with
further instructions in the business, and with assuredness of preferment and
promotion.


Board. Dear Eunuch let me hug thee: how I long to manifest thy service to my
Lady Timoclea. You will meet?


Eun. My hand and promise for it.


Board. It shall suffice.
By women man first fell, by them I Will rise. Exit.

Eun. Ha ha ha: Protector, here is a slave
Shall stuff thy coffin: him thou shall sacrifice
Unto Timocleas ghost, whose humerous soul
Shall in his passage over Acheron
Make Charon laugh, and the stern judge of hell
Smile at his folly: this is the fatal key
Conducts him to those shades by Borgias hand.
Thus fools must fall, that wise men firm my stand.

Scaena. 3.
Enter a Friar, after him a funeral in White, and bearers in white, after them
Borgias, then the two Dukes, after them the Senate. etc. A solemn march. Bor.
SEt down that heavy load of misery,
SO would the easing you, might ease my heart!
Pure virgin Hark: O let it not impeach
The gravity of age to let some tears
Fall at thy funeral: true relic of that love
I did inherit from thy fathers mouth,
When to my charge he left his heir and Dukedom
In thee I am deprived of all that honor
I should have purchac'd by that thankful care
Was due unto thy fathers memory:
Did not my grief load all my powers of speech,
Oh I could spend my age in commenting
Of those ^rue virtues dyed with him and thee,
But sorrow shuts my breast: Prier, thine office.

Fry. By that great power is given to me
The gates of heaven I open to thee,
When among the Angels thou shall sing
The song of Saints before a King,
That sits for ever on his throane,
And gives light to every one:
To him thy soul we do bequeath,
Thy body to the earth beneath:
And so we close thy tomb again,
And pray thy soul be free from pain.

Ven. Look from thy holy mansion sacred maid
And see how prostrate I adore thy bliss:
These arms in hope of conquest of thy love
That rould themselue^ in ste^le, shall claspe the air,
And in their empty foldings live still ba^^en
Of all the comfort my you^hs hope did promise.
And since thy death takes my loves joy from me,
I Will die a virgin-Saint and live with thee.

Fer^ I cannot vent my breast in love sick terms,
Nor call to record all the gods of love
For my integrity: nor prostitute,
An oily pas^ion curiously composd
Of riming numbe^s at my mistres hearse:
Or tell her dead tr^ncke my true love in vearse:
But since by death her love I am denide,
To say I loud her is Ferraraes pride.

Borg. My honor, and that weak abillity
Our state affoords, to do your graces service,
Lies at your princely feet, for this your love
Done to the dead: now is Iulia shut
For ever from your eyes: save that she lives
Like a pure relic of some holy Saint,
Shrind in our breasts for ever: let me now renew
My first request, to sup with us to night,
A ceremony due at funerals.
So shall you double honor unto me,
In doing double honor unto her.

Ven. I Will do all honor both to her and you.

Ferr. I Will break no custom.

Borg. I humbly thank your graces, please you lead?
Here lives a lasting memory of the dead. Exeunt.
A solemn marth. Manet Borgias Thus far my pioning policies run even,
And level with my aims: Iulia lives,
And in her hearse Timoclea my wife,
Deludes the credulous Dukes: poisoned last night
By Mulleasses, to make way for me,
To marry Iulia my brothers daughter,
For which the Cardinal of Aniou my kinsman
Sollicites daily with his holiness,
For dispensation with our bloods alliance:
As for these weak men, whose pursuits in love,
Dies with my strong auerring of her death,
I can command their lives: and then maintain
My actions with the sword: for which the Turk
By Mulleasses made unto my purpose,
Offers me forty thousand Ianisaries
To be my guard, against foreign outrages:
And more: he will make me king of Italy,
To give him but command upon the streights,
And land his force on this side Christendom
And I will do it: on my faith to God
And loyalty I owe unto the stars,
Should there depend all Europe and the states
Christened thereon: I Would sink them all,
To gain those ends I have proposd my aimes^
Religion (thou that ridst the backs of Slaves
Into weak minds insinuating fear
And superstitious cowardn^s^e) thou robst
Man of his chief bliss by bewitching reason.
Nature at these my brows bend: thy mysteries
Wrought by thine own hands in our active brains,
Give us the use of good: thou art my God,
If what I have of thee, or wit or art,
Or Serpent sliding through the minds of men,
Cunning confusion of all obstacles,
Be they my childrens lives, my dearest friends
May gain me what I wish, I stoop at thy renown^
And think all is vacuum above a crown,
For they that have the sovereignty of things,
Do know no God at all, are none but Kings. Exit.

Finis Actus Primi.
Actus 2. Scaena 1.
Mulleasses solus. Mull. Eternal substitute to the first that moved
And gave the Chaos form. Thou at whose nod
Whole Nations stoopt, and hold thee still a God:
Whose holy-customd-ceremonious rites,
Live vnprophan'd in our posterity:
Thou God of Mecha, mighty Mahomet^
Thus Mulleasses at thy memory
Discends: accept his prone humility,
Great Prophet: let thy influence be free
Unchecked by danger: mew not up my soul,
In the pent room of conscience:
Make me not moral Mahomet, coopt up
And fettred in the fools philosophy,
That points our actions unto honesty.
Give my plots fortune: let my hope but touch
The mark I aim at: then the gazing time
Shall in the present hide my former ill
Success like I^the to ^he souls in bliss
Makes men forget things past and crowns our sins
With name of valor, be we impious.
A Scelus felix styles us virtuous.

Enter Eunuchus. Eunu. My honored Lord:

Mull. What devil interrupts m?

Eunu. My duty.

Mull. Your duty is too dilligent that dares
P^ere into my retreats: now should I kill thee.

Eunu. The Lord Protector Borgias my master --

Mull. Age and diseases breed consumptions
And rot him. What craves he?

Eunu. Your instant presence.

Mull. I have instant business whose high import
Detaines my speed: know you the matter?

Eunu. A tumult amongst the fearful multitude,
Causd by an ominous terror in the heavens,
Is as I guess the reason of your want.

Mull. What heavens? what terror?

Eunu. The Sun on sudden feels a dark eclipse
And hides his silver face behind the moon,
As loath to see some prodegies appear.

Mull. Make that eclipse eternal Mahomet.
Rise, rise ye mistie-footed Iades of night,
Draw your dark mistress with her sable veil,
Like a black Negro in an Ebone chair,
Athwart the wo^lds eye: from your foggy breaths
Hurl an Egiptian grossenes through the air,
That none may see my plots: Have any greater news?

Eunu. The days eyes out, a thousand little stars
Spread like so many torches, about the sky,
Make the world show like Churches hung with black,
And set with tapers at some funeral:
Amongst these stars directly from the East,
A fiery meteor points a burning rod
At Florence.

Mulle. Perhaps it is thirsty for the blood of Princes,
Blase out prodigious star, and let the fire
Dart soul amazing terror to all eyes:
Be like the Basiliske fatal to behold:
I Will fat the slimy earth more then the plague,
And from her bosom send the blood of Kings
Stild into oily vapors and borne on high,
To expiate those flames that else would die.

Eunu. What answer shall I return unto my Lord?

Mulle. That I will see him presently, be gone: Borgias,
Thou art no tutord Pollitition Exit Eunuc:
To lay another in thy bosom.
Know a stat^-villaine must be like the wind,
That flies unseen yet lif^s an Ocean,
Into a mountains height. That on the sands
Whole Nauies may be split in their descent.
I stand above thee, and as from a rock
Whose eminence outswelles the raging flood,
See thy hopes shipwrackt: O credulity,
Securities blind nurse^ the dream of fools:
The drunkards Ape, that feeling for his way
Even when he thinks in his deluded sense,
To snatch at safety, falls without defense.
Twice has the Nemean Lion breathd, forth fire,
And made the scalded Dogge-star pant with heat.
Twice the days planet through the burning signs
Hurred his fiery chariot since the time
I came to Florence in exchange for Iulia.
The son of Borgias here to learn the tongues,
The fashions and the arts of Ch^istendome:
Now by my sly and affable intrusion
I am made intimate with Borgias:
He thinks my thoughts are Osiars to be wrought
In any form: the Dukes (that claimd
The love of Iulia) he has deluded
By a feigned rumor of a sudden death:
Her he detaines until he fits his time
By murder of the Dukes to be secure,
In his own power to dacke his marriage:
Timoclea his wife (the death of all his plots
If she suruiues) he now beleues is dead
Poysond by me: in liew of which he grants
His daughter Amada to me for wife:
As if my hopes flew not as high as his:
Now to secure my flight and make my wings
Stronger then his that melted in the Sun,
His wife Timoclea lives within this tomb
Made seeming liueles^e by a sleepy juice
Infusd in stead of poison in her cup:
Here I must wake her and in her stir up
Revenge against Borgias.
Image of death and daughter of the night,
Sister to Lethe all oppressing sl^epe,
Thou that amongst a hundred thousand dreams
Crowned with a wreath of mandrakes sitst as Queene^
To whom a million of care-clogged souls,
Lie quaffing juice of Poppy at thy feet,
Refigne thy vsurpassion, and dislodge,
Hang on the eyes of sloth and make them sleep
Whose hearts are heavy, or whose sorrows weep,
Give way to motion: and thou whose blood
Stands in thy full veins like a charmed flood
Receive the air again: survive his hate
That on thy grave again climbes high to reach his fate.
Timoclea rises in the tomb.
Timo. Who speaks so loud?

Mul. He that speaks life Timoclea.

Timo. You wake me.

Mul. Such power I challenge Lady in my voice,
To wake you from your grave.

Timo. Where am I?

Mul. In your grave.

Timo. Hah, my grave!

Mul. Be not amassed madame: you are safe.

Timo. Who speaks unto me? oh forbear:
I am not for your presence: see my bed
Lies much unseemly: who attends me there?
What means this impudent intrusion?

Mul. Take time to your amazement: know where you are
It Is Mulleasses speaks to you: him you once lou`d:
It Is not now time to fear.

Timo. I know your face and yet I fear my being
Gives cause of fear.

Mul. Give your self, to me and on those rites
Due to the sweets of love, here is no danger.

Timo. Accept me in your arms.

Mul. See where you are, know you this place?

Timo. Some Church I think.

Mul. And these the Tropheyes of your Ancestors.
This is the buriail common to your blood.

Timo. Oh free me from amazement, what strange accident
Brought me so n^ere my death? I am now my self
And truly capable of a discourse.

Mul. Then know madame your life has been pursued,
And my self bribed to be your poisoner,
But that my love turned death unto a sleep,
And brought you thus alive unto your grave:

Timo Say on my dearest Lord, who bribed thy love?
What barbarism, or what desert of mine
Moved this attempt against my life?

Mul. My soul durst justify your innocence,
But that desease that bred in Paradise,
Swells like the Presters poison in our veins
(To which al men are heirs ambition)
Desire to be like God: it was that corruption
Gave me occasion thus to show my love
On your lives safety:

Timo. My love and life are thine: speak openly,
What breast could be so cruelly ambitious?
Whose honor or whose fortunes could my life
Eclipse or darken?

Mul: First madame you must swear,
By life, by love, and by that happiness
Your ^oule assures you in the faith you hold
With me, this night to prosecute revenge
On your lives enemy.

Timo. By life, by love and by that happiness,
My soul assures me in the faith I hold,
By that which binds me more -- by this kiss him.
I swear this night to prosecute revenge
On my lives enemy.

Mul Enough: thy resolution like a fire,
Makes my warm blood boil: Borgias.

Timo. My husband.

Mul. Your husband: start not Lady,
It Was he that by a promise of your daughter
The fairest Amada to me for wife
Made my tongue say, that I would poison you:
Silence dear Lady: choke all passion,
And feminine complaints in thoughts of vengance.
Forget you are a woman: and be like your wrongs
Full swollen with death: let your inuentiue brains
Carry more fate in their conception,
Then Hecubas womb to Troy: my plots are yours,
Are you reuengefull?

Timo. As full as Jealousy: or the wife of Jason
Robbed by the fair Corinthian of her love.

Mul. Then thus we seal our resolution -- kiss
Thus I ascend, and from proud Fortunes wheel,
Pu^l my own fate: forgiveness Mahomet
My hopes make me profane; and my proud thoughts
Usurp above thy greatness: Apprehension?
Thou that give food unto the soul of man,
The best companion to relieve the mind.
What sweet suggestions of my future bliss
Have I from thee? O I am transported
Beyond the power of reason! the present time
Craves a more sober temper. Madam this disguise
Must carry you unknown unto my chamber
Where we have much to do: release your thoughts,
Give freedom to those faculties of nature,
That made your sex first dare to reach at pleasure.
Be proud and lustful, let ambition sway
The power of action in you: murder and blood
Are the two pillars of a States-mans good. Exeunt.

Seena 2.
Borgias solus. Borg. A A Pollititian Proteus-like must alter
His face and habit, and like water seem
Of the same color that the vessel is
That does contain it, varying his form
With the Cameleon at each objects change.
Twice like a Serpent have I cast my skin,
Once when with mourning sighs I wept for Iulia,
And made the two Dukes weep for Iulia,
That coat is cast: now like an Amorist,
I come in loving terms to court my Iulia,
And seem a louer^ but of all shapes
This sits me worst: whose constellation
Stamped in my rugged brow the signs of death,
Envy and ruin: strong Antipa^hyes
Against love and pleasure: yet must my tongue
with passionate oaths and protestations,
With sighs, smooth glances, and officious terms,
Spread artificial mists before the eyes
Of credulous simplieity: he that will be high,
Must be a Parasite, to fawn and lie.

Enter Amada. Amada. Ama. Your pleasure.

Borg. How stand your thoughts affected to the marriage
I lately did acquaint you with, are you resolved?

Ama. I am Rather to dye then live to see that hour aside.

Borg. I would see Iulia, pray her company?

Ama. I will. Exit Amada.

Enter Mulleasses. Borg. Your presence is most welcome:

Mull. What business of import?

Borg. Naught for the instant but a wooing scene,
Prepare your wit my Lord to fight with words.
The Champions straight approach, but two to two.

Enter Iulia and Amada. Borgias courts Iulia, and Mulleasses Amada, glancing
his eye on Iulia. Mull. My loved dear Lady.

Borg, Beauteous Madam.

Mull. Fair as the morning^

Borg. Be as thy beauty seems, propitious, loving:

Mull. Attractiue Sunshine: all affections moving.

Borg. More then a subject, and more humbly bent.

Iul. How supple seems ambition? Uncle you are too low:

Mull. Deuinest fair to whom all hearts should bow.

Ama. Fit attributes for heaven: my Lord, my feature
Is but earthmould, the weak frame of nature.

Mull. Yet graced with heavenly virtue, it seems divine

Borg. I know your lights above me, yet let it shine
Like the days beauty on the lowly plains.

Iuli. Subjects are no fit loves for Sovereigns.

Borg. High comets from the earth draw up then nurture.

Iul. Yet from the Sun true stars have all their luster.

Mull. True star on earth:

Ama. You flatter, pray 'forbeare.

Borg. Love Madam is importunate, you must hear:
Your niceness makes me be abrupt: I love
And must enjoy you.

Mull. Hell to my love: Borgias I Will prevent you.

Iul. I must be plain: love you me my Lord?

Borg. I by that power that made me.

Iuli. Restore then that, that you have robbed me of,
My honor and my life: for I am dead,
So thought of in the world: give me what I am:
Return the title due unto my birth
Du^^hesse of Florence, and thy Sovereign.
Make me as free as I was borne, and give my love
The liberty of nature: then shall I believe
And think you love me.

Borg. I will restore your honors and your life,
I will return the duties of your birth:
Duchess of Florence and my Sovereign,
The Sovereign of my heart: and kneel to you,
And make my thoughts as humble as my knees:
See: I am not ambitious, it is not a crown
The gorgeous title of a Sovereign,
Makes me so evil in your thoughts: the poize of love
Whom some term light, and gives him wings
To soar al often in me is but the same
And makes me stoop thus low to Iulia.

Iuli. Uncle I am a^ham'd that any blood of mine
Should harbor such an incest: you have an easier way
To gain what you desire: make good the fame
The world is now possessed of: murder me,
Then are you heir to Florence: it is not half so ill,
As this incestuous mixture you so plead for,
Against nature and the law of heaven: but on,
Use your usurped power; be still a villain:
My life is the utmost, and you may command it,
But my bloods vessel given unto my soul,
As a pure mansion to inhabit in
Shall while I am and breath, be vnprophan'd.
I Will be more cha^t then Lucrece, dye unstained.

Mull. You are a woman Lady, and will change:
The Protector's at a nonsuit in his love,
How now my Lord?

Borg. Thus crossed by superstitious obstinacy,
I Will use the power I have, and make -- How thriues your suit?

Mull. Unthriftily like yours: we are no Venus darlings,
No delight for women: she cannot love.

Borg. She cannot love? your reason Lady
Is your blood holy? are you a sanctuary
That none may violate. What ease of conscience
Keeps you vnprophand? know that religion
Binds your obedience minion to my will.
Love him or I Will hate thee.

Ama. I tender up the duty of a child
And yield a fathers high prerogative
Ore what I am: yet for that affection
That you would have me captive in his breast,
Know it is prisoner at so dear a rate,
As all my strength can no way ransom it.

Borg. I Will use no rhethorique Lady to your ears:
But hear what I commaund^ and do my will,
Or thou shall hear what will displease thy will.

Mull. Be these the precepts Christians give their children?

Borg. But Madam for your love.

Mu^l. I would forsake a God.

Borg. A more soft style beseemes a subjects tongue,
I Will be no higher then my self: and not commaun'd
What Is in my power. Will you resign your love?

Iul. I to that God that thou have so prophand,
Detested Atheist.

Borg. Be religious Madam still and rail not,
Think of my honest suit: and think what power
This hand does gripe: we are troublesome
And leave you to your thoughts: these fits must end,
Trees are as easy broke that will not bend.

Exeunt at several doors. Scena. 3.
Eunuchus solus. Eunu. THis is the hour I should meet my catamite Signior
Bordella: I cannot but laugh to see the slave make a lecherous progress to
Lucifer. The moral will hold rarely: he shall have his brains fly about his
ears in the hight of his venery: this instead of going to Tymoclea shall
conduct him to the bed of Borgias: a midst whose waking plotts and state
volutio^s, the amorous youth must needs be hartyly welcome: for mine own part,
my handshall be clear from the blood of the goate^ and yet I could account it
happiness to be within ear shot of his departure, to here how lamentably the
coxcombe would sigh out Tymoclea: but the best is, neither Court nor country
will much miss the fool: there are elder brothers enough to supply his room:
Enter Borde^la. And see where the Cocoloch appears: he passes as if he would
steal to hell without company: whist Signeor.


Board. Eunuchus?


Eunu. The same: now I see thou will stand to thy word.


Board. Thy Lady shall see that in my deeds Eunuchus if all the sweet meats in
Florence be prouocatiue.


Eun. I Sir, but Ladies are of the nature of Idols and will be served on your
knees.


Board. True, were I not a man of war whose valor and magnanimious courage
is not to be dejected so long as his weapon holds.


Eunu. Then I perceive you will shortly be at my Ladies mercy


Board. If I should, doubt not her gracious hand in my erection: but gentle
Eunucus, the key that opens to the Via lactea:


Eunu. H^ere Sir, and look your entrance be wary, soft and circumspect.


Board. I had thought an entrance rough, manly and boistrou^ had been more
pleasing to Ladies: Enter Madam Fulsome, But see Eunuchus I shall be troubled I
shall be tormented with this court owl if you assist me not: sfoote the
flesh-fly has espied me, she will never linne sucking at me so long as I have
any matter for her to work upon.


Eu^. Who, Madam Fulsome the Gouernesse of the maids? she is a good creature
and very musical: she sets mo^e instruments a-worke then a Fiddler: thou must
needs love her if it were but for her humility: she will bend her self to the
meanest page of the Scullery: and she hates the pride of the flesh excedingly,
and is known to be a mortifier of carnality.


Board. I verily believe it, for her very countenance and complexion shows she
is able to allay any man's courage living with a breath.


Enter two Ladies and Phego a Gentleman Usher. Fulsom. Phego do you epsy no
motions behind the arras, no squals, musslings, or pages standing sentinel? or
because our head the Lady Iulia is dead, are al her servants that is her
members in the same predicament?


Phego. Surely I see no body stirring Lady: it is supper time and every man is
providing for the belly.


Full It will be shortly time for every woman to provide for the belly too,
P^ego a word with you.


Board, What is that Ph^go Eunuchus^ do you know him?


Eunu. How, know him, can I mistake him sir, that is never hoodwinckt? he is an
extreme enemy to Haberdashers: affecting no block, but that which nature
bestowed on him: and of that he has been so curious that it is not a hair
amiss: he is sir the ^reface to your compoundresse of man's flesh, and Vshers
her to ^mployment: and is a creature of singular patience; contenting himself
with the Theory, when others are the Practique. In his pace he imitates
Fensers, and stands much upon distance: He is partly an Astronomer too, being
much given to observation of signs: for when the Sun is in Gemini the
Dog-starre attends without doors: he is a great friend to Aries but naturally
hates Pisces for it is a chill sign and cooles his toes ouer-vehemently: in
brief sir he is a Gentleman Usher.


Phego salutes Bordello. Full. Sure Phego that should be sig^ior Bordello: I
pray you entreat his approach: of all our Courtiers I love men of his country
and breeding, they are the louingst, best spoken, well gract creatures in these
parts extant: I think it be given to those that be borne under your northren
clyme, to thaw and melt away at the Sunshine of beauty: you shall read in very
late stories that many of them have lost their best members in the service of
Ladies and distressed waiting Gentlewomen.


Board. I should account it none of my nearest mishaps, being interdicted so
worthy a presence by more then urgent affairs. Sweet Sir bear my excuse with
all respective desire of pardon.


Full. Whether Signior Bordello in such post-hast: you forget your old friends:
when you came first to Court, you and I were more inward man.


Board. Being upon my departure Lady, I am enforced to see to the conuaying of
my goods, and the trussing away of my bagage.


Full. And that word bagage (I will besworne) had been an apt phrase for his
bringing in, but you purpose not I hope signior to depart Fl^rence altogether.


Eun. Oh no: his flight Lady is like the Ravens, that having spied a fat
carckase, romes about to calmore of her fellows to the prey.


Full. But signior, have you so fully furnished your discours^ with observation,
as with so slight a view of our Gentlewomen to make a departure? indeed
signiour the Ladies of your country will exact some obseruatiue relate of your
travels upon your return.


Board. For our Ladies Madam they are few or none, our country men are not so
addicted to titles of honor: they use knighthood as rich Iewellers desire
Iemms rather for traficque then ornament.


Phego. Is there any commodity to be had in the purchase ^ir?


Board. Great Commodity, and that is the reason so many merchants and yeomen
sons hunt after it.


Full. Belike this is one of your observations: pray sir be more open: I see you
have profited much since your coming.


Board. For the bettring of mine inward parts, some few notions I have committed
to memory.


Eunu. Impart them S^gn^or: it may be I shall add to your store: these La^yes
will not discover us for intelligencers: they are naturally given to the
concealment of private actions.


Board. Since my coming to Florence I have seen ignorance in the shape of a
Ci^tizen mufled in the scarlet of magistracy that could not write his own
name. Generally I have noted through the whole Country great enmity between
wit and clokes lined through with velvet: and yet beggars and gallants agree
together very f^miliarly. There is no thriuing but by impudence and pan^arisme:
he that is furnished with one of these two quallities shall beg more of a
foolish Lord at a mar^bone breakfast, then all the Poets in the whole town
shall rhyme out of him in an age:


E^n. ^ut th^se are but petty observations: I have seen since my coming to
Florence the son of a Peddler mounted on a foot cloth: a fellow created a
Lord for the sm^othn^sse of his chinne: and which is more; I have seen a capp
most my raculously turned into a beauer hatt without either trimming or dressing.


Full. That is strange indeed: Signior and Eunuchus, we are to press you to a
further curtesy in meeting us in the lobby some two hours hence at a posset.


Board. You shall find us as forward in as hot a service in the Lobby or
elsewhere at your Ladyships appoint, but --


Full. We must have no denial.


Eunu. Cans^ not say the Court-grace? promise man promise.


Board. Your Ladyship shall find us ready to put in -- our spoones.


Full. Till then adieu Signior and Eunuchus. Phego forward.


Phe. So long as my ham-strings hold. Exeunt.


Board. You see Eunuchus, familliarity and courtesy has enwrapt me in the
knowledge of these meanest vassels of honor: but henceforth my countenance
shall be estranged, and I will bury my acquaintance in scilence.


^unu. I think the Cuckoe foresings his own dirdge: Signior, you shall need
no further prescriptions: in the carriere of your delight, vouchsafe a thought
of Eunchus, you conceive me Sir, manifest my service to Timoclea.


Board. I were inhumaine if I should forget you the latest minute of my life:
pray heavens my Page Pantofle have procured in my absence the embrodered shirt
I gave directions for upon both our wardrops: that care once over, I shall never
henceforth taste of lousy misfortune.

Venus supplying what Bordello most lackes,
Courtiers and Porters live by able backs. Exeunt

Scena. 4.
Enter 4. Tapers borne by 2. Pages, Borgias, Venice, Florence, Mulleasses,
Prusias, Philenzo. Borg. THus our presumption has prolongd your stay
At a ch^ape banquet: did not the rites of love
Exact your presence as a debt to Iulia,
Our boldness might have wanted an excuse
Thus to detain you.

Ferr. You are too full of ceremony my Lord,
Knowing your welcome prodigal, and full of state,
And such as fits our mournful accidents.

Ven. The better part of love due to the living,
Appears in friends even when their friends are dead,
And think my Lord Protector that our love,
For which we came in arms against your walls,
Would not be wanting in one ceremony
Due unto Iulia at her obsequy.
Is Prusias returned from our Camp?

Pru. I my gracious Lord.

Ven. Does our Liefetenant keep a careful watch
Are Sentinels set out?

Prus. They are and it like your grace.

Ferr. Where is Philenzo?

Phil. Here my Sovereign.

Ferr. Are all in safety at our Camp?

Phil. Safe and in quiet.

Ferr. The night is old,
And drowsy sleep hangs heavy on our eyes:
Conduct us to our rest.

Borg. Never till now was Borgias fully blessed:
To lodge two mighty Princes in one night
Under his roof: where my sons son may say,
Here might^ Venic^ and F^rrara lay.
My Lord ^hese Tapers lead you to your chamber,
These great Ferrara unto yours.

Ven. Rest to you all. Exit.

Ferr. Good night and sleep unto your sorrows. Exit.

Borg. Sweet quiet be a guard unto you both,
So may you sleep for ever. Eun^c^us:
Remove with our attendance from our ears.
Exeunt all but Mulleasses. Now my hearts treasurer^ what now remains?
My resolution holds to murder them,
And with that force the town may now afford,
Practice some sudden stratagem on their powers.

Mull. That were too violent: things done for state,
Must carry for me, and with an outward gloss,
Varnish and cover what would else seem gross,
Should they be murdered in their beds, or die,
Having your promise for their guard: the offense
Could have no safety but in violence.
No let them sleep secure, and this nights safety
Will make them feareles, easy to be trapt
In a more cunning net.
To morrow at a banquet they shall drink
A drugge, whose working in their breast shall sleep
Twice fifteen days, until their absence hence
May give you color from suspicion.
But then dissoluing like a fire that is hid,
Spreading a burning poison through the blood,
It scalds the heart, and through the body runs:
Turns to a hot quotidian and, does leese
Although of poison in a mad desease:
So dying, no impute can touch your name:
Things are undone that are vnspoke by fame.

Borg. My fortunes on thy council noble Turk.
We Will clime together: my daughters heddy will
Shall stoop unto thy pleasure: as for Iulias love
She must or yield or dye: he that is wise,
Will tread on any that may make him rise. Exeunt.

Finis Actus Secundi.
Actus 3
Enter Timoclea like a Ghost. Timo. BLush not thou chaste and modest Queen of
night,
Nor hide thy silver crescent in a cloud,
To see me thus Rhamnusia like attired:
Stare on ye Argus eyed heavens and se a woman
More full of vengeance, then your jealous Queen.
Medusa sometime the love of Neptune,
(But after for thy lust transformd a monster)
Lend me those serpents that about thy head
Curle up like Else-knots, at whose horrid sight
The Sun may vanish or stand still aff^ight.
Or you you Furies ministers of fear,
(That at Astreas feet lie bound in snakes
Attending her just sentence to begin
Terror of conscience in the breast of sin)
This night be powerful in me and inspire
My face with fear, my heart with rancke-swolne ire^
Venice, Venice, great Venice:

Ven. Who speaks to Venice? within.

Timo. Iulia thy love.

Ven. Delusiue voice, why do renew my grief
By naming Iulia?

Timo. Did thou love Iulia?

V^n. Thou wrongst me to make question of my love.
Whatsoere thou art.

Enter Venice. Timo. Then see thy Iulia and revenge her wrongs.

Ven. Dissolve ye glassy pearls and melt in drops,
Or with the teare-spent mother Niobe
Turn into stones: shall I believe my thoughts,
And credit what thy shape presents to me?
Thou art the Ghost of murdered Iulia.

Timo. I am.

Ven. Immortal essence Virgin-element
So may I term thy ayry substance freed
From the gross mixture of our earthly load:
Oh I am throngd with passions and each craving vent
None can have passage till some tears be spent,
Fall fall ye silver pearls, and of the ear^h
Purchase a soft relenting at my griefs.
Shoure down like rainie drops, and pearce the stones
Make them receive my sorrows, or from mine eyes
Run like to crystal rivers through the world,
Slide ore the flowery meadows that the Nimphs
Dancing in feary rings upon the grass,
May leave their sport, and weep to see you pass,
Where by the doleful murmur as you go,
The hills may here you mourn and sound my woe,
Pardon: if I be tedious virgin spirit,
Or if my grief be too effeminate:
Thy habit is an Index to revenge,
Which thy wrongs seem to plead for of my love,
Speak them, or deal them through the yielding air
Into my ears, and they shall be to me
Like the stern drum, or music of the war
Unto the coward, or the fainting soldier.

Timo. Venice I was murdered.

Ven. Murder is open mouthd, and as the Sea
Whose covetous waves in prisond by thy land,
Bellow for grief and roar upon the sand.
So from the earth it cries, and like a child
Wronged by his careless nurse will not be stilld:
Are ye then deaf yea gods, ye cannot hear it?
Or is just Libra fallen out of your Spheres,
That wronged States must to the earth appeal
For justice and revenge. Then it is not profane
T'usurpe your functions: my hand shall be as just
As my soul loving: and they both shall leave
A story to the world of my revenge.
Nor in succeeding times shall be forgot.
Venice reuengd those wrongs the heavens would not.
I interrupt what that would say, and seem
To crown all vengeance in a passion.
Speak but his name.

Timo. My uncle Borgias.

Ven. Enough.
O that the genious that attends on man,
Should be a doubtful Oracle to the soul
And whispering to our intellect what fate
Hangs like a falling tower upon his state,
Yet be no more of force to length our ioy^
Then were Cassandras prophecies to Troy.
Disloyal treacherous villain Borgias,
Some Hydras poison, or the blood of Nessus
Cleave to thy flesh:
Oh my blood swells beyond my power: my voice
Louder then his that thunders through the clouds,
Shall speak this monstrous murder to the world,
I Will be thy Orator wronged spirit and plead
Blood and revenge for thee though thou best dead.

Timo. Stay.

Ven: What would thou more?

Timo. Hear and be aduisde:
To morrow when the Senate sits be there,
And in the ears of the whole state proclaim,
And justify my words against Borgias:
In this alone I will great Venice prove,
Do it as ever thou did Iulia love.

Ven. I will.

Timo. Whilst I borne upon air attend my bliss.

Ven. Peace to thy soule^ Adieu. Exit.

Timo. Remember Iulia.
Yet prosper and go on, for Iulias ghost
My false shape takes: the abused Duke's afire,
Through Borgias blood I Will run to my desire.
Enter Bordello solus. Whom have we here?

Board. Priapus thou woman's God assist me with a Iouiall ability: this night I
may beget a Hercules: Fortune I must confess thou have turned up thy muffler,
and cast a gracious aspect on Bordello: for I am not only in the state of
clean linen; but also thou have made me gracious in the eye of Signior
Diaspermaton my Apothecary, who has furnished me with this receipt: here is a
compound of Cantharid^s Diositerion, marrow of an Ox, hairs of a Lion, stones
of a Goat, Cock-sparrowes brains, and such like this after an hours receipt,
has a fourefold operation: and least I should be like a Peacocke all tail and
no heart, here is a distillation of ten pound a pint, that comforts the
inward, fires the brains, cheeres up the spirit, and makes a man lay about him
like a dutchman. Let me see, it is more then time that I commit this divine
pill to his hopeful working: least my staff be out of the rest when my
adversary is in the carriere. So Cupids fair mother be thy mid wife: out and
alas I am mare rid, what Somners Ghost or limme of Lucifer, puts poor Bordello
in mind of penance before he has trespassed?


Timo. I am espied: his fear does apprehend me for a ghost,
And I must feed it.

Board. Se, it makes toward me: unfortunate Bordello that the devil should be
an enemy to lechery.


Scaena. 2.
Enter Madame Fulsome, Eunuchus and Phego. Full. Come let us set to our
business, Phego,
Lend us your wind to cool this posset.

Phego. It is not the first time I have been constrained to puff and blow in
your Ladyships service.


Full. It has often come in my mind to know the deriuation and denomination of
this word posset?


Eunu. I take it that it comes of the Latin word posse to make a man able: and
that is the reason ever after eating them, men desire to make experience of
their forces.


Phego. I rather conceive it comes of the word pono of putting together, for
that your possets are the usual means of congregating, putting and combining
your Court creatures together.


Eunu. And that may well be: for I remember that reverent pedagoge William
Lilly, brings in gigno, pono, can^, one in the neck of another, gigno to
beget, pono to put in, and cano to sing.


Full. That Lilly was a beastly knave to put pono behind gigno there is no
music in it: but all this time we miss not Signior Bordello, it has not be
his custom to be absent where his chops might have had employment.


Eunu. You speak of the days of hunger, when the slave was a stranger in the
land of Hauilah: but the word is retrograde: the last age is a golden age with
him.


Enter B^rdella. Fuls. See where the son of Saturn appears.


Eun. S^oot I thought the Dog-fish had been bayting Cerberus ere this time.


Board. Ladies did you not see a spirit pass this way?


Eunu. Thou see we are feeding the flesh man, what do thou talk of the
spirit?


Board. Without jest a mere Ghost, standing bolt upright at Timocleas chamber,
so nigh Court Incubus on my life.


Fuls. Were you not much terrified Signior with the apparition?


Board. How: terrefied? I no sooner beheld it, but drawing my better parts
together Enter Timoclea. Help, help! All run out, Timoclea follows the
Eunuch out.


Scena 3.
Enter Ferrara solus. Ferr. Fear and suspicion, two night-waking charms,
Banish all sleep, suggesting in my thoughts,
Falsehood and treason: I am slow and dull,
Discending like the earth: yet I know not what
Pricks like the thorn of Phil^mel at my breast:
And tells me ther^ is danger in my rest.
Sometime I think of Iulia: and that thought
Presents her loves in a living shape.
When not remembering death, I open my arms,
To tie a Gordian knot about her waste
And bid her welcome: but that empty claspe,
Deluding my false hopes with naught but air,
Makes my blood angry, and does turn my passion
To seek a subject fit for my revenge:
And then I ever think of Borgias.
As if my love were wronged by Borgias. A groaning within.
What means these sudden tumults in mine ears?
Save me eternal guard of innocence:
Treason, treason, villain thou shall buy my blood.

Eunuchus rusheth in: he kills him: Enter Timoclea. Eun. O spare me.

Fer. Distraction of my brain, what shape art thou?

Timo. Iulia^ Exit.

Ferr. Iulia: hah: stay it is gone: did I see?
Or did my fear and fancy frame this form?
Villain thou art some instrument of falsehood
Confess thy treason.

Eun. You are secure: that shape that named your love
Pursued me through the court, till for my rescue
Fear made me use this violence at your chamber.
O I am slain, and dye a causeles death,
I nere liud false to thee: all thou have gaind
Is that my soul dies clear and leaves thine staind. He dies.

Ferr. To do thee good my soul shall say as much
And witness it before the Judge of souls,
When at the general Bar we meet together.
But I must use thy shape: this night I Will walk
Hid in thy habit from discerning eyes:
I Will pry about the Court, perhaps I may
Once more see Iulias ghost, and learn her wrongs,
By them to aim aright in my revenge.
My hand first dies the scene: and it shall fill
The stage with vengeance: Nemesis shall wade
Up to the chin and bath herself in blood,
The dangling snakes that hang about her neck
Shall suck like Lethe of the purple gore
Shed for my Iulias death.
I Will feast the ravenous people of the air,
And fill the hungry wolves with sl^ughtered men.
The streets of Florence like the streets of Rome
(When death and S^ll^ raingd) ^hal^ run with blood^
Their swelling channels with a scarlet tide
Shall wash the stores, and for my Iuli^^ death
The angry gods of wr^th shall smil^ as pleased
To s^ me so re^engd: Eunuchu, thy death
Is but a prologue to induce a plot,
May ^h^u be blessed, thou art not w^rth my hate
I must reach higher, and on thy disguise,
Lay but the groundwork for revenge to rise. Exit.

Scaena 4.
Enter Mulleasses solus. Mull. BE pleased ye powers of might, and bout me skip
Your anticke measures: like to cole black moors,
Dancing their ^igh La^oltos to the Sun
Circle me round: and in the midst I Will stand^
And crack my sides with laughter at your sports.
Oh my hopes fat me: nor shall time grow old,
Or weary with attending my success.
One night shall crown me happy: Borgias wife
Appears unto the Dukes for Iu^ias ghost,
To breed suspit^on in them of her murder,
So that if Borgias chance survive this night
(As he must dye if all my plots hi^s right)
The Dukes to morrow when the Senate sits
May prove what i will affirm against his life.
Nor to redeem his sa^ety shall he bring
The Lady to disprove what we auerre.
Here will I cease, and in some strange disguise
Keep till my growing faction be of force
To second my ambition for the crown.
If I plot well fair Amada must dye,
And by her mothers hand: she must not live
To speak her fathers wrongs. Timoclea
Thou, thou art next: I took thee from thy grave
Not for the love I bore Timoclea,
But to suck from thy use the sweets of love
I bore to Iulia: it was love and state.
^aue thee this time of life to str^ngth my fate:
But blabbe not: scilence tongue: she comes.

Enter Timoclea. Timo. My Lord, what, drowned in contemplation?
Mull^asses: love.

Mull. Heavenly creation, beauties abstract, natures wonder.

Timo. What means my Lord? awake, Timoclea speaks.

Mul. I must enjoy thee Amada: strong force of passion.

Timo. Ha: Amada: dearest Lord: your sense
And know me.

Mul. Ha Timoclea: thy love and pardon, I was oreborne,
And carried from my self with iole thoughts
Of what sad melancholy suggested in me:
What comfort bringst thou? has thy dead shape
Been powerful unto fear? stood they a mazd?
Their eyes like fiered stars set on thy face:
Their speech abrupt and short: their hair upright?
Stiff like the quils of Porcupines? art blessed?

Timo. I am: if what you speak may make me blessed.

Mul. It makes us happy: gives our hope true life.

Timo. Neither my life nor hope to be so blessed
Makes me so happy as thy love dear Turk.
Were I a Venus thou should be my Mars,
And I would court thee even in Phoebus sight,
Although it moved an envy in the gods.
Be Io^ial: and like Salmecis, thy love
Shall cling about thy neck.

Mull. I am not sportfull:

Timo. I Will dance before thee like a faiery Nymph,
And with my pleasing motions make thee spor^:
I Will court thee naked, as did the Queen of thoughts
Her sullen boy, and all to make thee sport.

Mull You are not pleasing.

Timo. Not pleasing gentle Turk?
Time has not set the caracters of age
On my smooth browe: my pulses beat as high,
As when my first youth lifted up my blood,
I buy no beauty: nor has nature been
A niggard in my face: I am yet young
Fresh and delight some, as the checkerd spring,
The Lilly and the Rose grow in my che^kes,
And make a bed for love to rest him on.

Mul. But I am restles.

Timo. Rest thee on my breast.

Mul. No I must pilgrine to a love divine.

Timo. Love me and unto love I Will build a shrine
And on an Altar offer to our loves,
The thighs of Sparrowes and of Turtle Doves.

Mull. You are importunate.

T^mo. Yield then and I have done.

Mul. No more:
Fair Amada's the saint that I adore. Exit.

Timo. Amada: minyon is it you?
Makes me thus sue unheard? my daughter Amada
Have I in my bosom nursed a snake:
No fierce streamd torrent^ nor no storm at Sea,
No stepdame is half so raging: my blood was not so strong,
When thou were got: now us like the Sea,
My soul a Bark that runs with wind and tide
And cannot stop: the Anchor of my thoughts
(Reason) is lost, and like the vine-gods pries^s
Running down Ni^a or from Pindus top,
I am unstaid and doubtful in my course.
O the strong power of sense: I must do that
Which all succeeding times to come shall speak
Ye^ not believe; all say it was done, yet none
Say it was well done. Love is a God,
Strong, free, unbounded, and as some define,
Fears nothing, pittieth none: such love is mine. Exit.

Finis Actus 3.
Actus 4. Scena I.
Enter Iulia and Amada. Iuli. O Had our souls no deeper sense then flesh,
Were they like waxen pictures formable:
Obsequiously to take impression
From every rude hand, and be like this will,
That wills us unto some defo^mity,
I should not Amada complain of wrong
But make religion of my forced restraint:
I then should sleep and pray: and on my beads
Number deuo^ion: my environed spirit
Should not thus swell beyond my present freedom:
Whisper my wrongs, and prompt my weaker powers
To prone impatience

Ama. Madam I am yours.
Let not the name of daughter unto him
That has confinde your hope, be prejudice
To those affections I bear your state:
I Will prove against reason and received truth,
Like breeds not like, in breeding every thing:
Clear streams may flow even from a troubled spring.

Iuli. I am no infidel to thy posi^ion,
Sad thoughts oppress me: may I have no music?

Ama. Yes Madam.

Iuli. Some say that when the Thracian entered hell,
The to^tu^'d souls enchanted with his tunes,
Felt not their torments: Syciphus sat down,
Ixions wheel s^ood still: the thirsty son of Jove,
Forgot to drink, and all the r^st did stand
Ca^ching the air from his delicious hand:
I would I might partake their happiness.

Ama. Madam you shall: gi^e your ears a while,
And you shall hear such music as would make
The greedy wolf forsake the tender lamb,
And listen to it: such as the son of Neptune
Played to the Dolphins: when they in a ring
Danct their crookt measures but to hear him sing. A song,
Madam how fare you now^

Iuli. Even as the laboring dayman after sleep.
Enter Timoclea like a Ghost. Refresht and cherisht: ha but Amada.

Amad. Some better Geniu^ assist my fear.

Iuli. What would it Amada, it beckens to thee?

Ama. My mothers troubled spirit: O defend me heavens.

Timo. Away: Amada.

Iuli. It commands my absence.

Ama. O for heavens sake stay.

Timo. Away.

Iul. S^mething it would unfold to thee: I go. Exi^ Iulia.

Timo. Contain thy fear, I live.

Ama. Such terror lives not in a living eye,
Death is not sha^per then those pointed beams
That pierce unto my heart.

Timo. Would they were ponyards digging at thy breast.
Keep in thy short-drawne accents: let not the air
Carry the softest clamor to the ear
Of waking Iealo^sie: if it do --
How Lust and Nature do divide my soul?
The one does plead prescription in my blood,
And sues as plaintiue with such clamorous spells,
As might conjure the violent rape of Lust
To modest continence: O but it is a vice
Sooner condemnd then banished: easily spoke against
But yet t'wil fawn as smoothly on our flesh,
As Circe on the Grecian trauellours,
When she detaind them in the shape of beasts.
Amada know thou my face?

Ama. I knew that outward Character of her
That sometimes I called mother.

Tym. Do think I have no life?
Se^st not my blood in a continual pulse
Beat through the azure conduits of my flesh?
Feel how I burn: what star'^t thou on me?
Am I transparant? can see from my heart
Death in the shape of jealousy: stand
Like a chief organ guiding all my frame,
Unto some tragic action?

Ama. O give my sense some freedom
From fear and terror, that I may distinguish
Betwixt the credulous rumor of your death,
And what I see.

Tym. I live, the time befits not inquisition
Of tedious circumstance: Amada I live:
But thou must dye, and by thy mothers hand.

Ama. O be not a Medea.

Tym. Why like Creusa have thou stolen my Iasen?
My Mulleasses he d^tes upon thee:
I am debard his breast,
Robbed of his love by thy alluring looks.
Sad discontent wound in his folded arms,
Sighs naught but Amada: but by my better hopes
My blood shall like Medusas first turn to serpe^ts
And taint thy flesh, ere it shall loose that fire
Which makes it boil and burn^ in his desire.

Ama. Deforme my beauty fill my face with scarres,
Make me more loath some then a dead man's scull:
Wash me with spiders blood, that I may swell,
And be more ugly then a Gorgons head,
That he may fear to see me: only let me live,
And spare me that that only you did give.

Time. My pleasure gave thee life, and it resumes
That life again, because it kills my pleasure:
Thou Art like an Iuy nourisht at the root
Of some proud oak: that not content to creep
And feed upon the sap, but stretching up,
Proudly presumst to ouerlooke the top:
So that the verdure of the ambitious impe,
Detaines all admiration: the Oak wants grace,
Only because the Iuy is in place.
Enter Mulleasses. But I Will displant thee for no weed shall grow
So near the root from whence my sap does flow.
she kills her.
Ama. Cruel unnatural: heaven my hopes in thee
If virgin pureness please, accept of me. mo^itur

Mul. What, do you Christians sacrifice with flesh?
Or like the Laodiceans unto Pallas, offer
The blood of virgins? O inhumane deed,
Ungentle monster, beauteous Amada!

Timo. It was her beauty that I offered up
Unto thy love my dearest Mulleasses.

Mu^l. Worse then a Cammel in her time of lust,
Cruel unto thy child: loose thy snaky arms
O thou have done

Timo. As Lucius Catalline
Romes terror did for Orestilla, killed
My child: no more: for Mulleasses love,
I would outgoe examples, and exceed
As in desire, all others so indeed.

Mul. And yet I love thy cruelty: for this night thou must
Discard the timorous pity of thy Sex:
Be a Semiramis: let thy husbands death
Give thy hopes life: feed, feed upon his blood,
And let thy veins swell: now he prepares to bed
Be thine own ghost: and like the apparition
Of his be^eeu'd-dead wife call for revenge:
Incite his timorous conscience to despair,
Speak of damnanion: let one word contain
A hell of torments. But time slides.

Timo. I run. Exit.

Mul. Much ere the morning rises must be done,
I Will bear this body hence: ha ha ha,
O now me thinks I gin out-reach my self,
Now like some huge Collossus cold I strut,
And stride that Oak of Mahomet: that bears up
The ponderous center: whose divided horns
Measuring the passing of a thousand years,
Touch at both Polles, and toss the massy ball:
Makes mountains nod and curled Cedars reele
On Syrian Lybanus. But soft me thinks I hear within oh oh
Some mutinous and distracted tumult.

Enter Borgias and Timocl^a after him. Borg. Guard me ye just and intellectual
powers
Thou triple and eternal essence.

Timo. Borgias.

Borg. What dreadful summons calls on Borgias?
What art thou?

Timo. Timoclea thy poysond wife.

Borg. What would thou, Hah.

Timo. Revenge and horror.

Borg. Terror to my soul: forbear those looks.

Timo. Despair and vengeance.

Borg. May thou be peaceful, in my prayers I wish it,
Let them expiate my sin: if thou be'st a spirit
Blessed and celestial: change that face of fear,
Or leave the infectious grosnesse of our air,
And like an Angel dance about the Spheres,
Play with the Moon and make the Sun thy glass,
To see thy beauty as thy beauy pass.
Or if thou be'st --

Timo. A messenger of death.

Borg. Then like a Fury post to Tartarus,
Fetch up the snackie curld Eumenides:
From Orcus bottom where reuengefull cares
Grief, pale diseases, sad and crooked age
Are ever resident: let them and their effects
Let fierce Erennis with her brazen feet,
Seize me at once, and strike me in my fall,
Lower then him that durst ascend the Sun.
Only be thou appeasd.

Timo. Not till I meet thee in the shades of death.

Borg. Which thou deniest me: for thy fears keep in
My trembling soul: it dares not leave my breast,
Mount to the flaming girdle of the world,
And fetch me lightnings, I will swallow it.
Snatch from the Ciclops bals of Etnean fire
And I will eat them: steal thunder from the clouds
And dart it at me: quaffe Stigian Nonocris
I will pledge thee.

Timo. I Will haunt thee to despair. Exit Borgias. Timocl^^ following him^

Mul. Pursue his fear to some effect of death,
Whilst I like stars that spread their sparckling fires
Beyond an usual light fore-shewe a tempest
Of the whole state of Florence. Amadas removed
Her near alliance unto Iulias blood,
Shall not distaste my hopes: Timocleas fear
Works death on Borgias: up Mulleasses
Sit like Saturnus on the highest orb,
And let starre-gazing wizards from thy fear,
Buzze sad Astrology in the peoples ear.

Enter Borgias and Timoclea aloft. Borg. What night or what darcke Chaos can
conceal^
My conscience horror? rather let me see
The fear of Hercules: let the Cretian Bull
Bellow and burst my brains: only may my ears
Be deaf to thy exclaimes.

Timo. Thou art at farthest.

Borg. Then I can but fall. He leapes down.

Timo. Like Lucifer from heaven. discendit Timoclea.

Mul. Oh now me thinks a Chorus all of Angels
Clad with the Sun and crowned with golden stars,
Should make more heavenly music at thy fall
Then all the Spheres that dance about the ball:
Now should they poetize in verse for joy,
And out-sing Homer in the fall of Troy.

Borg. Villain triumphst thou?

Mull. O ye strong power of superstitious faith
It reigns on fools: that men of wit and state,
Men that like Eagles climb to be above,
And shroud themselves between the knees of Iou^^
Should be struke down by apparitions.

Enter Timoclea. Timo. Delu^iue counterfeit.

Borg. Conterfeit!

Timo. I Valentine I liue^
And am the actor of mine own revenge.
That cup of poison made against my life,
Was by my dearest Mulleasses love
Turned to a philter: and my working sense,
Charmed in the scilence of a quiet sleep,
Showed as if death had locked my pulses up,
But posting time brought motion on my blood.
And now my full veins like a water-brooke,
Tha^ slyding gently at some proud hills foot,
In pipes of lead are carried to the top,
And the^e in amourous branches spreading forth,
Courts the curld mountain thus, thus, and thus: she kisses him.

Borg. Lascivious strumpet.

Timo. My beloved Turk.

Borg. Incestuous Phedra.

Timo. Love Hipolitus.

Borg. Cruel Medea.

Timo. My kind Jason.

Borg. Whirle me ye just and more au^pitious powers,
Amongst the thick and thunder darting clouds,
That being wrapped in flames I may be thrown,
Like Aetnean bals from heaven and strike you down:
Or would my dying breath were more infectious
Then half rotte bodies digd up from their graves,
Or then those mists felt by the souls of men,
When they descend^^th Acharusian fenne.
It should not strive within me, or be loath
To leave my body might it blast you both. He faines to dye.

Timo. So with thy death the Embri^m of my love
Takes perfect shape. Now like the Sestian maid
May I court Leander swimming in my armes^
And with our pleasing motions mock the seas
That rose and fell to wanton with his thighs:
Now there is no Hellespont betwixt our loves:
I am not jealous: Agamemnons dead,
And Clitemnestra with A^g^sthus plays:
Pleasure is free.

Mul. Come there is no pleasure in you:
You Are a lustful time sp^nt murderous strumpet,
The prostitution of your known Bordellos,
Where every itching letcher ^ents his blood,
Is not so loathsome.

Tim. You speak not like a lover.

Mull. No, for thou have killed my love Amada:
And now thy husbands blood bids me beware
Of some new lust and third adulterer:
Such is your love to me.

Timo. Oh stop those killing accents, be more mild
I do forgive what you did speak: and ask
But a kind thought for all my loving task.
These eyes have seen you smile: look gently on me,
And let me read some milder characters:

Mull. Hence with thy Serpent twines.

Timo. I am no Lamia nor no Lostrigon,
No high-prizd Lais: that thou should esteem
Repentance purchasd at too dear a rate:
Kings shall not come to Corinth where thou may,
Not with a common Ephereian ^^ull,
Purchase a minutes pleasure: but with me
(As fair but yet more chaste by far then she)
Spend years of sweet content.

Mull. Siren mine ears are stopped I will not hear thee.

Timo. Oh would I had a Sirens charming voice,
I Would use no incantations but to thy ears,
Or were my tongue like Orpheus golden lyre,
To which the winds were hushed and heard it play^
It should be silent but to please thy ears,
Or like the dying swan, would I might sing
A funeral elegy to my parting soul,
So that the music might but please thy ears:
What should I say?

Mull. Be dumb and leave me.

Timo. Not till thou love, or else of life bereave me. Exeunt.

Borg. Ha,
Are ye gone: all clear, damnation cease ye,
I, a known practisde pollititian,
And thus outreacht: O my shallowe brains.
Fell I so high? would I had fallen from heaven:
So, like a Phaeton I had fired the world:
Or like a flash of lightning on your heads,
Consumd you for these tricks: I dyed in time^
Like a true coward, counterfeited death,
For fear to die indeed: well then for my life
I am beholding yet unto my wit:
But for my legs I know not how they stand,
Are my bonesstiffe still, not broken?
Enter Mulleasses. Ha?

he falls again. Mull. I am at last freed of my lustful love,
My hope is yet despair will arm her hands
To her own death, and save my sword a labor:
If not, it is but the taking back of what I gave,
And send her once again into her grave.
Now for my Iulia, she is the maine of all,
Her will I ceaze and keep, until the Fleet
Now under sail for Florence be ariu'd,
From the grand Signior sent to make me strong,
And get command upon the straights: how soere
It Was promised Borgias to make strong his part,
Against the Dukes: she being had,
My title's firm for Florence, their claime's bad.
Eunuch.

Enter Ferrara disguisd. Ferr. Your pleasure.

Mul. See you this body?

Ferr. I do.

Mul. Convey it to his bed there let it lie,
The murder I Will transport upon the Dukes,
Or on some treason by their means contrived:
See it be done.

Ferr. It shall.

Mull. Now unto Iulia, on her lies my state,
If she consents: why so: if not I know
Death and command makes women's hearts to bow. Exit

Ferr. The death of slaves pursue thee. hah Borgias,
Protector: true true: clap clap ye furies,
Dance your black rounds, and with your iron whips,
Fetching eternal lashes as you skip
Strike a loud sounding music through the air,
And make the night Queen pale to hear your noise.
Be peaceful wronged Ghost where soere thou be,
Post to the blessed fields where souls take rest:
Drink Lethe freely for thou art reuengd.
Come thou enclosure of a damned soul,
I Will be obedient bear to thy bed,
Then in my chamber laugh that thou art dead.
Ferrara takes up Borgias, Borgias draws out Ferraras dagger and stabs him
with it. What sudden pain assaults my yielding heart?

Borg. Ha ha, ha, you will bear me to my bed,
Then in your chamber laugh that I am dead.

Ferr. Live thou damnd villain?

Borg. I live, and laugh vilde slave to see thy fall,
This is the enclosure of a damned soul,
Villain thou shall not breath another word.

Ferr. Stay but a minute longer, know that I have
Thy promise and thy oath to be my guard,
Thy slave I murdered and assumd his shape,
I am Ferrara.

Borg. Ferrara, ha? true true, clap clap ye furies
Dance your black rounds, and with your iron whips,
Fetching eternal lashes as ye skip,
Strike a loud sounding music through the air
And make the nights Queen pale to hear your noise:
You have my oath and promise for your guard:
So wise men promise fools, but their reward
Like thine Ferrara is the loss of breath.

Ferr. Justice I thee implore, revenge my death

Borg. Mulleasses thinks me dead, and in his plots
Goes on securely: I Will return his policies,
And upon him transport Ferraras murder.
My wife he has forsook: that sweetens danger
That I but live to see revenge on her.
My weak force built upon the Turkish fleet,
I see is ruind, and I but undermined:
No hope is left save in mine own command
And power with the state: whose light credulity,
I easily did delude with Iulias death.
But yet Timoclea lives, and may perhaps
Escape her false loves hate: which if she do,
This black nights horror falls like thunder on me:
She must not live till day: be ever dark.
Stand night upon the noonestead: and attend
My fates security: if ever blacknes pleased
Or deeds to which men may resemble thee,
Turn then thy sooty horse, and with their feet,
Beat at the rising morn: and force the Sun,
Forbear his luster till this black deed's done. Exit.

Finis Actus quart.
Actus 5 Scena I.
Enter Timocleasola. Timo. HEll and ye furies wheresoere you be,
show me your tortures, and present your selves
Or let the burning monarch clad in flame,
Make an infernal echo to my name.
I know not what I say: Timoclea wronged,
Loue-slighted and contemned: O my wish!
That like the crosse-eyd witch of Thessaly
My voice could through the riuets of the earth
Hollo and call revenge: or rather: what?
My dangerous ghost attired like Nemesis
About her middle for a virgin Zone
Girt with a forckt-tooth'd serpent, vent at my breast
That did exceed a stepdame in my lust.
Forbear yet gentle maid; thy fathers soul
Kneels at the brazen Throne of Radamanth
And craves that office: Whither am I borne?
Despair, thou art a false glass to the soul,
And in the conscience dazeld with thy guilt
Of many sins, do vary forms of fear.
I not believe thy forced suggestions,
I am seduced by passion: death and terror.

Borg. Error, within.

Timo. False air thou lie I err not: my loves wrong
I Will tear out of my breast: forget those hopes
Made my hands bloody: I am cleare^ unstained:

Borg. Staind:

Timo. Forbear thy thunder gentle, gentle voice,
Beat not my conscience torments against the walls,
To make the Court ring with thy clamorous answers:
Heavens let my tears redeem me unto life.

Borg. Life.

Timo. Of my terror: I desire not: speak of death.

Borg. Death.

Timo. Of my daughter: how easy through the air
Our sins are hurried: thou can tell of murder.

Borg. Murder.

Timo. I of my husband: night thy cole-blacke wings
Though darker then the Moons ecclipsed browe
Are not fit Canopies for sin.

Enter Borgias. Borg. Timoclea.

Timo. Distraction of my soul, who breathes my name!

Borg. The airy breath of him that sometime lived
A tenant in the breast of Borgias,
By thee driven out the frame and house of life.

Timo. By me

Borg. And now like one whom stern oppression throws
Naked out of all he did possess: being tobd and spoild
Of the warm covert he inhabited,
I sigh my helpelesse wrongs^ and in the air
Counting all hope I had, find all despair.

Timo. Despair.

Borg. And empty longings for an end of pain,
Which I still wish and crave.

Timo. But never gain.

Borg. Never.

Timo. Forgive me.

Borg. Ask it of the heavens,
To whom my blood with ceasseles clamours calls
For Justice and revenge.

Timo. Justice in heaven is like my sin against thee
Cruel: and sooner may I with my knees
Eat through the center: from these pearly eyes
Should there fall down more tears of penitence
Then the clouds drop to purchase a new spring
I could not be forgiven.

Borg. Death is the winter dombd unto thy soul
Disrobe it of that warm and wanton flesh,
The mouth of Justice bids Timoclea dye.

Timo. Be thou then justice executioner
Reuengefull spirit: in this flesh of mine
Carue thy revenge in carracters of blood
Blast me: or from the centers hollow deep
Let loose some coniur'd tempests: whose loud storms
Driven through the air sings horror to the world,
And let them hurl me against the laboring clouds
Sink to the brazen-gated deep Abisse,
Where furies sit curling their snakes in knots,
And pull a viper from Alectos head,
And on these breasts that in thy heat of life,
Have been as pillowes to advance thy lust
Let it suck freely: the AEgiptian Queen
Nere dyed more daring.
And to the stern commissioners of blood,
Be a glad Hermes: tell them, Timoclea
Takes vengeance on her selfe^ dull Element be gone.

Borg. The mornings saffron horse breathes from the East
Their spicy vapors, sucked from th'ndian plains
And through the gentle air hurl their perfumes.
I hear the Suns steedes trot toward the milky way,
And in a Coach of flames draw up the day:
Aurorat usher to the stars of night,
Tells the approaching of the God of light:
They gin to twinckle and take in their fires
At their eclipse we spirits leave the air,
And in a dismal vale of darkness groan,
Under the burden of a thousand chains:
I must away, thou only do detayne me,
With want of vengeance, which thy death must gain me.

Tim. It shall, it shall:
Hard hap of misery, it has many hands,
That like the windings of a laborinth,
Leads the despayring wretch into a maze:
But not an Ariadn^ in the world,
That lends a clewe to led us out the world.
The very maze of horror.
Cease thou that stands first mouer of the Spheres
From whose high concaue all inferior fires
Derive successiue motion.
Stand ye night-wandring planets in a maze,
And from your hollow Fabrics vewe Timoclea,
Or else ye heavens put in your flaring lights,
And on your azure-seiled arches hang
A rauen-blacke Canopy of congealed clouds
That you may seem a Chaos to the world,
And boade eternal darkness: thou were not made to kill,
Looks on her hair displayed. Nor was the Diadem of her Ponticke Queen
Made as a fatal instrument of death,
And yet it was the engine stop her breath
As thou must mine. Soul of Borgias
Thus to thy ghost I sacrifice my life,
To buy thy requiem.

Borg. I accept it wife.
He strangles her with her own hair. And thus return the fall of Borgias.
Nay nay repent not dear Timoclea,
You Are caught in faith: th^n like a Lioness
Snared in the wary hunters tangled toils,
Grind the thin air: swell higher till thou burst,
And let the breath that like a vapor pressed
Struggle within thy bosom, hurl the up.
Soft -- the time spends fast, and I have much to think of
Before the tell-tale god displaies his light,
To show the world the horror of this night.
First for thy death the lustful Turk must dye,
My rival in the love of Iulia.
Him I Will accus^ for murdring thee. The Dukes
Because his claim may alienate my hopes
Him in my accusation I will join
As joint coagent in the Turk devises.
As for that rumor of fair Iulias death,
I Will first proclaim her life: and on Mulleasses
(Who now detaines her) will transfer the falsehood,
As if my self had been by him deluded:
These mazes when like Theseus I have trod^
Fortune shall spread her wings to make me sails,
And with a strong air cut the angry tide,
That into mountains swells to stay my pride.
H^h! what heavy noise beats through my ears?
Hang heavy Morpheus on the eyes of men,
And make suspicion sleep.

Enter Philenzo and Phego. Philen. The rumors strange I pray possess me with
your propper knowledge.


Phego. You shall understand Sir, that according to my function, giving near
attendance to my Lady, she being fervently employed in the Lobby, about a
mixture or composure of (as we vulgarly term it) a posset: upon our first
entrance, ere we had relisht the sweet of her sweet, that is the fruit of her
labors, we were suddenly assailed by a she-goblin: to describe it Sir I am
not able, for my eyesight turned inward to look after my heart that was
running from my heels, yet thanks to the lancknesse of my calfe they made
reasonable haste.


Borg. Heart of all mischief see the Court is up,
Hell and the darkness keep me from their sight.

Philen. At midnight did Ferrara leave his chamber,
Heavens be his safety.

Phego. A ghost a ghost. Exit Borgia^


Philen. Pursue it where it goes: fear shall not stop me.
Follow me sir, I Will speak to it, though death
Ceaze on my life: it shall not loose mine eyes
Unless it sincke into the earth. Exit.

Phego. S'foot my office is italianated, I am feign to come behind.


Enter Bordello. Board. Was ever man thus distracted between the flesh and the
spirit? s'foot this Pill has so fiered my mansion that unless I light on some
water-worke, I shall loose the rain^s like a second Phaeton, and burn my
Fabric. Surely I am that Tantalus the hungry Poets talk of, and am as dry as
an Eele in a sand-bagge, and yet want water for the reaching: Let me see, why
should I fear spirits that have raised up such an able one at my pleasure,
that like a bold Orator stands on tip-toes to speak in Bar: and yet me
thinks he should be no good pleader, he was so suddenly dejected and out of
countenance with an apparition. I would the case were laid open, that I might
see how my young mooter would bestir himself: Ha: who is this? no more ghosts
I hope: if it be it is the more womanly of the two. She lies as if she knew
the end of her creation. On my life some waiting maid that has a Court
Epilepsie come upon her: I Will see if she foam at the mouth. Out and alas, the
heavens have conspired poor Bordellos overthrow. The virtuous Timoclea
wretched and most accursed hands, that have trust up my fortunes in thy
Elfe-knot.


Scaena 2.
Enter Duke of Venice, Lord Prusias Attend. Lord. THese apparitions do import
more weight
Then our distracted judgments can yet poize,
Yet mighty Duke suspend a while all fear
If both my power in state and worth in honor
May be sufficient gage to be your guarde
Then think you are in safety.

Ven. Sir we thank you: neither is there one
Known unto us in Florence, on whose worth,
I dard assure such safety as from you,
And to that end I brought this gentleman,
As well to acquaint you with this deep occurrence,
That much concerns your present state, as crave
A guard for our security against danger.

Prus. Respect your guard great Duke. Villain what art thou


Board. A most dejected parcel of man's flesh.


Prus. Lend your eyes and see
A deed as black as is the time that hides it:
A murdered gentlewoman.

Lord. Ignoble villain, could thy coward-arme
Presume the least wrong to her feeble sex?

Board. Wrong: heavens know I meant to have done her a^ much right as could
have been done to one of her sex.


Ven. Death has not changd her form: see her face,
You may discern her by her character.

Lord, She bears the image of Timocl^^
Wife hnto Borgias.

Ven. Soul of delusion, in this very shape
The ghost of Iulia was presented unto me.

Lord. Amazement and the giddy thought of fear
Run an unsteady circuit through my brain:
Thy fear and trembling does proclaim thy guilt.

Board. Alas Sir my shaking proceeds of a standing ague I have had this two
hours.


Lord. The time importunates and craves sudden counsel.
Guard ceaze him safe, some bear this body hence,
We Will unto Borgias chamber, him we will wake,
Acquaint him with the ground of our suspicion:
Mean time be safe in me: nor love nor life
Shall turn mine honors current: I Will be your guard:
This hand seems your person, or my sword
Shall in the Traitors heart make good my word. Exeunt.

Scena 3.
Enter Mulleasses and Iulia etc. Iuli. IF thou be humane, then forsake thy
suit
Your words are strange to me: my virgin ears
Nere knew such sound: desist I will not bow.

Mull. We loose all pleasure that we do not know
Then like Pandora view those heavenly gifts.
The Gods have decked thee with: See but thy self
And taste more pleasure from thy proper good
Then from the full horn of the Protean flood:
Elisium is in thee, and I implore --

Iuli. Sirens have left the Sea and sing on shore.

Mull. Could I out-^ing those Sirens Iulia,
Or were my voice as tunefull as that harp
That now vies music with the harmonious orbs,
To which each learned Sister naild a star,
Thou might with safety hear me: thy Uncles love
Cold as the white head of the Apennine
feels not my fire: ambition of rule
Tu^nes all the heat is left in him to incest.
If thy warm blood (that dallies in thy veins,
And through thy flesh like wanton riuile^s plays)
Desires with Nyle to rise above her banks,
And vent in pleasure on the neighboring plains;
A carpet richer then the breast of Tempe,
Or Tagus yellow channel, shall be spread
And pr^st with Iulias weight.
Nor the blew Sea-god when in storms he treads
On pea^les as Orient as the rising East,
For which the toyling Negro dives in vain,
Are boasted of such wealth: thy bed as ^oft
As down feathers plucked from Ledas swannes,
Shall yield unto thy dalliance,
A hundred boys like winged Cherubins
As fair as Psiches love shall --

Iu^ia. Enough, too much: I am not fit for pleasure
Or if I were thy Mermaid eloquence
Sounds harsher in my ears then Sillas dogs
Unto the frighted Seaman.

Mul. Lady.

Iulia. Heathen profane.

Mull. Be gentle Madam.

Iulia If thou be gentle leave me Mahomet
Our loves like our religions are at wars
And I disclaim all peace.

Mull. And I a lovers smoothnes: your Uncles dead
His power is mine, and you must go.

Iulia. Soul of wrongs: whither? you are both to weak
There Is more then woman in me: villain, slave:

Mul. You urge me unto violence come to my chamber.

Iulia. In hell or in my grave: a rape, treason: treason.

Lord. A guard, a guard.

Mull. Death of my hope the Court is up.

Enter Lord, Venice, and attendants: wi^h Bordello bound. Ven. From hence the
voice was heard, be circumpect.

Iulia. Treason, treason.

Lord. Who speaks that word?

Iulia. Iulia your Sovereign.

Mul. Scilence or thou dyest.

Lord. Error of darkness in what Labirinth
Our souls are plunged: raise the Court: Iulia?

Iul. I.

Ven. Iulia and Mulleasses?

Mul. Iulia and Mulleasses fond Venitian
Prevented at the point of hapines:

Ven. Thus I redeem her.

Mul. And like Cephalus kill thine own Procris.

Iul. Save me.

Lord. Thy death shall be her freedom infidel.

Mul. Why stop you in your courses short breathed Christians?
Nail us together. Now me thinks I stand
L^k^ a pro^d Lion with a richer prize
Then N^ssus would have stolen from Hercules
And dare your enuies: my death unto your state
S^albe as ominous as his poysond shirt:
Your false Protec^or's dead: ^e mocked your griefs
And made you we^pe at Iulias f^nerall,
Who^e hope I vnderwrought, and now had worn
The wreath of Florence: Love and ambition,
Kindled my cold brain from their mutual heat
Sprung my aspiring aim: nor shall it sincke
But in the death of Iulia: since I cannot
Quench my hot thi^st of Lust, and cool the heat
That hotter then the coals of Parta
Burn in my liver: like the snowy Dragon,
Tangling the El^phant in his snarled orbs:
I Will dye in the pursuit of my desire,
And mix our bloods in death to sat my fire,

Ven. Hold monster.

Lord. Damnation on thy soul.

Ven. Thy death shall ransom her.

Mul. Death double thy feared force, and it some form
Affright pale Hecate darken the Moon,
I like the Sun, backed on The Arcadian beast,
When in his burning progress he did sindge
Adonis gardens: from my souls fair light
Chase cloudy fear: and like Thetis son,
When he was oynted with Ambrosia^
Am more then fire-proofe: lives Iulia yet?

Ven. She lives damned villain and out-liues thy hate.

Mull. Death had been kind in her: with her I might
Under the cool shades of Elisium
Played before Pluto and made Proserpine
As jealous as Juno of my love --
But since I must not

Enter Borgias Philenzo, Phego. Borg. Up from the dark earths exhalations
Thicker then Lernas foggy mists and hide me:
I cannot loose their sight, hell of fear!

Phil. It flies our eager steps: follow, follow.

Lord. What means these clamours: Borgias?

Mul. Hah, Borgias:

Borg. Horror of ^oules I am surprizd.

Mull. Illusiue air, false shape of Borgias,
Could thy vain shadow work a fear in him
That like an Atlas underwent the earth
When with a firm and constant eye he saw
Hells fifty headed Porter: thus I Would prove
Thy apparition idle: -- runs at Borgias.

Borg. Treason: I live: Devils and Furies I am slain.

Lord. Wonder of admiration: what distraction is this?

Mul. Ha ha, ha: climb high my mounting spirit
And when thou have aspird to thy full hight
Like a Collossus on a base of clouds
Stand and applaud thy fortunes: Borgias

Borg. Grin'st hellish Anticke?

Mul. Should the Cecropian thief stretch my torn flesh
Rackt on his bed of steel: if on Caucasus
My growing liver were exposd a prey
To ravening Vulturs: I would still laugh
To see thee like a falling Pine Tree reele
In a rough tempest.

Borg. Hold up ye broken organs of my soul
Carry me high and make me stand as firm
As Oaks on Ossa: that advance their tops
Even till their roots break. Timoclea

Mull. For love of me killed her own child
Thy daughter Amada.

Lord. Amazement!

Borg. Blessed fates I thank you: I shall dye revenged
Fly, Jove loved Nemesis and at Justice feet
Shake thy triumphall Ash: I slew Timoclea

Mull. By thee before thought dead
I took her from the hearse of Iulia,
When in the habit of a murdered ghost,
This night she appeared to the Duke, to breed
Suspect in them of thee, and arm their hate
Unto my plotted faction.

Ven. Damnd illusion.

Lord. Where is Ferrara?

Phil. Heavens be his guard.

Borg. So they are. He killed my sl^ue
And in his habit by this hand he dyed.

Phil. False periurd villain. He runs at him.

Borg. Sink, sink Cytheron, high P^ll^ne tremble
Green Tempe wither, and with me forgo
Your place and being, this whole world of flesh
With ^atall earthquakes totters.
False Turk thy fate be but as cruel as is Borgias hate. moritur.

Mul. Stoop down thou Lydian mount, bend thy cold head
And hide it in thy brackish fathers waves
That as thou shrinkst, thy starry load may nod
At Mulleasses fall: or ever shroude
Those joyful bonfires in a mourning cloud. moritur.

Ven. Just end of treason.

Lord. Madame our duties joy your life
And wish your happiness.

Ven. As the just reward of danger.
My Lord I claim her love.

Lord. Not without Justice brave Venecian
She is herself and free.

Iulia. And thus I give my self.

Lord. Heavens seal it for the the good of both our states.

Ven. Philenzo:
We can but grieve at great Ferraras loss:
Ambassadors from us shall plead our sorrows
Even to your Senats: mean time his obsequies
Shall want no honor: Signior Bordello
We give you liberty: what remains undone
Shall by the Senate be confirmed: lead on.

FINIS.

