THE CITY MATCH.

A COMOEDYE.

PRESENTED TO THE KING and QVEENE AT WHITE HALL.

ACTED SINCE AT BLACKFRIARS BY HIS MAJESTY'S Servants.

HORAT. de Art Poet. Versibus exponi Tragicis res Comica non vult.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the UNIVERSITY.

Anno Dom. M. DC. XXXIX.

TO THE READER
THe Author of this Poem, knowing how hardly the best things protect themselves
from censure, had no ambition to make it this way public. Holding works of
this light nature to be things which need an Apology for being written at all.
Nor esteeming otherwise of them, whose abilities in this kind are most
passable, then of Masquers, who spangle, and glitter for the time, but it is
through tinsell. As it was merely out of Obedience that he first wrote it, so
when it was made, had it not been commanded from him, it had died upon the
place, where it took life. Himself being so averse from raising fame from the
stage, that at the prefentment, he was one of the severest spectators there;
nor ever showed other sign whereby it might be known to be his, but his
liberty to despise it. Yet he has at length consented it should pass the
Press; not with an Aim to purchase a new Reputation, but to keep that which
he has already from growing worse. For understanding that some at London,
without his Approbation or allowance, were ready to print a false, imperfect
Copy, he was loath to be libelled by his own work; or that his Play should
appear to the world with more then its own faults. Farewell.

THE PROLOGVE TO THE KING AND QUEEN.
THE Author, Royal Sir, so dreads this Night,
As if for writing he were doomd to th'sight.
Or else, unless you do protect his fame,
Y' had saved his Play, and sentenced him to the flame.
For though your name, or power, were ith'reprive,
Such works, he thinks, are but condemned to live.
Which, for this place being rescued from the fire,
Take ruin from th'advancement, and fall higher.
Though None, he hopes, sit here upon his wit,
As if he Poems did, or Plays commit.
Yet he must needs fear censure, that fears praise,
Nor would write still were to succeed in the Bays.
For he is not oth' trade, nor would excel
In this kind, where it is lightness to do well.
Yet as the Gods refined base things, and some
Beasts foul in the Heard grevv pure in the Hecatombe;
And as the Ox prepared, and crowned Bull
Are Offerings, though kept back, and Altars full:
So, Mighty Sir, this sacrifice being near
The Knife at Oxford, which y' have kindled here,
He hopes twill from you, and the Queen, grow clean,
And turn to Oblation, what He meant a Scene.
THE PROLOGVE AT BLACKFRIARS.
WEre it his trade, the Author bid me say,
Perchance he would beg you would be good to the Play.
And I, to set him up in Reputation,
Should hold a Basin forth for Approbation.
But praise so gained, He thinks, were a Relief
Able to make his Comoedy a Brief.
For where your pity must your judgment be,
It Is not a Play, but you fired houses see.
Look not his quill, then, should petitions run;
No Gathering's here into a Prologue spun.
Whither their sold Scenes be dislikt, or hit,
Are cares for them who eat by the stage, and wit.
He Is One, whose unbought Muse did never fear
An Empty second day, or a thin share;
But can make the Actors, though you come not twice,
No Loosers, since we act now at the Kings price.
Who has made this Play public, and the same
Power that makes Laws, redeemed this from the flame.
For the Author builds no fame, nor does aspire
To praise, from that which he condemned to the fire.
He Is thus secure, then, that he cannot win
A Censure sharper then his own has been.
The Persons of the Play.
Warehouse. An old Merchant. Frank Plotwell. His Nephew. Cipher. His Factor.
Baneswright. Old Plotwell disguised. Madam Aurelia. Penelope Plotwell his
daughter. Seathrift. A Merchant. Ms Seathrift. His Wife. Timothy. His Son.
Dorcas. Susan Seathrift his daughter. Bright. Two Templers. Newcut. Two
Templers. Ms Scruple. A Puritan Schoolemistresse. Ms Holland. A Seamster on the
Exchange. Quartfield. A Captain. Salewit. A Poet. Roseclappe. One that keeps
an Ordinary. Mill. His wife. Prentice. Two Footmen. Boy that sings.
The SCENE LONDON.

ACTVS I.
SCENA I.
Warehouse. Seathrift. I Promise you 'twill be a most rare plot.
Ware-h. The City, Mr Seathrift, never yet
Brought forth the like; J would have them that have
Fined twice for Sheriff mend it.

Seath. Mend it? Why
It Is past the wit oth' Court of Aldermen.
Next Merchant Tailor that writes Chronicles
Will put us in.

Ware-h. For, since I took him home,
Though, Sir, my Nephew, as you may observe,
Seem quite transfigur'd, be as dutiful
As a new prentice; in his talk declaime
Against revelling Companions, be as hard
To be enticed from home as my door posts*
This reformation may but be his part,
And he may act his virtues. I have not
Forgot his riots at the Temple. You know Sr --

Seath. You told me Mr Warehouse.

Ware-h. Not the sea
When it devoured my ships cost me so much
As did his vanities. A voyage to the Indyes
Has been lost in a night. His daily suits
Were worth more then the stock that set me up.
For which he knew none but the Silk-mans book,
And studied that more then the Law. He had
His Loves too, and his Mistresses; was enterd
Among the philosophical Madams, was
As great with them as their Concerners, and I hear
Kept one of them in pension.

Seath. My son too
Has had his Errors; I could tell the time
When all the wine which I put off by whole sale
He took again in quarts, and at the day
Vintners have paid me with his large scores. But
He is reformed too.

Ware-h. Sr, we now are friends
In a design.

Seath. And hope to be in time
Friends in Alliance, Sir.

Ware-h. I Will be free,
I think well of your son.

Seath. Who, Timothy?
Believed a virtuous boy, and for his sister
A very Saint.

Ware-h. Mistake me not, I have
The like opinion of my Nephew, Sir,
Yet he is young, and so is your son, nor
Does the Church-book say they are past our fears.
Our presence is their bridle now: It Is good
To know them well whom we do make our Heirs.

Seath. It is most true.

Ware-h. Well, and how shall we know
How They will use their fortune, or what place
We have in their affection without trial?
Some wise men build their own Tombs, let us try
If we were dead whether our Heirs would cry,
Or their long clokes: this plot will do it.

Seath. Twill make us
Famous upon the Exchange for ever. I Will home
And take leave of my wife and son.

Ware-h. And I Will
Come to you at your Garden house* within there. Ex. Seath.

Enter Cipher. SCENA II.
Warehouse. Cipher. Now Cipher, where is my Nephew?
Cyph. In the Hall
Reading a letter which a footman brought
Just now to him from a Lady Sir.

Ware-h. A Lady?

Cyph. Yes, Sir, a Lady in distress; for I
Could overheare the fellow say she must
Sell her Coach Horses, and return again
To her Needle, if your Nephew not supply her
With money.

Ware-h. This is some honorable seamstresse.
I Am now confirmd: They say he keeps a Lady,
And this is she. well Cipher, it is too late
To change my project now. Be sure you keep
A Diary of his Actions, strictly mark
What company comes to him, if he stir
Out of my house observe the place he enters.
Watch him till he come out: follow him disguised
To all his haunts.

Cyph. He shall not want a spy Sir.
But Sir when you are absent if he draw not
A Lattice to your door, and hang a bush out --

Ware-h. I hope he will not make my house a Tavern.

Cyph. Sir I Am no Sybils son.

Ware-h. Peace here he comes. Enter Plotwell in a sad posture.

SCENA III.
Warehouse. Plotwell. Cipher. Good morrow Nephew: how now? sad? how comes
This melancholy?
Plotw. Can I choose but wear
Clouds in my face when I must venture, Sir,
Your reverend age to a long doubtful voyage
And not partake your dangers?

Ware-h. Fie, these fears
Though they become you, Nephew, are ominous.
When heard you from your Father?

Plotw: Never since
He made the escape Sir.

Ware-h. I hear he is in Ireland:
Is It true he took your sister with him?

Plotw. So
Her Mistress thinks, Sir, one day she left the Exchange,
And has not since been heard of.

Ware-h. And Nephew
How like you your new course? which place prefer you
The Temple or Exchange? where are, think you,
The wealthier Mines in the Indies, or
Westminster Hall?

Plotw. Sir my desires take measure
And form from yours.

Ware-h. Nay tell me your mind plainly,
In The City tongue. I Would have you speak like Cipher.
I do not like queint figures, they do smell
Too much o'th Innes of Court.

Plotw. Sir, my obedience
Is ready for all impressions which --

Ware-h. Again?

Plotw. Sir I prefer your kind of life, a Merchant

Ware-h. It Is spoken like my Nephew: Now I like you.
Nor shall I ere repent the benefits
I have bestowed, but will forget all Errors, Exit Cyph.
As mere seducements: And will not only be
An Uncle but a Father to you: But then
You must be constant, Nephew.

Plotw. Else I were blind
To my good fortune, Sir.

Ware-h. Think man how it may
In time make thee oth' City Senate, and raise thee*
To the sword and Cap of Maintenance.

(Plotw. Yes, and make me
Sentence light bread, and pownds of butter on horseback.)

Ware-h. Have Gates and Conduits dated from thy year*
Ride to the Spittle on thy free beast.

(Plotw. Yes,
Free of your Company.)

Ware-h. Have the people veil
As low to his trappings as if he thrice had fined
For that good times employment.

(Plotw. Or as if
He had his Riders vvisdome.)

Ware-h. Then the works
And good deeds of the City to go before Thee,
Besides a troop of Varlets.

(Plotw. Yes, and I
To sleep the sermon in my Chain and Scarlet.

Ware-h. How say you? Lets hear that.

Plotw. I say, Sir, I
To sit at sermon in my chain and scarlet.

Ware-h. It Is right, and be remembered at the Cross.

Plotw. And then at Sessions, Sir, and all times else,
Master Recorder to save me the trouble,
And understand things for me.

Ware-h. All this is possible,
And in the stars and winds: therefore dear Nephew,
You shall pursue this course, and to enable you
In this half year that I shall be away,
Cipher shall teach you French, Italian, Spanish,
And other Tongues of Traffic

Plotw. Shall J not learn
Arithmetic too, Sir, and shorthand?

Ware-h. It Is well
Remembered, yes, and Navigation. Enter Cipher.

Cyph. Sir, Mr Seathrift says you 'will loose the tide,
The boat stays for you.

Ware-h. Well, Nephew, at my return
As J hear of your carriage, you do know
What my intentions are; and for a Token
How much I trust your reformation,
Take this key of my Counting House, and spend
Discreetly in my absence. Farewell. Nay
No tears* I Will be here sooner then you think on it
Cipher you know what you have to do.

Cyph. I warrant you, Sr.

Plotw. Tears? yes my melting eyes shall run, but it Exit
Shall be such tears as shall increase the tide
To carry you from hence.

Cyph. Come Mr Plotwell shall I
Read to you this morning.

Plotw. Read what? how the price.
Of sugar goes, how many pints of Olives
Go to a jarre, how long wine works at sea,
What difference is in gain between fresh herrings
And herrings red?

Cyph. This is fine, ha you
Forgot your Uncles charge?

Plotw. Prithee what was it?

Cyph. To learn the Tongues and Mathematiques.

Pl. Troth
If I have tongue enough to say my prayers
In The phrase oth' Kingdom J care not; otherwise
I Am for no tongues but dried ones, such as will
Give a fine relish to my backragg; and for Mathematiques,
I hate to travail by the Map, Me thinks Enter* Bright and Newcut.
It Is riding post.

Cyph. I knew twould come to this.
Here be his Camerades.

Plotw. What my Fleetstreet friends?

Exit Cipher. SCENA IV.
To Him Bright and Newcut. Br. SAve you Merchant Plotwell.

Newc. Mr Plotwell
Citizen and Merchant, save you.

Br. Is thy Uncle
Gone the wished voyage?

Plotw. Yes, he is gone, and if
He dye by the way has bequeathd me but some
Twelve hundred pound a year in Kent, some three-
Score thousand pound in money, besides Jewels, Bonds,
And desperate debts.

New. And do not thou fall down
And pray to the winds to sacrifice him to
Poor John and Mackrell?

Br. Or invoke some rock
To do thee justice?

New. Or some compendious Canon
To take him off in the middle?

Plotw. And why my tender
Softhearted friends?

Br. What to take thee from the Temple
To make thee an old Juryman, a Whittington?

New. To transform thy plush to pennystone, and scarlet
Into a velvet Jacket which has seen
Aleppo twice, is known to the great Turk,
Has escaped three shipwracks to be left off to thee,
And knows the way to Mexico as well as the Map?

Br. This Jacket surely was employed in finding
The Northeast passage out. Or the same Jacket
That Coryat died in.

Plotw. Very good.

New. In Ovid
There is not such a Metamorphosis
As thou art now. To be turned into a tree
Or some handsome beast is courtly to this.
But for thee, Franck, O Transmutation!
Of Satin changed to Kersy hose I sing.
Slid his shoes shine too.

Br. They have the Gresham dye.
Do thou not dress thy self by 'em? I can see
My face in them hither.

Plotw. Very pleasant Gentlemen.

Br. And faith for how many years art thou bound?

Plotw. Do you take me for a prentice?

New. Why then what office
Do thou bear in the parish this year? Let Us feel,
No batteries in thy head to signify
Thou Art Constable?

Br. No furious Judge broke on it
In the Kings name?

Plotw. Did you contrive this scene
By the way Gentlemen?

New. No, but the News
Thou should turn Tradesman, and this Pagan dress,
In which if thou should dye thou would be damned
For an Usurer, is comicall at the Temple.
We were about to bring in such a fellow
For an Apostate in our Antimasque.
Set one to keep the door, provide halfe-crowne rooms,
For I Will set bills up of thee, what shall I
Give thee for the first day?

Br. I, or second?
For thou't endure twice or thrice coming in.

Plotw. Well my conceipted Orient friends, bright Offsprings
Oth' female silkworme, and Tailor male I deny not
But you look well in your unpaid for Glory.
That in these colors you set out the Strand,
And adorn Fleet Street. That you may laugh at me
Poor Working day oth' City, like two Festivals
Escapt out of the Almanacke.

New. Sirrah Bright,
Did look to hear such language beyond Ludgate?

Br. I thought all wit had ended at Fleet-bridge.
But wit that goes oth' the score, that may extend
If It be a Courtiers wit into Cheapside.

Plotw. Your Mercer lives there does he? I warrant you
He has the patience of a burnt Heretic:
The very faith that sold to you these silks
And thinks you will pay for em is strong enough
To save the Infidel part oth' world, or Antichrist.

Br. We Are most mechannically abused.

New. Let Us tear
His Jacket off.

Br. A match take that side

Plotw. Hold, hold.

Br. How frail a thing old velvet is, it parts They tear off his Iacket
With as much ease and willingness as two Cowards.

New. The tenderst weed that ever fell a sunder.

Plotw. Ha you your wits? what mean you?

Br. Go, put on
One of thy Temple suits and accompany us,
Or else thy Dimmity breeches be mortal.

Plotw. You will
Not strip me will you?

New. By thy visible ears we will.

Br. By this two handed Beaver; which is so thin
And light a Butterflies wings put to it would make it
A Mercuries flying hat and soar aloft.

Plotw. But do you know to how much danger
You tempt me? should my Uncle know I come
Within the air of Fleet Street --.

New. Will you make
Your self fit for a coach again, and come
Along with us?

Plotw. Well my two resolute friends
You shall prevail. But whether now are your
Lewd motions bent?

New. Weel' dine at Roseclaps, there
We shall meet Captain Quartfield, and his Poet,
They shall show us another fish.

Br. But by the way we have agreed to see.
A Lady, you Mechanic.

Plotw. What Lady?

New. Have
Not thou heard of the New-sprung Lady?

Br. One
That keeps her Coachman, Footboy, woman, and spends
A thousand pound a year by wit.

Plotw. How? wit?

New. That is her patrimony, Sir; it is thought
The fortune she is borne to will not buy
A bunch of Turnips.

Plotw. She is no Gamester is she?
Nor carries false dice?

Br. No, but has a Tongue,
Were in a Lawyers mouth, would make him buy
All young Heirs near him.

Plotw. But does no man know
From whence she came?

Br. As for her birth she may
Choose her own pedigree; it is unknown
Whither she be descended of some Ditch,
Or Duchess.

New. She Is the wonder of the Court,
And talk oth' Town.

Plotw. Her name?

New. Aurelia.

Plotw. I Have heard of her. They say she does fight duells,
And answers challenges in wit.

Br. She has been
Thrice in the field.

Plotw. In The the field?

New. Yes, in Spring Garden.
Has conquered with no second but her woman.
A Puritan, and has returned with prizes.

Plotw. And no drum beat before her?

New. No, nor Colors
Flourisht. She has made a vow never to marry
Till she be won by Stratagem.

Plotw. I long
To see her.

Br. In The name of Guild Hall who comes here?

Enter Timothy. SCENA V.
To them Timothy. Tim. By your leave Gentlemen.

Plotw. Mr Timothy!
Welcome from the New world. I looked you should
Ha past through half the signs in Heaven by this.
And ha converst with Dolphins. What not gone
To sea with your Father?

Tim. No faith, I do not love
To go to sea, it makes one lousy, lays him
In wooden sheets, and lands him a preservative
Against the plague. Besides, my Mother was
Afraid to venture me.

Plotw. Believed she is wise,
Not to trust such a wit to a thin frail barck
Where you had saild within three inches of
Becoming a Jonas. Besides the tossing, to have
All the fierce blustering faces in the Map
Swell more tempestuously upon you then
Lawyers preferrd, or Trumpeters. And vvhither
Were you bound now?

Tim. I only came to have
Your judgment of my suit.

Plotw. Surely the Tailor
Has done his part.

Tim. And my mother has done hers,
For she has paid for it. I never durst be seen
Before my Father out of Duretta and Serge.
But if he catch me in such paltry stuffes,
To make me look like one that lets out money,
Let him say Timothy was borne a fool.
Before he went he made me do what he list;
Now he is abroad I Will do what I list. What
Are these two? Gentlemen?

Plotw. You see they wear
Their Heraldry.

Tim. But I mean can they roar,
Beat Drawers, play at dice, and court their Mistress.
I mean forthwith to get a Mistress.

Plotw. But
How comes this, Mr Timothy, you did not
Rise such a gallant this morning.

Tim. Alls on for that.
My Mother lost her Maidenhead that I
Might come first into the world; and by Gods lid
I Will bear my self like the elder brother, I.
Do You think I Will all days of my life frequent
Saint Antlins, like my sister? Gentlemen
I covet your acquaintance.

Br. Your servant, Sir.

New. I shall be proud to know you.

Tim. Sir, my knowledge
Is not much worth; I me borne to a small fortune,
Some hundred thousand pound, if once my Father
Held up his hands in Marble, or kneeld in brass.
What are you Inns of Court-men?

New. The Catechism
Were false should we deny it.

Tim. I shall shortly
Be one my self, I learn to dance already,
And wear short clokes; I mean in your next Masque
To have a part, I shall take most extremely.

Br. You will inflame the Ladies, Sir. They Will strive
Who shall most privately convey Jewels.
Into your hand.

New. This is an excellent fellow;
Who is it?

Plotw. Rich Seathrifts son that's gone to sea
This morning with my Uncle.

Br. Is this he
Whose sister thou should marry? The wench that brings
Ten thousand pound.

Plotw. My Uncle would fain have me,
But I have cast her off.

Br. Why?

Plotw. Faith she is handsome,
And had a good wit, but her Schoole-Mistresse
Has made her a rank Puritan.

New. Lets take him
Along with us and Captain Quartfield shall show him.

Plotw. Twill be an excellent Comoedy, and afterward
I have a project on him.

Tim. Gentlemen
Shall we dine at an Ordinary? You
Shall enter me among the Wits.

Plotw. Sir, I
Will but shift cloths then we will associate you.
But first you shall with us and see a Lady,
Rich as your Fathers chests and odd holes; and
Fresh as Pygmalions Mistress newly wakened
Out of her Alablaster.

Tim. Lead on;
I long to see a Lady and to salute her.

Exeunt. ACTVS II.
SCENA I.
Aurelia. Dorcas. WHY we shall have you get in time the turn
Up of your Eyes, speak in the Nose, draw sighs
Of an ell long, and rail at Discipline.
Would I could hear from Baneswright, ere I Will be torturd
With your preciseness thus, I Will get dry palms
With starching, and put on my smocks my self.
Dor. Surely you may, and ayre'em too, there have been
Very devout and holy women that wore
No shift at all.

Aur. Such Saints you mean as wore
Their Congregations, and swarmed with Christian Vermin.
You Will hold clean linen Heresy?

Dor. Surely yes,
Clean linen in a Surplesse; That and powders
Do bring dry summers, make the sickness rage,
And the Enemy prevail, It was revealed
To Ms Scruple and her husband, who
Do verily ascribe the German war,
And the late persecutions, to curling,
False Teeth, and Oil of Talck.

Aur. Now she is in
A Lecturer will sooner hold his peace
Then she.

Dor. And surely, as Master Scruple says,

Aur. That was her Schoolmasters. One that cooles a feast
With his long grace, and sooner eats a Capon
Then blesses it.

Dor. And proves it very well
Out of a book that sufferd Martyrdom
By fire in Cheapside, since Amulets, and Bracelets,
And Love-locks were in use, the price of sprats,
Jerusalem Artichocks, and Holland Cheese,
Is very much increased, so that the Brethren,
Botchers I mean, and such poor zealous Saints,
As earne five groats a week under a stall,
By singing Psalms, and drawing up of holes,
Cannot live in their vocation, but are feign
To turn --

Aur. Old breeches.

Dor. Surely, Teachers and Prophets.

SCENA II.
To Them Baneswright. Aur. O Mr Baneswright, are you come? my woman
Was in her preaching fit, she only wanted
A Tables end.

Banesw. Why what is the matter?

Aur. Never
Poor Lady had so much unbred holiness
About her person; I am never dressed
Without a sermon, but am forct to prove
The lawfulness of curling irons before
She Will crisp me in a morning; I must show
Text for the fashions of my gowns, she will ask
Where Jewels are commanded, or what Lady
In The primitive times wore ropes of pearl or rubyes;
She will urge Counsels for her little ruff
Called in Northampton shire; and her whole service
Is a mere confutation of my clothes.

Banesw. Why Madam, I assure you time has been
However she be otherwise, when she had
A good quick wit, and would have made to a Lady
A serviceable sinner.

Aur. She cannot preserve
(The gift for which I took her) but (as though
She Were inspird from Ipswitch) she will make
The Acts and Monuments in sweetmeats; Quinces
Arraigned and burnt at a stake; all my banquets
Are persequutions, and Dioclesians days
Are brought for entertainment, and we eat Martyrs.

Banesw. Madam she is far gone.

Aur. Nay, Sir, she is
A Puritan at her needle too.

Banesw. Indeed?

Aur. She works religious petticoats; for flowers
She Will make Church Histories; her needle does
So sanctify my Cushionets, besides
My smock-sleeves have such holy imbroderies,
And are so learned, that I fear in time
All my apparel will be quoted by
Some pure Instructor. Yesterday I went
To see a Lady that has a Parrot, my woman
While I was in discourse converted the foul.
And now it can speak naught but Knoxes works,
So there is a parrot lost.

Banes. Faith Madam she
Was earnest to come to you, had I known
Her Mistress had so bred her I would first
Ha preferred her to new England.

Dor. Surely, Sir,
You promised me when you did take my money
To help me to a faithful service, a Lady
That would be saved. Not one that loves profane,
Unsanctified fashions.

Aur. Fly my sight
You gooddy Hofman, and keep your chamber till
You can provide your self some cure, or I
Will forthwith excommunicate your zeal,
And make you a silent waiting woman.

Banes. Ms Dorcas,
If you will be usher to that holy learned woman
That can heal broken shinnes, scald heads, and the Itch,
Your schoole-mistresse, that can expound, and teaches
To knit in Chaldee, and work Hebrew samplers,
I Will hlpe you back again.

Dor. The motion sure is good
And I will ponder of it.

Aur. From thy zeal, Ex. Dorcas.
The frantic Ladies judgments, and Histriomastix,
Deliver me. This was of your preferring,
You must needs help me to another.

Banes. How
Would you desire her qualified, deformed
And crooked like some Ladies, who do wear
Their women like black patches to set em of?

Aur. I need no foil, nor shall I think I Am white
Only between two Moors; or that my nose
Stands wrong, because my woman's does stand right.

Banes But you would have her secret, able to keep
Strange sights from the knowledge of your Knight when you
Are married, Madam, of a quick faining head?

Aur. You vvrong me, Baneswright, she whom I would have,
Must to her handsome shape have virtue too.

Banesw. Well Madam I shall fit you. I do know
A choleric Lady which within these three weeks
Has, for not cutting her corns well, put off
Three women; and is now about to part
With the fourth, just one of your description.
Next change oth' Moon, or vveather, when her feet
Do ache again, I do believe I shall
Pleasure your Ladyship.

Aur. Expect your reward.

Exit Baneswright. SCENA III.
To Her Bright, Newcut, Timothy, Plotwell. Tim. LAdy, let me taste the Elysium
of your lips.

Aur. Why what are you? you will not leap me, Sir,
Pray know your distance.

Tim. What am I sweet Lady?
My Father is an Aldermans fellow, and I
Hope to be one in time.

Aur. Then, Sir, in time
You may be remembered at the quenching of
Fired houses, when the bells ring backward, by
Your name upon the Buckets.

Tim. Nay they say
You have a good wit Lady, and I can find it
As Soon as another: I in my time have been
Oth' University, and should have been a scholar.

Aur. By the size of your wit, Sir, had you kept
To that profession, I can foresee
You would have been a great persecuter of Nature*
And great consumer of rush Candles, with
As small success, as if a Tortoise should
Day and night practice to run races: Having
Contemplated your self into ill looks,
In pity to so much affliction,
You might ha past for learned: and 't may be,
If you had fallen out with the Muses, and
Escaped Poetry, you might have risen to scarlet.

Tim. Here Is a rare Lady with all my heart, by this
Light Gentlemen, now have I no more language
Then a dumb parrot, a little more she will jeere me
Into a fellow that turns upon his toe
In a steeple and strikes quarters.

Br. And why should you
Be now so dainty of your lips? verily
They are not Virgins, they have tasted Man.

Aur. And may again but then I Will be secured,
For the sweet air oth' parties. If you
Will bring it me confirmed under the hands
Of four sufficient Ladies that you are
Clean men, you may chance kiss my woman.

New. Lady,
Our lips are made of the same clay that yours,
And have not been refused.

Aur. It Is right you are
Two Inns of Court-men.

Br. Yes, what then?

Aur. Known Cladders
Through all the Town.

Br. Cladders?

Aur. Yes, Catholic Lovers,
From Country Madams to your Glovers wife,
Or Laundresse; will not let poor Gentlewomen
Take physic quietly, but disturb their pills
From operation with your untaught visits.
Or if they be imployd, contrive small plots
Below stairs with the Chambermaid; commend
Her fragrant breath, which five yards of salutes,
At four deflowers a Rose, at three kills spiders.

New. What dangerous truths these are?

Aur. Ravish a lock
From the yellow waiting woman, use stratagems
To get her silver whistle, and way-lay
Her pewter knots or bodkin.

New. Pretty, pretty.

Br. You think you have abused us now?

Aur. I Will tell you,
Had I in all the world but forty Mark,
And that got by my needle and making socks;
And were that forty Mark Mil-sixpences,
Spurroyals, Harry groats, or such odd coin
Of husbandry as in the Kings reign now
Would never pass, I would despise you.

New. Lady,
Your wit will make you die a witherd virgin.

Br. We shall in time when your most tyrant tongue
Has made this house a wilderness, and you
As unfrequented as a states man fallen;
When you shall quarrel with your face and glass,
Till from your pencill you have raisd new cheeks,
See you beg suitors, write Bills ore your door,
Here is an ancient Lady to be let.

New. You think you are handsome now, and that your eyes
Make star-shooting, and dart?

Aur. 'Tmay be I do.

New. May I not prosper if I have not seen
A better face in signs, or ginger-bread.

Tim. yes, I for two pence often have bought a better.

Br. What a sweet innocent look you have!

Plotw. Fie gentlemen,
Abuse a harmless Lady thus, I cannot
With patience hear your blasphemies. Make me
Your second Madam.

Tim. And make me your third.

Aur. O prodigy to hear an Image speak.
Why, Sir, I took you for a Mute in the Hangings.
I Will tell the faces.

Tim. Gentlemen do I
Look like one of them Trojans?

Aur. It Is so, your face
Is missing here, Sir, pray step back again
And fill the number; you I hope have more
Truth in you then to filch your self away,
And leave my room unfurnisht.

Plotw. By this light
She Will send for a Constable straight and apprehend him
For the every.

Tim. Why Lady do you think me
Wrought in a Loome, some Dutch piece weavd at Mooreclack*

Aur. Surely you stood so simply, like a Man
Penning of Recantations, that I suspected
Y' had been a part of the Monopoly.
But now I know you have a tongue, and are
A very Man, I Will think you only dull,
And pray for better utterance.

Plotw. Lady you make
Rash judgment of him, he was only struck
With admiration of your beauty.

Tim. Truly
And so I was.

Aur. Then you can wonder, Sir?

Plotw. Yes when he sees such miracles as you.

Aur. And love me cannot you?

Tim. Love you? By this hand
I Would love a dog of your sweet looks; I am
Enamored of you Lady.

Aur. Ha, ha, ha, now surely
I wonder you wear not a cap; your case
Requires warm things, I Will send you forth a Cawdle. Exit.

Br. The plague of rotten teeth, wrincles, loud lunges
Be with you Madam.

Tim. Had I now pen and ink,
If I were urgd I Would feign know whether I
In conscience ought not to set down my self
No wiser then I should be.

Plotw. Gentlemen
How like you her wit?

Tim. Wit? I verily
Believe she was begotten by some wit;
And he that has her, may beget plays on her.

New. Her wit had need be good* it finds her house.

Tim. Her house? It Is able to find the Court, if she
Be chaste to all this wit, I do not think
But that she might be shown.

Br. She speaks with salt,
And has a pretty scornefulnesse, which now
I Have seen I Am satisfied.

New. Come then away;
To Roseclaps.

Tim. Lead on, Let us dine: This Lady
Runs in my head still.

Foot. Sir, My Lady prays. Enter a Footman.
You would dismiss your company, she has
Some business with you.

Plotw. Gentlemen walk softly,
I Will overtake you.

Br. Newcut 'slight her wit
is come to private meetings.

New. I, J thought
She had some other virtues. Well make have,
We Will stay without, when thou have done inform us
What the rate is; if she be reasonable
We Will be her Customers.

Plotw. You Are merry, Sir.

Ex. Br. New. Tim. Enter Aurelia. SCENA IV.
Plotwell. Aurelia. NAy sister you may enter, they are gone.
I did receive your ticket this morning. What?
You look the Mine should run still?
Aur. O you are
A careful brother, to put me on a course
That draws the eyes oth' Town upon me, and makes me
Discourse for Ordinaries, then leave me in it.
I will put off my Ladyship, and return
To M' Holland, and to making shirts,
And bands again.

Plotw. I hope you will not.

Aur. I
Repent I left the Exchange.

Plotw. Faith I should laugh
To see you there again, and there serve out
The rest of your Jndentures, by managing
Your Needle well, and making Night-caps, by
A Chafing dish in winter mornings, to keep
Your fingers pliant. How rarely 'twould become you
To run ore all your shop to passengers
In a fine sale tune?

Aur. What would you have me do?
Do You think I Am the Dutch Virgin that could live
By the sent of Flowers? Or that my family
Are all descended of Chameleons,
And can be kept with air? Js this the way
To get a husband to be in danger to be
Shut up for house-rent, or to wear a gown
Out a whole fashion, or the same Jewels twice?
Shortly my neighbors will commend my clothes,
For lasting well, give them strange dates, and cry
Since your last Gorget and the blazing star.

Plotw. Prithee excuse me sister, I can now
Rain showers of silver into thy lap again;
My Uncle's gone to sea, and has left me
The key to the golden fleece. Thou shall be still.
A Madam, Pen, and to maintain thy Honor,
And to new dub thee take this. But sister, I Gives her a Purse.
Expected you ere this out of the Throng
Of suitors that frequent you, should have been
Made a true Lady, not one in Type or show.
I fear you are too scornful, look too high.

Aur. Faith brother it is no age to be put off
With empty education; few will make Ioyntures
To wit or good parts. I may dye a Virgin,
When some old widow which at every cough
Resignes some of her teeth, and every night
Puts off her Leg as duly as french Hood,
Scarce wears her own Nose, has no eyes but such
As she first bought in Broad-street, and every morning
Is put together like some Instrument,
Having full Coffers shall be wooed, and thought
A youthful Bride.

Plotw. Why sister will you like
A Match of my projection? you do know
How ruinous our fathers fortunes are;
Before he broke you know there was a Contract
Between you and young Sea-thrift. What if I
Make it a wedding?

Aur. Marry a fool? in hope
To be a Lady Maioresse?

Plotw. Why sister, I
Could name good Ladies that are feign to find
Wit for themselves and Knights too.

Aur. I have heard
Of one whose husband was so meek, to be
For need her Gentleman usher, and while she
Made visits above stairs would patiently
Find himself business at Tre-trip in the Hall.

Plotw. He Is only City bred, one month of your
Sharp conversation will refine him; besides
How long wilt be ere your dissembled state
Meet such another offer?

Aur. Well Brother you shall
Dispose of my affections.

Plotw. Then sometime
This afternoon I Will bring him hither* do you
Provide the Priest; your Dining room will serve
As well as the Church.

Aur. I will expect you.

Exeunt several ways. SCENA V.
Enter Captain Quart-field beating Rose-clap. Sale-wit and Millicent laboring
to part 'em. Quart Sirrah, I Will beat you into air.

Ros. Good Captain.

Quartf. I will by Hector.

Ros. Murder, murder, help.

Quartf. You needy, shifting, cousning, breaking slave.

Mill. Nay, Mr Salewit, help to part 'em.

Salew. Captain.

Quartf. Ask me for money, dog?

Ros. Oh! I am killd.

Mill. Help. Help.

Salew. Nay Captain.

Q. Men of my coat pay?

Mill. Jle call in neighbors. Murder. Murder.

Q. Rascal
Jle make you trust and offer me petitions
To go oth' score.

Ros. Good, it is very good.

Mil. How does thy head sweetheart?

Ros. Away be quiet, Mill.

Salew. Roseclap, you will never leave this, I did tell you
Last time the Captain beat you what a Lion
He is being asked for reckonings.

Mill. So you did
Jndeed good Mr Salewit; yet you must
Ever be foolish husband.

Salew. What if we
Do owe you money, Sir, is it fit for you
To ask it?

Ros. Well, Sir, there is law; J say
No more, but there is law.

Quartf. What law you Curre?
The law of Nature, Custom, Arms, and Nations,
Frees men of war from paiments.

Ros. Yes, your Arms Captain,
None else.

Q. No soldiers ought to pay.

Sale. Nor Poets:
All void of money are privileged.

Mil. What would you have,
Captains and Poets, Mr Salewit says,
Must never pay.

Salew. No, nor be asked for money.

Ros. Still I say there is law.

Quartf. Say that again,
And by Bellona J will cut thy throat.

Mill. You long to see your brains out.

Quartf. Why you Mungrill,
You John of all Trades, have we been your guests
Since you first kept a Tavern, when you had
The face and impudence to hang a bush
Out to three pints of Claret, two of Sack
In all the world?

Salew. After that, when you broke,
Did we here find you out, customd your House,
And helped away your victuals which had else
Lain moldy on your hands?

Ros. You did indeed,
And never paid for it. I do not deny,
But you have been my Customers these two years,
My Jack went not, nor Chimney smoakt without you.
I will go farther; your two mouths have been
Two as good eating Mouths as need to come
Within my doors, as curious to be pleased
As if you still had eaten with ready money:
Had still the meats in season; still drunk more
Then your Ordinary came to.

Sale. And your conscience now
Would have this paid for?

Ros. Surely so I take it.

Sale. Was ever the like heard?

Qua. It Is most unreasonable
He has a hardened conscience. Sirrah, Cheater,
You would be questioned for your reckonings, Rogue.

Ros. Do you inform.

Quartf. I hear one oth' Sheriffs
Paid for the boiling of a Carp a Mark.

Salew. Most unheard of exactions!

Ros. Yet surely, Captain.
No man had cheaper reckonings then your self,
And Mr Salewit here.

Quartf. How cheap?

Ros. I say
No more good Captain; not to pay is cheap,
A man would think.

Quart. Sir, Don't you reckon Air,
And make it dear to breath in your house, and put
The Nose to charges?

Ros. Right, perfumd Air, Captain.

Quartf. Is not the standing of the salt an Item,
And placeing of the bread?

Ros. A new way, Captain.

Quartf. Is not the folding of your Napkins brought
Into the Bill?

Ros. Pincht Napkins, Captain, and laid
Like Fishes, Fowls, or Faces.

Salew. Then remember
How you rate sallets, Roseclap; one may buy
Gardens as Cheap.

Ros. Yes, Mr Salewit, sallets
Taken from Euclide, made in Diagrams,
And to be eaten in Figures.

Quartf. And we must pay
For your Inventions, Sir.

Ros. Or you are damnd,
Good Captain, you have sworn to pay this twelvemonth.

Quartf. Peace you loud, bawling Curre; do you disgrace me
Before these Gallants, See if I don't kill you.

SCENA VI.
To Them Bright. Newcut. Timothy. Plotwell. Br. SAve you Captain Quartfield,
and my brave Wit,
My man of Helicon, salute this Gentleman,
He is a City wit.

New. A Corporation
Went to the bringing of him forth.

Quartf. I embrace him;

Salew. And so do I.

Tim. You are a Poet, Sir,
And can make Verses, I hear?

Salew. Sir, I am
A servant to the Muses.

Tim. I have made
Some speeches, Sir, in verse, which have been spoke
By a green Robin Goodfellow from Cheapside Conduit,
To my Fathers Company; and mean this afternoon
To make an Epithalamium upon my wedding.
A Lady fell in love with me this morning,
Ask Mr Francis here.

Plotw. Heart you spoil all,
Did not I charge you to be silent?

Tim. That Is true,
I had forgot. you are a Captain, Sir?

Quartf. I have seen service, Sr.

Tim. Captain I love
Men of the sword, and buffe, and if need were
I can roar too, and hope to swear in time,
Do you see, Captain.

Plot. Nay Captain we have brought you
A Gentleman of valor who has been
In Moore-fields often, marry it has been
To squire his sisters, and demolish Custards
At Pimlico.

Quartf. Before me, Mr Plotwell,
I never hoped to see you in silk again.

Salew. I looked the next Lord Majors day to see you oth' Livery,
Or one oth' Batchelour Whiflers.

Quartf. What is
Your Uncle dead?

Plotw. He may in time; he is gone
To sea this morning, Captain, and J am come
Jnto your order again. But hark you, Captain,
What think you of a Fish now?

Qu. Mad wags, mad wags.

Br. By Heaven its true, here we have brought one with us.

New. Rich Seathrifts son, he will make a rare Sea Monster.

Quartf. And shall's be merry in faith?

Br. Salewit shall make
A song upon him.

New. And Roseclaps boy shall sing it.

Salew. We have the properties of the last fish.

Quartf. And if I
At dinner do not give him sea enough,
And afterward if I, and Salewit do not
Show him much better then he that shows the Tombs,
Let me be turned into a Sword-fish my self.

Plotw. A natural change for a Captain. How now Roseclap,
Pensive and cursing the long Vacation?
Thou look as if thou meanst to break shortly.

Ros. Ask
The Captain why I am sad.

Quartf. Faith Gentlemen,
I disciplined him for his rudenes.

Plotw. Why these
Are Judgments, Roseclap, for dear reckonings.

Tim. Art thou
The half Crown fellow of the house?

Ros. Sir, I
Do keep the Ordinary.

Tim. Let Us have wine enough;
I mean to drink a health to a Lady.

Plotw. Still
Will you betray your fortune? One of them
Will go and tell her who you are, and spoil
The Marriage.

Tim. Noe, peace. Gentlemen if you will
Go in we will follow.

Ros. Please you enter, dinner
Shall straight be set upon the board.

Br. We Will expect you, Ex: Br. New. Salew. Quart. Rosecl.
Come Gentlemen.

Tim. But Mr Francis, was that
The business why she called you back.

Plotw. Believe it
Your Mothers smock shined at your birth, or else
You wear some Charm about you.

Tim. Not I truly.

Plotw. It can not be she should so strangely dote
Upon you else: slight had you stayed, I think
She would have wooed you her self.

Tim. Now I remember
One read my fortune once, and told my father
That I should match a Lady.

Plotw. How things fall out?

Tim. And did she ask you who I was?

Plotw. I told her
You were a young Knight.

Tim. Good.

Pl. Scarce come to the years
Of your discretion yet.

Tim. Good still.

Pl. And that a great Man
Did mean to beg you for his daughter.

Tim. Most rare.
This afternoone's the time?

Plotw Faith she
Looks you should use a little Courtship first,
That done, let me alone to have the Priest
In readiness.

Tim. But were I not best ask
My friends consent?

Pl. How? Friends consent? that's fit
For none but Farmers sons, and Milk-maids. You shall not
Debase your judgment. She takes you for a wit,
And you shall match her like one.

Tim. Then I will.

Plotw. But no more words to the Gallants.

Tim. Do you think
I am a sive and cannot hold.

Ros. Gentlemen Enter Roseclap.
The company are sat.

Tim. It shall be yours.

Plotw. Nay, Sir, your fortune claims precedence. Exeunt.

SCENA VII.
Warehouse. Sea-thrift. Cipher. Ware-h. Fetched abroad by two Gallants say you?

Cy. Yes, Sir,
As Soon as you were gone; he only staid
To put on other clothes.

Seath. You say my son
Went with em too?

Cyph. Yes, Sir.

War. And whether went they?

Cyph. I followd'em to Roseclaps Ordinary

Ware-h. And there you left em?

Cyph. Yes, Sir, Just before
I saw some Captains enter.

Seath. Well, I give
My son for lost, undone, past hope.

Ware-h. There is
No more but this we will thither straight. You Cipher
Have your instructions.

Cyph. Sir, let me alone
To make the story doleful.

Ware-h. Go, make you ready then*
Now, Mr Seathrift, you may see, what these Exit.
Young men would do left to themselves.

Sea-th. My son
Shall know he has a sister.

Ware-h. And my Nephew
That once he had an Uncle. To leave land
Unto an unthrift is to build on sand.

ACTVS III.
SCENA I.
Bright. Newcut. Plotwell. Rosclap. hanging out the picture of a strange fish.
Br. FOre Jove the Captain foxt him rarely.

Ros. O Sir
He is used to it; this is the fifth fish now
That he has shown thus. One got him twenty pound.

New. How Rosclap?

Ros. Why the Captain kept him, Sir,
A whole week drunk, and showd him twice a day.

New. It could not be like this.

Ros. Faith I do grant
This is the strangest fish. you I have hung
His other picture into th'fields, where some
Say it is an oregrowne Porcpisce; others say
It Is the fish caught in Cheshire; one to whom
The rest agree, said 'twas a Mermaid.

Plotw. S'light,
Roseclap, shall have a patent of him. The Birds
Brought from Peru, the hairy Wench, the Camel,
The Elephant, Dromedaries, or Winsor Castle,
The Woman with dead flesh, or She that washes,
Threads needles, writes, dresses her children, plays
Oth' Virginalls with her feet, could never draw
People like this.

New O that his Father were
At home to see him.

Plotw. Or his Mother come,
Who follows strange sights out of Town, and went
To Branford to a Motion.

Br. Bid the Captain hasten,
Or he will recover and spoil all.

Ros. They Are here.

SCENA. II.
Enter Quartfield and Salewit dressed like two Trumpeters, keeping the door Mrs
Seathrift and Mrs Holland with a Prentice before 'em as comers in. Quart.
BEarback there.

Sale. Pray you do not press so hard.

Quart. Make room for the two Gentlewomen.

Mrs. Seath. What is it?

Sal. Twelvepence a piece.

Ms Holl. We will not give't. Q. Make room
For them that will then.

Plotw. O fortune here is his Mother.

Br. And who is the other?

Plotw. One Ms Holland, the
Great seamstresse on The Exchange.

Ms Holl. We gave but a groat
To see the last fish.

Quart. Gentlewoman, that
Was but an Irish Sturgeon.

Salew. This came from
The Indies, and eats five Crowns a day in frye,
Ox livers, and brown past.

Ms Seath. Well there is three shillings,
Pray let us have good places now.

Quartf. Bear back there.

Ms Holl. Look Ms Seathrift here be Gentlemen.
Sure it is a rare Fish.

Ms Seath. J know one of them,

Ms Holl. And so do I, his sister was my prentice.

Ms Seath, Lets take acquaintance with him.

Plotw. Ms Seathrift.
Has the sight drawn you hither?

Ms Seath. Yes Sir I
And Mrs Holland here, my Gossip, past
This way and so called in. Pray, Mr Plotwell,
Is not my son here? I was told he went
With you this morning.

Plotw. You shall see him straight.

Ms Holl. When will the Fish begin, Sir?

Br. Heart she makes him
A puppet play.

Plotw. Why now they only stay
For company, 't has sounded twice.

Ms Seath. Indeed
I long to see this fish; J wonder whither
They will cut up his belly, they say a Tench
Will make him whole again.

Ms Holl. Look Ms Seathrift,
What claws he has.

Ms Seath. For all the world like Crabs.

Ms Holl. Nay mark his feet too.

Ms Seath. For all the world like Plaice.

Br. Was ever better sport heard?

New. Prythe peace.

Ms Holl. Pray can you read that? Sir, I warrant you,
That tells where it was caught, and what fish it is.

Plotw. Within this place is to be seen,
A wondrous Fish. God save the Queen.

Ms Holl. Amen, she is my customer, And I
Have sold her bonelace often.

Br. Why the Queen?
It Is writ the King.

Plotw. That was to make the rhyme.

Br. Slid thou did read it as 'twere some picture of
An Elzabeth fish.

Quartf. Bear back there.

Salew. Make room, you
Friend that were going to cut a purse there, make
Way for the two old Gentlemen to pass. Enter Warehouse and Seathrift
disguised.

Wareh. What must we give?

Quartf. We take a shilling Sir.

Salew. It is no less.

Seath. Pray God your fish be worth it.
What is it a whale you take so dear?

Quart. It is
A fish taken in the Indies.

Wareh. Pray dispatch then,
And showt, us quickly.

Salew. Pray forbear, you would have
Your head broke Cobbler.

Wareh. Yonder is my Nephew
In his old Gallantry.

Seath. Who Is there too? my wife?
And Ms Holland? Nay I looked for them.
But where is my wise son?

Ware-h. Mass I see not him.

Quartf. Keep out Sir.

Salew. Waterman you must not enter. Cipher presses in like a waterman.

Quartf. This is no place for scullers.

Cyph. I must needs
Speak with one Mr Plotwell.

Quart. You must stay.

Salew. Thrust him out.

Cyph. And one Mr Seathrift They thrust him out.
On urgent business.

Salew. They are yet imployd
In waightier affairs, make fast the door.

Quartf. There shall no more come in: come in boy.

Seat. Don't
They speak as if my son were in the room?

Ware-h. Yes, pray observe and mark em.

Quartf. Gentlemen,
And Gentlewomen, you now shall see a sight, Draws a Curtain behind it Timothy
a sleep like a strange fish.
Europe nere showed the like; behold this fish.

Ms Holl. O strange look how it sleeps.

Br. Just like a Salmo^
Upon a stall in fishstreet.

Ms Seath. How it snorts too,
Just like my husband.

Ware-h. It Is very like a man.

Seath. Thas such a nose and eyes.

Salew. Why it is a Man fish.
An Ocean Centaure, begot between a Siren
And a he stock fish.

Seath. Pray where took ye him?

Quartf. We took him strangely in the Indies, near
The mouth of Rio de la plata, a sleep
Upon the shore just as you see him now.

Ms Holl. How say y', a sleep.

Ware-h. How? would he come to land?

Seath. It Is strange a fish should leave his Element.

Quartf. Ask him what things the Country told us.

Sal. You
Will scarce believe it now. This fish would walk you
Two or three mile oth'shore sometimes; break houses,
Ravish a naked wench or two, (for there
Women go naked) then run to Sea again.

Quartf. The Country has bin laid, and warrants granted
To apprehend him.

Ware-h. I do suspect these fellows,
They lie as if they had patent for it.

Seath. The company
Should every one believe his part, would scarce
Have faith enough among us.

Ware-h. Mark again.

Salew. The States of Holland would have bought him of us
Out of a great design.

Seath. Indeed?

Salew. They offered
A thousand dollars.

Quart. You cannot enter yet. Some knock.

Ware. Indeed? so much? pray what to do?

Salew. Why Sr,
They were in hope in time to make this fish
Of faction against the Spaniard, and do service
Unto the state.

Seath. As how?

Salew. Why, Sr, next plate-fleet
To dive, bore holes in the bottom of their ships,
And sink em; you must think a fish like this
May be taught MACHIAVEL, and made a state-fish;

Plotw. As dogs are taught to fetch.

New. Or Elephants
To dance on ropes.

Br. And pray what Honor would
The States have given him for the service?

Quartf. That,
Sir, is uncertain.

Salew. Ha made him some sea Count;
Or't may be Admiral.

Plotw. Then, sir, in time,
Dutch Authors that writ Mare Liberum,
Might dedicate their books to him?

Salew. Yes being
A fish advanced, and of great place. Sing boy.
You now shall hear a song upon him.

Br. Listen

New. Do they not act it rarely?

Plotw. If 'twere their trade
They could not do it better.

Seath. Hear you that sir?

Ware-h. Still I suspect.

Ms Holl. I warrant you this fish
Will shortly be in a Ballad.

Salew. Begin boy

Song.
We show no monstrous Crocodile,
Nor any prodigy of Nile.
No Remora that stops Your fleet,
Like sergeants Gallants in the street.
No seahorse, which can trot or pace,
Or swim false gallop, post, or race.
For crooked Dolphins we not care,
Though on their back a fiddler were.
The like to this fish which we show,
Was nere in Fishstreet Old, or New.
Nor ever servd to' th'sheriffs board,
Or kept in souse for the Major Lord.
Had old Astronomers but seen
This fish, none else in Heaven had been.
Ms Holl. The song has wakned him, look, he stirs.

Tim. Oh,
Captain -- pox -- take -- you -- Captain.

Ms Sea. Hark he speaks.

Tim. Oh-my -- stomach.-

Wa. How Is this?

Se. I Will pawn my life
This is imposture.

Tim. Oh -- Oh --

Plot. Heart the Captain
Did not give him his full load.

Wareh. Can your fish
Speak friends? the proverb says they are mute.

Qu. I Will tell you
You will admire how docile he is, and how
He Will imitate a man; tell him your name
He will repeat it after you; he has heard me
Called Captain and my fellow curse sometimes,
And now you heard him say pox take you Captain.

Salew. And yesterday I but complaind my stomach
Was over chargd, and how he minds it?

New strange?

Br. J is it not?

Plotw. The towardness of a fish.

Salew. Would you think when we caught him he should speak
Drake, Drake.

Br. And did he?

Qu. Yes and Hawkins;
A sign he was a fish that swum there, when
These two compast the world.

New. How should he learn
Their names J wonder.

Salw. From the sailors.

New. That may be.

Qu. He Will call for drink like me, or any thing
He lacks.

Tim. O-God-my-head.-

Qu. Do You hear him?

T. Oh,
Hostess -- a -- basin --

Plotw. slid he will spew.

Br. No matter.

Quart. Nay J have seen him foxt, and then maintain
A drunken Dialogue.

Ms Holl. Lord how J long
To hear a little. Pray try him with some questions,
Will you, my friend?

Quartf. Sometimes he will be fullen,
And make no answers.

Salew. That is when he is angered,
Or kept from drink long.

Quart. But I Will try him: Ms Sea.
To see what Creatures may be brought to.

Quart. Tim,
You are drunk.

Tim. Plague take you Captain -- Oh -- Lord
You -- made -- me --

Sea. God's Death my sons name.

Tim D' you call him?

Sal. He Will answer to no name but that.

Q. And Tim,
What think you of a wench now?

Tim. Oh I Am sick
Where is she, Oh.

Seath. I Will lay my life this fish
Is some confederate Rogue.

Quart. I drink to you, Timothy,
In sack.

Tim. Oh Oh.

Quart. A health, Tim.

Tim. I can drink
No more, Oh.

Salew. What not pledge your Mistress?

Tim. Oh,
Let me alone.

Salew. He is not in the mood now.
Sometimes you would wonder at him.

Quartf. He is tired
With talking all this day. That and the heat
Of company about him, dull him.

Ware-h. Surely,
My friends, it is to me a miracle
To hear Fish speak thus.

Quartf. So, Sir, 't has been
To thousands more.

Salew. Come now next Michaelmas,
It Is five years we have shown him in most Courts
In Christendom, and you will not believe
How with mere traveling and observation,
He has improved himself, and brought away
The language of the Country.

Seath. May not I
Ask him some questions?

Quartf. Sir, you may, but he
Will answer none but one of us.

Ms Sea. He Is used, Knocking at door.
And knows their voices.

Salew. He is so Ms. Now
We Will open door.

Wareh. Well my belief does tell me
There is a mist before our eyes.

Seath. I mar'le
My wise son mist this show.

Quart. Good people, we
Do show no more to day; if you desire They draw the Curtain before him.
To see, come to us in Kings-street to morrow

Ms Holl. Come Gossip let us go, the Fish is done.

Ms Seath. By your leave Gentlemen. Truly it is a dainty fish.

Exit Ms Seath. Ms Holland and Prentice. SCENA III.
Enter to them Cipher like a Water-man. Cyph. PRay which is Mr Plotwell?

Plotw. I Am he friend,
What is your business?

Cyph. Sir, I should speak with
Young Mr Seathrift too.

Plotw. Sir, at this time,
Although no Crab like you, to swim backward, he is
Of your element.

Cyph. Upon the water?

Plotw. No
But something that lives int. If you but stay
Till he have slept himself a land Creature, you may
Chance see him come a shore here.

Tim. Oh -- my -- head --
Oh -- Captain -- Mr Francis -- Captain -- Oh. --

Plot. That is his voice Sir.

Seath. Death o my soul my son?

Cyph. He is in drink, Sir, is he?

Plotw. Surely friend,
You are a witch, he is so.

Cyph. Then I must tell
The news to you, it is sad.

Plotw. I Will hear't as sadly.

Cyph. Your Uncle, Sir, and Mr Seathrift are
Both drowned some 8 mile below Greenwitch.

Pl. Drowned?

Cyph. They went in the Tilt boat, Sir, and J was one
Oth' oars that rowed 'em, a Cole-ship did ore run us,
I escaped by swimming, the two old Gentlemen
Took hold of one another, and sunk together.

Br. How some men's prayers are heard? we did invoke
The sea this morning, and see, the Thames has took 'em.

Plotw. It cannot be, such good news, Gentlemen,
Cannot be true.

Ware-h. It Is very certain, Sir,
It Was talk upon the Exchange.

Seath. We heard it too
In Paul's now as we came.

Plotw. There friend, there is
A fair for you; I Am glad you escaped; I had Gives him many.
Not known the news so soon else.

Cyph. Sir, excuse me,

Plot. Sir, it is conscience; J do believe you might
Sue me in Chancery.

Cyph. Sir, you show
The virtues of an Heir.

Ware-h. Are you rich Warehouse
Heir, Sir?

Plotw. Yes, Sir, his transitory pelf,
And some twelve hundred pound a year in earth,
Is cast on me. Captain, the hour is come,
You shall no more drink. Ale, of which one draught
Makes Cowards, and spoils valor; nor take off
Your moderate quart-glasse. I intend to have
A Musket for you, or glass Canon, with
A most capacious barrel, which we will charge,
And discharge with the rich valiant grape of
My Uncles sellar, every charge shall fire
The glass, and burn it self in the filling, and look
Like a Piece going off.

Quartf. I shall be glad
To give thanks for you, Sir, in pottle draughts,
And shall love Scotch cole for this wrack the better,
As long as I know fuel.

Plotw. Then my Poet,
No longer shall write Catches, or thin Sonnets,
Nor preach in verse, as if he were suborned
By him that wrote the whip, to pen lean Acts,
And so to overthrow the stage for want
Of salt or wit. Nor shall he need torment
Or persecute his Muse; but I will be
His God of wine t'inspire him. He shall no more
Converse with the five yard butler, who like Thunder
Can turn beer with his voice, and roar it sower;
But shall come forth a Sophocles, and write
Things for the Buskin. Instead of Pegasus,
To strike a spring with his hoof, we will have a steel
Which shall but touch a But, and straight shall flow
A purer, higher, wealthier Helicon.

Salew. Frank, Thou shall be my Phoebus. My next Poem
Shall be thy Uncles Tragoedie or the life
And death of two Rich Merchants.

Plotw. Gentlemen,
And now in faith what think you of the fish?

Ware-h. Why as we ought, Sir, strangely.

Br. But do you think
It is a very fish?

Seath. Yes.

New. It Is a man.

Plotw. This valiant Captain and this man of wit
First foxt him, then transformed him. we will wake him
And tell him the news. Ho Mr Timothy!

Tim. Plague take you Captain.

Plotw. What does your sack work still?

Tim. Where am I?

Plotw. Come you have slept enough.

Br. Mr Timothy!
How in the name of fresh Cod came you changed
Into a sea Calfe thus?

New. Slight, Sir, here be
Two Fishmongers to buy you; beat the price
Now you are awake, your self.

Tim. How Is this? my hands
Transmuted into Claws? my feet made flownders?
Arrayd in Finnes, and scales? arn't you
Ashamd to make me such a Monster? pray
Help to undresse me.

Plotw. We have rare news for you.

Tim. No letter from the Lady I hope?

Plotw. Your Father
And my grave Uncle, Sir, are cast away.

Tim. How?

Plotw. They by this have made a meal
For Jacks and Salmon. They are drowned.

Br. Fall down
And worship sea-coales, for a ship of them
Has made you, Sir, an Heir.

Plotw. This fellow here
Brings the auspicious news: And these two friends
Of ours confirm it.

Cyph. It Is too true, Sir.

Tim. Well,
We are all mortal; but in what wet case
Had J been now, if I had gone with him.
Within this fortnight I had been converted
Into some Pike, you might ha cheapned me.
In Fish-street; J had made an Ordinary,
Perchance at the Mermaid: Now could I cry
Like any Image in a fountain which He faines to weep.
Runs Lamentations. O my hard misfortune!

Seath. Fie Sir, good truth it is not manly in you, He feignes to weep.
To weep for such a slight loss as a father.

Tim. I do not cry for that.

Seath. No?

Tim. no; but to think
My Mother is not drowned too.

Seath I assure you,
And that's a shrewd mischance.

Tim. For then might I
Ha gone to the Counting house and set at liberty
Those harmless Angels, which for many years
Have been condemned to darkness.

Plotw. You Would not do
Like your penurious Father, who was wont
To walk his dinner out in Paul's, whiles you
Kept Lent at home, and had, like folk in seiges,
Your meals weighed to you.

New. Indeed they say he was
A Monument of Paul's.

Tim. Yes, he was there
As constant as Duke Humphrey. I can show
The prints where he sat holes in the loggs.

Plotw. He wore
More pavement out with walking then would make
A row of new stone-Saints, and yet refused
To give to the reparation.

Br. I Have heard
Heed make his Jack go empty to cosen neighbors.

Plotw. Yes, when there was not fire enough to warm
A Mastick patch to apply to his wives Temples
In great extremity of tootach. This is
True, Mr Timothy, is it not?

Tim. Yes. Then Linen.
To us was stranger then to Capuchins.
My flesh is of an Order with wearing shirts
Made of the sacks that brought ore Cutchyneele,
Copprice, and Indico. My sister wears
Smocks made of Curran-bags.

Seath. I Will not endure it.
Lets show our selves.

Ware-h. Stay hear all first.

New. Thy Uncle
Was such another Plotwell; I have heard
He still last left the Exchange; and would commend
The wholsomenesse oth' air in Moore-fields, when
The clock struck three sometimes.

Plotw. Surely my self,
Cipher his Factor, and an ancient Cat,
Did keep strict diet, had our Spanish fare,
Four Olives among three. My Uncle would
Look fat with fasting; I ha known him surfeit
Upon a bunch of Raysins, swoone at sight
Of a whole joint, and rise an Epicure They undisguise.
From half an Orange.

Ware-h. Gentlemen it is false.
Cast off your Clowd. Do You know me, Sir?

Plotw. My Uncle!

Sea. And do you know me, Sir?

Tim. My Father!

War. Nay,
We Will open all the plot, reveal your self.

Plotw. Cipher the waterman!

Qu. Salewit away; Exit Qu. Salewit.
I feel a tempest coming.

Ware. Are you struck
With a Torpedo Nephew?

Seath. Ha you seen too
A Gorgons head that you stand speechless? or
Are you a fish in earnest?

Br. It begins to thunder.

New. We will make bold to take our leaves.

Ware. What is
Your Captain fled?

Seath. Nay Gentlemen, forsake
Your Company?

Br. Sir, we wave business.

Sea. Troth
It is not kindly done.

War. Now, Mr Seathrift, Ex. Br. New.
You see what Mourners we had had, had we
Been wrackt in earnest. My grievd Nephew here
Had made my sellar flow with tears, my wines
Had chargd glass Ord'nance, our funerals had been
Bewaild in pottle draughts.

Seath. And at our graves
Your Nephew and my Son had made a Panegyric,
And opend all our virtues.

Wa. Ungrateful Monster.

Sea. Unnatural villain.

Wareh. Thou Enemy to my blood.

Sea. Thou worse then Parricide.

War. Next my sins I do
Repent I am thy Uncle.

Sea. And I thy Father.

Wareh. Death O my soul, did J when first thy Father
Broke in estate, and then broke from the Counter
Where Mr Seathrift laid him in the hole,
For debt among the ruins of the City,
And Trades like him blown up, take thee from dust,
Give thee free education, put thee in
My own fair way of traffic; nay decree
To leave thee Jewels, Land, my whole estate,
Pardond thy former wildness, and could thou sort
Thy self with none but idle Gallants, Captains,
And Poets, who must plot before they eat,
And make each meal a stratagem? Then could none
But J be subject of thy impious scoffs?
I swoone at sight of meat; I rise a Glutton
From half an Orange; Wretch, forgetful wretch;
Fore Heaven I count it treason in my blood
That gives thee a relation. But J'le take
A full revenge. Make thee my Heir? J'le first
Adopt a slave, brought from some Gally; One
Which Laws do put into the Inventory,
And men bequeath in Wills with stools, and brass pots.
One who shall first be household stuff, then my Heir.
Or to defeat all thy large aims J'le marry;
Cipher, go find me Baneswright; he shall straight
Provide me a wife. I will not stay to let
My resolution cool. Be she a wench
That every day puts on her Dowry, wears
Her fortunes, has no portion, so she be
Young and likely to be fruitful, J'le have her;
By all that's good I will; this afternoon;
I will about it straight.

Se. I follow you. Ex. Ware. Cyph.
And as for you Tim Mermaid, Triton, Haddock,
The wondrous Indian Fish caught near Peru,
Who can be of both Elements, your sight
Will keep you well. Here J do cast thee off,
And in thy room pronounce to make thy sister
My heir; it would be most unnatural
To leave a Fish Land. Less, Sir, one of your
Bright sins and gills must swim in seas of sack,
Spout rich Canaries up like Whales in Maps.
I know you will not endure to see my Jack
Go empty, nor wear shirts of Copprice bags,
Nor fast in Paul's, you. J do hate thee now,
Worse then a Tempest, Quick-sand, Pyrate, Rock,
Or fatal Leake, I or a Privy seal.
Go let the Captain make you drunk, and let
Your next change be into some Ape, (it is stale
To be a Fish twice) or some active Baboone.
And when you can find money out, betray
What wench in the Room has lost her maidenhead;
Can mount to the King, and can do all your feats,
If your fine chain, and yellow coat come near
The Exchange, Jle see you, so I leave you.

Plot. Now Ex. Sea.
Were there a dextrons beam and twopence hemp,
Never had man such cause to hang himself.

Tim. I have brought my self to a fine pass too* Now
Am J fit only to be caught, and put
Into a pond to leap Carps, or beget
A goodly race of Pickrel*

SCENA. IV.
To them Quartfield. Salewit. Roseclap, and Baneswright. Quartf. HOw now mad
Lads, what? is the storm broke up?

Salew. What sad like broken Gamsters? Mr Timothy
'Slight who would think your Father should lay weeles
To catch you thus?

Tim. If ever I be drunk
With Captains more --.

Plotw. Where Is Bright and Newcut?

Salew. They
Were sent for to the Temple, but left word
They would be here at supper.

Plotw. They are sure friends,
To leave us in distress:

Quartf. What a mad plot
These two old Merchants had contrived, to feign
A voyage, then to hunt you out disguised,
And hear themselves abused?

Salew. We heard all.

Quart. If J had staid they had paid me for a Captain.

Salew. They had a fling at me. But do you think
Your Uncle in this furious mood will marry?

Plotw. He deeply swore it; if he do, the slight
Upon the cards, the hollow dye, Park corner,
And Shooters hill are my revenue.

Tim. Yes,
And as for me, my destiny will be
To fight by the day, carry my Kitchen, and
Collation at my back, wear orderly
My shirt in course, after 't has been the shift
Of a whole Regiment in the Low Countries.
And after all return with half a leg,
One arm perchance, my nose shot off, to move
Compassion in my father, who in pity
To so much ruin my be brought to buy
Some place for me in an Hospital, to keep me
From Bridges, Hill-tops, and from selling switches. Ent. Rosecl.

Ros. Yonder Is your Uncle at the field door talking
With Baneswright, as hot, and earnest for a wench,
As a recovered Monsieur.

Quartf. What is this Baneswright?

Salew. A fellow much imploid about the Town,
That contrives Matches. One that brings together
Parties that never saw, or ever met,
Till't be for good and all. Knows to a penny
Estates and Joyntures; J'le undertake he has
Now lying by him unprovided some twenty
Widows of all fortunes that want husbands,
And men that want wives, and at an hours warning
Can make things ready for the Priest.

Quartf. Let us
Devise to get him hither and cross the Match.

Plotw. I have great interest in him, the fellow loves me.
Could I speak with him and draw him to be
An Actor in it, J have a stratagem
That can redeem all, and turn the plot Enter Baneswright.
Upon these sage heads.

Salew. By Minerva, look,
Here Is Baneswright.

Plot. Mr Baneswright!

Ban. Save you Gallants.

Plotw. You are imploid I hear to find a wife out
For my young sprightly Uncle.

Banes. Sir, he has
Retained me to that purpose. I just now
Came from him.

Plotw. And do you mean the match
Shall then proceed?

Banesw. I have a Leiger wench
In readiness, he is gone to put himself
Into fit ornaments, for the solemnity.
I Am to provide the Priest and License, we go
Some two hours hence to Church.

Qu. Death you Pander.
Forbid the banes or I will cut your wizzell;
And spoil your squiring in the dark; J've heard
Of your lewd function, Sirrah; you prefer
Wenches to Bawdy-houses, Rascal.

Banesw. Good, Sir.
Threaten me not in my vocation.

Plotw. Why Baneswright you can be but paid, say I
Procure the wench, a friend of mine; and double
Your bargain, such a fair reward me thinks
Should make thee of my project. Thou do know
My fortunes are engaged, and thou may be
The happy instrument to recover 'em.
Be my good Angel once, I have a plot
Shall make thee famous.

Quartf. By Mars deny, and I
Will act a Tragoedy upon thee.

Banes. Gentlemen,
I am a friend to wit, but more to you, Sir.
Of whose misfortunes I will not be guilty.
Though, then, your Uncle have imploid me, and
Have deeply sworn to wed this afternoon,
A wife of my providing, if you can
O'rereach the angry Burgess, Sir, and bring
His wisdom to the Ginne, show me the way
I Will help to lay the trap.

Quartf. Now thou art
An honest hearted pimp, thou shall for this
Be drunk in Vine Dee, Rascal: I Will begin
A Runlet to thee.

Plotw. Gentlemen lets in,
I Will tell you my design; you, Salewit, must
Transform your self to a French Deacon. J
have parts for Bright and Newcut too. Mischief
Upon their absence.

Salew. We Will send for 'em.

Plot. And
For Mr Timothy J have a project
Shall make his father everlastingly
Admire his wit, and ask him blessing.

Quart. Come,
Lets in and drink a health to our success.

Tim. I Am for no healths unless the glass be less.

Exeunt. ACTVS IIII.
SCENA I.
Stathrift. Ms Seathrift. Ms Holland. Ms Scruple. Seath. I did commit her to
your charge that you
Might breed her, Ms Scruple, and do require
Her at your hand. Here be fine tricks, indeed;
My daughter Susan to be stolen a week,
And you conceal it; you were of the plot,
I do suspect you.

Ms Scru. Sir, will you but hear
Me meekly?

Seath. No, J'le never trust again
A woman with white eyes, that can take notes,
And write a Comment on the Catechism.
All your devotion's false; is it possible
She could be gone without your knowledge?

Ms Scru. Will you
Attend me, Ms Seathrift? If my husband
To weane her from love courses, did not take
More pains with her then with his Tuesday Lectures,
And if J did not every day expound
Some good things to her against the sin oth' flesh,
For fear of such temptations, to which frail girls
Are very subject, let me never more
Be thought fit to instruct young Gentlewomen,
Or deal in Tent-stitch. Who ere it was that seduced her,
She took my daughter Emlins gown and ruff,
And left her own clothes: and my Scholars say
She often would write Letters.

Seath. Why it is right
Some silenc't Minister has got her: that J
Should breed my daughter in a Conventicle!

Ms Seath. Pray husband be appeased.

Seat. You are a fool.

Ms Seath. You hear her Ms could not help it.

Seath. Nor
Your son help being a fish.

Ms Holl. Why, Sir, was he
The first that was abused by Captains?

Seath. Go
You talk like prating Gossips.

Ms Holl. Gossips? slight
What Gossips, Sir?

Ms Seath. What Gossips are we? speak.

Seath. J'le tell you since youd know: my wife and you,
Shrill Ms Holland, have two tongues, that when
They Are in conjunction, are busier, and make
More noise then country faires, and utter more tales
Then blind-folkes, Mid-wives, Nurses. Then no show
Though It be a Jugler scapes you. You did follow
The Elephant so long, and King of Sweden,
That people at last came in to see you. Then
My son could not be made a Fish, but who
Should I find there much taken with the sight
But you two? I may now build Hospitals,
Or give my money to Plantations. Exit Seath.

Ms Seath. Lets follow him, come Ms Scruple.

Ms Holl. Just
As your Sue left her Schoole-mistresse, my Pen
Left me.

Ms Scru. They Will come again J warrant you.

Exeunt. SCENA II.
Plotwell. Aurelia. Plotw. SIster it is so projected, therefore make
No more demurres, the life of both our fortunes
Lies in your carriage of things well* think therefore
Whither you will restore me, and advance
Your own affairs, or else within this week
Fly this your lodging, like uncustomd sinners,
And have your Coach-horses transformd to Rent,
Have your apparel sold for properties,
And you return to Cut-work. By this hand
If you refuse all this must happen.

Aur. Well, Sir,
Necessity which has no Law, for once
Shall make me oth' conspiracy, and since
We are left wholly to our wits, Let Us show
The power and virtue of 'em; if your Baneswright
Can but persuade my Uncle, I will fit
Him with a Bride.

Plotw. The Scene is laid already;
I have transformd an English Poet into
A fine French Teacher, who shall join your hands
With a most learned legend out of Rablais.

Aur. But for my true groom who you say comes hither
For a disguised Knight, I shall think I wed
His Fathers Counting House, and go to bed
To so much Bullion of a man* Faith I Have
No mind to him, brother, he has not wit enough
To make it a lawful marriage.

Plot. Y' are deceivd,
I Will undertake by one weeks Tutoring,
And carrying him to Plays and Ordinaries,
Engaging him in a quarrel or two, and making
Some Captain beat him, to render him a most
Accomplished Gallant. Or say he be borne, sister,
Under the City planet, pray what wise Lady
Desires to match a wise Knight? you would marry some
Philosopher now, that should every night
Lie with you out of Aristotle, and loose
Your maidenhead by Demonstration.
Or some great statesman, before whom you must sit
As silent and reservd as if your looks
Had plots on foreign Princes, and must visit
And dress your self by Tacitus. What he wants
In Naturals, his fortunes will make up
In Honors, Pen; when he is once made a Lord,
Who Will be so sawey as to think he can
Be impotent in wisdom? She that marries
A fool, is an Hermaphrodite, the Man
And wife too, sister. Besides it is now too late,
He Will be here presently, and comes prepared
For Hymen. I took up a footman for him,
And left him under three tyremens hands, besides
Two Barbers.

Aur. Well, Sir, I must then accept him
With all his imperfections, J have
Procured a Sir John yonder.

Plotw Who is it?

Aur. One
That preaches the next parish once a week Enter a Footman
A sleep for thirty pounds a year.

Foot. Here is
A Knight desires your Ladyship will give
Him audience.

Aur. It Is no Knight Ambassador?

Foot. He rather looks like a Knight oth' Sun.

Pl. It Is He.

Aur. Let him come in.

Plot. If you be coy now, Pen, Ex. Foot.
You spoil all.

Aur. Well, Sir, I Will be affable.

SCENA III.
To them Timothy fantastically dressed, and a Footman. Plotw. HEre he comes.

Tim. Sirrah, wait me in the Hall,
And let your feet stink there; your ayre's not fit,
To be endured by Ladies.

Plotw. What quarrel with
Your Footman, Sir?

Tim. Hang him, he casts a sent
That drownes my perfumes, and is strong enough
To cure the Mother or Palsy. Do I act
A Knight well?

Plotw. This imperiousness becomes you
Like a Knight newly dubd, Sir.

Tim. What says the Lady?

Plotw. Speak lower, J've prepared her, show your self
A Courtier now she is yours.

Tim. If that be all
I Will Court her as if some Courtier had begot me
In The Gallery at a Masque.

Plotw. Madam, this Gentleman
Desires to kiss your hands.

Tim. And lips too Lady.

Aur. Sir, you much honor both.

Tim. I, I know that,
Else I Would not kiss you. Yesterday J was
In company with Ladies and they all
Longed to be touched by me.

Aur. You cannot cure
The Evil, Sir, nor have your lips the virtue
To restore ruins, or make old Ladies young?

Tim. Faith all the virtue that they have, is that
My lips are knighted. J am borne, sweet Lady,
To a poor fortune that will keep my self,
And Footman, as you see, to bear my sword
In Cuerpo after me I can at Court,
If J would show my gilt in the Presence, look
After the rate of some five thousands
Yearly in old rents, and were my Father once
Well wrapped in seare-cloth, I could fine for Sheriff.

Plotw. Heart you spoil all.

Tim. Why?

Plot. She verily believd
You Had nere a father.

Aur. Lives your father, then Sir?
That Gentleman told me he was dead.

Tim. It Is true,
I had forgot my self, he was drowned, Lady,
This morning, as he went to take possession
Of a summer house and land in the Canaries.

Plotw. Now you have recoverd all.

Tim. D' you think I have
Not wit enough to lie?

Plotw. Break your mind to her,
She does expect it.

Tim. But Lady this is not
The business which J came for.

Aur. I Am at leisure
To hear your business, Sir.

Plotw. Mark that.

Tim. Indeed,
Sweet Lady, I Have a motion which was once
Or twice this morning in my mouth, and then
Slipped back again for fear.

Aur. Cowards nere won
Ladies, or Forts, Sir.

Tim. Say then I should feel
Some motions, Lady, of affection; might
A man repair Paul's with your heart, or put it
Into a Tinder-box?

Aur. How mean you, Sir?

Tim. Why is your heart a stone, or flint?

Aur. Be plain, Sir,
I understand you not.

Tim. Not understand me?
Y' are the first Lady that ere put a man
To speak plain English; some would understand
Riddles, and signs; say J should love you, Lady?

Aur. There should be no love lost, Sir.

Tim. Say you so?
Then by this air my teeth eene water at you;
I long to have some Offspring by you; we
Shall have an excellent breed of wits; J mean
My youngest son shall be a Poet; and
My Daughters, like their Mother, every one
A wench oth' game. And for my eldest son,
He shall be like me, and inherit. Therefore
Lets not defer our joys, but go to bed
And multiply.

Aur. Soft, Sir, the Priest must first
Discharge his office. I do not mean to marry Enter Dorcas out of her Puritan
dress
Like Ladies in New England, where they couple
With no more ceremony then birds choose their Mate
Upon St Valentines day.

Dor. Madam the Preacher
Is sent for to a Churching, and does ask
If you be ready, he shall loose, he says,
His Chrysome else.

Aur. O miracle! out of
your little Ruff, Dorcas, and in the fashion?
Do thou hope to be saved?

Dor. Pray Madam do not
Abuse me; J will tell you more anon.

Plotw. Tell him she is coming.

Aur. Sir, please you partake
Of a slight banquet?

Pl. Just as you are sat Exit Dorcas.
I Will steal the Priest in.

Tim. Do.

Pl. When you are joind,
Be sure you do not oversee, but straight
Retire to bed, she will follow.

Tim. It Is not three
A clock in the afternoon.

Plotw. It Is but drawing
Your Curtains and you do create your night.
All times to Lovers and New married folks
May be made dark.

Tim. J will then. By this Room
She Is a rare Lady. J do almost wish
I could change sex, and that she might beget
Children on me.

Plotw. Nay will you enter?

Tim. Lady,
Pray will you show the way.

Plotw. Most City like,
'Slid take her by the arm, and lead her in.

Tim. Your arm sweet Lady. Exeunt.

SCENA IV.
Bright. Newcut. Br. BUt are you sure the are they?

New. I Will not believe
My treacherous eyes again, but trust some dog
To guide me, if J did not see his Uncle
Coming this way, and Baneswright with him.

Br. Who,
The fellow that brings Love to banes, and banes
To bare thighs 'bout the town?

New. The very same, Sir;
The City Cupid that shoots arrows betwixt
Party and party. All the difference is,
He has his eyes, but they he brings together
Sometimes do not see one another till
Till they meet in the Church.

Br. What say you now if Warehouse
Should in displeasure marry?

New. It Is so, this fellow
In's company confirms me. It Is the very business
Why Plotwell has sent for us.

Br. Here they come.
Prithee lets stand and overheare 'em.

New. Stand close then.

SCENA. V.
Enter Warehouse. Baneswright. Ware-h. MAdam Aurelia is her name?

Ban. Her father
Was, Sir, an Irish Baron, that undid
Himself by housekeeping.

War. As for her birth
I could wish it were meaner. As many Knights
And Justices of peace as have been of
The Family are reckoned into the portion;
She Will still be naming of her Ancestors,
Ask Jointure by the Heralds book, and I
That have no Coat, nor can show azure Lions,
In Fields of Argent, shall be scornd; she will think
Her Honor wronged to match a man that has
No Scutcheons but them of his Company,
Which once a year do serve to trim a Lighter
To Westminster and back again.

Ban. You are
Mistaken, Sir. This Lady as she is
Descended of a great house, so she has
No Dowry but her Arms. She can bring only
Some Libbards heads, or strange beasts, which you know
Being but Beasts, let them derive themselves
From Monsters in the Globe, and lineally
Proceed from Hercules labors, they will never
Advance her to a husband equal to
Her self in birth, that can give Beasts too. She
Aims only to match one that can maintain
Her some way to her state. She is possessed
What streams of gold you flow in, Sir,

Ware-h. But can she
Affect my age?

Banes. I asked her that; and told her
You were about some threescore, Sr, and ten;
But were as lusty as one of twenty, (or
An aged Eunuch)

Ware-h. And what replied she?

Bans. she,
Like a true Lucrece, answered it was fit
For them to Marry by the Church book, who
Came there to cool themselves; But to a Mind
Chaste and endued with virtue, age did turn
Love into Reverence.

Br. Or Sr Reverence.

New. Prythe observe.

Ware-h. Is she so virtuous then?

Banes. It Is all the fault she has, she will out-pray
A Preacher at St Antlins; and divides
The day in exercise; I did commend
A great Precisian to her for her woman.
Who tells me that her Lady makes her quilt
Her smocks before for kneeling.

Ware-h. Excellent Creature!

Banes. Then, Sir, she is so modest.

Ware-h. Too.

Banes. The least
Obscene word shames her, a lascivious Figure
Makes her do penance; and she maintains the Law
Which forbids fornication, does extend
To kissing too.

Ware-h. I think the time an age
Till the solemnity be past.

Banes. I have
Prepared her, Sr, and have so set you out!
Besides, I told her how you had cast of
Your Nephew, and to leave no doubt that you
Would ere be reconciled, before she went
To Church would settle your estate on her,
And on the Heirs of her begotten.

Ware-h. To make all sure,
We Will call upon my Lawyer by the way,
And take him with us.

Banes. you must be married, Sr,
At the French Church, J have bespoke the Priest;
One that will join you in the right Geneva form,
Without a license.

Ware-h. But may a man
Wed in a strange tongue?

Banes. I have brought together
Some in Italian, Sr, the Language does
Not change the substance of the Match; you know
No license will be granted, all the Offices
Are beforehand bribed by your Nephew.

Ware-h. Well,
Lets to the Lady straight, to cross him, I
Would marry an Arabian, and be at charge
To keep one to interpret, or be married
In China Language, or the tongue that's spoke Exit Ware. and Banes.
By the great Cham.

Br. Now Newcut, you perceive
My divination's true, this fellow did
Portend a wedding.

New. Plague oth' prognostication.
Who'd think that Madam were the Party?

Br. Oh Sr,
She Will call this wit to wed his baggs, and lie
With some Platonic servant.

New. What if we
Before we go to Plotwell, went to her
And strived to dissuade her?

Br. Lets make have,
They Will be before us else.

Exeunt. SCENA. VI.
Enter Timothy unbuttoning himself. Aurelia. Plotwell. Dorcas. Footman. Tim.
BY this hand Lady you shall not deny me:
Since we are coupled, I shall think the Priest
Has not done all, as long as I Am a Virgin.

Aur. Will you not stay till night, Sir?

Tim. Night? No faith,
I Have sworn to get my first child by day, you may
Be quick by night.

Plot. Madam, your Knight speaks reason.

Tim. I will both speak and do it.

Aur. Well Sir, since
There is no remedy, your beds prepared;
By that time you are laid I Will come, Mean time
I Will pray that Gentleman to conduct you, There Is
My Footman to pluck of your stockins.

Plotw. Come Sir.

Tim. Sweet Lady stay not long.

Plot. I Will promise for her.

Dor. Faith I admire your temperance to let Ex. Tim. Pl. and Footman.
Your Bridegroom go to bed and you not follow.
Were J in your case J should ha gone first,
And warmed his place.

Aur. Well wench but that thou have
Revealed thy self unto me, I Would admire
To hear a Saint talk thus. To one that knows not
The Mystery of thy strange conversion, Thou
Would seem a Legend.

Dor. Faith I have told you all,
Both why I left my Schoole-Mistresse, who taught me
To confute Curling-Irons, and why I put
My self on this adventure.

Aur. Well wench my brother
Has had his plots on me, and I Will contribute
My help to work thy honest Ones on him.
Do but perform thy task well and thou winn'st him.

Dor Let me alone; never was man so fitted Enter Footman.
With a chaste Bride, as I will fit his Uncle. Exit.

Foot. Madam your Knight does call most fiercely for you.

Aur. Prithee, go tell him some business keeps me yet,
And bid him stay himself with this kiss.

SCENA. VII.
As they kiss. Enter to them Bright. Newcut. Br. BY your leave Madam, what for
practice sake
Kissing your woman? Lord how a Ladies lips
Hate Idleness, and will be busied, when
The rest lies fallow, And rather then want action
Be kind within themselves, an't be to enjoy,
But the poor pleasure of contemplation!

New. And how do you find her Madam?

Aur. Stay wench.
Does it not grieve you now, and make you sigh,

New. Lord,
And very passionately accuse Nature,
And say she was too hard to make your woman
Able to kiss you only and do no more?

Br. Js it not pity but besides the gift
Of making Cawdles, and using of her Pencill,
She had the trick oth'other sex?

Aur. Me thinks
Your own good breeding might instruct you that
My house is not a new Foundation, where
You might, paying the rate, approach, be rude,
Give freedom to your unwasht Mouths.

Dor. My Lady
Keeps no poor Nuns that sin for victuals, for you,
With whom this dead vacation you may trade
For old silk stockins and half shirts. They say
You do offend oth' score, and sin in chalk,
And the dumb walls complain you are behind
Jn pension; so that your distressed Vestalls,
Are feign to foot their stockins, pay the Brewer,
And Land-Lords-rent in womankind, and long
More earnestly for the Term then Norfolk Lawyers.

Br. Why you have got a second, Lady, your woman
Does speak good Country language.

New. Offers at wit,
And shows teeth for a jest.

Br. We hear you are
To marry an old Citizen.

Aur. Then surely
You were not deaf.

New. And do you mean his age,
Which has seen all the Kingdom buried thrice,
To whom the heat of August is December; Ex. Dorcas.
Who, were he but in Italy would save
The charge of Marble vaults, and cool the air
Better then ventiducts, shall freeze between
Your melting arms? Do but consider, he
But marries you as he would do his furs,
To keep him warm.

Aur. But he is rich, Sir.

Br. Then,
In wedding him you wed more infirmities
Then ever Gallen wrote of; He has pains
That put the Doctors to new experiments.
Half his diseases in the City bill
Kill hundreds weekly. Alone Hospital
Were but enough for him.

New. Besides,
He has a cough that nightly drownes the Bell-man;
Calls up his Family; all his neighbors rise
And go by it, as by the Chimes and Clock.
Not four loame walls, nor saw dust put between,
Can dead it.

Aur. Yet he still is rich.

Br. Jf this
Cannot affright you, but that you will needs
Be blind to wholesome counsill, and will marry
One who by the course of Nature ought to have been
Rotten before the Queens time, and in Justice
Should now have been some threescore years a Ghost,
Let pity move you; Jn this Match you quite
Dostroy the hopes and fortunes of a Gentleman,
For whom had his penurious Uncle starved
And pined himself his whole life, to increase
The riches he deservest' inherit it
Had been his duty.

Aur You mean his Nephew Plotwell;
A prodigal young man; one whom the good
Old man his Uncle kept to the Inns of Court,
And would in time ha made him Barrester;
And raisd him to his satin Cap, and Biggon,
In which he might ha sold his breath far dearer,
And let his tongue out at a greater price,
Then some their Manors. But he did neglect
These thriving means; followd his loose companions,
His Brights and Newcuts; two, they say, that live
By the new Heresy Platonic Love.
Can take up silks upon their strengths, and pay
Their Mercer with an Infant.

Br. Newcut!

New. I,
J do observe her Character; well then
You are resolvd to marry?

Aur. Were the Man
A statue, so it were a golden one,
I Would have him.

Br. Pray then take along to Church
These few good wishes. May your husband prove
So jealous to suspect that when you drink
To any man you kiss the place where his
Lips were before, and so pledge meetings. Let him
Think you do Cuckold him by looks; and let him
Each night, before you go to rest, administer
A solemn oath, that all your thoughts were chaste
That day, and that you sleep with all your hayres.

New. And which is worse, let him forget he lay
With you himself, before some Magistrate
Swear it was some other, and have it believed
Upon Record.

Pl. Sister J've left your Bridegroom,
Under this key locked in, to embrace your pillow. Enter Plotw.
Sure he has eat Eringoes, he is as hot --
He was about to fetch you in his shirt.

Br. Hows this? his sister?

New J conceive not this.

Pl. My Noble friends, you wonder now to hear
Me call her sister.

Br. Faith, Sir, we wonder more
She should be married?

New. I'ft be your sister, we
Have labourd her she should not match her Uncle,
And bring forth Riddles, Children that should be
Nephews to their Father, and to their Uncle sons.

Plotw. I laugh now at your ignorance: why these
Are projects, Gentlemen; fine ginns, and projects.
Did Roseclaps boy come to you?

Br. Yes.

Pl. I have
A rare Scene for you.

New. The boy told us you were
Upon a stratagem.

Plotw. I Have sent for Roseclap,
And Captain Quartfield to be here. J have
Put Salewit into orders, he is inducted
Into the French Church, you must all have parts;

Br. Prithee speak out of Clouds.

Pl. By this good light
Twere Justice now to let you both dye simple,
For leaving us so scirvily.

New. We were
Sent for in have by the Benchers, to contribute
To one of them that's Reader.

Plotw. Come with me,
I Will tell you then. But first J'le show you a sight
Much stranger then the Fish.

Dor. Madam, here is Barneswright
And an old Merchant do desire access. Enter Dorcas.

Aur. Bid 'em come in.

Pl. Gentlemen, fall off. Ex. Dorcas.
If we be seen the plot is spoild. Sister,
Now look you do your part well.

Aur. J am perfect.

Exit Plot. Br. Newc. SCENA VIII.
To Her Baneswright. Warehouse. Dorcas. Banes. MAdam, this is the Gentleman J
mentioned,
I Have brought him here, according to my function
To give you both an enterview; if you
Be ready, the Church and Priest are.

Aur. Is this, Sir,
The wealthy Merchant?

Banes. Madam, this is He
That if you will wear the price of Baronies,
Or live at Cleopatra's rate can keep you.

Aur. Come you a Suitor, Sir, to me?

Ware-h. Yes Lady,
I did employ my speaker there, who has
I hope informed you with my purpose.

Aur. Surely,
Your speaker then has errd; I understood
Him for my woman, if you can like her, Sir,
It being for ought I hear, all one to you,
I Have wooed her for you. But for my self, could you
Endow me with the stream that ebbs and flows
In waves of gold, J hope you do not think
I Would so much stain my birth as to be bought
To match into a Company* Sir, plainly,
I Am matched already.

Ware-h. Baneswright, did not you
Tell me she would have me?

Banesw. Faith, Sir, I have ears
That might deceive me, but I did dream waking
If she were not the party. Madam, pray you
One word in private.

Aur. I Will prevent you; it is true,
My Brother laid the Scene for me, but since
We Have changd the plot, and it is contrived, my woman
Shall undertake my part.

Ban. I am instructed.
I was mistaken, Sir, indeed the Lady
Spoke to me for her Gentlewoman. How
Do you affect her, Sir? you see she is
As handsome as her Lady, and her birth
Not being so high she will more size with you.

Ware-h. I say, J like her best. Her Lady has
Too much great house in her.

Ban. It Is right, this you
May govern as you list. I Will motion't: Lady,
Pray pardon our mistake, indeed our Errand
Was chiefly to your Gentlewoman.

Aur. Sir,
She Is one whose fortune J so much intend,
And yours, Sir, are so fair, that though there be
Much disproportion in your age, yet J
Will overruled her, and she shall refer
Her self to be disposd by me.

Ware-h. You much
Oblige me, Madam.

Aur. Dorcas, this is the Merchant
I have provided for you, he is old,
But he has that will make him young, much Gold.

Dor. Madam, but that I should offend against
Your care as well as my preferment, J de
Have more experience of the Man, J mean
To make my husband. At first sight to marry,
Must argue me of lightness.

Aur. Princes, Dorcas,
Do woo by pictures, and Ambassadors,
And match in absent Ceremonies.

Dor. But
You look for some great portion, Sir.

Wareh. Fair Mistress,
Your virtues are to me a wealthy Dowry.
And if you love me J shall think you bring
More then the Indies.

Dor. But, Sir,'t may be
You Will be against my course of life. J love
Retirement, must have times for my Devotion,
Am little used to company, and hate
The vanity of visits.

Ware-h. This makes me
Love you the more.

Dor. Then J shall never trust you
To go to sea, and leave me; I shall dream
Of naught but storms, and Pirates. Every wind
Will break my sleep.

War. J'le stay at home.

Dor. Sir, there
Is one thing more; J hear you have a Nephew,
You mean to make your Heir. I hope you will
Settle some Jointure on me.

War. He Is so lost
In my intents that to revenge my self,
I take this course. But to remove your doubts,
I Have brought my Lawyer with blank deeds,
He shall put in your Name, and J, before
We go to Church will seale'em.

Dorc. On these terms
Where is your Priest, Sir?

War. He expects me at
The French Church, Mistress.

Aur. Come, when you have sealed, Sir,
I Will bear a part in the solemnity.

Exeunt. ACTVS V.
SCENA I.
Plotwell. Aurelia. Bright. Newcut. Quartfield. Salewit. Roseclap. two Footmen.
Cipher. Plotw. WEll Sister, by this hand J was afraid
You had marred all; but I am well content
You have out-reacht me. If she do act it well now,
By Jove I Will have her.

Aur. She has studied all
Her Cues already.

Plotw. Gentlemen, how do
You like the project?

Br. Theirs was dull and cold
Compared to ours.

New. Some Poet will steal from us
And bring't into a Comoedy.

Quartf. The jest
Will more inspire then sack.

Plotw. I have got Cipher
Over to our side too; He has been up and down Ent. Salewit
To invite Guests to the wedding. How now Salewit, like a Curat
Are they gone home?

Salew. Yes faith, for better, for worse;
I Have read a Fiction out of Rablais to 'em,
In a religious tone, which he believes
For good French Liturgy. When J had done
There came a Christning.

Plotw. And did thou baptize
Out of thy Rablais too?

Salew. No faith, J left 'em
In expectation of their Pastor.

Br. Newcut,
Who does he look like in that dress?

New. Hum? why
Like a Geneva Weaver, in black, who left
The Loome and entered into the Ministry
For conscience sake.

Plotw. Well Gentlemen you all
Do know your parts, you Captain, and Baneswright
Go get your properties. For you two, These
Two Mules shall carry you in greater state,
And more ease then the Fistula. You sister
We Will leave unto your Knight, to come anon.
Roseclap and J will thither straight. You Cipher
Know what you have to do?

Sale. And as for me
I Am an invited Guest, and am to bless
The Venison in French, or in a Grace
Of broken English.

Quartf. Before we do divide
Our Army, let us dip our Rosemaries
In one rich bowl of sack to this brave girl,
And to the Gentleman that was my Fish.

All. Agreed, Agreed.

Plotw. Captain you shall dip first.

Exeunt. SCENA II.
Warehouse. Dorcas. MY dearest Dorcas, welcome. Here you see
The house you must be mistress of, which with
This kiss I do confirm unto you.
Dor. Forbear, Sir.

Wareh. How wife, refuse to kiss me?

Dor. Yes, unless
A sweeter air came from you; y' have turned my stomach.
I wonder you can be so rude to ask me,
Knowing your Lungs are perished.

Wareh. This is rare.
That I should live to this great age, and never
Till now know I was rotten!

Dor. I shall never
Endure your Conversation; I hope you have
Contrived two Beds, two Chambers, and two Tables;
It is an Article that I should live,
Retired, that is, a part.

Wareh. But pray you wife
Are you in earnest.

Dor. Do You think Jle jest with age?

War. Will you not lie with me then?

Dor. Did ever Man
Of your hairs ask such questions? J do blush
At your unreasonablenesse.

War. Nay then --

Dor. Is It fit J should be buried?

Wareh. I reach you not.

Dor. Why to lie with you were a direct Emblem
Of going to my grave.

Wareh. I understand you.

Dor. I Will have your picture set in my wedding ring
For a Deaths head.

Wareh. I do conceave you.

Dor. I Would
Rather lie with an ancient Tomb, or embrace
An Ancestor then you. Do You think I Will come
Between your winding sheets? For what? to hear you
Depart all night, and fetch your last groan? and
In The morning find a Deluge on the floor,
Your Entrails floating, and half my husband spit
Upon the Arras?

Ware. I am married --

Dor. Then,
For your abilities, should twelve good women
Sit on these reverend locks, and on your heat,
And natural appetite, they would just find you
As youthful as a Coffin, and as hot
As the sultry winter that froze ore the Thames;
They say the hard time did begin from you.

Wareh. Good, I am made the curse of Watermen.

Dor. Your humors come frost from you, and your nose
Has ycicles in June.

War. Assist me patience.
Why hear you mistress, you that have a fever,
And Dog days in your blood, if you knew this
Why did you marry me?

Dor. Ha, ha, ha.

War. She laughs.

Dor. That your experienced ache, that has felt springs
And falls this forty year, should be so dull
To think J have not them that shall supply
Your cold defects.

War. You have your servants then?
And I am forkt? hum?

Dor. Do you think
A woman young, high in her blood --.

War. And hot
As Goats, or Marmosites --

Dor. Apt to take flame at
Tvery temptation --

War. And to kindle at
Ehe picture of a Man --

Dor. Would wed dust, ashes,
A Monument, unless she were --

War. Cracked, tried,
And broken up? --

Dor. Right, Sir, or lackt a Cloak?

War. Mischief and Hell, and was there none to make
Your cloak but I?

Dor. Not so well lined.

War. O you
Staid for a wealthy Cuckold, your tame beast
Must have his gilded horns.

Dor. Yes, Sir, Besides
Your age being impotent, you would I knew
In conscience wink at my stolen helps, if I
Took comfort from abroad.

War. Yes, yes, yes, yes,
You shall be comforted, I will maintain
A Stallion for you.

Dor. I will have friends come to me
So you will conceal.

War. Alas, I Will be your Pander;
Deliver letters for you, and keep the door.

Dor. I Will have a woman shall do that.

War. O impudence!
Unheard of impudence!

Dor. Then, Sir, I Will look
Your Coffers shall maintain me at my rate.

War. How Is that?

Dor. Why like a Lady; for I do mean
To have you Knighted.

War. I shall rise to honor.

Dor. Do You think I Will have your Factor move before me,
Like a Device stirred by a wier, or like
Some grave Clock wound up to a regular pace?

War. No, you shall have your Usher, Dame, to stalk
Before you like a buskind Prologue, in
A stately, high, majestic motion, bare.

Dor. I do expect it; yes, Sir, and my Coach,
Six horses, and Postilion; four are fit
For them that have a charge of Children; you
And I shall never have any.

War. If we have,
All Middlesex is Father.

Dor. Then Jle have
My Footman to run by me when I visit,
Or take the air sometimes in Hide-park.

War. You,
Besides being chaste, are good at Races too?
You can be a Iockey for a need?

Dor. You Are pleasant, Sir.

War. Why hark you, hark you, Mistress, you told me
You loved retirement, loved not visits, and bargaind
I should not carry you abroad.

Dor. You? no;
Is It fit I should be seen at Court with you?
Such an odd sight as you, would make the Ladies
Have melancholy thoughts.

War. You bound me too
I should not go to Sea, you loved me so
You could not be without me.

Dor. Not if you staid
Above a year; for should I, in a long voyage,
Prove fruitful, I should want a father to
The Infant.

War. Most politiquely kind,
And like a Whore perfect in the mystery.
It is beyond my sufferance.

Dor. Pray, Sir, vex,
I Will in, and see your Jewels, and make choice
Of some for every day, and some to wear Exit.
At Masks.

War. It Is very good. Two days.
Of this I shall grow mad, or, to redeem
My self, commit some outrage -- O -- O -- O.

SCENA III.
To him Plotwell. and Roseclap. Plotw. SIr, I am sorry such a light offense
Should make such deep impressions in you; But that
which more afflicts me then the loss of my
Great hopes, is, that you are likely to be abused, Sir,
Strangely abused, Sir, by one Baneswright. I hear
You are to marry.

War. Did you hear so?

Plotw. Madam Aurelia's woman.

War. What of her, Sir?

Plotw. Why, Sir, I thought it duty to inform you,
That you were better match a ruind Bawd;
One ten times cured by sweating, and the Tub,
Or paind now with her fiftieth Ach, whom not
The power of Vsquebaugh, or heat of fevers
Quickens enough to wish; one of such looks,
That Judges of Assize, without more proof,
Suspect, arraigne, and burn for witchcraft.

War. Why pray?

Plotw. For she being past all motions, impotence
Will be a kind of chastity, and you
Might have her to your self, but here is one
Knows this to be --

War. An arrant whore?

Ros. I see
You have heard of her, Sir; Indeed she has
Done penance thrice.

War. How say you, penance?

Rosc. Yes, Sir,
And should have sufferd --

War. Carting should she not?

Ros. The Marshall had her, Sir.

War. I sweat, I sweat.

Ros. She Is of known practice, Sir: the clothes she wears
Are but her quarters sins, she has no linen
But what she first offends for.

War. O blessed Heaven
Look down upon me.

Plotw. Nay, Sir, which is more,
She has three children living, has had four.

War. How? Children? Children say you?

Plot. Ask him Sir,
One by a French Man.

Ros. Another by a Dutch.

Plotw. A third, Sir, by a Moore; borne of two colors.
Just like a Sergeants Man.

War. Why she has known then
All Tongues and Nations.

Ros. She has been layne with farther
Then ever Coryat travaild, and layne in
By two parts of the Map, Afrique, and Europe.
As if the State maintaind her to allay
The heat of Forrainers.

War. O -- O -- O -- O.

Plotw. What aile you, Sir?

War. O Nephew I am not well,
J am not well.

Plot. I hope you are not married.

War. It is too true.

Ros. God help you then.

War. Amen;
Nephew forgive me.

Ros. Alas good Gentleman.

Plot. Would you trust Baneswright, Sir?

War. Nephew in Hell
There Is not a torment for him; O that I could
But see that cheating Rogue upon the rack now:
I Would give a thousand pound for every stretch,
That should enlarge the Rogue through all his joints,
And but just show him hell, and then recall
His broking soul, and give him strength to suffer
His torture often; J would have the Rascal
Think hanging a relief, and be as long
A dying as a chopped Eele, that the Devil
Might have his soul by pieces. who is here? a Saylor?

Enter Cipher like a Saylor. SCENA. IV.
To them Cipher. Cyph. ARe you, Sir, Warehouse, the rich Merchant?

war. Sir,
My name is Warehouse.

Cy. Then you are not, Sir,
So rich by two ships as you were.

War. How mean you?

Cyph. Your two ships, Sir, that were now coming home
From Ormus are both cast away; the wrack
And burden on the place was valewd at
Some forty thousand pound. All the men perished,
By the violence of the storm, only my self
Preserved my life by swimming, till a ship
Of Bristoll took me up, and brought me home
To be the sad reporter.

War. Was nothing saved?

Cyph. Two small Caskes; one of blew Figs, the other
Of pickeld Mushromes; which served me for bladders,
And kept me up from sinking. It Was a storm
Which, Sir, J will describe to you. The Winds
Rose of a sudden with that tempestuous force --

War. Prithee no more; I have heard too much. Would I
Had been in the tempest.

Cyph. Good your worship give
A poor seafaring man your charity,
To carry me back again. I Am come above
A hundred mile to tell you this.

War. Go in,
And let my Factor if he be come in,
Reward thee, stay and sup to.

Cyph. Thank your Worship.

War. Why should I not now hang my self? Or if Ex. Cyp.
It be a fate that will more hide it self,
And keep me from discredit, tie some weight
About my neck, to sink me to the bottom
Oth' Thames, not to be found, to keep my body,
From rising up and telling tales. Two wracks?
And both worth forty thousand pound there? why
That landed here, were worth an hundred. J
Will drown my self; I nothing have to do
Now in this world but drown my self.

Plotw. Fie these
Are desperate resolutions. Take heart, Sir,
There may be ways yet to relieve you.

War. How?

Plotw. Why for your lost ships, say, Sir, I should bring
Two oth' Assurance Office that should warrant
Their safe return, it is not known yet. Would you
Give three parts to secure the fourth?

War. I Would give
Ten to secure one.

Plotw. Well, Sir, and for your Wife,
Say J should prove it were no lawful match;
And that she is another Man's? you would take
the piece of service well.

War. Yes, and repent
That when I had so good an Heir begot
Unto my hand, I was so rash to aim
At one of my own dotage.

Plot. Say no more, Sir,
But keep the Saylor that he stir not. We Will Exit Plotwell and Roscl.
About it straight.

War. How much I was deceived
To think ill of my Nephew. In whose revenge
I see the Heavens frown on me; Seas and Winds
Swell and rage for him against me. But J will
Appease their furies, and be reconciled.

SCENA. V.
To him Sea-thrift. Ms Sea-thrift. Ms Holland* Ms Scruple. Ms Sea. MUch joy to
you, Sir, you have made quick dispatch
I like a man that can love, woo, and wed,
All in an hour, my husband was so long
A getting me, so many friends consents
Were to be asked, that when we came to Church
It Was not a Marriage, but our times were out,
And we were there made free of one another.

Ms Holl. I looked to find you abed, and a young Sheriff
Begot by this. My husband, when I came
From Church, by this time had his Cawdle; I
Had not a Garter left, nor he a point.

Ms Scru. Surely all that my husband did the first
Night we were married, was to call for one
Of his wrought Caps more, to allay his Rheum.

Ms Holl. We hear y'haue matched a Courtier, Sir, a Gallant;
One that can spring fire in your Blood, and dart
Fresh flames into you.

Ms Sea. Sir, you are not merry.
Me thinks you do not look as you were married.

Ms Holl. You rather look as you had lost your Love.

Ms Scru. Or, else as if your Spouse Sir, had rebukt you

Sea. How is it, Sir? you feel have brought along
My Fiddlers with me; my Wife and Ms Holland
Are good wind Instruments. It Is enough for me
To put on sadness.

War. You, Sir, have no cause.

Seath. Not I? ask Ms Scruple. I have lost
My Daughter, Sir she is stolen. Then, Sir, I have
A spend thrift to my son.

Warch. These are felicities
Compard to me. You have not matched a Whore, Sir,
Nor lost two ships at sea.

Sea. Nor you, J hope.

War. Truth is you are my friends. I am abused,
Grossly fetched over. I have matched a Stews;
The notedst woman oth' Town.

Ms Seath. Indeed J heard
She was a Chambermaid.

Ms Holl. And they by their place,
Do wait upon the Lady, but belong
Unto the Lord.

Sea. But is this true?

War. Here was
My Nephew just now, and one Roseclap, who tell me
She has three Children living; one dapple gray,
Half Moore, half English. Knows as many men
As she that sinnd by the Calendar, and divided
The nights oth' year with several men.

Sea. Bless me goodness!

War. Then like a mad condemnd to all misfortunes,
J have estated her in all I have.

Sea. How?

War. Under hand and seal, Sir, irrecoverably.

Enter Salewit. SCENA. VI.
To them Sale-wit. Ms Holl. LOok Ms Scruple here is your husband.

Sale. Be
The leave ofe the fair Companee.

Ms Scrup. My Husband?
His cold keeps him at home. surely J take
This to be some Dutch Elder.

Sal. Were is
The Breed an Breed-groome? Oh, Monsieur, J'me com't
To give you zhoy, and bless your Capon; were
Is your fair Breed?

War. O Monsieur, you have joynd me
To a chaste Virgin. Would when J came to you
Y' had used your Ceremonies about my Funeral.

Sal. Foonerall? Is your Breed dead?

War. Would she were.
I Would double your Fee, Monsieur, to bury her.

Sal. Ee can but leetle English.

War. No, J see
You are but new come over.

Sal. Dover? Tere
Eelanded.

War. J, Sir, pray walk in; that door
Will land you in my dining room.

Sal. Ee tank you. Exit.

War. This is the Priest that married us.

Sea. This is
A Frenchman is it not?

War. It Was at the French Church.

SCENA VII.
Enter to them two Footmen bearing the Frame of a great Picture. Curtains
drawn. 1 Foot. SEt'em down gently, so.

2 Foo. They make me sweat*
Pictures quoth you? slight they have weight enough
To be the Parties.

1 Foot. My Lady, Sir, has sent
A Present to your wife.

War. What Lady pray?

1 Foot. Madam Aurelia, Sir.

War. Oh --

2 Foot. Sir, they are
A brace of Pictures with which my Lady prays
She will adorn her Chamber.

Ware. Male Pictures pray,
Or Female?

1 Foot. Why do you ask?

Ware-h. Because me thinks
It should be Mars and Venus in a Net,
Aretines postures, or a naked Nymph,
Lying asleep, and some lascivious Satyr
Taking her lineaments. These are pictures which
Delight my wife.

2 Foot. These are Night-peeces, Sir,

Ms Holl. Lord how I long to see'em? I have at home
The finest ravished Lucrece!

Ms Scru. So have I
The finest fall of Babylon! There is
A fat Monk spewing Churches, save your presence.

Ms Holl. Pray will you open 'em.

1 Foot. My Lady charged us
None should have sight of 'em, Sir, but your wife.

War. Because you make so dainty, I will see'em.

2 Foot. It Is out of our Commission.

War. But not of mine. Draws the Curtain within are discovered Bright. and
Newcut.
Hell and damnation!

1 Foot. How do you like 'em, Sir?

Ms Holl. Look they are picturd in their clothes.

Ms Sea. They stir too.

2 Foot. Sir, they are drawn to life; a Masters Hand
Went to 'em, I assure you.

War. Out Varlets, Bawds,
Panders, avoid my house. O Devil! are you They come out.
My wives Night-peeces?

Br. Sir, you are rude, uncivil,
And would be beaten.

New. We cannot come in private
On business to your wife, but you must be
Inquisitive Sir? Thank God it is in your own house,
The place protects you.

Br. If such an Insolence
Escape unrevenged, henceforth no Ladies shall Enter Dor.
Have secret servants.

New. Here she comes, we will ask
If she gave you Commission to be so bold.

War. Why this is far beyond example rare.
Now J conceive what is Platonic Love,
It Is to have men like Pictures brought disguised,
To Cuckold us with virtue. They whisper.

SCENA VIII.
To them Dorcas. Dor. HE would not offer't would he?

Br. We have been
In danger to be searched; hereafter we
Must first be questiond by an Officer,
And bring it under hands we are no Men,
Or have naught dangerous about us, before
We shall obtain access.

New. We do expect
In time your Husband to preserve you chaste,
Should keep you with a guard of Eunuchs; or
Confine you, like Italians, to a room
Where no male Beast is pictured, least the sight
Of ought that can beget, should stir desires.

Dor. I mar'le, Sir, who did license you to pry,
Or spy out any friends that come to me;
It shows an unbred Curiosity;
Which J'le correct hereafter, you will dare
To break up Letters shortly, and examine
My Tailor, least when he brings home my gown
There be a Man in it. J'le have whom I list,
In what disguise I list, and when I list,
And not have your four eyes so saucy, to peep,
As if you by prevention meant to kill
A Basilisk.

War. Mistress, do what you list,
Send for your Couch out, lie with your Gallants there
Before us all. Or if you have a mind
To fellows that can lift weights, I can call
Two Footmen too:

Sea. You are too patient, Sir.
Send for the Marshall, and discharge your house.

Ms Sea. Truly a handsome woman, what pity it is
She is not honest?

Ms Holl. Two proper Gentlemen too.
Lord that such Pictures might be sent to me.

SCENA ULTIMA.
Enter to them Plotwell and Roseclap. with Baneswright and Quartfield
disguised. War. O Nephew welcome to my ransom; here
My house is made a new Erection; Gallants
Are brought in varied forms. Had I not looked
By providence into that frame, These two
Had been conveighd for Night-peeces and Lantskips
Into my chaste Brides chamber. Till now she took
And let her self out; now she will be able
To hire, and buy Offenders.

Plot. J'le ease you, Sir.
We Two have made a full discovery of her.

Ros. She Is married to another man, Sir.

War. Good.
Nephew thou art my blessed Angel: who
Are these two?

Plotw. Two that will secure your Ships;
Sent by the Office. Seal you, Sir, The have brought
The Assurance with them.

War. Nephew thou were borne
To be my dear preserver

Plotw. It is duty, Sir,
To help you out with your misfortunes. Gentlemen,
Produce your Instruments. Uncle put your seal, They subscribe seal and
deliver interchangeably
And write your name here, they will do the like
To the other parchment. So, now deliver.

War. I do deliver this as my Act and Deed.

Ban. Quart. And we this as our Act and Deed.

Pl. Pray Gentlemen
Be witness here. Upon a doubtful Rumor
Of two Ships wrackt as they returned from Ormus,
My Uncle Covenants to give three parts
To have the fourth secured. And these two here Sea. Ros Br. New. subscribe as
witnesses.
As Delegates of the Office, undertake
At that rate to assure them. Uncle now
Call forth the Saylor, and send for the Priest Ent. Sale. * Cyph.
That married you.

War. Look here they come.

Plot. First then,
Not to afflict you longer, Uncle, since
We now are quit, know, all this was my project.

War. How?

Plot. Your two Ships are richly landed: if
You Will not believe me, here is the Saylor, who Cyph. undisguises.
Transformd to Cipher, can tell you.

Cyp. It Is very true, Sir.
I hired this travailing case of one oth' Sailors,
That came in one of 'em. They lie at Black-wall.
Troth I in pity, Sir, to Mr Plotwell,
Thought it my duty to deceive you.

War. Very well, Sir.
What are these Masquers too?

Plot. Faith, Sir, these Ex. Cyph. they undisguise.
Can change their forms too. They are two friends
Worth threescore thousand pound, Sir, to my use.

War. Baneswright, and Captain Quartfield!

Qu. Nay old boy
The have a good pennyworth on it. The jest is worth
Three parts of four.

Ban. Faith, Sir, we hope you will pay
Tunnage and Poundage into the bargain.

War. O
You are a precious Rogue, you ha preferred me
To a chaste Lucrece, Sirrah.

Ban. Your Nephew, Sir,
Has married her with all her faults, They are
New come from Church.

War. How?

Pl. Wonder not, Sir, you
Were married but in jest. It Was no Churchforme,
But a fine Legend out of Rablais.

Sal. Troth Salw. undisguises.
This reverend weed cast off, I Am a lay Poet,
And can not marry unless't be in a Play,
In the fifth Act, or so; and that's almost
Worn out of fashion too.

Ms Sea. These are the two
That showd my son.

Ms Holl. Lets have our money back.

Plotw. But Uncle for the Jointure, you have made her,
J hope you will not retract. That and three parts
Of your two Sips, besides what you will leave
Us at your death, will make a pretty stock
For young beginners.

War. Am I o'rereacht so finely?

Sea. But are you married, Sir, in earnest?

Plot. Troth,
We have not been abed yet, but may go,
And no Law broken.

Sea. Then I must tell you, Sir,
Y' have wronged me, and I look for satisfaction.

Plotw. Why? I beseech you, Sir.

Sea. Sir, were not you
Betrotht once to my daughter?

Ms Seath. And did not I,
And Ms Holland help to make you sure?

Plot. I do confess it.

Sea. Bear witness, Gentlemen,
He does confess it.

Plot. I Will swear it too, Sir.

Sea. Why
Then have you matched this woman?

Plot. Why? because
This is your Daughter, Sir, I Am hers by Conquest,
For this days service.

Sea. Is It possible I should
Be out in my own child so?

Ms Sea. I told you husband.

Ms Scru. Surely my spirit gave me it it was she.
And yet to see, now you have not your Wire,
Nor City Ruff on, Mistress Sue, how these
Clothes do beguile. Jntruth I took you for
A Gentlewoman.

Sea. Here be rare plots indeed.
Why how now, Sir, these young heads have outgone us.
Was my Son oth' plot too?

Plotw. Faith, Sir, he
Is married too; I did strike up a wedding Ent. Tim. Aur.
Between him and my sister,

Pen. Look, Sir,
They come without their Maiden heads.

Sea. Why this
Is better still. Now, Sir, you might have asked
Consent of Parents.

Tim. Pray forgive me, Sir.
I thought I had match a Lady, but she proves --

Sea. Much better, Sir; I Would chide you as a Fish
But that your choice pleads for you.

Tim. Mother pray
Salute my wife, and tell me if one may not
Lie with her lips; nay you too, Mr Holland;
You taught her to make Shirts and Bonelace; she is
Out of her time now.

Mr Holl. I release her, Sir.

War. I took your sister for a Lady, Nephew.

Plot. I kept her like one, Sir, my Temple scores
Went to maintain the Title, out of hope
To gain some great match for her, which you see
Is come to pass.

War. Well, Mr Seathrift, things
Are just fallen out as we contrivd'em; I
Grieve not I am deceived. Believe me, Gentlemen,
You all did your parts well; it was carried cleanly;
And though I could take some things ill of you
Fair Mistress, yet it was plot, and I forget it;
Lets in and make 'em Portions.

Sea. Lead the way, Sir.

Ban. Pray stay a little.

War. More Revelations yet?

Ban. I all this while have stood behind the Curtain;
You have a brother, Sir, and you a father.

Plot. If he do live, I have.

Ban. He in his time
Was held the wealthiest Merchant on the Exchange.

War. It Is true, but that his shipwracks broke him.

Ban. And
The debt for which he broke I hear you have Baneswr. undisguises
Compounded.

Sea. I am paid it.

Ban. Then I thank you.

War. My brother Plotwell!

Ban. Son I wish you joy.

Plot. O my blessed stars! my Father.

Ban. And to you fair Mistress
Let it not breed repentance that I have,
For my security to escape your Father,
A while descended from my self to this
Unworthy shape. Now I can cast it off,
And be my true self. I have a ship which fame
Gave out for lost but just now landed too
Worth twenty thousand pounds toward your Match.

Sea. Better and better still.

War. Well what was wanting
Unto our joys and made these Nuptials
Imperfect. Brother you by your discovery Enter Cipher.
Have fully added.

Cyph. Sir, The two Sheriffs are
Within and have both brought their Wives.

War. The Feast
Intended for my wedding shall be yours.
To which I add may you so love, to say
When old, your time was but one Marriage Day.

FINIS.
THE EPILOGVE AT WHITE HALL.
THE Author was deceived, for should the Parts,
And Play which you have seen, plead Rules and Arts,
Such as strict Critics write by, who refuse
T'allow the Buskin to the Comic Muse,
Whose Region is the People, every strain
Of Royalty being Tragic, though none slain:
He Would now, Great Sir, hold all his Rules untrue,
And thinks his best Rule is the Queen and You.
He should have searched the Stories of each Age,
And brought five Acts of Princes on the Stage.
He should have taken measure, and raised sport,
From persons bright, and glorious as your Court*
And should have made his Argument to be
Fully as high, and great as They that see.
Here, he confesses, you did nothing meet
But what was first a Comoedy in the street:
Cheapside brought into verse, no passage strange
To any here that has been at the Exchange.
Yet he hopes none does value it so low
As to compare it with my Lord Majors show.
It Is so unlike, that some, he fears, did sit,
Who missing Pageants did or'esee the wit.
Since then his Scenes no pomp or Highness boast,
And low things graced show Princes Princes most,
Your Royal smiles will raise't, and make him say,
He only wrote, your liking made the Play.
THE EPILOGVE AT BLACKFRIARS.
ONce more the Author, ere you rise, does say
Though he have public warrant for his play,
Yet he to the Kings command needs the Kings Writ
To keep him safe, not to b'arraign'd for Wit.
Not that he fears his name can suffer wrack
From them who sixpence pay, and sixpence crack.
To such he wrote not; though some parts have been
So like here, that They to Themselves came in.
To Them who called reproof to make a face,
Who think they judge when they frown ith'wrong place;
Who if they speak not ill oth' Poet, doubt
They loose by the Play, nor have their two shillings out,
He says, he hopes, they will not expect he would woo,
The Play being done, they would end their sour looks too.
But before you who did true Hearers sit,
Who singly make a box, and fill the Pit,
Who to his Comoedy read, and unseen,
Had thronged Theaters, and Blackfriars been,
He for his Doom stands; your Hands are his Bays;
Since They can only clap, who know to praise.

