The solace OF THE SOVLE AGAINST the bitter storms of sycknes and death,
greatly encouragynge the faithful, patiently to suffer the good pleasure of
God in all kind of aduersite, newly set forth in English by Thomas Becon.

Prouerbi. iii. Refuse not the chastenynge of God, nether grudge thou, when he
correcteeh the. Anno. M.D.XLVIII.

TO THE REDER.
VERE notable is this saying of our LORD and savior Jesus Christ he that
continues unto the end, Math, ^
shall be safe, for it declares unto us, that though the most and greatest
part of our life seems to be spente both faithfully, and godly, yet if we
persevere not in tha^ faith and godlynes even unto the last breath, but let
slyppe our hold, that we have had heretofore of faith and godly conuersatyon
in Christ Jesus, all the labors, pains and trauayles, that we have sustained
in the former part of our life, are frustrate and vain. For noman that
puts his hand to the Ploughe and looks back, Luce. (...).
is mete unto the kingdom of God. And it is written in the Revelation of saint
John. Be faithful unto the ^eath, and I shall give the y^ crown Apoca, ^
of life, the crown of life is prom^sed. But to whom? verily to those that be
faithful even unto death, as saint Paul says. Noman is crowned except he
stryueth laufully, tim. ii.
to strive laufully, is not to play the cowarde in the battle of Christ our
captain, and to give place to our adversaries, but at all times valeauntly to
fight agaynt them with the strong and mighty shylde of faith, and so to
continue even unto the end. And albeit this conflycte between the faithful
Christyanes and there enemies be at all times ieoperdous and full of peril, yet
in in the time of syckenes, and when death begins to draw nyghe, it is
most dangerous. In health and prosperity Satan's assaults seem to be but
tryfles and things of daliauns, but in aduersite, trouble, sycknes and death,
they appear most vehement, grievous, terrible and not able to be resysted, at
which time, if we give place, we are undone, if we manfully resist, the victory
is ours. We must therefore (godly reder) against this so perilous time of
sycknes and death, so furnyshe our selfs unto this battayll, that we be not
put to flyghte, ever remembrynge that our strife and fyghting, is not against
blood and flesh, but against Rulers, against powers, against the lords of
the world, ephe. v^
the Governors of the darkness of this world, against spiretuall subtilities
or wylynesses in heavenly things, I mean Satan with all his infernal army and
deuellysh warryours. And forasmuch as our pryncipal conflycte and chief battle
is in y^ time of sycknes and pains of death, and seeing we have then most need
of consolation and comfort, that we be not overcome nor subdued of our
enemies, but know how we shall both take the cross of Christ, appear it to y^
flesh never so painful, and put our adversaries to flight and so continue
faithful to the end: I have translated this little treatise following, wherein y^
shall find most swet and present comfort both for thy self and other, an
armoures or wepens to defend thy self against all thyn enemies, that not they
over the, but thou over them may full gloriously triumph, and get the
victori through Jesus christ our gra^d^ captain, this lytyl work I wysh^ to
be in the hands of all the faithful at all times, but specially in ye time of
there sycknes, y^ they might learn^ unfeignedly to rejoice in tribulation and
valea^tly to strive against the enemies, the slesh, the world, y^ diui^ hell,
syn, death and desperatio^. Yea^ I wish y^ all the faithful in the tim^ of there
sickness might have this tr^atyse red unto the^, either of there cu^rates or of
some other faithful christians: so should they without al doubt fin^e exceeding
great comfort, patiently and thankfully bear the cross that god lays upon
the^, and with glad hearts wyshe with S. Paul to be losoned from this wretched
body and to be with Christ in glory. Philip.
Farewell good Reder, and pray that the Gospel of our health, Roma.
which is the mighty power of god unto salvation for every one that believes,
may have free passage emonge us unto the utter subuersio^ of Antichrist and his
kingdom. Pray also, that we may so led our lyfes in all things comfortable to
the will of god, that through our godly manners and Christen conversation we may
garnyshe and beautifye the doctrine of our savior and Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom with the father and the holy ghost be al glory praise and honor, worlds
without end.

AMEN.
THE SOLACE OF THE SOVLE.
THOU SHALT Ever be at this point (o thou Christian) which art sick and
dyseased, faithfulli to believe that thy punyshement and trouble comes not unto
the by chauns or fortune, but by the appoyntmente, council and sufferauns of
God. What soe^er syckenes, calamyte or myscry chaunchethe to the godly, all
that come to pass at the appoyntmente, will and pleasure of God. ^u. xvii
For in him we live, move, and have our being. He has made us, ^. xcix
and not we our selfs. Nether shalt thou doubt, but that of a right good
and very fatherly mind he sends the what so ever disease thou have, not to
destroy the, but to call the unto repe^tauns, and to exercise, prove, try, and
store up thy faith. For afflyctions are the sure signs and undoubted tokens of
Gods high mercy, and syngulare good will. Who^ he loves, him he correcteh,
says Salomo^. Proue^
He scourges every son, that he receives: Hebr.
that thy most tender heavenly father, which so derely loves the, according
to his singular good appointme^te, and of an ernest bent good will toward
the, with this thy aduersyte even as it were with bonds does pluck back,
refrain, and mortifye thy old man, that y^ may crucyfye with Christ the
gladlier and more cherfully thy body and offer it as a sacryfice: Romans
this thy di^ease therefore, wherewith thou art vexed, is a fatherly
chastysemente laid upon the, not that thou should be distroied, but that
thou should be amended, quickened and made a new man. Paraduenture God the
the father sees, that thy old Adam is fearse, stobborne, froward unruly take
his pleasure, lives more licenciously the^ becomes him follows his awn
carnal affectes, and can keep him self in no good order, therefore does he cast
this as an halter upon him, snarle him with this fetters and chenes, spearethe
him in this prison and dengden, ouercometh him with this punishment, that he
may bridle him, knock him down and keep him under awe, (...)
that he cast in to perell and put in extreme ieoperdye thy most noble and
precious soul: flesh and blood reygne and bear more rule in the, tha^ the
spirit: here is god present with thy spirit, and helps her stryuing against
the fearse vnrul^ and rebellious flesh, that she may overcome, subdue and
tread under foot the flesh. If that were in good health and in bodily
prosperity now, paraduenture, the flesh (as it is always naturally disposed,
pro^e and bent unto y^ devil) should deceive the and cast the into many and
grievous sins against God wherwyth God being dyspleased thou should be in
danger of cursyng and dampnatio^: that thy heavenly father preuentyng this
inco^modite and perell, and prouidynge for the and thy health, bryngethe under
and kepethe down thy flesh, which with all main and ferse waxes wood
against the spirit, Gala.
and is evermore contrary to it, that it be not waloued forth into y^ most
stynkynge and fylthy pudle of sin, but be subject and obedyent to the
spyrite: forasmuch than as this is the pleasure of thy most louinge Father,
again seeing that all thyngesturne unto thy co^modite and wealth, take heed
dylygenlye (O brother) that thou doste not strive against the good will of God
but, suffer and pray y^ the will of thy father may be done in the, that he may
handle the as he thinks best, and that thou may not wysshe covet or desire
any thing, but that he shall think good, that all things may turn to the
glory and praise of god and that he may assyste the with his grace, that thou
may patiently and thankefully bear the cross that is laid upon the: for
patience bryngethe experyence, experyence brings hope, and hope makes not
ashamed. Here have thou an occasyon to exercise and learn patience in all thy
troubles. First thou lernest that God of a fatherly mind punishes the, and
this do thou learn by experyence, na. v
for except thou dedyst prove in very deed, how health full it were to give
over thy self wholly to God, to obey his will, (as David says, it is hyghly
for my profyt, that y^ have punished me) thou could not conceive a certain
and xviii*
sure hope of him, having no experye^ce before that a mind so fatherlye and
wonderfully desirous of the high hid under this cross and rod. But seeing
thou have learned that before by experience, and haste now some taste of that
thing, thou doste not despair in any trouble, but thy hope increases
streyghtewayes, seeing thou have before ofte^tymes proved* the help of God
present. And although he wynketh at the matter, and sometime suffers the for
a certain space to styke and stand fast in the mire, yet at the last he
retcheth forth his helping hands, delyuereth and saves the: he suffers the
to swymme for a certain space, yea and to be overwhelmed with waters, but he
sufferethe the not to be drowned. Hereof may thou gather a sure hope, that
he will never leave the socou^les nor cast y^ away, seeing he has preserved the
being so often in ieoperdye: in aflyctyons and trubles therefore do thou learn
to conceive and nouryshe a good and undoubted hope of God, that even in the
most grievous afflyctions of al, where no help at all appears, thou may
trust unto him, being now thorouly taught his custom in deliuerynge and
saving his people, thou haste learned that afflictions be sent not of
dyspleasure but of a Fatherly love. Which thing thou beleuyng and having
experyence thereof, doste pacyently abide his help, neither dispayrest thou,
but trustest steadfastly, that he at the last will help the, although he
delayeth it never so long, hydeth and kepethe him self secret. And thus at
the last do thou know and understand that thy disease or trouble is not sent
unto the for this purpose that y^ should be destroyed, bu^ that the glory of
God may be set abroad, and that al things may turn unto thy health and
salvation: he y^ can give him self over and wholly commit him self to god on
this manner, and put al his aff^auns and trust in his promises, truly that man
never dies: which thing Christ him self even with an ooth, because we should
not doubt, affyrminge the same, says, Uerely, verily, John, v
if any man keep my word, he shall never se death. And in an other place he
says. I am the way, the truth, and the life: he that believes in me, shall
live, John, x
although he be dead. And he that lives, and believes in me, shall never dye:
John. ^.
these words of christ (o brother) look that thou depely repose the^ and with
al diligence keep them in thy mind, and wha^ soever y^ perceiuest y^ ^hi mind
waver or is tr^bled, vnderprope and lift it up with this sweet and comfortable
John. ^
sayings: he that beleuethe in Christ, shall not taste death: he that
believes in me, has everlasting h^. xvii
life, says Christ: this is ever lastyng life, to know the even the true God,
and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Everlasting life is begun in this
world: for he that has Christ, has the true life, for Christ is y^ life: he
is also the truth in, xiiii
therefore will not he mock us, butal the promises of god ar in hi^, ^ori. i.
ye and ar in him Ime^. And that y^ should doubt nothing, but that God will
abide by his promises, he has bond him self unto the with a certain peculiar
couenaunte and sign put unto thy body. ^tisme*
For when he being gratly desirous of thy health sent his son in to the
world to offer him self unto the death for thy sake, he ded make and stryke
up a barge^ of grace before y^ christ, in who^ he has promised, if thou will
believe and be Baptized, that he will give the everlasting life frelye, and
never forsake the, yea that he will be thy father, Psalm. cii
and crown the with grace and mercy: thy baptysme is a sign of this
couenaunte. Now is it necessari for the, that thou cleuest with tothe and nail
to the promyses, which are added to this sign. For God has given this sygue,
that thou should nothing doubt of the grace or favor that he has promised,
nor yet of his faith concerning the faithful perfyrmans of the same: thou
art baptized to dye with Christ, as Paul says, Romans vi
that his death should be thy death, and that he should puryfye all things for
thy sake, yea thou have put him on in babtisme, that thou shuldeste be whole in
him, and he in the.

Baptysme therefore is a couenau^te, which lyfteth up, chereth and makes quiet
thy conscience before god (as Peter testifies) that he will never ^. Pet. i^^
dampne the for thy sins. For thou being justified by faith, have peace with
God: a quiet, clear, and pacifyed conscience is the true peace ^ma. v.
Thou have perceived a most sure sign as a certain seal of this justification
and remission of sins, ^uen Baptysme, that thou should believe for a
certente, that God for Christ's sake will have pytye on the, preserve and
deliver the.

Now seeing than that God fauo^eth the, and will be thy father and never
forsake the, seeing also that thou haste an vndeceauable sign and wyt^es of
this thing, look that thou do commyt and wholly give over to him both thy
self and all that ever perteine unto y^* thou must also obey his will, and
patiently suffer his hand, whether he will that thou live or dye, that his
will, which is ever best, may be done ^om. viii
unto the glory and praise of him, although it be impossible, that tho^
should be dampened, if thou doste faithfully trust on the mercy which he has
promised for Christ's sake and consecrate thy self wholly to him, obeynge his
most godly will in all parts. For he has promised, that he will be thy
father, and forasmuch as he is true, when thou knoweledgest him to be thy
father, and do hope and look for all good things of him, he can none
otherwhyse but be thy father and save the, although he handle the for a certain
time never so hardly. Seeing tha^ that he has promised to be thy father, and
thou do trust on his promises, without doubt he will care both for the and
thine at all times: wherefore thou shall commend to him not only thy body, but
also thy wife and children, thy kynnesmen and friends, to be short, all that
ever thou haste, and doubt not but that ^e will be a true Father, a true
husband, a true kynnesman and friend: for he has hitherto used the in these
things only as a stuward and dyspensatoure: But now seeing he is minded that
thou shouldeste leave of the function and use of this office, he will appoynte
another in thy room, which like a good stuwarde shall both faithfully and
dilygently look upon them. If thou hopest this thing of him, and lokest for it
with a full trust of heart, it is no doubt, but he will do that I have spoken:
wherefore put out of thy mind, all sorrowful care of worldly things, and
commend it to God. Rather take thought for thy self, how thou may provide
for thy soul, and send that unto God. And seeing that God has forgyuen the
all thy sins freely for Christ's sake, he requires nothing at all of the, for
this exceeding great and in estimable benefyte, but that thou should again
forgive even from the very heart them that have done the wrong: for he
promysethe Math
that he will forgyne us our offenses if we forgive men there offenses, Mat. x
therefore when thou haste forgyuen all Merci^
offenses even from the very heart, yea and that so, that thou never
remembreste them afterward, pray also for them that have hurt the according
to the doctrine and example of Christ, Luce. x
yea and if ever thou recouerest, help so much as lygheth in thy power them
that have need of thy help. If that thou have a mind void, of dissimulation,
preuy dyspleasure, envy, malice, ill will and wrath, thou haste also a sign
and earnest token that God has forgyuen the thy sins: for faith wherwyth thy
heart is puryfyed, Actu. ^
stretchynge out her self, and bringing ^orth her fruits for the infynite
benefits of God can none otherwise then forgive again and to do well to her
neighbor. This fruit of charity bears the witness and makes the sure, that
thy faith is true and lyuishe, seeing it brings forth true and good fruytes:
This means Peter, where he commaundethe that we should make our vocation Pet.
^.
and election fyrme and sure with good works, for he signifies and plainly
means, y^ this works ar testimonies and signs that thou art elect of God,
and purchased to be his son unto the joys of everlasting life. Nether is
there any cause (o brother) that god should forgive the thy sins, for the
greuousnes of thy disease and cross: for there is none other satisfaction,
John. i^.
none other reco^pense for thy sins, than the only death of Christ. God
beholds none other thing in this cause he accepts none other thing here
than his only begotten son: he is y^ la^be of god which takes away the
sins of Johan.
the world: He is the sacrifice and oblation sufficient, Hebre.
absolute and perfect for the synnts of the whole world: thy disease and
pains ca^ not satisfye before God for the lest syn that thou have committed,
much les are they able to deserve health and everlasting salvation, as Paul
testifies, Rom^
saying I do not think that the affli^tions of this life are worthy of the
glory which shall be showed upon us. No creature nether in heaven nor earth, no
a^gel was able to apease, mytigate and swage the wrath of the father, much les
shall this thy disease and short trouble pacyfye it. For he that should aswage
that wrath and reco^cile God to man, he must needs be both god and man, seeing
he must be an intercessor and advocate between god 1. Ti^
being angry and man condemned. Therefore was it conuentente for the son of
god to become man, that he sh^lde apease the wrath of God the father by
sufferynge pains in his own body, and so preserve us from it, as the Prophet
testyfiethe, saying: He has taken upon him our dyseases, ^y. liii,
and borne away our sorrows. God has laid y^ unrighteousness of us all on
him: For the wickedness of my people have I stricken him. et. ii
And Peter says: By his strypes were we made whole: therefore for this Christ
thy Lord are thy sins forgyuen the, and for none other thing neither in
heaven nor in earth, not for thy good works, nor for any afflyction, although
never so hard and bitter, ^rin. i.
Christ is our only ryhhteousnes, health, redemption and satisfaction: God
made him syn for us, which knew no syn that we might be made righteous:
wherefore if thou beleuest, thou art the son of God al ready: if thou be the
son of God than art thou also the heir of God, and fellow enheritoure with
Christ: if everlasting life be enheritaunce and the gift of God, as Paul
calls it, Roma.
certes then shalt thou not deserve it with the sorrows of thy disease: but
God would have the punyshed with this sickness, that thou myghtest repress
break, restrain and mortyfye thy old man, that it may ones cease to sin,
that shall come to pass at the last by the death of the body. And for this
cause must we dye, that our soul may depart hence unto everlasting salvation:
for this death is a gate and entrauns unto eternal life, there at the last are
we delivered from al wretchednesses, miseris carefulnes, dysquietnes, from al
erroures and iuglynge castes of the dyuill, neither shall we any more be
defiled with the most stynkynge fylthynes of sin, neither shall we be seduced
and led away into heresys or erroures, nor yet be thrown hedlonge into
desperation. For an end of all euylles, adversities and inco^modities is then
come, yea the^ shall we rest in the Lord and enjoy eternal life and pleasure
without end. Death therefore is not to be abhorred nor feared, yea it is rather
most fervently to be desired, seeing by that we pass hence unto eternal joys.
om. viii
Uery true is y^, which Paul says, to the godly all things work for the
best: Death in the syghte of the world is a thing of all things most
odyous, most hateful, most loathsome and most horrible, yet to the faithful
it is most swet, most acceptable and most pleasant. And although it be so,
that our old^ Adam tre^bleth at it, excheweth and abhors it, yet the inward
man i^ ready and wylling to suffer it, for as much as he perceyueth and knows
that by it he is delivered from all fylthines of syn, vice, and wretchedness
and departethe unto everlasting joys.

How they are to be comforted, which are in parell of death.
THE best God and thy most loving father having pytie on the (o Brother)
calls the from this most wretched and miserable life, wyllyng to remove the
unto him, and to carry the into y^ perpetual joys of the heavenly life.
Therefore yield, give over and commend to him wholly thy self, and all that
ever thou have, and what so ever his will is let thy will be the same, and
say, let thy will be done o father God, Mat. x
and not mine: cry unto Christ with the thief fastened to the cross, reme^ ber
me, o Lord, Luce. ^
when thou comeste into thy Kingdom: erye with the Publican, nc. xviii
Lord be merciful to m^ wretched sinner cry instanstly with that earneste
woman the Cananite, ^ath. xv
o son of David have mercy on me. If thou cryest thus, Christ will hear
the, doubt not, he will have mercy on the, he will forgive the thy sins, yea
thou shalt be with him in paradyse: therefore lay hand on this Christ, cleue
to him with tothe and nail, commyt thy soul unto him: cry with this christ
crucifyde unto God the common father, al. lxi.
o Lord my trust is in the, let me never be put to confusion, but rydde me,
and deliver me through thy ryghteousnes: Bow down thine ear unto me, make
haste to deliver me. Be thou my God and strong hold (whereunto I may always
fle) that thou may help me, for thou art my strenght and refuge: thou art
my defender: Into thy hands I commend my spirit: cry also with David: Psalm.
vxii
o Lord thou art my strenghte, my sure hold, my refuge and my delyuerer. O my
God thou art my helper, my defe^der, and the horn of my health and my
protection. Unto the o Lord, lift I up my soul: o my God my trust is in the,
let me not be driven to shame: dyrecte me in thy truth, thou art the God my
sauionre, Remember, o Lord thy tender mercies, and thy pyteful compassions,
which thou have ever used: Remember not the trespasses of my yonghe:
According to thy mercy remember me for thy goodness sake: for thy names sake
(o lord) forgive my sin, for it is much: look on me, and have pytye on me,
deliver me from my necessities: forgive me all my offenses keep my soul, and
deliver me: Let me not be put to confusion for my hole trust is in the. If on
this manner thou will call for the help of God with and hole heart, god will
surely helpe^ the in time convenient, and he will say unto the that, which is
in the Psalm. Forasmuch as he has put his trust in me, ^sal. xc,
I will deliver him: I will defend him because he has known my name: He has
cried unto me, and I will favorably hear him. I am with him in his
tribulation: I will deliver him and glorify him. Wherefore (o thou Christian)
fight here a good fight, strive valeau^tly and with a good corrage, as it
becomes a true christea^ man: take heed, y^ geuest not over, take heed, thou
turnest not thy back: there is no danger thou stryueste not here alone, but
Jesus Christ the king is thy guide in this agony, this thy guide and captain
shall be thyn auen ger, and in this battle he shall defend and deliver the from
all the enemies of thy soul, from all perell and from all misery and
wretchedness: follow this captayn going before the in this co^flicte and battle:
he is a king not like to other but of an exceeding and infinite power: he has
already overcome and thrown under the foot for thy sake: death, Hebrc. i^^ i.
Cor. x^ Oze. xiii
Satan and hell death is swallowed up into victory Christ dyed for the:
Therefore everlasting death has no power in the Christ went down for the unto
hell, that he might deliver the from this everlasting darknesses therefore be on
a lustye and bold^ mind, and with a valeau^te courage brast into the army. Put
away all fear, there is no danger in this behalf: there is no cause why thou
should fear the fearce and streyghte judgment of God. Christ Jesus is a
mediator before God, i. Tim^
the same is an advocate, yea and thy Patron, defender, Bishop and Preeste:
i. Iohu. Hehre.
He has reconcyled the to God, and has restored to the his fafatherly
mind, which before was estraunged from the for thy sins, God for Christ's
sake is now thy father, he takes charge of the, he entierly loves the as his
most tender son. Now seeing that so noble a king stands on thy side, who
shall put the to any busynes, who shall be bold to assail the or ones fight
against the? who I pray the, shall do the any wrong? what danger ca^ there be?
hear Paul: om. viii
If god be on our side, says he, who can be against us? which spared not his
own son, but gave him for us all, how is it possible, that with him he should
not give us all things? who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect?
It is God that justifies, who is he that ca^ condemn? it is Christ that dyed,
yea which rose again, which also is at the right hand of god, and makes
intercession for us: Who shall sepa^ate us from the law of? God I am sure that
neither death, nor life, nor ^yghenes, nor depenes, nor any other creature can
separate us from tha law of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Therefore
seeing that Christ is given, to the with all that ever he has, so folowethe
it that his ryghteousnes, innocence, health and everlasting life is given to
the, as Paul witness the, i. Cor. i.
saying. Christ is made of God our wisdom, ryghteousnes, sanctification and
redemption. Therefore put all thy hope, psalm. cxv^
trust and confidence in this Christ, which is the head cornerstone. This
stone is a valeaunte, strong, i. Pet. ii
steadfast and sure foundation, whereunto thou may safely trust and commytte
thy self. No tempest although never so black and horrible, no showers, Math.
vi^^
no storms ca^ shake and topple ever this foundation: In this Christ, I say,
let all thy hope and confydence be set. Cast thy self wholly on him, yield
thy self altogyther to him, cleue to him with strong faith, let no trouble or
temptation pluck the from him, although all things seem never somuche to the
go to havoc, although slesh^ and blood yell the never so much the
contrary, and reason thynkethe far otherwise, yea although th^^ Devil
sometime whysper in thy mind that thou art utterly undone, that God is an
extreme enemy unto the, and that thou haste deserved the punishment of hell
fire, and therefore thou must needs be dampened* For faith is a sure confidence
and ^ lokynge for of this things that ebre. xi
are to be hoped, that is to say, promised, and a certen^e and euyden
knowelege of those things tha^ do not appear with that holy (...) Patriarche
Abraham thou must believe under hope against hope: thy faith and hope must
needs resyste and set them selfs against all those things, which ever blind
reason does Imagyne, or that most sutle, and craftye enemy do bring to
remembauns and work against the: wherefore thou must thoroulye learn what
cu^^tme, deu. xxx
God does keep in saving his: i Reg. ii.
whom he will lift up into heaven, Tobi. xii
him he bryngethe down first unto Hell: Sap^e. xv
Whom he will ^uycken, him does he first kill, Psalm. c. xi^
upon whom he will exercise his exceeding Mercy, him will he first try, and
make asthoughe he would dampne him. And this is that unfeigned purgatory and
that true purging fire, The true Purgator
into the which God castethe his Servants and prouethe them as Gold in the
fire: ^pien, iii
wherefore when thou fealeste none other thing then most present death,
when God ^emeth to be most angry with the, to be gone away most furdeste
from the, and to have forsaken the utterly, yea when he semethe that he has
cast ^ the away and will condemn the even then think thou most certainly
that he is most nyhhe unto the, that he will defend the and deliver the, yea
that he then most entyerly loves the, and carethe most of all for the: for
when he does lay^ afflyction and trouble upon the, the does he remember his
mercy, as^ the Prophet says. He is not angry for ever: as the father has
pytye of his sons so has the Lord compassion of them that fear hi^ for he
knowethe our making, and remembers that we are but duste^ The mercy of the
Lord endures sal. c. ii
ever and ever: The Lord is a tender fauorer and merciful, he is long
sufferynge and full of compassyon. Wherefore spare the eyes of thy senses, cast
away the judgment of reason, and submyt, yield, give over, and commend thy
self wholly to Christ, and take it to good worth, how so ever he handles
the: esteem not death and the dredefnlnes and sorrows thereof after the
judgment of the eyes, senles or reason, but after the word of God. David say
the, precyons is the death of Saints in the syghte of the Lord. Again,
Blessed are the ded, Psalm. cxv^
which dye in the LORD. Apo xii
Christ also says, he that believes in me, Iohu. vi
shall not taste ^eathe. Therefore if any things come to remembrance, which
go about to turn the from Christ, and to ^aste the into desperation, cast
them all out of thy mind: cleue to the lively word of God with tothe and
nail, have thy medytation in that and ever be whettynge of that in thy mind:
For thou shalt never by the perspycacyte and quyckenis of thy reason perceive,
how it may be possible, that by Death thou shouldeste goo unto the true
life, how when thou gyueste up the Ghost, thou should depart unto a
better state, how thy soul should be kept in the Lord, and reaste unto the
last day, again, how thy body being rotten, consumed and eaten of worms,
may rise again at the last Judgment, and come forth in a new godly
form, shape or fashon. This can not reason comprehend. Faith alone is able to
do it. Therefore call to thy remembrance contynually the artycles of thy
faith, and boulte out every parcel of them dylygently, and weyghe them
earnestly in thy heart.

How he is to be spoken unto, which is ready to give up the Ghost.
O Brother in Christ, now look that thou fyghteste a good fight, look that
thou abydeste in the faith valeauntly, and steadfastly. Infyxe and depely
engraue in thy breast, the Promyses of Christ thy redemer. Johan. x
I am the resurrection and life, says Christ. He that beleuethe in me, shall
live and never dye. Christ took the nature of man upon him sufferynge many
iniuryes and wrongs, and when he dyed, Hehre. x
he offered him self a sacryfyce for our sins on y^ altar of the Cross,
John. il.
he with his holy bloudthorowlye and in all points cleansed the sins of al
mankind: this Christ will not forsake the, this Christ will not leave y^
socourles, this Christ cares for the: Christ saves the and defe^deth the, so
that no ill or misery shall chauns unto the: the foundation of God stands
sure having this seal. THE LORD KNOVVETH, WHICH ARE HIS. i. Tim. ii
Christ says, my sheep hear my voice, and I know the^ and they follow me,
and I give the^ ever lasting life, neither shall they peryshe for ever, ohan.
x.
nor yet shall any man pluck the^ out of my hand: my father which gave the^
to me, is greater then al, and noman can pluck the^ out of my fathers hand: I
and my father am one. Wherefore (o brother) in Christ, commend thy soul to God
the father, which loves y^ so derely, cry with Christ thy brother, when he
honge on the cross, Luc. xx
o father into thy hands I commend my spirit God the Father of all mercy,
moughte led the into everlasting life, and save the unto that most ioyefull
resurrection of the last judgment AMEN.

Virescit vulnera virtus.

A prayer to be said of the syckman, being in perell of death.
O Most mercyf^ll God, o father of al mercy the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, be mercyful to me a synuer, have pytie on me, and quyckely help me
poor wretch for thy most bitter and most precious passion and death of
Jesus Christ thy only begoten son and our only redemer and sauyoure.
Amen. Enter not into Judgment with thy servant, o Lord handle me not
according to my deserves and merits, neither reward me after mine iniquytie
but for thine infynite and unmeasurable bounte and excedyng great mercy receive
me. I miserable and weak creature am in thy hand, I am thy bond servant
and thy debtor. O most gentle God, o most favorable Father, forsake me not,
cast me not away pore wretch that I am, I am thyn with all that ever I can
make. Noman is able to confirm me, noman is able to deliver me, noma^ is able
to help me, but y^ alone. Thou art the true helper in aduersite, y^are the
most sure and present comfort iu al necessite, y^ alone art our help, our
buluarke, our fortress, and our most mighty and stronly defense fence tower,
y^ o god, art our refuge, thou art our strenght, thou art our helper in all our
tribulatio^s: In the o Lord, do I trust, let me not be co^fou^ded, let me never
be put to shame let me not be deceived of my hope, but preserve me for thyn
righteousness. Bow down thin ear unto me, make have to deliver me. Be my
defe^der, o god, and my strong hold that thou may save me: for thou art my
strength and my refuge, yea y^ art my god, and my destenies ar in thy hands
Lighte^ thy cou^tenau^s upon thy servant, save me for thy mercyes sake, o
Lord. And forasmuch (o sweet Father) as it is thy godly pleasure to call me
from this miserable life and wretched world, I most entierly beseech the so
to defend me in this agonye of death, that Satan nor his ministers prevail
against me, but that I continue faithful and constante unto the end in the
confession of thy holy name, lokyng for full remyssyon of all my sins in the
precyons blood of thy well-beloved son and my savior Jesus Christ, and that
I departing in this faith and perfect trust may be placed among thy blessed
saints and heavenly spirits, so for ever to remain wy^h the in glory. Grant
this o most merciful father for thy son Jesus Christ's sake. Lord recyue my
spirit. Father into thy hands I commend my spyrit: for thou that art the God
of truth haste redeemed me. To the be all glory and honor.

Amen.
The articles of the Christen faith.
FIRST, I believe in one god Deuteronomy. vi. And father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
ii. Cor. i. The which is the Lord of heaven and earth. Luke: xit. And creator
of all, creatures. Hebre. i. Yea he is father of us all, and: Epe. iiii. The
which has elected us to be his children through Jesus Christ. Ephe. i. And
therefore shall we all him worsh^ppe only, and beside him have none other
gods. Deuteronomy. vi Also we shall fear him as one almighty God. Psalm. xxxiiii. And
as mercy full father we shall love him with all our hearts, with all our
soul, and with all our power and mind Math. xxii^ And upon him must stand
all our hope. Hiere. vii. For he is the father of light. Jacob. i. Of the
which all mankind leueth Aetu. xiii. And receives both bodily goods.
Proverb x. And enerlastynke salvation. Psalm. xxxvii Together with all perfect
gifts, which come and descence from him alone. Iacobi.i. Furthermore I believe
in Jesus Christ, the son of the living God our lord. i. Cor. vii The which is
the very bryghtnesse of his fathers glory, and the very image of his
substance. Hebre. i. Yea he is the only begotten son of the father. John.
i. Come forth of the mouth of the most hyeghest God. Eccles. xxiii. First
boren before all creatures. Collos. i. Through the which all things are
created. Hebre. i. In whom we have redemption, namely remyssyon of sins
through his blood. Col. i. With the which he has washed us Apo. i. And has
also reconciled us again to his most holy and gloriouse father. Ephe. ii. That
were before enemies to God. Roma. viii. For after the time that God had made
man, after his image and symilytude, he seat him in Paradise that he should
eat of all the fruytes in the gardyn of pleasure, exceptynge him the tree of
knowledge of good and evil. Gene. ii. But man dysobeyed the Lord his God, and
tra^sgressed his commandment. Gene. iii. Through the which disobedyence and
transgressyon of the godly commandment, death and curse is come over all
mankind. Roma.v. And when there was no help, nor comfort for man whereby he
might have been redeymed, or delivered out of Satan's power, then has God
the merciful Father pytye upon mankind, and Promised them a seade, namelye
Jesus Christ, his only begotten son, the which should tread upon the
head of the Serpente, and overcome the Dyuyll, and restore us to life again.
Genesis. iii. And likewise as God is ryghtuouse in all his ways, and holy in
all his works. Psalms. clv. And true in all his words. Psalm. li. So has he
kepet all his promises tre^ly. And as the time was fulfilled. Gala. iiii. God
leat his word descend in to the womb of the virgyn Mary, and by the workyng of
the holy ghost became flesh: As John witnesses saying: The word became
flesh, and dwelt among us and we saw his glory, as the glory of the only
begotten Son of the father, full of grace and verity. John. i. Also this
only begotten of God became like unto us in all things except syn. Hebre.
ii. He has suffers death for our sake. Esaias. liii. And has taken away
Satan's power, and restored life in again. i. Timothe. vi. Yea he is made unto
us wysdo^, and rightwysnes, sa^tifyeng, and redemption. i. Cor. i. And likewise
as he dyed for our sins. Hebre. ii. So is he risen again through the power
of his father. Roma. vii. For our ryghtuousnes. Roma. iiii. And as he
oftentimes showed him self after his resurrection: unto his dysciples. Actu.
i. So is he ascended unto heaven in there presens. Luke. xxiiii. And sytteth at
the right hand of the almighty father. Rom viii. Above all rule and might,
and dominion, and above all that may be named, not only in this world: but
also in the world to come Ephe. i And has subdued al things under his fete.
Hebre. ii. To be brefe he is a Lord above all lords, and a king above all
kings Apoc. xix. Yea he is an almyghtye God with his father. Apoc. xxii. John.
x. And nevertheless he is our aduocat, and mediator. i. John. ii ^^. Timot.
ii. Our only hye preiste. Hebr. v. The saceifice that he has done for our
sins, abides for eueermore of valor. Hebre. x. Furthermore likewise as
Christ is ascended up in to heau^n, so shall he come again from heanen. Actu.
i With the dominion of his father, and with the angels. Match. xxv. For to give
every man reward after his works, yea for to judge the quycke and dead. Act.
x. i. Tim. iii.

I believe also in the holy Ghost equal god with the father and the son which
holy ghost is a teacher of all christian. John. xiiii. and he does cloth the^
with his gifts, and gives every one the measure of faith after his own will.
i. Corin. xi^. And keeps the^ immovable in one faith for he is a ruler of the
christian congregation. Aet. xx. He is also the anoinmente.i. John. ii.
Wherewyth all Christen are anointed, and of that behalf are called the
anointed of the Lord. Psalm. c. iiii. So is this holy ghost given unto the
Christen as an ernest of there inheritance to there redemption, and they again
be his awn to the pryse of his glory Ephe. i. To be shor ^it is impossible
without this holy ghost to know God truly.i. Cor. ii. Or wythall the hope of
the heart to believe upon him.i. Cor. xii Or to call upon him as a father.
Romanorum. viii.

And therefore does God power this his holy Ghost upon his children, whereby
they may treuly know him, and treuly believe him: and as a true father call
upon him Gala. iiii. This is my believe in the father, in the son, and in the
holy ghost, which tree I knowledge to be one god. Deuteronomy. vi. whous seat is the
heaven, and the earth is a benche of his fete. Esaias. xlvi. Yea y^ which is an
everlasting.ii. Match. i. and almyghtye God. Psalm. c. xlv, The which alone will
be worshypped, and served. Dent. vi. For he can alone help us. Esaias. xliiii.
which he does for his names sake, and not for our righruousnes sake. Esa.
xliiii.

Furthermore as I have said. that al they that do belene ar joined together,
and through the holy ghost knytte in unity. so is there a loving christian
church the which is builded of living stones.i. Pet. ii. which church is the
house of god. Hebr. iii And the house of God is the congregation of god.i.
Timo. iii. And the congregation of god is the body of Christ Ephesians. i. And
seyngy^al right Christians are one body.i. Corin. x. In the which they all
through one spryte are baptized. i. Cor xii. So must there be a congregation of
saints, namely that all saints or true beleners ar also joined together in
faith, as the members of one body Roma, xii. And in this communion of saints
is remission of sins, and that without it is no syn forgeuen, nor any hope of
salvation. Ephe. ii. yea as it is impossible that a member can live which is
not in the body, so it is impossible that any man may live in his soul, and
ca^ be rele^ced out of death by remission of syn, the which is not a member of
the body of Christ: for Christ has reco^cileo us al unto god his father in one
body Ephe. ii. And therefore must al they stand in var^au^ce that at no me^bres
of this body, of the which Christ is the head. Ephe. i. To the which he gives
salvation. Ephe. v.

Now must we also know that albeit, that god alweyes forgeueth synnis. Esaias.
xliii. yet has Christ given unto his congregation power to bind and to loose,
which shall not be understand after y^ Antichrists doctrine. The bishop of
Rome which chalenge^h power to remyt sins, but the Christian congregation
whose head is Christ, and not the Romyshe antichrist, and his ruled of the
holy ghost, and not of the fornicatish spirit of the prophetess Iesabel. This
congregation I say has power to bynd and to loose, that is to say, all what
she binds other loses is done by the poweh of our Lord Jesus Christ i. Cor.
v And through the holy ghost as a ruler of the christian congregation. Actu. xx.
so is there is the Christen congregation remissyon of sins.

There shall be also a general resur rectio^ of the flesh, namely that all they
that are dead, shall rise again, some to everlasting life, and some to
everlasting pain and da^natio^. John v. And they y^ shall live and remain
until the coming of one lord Jesus Christ, they shall be changed in the
ti^keling of an eye at the time of the last tru^peth.i. Cor. xv. For the
trumpet (says Paul (shall blow, and the dead shall rise incorruptible, and we
shall be changed. for the corruptible body must put on vncorruptibilite and this
mortal body must put on immortality. Cor. xv. At the last is there also one
euerlysting life, John xvii. which al they shall receive that believe on Jesus
Christ. John. vi. and steadfastly abyd in good works seeking praise, honor,
and immortality. Roma. ii.

This is the sum of my belief yea and a true Christ belief, through the
which faythal rightuouse live Aba. ii. And without the which belyefe no man may
please god. Hebre xv. Therefore must the everlasting God be blessed, that our
ofr his immesurabl mercy and grace has given us this through Jesus Christ
Ephe. ii. To whom with the fafather and the holy ghost be praise, honor, and
glory, for evermore.

AMEN.
Apoca. Be faithful unto the death and I will give the the crown of life.
Imprynted at Loudon in Paul's church yard at the lygne of the Hill by Wyllya^
Hill, and are tobe sold at the West side of paul's under Peter college by John
Casse.


