Whereas the Professor hereof, Iacobus Maximinus, borne in Italy, and lately
come out of Germany, has attained unto the demonstration of the making of
Four most strange and rare Artificial Stones, and a sweet Ball, and the true
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms virtues thereof: and the Names and Colors of
every stone.

The first, is the Moraccolocius Stone is white: The famous Am^thist is the red Stone: The famous Safaris is the purple Stone: The Safonya, which is the
Straw colored Stone, etc.

THE Moraccolocius stone is white, it is very good to help the Canker in the
mouth or throat, and all evils that come of Blood or rhewme: it must be
dissolved in white wine, it helps in three washings, with Gods help.
Probatum est.

2 It is approved help for the Toothache, and all rotten and stinking Teeth:
put this stone to the hole or aching tooth, and it brings forth the worm, and
rhewme, and is present help (with Gods help) and makes the mouth sweet.
Probatum est.

3 It is good for a stopping, or a stuffing in the stomach with any kind of
phlegm or glart, or heart-burning, and heart-aking, take it fasting in half a
pint of Beer, or Ale, and it is present help. Probatum est.

THE famous Safonya stone, is the straw colored stone, it is very good for the
corns in your feet and ears, soaking your corns in warm water, and then
pare them, and shave some powder of the stone, and it helps them suddenly, the
powder being laid thereto. Probatum est.

2 Make this stone into powder, and mix it with oil of Bays, and it will
kill the itch, and make no Lice shall trouble any one if the body be anointed
therewith. These stones have been proved, and have helped many one in this
City of London. Probatum est.

The Professor hereof does make a sweet Ball of diverse colors, which is good
to take off the Morphew, and all spots, and Sunburnes, and clears and
beautifieth the face, if you wash it in the mornings, and rub it with a
stammell cloth. And this Ball will take out staynes out of any woollen or
silk in fair water to be washed. Probatum est.

THE famous Amothist stone is red, it is good for the pain in the huckle-bone,
or shins, take the stone, beat it to powder, and mix it with Swine grease, and
anoint it by the fire very well, and it is present help, it takes away the
pains and swellings. Probatum est.

2 Make a plaster of this Ointment, and lay it to the stomach, or to the
navel of Children, and it brings away the Worms, both Chest-wormes and other,
in four and twenty hours. Probatum est.

3 Dissolve this stone into four spoonefuls of water, and snuff up part of a
spoonefull at the nostrils, and hold somewhat betwixt the tooth, and let the
rhewme void out, and it helps the pains of the head, and the hearing, and the
Megrim, and sore eyes, and brings away the rhewme out of all parts of the head.
Probatum est.

4 This red stone is very good to stanch Blood: put it to the bleeding place,
or wear it about the neck. Probatum est.

THE famous Safaris stone is the purple stone, it is very good to help the
shaking Palsy and the shaking Ague, and all shaking of the Joints. Sow this
stone in a little silk bag, and wear it about your neck, and with Gods
help it is helped in twenty days. Probatum est.

2 This stone is very good, and a present help for the Crampe: sow it in a
little bag, and wear it about your neck. Probatum est.

The Professor hereof, does make a blew stone, which is good for the green
sickness, and procures urine, and causes the stone to void, and does expel
the wind in the body: you must take it in the morning with Posset-Ale, four
mornings together, and divide it into four parts. Probatum est.

1622. October the 24. Your loving friend, Iacobus Maximinus.
God save the King.

