A DECLARATION OF THE ESTATE OF CLOTHING NOW USED WITHIN THIS REALM OF
ENGLAND.

1 The Royalty and benefit of Wool and Woollen Cloth. 2 The Condition of the
Makers, being two sorts. 3 The antiquity and power of the Alneger. 4 The
manner of search and Searchers, now used. 5 The several faults and abuses
practiced in Cloth. 6 The inconvenience and hurt by the abuses. 7 The remedy
to be made by the Alnegers provision.
With an Apology for the Alneger, showing the necessary use of his Office.

Written by JOHN MAY, a deputy Alneger.

LONDON Printed by ADAM ISLIP, An. Dom. 1613.

TO THE MOST NOble Prince Lodwick Duke of Lenox, Earl of Darnely, Baron of
Torbolton, Metheuen, and Aubigny, Lord high Admerall and Chamberlein of
Scotland, Knight of the most noble order of the garter, and one of the Kings
Majesty's most honorable privy council, and his Highness Alneger general
for the Realm of England and the Dominion of Wales.
Being for a time restrained from that service, which I endeavored to perform
upon some occasion well known to your grace, My love and duty which no cause
can obscure, presents it self with a subject of your government, often by your
Graces cost and consent examined by me; whose condition shall be truly
revealed, leaving the censure thereof to your honorable and wise consideration,
my self standing by to accuse it of many defects, who might be drawn back
in bashful manner when I look into mine own impefection in wanting
sufficiency to deliver this cause in the right nature, but knowing that truth
seems beautiful although naked, and presuming on your honorable disposition,
which is ever more ready to forgive than sharply to reprove harmeles
simplicity, imboldens me to go forward although in rude sort; wherein your
grace may not epect an exquisit manner, but like a plain man's tale before a
Judge, which will more savor of truth than eloquence, nor do I take the
help of any other to prompt me, but only seven years experience, which I
have employed in this subjects acquaintance, and now compiled the same into
seven hours study, for one hours relation, and so made it my first fruits
for this manner of publishing, which I humbly entreat to be shrouded under
your gracious favor. The cause which procures me to this task is two fould:
First, (according to my duty) to acquaint your grace with the estate of the
business: And secondly to stir your aid in the redress, your power being
able to reform, and your place requiring it, still in all humbleness desiring
to have all imperfections ouerpassed with your graces favor, and not called
into a strict examination. The widows mite was small, but acceptable in regard
it was all she had; let not the ability, but the affection be called in
question, which wishes his power far greater, only to show it all in your
graces service to whom he is so perpetual and irreuocable bound unto, as all
is too little he can perform, wishing your grace all worldly content, and
after this life all heavenly joys, to guerdon your happy and honorable deeds.

Your Graces mest humble and devoted servant. JOHN MAY.

To the courteous Reader.
GEntle Reader, I must confess that my ouerdaring attempt, deserves a
disgraceful check, who like Icarus, with waxen wings has soard so high, but
that the sun beams have been favorable, my downfall might be as sodains:
this president is none of my profession, and being so far unfit intend not
to make it my practice. An extraordinary cause compels me to this work,
wherein you must expect an explanation by an Alneger and not by an Orator: and
as I most desire the good opinion of the best, who do always censure well, so
I least regard the taunts of the worser sort, who commonly carpe at all. If
amongst these rude weeds, you can gather any wholesome herbs to serve your use
I shall then gain what I most sought for. I am the more incoraged to adventure
because this vessel is bound to that port, where yet noe other has been
before me with like lading, whose better beautified wares had spoilde my
market: yet have I traveled as much to collect, and been as careful in the
choice of this freight as any whatsoever: and imagine that he which in this,
trades farther, shall deal for a doubtful gain, being commodity not
vendible for all, but rather utterly rejected by some, yet good hope may draw
them on, in regard that the same sort, or the least company and worst
condition, who knows not that from one flower the Be draws honey and the
Spider poison, and that the content of the good, is the contempt of the evil:
Therefore my resolution is set, hap how it will, if the voyage miscarie I am not
the first whom hope has deluded, but will strive to rest satisfied howsoever.
And so I take my leave.

Yours to his power, JOHN MAY.

THE ROYALTY and benefit of Wool and Woollen Cloth.
CHAPTER I.
THE antiquity of Woll within this Kingdom has been, beyond the memory of
man, so highly respected for those many benefits therein, that a customable use
has always been observed to make it the seat of our wise learned Judges in
the sight of our noble Peers, within the place where all wholesome laws are
established for the good government of this kingdom, The Parliament house.
to imprint the memory of this worthy commodity within the minds of those
firm Supporters and chief Rulers of the Land, who ever from time to time have
with greatest care provided for the maintenance thereof, as a blessing sent
from Almighty God upon this nation more than all the people in the world,
whose mercy in preservation of those cattle is shown by the suppression of
ravening Wolves and devouring beasts (enemies to those harmless and
vnresisting flocks) which other countries, to their great damage, do harbor
vnremedilesse: so that no kingdom whatsoever can speak so happily of this
benefit as this realm, who finds it the rich man's increase, and the poor
man's comfort, in such an excellent nature, the quantity so much as serves all
nations in the world, and the quality so good, as is chiefly desired of all,
working a general fame, and most profitable traffic to this Land, that it
may be rightly called, The English India. The depth of benefit in this royal
commodity, was a long time obscured within this kingdom through ignorance and
negligence of our people in those days, who suffered the transportation thereof
unto a more ingenious nation, which made far greater benefit by their labor,
than those whom God had freely sent it unto: For when it was converted from the
sheeps back, fit for man's back, it was returned by them to this realm at a
treble rate, only increased by their industry; which shameful course brought
great scandal of our idleness: Like men that would lay no hand to the plough,
and women that would set no hand on the wheel, deserving the censure of wise
Solomon, He that would not labor should not eat. But least I should ^^nne too
far in the judgment hereof, I do call both their ignorance and negligence
in question not knowing which was greater; but rather impute it to their
ignorance, which appeared by the remedy procured by diverse provident and
worthy kings, who drew diverse skillful workmen out of those foreine parts, to
direct these unskillful people, which in short time grew perfect in this
mystery, and has ever sithence so mightily increased, that it is at this
instant the glory of our traffic, and maintenance of our poor, many hundred
thousands depending wholly on the same; chief pillar to our Princes revenue,
the life of our Merchant, the living of our Clothier, and the means of
sustenance to most trades and poor, whose bread is gained by these
employments. The excellent quality of wool is like most fertile ground that
will bear all fruits, affoording the most ingenious wits to work upon his
nature, so that daily new devises are yielded thereby to every inuenter. It
affoords raiment, nay rich robes for the greatest Princes, and also warm
clothing for the meanest personages, being wroght to the height, in worth it
makes rich silk seem foreine rags; and in ordinary manner it serves the
necessity and use of all: so that the excrement of the worm may not compare
with the fleece of the sheep, although the labor and industry of man makes
it the height of pride, yet in riches, comeliness, and profitable wearing it
comes far short of a perfect fine woollen cloth, which although all cannot be
so, yet all serves the necessary use of all sorts, from the Prince to the
poor, and no part unprofitable or deceitful in it self, but often abused by
the wicked practices of deceitful people, as shall be hereafter described,
wishing a due respect of the commodity, and care to continue the credit
thereof.

CHAP. II. The condition of the Makers, being two sorts.
WHen the use of Clothing was planted here, some in all parts of the Realm
undertook the profession: The number was but small for a long time, but found
such good success on their labors, as they mightily increased in fame and
riches, chief comforters to the aged, and trainers up of youth, their houses
frequented like Kings Courts, their tables replenished like feasts, their
hospitality bountiful, and in all these their carriage plain and honest, yet
with such plenty and content, that royal Kings have bin highly pleased with
their entertainment. Then was true dealing held in great estimation, and deceit
hatefully loathed. These men commonly made their recourse to London weekly,
who might have been strangers one to another in regard of their distance in
dwelling, yet proved brethren by reason of their profession. Their conference
of meeting was to uphold their credits by truth, and their care how to
suppress falsehood, least he should steal into their trades. Happiest was he
that could win most commendatio^ by desert; so that their marks made their
markets, and their merchants their suitors to hold on their custom. Whilst
this course continued the trade flourished, and Gods blessing abounded on all
dealers therein: But corrupting time (more apt in stooping to vice than
mounting to virtue) not only infected some of this Fraternity with the
knowledge of deceit, but also stirred other intruders in this trade, who
greedy of such apparent gain, obtained by the well deseruers, usurped the
name of Clothiers, without the knowledge of the true course, but well studied
in fraud, which practice they intended should supply their want of knowledge,
to equal that gain formerly obtained, more respecting their present profit
than all future good, nor making conscience of the means, so they possessed the
matter. This viperous sort does too much increase in these days, the only
breeders of all enormities in this trade and Commonwealth, and like
caterpillars destroy the fruits of the earth, or like drones which wast the
honey of the laboring Be; whose mischief must be prevented, or else in short
time all benefits herein will be made frustrat. But more of these abusers when
their abuses shall be in question: only it may be said of Clothiers, as of the
tongues which Aesop bought, the worst meat and the best; so of the good
Clothier and the bad: how lamentable thing it is, that the private gain of one
should be the prejudice of thousands: where truth and equity decays the
people soon perish, and pity it were but the law should be a sharp bridle to
curb such disordered men. If lawless liberty were allowable we should not
differ from beasts, nor distinguish good from bad: our reason and religion
leads us to better knowledge, and daily experience of Gods favor toward truth
should draw us to embrace it.

We have a president within this Realm to lead us to a true course from that
nation which were our first tutors to the trade, who now make a commodity
among us of our Woolls; which, by reason of their slightness and small value,
might be esteemed unworthy of wearing, yet by their good observation in
making, searching, and sealing, it is so vpheld and maintained, that it is more
vendible than any cloth we make, and so far void of deceit, that any man,
although unskillful, may buy it without prejudice or loss. Look into their
lives and conditions, you shall find them religious toward God, dutiful to
our Prince, loving one toward another, and harmless to all men, only
enemies to fraud and idleness, which they do not only hate in others, but
punish severely in themselves. They keep together, and disperse not in many
places, to the end one government shall rule them; but in two places within
this Realm do they make their congregations, Sandwich and Colchester.
where it were a wonder to behold, so many people to maintain themselves on so
flight a trade, yet never a beggar amongst them. They have no Statute Law to
bind them, but orders amongst themselves, which are so duly executed, without
partiality, that their rich are not favored, nor their poor oppressed. Their
search in that commodity is threefold, one from the Loome, one from the
milling, or thickening, and one from the dressing; and where offense is made,
there punishment is sure. What would these people do if they had the making
and ordering of our rich clothes of great value, that can bring such slight
ware in that estimation? But as we are far from inuenting good, so are we
unapt to imitate it, though never so plainly taught us before our eyes.

It has been seen that a foreine cloth being made, and not falling out to
the full goodness intended, the maker has affixed a piece of silver to that
piece, of such value as should counteruaile the want of worth: But we are more
ready in greedy manner to take away from a cloth, when it is too bad before.

Now as herein the Clothier and maker is taxed, the Merchants and buyer cannot
escape untouched; For as there are good of both sorts (whose number are too
few) so there are extreme bad (which, without amendment, might be well
spared): There is no more difference between a bad Clothier and a bad
Merchant, than between a thief and his receiver; for as the one commits
unlawful crimes, the other maintains it by concealements, nay more, procures
him thereunto. Many Merchants are of that disposition, that they more respect
their present gain than the good of all others, looking upon the cheapnesse,
and not on the goodness of what they buy; casting upon their gain of money,
and not on their gain of credit, whereas both might easily be obtained. Let a
Clothier have a new trick of deceit, contrary to law, and prejudicial to the
general good, if it may be a particular profit, although not durable, that man
shall be sure of entertainment: if he fear discovery, or to be caught by the
law, these Merchants have infinite devises to make it walk invisible; if Argus
eyes were watchful over them, yet have they mists to blind them all: But God,
who is the vpholder of truth, will one day bring these hidden mischiefs to
light, and turn this wicked gain to shame and loss.

CAP. 3. The antiquity of the Alneger with his power.
BEfore the making of Cloth within this Land, the Alneger was ordained, who
exercised that office upon al cloths coming from foreine parts, to measure and
try them where they were put on la^d. The enterpretation of his name Alneger
shows the nature of his office as only measurer appointed. 2. Ed. 3, cap. 14.
For a long time his authority was carried by proclamation, before any
Parliament was holden: his fee was not then given him, but allowance from the
Lord Treasurer and Barons of Eschequer, according to his pains and care: his
charge was to see all clothes of assise marked, and those not of assise and
defective, to be taken into his hands for the King, 2. Ed. 3. cap. 14.
although in the presence of any Mayor, Bailife, or other magistrate, wherein
his credit and trust reposed by the King was explaned.

When the making of those Clothes were drawn hither, and daily increased, the
King found great loss in his customs; for that the wools of those Clothes
being before transported, did yield much custom, and the like answered upon
return of the Cloth, which double benefit to the king was lost, although it
brought much good to the common wealth by the subjects employment. Upon due
consideration hereof, a subsidy was granted unto the king and his successors
upon all Clothes made within the Realm, four pence upon every cloth, and two
pence on every half Cloth: besides, a Subsidy upon all grain colors, 27.
E. 3. cap. 14.
as appears by that Statute at large: the collection whereof was appointed to
the Alneger, as the most fittest man for it, being the kings only officer for
those affairs: at which times he had also his fee of a halfepenie on every
Cloth given him, with a reservation of all his former power and charge both for
the king and reformation of abuses.

Now it is to be considered what value a halfepenie was in those days, and
what the service was to be performed for it: All the pains he took, was but
to cast a Line of seven yards four times over the Cloth in length, and to
measure the breadth then appointed, which he continued a long time: then were
the faults but few, and easily-supprest; but in time grew like Hydras heads, in
cutting off one, many sprung up in the stead, that the defects numbered so fast
upon him, as put him to endless trouble.

And in regard his place stood upon two distinct offices, the one to collect
the Susidie, wherein was no farthing charge; the other was the executing of the
Alnage, which tied him by great penalties to perform truly: he finding the
pains so much to make reformation in so many defects, and of such diversities,
with his fee too small to counteruaile his danger and trouble, did voluntarily
forgo the execution of his office, and only betook himself to the
collection of the Subsidy: and having two Seals appointed him severally, one
with the kings arms for the Subsidy, the other with the true content and
search for the Alnage, he would afterward only set on the kings seal, leaving
his search and fee, to be freed of his prejudice; which neglect of his gave way
to those which practiced those deceipts, and in time grew to that highth, as
the whole common wealth felt the smart thereof; and forced all sorts
appertayning to those trades to seek for redress, and to make severe Laws
for the punishment of those deceits, appointing searchers and ouer-seers for
that purpose, with diverse orders concerning the same; and perceiving that the
small fee of the Alneger caused him to neglect the search, the fee was
augmented from a halfepenie to two pence, and so for a time carefully executed:
but the former mischief, which caused the provision of those Laws and orders,
in short time crept in again, more dangerous, and the office of search worse
executed with the fee of two pence than before with the Alnegers farthing:
better it were such search should be forborne, than so faslly performed, nor
will it ever be truly executed but by the Alneger, who has ever brought all
questions and punishment upon all faults yet brought to light. The Alneger is
fittest for that place considering his credit and trust with the Kings Seal,
which he is made Chauncellor of for that purpose, and that all the imputation
of false Cloth and false sealing is laid upon it; so that both our nation and
our Kings imperial arms are scandalized in all foreine parts. How careful
have former Kings been to have the Alneger sufficient in all points: 1. R. 3.
cap. 8.
First to be expert in knowledge, then sufficient in wealth, and that no
Alneger of any County or City should be less worth than an hundred pounds,
if he were of such value, to the King; and in those days his credit was
little inferior to most of the Justices where he abode: Then had he his
privilege to make his accounts but once a year, whatsoever was in his hands:
And so favored, to pass those accomps in his highness Eschequer, without
charge or fee: besides he must be the Kings natural subject, no alien to be
permitted thereunto. This was intended for those that did execute the place:
but for those which should receive the revenue and profits royal, choice has
been made of such, as appears upon records, that the Queen of this Realm and
the duke of Buckingham has been interessed therein for some part of the
Kingdom. And in every Parliament where statutes were ordained, the Alnegers
power and privilege still preserved: this charge, credit, trust, and provision
must of force draw his care beyond those slight searchers of small credit: But
the offenders and those which practice deceit, think the Alneger too busy in
his place, seeking to suppress, his power by all means they can. There was of
late years a notorious felo^ within this realm, who having committed many
unlawful outrages, and desirous to continue so, would have the Lord chief
Justice bound to the peace, offering to take his oath that he did not only
seek to deprive him of his means of living but also sought his life; so if
they could bind the Alneger to the peace, they could make a trade of falsehood
without controlement: But by too much sufferance of this hurt, the common
wealth is wounded, the best sort seeking means to heal it, but they like
gald-backe Iades, kick at those which come to cure them. The golden snuffers
of the law is put into the Alnegers hand, who must make use of them, and
howsoever they snuff, he will snuff too, and clear the light which shall
show them the way to truth. In this he shall stir up the sting of envious
tongues whose venom cannot hurt him, but procure the prayers of the best which
shall receive comfort thereby.

The most reverent Divine, if he touch the finnes of the wicked to the quick,
shall sooner move them to railing than to reformation, but the malice of evil
people is not to be regarded. Here might question be made, wherefore the
Alneger should now stir more than of late times: It was his usual course, to
take his money for the seal and so to be quiet: Why should he trouble
himself with such labor that will breed envy to him, and vexation to others.
It must be answered that although he has long time lain a sleep, the
necessity of the time, and loud clamours of abuses has awakt him. His charge
and duty to the office, his service to the King, his maintenance of the
trade that must mayntaine him, and benefit to the common wealth, sets him on
foot to perform that which no other can do: wherein he will ay me at two
things, the general good, and his private profit. Since his forbearance much
power and profit has been drawn from him by usurpation, which he may easily
recover, as branches plucked from his body. The measuring of silk, linen,
yea and of some sorts of woollen cloth, are made petty offices, and held by
those which have no right thereunto. Every inferior Magistrate will take upon
him to establish offices, which shall contradict the appointment of the King
and his Laws. Who is the measurer of all saleable Clothes, or all commodities
measurable, but only he? not only appointed by several Statutes, but also
confirmed by the kings grant by letters patents. It is appointed an office at
the common Law, 1^ I. 2.
by grant from the king: And that the Warden of the Alnage should deliver
yearly to the Lord Treasurour the estreates of his office, containing all the
faults he found of Clothes throughout the Realm: The same King did also grant
the Alnage of all Canuas and linen cloth to Tho. Dewight, in the 1. year of
his reign, and afterward in the fourteenth year of his reign to one Symond of
Darlington, and also another patent for the Alnage of all manner of outlandish
Cloth, to one John Griffen in the seventeenth year of his reign, as may
appear upon the several records in the Tower of London. If the Alneger did
but a while forbear his collection of the subsidy also, some forged
authority would lay claim to that too; but sufferance cannot suppress right,
the one office being as truly due as the other, 25. E. 3. cap. 1.
and so many Laws to confirm it, which also binds him upon oath to perform
it: who shall then deny or contend against him when he shall claim his right
and perform his place? As he may receive both subsidy and alnage upon all
sorts of woollen commodities, so may he receive the alnage fee upon all other
sorts of Cloth and commodities measurable and saleable, from the finest silk to
the coursest hemp: much of that due is taken in some places from him, which
must give way when he please to take place: nor shall he need much difficulty
to decide that right being so apparent and plain in his behalf: at all times
when question has bin made of his right or power, the leaned Judges of this
la^d have confirmed the same, as appears by many several decrees. The ancient
laws made for alnage causes, may fitly be compared to the will and testament of
deceased kings, who bequeathed to their subjects the benefit of justice and
upright dealing, wherein the Alneger is made sole executor: and although by
some later laws there has been searchers appointed as overseers to assist the
Alneger in the better performance of this will, they like idle and careless
ministers, according to the course of such overseers put in trust, have
superficially past over that charge to no purpose, but rather looking after
their legacy of two pence on a cloth: the which the Alneger must abridge them
of as unworthy by their negligence to receive it, and he himself take upon
him to see the will performed, being held thereunto by three principal
reasons: First, the trust from the King with his seal, and collection of his
Subsidies, Fines, and Forfeitures: Secondly, his charge not to set on that
seal but upon perfect and sizable cloth, and to take the contrary into his
hands for the kings use: Thirdly, his danger of the penalty, if he perform
not this charge, which are great fines, and the loss of his place: So he must
be the man to give unto the subject length, breadth, weight, and goodness, or
else to punish the offender, and give the buyer knowledge of the fault; For
want hereof he is most taxed and blamed on all parts, not without just cause,
for where should this benefit be receined, but from him being authorized, and
appointed for the same. To conclude, his service truly performed herein would
prove a large fountain of good, to his small drop of benefit.

CHAP. 4. The manner of search and searchers now used.
THe Law has effectually provided for the search in all points, that in every
place where cloth is made and fold, two, four, six, or eight shall be
appointed for the search thereof, that it be arcording to law. Those searchers
to be able and sufficient in wealth and knowledge, that they shall be sworn
to do it uprightly? and bound in forty pounds a piece, not to neglect it,
that they shall perform that search, once in every month at the least, and
enter into the houses, shops, or other places which harbor any cloth, there to
feeke for faulty cloth which might otherwise be concealed or hidden from
them, and great penalty laid on those which shall resist or deny any of them.
For those clothes which are sealed by them, the law directs their order,
appointing the several penalties on every fault, and how the same shall be
disposed. If the Magistrates or Justices of any place neglect the choice of
such searchers, then a penalty is laid on them for that default: But this
search and orders are grossly abused in several kinds. In many places are no
searchers at all appointed: In some places the Clothiers and makers keep a
searched seal of their own, to set on what they please: but in most places
those searchers chosen are insufficient in knowledge to perform their place,
or in ability to answer the penalties; if they be of knowledge, then are they
such which be servants, or workmen to those Clothiers or makers which are the
offenders, whom they dare not punish nor offend: and to avoid their breach of
oath, will send boys or other like people to perform their place, and set on
the seal; else will they lend that seal to every one which demands it, by
which means they save their oaths in seeing no faults, and for their bonds
they provide for the safety of them, by a combination between the Clothiers
and themselves, none can challenge them, but those which will keep their
counsel; when any choice is to be made, then are the clothiers suitors to the
Justices for such men as they nominate, which are according to their own
hearts, which request of theirs is seldom denied: So there are often chosen
Tailors, glouers, tanners, butchers, smiths, or such like, which have no
judgment at all in Cloth, nor the place. If malefactors of the Law might choose
their Judge and Jury, they would seldom be cast. The best search made by the
searchers in any place, is but to cast the Clothes into skales to see if they
be weight or no, which if any do want, the clothier supplies that want with
stones, bricks, lead, leaden weights, and other ponderous things which they
co^uey into light cloth to make it hold weight, which is easily done in regard
those cloths brought to their beam, are alwais made up hard with tacking and
binding, that without opening, those deceits cannot be found, which they never
do, yet ought to see the cloth quight through from end to end, and to notify
the faults upon the seal. If by chance a fault appears unto them which they
cannot avoid, seeing, for they strive to let al pass in such sort as their
knowledge should not be charged then do they punish the clothier for that fault,
as the Friar whipped the Nun with a Fox tail, but there is not one fault amongst
a thousand called in question. Again, if question be made in some places, then
does the Major there take upon him more than the Lord Treasurer, to determine
the cause, claiming a right unto all these sorf. due to them, and so as it were
hold an exchequer in every petty town: in other places, the Just. of Peace
decide those causes at their quarter sessions, and so complaints past over
according as the offenders make friends with them. To maintain this
authority, they take hold o^ the statute of 39 El. c. 20. But that branch is
repealed by 4. Iac. cap. 2. yet still by them put in practice. One principal
thing is to be considered, That so many thousands of defective cloths made
within this realm, as the smart thereof is too truly found, yet are there
none presented in the kings Majesty's Exchequer, but the abuses still
maintained, the common wealth wronged, the king deprived of his benefit, and
the offenders escape without punishment, all this is certain, and well known
to all men.

CHAP. 5. The several faults and abuses practiced in Cloth.
IN discovering of deceit, some cauilling humor may object, it will rather
serve for instruction to farther practice than preuento future harm. It is
answered, that those practitioners in these abuses are so deeply experienced
therein, being in common use of them, as all other wits can give them no more
direction. The purpose here intended, is to unmask the face of falshoode:
which seems that it is not, and to give knowledge thereof to those that are
wronged. The art of Conycatching was a secret Mystery, until a book of
discovery came forth, which could not teach them who were perfect in their
lesson without book, but cause the simple to see, and the wisest to shun
their subtle snares provided to catch their gulls. The cause here handled is
nothing inferior to theirs in cunning, but much more beyond them in prejudice,
by the many more in number which feel the smart thereof; wishing this brief
relation might so effectually reveal the deceits, as it might publicly be
known as well no those which endure the damage as them which commit the crimes:
and although every particular fault cannot be here described, by reason of
their numbers (which were too tedious) yet the principals shall be touched
upon which the rest depend: he that sees a tree may easily view the body
but hardly number the leaves, but the tree being felled the leaves soon die.

Herewithall a difference must be noted between the opinion of some people,
and the true intent of the law. There are many sorts of cloth or stuffes lately
invented, which have got new god fathers to name them in fantastical fashion,
that they which wear them, know not how to name them, which are generally
called new draperie, what hold can the law take of them? In the first law,
the cloth raye was understood and colored clothes what sizes they should
contain in length and breadth; since that time provision made by laws, for
broad clothes, kersies, dozens, penistones, cottons, and such like to contain
length, breadth, and weight appointed: but these new devices are out of the
reach of those laws, and free to be made as it shall please the maker without
contradiction. To answer the same, the briginall and ground is to be
understood, the wool paies subsidy, and the leugth of every piece allows
alnage, and although the converting of wools (whose condition yields to diverse
inventions) be altered from clothes to stuffes, shall the king lose his subsidy,
or the Alneger his see? no, it was long time since ordained by statute, that
all sorts of clothes, although not of assise, should pay subsidy and alnage.
And now of late years, the said new devises are grown to that quantity as the
old sort of clothing is much impaired, and that greatly increased, which is not
to be discommended, in regard it vents our woolles, and imploies our people.
But if government and orders were not provided to maintain it, in short time
we should find that as the same had eaten out the ancient drapery; so
falsehood would ruin that, and leave the people without employment. Why should
there be a distinguishment between old drapery and new, when the law allows
but one draperie: As the condition of water may be conveyed diverse ways by
rivers, springs, conduits, wells, pumpes, fountains, pipes, ponds, and a
number of several means, yet no alteration of the nature thereof; so may
woolls be converted into diverse properties: but yet the end and purpose of the
same, to serve man's use and wearing as broadcloth and ancient cloth did. If
we should have a new law for every new name of stuff now made and named, the
king must keep a perpetual Parliament to ordain for them. There was of late
a mad braind fellow which came by a company of workmen that were digging up of
a well to plant a pumpe in the place; he demanded who set them a work, they
answered the parson, churchwardens, and masters of the parish; he replied
again they understood not themselves, for thereby they should be forced to
alter their church book, wherein it was written, Praise God all ye springs
and wells, and now it must be Praise God all ye springs and pumps; which
fryuolous and vain question of his, may be compared to their exception, which
will go no farther then the word of the law, and never look to the true
intent of the same. 39. El. cap. 20.
A Statute was lately made concerning the abuses of clothes, wherein orders
were provided, that all sorts of clothes should be truly searched, and their
just contents of length and weight set upon every piece with the word
searched, upon pain of forfeiture. This law intended the general good and
reformation of all: yet in regard there was but two counties nominated, or a
certain circuit expressed which did before time most offend in those points;
all offenders in other places would stop that law from going any farther. 43.
El. cap. 10.
Wherefore the next Parliament following understanding that law to concern
the general good, as well as unto the former limitation, did make the same act
to respectively extend unto all and singular woollen broad clothes, half
clothes, Kersies, Cottons, Dozens, Penistones, Frizes, Rugges, and all other
woollen clothes of what nature, kind, or name soever they be, or shall be
made, and to be made within this Realm to be viewed, sealed, searched, and
subjected, to penalties, in such like manner and form and to such purpose and
intents, respectively as was limited to those clothes provided for in the
former law, now whether can those new draperies fly to shroud themselves
from the reach of this law, theit new names cannot help them; if they be
called by any name, the law takes hold of them, or of any nature to serve any
purpose the law takes hold of them, they can then plead no privilege to
free them from this law and orders, but in yielding obedience with true
observance find peace and happiness. The cause of this relation is to show
that some of these old deceits are practiced in the new devised stuff,
wherefore as needful to be reformed as the other; and so proceed thereunto.

Woolles being an excellent commodity of it self, and naturally without
deceit, is commonly abused by mingling in diverse kinds, Deceit in mingling of
woolles
sometime fleece wools, fell wool, and lambs wool which are contrary one to
an other are put together, which makes the cloth uneven, cockley, pursey,
baudy, and rewey.

Then the mingling of fine floxe with long wools yet course, which being
carded together does hold spinning and working but most deceitful in use and
wearing. The use of short thrums is likewise so ordered, which they take and
shred into short length, and then lay it in steep in strong lie or liquor
which opens the threads into wool again, then card it with other wool which
is worse than the flox by making more uneven in the spinning.

This abuse has been put in practice so intolerable, that it is certainly
known clothes have been made with two parts, floxe and thrums, and but one
part in wool; which has seemed good to the eye, but in the wearing such weak
strength as would not endure a fourth part of time like the perfect cloth. If
any make question, whether those flox, thrums, or sorts of wool should be
cast away or not put to use: It is known that several sorts of commodities
are appointed wherein they may be lawfully put to use, and very vendible; but
they with wicked purpose convert them to great gain, but greater hurt, worse
than casting dross into fine gold, which is easily found by the baseness, and
may be purified again, but this abuse is like a poison not found till past
cure.

Deceits in the weaning.
The long thrums left of broadcloth which cannot be wrought to that shortness
of narrow cloths, those are cunningly knit together and mingled with other
yarne of better nature, making the one help out the other, for the ease of
workmanship: the inconvenience whereof is very hurtful, for by reason of the
many knots in such clothes, which after the scouring are most of them burled
out, and afterward shut up again by the mill; but not so helped, but covered
for a time, when this cloth comes to wearing, in short time proves full of
holles and unserviceable in wearing.

In slaying of their warps they will cast the yarne to prove fine about a foot
broad by the listes, which is so far as commonly the merchant or buyer looks
into them, nor can they having the clothes pleighted and bound together with
threads, which will suffer no farther search into them, unless they should cut
them up, which is seldom or never done, the rest of the cloth wrapped through
with a far courser yarne very deceiuably. A common thing it is for the weauer
to cover a course warpe with a fine woofe, the warp being spon hard and small,
and the woofe soft and round to cover the warpe from sight, which in the
working may somewhat appear, but in the wearing thoroughly found, that is a
daiely practice especially on clothes sold rough.

Besides they have a practice in their woofe to shut in a fine woofe at both
ends of their cloth, which serves for a muster to show, but all the rest of
the cloth far worse; the same ends also are better driven in the loome with
better workmanship.

Deceits in the Mill.
When a cloth made with flox or thrums comes to the mill, who would be a true
searcher, and lay the fault open, if their cunning prevented it not? but they
preserve such cloth by extraordinary means with tallowe, pigges dung, and
vrin which keeps ni the flox, and suffers the thicking.

If a cloth prove slender, and will not thick kindly in the mill by reason of
his defects, then have they medicine to help it with oatmeale and such like,
which will remain in the cloth and make it seem fast and thick in the hand,
until it come to the dressing, where all that stopping vanishes, leaving it
to shame by the true fight of his substance.

When a cloth wants some of his substance or allowance in yarne, which would
soon be found being clean scoured, thicked, and dried, they will not scour
the same cloth clean, but leave a bad substance of oil and seame in it,
thicking it up in the same filth, which proves noisome in use and wearing.

Deceits in man king up of clothes.
Whereas the use of tenters is altogether forbidden upon rough clothes with
great penalties thereupon; yet in those countries where those rough clothes are
made and so to be sold many tenters are erected and used upon such clothes as
should be left in that order, as it comes out of the mill, yet by reason of
the aforesaid abuses in yarne and weauing, the mill leaves them shameful in
cockells, baudes, pursey, narrower in some places than other, which they by
color to even out, do often strain beyond the limitation allowed for dressed
cloths in deceiuable manner.

When such clothes have been so strained, the tenter hooks leave an evident
mark upon them along the lists, and at both ends, which would plainly tell
where they had been, and how used; but they have a trick to hide that fault,
for with a wet cloth and a hot Iron, they over run those lists and ends
which shuts up the marks or tongues of the tenter, as that shall tell no
tales.

If the cloth by the same tentring do prove hollow in hand, then do they
also over run the same cloth with that hot Iron about a span deep from the
listes, for the binding of the cloth up with threads keeps it from farther
sight, which devise makes the cloth feel close in hand in that place,
howsoever the rest fall out. Those clothes which fall out much too light they
will let hang abroad in an evening, sometime all night, to receive the dew, or
else to spout warm water into it, which will make it weigh heavier by eight
pounds, besides, to feel more kindly in hand: this is so cunningly done that
it is hardly to be perceived, yet many of them so ouerdone therewith as they
are returned again from beyond the seas rotten with the same usage.

Deceits in dressing.
When a cloth which is made up with flox or thrums, that it is too tender to
endure due workmanship, those clothes shall be rowed dry, and wrought with
solace and soft liquor to preserve the flox from the force of the tessell, yet
make it rise with a ground to work upon in shearing.

In the tentring of cloth, which is allowed to strain but half a quarter in
breath, and a yard in length upon a whole broadcloth: It is known that diverse
is strained a quarter and a half in breadth, and five yards in length, so that
a cloth strained to thirty yards, being wet again has lost above a third
part in length and breadth.

And a kersie allowed to be strained one nail in breadth, and half a yard in
length and no more: It has been known that a Deuon-shire kersie of twelve
yards has been strained a quarter of a yard in breadth and three yards in
length: so that in breadth and length the tentors lends them the one half of
the piece, which as soon as it comes to water flies away invisible to his own
country, but never to be found again. The like abuse in other sorts of kersie
and narrow clothes.

If a cloth by much milling is run in, which may cause them more labor to
bring unto the length and breadth they appoint to, then will they use warm
water in the tentring thereof, but commonly the warmth of the sun which they
always observe will make a cloth yield any way in stretching: so they do make
the glorious sun (which God has sent for comfort to the world) to be
accessory to their vild abuse, in giving them such help: So do the wicked
often turn Gods best blessings into the worst uses.

In the finishing of their work of rowing and shearing they will use a deceit
with flox of the same color of the cloth, which they can sheare as small as
dust, which mixed with solace, they spread upon the musters, and where the cloth
may be seen, which makes it seem much finer than it is, and feel more
substantial in hand; but the same cloth lying a while after the dressing, the
solace dries up, and then the same flox flies away leaning the cloth in his
own nature again.

Colors.
For the false dying of colors both in woolls, cloth, and stuffes, with the use
of logwood, it is intollerarable, and too common, to the great discredit of the
thing so died. The ground of good colors is substantial woading, without
which diverse colors cannot be perfectly made, as blackes, russets, tawnyes,
purples, greenes, and such like, whereof many of them are made without
foundation of woad, it appears beautiful and pleasing to the eye, but in use
and wearing prove like false painting and not true dying: Some colors have a
slight ground of woad, but far too weak for the depth of that color it
bears, yet can set up the woade mark, or woade rose, which is upon the piece
at a far richer depth than the piece is woaded throughout: nay farther, some
can set on a woadmarke upon a cloth with a little Indico which has no woade at
all on the piece: but herein the diers of London do best observe a true course
in setting a woaded seal upon woaded colors, which is a truer testimony than
the woade rose or mark so many ways abused, yet is not the use of that seal
effectually performed in this kind. There is five especial degrees in woading
that is to say a huling, a plounket, a watchet, anazur, and a blew, every one
of these exceeding each other in value, yet every one of them fit for some
colors: Now if these degrees were truly expressed on the woaded seal, then
might the buyer know the truth of each color, and cause a reformation of
that intolerable abuse, which does daily cause such numbers of our cloths and
stuffes, to be carried out of the realm to be dressed and died, to the great
prejudice of many of the Kings majesty's subjects which might be well maintained
upon those employments: the truth of the color is as material as the
goodness of the cloth, for as oftentimes good cloth is spoiled by a bad
color, so does a good color often mend and prefer a mean cloth, therefore
as needful to be provided for some: Casual faults.
faults come by negligence without deceiuable intent, as sometime by
ouermilling of a cloth through absence of the mill-man, then is there some
sorts of woolles of that nature as will not prove so well in milling as other
woolles: sometime a cloth over heated with going too dry in the mill and so
consumed, sometime a small stone in the fulling earth works many brackes or
holles in the cloth, then may misfortune happen by bad oils, as Whale oil by
lying long will change the color and alter the cloth; sometime a cloth hurt
by roukling to the mill, which fault might be well put in the milmans deceit,
because he does the same with cards to rake off much flox.

Again the want of the clothiers mark may sometimes come by negligence of the
weauer, but often pretended wilfully, either in regard of the falsehood of the
Cloth which makes them shame to set their mark, or else intending to put
another man's mark in it, which they commonly do without weauing, sowing the
same being taw, and so milled upon it: but very fit it is that every mark
should be wouen in the cloth, to draw them to perfect making, for the credit
of their marks.

Deceits used by some merchants and drapers.
There are some merchants that deal in stuffes termed new draperie, especially
in perpetuanas, which are now grown to great use and traffic, but not like
to continue long, by their falsehood since their first making, which brought
them into estimation: for where at first their pitch in the loome was twelve
hundredth, but now brought to eight hundredth, yet keep their breadth and
length. Some of these merchants do buy slight says and put them forth to
milling, and make bastard perpetuanas of them good to the sight, but so
unprofitable in wearing, that the same abuses do utterly discredit that
commodity.

A sort of cloth is made called Manchester or Lancashire plains to make
cottons, which contain about a yard in breadth: these are often bought by
merchants and others, which cut them in length according to a kersie, and has
them dressed and dyed in form to a kersie, the which are not only vented into
foreign parts, but many of them vented in the Realm; which cloth proves very
unprofitable in wearing. Also there have some merchants caused counterfeit
Devonshire kersies to be made in Yorkshire out of washers or halfethicks,
which have contained such length and breadth with stop lists, like those
Devonshire kersies, which they have caused to be dressed, died, and pressed
with the hot press, and so sent beyond the Seas in the name of Devonshire
kersies, to the great discredit of that sort of Cloth: besides, there is a
greedy desire in some merchants, who cause the Clothier to make their cloths
of extraordinary length, that is to say, the substance and length of a cloth
and a half into one cloth, and if they cannot get them made so, then they will
cut Cloths and draw three cloths into two so cunningly as can hardly be found:
this is done, to deceive the king of his customs and other duties. Some
Drapers have made practice to draw the forell of a fine Kentish Cloth upon a
Northen Dozen, so cunningly as could not easily be perceived, which forell by
the Alnegers negligence has had the kings arms with the name of that county
upon it, whereas he ought to set it within the Cloth. The sent of those Northen
Dozens has been taken away, first by ayring, and afterward with liquors or
powders: so the buyers have not had only the forels to deceive them, but in
false manner, the kings seal has been made use of to that purpose: and then
the deceiuer to conclude all, lays his hand upon the forell, and with an
equinocating oath, swears this Kentish cloth cost him so much.

There is also a late commodity in great use of making within this kingdom,
Fustians.
which sets many people on work, called Fustians, which for want of
government are so decayed by falsehood, keeping neither order in goodness nor
assise, insomuch that the makers thereof, in this short time of use, are weary
of their trades, and it is thought will return again to the place from whence
it came, who do still observe their sorts and goodness in such true manner,
as by their seals they are sold, keeping up the credit of that which they
make: what a shame is this to our Nation, to be so void of reason and
government, that a good trade should be suppressed for want of good order
amongst themselves, and have so good a president from others. These many
enormities are now in the hight of practice, the evil disposed having no
feeling thereof, but run forward to the ruin of all: but to the well
disposed which looks into these abufes, it appears lamentable and grievous,
desiring that a better portion may be procured for those offenders, to purge so
vile and dangerous a disease, which may in short time grow incurable.

CHAP. 6. The inconvenience and hurt by these abuses.
Whilst the true making of Cloth endured in reasonable manner it was most
vendible in all parts, and so much desired, that foreine Merchants did usually
come into this realm, to fetch them away: but since deceit crept in, he has
grown greater, and increased every day, the trade still declining from bad to
worse, and now to worst of all, like Iuie, which being suffered, claspeth the
tree so hard, that in time the body dies thereby. What makes those now to
refuse our Cloth being brought to their own doors, which before time earnestly
sought it at ours? falsehood. What makes the Gentleman complain of his Wool
which lies on his hand? The clothier complain of his dead sales? The Merchant
complain on his loss? all but falsehood. What will this come unto? Nay what is
it come to already? The Authors of this evil, both the bad Clothier and the
bad merchant, are surfeited with their sweet meat, like Prodigals that spend
their patrimony in a moment, which might well serve them and their posterity:
deceits cannot endure, especially who^ that it grows violent, nor can they
throw it so far off, but that it will rebound back to them which threw it. How
thick are certificats of falsehood returned upon our Merchants from beyond the
seas? so that they know no end of their trouble, nor certain of their gain or
loss until their moneys be received, and abatements deducted. Bad wares are
the breeders of bad debts and desperate hazards, wherewith both Merchaunts and
makers are extremely punished: when a complement of defective cloth is made,
the owner is often enforced to barter for as bad a commodity, a hilding for a
Jade, or else to deliver it out with a handful of that sweet herb time, but
receive it with a back burden of the bitter herb Rue. So here is adventure
increased, in which point the Merchant far exceeds the maker* Yet the maker is
an aduenturer, who has his goods and substance dispersed into many hands, yea
and amongst the poorer sort, of diverse conditions, whose fingers are like
thornie bushes which the sheep must go through, in every of which, do what he
can, he shall leave a lock of his fleece behind him, and although he preserve
the principal, yet will a part be detained indirectly: Then when he has with
great care and time finished his work, he must undergo a doubtful Market, and
often light on a bad merchant, which defeats him of all: yet herein is his
comfort; for his work folk, they are within the compass of his view, and
seldom fail, by reason of their continual dependa^ce; for his Markets he does
weekly know his worst; and for his Merchant, he may daily see or bear from
him at the Royal Exchange, if his dealing be in London, and in other places
within the Realm in like manner. Wherefore, his frazards are but petie
adventures in regard of the Merchants.

For when those commodities are fastened on the merchant, he must endure a
number of dangerous adventures, both outward and inward, shipwracks at Sea,
peril of Pirates, and other robbers; at his place of sale, there he must give
credit to those he never saw, and such as neither live in his religion nor
Law, he must abide to answer all defects found, where our own Laws shall be
alleged to punish them who before was not privy to the offense. If they
escape confiscation, yet shall they be sure of intolerable abatements, with
bad words, and shameful reproaches; they must stand to the honesty of their
factors, which often prove false, and the danger of the Country often subject
to change. These and many other casualties causes cares to abridge his rest,
and keeps him waking when others sleep, every stormy wind breeds his
fear, and every flying report makes him doubtful, and not without great
cause, seeing so many fall so lainly to the utter overthrow, not only of
themselves, but diverse other depending upon them, like to the fall of a mighty
Tree, which crusheth down the under shrubs about him, so far as his fall did
reach. Therefore the chief remedy to prevent much of this mischief, is to
deal in loyal and perfect commodities, which will with credit abide his time
for Market, when the other by long lying loses still, both in goodness and
credit; procuring hasty bargains, that brings after repentance. In Provinces
beyond the bounds of Christendom, God is blasphemed, our Religion reviled, and
our people mistearmed in beastly manner: when a Turk or Infidel brusheth his
garment bare, that he may number the threeds, and find it to have feeling fence
to run in at a wet shower, or a hot Iron, then our Christian profession is
called in question by those profane people, who measure our faith by our
works. In kingdoms nere us, these abuses have been found so odious, and their
people so much wronged, that they have made laws and edicts, to banish our
cloth out of their countries, rather desiring our wools, wherewith they can
make true commodities. This has set diverse countries on work, in making of
cloth, which serves those places of traffike, where we did use to commerce,
diverse workmen have gone out of this Land, to make use of their practice and
living there, where they are entertained, and daily increase: In our own
Country, where much of our Wool may be vented, the falsehood of clothing is
so common, that every one strives to wear any thing rather than cloth: if a
gentleman make a liuerie for his man, in the first shower of rain it may fit
his Page for bigness, and for the colors and other conditions in it, after a
months wearing, it will look like a soldiers coat which has line six
months out of garrison. It has bin known that a poor man, getting so much
money together with care and travel as would buy him a suit of cloth, and
taking his Tailor with him, who seeing the cloth, has justly told him how much
would serve to make his Ierkin, and breeches which he has bought accordingly,
afterward counceld by that Tailor, to cast his Cloth in the water, to make it
more serviceable, which he so doing, has quite lost his Ierkin, and having no
more money, was forced to go cold all winter in his upper parts: this in some
degree may be accounted sacrilege, to rob the poor; what are the
inconveniences that are drawn on by these means? first, indignity to our
king, whose seal is fixed on this cloth, injury to our nation that works
abuse on this cloth, infamy to our selves that wear some part of this Cloth,
and utter ruin of all benefits which should arise by this cloth. It is high
time to look out, when the fire has caught hold of the house end; if it be
not prevented by quenching it will soon consume to the ground, and it is
doubtful whether these enormities are incurable or no: the plant of falsehood
is grown so great and ancient, that it may be supposed rather to break than
bend, but extraordinary means and pains must be applied to the cause, which
may be recovered by good industry.

CHAP. VII. The remedy to be made by the Alnegers provision.
AS this full grown evil has now procured a dangerous hurt, so has it
very happily fallen out in a time which can afford an especial remedy. When
this kingdom was divided amongst seven kings, it was under a strange
government: when there was twice seven Alnegers in the realm, there was
neither law nor order observed amongst the^; but all they sought was gain, and
how to intrude into each others benefit: if a Clothier or offender were
interrupted in his falsehood within one County, he could freely exercise the
same in another; where he should be willingly received, because he augmented
that Alnegers profit. But now, thanks be to God, we live under one gracious
Prince, who ordaines no diversity of Laws; but has provided one order of
government for all; So that ill divided office of Alnage which ran to ruin in
many hands, is now reduced into one worthy man's hands; which has not only
power to command, but also will to perform all means, and courses, which may
tend to the reformation of this grievous enormitie: In this business many hands
must be employed, whose work may seem harsh to those which shall be put out
of their wonted course: But it is not their content that is sought; unto a
general good every particular help must be applied, here must be more
pains in the Alneger, more care and truth in the workman, and more trouble to
the clothier, but all to a good and profitable end. The first thing to be
looked unto, is the condition of the clothiers and makers of cloth, stuffes,
and commodities belonging to this government, which at this time is much
differing from law or order, many of them unexperienced and usurpers of the
trade, who not being masters thereof through want of knowledge commit most of
these abuses. And whereas the law prouides that none which profess those
trades should be admitted under seven years service in apprentiship, diverse
do come into the same with a months practice, and cloies the Kingdom with
defective commodities, beggering themselves, and hurting those which should
live by the same: These people for the most part dwelling in obscure places,
never bringing their commodities to search or seal, nor yielding any duty,
live rather like outlawes than subjects. There is a petition unto the Kings
Majesty, extant from the best clothiers and makers in diverse parts to this
purpose, who crave a corporation for the amendment of this, which were pity
but it should be granted, confidering how many inferior trades enioies such
privilege that govern their companies in good sort and order. If this were
accomplished, the better half of this great task were finished, and great
hope that our general Alneger will procure it, being so good an assistance to
work the reformation which lies on his charge.

The dispersing of clothiers and makers is a principal cause to breed these
defects: whereas the law ordaines that clothing shall not be used but in a
city, borough, or market town, or else where clothing has been usually, to
the end that the eye of the officer should be upon their doings: Now they
scatter themselves in unfitting places, and if there be but one clothier in a
parish he will demand an Alneger to attend him, if not, force the Alneger to
come unto his house to seal his cloth, where he shall bestow twelve penny
worth of labor for the earning or receiving of one groate: and when he comes
thither he shall find them searched by his neighbors that he has caused to
be chosen searchers, who have no skill, or else by his workman who dare do
nothing but what himself directs, and if the Alneger will sometime call
their search in question and try the cloth, he shall neither have place
convenient to view them, nor weights of any certainty to weigh them, but such
weights as they will bring him, which shall be stones, logges, and such other
things as they will tell him their weight, and he must believe them. There is
no officer under the king so much deluded and abused as he, being so
necessary for the kingdom and beneficial to the crown: Sometime, and in some
places they will call him from his rest at all hours of the night to perform
his office, not for necessity, but of purpose to disturb him, with many other
injuries, which they in base manner have offered him: but herein himself is
most to be blamed, that knowing his own power and place would suffer such
indignities. The course of these days is for such as will bear to have
greater burdens put upon them than can be borne. It is unknown that any
officer of the Kings which has the keeping and use of his seal should be
subject to such servitude, neither is it convenient: therefore the true course
herein to be obsetued, is for the Alneger, to provide in every place
(needful for an Alnegers residence) a convenient room for all Makers or
Clothiers to come unto, wherein must be a perch to draw over the clothes, a
table to measure and try the clothes, and a beam with true weights to weigh
the clothes, and the deputy not only to be sufficient in ability and
knowledge but also bound, and sworn to perform his office truly, that he
shall be there always ready at convenient or appointed times to make a true
search in all points, and in no place elsewhere, and upon the altering of the
property of the cloth, to make a new search in these degrees: First, if the
aforesaid corporation be procured, that then the clothes be first viewed raw
by the wardens or assistants of that corporation, to see whether the cloth be
made of sound yarne, or any deceit be wrought by the weauer, and being found
merchantable to be marked at the head end with a mark of allowance cut in the
cloth according to the manner of search now used upon raw Devonshire kerfies,
but being defective either to iagge the same at both ends, or cut off the head
forrell from the cloth, and to set such fine upon the offender as those Wardens
or Overseers shall find the fault deserve. But for the Alnegers charge, when
the cloth is thicked from the mill to measure the same truly in length and
breadth, not trusting to the clothiers content who will often for the credit of
his cloth, set on more length than it does truly contain; and that the
Alneger does set on the just content in the water, whatsoever it contains on
his seal, also expressing the the narrowness or other defects which he shall
find: And against every fault in the cloth to cut down a notch of an inch
deep and therein fix a seal as may appear to the buyer where the fault is,
then when this cloth is fully dried, that he set one the just content of
weight also whatsoever it shall weigh, all this to be done before the kings
seal be fixed thereunto.

When any of those clothes are farther altered by dying, dressing, or
strayning, that he cause those former seals of the water to remain still
upon the cloth, to express what it was, and to set other seals upon that
cloth to show unto the buyer what that cloth is strained unto according to the
appointment of the Lords of his Majesty's council which granted a tolleration
for certain clothes to be strained, yet laid that charge upon the Alneger,
that the difference between the water content and strained length might be
seen: If other faults be in that cloth either by dying or dressing, that the
same be also notified by several seals: whether that cloth be color grain,
woaded, or contrary in false color, so that in of right it ought to have those
seals ollowing.

1 A seal of water length. Died clothes. 2 A seal of narrowness and defects.
Died clothes. 3 A searched seal, with the weight. Died clothes. 4 A seal for
strained length. Died clothes. 5 A seal for color and dressing. Died clothes.
6 The kings seal and county. Died clothes.
And that every seal set on by the Alneger may have an especial mark
therein to signify the place where it was sealed, and by whom, to the end that
if any defects be passed over by favor or negligence in him, he may be
rightly challenged and punished for the same according to his error, and that in
all searches he be both present and principal, at the raw search with the
Wardens or Overseers, at search from the mill by himself and whom he please,
at the search of straining and dressing by himsefe and such workmen of
judgment as he shall make choice for sufficiency, and for the search of
dying to have always the true opinion of the best experienced therein, both for
colors died in wool, and colors died in cloth, and all to be sealed
according to their true property.

So here is four searches to be made on a dressed and died cloth, three
searches on a dressed white cloth or kersie or of like nature, and two searches
upon every rough white cloth undressed: And to every one of these searches a
fee due of two pence on every broadcloth, and so according to the rate on all
other clothes to be paid: and it may so happen that all these searches cannot
be performed in one place by reason that the cloth may be wouen in one place,
milled in an other, dressed in an other, and died in an other, so the
diversity of search must be performed by several Officers: this cannot be
avoided, but where the condition and property is altered, the Officer there
must make that search, and by the several seals appear where the cloth was
made, where dressed, and where died, and by whom in every search seen and
sealed.

In the manner of this search he must observe the several penalties ordained
by the law upon all offenses, wherein he must chiefly follow the direction
of the Statute lately made in 4. Iacobi cap. 2. for length, breadth, and
weight, of all sorts of cloth, which although he do not prosecute with
extremity, yet keep them so far within government, as may bring them to
reformation, and the King to receive more benefit by his laws. The Alneger in
every place must also keep a book for the King; wherein must be registered
the several fines and penalties taken in all these searches, for what, and
from whom, 11. H. 6. cap. 9.
which account must agree with the seal of faults by him set on: if any cloth
prove intolerable defective, that the Alneger then cut off the list or porell
at the one end of that cloth that it may not be accounted for a cloth, but a
remnant, and so sealed by him accordingly, taking his fees, duties, and
penalties on that cloth notwithstanding.

And that the Alneger procure them to public markets, especially in London
according to the statut of 39. Eb. cap. 20. or else to lay the penalty of that
law on them, which is 40. s. upon a cloth, and by all means to prevent private
sales, which is the cover to hide all abuses, and escape due search, and
therefore ought carefully to be observed. Objections.
In prosecuting this order and course there will be three maine objections
made, to say, trouble, charge, and danger: First who will endure such
extraordinary toil in carrying their goods so often to search, and being in
diverse places, far off from the place of search: Secondly who will yeeld-to
such a charge, as to the fees of a fourefold search whereas heretofore never
but one was required, and that fee hardly paid; this will be held a taxation or
an imposition unnecessarily drawn on, and good to be avoided: Thirdly, who
will run wilfully into the danger of the law, as to abide the penalties which
shall be found out by so many searches, wherein every degree many offenses
are made. We cannot (say they) cast our cloth in a mould, but shall of force
offend: rather then these hard conditions should be undergone, every man will
give over clothing and betake himself to other course of living, what shall
then become of the trade? The Answer.
To the first, the law requiers them to be searched and further appoints them
to bring their cloth to a city, borough, or town corporate, and there to be
searched and sealed where the Alneger or sealer shall be, and place fitting:
Besides, 4. and 5. P. and M. cap. 5.
there is a vacant time commonly with every cloth betwixt each degree of
search: when a cloth comes forth of the loome, it goes not presently to the
mill, nor so from the mill to dressing, neither from dressing to dying, but
sometime a day or two, more or less lies still, affording time for such
trial; but admit that all expedition therein may be required, that time lost
is nothing being soon dispatched, neither will the pains seem great to
those which intend truth, better it is for them to endure a miles travel,
than the Merchants should still undergo an endless trouble, theier clothes
often returned many hundred miles, and certificats daily which does treble
their loss every way: whereas by this course they shall know their worst at
home, avoid after-reckonings, and breed ease and benefit to the merchants and
themselves. Secondly, for the charge that cannot be forborne, if the service be
performed, considering this, that those which do the same, are or ought to be
of estimation, professors of that trade: wherefore, precious is loss of time,
and that their pains duly done therein, deserves no less fee, but especially
their danger of loss, which will light on them, if their search be false and
negligently performed. The charge of a bay, sealed at Colchester (whose course
herein must be imitated) by reason of the often search it comes unto ten pence
duty, yet diverse of them not above forty shillings value: if this payment
were left, their orders would fall, wherein they reap a fiue-fold benefit: so
shall all Clothiers and makers find hereby, that if his cloth be defective, he
shall know the worst of his loss, but if it be merchantable, those seals
shall be such credit unto it as shall much advantage the sale thereof. Better
is 8. pence given to have a work effectually done, than two pence to him that
does nothing at all, if any thing, rather hurt than good. The sparing of this
course, and these fees, has been the breeding of all former hurts; and
although the general good required it, yet every man's private respect that
should perfome pains without profit, drew back the means of remedy and
reformation. 3. the daunager of Law cannot be dispensed withal to those which
wilfully break the Law: it was ordained to be observed, yet moderadion will be
herein used and a difference made between faults pretended, and faults casual,
and the punishment in also inflicted, as shall rather tend to procure
amendment, than the offenders ruin: and for offenses general, which are all
liable to the law, most of them by the makers care and officers search will be
suppressed, and all in short time by endeauours on all parts quite rooted out.
That a does cannot be cast in a mould, it is true, but a clothier skillful and
careful in choice of his wool and yame, and also perfect in his trade, may
make a cloth as it pleases himself in length, breadth, evenness, and
especially in weight. We have a sort of Clothiers which have tolleration to
strain, and whereas their clothes should contain in weight being dressed 60.
l. the tolleration allows them at 58. which coming all to the Alnegers
trial, be in favor to them, pardons them at 56. which they perceiving to
incur no danger, unless they be any thing under that weight, will bring
them so just thereunto, that in 20. clothes together, you shall scarce find a
quarter of a pound in any differing from 56. l. that indeed a man may judge
they were cast in a mould: these men could as well make them to 58. l. but that
they strive to decline, so far as they can without danger. As for the
discouraging of people to deal in this trade, when so strict search and order
shall be taken, neither the good clothier, nor the good Merchant, will say so,
nor the general opinion esteem it so: It was never known that true government
did at any time decay any trade, but rather caused it to increase and flourish,
by this means much more Cloth will be made, better sold, and more desired and
sought for: and to conclude, supply all necessary wants, which this worthy
(but ouerwronged) trade has long time endured.

FINIS.

