AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST POPERY: Confected out of Scriptures, Fathers, Councels,
and Histories.

WHEREIN DIALOGVE-wise are showed, the points, grounds, and antiquity of the
Protestant Religion; and the first springing up of the points of Popery:
together with the Antichristianisme thereof.

Being alone sufficient to enable any Protestant of mean capacity, to
understand and yield a reason of his Religion, and to encounter with and foil
the Adversary.

By John Mayer, B. D. and Pastor of the Church of little Wratting in Suffolk.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for John Grismand: and are to be sold at his Shop in
Paul's Alley, at the sign of the Gunne. 1625.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY JAMES, BY THE grace of God, King of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Dread Sovereign:
AFter that I had compiled this ens^ing Dialogue, I thought your Majesty the
most fit Maecenas for it; both in respect of the matter and manner. The matter
is a Dispute about Religion, both Protestant and Popish; the manner is by
usurping certain names occurring in the Acts of the holy Apostles, and
accommodating them so, as may best befit these times: amongst which, the chief
is Sergius Paulus, before whom Paul and Elymas enter the lists, with an aim
chiefly at the ouercomming of this honorable person. The issue is, according
to Paul's desire, the settling of Sergius Paulus in the truth; so that with him
there was no more place now for Elymas. Your Majesty has been much
conversant in disputations, and now at length, I will not say being settled
(for it appears sufficiently, that there has ever been a setlednesse and
resolution in your Royal breast) but not thinking good to lend an ear any
longer to the frivolous arguments of such as have sought your auersion from the
Truth, your MAJESTY has provided, that they shall have no more cope of
disputing within your whole jurisdiction. The Work, I confess, is too
sleighty to be presented before so large an understanding, and the Author too
mean to presume to so high a patronage: Epistle Dedicatory upon the Lords
Prayer.
But forasmuch as your Majesty has acknowledged it to have been your own
course to dedicate your royal writings to fit persons, with whom each Tract
might best suite; my hope is, that my boldness shall have pardon, if in
following so worthy an example, I have aspired to this dedication. It has bred
much solicitude in your Majesty (as your late directions touching preachers
and preaching do testify) to consider the daily increase of Popish
superstition even within your Majesty's Dominions. And we your faithful
subjects cannot but have a sympathy herein; for which cause we highly
applauding that direction of instructing in the Principles of Religion, do
apply our selves diligently to this Catecheticall kind of teaching, if happily
the mobile vulgus might thus be faster grounded. And for mine own part,
according to that slender skill, which GOD has given me, I have by vvriting
endeavored to further this kind of teaching, English Catechism.
and to hold to the pattern of the lesser authorized Catechism, for the
avoiding of confusion, by an uniform proceeding: wherein I have not been
altogether frustrated of my end neither, there being many Reverend Divines and
others, amongst whom this labor of mine has been so accepted, as that it
has long ago come to the third impression. Now if my conjecture deceive me
not, another good help to preserve from this infection, would be some
Antidote of our tenants and grounds, and of Popish tenants and practices in the
worship of God, without all ground set up, either by advantage taken of the
darkness, or by force, there being none able to make resistance in several
times and ages of the world; especially if it might be perspicuous and plain
to any capacity, and brief for every ones leisure and ability. And such is
this, which I here present unto your Sacred Majesty, the which or the like
unto which, I could wish that every one, who is not furnished with better,
would make his vade mecum. That Reverend and learned Bishop of Mead has
lately put out a Work in answer to a Jesuit, of the novelty of Popery, in
so complete a manner, as that a man would think, as it was said of the answer
of our blessed Savior, none should dare to ask that question any more. If
this of mine coming after, it should seem superfluous, my apology is, that
our Church besides the greater has also the lesser Catechism. Babes must have
their provision as well as those that are stronger. Your Majesty's care of the
good of this Church committed unto you herein, like to that of Constantine in
the matter of Ar^ianisme, as it has much rejoiced my heart, and the hearts of
many thousands that pray for the prosperity of Sion, so it has encouraged me
to press into your Sacred presence with this my Goates-haire, not being able
to bring better. Your Majesty, I know, has no need of such Tracts, but many
of us that bring presents in this kind may be glad to learn from your Pen,
and to receive knowledge from your lips; yea, 1 King. 10.^.
blessed are they that stand always in thy presence to hear thy wisdom. Yet
vouchsafe, I beseech your Majesty, to suffer it to pass under the protection
of your countenance to your people, and I doubt not, but the Protestant
Religion shall hereby appear unto them as it is, so amiable and rightly
grounded; and the Religion of the Church of Rome so corrupt, and perverting the
grounds, as that thousands, which shall attentively and without prejudice read
it, shall herein bless God for you; some that were ignorant of the differences
of these religions, and so standing indifferently affected, being better
informed; some that were wavering through the seeming truth of that heresy,
being confirmed; and some that were simply seduced and gone from us, being
again to the truth reduced, to the great glory of God, and to the fulfilling
of the number of most loyal and faithful subjects, in whom the heart of your
Majesty may most safely trust. The Father of lights, who has so enlightened
your knowledge; the Son, that life, who has so viuified your heart; and the
Spirit, that sire, who has so inflamed your zeal for the truth, increase,
confirm and prosper this your knowledge, life, and zeal to the benefiting of
many souls, and to the joyful giving up of your Majesty's Accounts at the
great day of reckoning; Amen prays he, who is

Your Majesty's most humbly devoted subject and servant, JOHN MAYER.

To all that conscionably inquire after the Truth, that they may be saved; both
of the reformed Religion, and of the Roman Catholic.
COurteous Reader, thou may happily blame me for my ouer-diligence in
writing-so much, and now upon a subject so thoroughly canuased already in diverse
books of learned Authors. But know, that I have been drawn to do this by
the solicitation of others, being l^th of my self to interrupt my course in
another tract, which I have begung, Treasury of Eccles-expositions.
and to perfect which will require the whole life and labor. of one whole man.
Many have written so I grant, in this argument, as that they exceed this of
mine without all compare: but some are so large and have made their books to
swell to so great volumes, as that they are only for professed Students, and
not for every man's memory, leyfure or money. Some again are so short, and do
so prosecute some points only, as that howsoever they be for every man, yet
when they are read, almost every man remains still unsatisfied in many
things. Lastly, some are neither too large, nor too short, but have written
fully, methodically, and logically: yet not so fully, but that diverse
particulars have been omitted, the common motives on both sides have not been
so thoroughly weighed, the originalls of the many e^rours of the Church of Rome,
and the Apostolic Antiquity of the Reformed Religion has not been so
declared, nor the treatises in the manner of them so fitted to the capacity of
the vulgar, so as that many read them, but for want of capacity, and through
these defects in the work, are not so much moved. Now to supply all these
defects, and to instruct all, even my most incapable Countrymen in every point
and motive, so as that there might be nothing to hinder those that desire to
know the truth, and to cleave unto and obey it; I have written this plain and
short Dialogue. And herein I am not so blind but I see to what envying and hard
censuring I expose my self, but neither credit, nor life are any thing to me,
so that by any means I may save some: Only let me say thus much in way of
Apology, that it is well known, that I am not malicious against the Roman
Catholics, nor out of spite have thus written or used the name of Elymas to
disgrace any but wilful Pontificians, who for sinister respects, against their
knowledge seek to lead into error not only common people, but noble
governors, that attentively hearken to Paul's preaching. For the rest let me
entreat you to read me, not as an enemy, unless I shall therefore be counted
your enemy, Gal. 4.16.
because I tell you the truth; but as one that desires and prays for your
salvation; and I doubt not, but through Gods grace, you shall see that, which
will make you suspect, and not so well to like your present estate, nor so much
to condemn our reformation, if not to separate your selves, and to come out
with us from amongst them, lest ye perish everlastingly. For I profess before
God, who knows all secrets, that till I seriously studied upon these things,
I was not so resolved, that the Pope is the Antichrist, nor your tenants and
superstitions so damnable: but the further I waded into this study, the more
was I resolved, so as that now I make no further doubt of it. And therefore my
hope is, that the like effect may by reading these my meditations be wrought
in others also, that the unstable may be settled, and the erring be brought
home into the one sheepfold of Christ, before it be too late, which God grant
unto you all for his mercies sake. Amen.

A Table of the points of both Religions discussed in this Book.
Of the Protestant Religion.
1 God only is to be believed in, and not the Church. Page. 2 2 Christ only
is our Mediator, and not the Saints departed. Page. 2 3 Justification and
salvation is by faith only. Page. 3 4 Faith assures of salvation. Page. 4 5
The souls of the faithful go not to Purgatory. Page. 5 6 Prayers for the
dead avail not. Page. 6 7 The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is no sacrifice.
There is no real presence, it ought to be in both kinds. Page. 6 8 Baptism
does not quite: ache away natural corruption. Page. 7 9 The Sacraments of the
new Testament are but two only. Page. 7 10 There is no perfection of
righteousness in this life. Page. 7 11 There is no liberty of will unto good.
Page. 8 12 Marriage is free for all men. Page. 8 13 The Scriptures alone are
sufficient. Page. 10 14 None ought to be debarred from reading the Scriptures.
Page. 11 15 The Pope is not supreme head of the Church. Page. 12 16 God only
is to be called upon, and not the Saints departed. Page. 14 17 The use of
images in divine worship is unlawful Page. 15 18 All prayers ought to be in a
known tongue Page. 17 19 Confession of sins is not necessary to any but to
God only. Page. 17 20 Satisfaction for sin cannot be made by works of
penance. Page. 17 21 All sins are mort all none venial. Page. 18 22 To go
on Pilgimage is a superstition. Page. 19 23 Extreme vncton ought not now to be.
Page. 19 24 Crossing and holy water are vain superstitions. Page. 19 25
Nothing is to be taken from the word for any end. Page. 20 26 Wilful poverty
is not warrantable. Page. 20 27 To vow perpetual Virginity is unlawful. page.
21 28 Of Holy days and fasts upon their Eeues. page. 21 29 The Clergy is
subject to the King, as well as the laity. page. 22 30 Superstitions ceremonies
in baptizing, are anoyded. page. 23 31 The holy S^^rament is not to be kept for
after-vses. page. 23 32 The Church of Rome is no true Church, because she
razeth the foundation. page. 24 33 The ignorant Papists endangered as well as
others. page. 32
Of Popery.
1 Satisfaction for temporal punishments. page. 25 2 The merit of Saints: of
the Mass, and of works. page. 26 3 The saints Mediators. page. 27 4 Free Will
preparing for grace. page. 28 By these the foundation is razed. page. 29 5
Uncertainty of faith. page. 31 6 The Popes supremacy. page. 37 7 The
worshipping of Images. page. 43 8 The single life of Priests. page. 47 9 The
real presence. page. 49 10 Prayers in the Latin tongue. page. 53 11 Purgatory
and praying for the dead. page. 54 12 Crossing and holy water. page. 55 13
Freewill. page. 59 14 Justification by works. page. 60 15 The uncertainty of
salvation. page. 62 16 Satisfaction for sin. page. 62 17 Seven Sacraments.
page. 64 18 Apocryphal Scriptures and traditions, etc. page. 65
AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST POPERY.
In way of a Dialogue: Wherein, The Speakers are Saul or Paul, Sergius Paulus,
and Elymas.
Saul. NOble Sir, because you are an elect vessel, the Lord has sent me to
publish the true Religion unto you, by the embracing, and right professing
whereof you may be saved.


Sergius Paulus. What is that religion?


Saul. It is the Christian Religion; taught, and maintained in the reformed, or
Protestant Churches.


Serg. Paul. Wherein stands this religion?


Saul. The maine points of it concern either faith, or practice in exercising
the parts of Gods worship.


Serg. Paul. Concerning faith, what does the Protestant Church hold?


Saul. I will not rehearse all contained in the Symboll or Creed of the
Apostles, about which it is agreed by all that bear the name of Christians;
but only those particulars, about which there is difference.


Serg. Paul. I am also resolved by that which I have heard from thee
heretofore, of all that is generally held by all Christians, that there is one
God, which made, and governs the whole world, who is a spirit,
incomprehensible, and comprehending all things: and one Lord Jesus Christ,
perfect God, and perfect Man, who dyed for our sins, etc. Tell me therefore
only, what particular points of faith are held by the Protestants, but
contradicted by others?


Saul. The first is, that God only is to be believed in, and not any man of
what title or succession so ever, nor yet any company of men called the Church:
Romans 3.4.
because God only is true and all men are liars: neither does the Apostles
Creed propound any other to believed in but God only.


Serg. Paul. What, do you say that the Church is not to be believed in? Is it
not expressly said, I believe in the holy Catholic Church?


Saul. It is indeed said I believe the holy Catholic Church, but not in it;
because the Catholic Church, that is, the Church of God being in all ages, and
ouer-spreading all parts of the world, is an object of faith, and not of sense;
forasmuch as by sense and experience we cannot know this, but by faith only,
as we apprehend the Communion of Saints, forgiveness of sins, and the life
everlasting. Of all which the same is said that of the Catholic Church, seeing
there is but one Verb, I believe, after which they all follow. So that if
hence it might be gathered, that the Church is to be believed in, it may
likewise be gathered, that the remission of sins, and the refurrection of the
body, etc. are to be believed in, which were absurd.


Serg. Paul. What is the second particular point?


Saul. The second is, that Christ Jesus is our only Mediator and Advocate with
the Father in Heaven; neither is it lawful to come to the Father by any other
but by him, and in his name alone: and that the Saints departed out of this
life know not of our seeking their mediation, if we should crave it.


Serg. Paul. Is the Lord so strict, that by him we are thus restrained from
all Mediators in Heaven, and yet directs us to crave the help of others upon
earth to pray for us?


Saul. It is the voice of Gods own Spirit. There is one God, 1. Tim. 2.5.
and one Mediator betwixt God and Man, of whom only, and of none else mention
is made sundry times; as Ioh. 14. Ioh. 16 Romans 8. 1 Ioh. 2. As for that
direction to crave the prayers of men upon earth, it is that by having mutual
help one from another, our mutual love might increase, which cannot be in
craving their mediation in Heaven, seeing howsoever our love may increase
toward them, yet theirs is already fully perfect. But to insist upon nothing
else, they cannot hear us, as the living do; and if they hear, it is kept
secret from us: neither has the Lord spoken one word to direct us to them,
without which, who so seeks to them, may justly have the complaint taken up
against him, Ier, 14.14.
He runs before he is sent.


Serg. Paul. What is the third particular point?


Saul. The third is, that we are justified and saved only by faith in Jesus
Christ, and that our works even when we are at the best, merit nothing toward
our eternal glorification. For to this effect speaks the Lord. Luke 17.10.
When ye have done all that ye can, say that ye are unprofitable servants.
And Saint Paul. A man is justified by faith, Romans 3.28.
without the works of the Law.


Serg. Paul. Is not the work of him that has faith then of more virtue, then
his that has none? Is he not Christ's member, and so Christ's virtue his virtue,
that as in Christ's actions, so in his there should be merit.


Saul. The works of the best are of no more virtue to merit, because he is
still a servant, and bound in duty to what he does, whereas merit implies
doing more then duty requires. And as for Christ's virtue communicated unto
him, it is sufficient, that he is made thus worthy, though not his works,
seeing perfect blessedness is already fully merited by Christ for him, neither
is there need of any more merit.


Serg. Paul. Can he be said to be justified then that has no works, but
rests upon a bare faith?


Saul. No by no means: for faith which justifies, works by love, is lively
by works, as the body by the soul. Wherefore Saint James writing against
such a faith as is without works, Iam. ^.24.
says; A man is not justified by faith only, but by the works of the Law:
That is, he is not become just and righteous in the sight of God, that has a
single and bare faith, but proves his faith sound by his works. For, that he
disputes not of faith, which is the saving grace wrought in the hearts of the
Elect; but of a common faith of which even Devils are capable, is plain from
the Text. For only that common faith is the faith, of which he says, A man is
not justified by faith only.


Serg. Paul. What is the fourth particular point?


Saul. The fourth is, that faith assures a man without wavering or doubting of
the remission of his sins, and of eternal salvation. Romans 4.20.
For such was Abraham's faith. He doubted not through unbelief, but
strengthened himself in faith. And that faith which is joined with wavering in
any man is like the waves of the Sea. Iam. 1.6.



Serg. Paul. This is much that man should come to know so far what the will
of God is, touching his future estate. It may be that some singular man as
Abraham or the holy Apostles, might surely know by revelation, because they had
more then ordinary acquaintance with God: but for other believers I cannot see,
how they should know, though they may all hope well.


Saul. There is great reason, why any faithful person should know this,
because he has received the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.12.
which knows Gods will, even as the spirit within a man knows his mind.


Serg. Paul. But seeing every man is apt to conceive the best of himself, and
natural presumption ofttimes assures a man of his salvation; how shall he
know that it is the spirit, whereby he comes to be thus assured, and not his
own partial fantasy?


Saul. It is a great indignity to the Lord, when as he has taught us, Rom
8.16.
that his Spirit witnesses with our spirits that we are the children of God;
to question whether this testimony can be known: for wherefore serves the
testimony of any, if it be unknown. Many indeed do through their own fault
deceive themselves, because being void of the spirit of sanctification they
presume: But he that is renewed in his mind unto holiness, can never be
deceived.


Serg. Paul. Will the Spirit always abide where once he has sanctified? or
may not a relapse to carnality and sin, cause him to depart, that so the
estate of that man, who has been once sanctified, through his own default,
may become as damnable or more damnable then before? which if it may happen to
be so, what certainty can any man have?


Saul. He that is borne of God sins not, neither can be, 1 John 3.9.
because he is borne of God. If I have seemed to speak otherwise of those that
have been enlightened and made partakers of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6.6.
I said it to stir up to work out salvation with fear and trembling, and
not as positiuely setting down that such might fall away. Wherefore I added, I
am persuaded better things of you, and such as accompany salvation, Heb. 6.9.
for God is not unfaithful to forget your labor and work in the Lord. And,
he that has begun this good work, Phil. 1.6.
will perfect is in you.


Serg. Paul. What is the fifth particular point?


Saul. The fifth is, That the souls of the faithful being justified by Christ,
do immediately after their departure out of their bodies, take possession of
that inheritance which he has by his blood purchased for them; and that there
is not any punishment by a Purgatory fire to be further endured before their
coming into heaven. Luke 12.
For Lazarus was carried immediately into Abraham's bosom; and the dead that dye
in the Lord are said to be blessed, Because they rest from their labors: which
were not true, Reu. 14.13.
if they had more misery yet to pass through, rather greater then any already
past.


Serg. Paul. But then thy self have taught, 1 Cor. 3.11.
that every one must be tried in the fire, after which, he whose work abides
shall be rewarded.


Saul. Thou art utterly mistaken: for I never taught that every man must be
tried by the fire, but every man's work; concerning which it may be doubted
here, even as of metal before it comes to the fire: but at the last day,
which shall be a time of fire and burning flames, it will plainly appear, what
solid or chaffie doctrine any man has built upon the true foundation Christ,
because the righteous Judge of the whole world coming in person, will lay
every thing open as it is. They are very inconsiderate therefore that take this
as spoken of persons, it being altogether besides my purpose there to speak of
any but builders, or of any pain by them to be suffered after death for the
more clarifying of them from sin: but only of the difference of their
acceptance before God at the last, as they have been solid or sleighty in
their building; that golden Doctors of the Church might be encouraged, and the
chaffie terrified, as being like, if they would not build better, to come into
great peril at the last.


Serg. Paul. What is the fixed particular point?


Saul. The sixth is, that when any are departed out of this life, we that
survive can do nothing auailable to their salvation, by offering up any
prayers, alms, or sacrifice. Because as the rich man being dead, Luke 16.26.
it was said, they that would come from thence could not: so we believe, that
there is no removing of souls from woe to bliss, but as the tree falls, so
it lies. 2 Samuel 12.
And therefore, as David prayed for his child being alive, but when it was
dead, ceased so to do: in like manner we pray for the sick, as being yet
capable of mercy, but if they be dead, we cease from praying any more, being
assured, that to pray now is no more devotion, but superstition, savoring more
of violent affection, then of right reason.


Serg. Paul. What is the seventh particular point?


Saul. The seventh is, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ought to be
administered to all the people in both kinds, and that it is a Sacrament
consisting of two parts, the thing signifying, and the thing signified; and not
a sacrifice of Christ's very body and blood there substantially present, as when
he was crucified upon the Cross, iterated again by the Priest to as great
avail, as when he suffered for us. For this were not to remember Christ absent
in the flesh, but to bring him back again to the death ten thousand times
over, and to make a miracle the object of faith, when as the proper end of
miracles is to help us to believe things invisible, themselves being always
visible and sensible.


Serg. Paul. Is not the Lord then to be beieeued, who says, This is my body?


Saul. Yes by all means, but as in other speeches we must not look so much
to the letter as to the sense (as when he says, I am the Vine, I am the Door,
I am the Way; John ^5.1.
in all which he is figurative) so here taking the speech as it is meant, we
believe it with all our hearts, that the bread is Christ's body to the faithful
receiver, and is thus called, because by it Christ is exhibited and received
indeed.


Serg. Paul. What is the eighth particular point?


Saul. The eighth point is, that in Baptism there is true and certain
remission of sins to all repentant and faithful persons, but not an
abolition of natural corruption: for that remains still in the baptized, to
entice, Iam. 1 14. Gal. 5.17. Romans 7.23.
and to draw to actual sinning, in so much that the regenerate cannot do what
they would, nor yet I my self, for I find in me the law of my members
rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captive to the law of
sin.


Serg. Paul. What is the ninth particular point?


Saul. The ninth is, that these two Sacraments are all the Sacraments of the
New Testament, because the Lord Jesus ordained these, and none of the other
five, which by some are added to make up the number seven. For a sacrament is
Gods seal, and so properly to be appointed by him, who alone has the power
over that which is sealed up hereby.


Serg. Paul. What is the tenth particular point?


Saul. The tenth point is, that the best are not so perfectly righteous in this
life, neither can any attain to such perfection in keeping Gods Laws, but
that they are still much faulty: for in many things we sin all: and, Iam.
3.2. 1 John 1.8.
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth
in us.


Serg. Paul. What? does Christ then command us things impossible? for he
bids us be perfect, Mat. 5.48. Phil. 3.15.
as our Father which is in heaven is perfect; and thou thy self have said, so
many of us as be perfect, let us be thus minded.


Saul. There is a twofold perfection, of parts, and of degrees: perfection of
parts, is when a man has not only one grace, or a few graces, but all graces:
perfection of degrees is when a man has attained such a measure of grace, as
that there is in him no imperfection or want at all. Of the former the Lord
speaks, that we should love not only friends, but also enemies, and
exercise benignity to all, and not of the other. Again, there is a perfection
of sincerity, and a perfection of sanctity, of the former of which only I
spoke, and not of the latter; for I had immediately before acknwoledged my
self not perfect in that sense.


Serg. Paul. What is the eleventh particular point?


Saul. The eleventh point is, that man's will is so corrupted ever since the
fall of Adam, as that he cannot desire to be converted, or think a thought
tending to conversion: but of his own will, he is carried only to evil, till
that God of his grace changes his will by putting a new heart and spirit into
him. Genesis 6.5. 2 Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.13.
For, all the imaginations of man's heart are only evil continually: and, we
are not able to think a good thought as of our selves, but it is God that
works in us the will and the deed of his own good pleasure.


Serg. Paul. Why then are we bidden to turn from sin, to repent, and believe
the Gospel? and why is it used as an argument of just judging, How often would I
have gathered you together and ye would not? if they could do no otherwise?


Saul. We are bidden to turn, to show that the Lord will not turn us without
our being willing, and by thus calling upon us, he works a willingness, in
such as be elected: and if any notwithstanding are still hardened, and finally
damned, the cause is not in God, who is tied to no man, but in the corruption
of their own will, brought in by man's own default, when at the first it was
not so.


Serg. Paul. What is the twelfth particular point?


Saul. The twelfth point is, that marriage is free for all men, and that none
ought to be debarred from it: but if any can contain, they are to be exhorted
to use this gift, that they may be more free to serve God, not being entangled
with so much worldly business, as they which have wife and children. For
marriage is honorable amongst all men: Heb. 13.4. 1 Timothy 4 3.
and it is a doctrine of Devils forbidding to marry; yea the Apostles
themselves were married men, and I might have used the same liberty also,
neither does the Lord approve it to be good for any sort of men, not to marry,
Math. 19.12.
but for such only as can contain.


Serg. Paul. If marriage brings worldly incombrances, and the Ministers of the
Gospel had need to enjoy all freedom, that they may the better attend upon
their office, it seems, that the unmarried are rather to be preferred, if a
sufficient number of such may be had: and if any be therefore willing to live
always single, that they may be the more fit for this service, it is no
forbidding of mariaege to receive only such to holy Orders. Again, though
marriage be lawful, and a man's companying with his wife be no sin, yet it
disableth him for a time to communicate in such things, as wherein holy persons
only have liberty, as to eat of the Shewbread. Abiathar tells David, 1 Samuel 21.4.
that if they had not lately companied with women they might cate of it, and
the Priests under the Law, when their course came to serve in the Temple, lived
apart from their wives, as appears by the example of Zachary. Luke 1.23.



Saul. If any sufficient and fit for life and learning, having the gift of
continency live single, it is not to be doubted, but that they are to be
preferred: but because this gift is very rare, and for preferment men will take
upon them that, which they have no ability unto, to admit only such into holy
Orders, is in effect to forbid marriage to some, and damnable, as of the Devil,
as has been already showed. Yea it is a marvel, that they which pretend the
Apostolical title so much, should be so plainly against the Apostle, who
says; Let a Bishop be the Husband of one Wife. 1 Timothy 3.
Neither are they that enforce themselves to a single life, but want the gift,
the more free, but rather much more troubled, seeing lust is an hundredth times
more incombring, then any domestical troubles of the married. And lastly, if it
be a good reason against the marriage of Priests, that companying with women
makes them unfit to partake of the Holy Bread for a time, it is good also
against the marriage of any Christian man, who is now also to partake of this
bread, as well as the Priest. No more therefore can be hence concluded, but
that all should abstain from companying with their wives against the time of
communicating, as against the time of fasting and Prayer. For so I have
elsewhere directed. Defraud not one another, 1. Cor. 7 5.
except it be by consent for a time, that ye may give your selves to fasting
and Prayer, and come together again.


Serg. Paul. What is the thirteenth particular point?


Saul. The thirteenth point is, that the holy Scriptures, that is, the
canonical books of the Old and New Testament, are alone sufficient for
salvation, neither are any other either Apochryphall Writings, or unwritten
Traditions of like authority, but only so far forth to be received, as they
agree with the contents of these Books. For it is plainly expressed, that
though Jesus did and spoke many things more, then are written, yet these things
are written, that we might believe, and believing have eternal life. Ioh.
20.31. Gal. 1 8.
And if we, or an Angel from Heaven, bring any other Gospel, let him be
accursed. We that are the Apostles of Christ have ever submitted our doctrine
to be examined by the written Word, and therefore, Act. 17.11.
if any thing be pretended to have been taught by us by word of mouth, or by
any that have followed us, not consonant to the written Word, it is without
doubt to be rejected.


Serg. Paul. It is no where written, that the Lords day is to be kept holy in
stead of the old Sabbath, nor that infants are to be baptized, nor that the
Lords Supper is to be received in the morning, or at the Church, or by women
as well as by men, and yet these things are necessary.


Saul. These are agreeable to the written Word, and therefore good reason, that
they should be observed: but this makes nothing for unwritten traditions
contrary to the Word of God, or for the authority of any, that are without
ground here.


Serg. Paul. The Scriptures are obscure, and therefore alleged even by the
vilest Heretics, so that if they only be received, it seems, that there
will be nothing to patronize the truth, more then error. It is not therefore
necessary to take them with the sense received by the Church, that we may
hold aright, and be saved?


Saul. Many places of Scripture are plain, and easy to be understood; namely,
so many, as do set forth the Articles of our faith, Gods holy will and
commandments, and the doctrine of Prayer, and worshipping God, which is all
necessary to be known unto salvation; so that herein a Christian of ordinary
understanding, needs not to depend upon the sense of others, but immediately
upon the Word of God. In places more obscure, the best Doctors of the Church
have always differed; and therefore even herein Christian people are not tied
to the sense of any, but to that, which is most agreeable to the truth,
plainly set forth in some other place.


Serg. Paul. If all have judgment in the sense of Gods Word, then it seems
that none are to be debarred from reading the Scriptures, for fear of falling
into error by so doing: whereas it is plain, that ignorant persons are
perverted sometimes by the scriptures themselves. 2. Pet. 3.16.
For, there are many places hard to be understood, which the ignorant and
unstable pervert to their own damnation.


Saul. Nothing can be more against the mind of Christ, then to debar the
people from reading, and hearing the Scriptures read in a known tongue. For
he has bidden, Search the Scriptures, for therein ye look to find eternal
life. Ioh 5.39.
The danger that some fall into hereby is otherwise to be provided against:
viz. by diligent preaching, and opening the sense.


Serg. Paul. But is not the Church all in all to Christian people. Have they
not the Scriptures from the Church? and do they not by the Church come to know,
that they are the Word of God? and therefore howsoever the Church shall order
the reading and setting forth of the Scriptures, is it not to be held to be
done very well?


Saul. It is not to be denied, but that as the Woman of Samaria brought the
people there to the knowledge of Christ, so we are brought by the Church, at
the first, to know the Scriptures to be the Word of God: but as the same people
said unto her, after that Christ had taught them: Ioh 4.42.
now we believe, not because of thy words, but because we have heard him our
selves: So Christian people receiving the Word into their hearts, do not
believe any more because of the Church, but because the Word it self working
upon their consciences persuades them, that it is the Word of God. And as it
gave the being at the first unto the Church, so the Church is to be ordered
thereby, as by the superior, and not to order it, as an inferior.


Serg. Paul. What is the fourteenth particular point?


Saul. The fourteenth point is, that Christ only is the supreme head and
foundation of his Church, neither has any one man, nor ought to have
superiority over all others in spiritual matters, in all Countries and
Nations, being as it were a common Rock, whereupon all may stay themselves,
nothing doubting, but that cleaning to him, they cleave to Christ, 1 Cor. 3 9.
and are free from error. For, none can lay any other foundation, saving that
which is laid, Jesus Christ. If upon any other the Church be founded, it is not
upon one, but upon all the Apostles alike, Ephesians. 2.20 Gal. 2.9.
and the Prophets too: if upon any as more principal they are three, James,
Cephas, and John, who seemed to be Pillars. If a power spiritually to rule by
opening, and shutting, binding, and loosing, be committed to any over all
others, neither is that committed to one Peter, but to all the Apostles: Ioh.
20 23.
For, whose sins ye remit, says the Lord, they are remitted, and whose sins
ye retain, they are retained: and if any one has rule over the world, as
chief, it is not Peter, Gal. 2 7.
but Paul: For, to Peter was committed the ministry of the circumcision
only, which was but of one Nation; to Paul the minister of the uncircumcision,
which was of all the rest of the world.


Serg. Paul. But of Peter the Lord says singularly: Math. 16.16.
Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and to thee I give
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. And, follow me, and I will make thee a
fisher of men. And again, Peter love thou me? Ioh. 23.
Feed my sheep. By all which it should seemt, that howsoever others had power
of binding and loosing too, yet he was preferred, as chief, and above all the
rest, after whom such another should succeed, and so another from age to age to
the worlds end. And this construction seems to be verified by the
uninterrupted succession of those Bishops, who challenge to be his successors,
beyond all other Bishops of any other place, seeing there is no such sucression
else where to be found?


Saul. If Peter had been appointed over all, I had been much to blame to
withstand him to his face at Antioch, Gal. 2.14.
and to go on in mine office without seeking allowance and advice from him. I
do not therefore acknowledge any chiefly intimated in Peter above the other
Apostles, but that he should be a most notable instrument of glorifying God,
and propagating the Gospel, wherein he should exceed the rest, being fuller
of the power of the Holy Ghost, as he was fuller of zeal toward Christ. And
that last committing of the sheep and lambs to his feeding singularly, was no
more then was needful after his gross fall by denying his Lord and Master,
through which he might for ever have been discouraged, had not his commission
been again renewed. It pleased our good God for his own glory to deal alike
with him, and with me, both grievous sinners and blasphemers, that where sin
had most abounded, zeal and grace might most abound; and whereas we were most
darkened, through scandal that might hence arise, making us unfit to be lights
of the world, to make us shine by miracles above all others, that thus no
scandal to hinder the Gospel might any more appear. And as for the
succession so much gloried in, it is no true succession of Apostolical men,
but of political Princes, maintained by the sword, and not by the word, even
as the successors of Mahomet have done. Of Apostlolike men there has been a
more true succession at Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch.


Serg. Paul. But if there be no supreme power upon earth, how shall unity be
maintained in the Church, seeing diners men will be of diners minds? and in
case of difference about matter of faith, who shall be Judge to end it? if no
one man, how shall it come to an end? or has the Lord left his Church in such
a miserable case, as that she must needs broile in contentions without end?


Saul. There was no supreme in the Primitive Church, and yet they are said to
have beens all together with one mind; Act. 2.46.
the Spirit which is the Author of unity, shall keep the true Church in unity,
though there be no visible head over all. And as for differences that arise,
we have an exemplary direction to meet in Council: Acts 15.
Where being free liberty for any learned member to speak, it is not to be
doubted, but that the assistance of the Holy Ghost being inuocated, after
reasonable debating of things controuerted, all shall be swayed to hearken
unto and determine with one eminent man, as they did with James. Verse 22.
If not, but as in the time of Arrianisme more are for error then for the
truth, it must be borne as a cross, till the Lord will be entreated to give
the truth the victory again, as he did then after certain years. And thus I
have related all the chief points of the faith maintained by the Protestant
Church, so plaily founded upon the word of God, as that if in any of them there
be error, we may cry out with the Prophet, Ier. 20.7.
and say, If we be deceived (O God) thou have deceived us. There be many points
more, but because they will better come under those that concern practice, I
will refer them thither.


Serg. Paul. What are the points concerning practice?


Saul. First, as we hold that God only is to be believed in, so we make all
our prayers to him only, utterly refusing to pray to Angels or Saints
departed, how gracious soever they may seem to be with the Lord: And herein
we have warrant from the word of God, who says, Psalm. 50.14.
Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear and deliver thee. Thus
all the faith full, whose practice is recorded in holy Scriptures, have always
done, neither has any ever called upon any other.


Serg. Paul. Did not Iaacob pray to the Angel that was with him in all his
peregrination, Genesis 48.16.
that he would bless the two sons of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasseh, when he
said, God before whom my fathers did walk, the God, which fed me all my life
long unto this day, the Angel, which redeemed me from all evil, bless the
^ads, etc.


Saul. The Angel named here, is none other but the Lord Jesus: for where do
we read of any other Redeemer? If he had meant an Angel, as the word is
commonly understood, he would have said Angels, and not an Angel, for at all
times of danger mention is made of the Angels appearing to him, as both in his
journey toward Padan Aram, Genesis 28.10. Genesis 32.1.
and in his return from thence. Only he, to whom his deliverance from Esau
is to be imputed, wrestled with him alone, of whom the Text speaks so
plainly, as that it is most certain he was the Lord. If Iaacob should have
prayed to an Angel, how far an Angel would have been from accepting of it,
appears in the example of John and Daniel, who were both forbidden to worship
an Angel.


Serg. Paul. What is the second point in practice?


Saul. Secondly, because God is a Spirit, which cannot be expressed by any
similitude, we abhor the use of any image or similitude in divine worship:
yea we refrain altogether from setting forth the divine Majesty by any image.
For, both Moses charge the people, Deur. 4.15.
that they make no image, because they saw none in the day that the Lord spoke
to them; Esaias 40.
and the Prophet Esaias speaks of it as a thing impossible to represent God,
who is infinite, by a finite resemblance; and Hahakkuk plainly calls images
teachers of lies. Hab. 2.18.



Serg. Paul. But God has sometime assumed a shape unto himself, as to Daniel
he appeared like an old man, at Christ's baptism the Holy Ghost appeared in the
likeness of a Dove. Why may he not then be thus pictured and set forth?


Saul. The precepts of God, and not his actions, ought to be a direction to us;
so that if he has forbidden to make an image of God, it will be no good plea
to allege how he has sometime appeared, if we presume thus to picture him.
Besides, all images made by man are dead things, whereas the resemblances which
God has at any time appeared by have had life and motion. And such a picture
of God is any huing man, rather then a dead and dumb image. And lastly, these
resemblances were not exhibited to be worshipped, but only to express in
vision, what the Lord would have his people to understand.


Serg. Paul. An image puts a man in mind of God, who is apt otherwise to be
carried away with by-thoughts.


Saul. Shall man take upon him to be wiser then God; when he has commanded
to make no image, but to worship him in spirit, what it is in effect but to
instruct him? What will thou, that no image be made, but only that the mind
be fixed upon thee in Prayer: thou do not so advisedly herein, because men's
minds are ready to be drawn away if they have nothing to behold. It were much
better therefore for them to have some image to keep the mind from wandering,
and to stir up devotion. Oh intolerable arrogancy, that man should dare thus
to correct the precepts of his Maker.


Serg. Paul. Does the command of God touch Images, or rather Heathen Idols,
which are representations of false gods, which he forbids to have in the
first command: and then to make images of them in the second?


Saul. Indeed, some are much deluded hereby, thinking that their image-making
is thoroughly justified thus. But silly men that they are, they do little
attend the vehement inuectiues of the Prophets, against such as attempted by
image, to represent the True God, both because it is impossible, and because it
is the way to let in much corruption in the worship of God.


Serg. Paul. It seems, that the Lord was delighted in images about his
Tabernacle, and Temple; for he appointed Cherubins to be made in most glorious
manner, which had faces like young men: so that the garnishing of Churches with
images now is not a thing so unwarrantable, and without president, as you would
make it to be.


Saul. Those images were only for ornament, and happily for some signification,
but for adoration there is not the least syllable, that tends to show that
they were: neither did they serve to resemble God, but in some sort in what
state and majesty the Lord sits in Heaven, attended by such glorious
creatures. It cannot be gathered hence, that Churches may now be garnished in
like manner, because then they were much taught by outward things, as children
in their nonage, but now being of full age, we are no more under beggarly and
impotent rudiments. Gal. 4.9.



Serg. Paul. What is the third point in practice?


Saul. Thirdly, because the Lord Jesus has bidden us ask any thing in his
Name; we pray always in the name of Jesus Christ only to the Father, flying
as sacrilege, prayers unto Saints departed. For it is the proper honor of
Christ to seek unto God by his mediation. 1 Ioh. 2.2.
If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous. Wherefore to use the mediation of others, it is to rob Christ of his
honor. Even as if the Prince should bid us all, that have suits to the King,
to come to him, and he will prefer them for us: if notwithstanding we leaving
the Prince, should flock about some Courtiers to intercede for us.


Serg. Paul. What is the fourth point in practice?


Saul. Fourthly, we make all our prayers in a known tongue: for, I will pray
with the spirit, 1 Cor. 14.15.
and I will pray with my understanding also. It is a confusion, and no
edification to use public service in a strange tongue, even as when a trumpet
makes an imperfect sound.


Serg. Paul. What is the fifth point in practice?


Saul. Fifthly, because the Lord has forbidden vain repetitions, Math. 6.
as heathenish: we do not place devotion in saying over a multitude of
prayers, but in fervent and hearty praying; one, or a few prayers at a time, so
as that our affections may be quickened, and not dulled hereby.


Serg. Paul. What is the sixth point in practice?


Saul. Sixthly, we content our selves to confess our sins only to God, and
hold it not necessary to confess all things unto the Priest, but only for
necessary relief of conscience, being troubled in regard of some particulars.
And generally we deny not, but acknowledge to one another, that we are
sinners, and this is all that God has commanded. Iam. 5.16.
Confess your sins one unto another, and pray one for another.


Serg. Paul. What is the seventh point in practice?


Saul. Seventhly, when we have humbled our selves for our sins, we do not
take upon us to satisfy for them by punishing our bodies with whipping, or
putting on Hairecloth, but only by abstinence and contrition of heart,
watching more carefully over our ways, that we sin no more. For Christ has
satisfied fully for us, by bearing in his body the smart due for our sins, and
no more revenge is required to be taken by us upon our selves: but that whereby
our bodies may be beaten down, 1 Cor. 9.
and the better kept from sinning for the time to come, such as is hearty
sorrow, for so the Lord has commanded; Joel 2.13.
Rent your hearts and not your garments: and fasting is often called for, but
doing violence to the body, by striking till the blood comes out, is rather
to imitate Baals priests, 1 King. 18.
that lanched and cut their bodies in their superstitious devotion, then to
follow any approved pattern of the truly godly.


Serg. Paul. But the wearing of sackcloth and ashes is commended by many
approved examples, so that if you refuse this penance, it seems, that you are
justly to blame.


Saul. We must not confound, but distinguish betwixt times. Under the Law
indeed these things were required, and the washing of the body, and the
bringing of a sacrifice, for expiation of sin; because the Lord not content
with inward contrition, would have it outwardly expressed also; such was the
austeritie of the Law: but under the Gospel, these are remitted: for when the
Publicans and people asked John, Luke 3.9.
exhorting to works of repentance, what they should do, he omitteth all these
things, and speaks only of ceasing from sin, and doing good; neither is
girding with sackcloth, etc. any where else mentioned in the New Testament,
such is the lenity of the Gospel. Hereupon it is said, that the burden of the
Law was heavy, and such at neither we nor our fathers were able to hear: Act.
15.10. Math. 11.28.
but of the yoke of the Gospel, the Lord says: My yoke is easy, and my
burden light.


Serg. Paul. But are not some sins venial ^ for which Christ did not,
neither needed to suffer? and ought not we then by these works of penance to
satisfy for them?


Saul. It is an imaginaly distinction, no where founded in the Word of God:
Iam. 2.10. Math. 5.19.
for here all sin is condemned as mortal. He that observes all the Law, and
yet fails in one point, it guilty of all. He that breaks the least of Gods
commandments, and teaches others to do so, shall be counted the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven. And what lesser sin can there be then an idle word, Math.
12.36. Mark. 7.21.
and yet hereof account shall be given at the day of Judgment. And what
lesser then evil thoughts, and yet these defile a man, and so debatre him from
heaven, forasmuch as no unclean thing shall enter therein.


Serg. Paul. What is the eighth point of practice? Apoc. 22.



Saul. Eighthly, we hold that we may as acceptably worship God in one place, as
in another; namely, in our private worship one alone, neither have we need to
go on pilgrimage to any remote place, where the bones of any Saint, or
Relics are kept, or Church or Chapel in any respect supposed to be more
holy, as though we should the rather obtain Gods indulgence, in respect of
our sins, by thus doing. For when thou will pray, says the Lord, Math. 6.6.
enter into thy closet. And for public assembling to the worship of God, any
consecrate place is as good as Jerusalem, or the Mount, where Jacob was wont to
worship. For all such dignity of one place above another, is plainly by Christ
himself abrogated, saying: The hour comes, when neither at Jerusalem, Ioh.
4.20.
nor in this Mountain men shall worship the Father.


Serg. Paul. What is the ninth point of practice?


Saul. Ninthly, if any be sick, we pray for them, but anoint them not, Iam.
5.
because although direction be given thus to do, yet consideration must be
had of the times, anointing was then accompanied with healing, through a
singular virtue upon the Presbytery, for the more confirmation of the Gospel,
in the first beginnings thereof, but this has ceased long ago, and therefore
if it were now used, it would be a naked ceremony, without benefit to the
diseased.


Serg. Paul. What is the tenth point of practice?


Saul. Tenthly, we do not use crossing or Holy Water, or any the like
Ceremonies to bless us therewith: because we do not find, that they were
instituted by God, but invented by men given to superstition, and therefore can
have no further virtue, then such are able to give unto them.


Serg. Paul. But by experience it has been diverse times confirmed, that there
is virtue in these things: for the devil has been often hereby chaced away.


Saul. If any such effect has followed upon the applying of them, it has
been through collusion of the Devil, giving way for a further advantage:
namely, that superstitious people might be the more confirmed, in their
confidence in such impotent ceremonies, and be drawn away from God, who only
is able to curb Satan; that thus they might lie the more open unto him.


Serg. Paul. What is the eleventh point of practice?


Saul. Eleuenthly, we do not use any deceit, by keeping any thing written in
the canonical Scriptures, from the knowledge of the people, or by inuenting
stories of things never done, to stir up devotion in them. For whatsoever the
pretense may be in thus doing, we are sure that God has pronounced them
accursed, Deuteronomy. 4.
that take ought from his laws, or add any thing thereunto.


Serg. Paul. What is the twelfth point of practice?


Saul. In the twelfth place, we do not commend wilful poverty, as a point of
devotion, that is, for a man to give away all that he has to the poor, so
that himself is constrained to beg for relief. For we are not to give so,
as that we may be grieved, and others eased, 2 Cor. 8.13. 1 Cor. 16.1.
but every man as God has blessed him, and as he can spare.


Serg. Paul. Christ was poor, and so were the Apostles, and unto him that
asked, what he was yet to do, it is prescribed, if thou will be perfect, Math.
19 21.
go sell all that which thou have, and give it to the poor: and according to
this direction, they that had possessions, Act. 4.
sold them, and brought the price, and laid it at the Apostles feet. And
lastly, the poor are pronounced blessed, and woe is to the rich, and full.


Saul. Christ was borne poor, the Disciples forsook all to attend upon their
Apostolical Office, which necessarily required^t, and to this Office was that
Young man called, who was bidden to sell and give to the poor; so that what is
said to him binds not but in the like case: viz. when any man is called, the
necessity of the Church requiring it, in an Apostolic manner, to travel
through diverse countries to set forth the Gospel. Touching that example of
selling and laying down the price at the Apostles feet, it was extraordinary,
and only of such as joined themselves with the Apostles, for the public
service of the Church, and therefore soon ceased, as appears, Act. 5.13.
Lastly, the poor simply are not pronounced blessed, nor the rich woeful: for he
says only, Blessed are ye poor: namely, Luke 6.20.
which have left all to follow, and serve me in this Office: and, We to you
that are rich, that is, prefer your riches so, as that like the Young man, ye
refuse to leave them, to follow me, though hereunto invited.


Serg. Paul. What is the thirteenth point of practice?


Saul. In the thirteenth place, we do not vow perpetual Virginity, as
supposing it a point of more perfection; nor to live in Cells, Wildernesses, or
Monasteries, there to spend our time separate from the world, in the nabit, and
according to the rules prescribed by the instituters of such Orders, glorying
to be of their Order. For we ought not to vow any thing, but what we can
perform, but this we cannot, because it is not given to all. And for
Monastical living, it is plainly repugnant to this. 1 Cor. 7.20.
Let every man continue in that calling, wherein God has called him. And to be
named after any man, I have by the Spirit of God condemned as carnal, in the
persons of those at Corinth, that held some of Paul, 1 Cor. 3.
some of Cephas, etc.


Serg. Paul. What is the fourteenth point of practice?


Saul. In the fourteenth place, we keep Holy Days in remembrance of Christ,
the blessed Virgin Mary, and of the holy Apostles, as being set forth in the
Word of God, for most notable and holy instruments of our best good: but other
days dedicated to others we observe not: partly, lest the people should be
overmuch burdened with days; and partly, because we are uncertain of the
worth of such men, or the truth of such things, as in remembrance whereof these
observations were taken up.


Serg. Paul. What is the fifteenth point of practice?


Saul. In the fifteenth place, we keep fasts of Lent, and Holy-dayes-eues,
etc. according to the ancient custom of the Church of God, but we reckon not
this to be any part of Gods service, but a means, the better to enable us
against the flesh, and to the spiritual sernice. Neither do we think the
conscience defiled at such times by cating flesh: for nothing that enters into
a man defiles him, Mark. 7.20.
but only that they which do thus, are worthily fined, for neglecting
wholesome constituted Orders When there is any particular occasion to fast, we
abstain from all food, from morning till night.


Serg. Paul. What is the sixteenth point of practice?


Saul. In the sixteenth place, we all both Clergy and Laity are subject to
our King as Supreme; and to his Officers, whom we are bound to obey under him:
and if he does tyrannize over us, if he be an Heretic, or setter up of
Heresies, we resist not by force, neither by treachery seek to take his life
away; but we exhort him, and pray for him, and so leave him to the Lord, who
only is above him, and can justly chastise him. For thus David behaved
himself toward Saul, and I have plainly set it down as a charge to all;
Romans 13.1. 1 Timothy 2.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: and let prayers be made for
all, especially for Kings, and Governors, etc.


Serg. Paul. What is the seventeenth point of practice?


Saul. In the seventeenth place, we proceed in that simple manner in our
baptizing, that our Savior Christ has prescribed, using neither Milk, nor
Honey, nor Spittle, nor Salt, nor exorcising, but only Water, in the name of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and certain prayers, and sitting
admonitions before and after. For all other things were brought in since, and
so are humane and superstitious.


Serg. Paul. But ye use a special vestiment, and the sign of the Cross in
your baptizing?


Saul. We do so indeed, but not as any necessary appurtenances of Baptism;
but the Surplice is put on for order as a distinguishing garment; and the
Cross is made after baptisine ended, without opinion of any virtue in it,
only to figure out what a base profession in the opinion of the world we
betake our selves unto, we being yet no whit ashamed of the ignominy of
Christ's Cross, but rejoicing to bear every man the Cross, which he shall
meet withal for his sake.


Serg. Paul. What is the eighteenth point of practice?


Saul. In the eighteenth place, we receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
with all ^^^erence upon nor knees, but after this ended, we do not keep the
Holy bread remaining to be carried about in Procession, as having virtue to any
other use, but only to seed the souls of such as are present. If any be
sick, which desire it, other bread and Wine are taken; and being by the
Minister consecrated, as in public it is given to the sick, and to some
others with him. Moreover, we use common Bread and Wine, and not little Cakes
of unleavened bread to be given whole, being first lifted up in the sight of
the people, that they may worship them. For this use only of this blessed
Sacrament have we from our Lord Christ, and to bring in any other use, is to
presume to be wiser then he, and so to become stark fools. And thus I have
faithfully related the practice of the Reformed or Protestant Church.


Serg. Paul. But why is this called the Reformed Church? has Christ any more
Churches but one?


Saul. No: the Church of Christ is but one, wheresoever dispersed in all the
world: but this Church partly through the ambition and covetousness of the
Popes of Rome, and of the rest of the chief of the Clergy, and partly through
blind devotion, became very corrupt, both in doctrine, and manner of serving
God, wherein having lion many years to the grief of the truly zealous and
wise, who did what they could or durst to rectify things again, but without
effect, at length (though very loath so to do) many without fear of bodily
danger separated themselves from all society and communion with those, that
still adliered to these curruptions, teaching and holding as has be one before
deelared; who notwithstanding the hot brunts of persecution, which they met
withal, increased daily; whole Countries and Kingdoms, being in a short time
by Gods providence joined unto them. And because of this reformation, about
which they made then protestation, that simply for conscience toward God, and
his Truth, and only according to his written Word they thus proceeded, they
were called the Reformed or Protestant Church: others wilfully cleaving to
their corruptions still, and to the Pope and Roman Clergy, the chief
maintainers hereof, were called the Church of Rome, or the Popish Church, or as
they needs will have it, Roman Catholics.


Serg. Paul. Then it seems, that the Church anciently one, is now become two,
the one opposite to the other. Or, are they both one Church still, but divided
for their contrary opinions, and manners in many things?


Saul. As the Church of Christ has been, so it still is, and ever shall be
one, and not two; for it is Christ; Spouse, which is only one. I do not
therefore acknowledge, but advisedly deny the Church of Rome to be a true
Church of Christ: Reu. 3.1.
As the Church of Sardis had a name to be aline, but was dead, so it may hold
this name still, but is indeed a very carcass without a soul, by reason of
the gross errors therein maintained and practiced: for truth is the life of
the Church. The reformed Church then is the only true Church, neither may we
return again to them upon pain of damnation: but they must and shall come to
us at the last; for truth is stronger then all.


Serg. Paul. But the maine truth is still maintained in the Church of Rome:
viz. That Jesus is the Son of God: and have not thou thy self taught, 1. Cor
3.
that who so builds upon the foundation Christ Jesus, though but hay or
stubble, which shall hurne, yet himself shall escape as it were through the
fire? What is this, but that so Christ be cleaued unto, no erroneous opinions
or practice in the service of God shall damn the soul.


Saul. The Church of Rome teaches indeed generally this truth touching Christ
Jesus, but in the particular explication of what they hold hereabout, they do
plainly raze this foundation, and so their building is not upon the foundation
Christ described in the New Testament, but imagined in their own brains.
Again, although the foundation were rightly held, yet they are builders only
that shall be saved, not destroyers or demolishers, as they of the Church of
Rome are.


Serg. Paul. Wherein do they raze the foundation Christ?


Saul. In that they do not rely upon Christ only for salvation and grace. For
this is the property of a foundation, to bear up all the building alone, if it
be the only foundation, as I have taught, that Christ is. If then the building
rest partly upon some other foundation, this is in effect razed, because though
this be sound, yet the other upon which it partly stands being deceitful and
unsound, when that shall fail, the whole building cannot but come down.


Serg. Paul. It seems then, that Christ is the foundation to them only that
rest upon him alone; and that they which together with him rely upon any thing
else, are in effect gone from the foundation, and so shall have no more benefit
of it, then they that hold not Christ at all. Can you prove the Roman
Catholics to be such?


Saul. There is nothing more plain to them that will understand. For first,
when Christ only is relied upon, and so made the only soundation, his passions
alone are held to be fully satisfactory for all punishments due to us for all
our sins both temporal and eternal. Secondly, all merit whereby we become
worthy of salvation is held to be in him only. Thirdly, His mediation only to
God the Father, is rested upon to obtain any benefit or help in the time of
need. Fourthly, The beginning, progress and perfection of all grace is imputed
to him only through the working of his Spirit, and nothing to a man's self.
But the contrary to all these are maintained in the Church of Rome.


Serg. Paul. Declare this more particularly, and first, that they rely not upon
his passions only as fully satisfactory.


Saul. They say that he has satisfied for all eternal punishments in hell,
but not for temporal: for these are left to us to be satisfied for, partly
here by acts of penance, and partly hereafter in purgatory. And that there are
certain lesser sins called venial, for which we our selves must satisfy.
Flatly contrary to Saint John, who says, 1. Ioh 1.6.
the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. And I have taught that
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law being made a curse for us:
Gal. 3.13.
Now this curse did as well extend to temporal as eternal punishments,
witness Moses his dilating upon it, Deuteronomy. 28. and Leuit. 26. throughout which
Chapters he shows that the curse coming by sin is temporal.


Serg. Paul. If Christ had satisfied herein for us, were it not injustice in
God to put his to so much smart again daily, by sickenesses, losses,
ignominies, and persecutions in the world?


Saul. It were injustice indeed, if our sins being forgiven and cleansed away in
Christ's blood, he should still require us to be temporally panished. Luke
23.16.
This were just Pilates justice. I find no fault in this man, I will therefore
scourge him, and let him go. God forbid, that we should once think the most
righteous Lord to be such in his proceedings. It is to be understood
therefore, that the smart imposed upon us here is only either for our trial,
or for our correction in love, as parents are wont to deal with their children.


Serg. Paul. What do they hold touching merit?


Saul. That Christ's death and passion alone, are not the meritorious cause of
our salvation, but the blessed Virgin Mary, and the holy Apostles, and other
Saints which have suffered death for the Gospel, have also merited for us; and
that there is merit in the sacrifice of the Mass, extended to all both quick
and dead; and in the works of the regenerate through which they become worthy
of heaven.


Serg. Paul. The Saints are so near unto Christ, as that it seems to be all
one to ascribe merit unto their passions, and to hi^^ if they were diverse from
him, it were to lay another foundation indeed. Have not thou written to the
same effect saying, Col. 1.24.
I fulfill therest of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body which
is his Church? And touching the Mass, and good works of the regenerate,
whatsoever virtue is ascribed hereunto, it tends the more to the magnisying
of Christ's merit, which is able to give virtue to other things to m^rit also.


Saul. These are plausible reasons indeed to d^ceiue the simple, but he which
has any understanding can consider, that by the like reason the sun, moon
and stars, might safety be associated unto God in divine worship, for they
are near unto him also. And for that saying of mine, if any other part of my
writing, or of the whole Bible did sound to the seconding of such an acception,
it might well be taken so: but considering, that I have plainly professed
elsewhere, that Paul is nothing, and Aposlo nothing, 1. Cor. 3. Phil. 3.9.
and that Christ's righteousness is that only wherein I desire to be found.
Me thinks what I have said to the Colossians should not be wrested so, but
be simply taken of my sufferings, in going about to do good unto the Church,
which I call Christ's sufferings, because undergone for him, who taught me
sometime, Act. 9.
that the persecuting of his members was the persecuting of himself. Lastly,
where there is any such extent of the virtue of Christ's passion to make other
things meritorious certain, it is good to acknowledge and extol it, but out
of this case, as it is in the matter of the Mass, and of good works, it is a
plain derogating from Christ's merit the only sure foundation, and a razing of
it. That there is no merit in these things has been sufficiently showed
heretofore.


Serg. Paul. But did not the blessed Virgin Mary merit any thing for us by those
passions, which she had together with Christ in her soul, when he hung upon
the Cross?


Saul. I am glad that you put me in mind again to speak of this, that the
abomination of the Romish religion might the more appear. For indeed they
make her above all the Saints, not only a mediatrix of intercession, but of
Redemption also: affirming, that her standing by when the Lord suffered upon
the cross, full of sorrow to be hold it, was a joining with him in our
Redemption: and therefore, where as it is said of Christ, he shall break the
Serpents head, they turn it she; and whereas the Prophet says in his person,
Genesis 3.
I have trodden the winepresse alone, there was no man with me, Esa. 63.3.
they say there was no man indeed, but that blessed woman: yea and so far be
the Jesuits gone in their dotage about her meriting, as that they make
comparisons betwixt her milk and Christ's blood, ascribing as much to the one,
as to the other, as appears in the book called, The Jesuits Gospel.


Serg. Paul. Touching his mediatorship, do they rely upon any other Mediators;


Saul. Yes that they do, for they make both the Virgin Mary, and all the
Saints departed mediators unto God for them in all their common prayers,
desiring them to pray for them, and sometimes as though they had the disposing
of heaven, that they would confer upon them the Kingdom of heaven.


Serg. Paul. Although Christ be the only Mediator of Redemption, yet there are
more mediators of intercession, for we all must pray one for another. It
seems therefore that this does no more raze the foundation, then desiring the
Elders of the Church to pray for us in the time of sickness.


Saul. I have already spoken enough to show the error of this practice. It
shall suffice therefore only to add thus much more, that this distinction
betwixt a Mediator of Redemption and of intercession in heaven is vain: for as
Christ is the only propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.2. Romans 8.34.
so he only at the right hand of God makes intercession for us. If any else
do the like it is concealed from us, neither are we bidden to come by them,
but altogether by the Son unto the Father. Moreover, we cannot come by any in
heaven unto God, but we must ascribe unto them the divine attribute of
omniscience^ whereby they know all things though never so remote from them,
which is to rob the Lord of his peculiar honor, as if Majesty or Supreme power
were ascribed to any of the kings subjects.


Serg. Paul. Proceed new to the last point: what do they hold touching the
beginning and proceedings of Grace?


Saul. They teach, that there is in every man free will, whereby he can
desire, and do preparatiue works unto grace, which the Lord beholding has
mercy upon him, and inlargeth him, being before in prison and bound as it were
with chains, and then he becomes able to do according to his desire, that
is, perfectly to fulfill Gods Commandments, for which he shall finally have
the reward of eternal glory bestowed upon him.


Serg. Paul. And have they not good ground for this in the example of
Cornelius, Act. 10.
whose alms and prayers done before his conversion were acceptable to God, so
as that hereupon Peter was sons unto him, and the holy Ghost was bestowed upon
him?


Saul. God had wrought in the heart of Cornelius before this, Act. 10.2.
for he is said to have been a devout man and one that feared God, which
could not have been spoken of him, if he had been a mere natural man.
Therefore from his example no good argument can be made to prove preparatiue
works in natural men. He had doubtless so much grace, and knowledge, as was
incident to the faithful before Christ's coming in the flesh, only he wanted
the knowledge of his person in particular already come, to preach which, and
that withal he might receive the holy Ghost, Peter was sent unto him,


Serg. Paul. But how does this raze the foundation Christ?


Saul. Because upon Christ all our well desiring and doing does depend. We
cannot think a good thought as of our selves, but all our sufficiency is of
God: 2. Cor. 3.5. Ioh. 15.5. 1. Cor. 1. Genesis 6.5.
and the Lord has plainly said, without me ye can do nothing, and touching a
natural man, the wisdom of God is foolishness unto him, all the imaginations
of his beart are only evil continually. To teach that then, whereby a man
shall be brought in part to rely upon himself, is in effect to disanull
Christ, the alone ground of our well doing and desiring.


Serg. Paul. I am well satisfied by this, touching your first reasen, proving,
that the Roman Church is no true Church of God, me thought you game me an hint
of a further reason, in saying that buildert only upon the foundation Christ
should be saved, and not demolishers. Can you prove the Roman Catholics to
be demolishers?


Saul. You did not conceive amiss: for this word building is very notable in
the text: Now that they are not builders, but demolishers I make it plain
thus: He only builds upon a foundation, that erecteth somewhat upon it,
though it be but sleighty and weak, but if standing upon this foundation he
breaks in pieces, and disanulleth the chief materials of the building, he
builds not but demolisheth. And thus does the Roman Churh, for bearing
herself upon the foundation Christ, she teaches to transgress Gods
Commandments, and to proceed contrary to his ordinances, which are the chief
materials of the spiritual building.


Serg. Paul. Wherein do they commend transgressing against Gods Laws and
Ordinances.


Saul. In exciting the people to get them images, and to bow before them in
prayer plainly against the second commandment, which they seeing into, have
therefore put this commandment out of their Catechismes: in appointing the
Sacrament of Lords Supper to be administered to the people in one kind only
against Christ's institution: in forbidding the people to read the Scriptures,
and commending ignorance, as the mother of devotion, against that express
charge, search the Scriptures: in appointing service in an unknown tongue, 1.
Cor. 14.
being the representation of Babel, that by reason of strange tongues could not
be built, for so hereby such an uncertain sound is made, as that no
edification comes of it: in absoluing subjects from their allegiance to their
lawful Prince: in dispensing with treasons, murders, periuries, and
incestuous marriages: in maintaining lying, under the names of equivocations and
mental reseruations: in condemning marriage in some sort of people more then
fornication: in exempting the Clergy from the power of the civil Magistrate,
and setting up the Pope above all both spiritual and temporal things: all
which who knows not to be flatly against Gods Commandments.


Serg. Paul. Yet there are many things wherein they are builders, in that they
make many prayers, and condemn drunkenness, pride, uncleanness, oppression,
etc. and exhort unto the contrary virtues.


Saul. Those things which have been already spoken being so, they cannot be
counted builders any more then notorious wicked persons, who notwithstanding
their praying and some good cutward seeming things in them, are said to be
destroyers of the Law; for so the Prophet complains, Psalm. 119.126.
It is time for thee Lord to put to thy hand, for men destroy thy Law. How is
this but by transgressing? and if simply to transgress be a destroying of the
Law, much more to teach and maintain transgressing, and to oppose and destroy
such as dare not herein offend God, as the Romanists do by fire and sword.


Serg. Paul. I cannot see how they can defend themselves, if these be their
courses, but that they must come under that censure. He that breaks the
least of these commandments, Mat. 5.19.
and teaches others to do so, shall be counted the least in the Kingdom of
Heaven. Have you any thing else against them to prove that they build not, but
demolish and destroy?


Saul. There is one thing more, which may be reckoned a chief thing in this
building, and that is faith. For when the foundation Christ is rightly laid, it
is builded upon him by faith and love, these in short comprehending the whole
edifice: so that he which builds these two, is indeed a builder, and shall
be saved, though he builds withal hay and stubble of curious speculations,
frothy doctrine, or erroneous conceits, about points more mystical, as his
weak judgment mis-leadeth him. Now love is the fulfilling of the Law: and
herein I have showed that the Romanists build not, but destroy: and as I have
showed touching that, so I will further declare, to aching faith, that they
build not by teaching it rightly, but destroy by putting true faith down, and
bringing in an unsound and vain faith?


Serg. Paul. How shall that appear?


Saul. Very easily. For a sound faith is to believe steadfastly, without
doubting, in regard of the defects in us, casting our selves upon Gods mercy in
Jesus Christ for salvation, because he has promised, and is able to effect it.
For Abraham's faith, which is set forth for an example of a sound faith, is thus
described. He doubted ^^t, Romans 4.10.
neither considered the deadness of his own body, etc. See the place, Romans 4.
But they maintain, that there is no assurance to be had by faith, but only
by hope, to the lift moment of our lives, and that we cannot but be doubtful,
without special revelation, in regard of out own corruptions, through which
we may fall away when we have gone furthest in grace, flatly against that
which is said to have been done by Abraham our pattern.


Serg. Paul. This does not seem to be a destroying of faith, but humility for
a man's own unworthiness.


Saul. They pretend humility endeed, but we be to that humility that denies
the true instrument, which only can help us to heaven, and takes a
counterfeit in stead of it. For they teach, that faith is only to believe the
things contained in the holy Scriptures, and that as the Church believes them,
without knowing in particular what these things are, Iam. 2.
or applying them to a man's own soul in particular. Which if it be true
faith, then the devil has true faith: for he believes thus, and goes a
little further, because he understands what he believes.


Serg. Paul. Is it not then a sound faith, unless it be steadfast? oh how
uncomfortable is this to many poor souls that cannot attain to any such
certainty?


Saul. It is therefore to be understood, that though this be the virtue of a
sound faith to assure the soul; yet it is often a long time, before a believer
comes to this. For even as the impe must stand long in the stock, before it
closes with it, and becomes very fast; so this assurance comes after long
experience, and continuance in Christ by faith.


Serg. Paul. I am resolved now, that this Romish Church greatly erreth and
dangerously too: but there are many in that Church, that know not the depth of
these things: but only believe a Purgatory, and pray for the dead, and
beseech the Saints departed to help them, and use crossing, and Holy Water,
and receive the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, as Christ's real body and
blood, adoring it therefore with many the like superstitions. Is there any
great danger to them, being ignorantly miss-led, and doing herein but as they
are persuaded they ought to do?


Saul. There is no less danger to them, Deuteronomy. 13.
then unto their Leaders, no more then there was unto such as were seduced to
idolatry. For as they also must dye for it without all partiality: so the
simply misled Papist cannot but expect ruin with this Leader, Math. 15.14.
For if the blind lead the blind, they shall both fall into the ditch. Only
the judgment of the Leader shall be greater, especially if in sinister
respects, his conscience being convicted by the truth, he does yet persist in
upholding error, as experience has taught that many of them have done.


Serg. Paul. It stands with good reason that they which wittingly prefer
error, should bear the burden of it: but methinkes such as are misled by
them, following their conscience, should not perish: for many of them serve God
according to their profession with a good heart.


Saul. Error is of that nature, as that it is damnable in whomsoever. First,
because it is contrary to truth, which sanctifies and makes free. For so the
Lord has prayed, Ioh. 17.17. Ioh. 8.32.
Sanctify them by thy Truth, and has pronounced, the truth shall make you
free. Wherefore contrariwise error polluteth and enthralleth, and so debarreth
from entering heaven, Revel. 22.
because no unclean thing shall enter there; and the bondwoman shall be cast
out with her children. Secondly, Gal. 4.
because it is a judgment upon those only that perish, and are damned; to
have their eyes blinded, and to be given over to delusions, as I have showed,
2 Cor. 4.4. 2 These. 2.11. Thirdly, because God is truth, and the Devil is a
liar; and therefore by error the mind is out of the way to God, and can never
enjoy him, but is in the right way to the Devil.


Serg. Paul. Any one of these reasons is sufficient to prove their woeful case.
But may there not be any means found out to reconcile these two Religions, by
yielding somewhat on both sides, and by laying aside austeritie and
strangeness, and by putting on lenity and familiarity one toward another?


Saul. In all the particular points of difference I have made it plain, that
we are in the truth: as therefore if we would not go from God, we must not go
from any of these things either in faith, or practice^ for that were but to
yield to accompany them in the way to perdition, and not to do any thing
aduantageous to their souls. Wherefore they must yield unto us, and as we have
already done, come out of this Babel of errors, and superstitions, if ever
they will enjoy true peace and comfort to Godward. In the mean season, if
gentle and perswasiue means would do them any good, they have them in greater
measure then they could expect, considering their forepassed cruelty, and
rigor: but for familiarity and bosom friendship, it is expressly against
that charge; Tit. 3.10.
An Heretic after once or twice admonition avoid.


Serg. Paul. I thank you most heartily for this light which you have given
unto me, and I thank God, who sent you unto me, by whose grace I resolve to
live and dye in the faith which you have declared, and after no other manner to
worship God. And for this you shall no more be called Saul: but because I count
you my best friend in the world, and so another very self, you shall be called
after mine own name Paul, because I know not otherwise how to express how
nearely to my heart I have placed you for your good instructions this day given
unto me.


Elymas. Most excellent and worthy Governor: I am sorry to hear that a man of
your place, and wisdom, should have his ears and mind so much abused, by the
seducing words of an Arch-hereticke. Is your Church the only True Church of
God, and is the Church of the Catholics a false Church, or none at all? (Oh
God) what will not these men persuade unto? Is it not manifest to all the
world, that ye are a company of Heretics, and Schismatics, and a Church but
of yesterday, or since Luthers time at the most? Was God without a Church, till
your faction began? What impudency is this to abuse Noble Governors of
Countries thus, by drawing them from the Catholic Church of Rome, that has
ever been famous through the world, for constant cleaving to the Christian
Religion.


Paul. Thou bewitching Sophister, and beguiler of simple souls, is is known
to all men, that this is your usual false slander of our Church, and the
chief string to your Bow: so that when ye have nothing else to fay, your
refuge still is the old Religion, the old Religion: what will ye forsake the
old Religion for a new? But to follow you and beat you with your own weapon.
Be it known, that the reformed Religion, is the old Religion indeed, and the
present religion of the Church of Rome a new religion; of which this noble
person present shall be judge, seeing you have provoked me to enter these lists
with you.


Elymas. I am content that either he or any man shall judge herein between us,
and if you can prove what you have s^yd, I will lose the day.


Paul. I prove it therefore thus. The Religion commended to us by Gods Spirit
in the holy Scriptures is the old Religion; and that whereof men of later times
are authors is new in comparison of it: But the reformed is thus commended to
us, as I have already fully declared, and the Religion of the present Church of
Rome is from men of latter times. Ergo.


Elymas. Neither is the Protestant Religion commended in the holy Scriptures,
nor the Roman Catholic Religion invented by man since. For, as much as you
brag of the Scriptures, you have not one plain sentence in your own Bible
for any one point of your Religion, without adding, altering or glossing upon
it, as is your usual manner. And for our Religion, show if you can, when and
by whom those points which you call errors, were invented: for we hold, that
all things have ever since the Apostles times been thus.


Paul. I marvel that you and your fellow, whosoever he was, that wrote the
book blasphemously entitled, The gag for the Gospel, are not ashamed so
boldly to charge us, that we have not one plain place of Scripture. What is
that saying of our Lord, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve. Mat. 4.10.
Do not both the words and the circumstances plainly make for us, denying to
fall down and worship any but God, otherwise Christ had not spoken so apposite
to Satan, bidding him to fall down and worship him. What is that command? Thou
shall not make to thy self any graven image, etc. And again, Deuteronomy. 4.15.
Take good heed unto your selves, for ye saw no manner of similitude on the day
that the Lord spoke unto you in Ho^eb, lest you corrupt your selves, and make
you a graven image, the similitude of any figure, etc. What is this saying?
There is one God, 1. Tim. 2.4. 2. Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.13.
and one Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus: and this, We are
not sufficient of our selves to think a good thought as of our selves: and
this, God works in you the will and the deed of his own good pleasure; with
many more text^ before alleged, which I spare to repeat; So that we may most
truly affirm, that there is no one tenent of our Church, but we have a plain
place of Scripture for it: but it may truly be retorted upon you, that you have
not one plain place for any one of your tenants or practices, so that ye are
feign miserably to wrest and strain any text hence alleged, and when that
will not do, to fly to Apochryphall books, traditions, and ridiculous fables.


Elym. Are all these sayings in your Bible, if they be, it is more then I
know, but sure I am, that there are sentences plainly teaching the same that we
do. For what else is that saying of our Savior; This is my body, and, my
flesh is meat indeed, and blood, drink indeed: and, upon this rock will I
build my Church: and, to thee will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven:
and again, Peter feed my sheep. And touching the Church, Math. 18.17. 1 Timothy
3.15.
If he hears not the Church, let him be to thee as an Ethnicke: and, the
Church is the ground and pillar of truth. Touching other points we need none
other Scripture, seeing to the Church it is promised; Ioh. 16.13.
When he is come which is the spirit of truth, he will lead you into all truth.
Wherefore the Church cannot err, and whatsoever is by her propounded, as
matter of faith, or practice, must needs then be right: But be it known unto
you, that we want not plain places for particular points. Touching
justification. Iam. 2.24.
A man is not justified by faith only, but by works. Touching prayer for the
dead. There is a sin unto death, I say not, that ye should pray for it. 1
Ioh. 5.16. Iam. 5.14. Luke 7.47. Math. 25.
Touching extreme unction. They shall pray for him and anoint him in the name
of the Lord. Touching the merit of works. Many sins are forgiven her,
because she has loved much: and, Come ye blessed, etc. for I was hungry, and
ye fed me, etc. For time would fail me, if I should go on to allege all the
places, that plainly make for us.


Paul. You do well so to slieglit our evidences brought out of the holy
Scriptures, because they are so plain, that they cannot be answered; neither
indeed do your sect much acquaint your selves with the Bible: for there are
some students in Divinity of many years, that never read the Bible. To your
places therefore: How does the speech of our Savior make for
Transubstantiation, without altering or adding? It is meat indeed, we confess,
but he says not, is meat for the body, nor yet in explaining himself
afterward has he one word intimating a bodily substance that he would give to
be fed upon, but the clean contrary, for he says, Ioh. 6.63.
the flesh profits nothing, my words are spirit and life. Again, for those
sayings unto Peter, there is nothing plain for Peter's supremacy, for his
bearing up all, as a foundation, and much less for his pretended successors
the Bishops of Rome. For plainly to teach these things had been to have said,
upon thee and thy successors will I build my Church, and to thee and to him
that shall succeed thee in thy Bishopric at Rome, I will give authority over
all others. But so far is the Lord from this, that when there was just,
occasion offered upon the motion of the mother of Zebedees children, to declare
the supreme, and when they contended about it amongst themselves, he speaks
no word to settle the supremacy upon any one, but altogether to stop the mouth
of any from once challenging it. But I have spoken sufficiently of this before,
so that I shall not need to add any thing about his commission to feed his
sheep. It is marvel that when all chief points of faith are so plainly
expressed, that this which is so much stood upon, as inferior to none, should
be so obscurely passed over. Touching the Church there is nothing plainly
spoken, that it shall be always visible, but only it may be employed, that as
long as there are Christians to do those mutual offices of reproouing one
another for sin, there shall be a discipline exercised in the Church how
corrupt soever, for the chastisement of such as are complained of, as manifest
transgressors of the Law the just proceedings whereof, notwithstanding the
corruptions, are of force to the terror of malefactors. For that saying, tell
the Church, at that time had reference to a most corrupt Church of Scribes and
Pharisees, whose authority was yet by the Lord established, saying, Math. 23.1.
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do. So that from hence
nothing more can be rightly taught, no not by inference, but that there shall
always be some visible Church good or bad, which we also acknowledge. But in
case that there be two such Churches together, who doubts forsaking that
which is corrupt, to go to the best and soundest. Touching error, from which
you seek to exempt your Church, because the Church is called the gound and
pillar of truth, what is this to the present Church of Rome, the sink of most
gross errors and superstitions. The true Church indeed, such as it was in
those days founded upon the Prophets and Apostles, Christ himself being the
chief corner slone, Ephesians. 2.20.
was the ground of truth, because therein the truth was preserved and vpheld,
and wheresoever it is so at this day, that Church is likewise the ground and
pillar of truth. But it does not necessarily follow, that wheresoever the
Church is, whether sound or corrupt, it is the ground of truth, for so much as
the truth held and eleaued unto in all things makes the Church the pillar and
ground of truth, and not the Church that to be true whatsoever she shall think
good to propound. For otherwise Christ, the Prophets and Apostles, with their
dictates, institutions, and writings should not be a ground unto men
succeeding and inferior to them, but these men should be a ground unto them,
which were absurd. And the same I answer to that promise of the spirit, it was
peculiar to the Apostles and special instruments stirred up for those times, to
be so guided into all truth, as not to err, because what came from them was to
be a ground to the faithful in all succeeding ages, and it is most palpably
wrested to your Church now. And if your fundamental places be thus
impertinently alleged, the rest will fall without any labor, at the least
(most worthy Sergius) you may be able to judge hereof by that, which has been
already spoken in laying open the faith of the reformed Church.


Serg. Paul. When these places were first alleged by Elymas, I thought it
impossible to answer them and therefore did begin to incline to think better
of the Roman Church, then you had persuaded me: but now I see that they are but
the painting and coloring of a deformed face, being without all true beauty.
And for the places omitted, I have them so freshly in my memory, since you
resolved them unto me, at that I am fully reselued, that they are but wrested
and wrung by the adversary to sorne his turn.


Elym. But by your favor (sir) nothing has yet been said to one place
plainly distinguishing betwixt venial and mortal sins, and concluding
prayer for some dead, viz. that sin not unto death, but are penitent, before
they dye.


Paul. You do well to recall that again, which I thought not worth the
answering. How can it be spoken of mortal and venial sins? Is he that has
sinned a mortal sin to be given over then, as a desperate Reprobate, and not
to be prayed for any more? What is this, but to condemn Peter himself, and
David, and Manasseh, etc. as unworthy to be prayed for? If your distinction of
mortal and venial sins have no better ground but this, it is set up
altogether upon the sands. And for praying for any dead, nothing can be more
absurd, then to allege this: for he does not note out the time of continuing,
or breaking off from sin, as making his case that has sinned, desperate, or
reparable by the prayers of others, by reason of this circumstance, but
plainly in it self, for he says, There is a sin unto death. And again,
There is a sin not unto death; that is, in plain English, there is a sin,
which who so commits it, shall dye therefore, without all hope of life,
whatsoever prayers should be made for him: but there is sin also, the proper
sequel and wages whereof is death; yet not so necessarily, but remission and
life may be obtained notwithstanding. And if it be taken in this sense, there
is the consent of other places to confirm it, as that. All sins shall be
forgiven to the sons of men, but he that sins against the Holy Ghost,
shall never be forgiven, of such a sin Saul seems to have been guilty,
when the Lord forbids Samuel to pray any more for him. But take it of
praying for such as dye repeneantly, and where can you find any to second it?


Serg. Paul. I see it is in vain for you (Elymas) to hold argument with him
any longer by the testimonies of holy Scripture: preceed therefore to your plea
of antiquity, for therein ^o^ may happen to put him down indeed.


Paul. It must needs be so (Sir) as you have said; for whatsoever flourishes
they make, their conscience tells them, that the Scriptures are against them,
seeing they can no more abide them, then the ^^^tle the daylight. Why else do
they keep them locked up in an unknown tongue? Why do they condemn our
translations, as heretical, and allow only of Ieromes translation: for it
were a mad part for them to condemn and forbid that, which makes on their
side. This their cracking therefore of the Scriptures is but a fruit of their
late impudency, putting them on to undertake the proof of any thing, that can
bepropounded. But they are very confident, that we cannot demonstrate in
particular the time and persons, when and by whom their false doctrines were
broached, and their superstitions brought in, yet I fear as little to enter
the lists with him about this argument, as about the other.


Elymas. And I doubt not but to put you to shame enough in so doing: for the
most ancient Orthodoxe Fathers of the Church have always taught the same that
we do; and have often mentioned the particulars of our devotion; which ye
falsely call superstition. Which being so, I weigh not all your places of
Scripture, if you had as many more; nor your colorable answers to such as have
been by me alleged: for the customs of the Church, and traditions delivered
from age to age, are of the same authority with the holy Scriptures; and they
are rather to be regulated hereby, as being certain, then these by them,
speaking as every man lists to wrest and turn them.


Paul. It is a false slander by you laid upon the Scriptures, that they are
uncertain, and a burthening of Christian people, for which you shall answer,
to obtrude traditions thus unto them, as I have before declared. To pass that
over therefore here. Who can tell, whether the ancient Fathers in those
passages, wherein they have made some mention of some practices by you used,
were made to speak so by some audacious forger, seeing there are so many
supposititious writings falsely fathered upon so many imaginary Fathers, that
never were in rerum natura, and such purging and altering of ancient Writings
has been made of late by the authority of the Council of Trent. Moreover, it
is possible that through the neglect of Historians, or wittingly in favor of
your abuses, the original and first springing up of them may be concealed. But
if not, few men are read in History, neither is history reading necessary to
salvation; and therefore it makes not any whit the more on your side, though
they cannot precisely set down, when and by whom your heresies and
superstitions were brought in: even as Mahumetisme were no whit the more
approueable, though the original thereof were unknown. For by this reason the
Heathen priests of old sought to maintain the credit of their idolatries,
challenging the Christians for embracing a new Religion. It is a poor shift,
when any thing is particularly disproued by the Word of God, to cavil about
the beginning of it, as if the day were lost, if that could not be done: for if
the leakes of a Ship, or the decays of an House be apparent, if corruptions
within, or blemishes upon the body be made manifest: what avails it to
approve that they are no decays or blemishes, by pleading, But can any man
tell, when these first began?


Elym. Our errors, as you call them, are not so evident yet, as your
comparisons. If you cannot therefore show their beginning, it is plain, that
they were delivered from the Apostles, and it is heresy and impiety in you to
impugn them.


Paul. Does the same fountain send forth salt water and sweet? Does the same
mouth speak contradictories? for so certain is it, that these things cannot
be derived from the Apostles, seeing they are altogether against them. But
because you vige it so much, I will set down the time and age of every part of
your Religion, that the nouelty of it may appear to all the world. And first I
will begin with the chief and head of all your errors the Popes headship.
This was first established in a Council at Rome of seventy two Bishops, thirty
Presbyters, and three Deacons, in the time of Boniface the third, Anno Dom.
607. Plat. in vita Bonis. 3.
being then obtained of Phocas, who came to the Empire by murdering Mauritius,
his Master: and therefore to provide the better for himself, he was willing by
granting the supremacy over all, to join unto him the Pope of Rome. Conc.
Constant. the eight general Council.
Afterward there was a Council held at Constantinople, in the days of Pope
Adrian, under Basilius the Emperor, who slew his associate Michael, Anno Dom.
871. Wherein none were admitted, but such as subscribed to the Popes
Supremacy: for Adrian had curried favor with murdering Basili^s, as Bonisace
had before done with Phocas. Lastly, there was a Council at Lions in the days
of Gregory the tenth, under the Reign of Michael Paleologus Emperor, Anno Dom.
1273, wherein the Emperor confirmed the Popes Supremacy, that he might the
more strengthen himself by him also: for he was an usurper, and murderer, by
the slaughter of Theodorus committed to his custody attaining to the Empire.
He was so abhorred by the Grecians for yielding herein to Gregory, that when
he was dead, they would not suffer his body to be buried amongst other
Christians. Neither was this suprerr acie set up by any but these persons
infamous for murder, except Pipin and Charles his son, who attained the
Kingdom of France, by the deposition of Chelpericke the lawful King.


Elym. Are you not ashamed thus to seek to blindfold men's eyes? Did not
Constanine the Great, long before this, finding that of right the primacie
belonged to Saint Peter's Chair, Socr. lib. 2. c. 20.
establish it in the council of Nice? And was not Julius Bishop of Rome
appointed by the Sardian Council to be judge of appeals? Anno 35^. And did not
the Bishops of Rome long before Boniface, exercise their jurisdiction in
deposing Patriarchs? and were they not acknowledged by the ancient Doctors to
be supreme?


Paul. You may well be ashamed, I am sure, once to speak of the Council of
Nice, seeing the Popes plea founded hereupon, was so fully disproued in the
sixth African Council assembled at Carthage, Hist. Magd. Cent. 5.^.^.
Anno 'Dom. 402. in the days of Honorius and Theodosius the second, consisting
of 217 Bishops, lasting six years together. For thither did both Sozimus,
Boniface, and Celest^nus, Popes, send their Legates, requiring to have the
Supremacy confirmed, according to the Council of Nice: the Decrees of that
Council were searched, the Copies of them kept in the Register of Alexandria,
and Constantinople were sent for, and, no such thing being f^und, it was
decreed, that no appeal should henceforth be made from Africa to Rome, and
this plea was condemned, as a forgery. And in a council somewhat before this
at Meliuis^^^ it was decreed, that no man should make appellation to Bishops
beyond the sea, but in case his own Bishop did him wrong, he should appeal
to a council of African Bishops. In the third African or Carth: Council it
was decreed, that the Bishop of Rome should be called the Bishop of the first
seat, but not the High Priest, or Prince of Priests, Anno 399. In the sixth
Constantinopolitan council, Anno 681 under Constantius, Pegonatus, Pope
Sergius his Legate being present, and subscribing, it was decreed, Can. 4^.
that the Patriarch of Constantinople was of equal authority with the Bishop
of Rome, though Sergius being offended, refused afterward to subscribe. I
could reckon up many more passages in councels, and worthy authors writings,
and preachings, of ancient times, plainly oppugning the Popes supremacy, but
these shall suffice. Touching Julius, he was a worthy Prclate and protector of
the wronged, and therefore so set up in the Sardian Council, intending the
dignifying of his person, not of his Sea. For the exercise of this
jurisdiction, and learned men's ascriptions, you know, that a facto ad ins non
valet consequentia; and in the most learned being under the Bishop of Rome
there might be some flattery.


Serg. Paul. I did not think, but that the Bishop of Rome bad ever been High
Priest over all the Clergy, but it seemed ever to me an usurpation in him to
domincre over Kings and Emperors: but now I perceive that this supremacy even
over the Clargie is but a crazie foundation, with much tugging and opposition,
in time climbed up into; so that there is enough spoken to disprove his
principality over Kings also, seeing this yields an argument a minore ad
maius. Proceed therefore to some other point.


Paul. After the Supremacy, images were brought into the Church to be
worshipped, against which the Emperor Leo setting himself, sent his Mandate to
Pope Gregory the third to abolish them. Gregory calls a great Council at
Rome, about Anno 720, wherein the Emperor was therefore excommunicated and
deprived, and together with him Anastatius Patriarch of Constantinople. But
soon after Constantinus Coprony^nus called a Council in Constantinople, of 338
Bishops, Anno 755, wherein all setting up and worshipping of images is
condemned as heathenish: and the Fathers writing against them are alleged: as
Epiphanius, Eusebius, Gregorius Theel. Athanasius, Amphilochius, Chrysostomus
and Theodorus A^cyra. After this there was a Council held at Nice in Bythinia
under Irene mother to Constantine, Anno 788, who most unnaturally put out her
sons eyes, and so made him to end his days in misery: in which assembly of
350 Bishops, it was decreed, that the images of Christ, and of the blessed
Virgin Mary should not only be set up in places of adoration: but also be
adored, and woe shipped, because the honor of an Image does redound to ^^m,
that is there by represented. But mark upon what grounds chiefly they
proceeded thus. Pope Adrian wrote his Letters, wherein he tells, how
Constantine being a Leper, and advised to bathe himself in the blood of
children, which he was loath to do, had an apparition of Peter and Paul, bidding
him send for Syluester the Pope; who coming to him, and by the images of these
two holy Apostles which he had; making known to Constantine, (that at the fight
of them, said, these were they) who had appeared to him, he baptized him, and
his Leprosy was cleansed. Now all this is a mere fable, as appears by
Eusebius, who writing the life of Constantine, shows that Constantine was
always free from Leprosy, and baptized by Eusebius it. Nicomedia. Another
great motive to them to stand for images, was a foolish tale of a Monk, who
said that the Devil tempted him continually to uncleanness, and would not
cease, unless he did give over worshipping the image of the Virgin Mary. The
worshipping of images was again confirmed at Constantinople, in the time of
A^rian the second, Pope of Rome, Basilius being Emperor. But between these
two Councels, there was one held at Frankfort, by the appointment of Charles
the Great, Anno 794, to which the Popes Legates came and offered the Decree of
the last Council of Nice to be confirmed: but howsoever something in the
Council of Constantinople against images were disliked; namely, the
forbidding of them to be made, yet the Decree of that Nicene Council touching
the worshipping of image^ was more condemned, and that therefore judged worthy
the name neither of a Catholic, or Occumenicke Council.


Elymas. You are greatly mistaken to refer the beginning of images in the
Church to the time of Pope Gregory the third: for then the heretical Emperor
attempted the abolishing of them, which argues, that they were in use long
before.


Paul. They were in use indeed amongst Heretics, such as Simon Magus, of whom
Theodoret, and Augustine report, that he offered his own, and the image of his
Concubine to be worshipped; and the Cretians so much spoken against by Saint
Paul to Titus, are said by Jerome to be the first that brought images into the
Church, Iren. lib. 2 c. 6.
and the filthy Gnesticks worshipped the image of Christ: but Catholic Doctors
have ever anciently inueighed against them. Eusebius Bishop of Neocesarea
says, that it comes from the Heathen: for Heliogabilus, Alexander Seuerus,
and Adrianus, Enseb. lib. 7. c. 18
Heathen Emperors, had first the images of Abraham, Moses, and Christ in their
Chapels. Epipb. Epist. ad Job. (...).
Epiphanius wrote an Epistle to John Bishop of Jerusalem, against the bringing
of images into Churches; and he is famous for renting in pieces an image
painted upon a cloth, behind a Church door: and long ago in a Council held
at Eliberis a town of Spain, Can. 36. Can. 60.
it was decreed, that nothing that is worshipped should be pictured on a wall;
and if any were slain in breaking images down, he should be put into the
Catalogue of Martyrs. This Council was in the time of Constantine the Great.
In the Council of Constantinople before spoken of, many sentences of the
Fathers were alleged against images, amongst which that of Eusebius Pamphili
is most remarkable. Constantia the Empress had sent unto him for the image of
Christ, upon which occasion he write^h thus unto her. I would gladly know,
what image of Christ you inquire for, if it be of the true, and unchangeable
nature bearing the Character and engraven similitude of the Father, I hope that
you are sufficiently instructed, that as no man knows the Father, except the
Son; so no man knows the Son, except the Father. If it be the image of
the shape of a servant undertaken for our sakes: understand that the splendour
and shining brightness of his glory, cannot be represented with dead colors:
for even the Disciples on the Mountain were not able to abide the brightness
of his shining face; how much less are we able to abide the celestial
splendour of his glorified body?


Elymas. All this is only against the worshipping of images, which we do not,
but only have them for remembrances, knowing also, that an image cannot
represent perfectly the divinity, but put us in mind of him, that sometime
appeared in this shape.


Paul. Indeed so you make your seduced in England believe: but in your second
Nicene Council their worshipping was decreed, which made the Frankfort
Council so much distaste their proceedings. Constantine, Bishop of Constance,
in that Nicene Council said: I worship the holy images with the same worship,
wherewith I worship the consubstantiall Trinity. And John the Legate of the
East; The Image of the King is the King, and so the image God is God: and
therefore if any man worshippeth it with the same worship, he sins not. And
the chief pillars of the Roman Church since. Thomas Aquinas, and Bellarmine
speak to the same effect. Aquin. Tom 3. qu. 25. crtic. 3.
The one faith; Because the Cross represents Christ, who is God, it is also
to be worshipped with divine worship. Bell. de Ecclesia triumph. l. 2.6.2.
The other says, that images are properly to be worshipped. And unto them we
may join a third speaking in the name of all, Azor. lib. 9 c. 6.
Azorias, who says. It is the constant opinion of our divines, that the image
is to be worshipped with the same worship that the thing represented by it. In
a Council held at London, An. 712, the chief ground, whereupon they proceeded
for images, was the tale of a certain Monk, Eguuinus, who affirmed upon oath,
that the Virgin Mary appeared unto him in a dream, and declared that it was
her will, that her image should be set up in Churches and worshipped.


Serg. Paul. It seems, that here in England they are ashamed of the doctrine
of worshipping Images; and therefore they seek to hide what their Church
holds herein: and good reason, if the patrons of image-worshipping be
considered: for if I have observed you aright, there have been none but
infamous persons, Irene, and Basilius for murder, the Pope of Rome for
ambition, and superstitious Monks blindly leading on the blind to the
veneration of images by their fables. Enough therefore has been said of this
point, proceed now to some other.


Paul. The next shall be the single life of men in holy Orders, because there
was much trouble about this at the same time that images were in question. For
in England at a Council held at Canterbury Anno 975, there was great question
about it: but Dunstan then Archbishop of Canterbury handled the matter so, that
when it was likely to have gone against him, who stood for a prohibition of
marriage, there was a voice heard from a Crucifixe standing there, that Dunstans
opinion was best, and thereupon they decreed against marriage of men in holy
orders. Hist. Magd. Cent. 10. c. 9.
But at their next meeting Falihodus a Scot learnedly proved by the holy
Scriptures that marriage was lawful for all men, and so their minds were again
altered taking that voice to come from the Devil and not from God, who cannot
be contrary to himself. And after this, Anno 1060, Pope Nicholas the second
sent one Damianus to hold a Council at Millan, who condemned these marriages as
the heresy of the Nicolaitans: whereupon a great tumult in the City followed.
And after this at Erfurd, Anno 1074, a Council was called by the Archbishop of
Mentz, commanded so to do by Gregory the seventh, Pope, to which came many
married Priests proving the lawfulness of their marriages, and urging the
ancient practice of Clergymen: but when they no whit prevailed, the Archbishop
pressing them to put away their wives, they went out, and through great
discontent meditated his destruction, whereof he being aware, fled for that
time from the Council. The next year being again commanded, and the Popes
Legate being present, he attempted the same business again at Mentz: but the
Priests being assenibled, so terrified them both with clapping their hands, and
with a vehement commotion of their bodies, that they fled away for their lives,
neither durst he ever after assemble any more Council to that end.


Elym. You do well to pitch upon these later times wherein Priests were grown
more carnal and licentious: for you might if it pleased you, have found out
Counsels long before these, determining against Priests marriage without any
tumult. The 2 Carthag: Council under Theodosius, about Anno 380, forbad the
marriage of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, and in such as were already married, an
abstinence from matrimonial society. A Council held at Altissidorum in
France, Anno 613. ratifyed the same decree. And the 4 Council of Tolledo in
Spain, Anno 639, ordained, that when Priests and Deacons are admitted to their
offices they should vow chastity. Yea it was a thing so generally received even
from the Apostles times, as that till of late years all were single without
contradiction.


Paul. That is a notorious lie. For in the first Council after the Apostles
times, which was held at Ancyra in Galatia Anno 308, it was ordained, that
Deacons p^ofessing at the time of their ordination that they had not the gift
of continency, might afterward marry. And in the Council of Nice, Anno 330,
the marriage of such as were in holy orders coming in question again, Socrat.
Lib. 1.6, 11.
Paphnutim Bishop of a town in Thebaids being himself single, so persuaded to
leave every man to his own liberty, that nothing was then concluded against
these marriages. And in the 2 Council of Tolledo it was ordained, Con. Toll.
Con. 1.
as in the Ancyran Council before. Now I pitched upon later times, because then
the debating of the question is set forth, and upon what grounds your Church
proceeded, which is omitted in Councels foregoing. But I am glad, that you can
go no higher in this point, then the second Carthag: Council, wherein neither
were their marriages condemned, but continency commended; so that we have two
Councels before you, that left marriage free to all men that could not contain.


Serg. Paul. You have said enough touching this matter, and it is most likely,
that the Dewill spoke in the Council of Canter ^ury on Dunstans side against
Prusts marriages, because as I remember, you showed me before, that to forbid
marriage is the doctrine of Denils. Proceed therefore to some other point.


Paul. The real presence so much stood upon shall be the next. This was never
determined, nor the word transubstantiation heard of, till the Council of
L^^eran, under Pope Innocent the third, Anno 1215, and the Council held at
Rome under Leo the ninth, Anno 1050 against Berengarius, who seeing that such
an opinion began to take place, impugned it, and was therefore condemned; and
in another Council under Pope Nicholas the second, brought to recant, but he
afterward wrote again to justify the same truth, and to show his repentance
for his recantation.


Elym. Herein you do notoriously abuse the world. It is true indeed, that
before Berengarius his opposition, because no man withstood the doctrine of
transubstantiation it was not in a Council determined. But does it follow
therefore, that it was not before this time maintained? Have not all the
Fathers that lived before, from time to time, as they had occasion to treat of
the Mass, taught with one consent, a secret conversion by the Priests
consecration. Ambr. uses the very word conversion and mutation. Lib. 4. de
sacram. v. 4. Hom. 5. de Pascale.
Eusebius. Emissenus says, that the Priest by a secret power does turn the
visible creatures into the substance of Christ's body and blood: what should I
here reckon up more? Bellarmine has numbered 32 Fathers speaking to the same
effect.


Paul. Although the Fathers do use the words conversion, mutation, and making,
yet it is true, that I said before, they never taught transubstantiation: yea
after that Leo the ninth and his Council had condemned Berengarius, Peter
Lombard one of your Schoolmen, that lived Anno 1145, Lombard. Sent. 1.4.
did. 11.
scanning upon this conversion, says, If it be enquired what manner of
conversion it is, whether formal or substantial, or of any other kind, I am
not able to define. And after the determination of the Lateran Council, diverse
others of your learnedest Schoolc-men haueing enuously acknowledged, that the
faith of the transubstantiation is founded only upon the determination of the
Church: as Scot. in 4. Did. ^1. (...) 3, art. 1. and Bi^llect 41. in Ca^.
Miss. Petr^^ de A^aco in 4 Sem. qu. 5. art. 2. Conc. 2. with diverse others. To
those sayings of the Fathers I answer, that they meant not any alteration of
the substance of the bread and wine, but that it still remaining, they became
in a wonderful manner Christ's very body and blood to the faithful receiver.
For thus Ambrose expresses himself, Amb. de s^^ram. 1.4. c. 4. ^ial. 2. Gel:
in Eutych.
saying, They are the things which they were, and are changed into another
thing: And Theodoret says, These mystical signs do not g^^ from their
nature after their sanctification. And Gelasius against Eutychcs says; The
signs remain in the propriety of their nature. And Dr^thmarus, that lived
about An. 800, writing upon these words; ' Do this in remembrance of me,
Drutb in ^iet. 26.
says, the Lord turning the bread spiritually into his body, and the wine into
his blood has commanded us to do the same, that hereby we might remember what
he has done for us. Augustine says, The Lord doubted not to say, This is my
body, August. Cont. Adim. c. 12.
when he game a sign of his body. I could also reckon up many more, who have
taught, that the very bread in the Sacrament is Christ's body, and not some
other substance under the appearance of bread: as Iren. Just in Martyr,
Cyprian, Chrysostom, Origin, Nazianzen, etc.


Elym. These are your shists: for though you be urged with places and sayings
most plain, you will still have some evasion or other. Is it likely, that if
transubstantiation, though not in word, yet in effect had not been generally
received before Leo, or the Latoran Council, that all the world without any
opposition, but only of one Berengarius would have at once yielded unto it?


Paul. I wonder that you can without blushing speak of such a general consent
of all, when as the whole Greek Church withstood it tooth and nail: for
howsoener they agreed unto the Church of Rome in other things, yet in this
point, such as were present of them at the Council of Flerence under Eugenius
the 4, Anno 1439, could never be brought to consent: yet because Eugenius was
desirous of a consent for the credit of his Sea, having drawn them to
subscribe to his supremacy, the proceeding of the Holy Ghost, the use of
unleavened bread in the sacrament, and to Purgatory, he caused a Bull to be
published, called Bulla consensus, notwithstanding their constant opposition in
the point of transubstantiation; but even in other things, wherein they
yielded, such distaste was taken at them by the rest of the Greek Churches at
their return home, that they were publicly execrated therefore, and
prohibited Christian burial. And for others, that opinion of the Spirits
guiding the Church in the truth did so prevail with them, as that they yielded
to transubstantiation because it was in the Lateran Council determined, as
appears by the confession of the Schoolmen before cited, Scot. in 4 did. 11
qu. 3. art. 1.
the first of whom Scotus says; If it be enquired, why the Church has chosen
this so hard an understanding of this article about transubstantiation, when as
the words of the Scripture might be expounded safely according to a more easy
and true sense in appearance: I answer that the Catholic Church has expounded
the Scripture by the same Spirit of truth, whereby it was at the first
deliucred.


Elym. All this will not elude the antiquity of this doctrine. For if
transubstantiation were not always held, why was the Mass called a sacrifice,
the table an altar, the Minister a Priest? why has it always been showed to
the people to be worshipped, and offered in one kind to the people, and carried
about with that reverence, and the remainder of it kept for the same purpose in
a Pixe to be ready upon all occasions?


Paul. We do acknowledge that very anciently these names of sacrifice, Altar,
and Priest were usurped, but not in your sense. The table of the Lord was
called an altar, because the offerings of Christian people coming to the holy
Communion which were brought for the relief of the poor, were laid upon it,
according to Ireuaus, who says, Lib. 2. Cap. 32.
that Christ by taking bread and wine taught the Disciples a new oblation of
the new Testament, the first fruits of his creatures. In those Cannons, which
are said to be the Apostles, Can. 4.
it is or^^yned, that nothing should be offered upon the alter but ears of
corn and frankinscense, and in the 3 Council of Carthage, Can. 24.
that nothing should be offered but fruits of come and grapes. And hence
partly came the name sacrifice, for alms are a sacrifice to God: and partly
because of the representation of Christ's sacrifice made hereby, seeing it is
usual to call the thing representing by the name of the thing represented.
Lomb 1.4. did. 12.
And so Peter Lomb^rd says, that it is not properly called a sacrifice, but
because it is a memorial and representation of the true sacrifice of Christ
upon the cross. And lastly, for the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving then
offered unto God. That Christians had not altars properly so called is most
plain, from Arnobins, Arnob. lib. 6. contra gant. Orig. lib. 8. cent. Calls.
who says, that the Gentiles accused the Christians, because they had no
altars: and from Origin, who acknowledges, that Christians had neither altars,
nor images. And therefore as it is called an altar, so sometime it is also
called a table. See August. cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 47. Touching adoration,
it was not used, till Honorius the third, Anno 1220, five years after the
Council of Laterans Touching the administration in one kind, that was neues
used, Def. lib. de offic. py viri.
till 1000 years after Christ, as Cassauder shows, and it was first decreed
in the Council of Constance, under Pope Iobu the 23, Anno 1414 Touching the
reservation of the remainder, there was a long time no such use, for they burnt
it in the fire, Hesych. lib. 2. in Leuit ^ 8.
as Hesych: testifies; and if sometime it was reserved, it was by private
persons, who carried it home with them: but was not so generally approved; and
after more consideration in Counsels condemned, as in the Council called
Caesar Augustau. Cap. 3.
If any be preued not to have conformed the Eucharist received in the Church,
let him be anathema. And in the first Tolletan Council: Cap. 14.
If they shall remain ^ill the morrow, let them not be any longer reserved,
but by the diligence of the Clerciks consumed. The name of your Mass is very
ancient, but then the Mass or missa was a dismissing of the Catecumeni, when
others remained to receive, and thus it continued to Anno 600, according to I
sidor. lib. 6. Orig. c. 19. The Mass therefore in your Church now is new, and
so are all your vsages of it, and justly by Christians to be exploded.


Serg. Paul. I think this point has been so seanned, that there needs no
more to be said, for mine own part you hour given we such light into these
things, as I never had before: for the ancient name of the Mass and Sacrifice,
and Altar, etc. made still some scruple in my mind, that transubstantiation
was a most ancient tenent of the Church. But seeing I am now fully satisfied,
proceed to some other point.


Paul. The next new thing is the Latin tongue, wherein the Mass is offered,
and prayers are made, and the Scriptures are kept. This was not, but where
Latin was understood till the days of Vitalian Pope, An. 666, Os^^d. Cont. 7.
in whose time Latin was first used in Constantinople: Neither does your
Nauclerus much differ: For he assigns it to the time of Pope Agatho, Anno
675. In the other Countries, which understood Latin, as in France, Britain,
and in Africa, it was used more anciently: for the Latin tongue was familiar
to them for the space of 700 years and upwards, as appears in one passage of
the third Council of Tours, Cap. 17.
Anno 770, wherein it is appointed, that Homilies should be turned into a
rusticke Latin tongue, or Theotiske, that they might the better be understood.
So that, if the service was more anciently performed in the Latin tongue, it
was because they commonly understood it best: but since, it not being
understood, it is an absurd novelty to use it.


Elym. It is necessary, that seeing Christ's Church is one, the service should
be uniform; and for the Scriptures great reason, to keep them in an unknown
tongue, to prevent error.


Paul. It is necessary indeed, as conducing to establish the Latin Monarchy;
but it were more necessary for edification to have all in a known tongue, as
anciently it was wont to be, as may be gathered from Chrysostom, who says,
Hom. 18. in 2. Cor.
that common prayers are made both by the Priest, and the people: and Isidor.
When Psalms are sung, they ought to be sung of all: De Ecst. off. ib. 1. cap.
10.
when Prayer is made, let it be made by all; and when there is reading, let
silence be made that all may hear. And for your pretended fear of heresy,
that may be an excuse: but seeing anciently all had the Bible in their own
languages, it cannot but pass for a nouclty.


Serg. Paul. Be there any more points, the antiquitis whereof you can disprous,
as you have done these?


Paul. Yes: the doctrine of Purgatory and praying for the dead, came in also
long after the Apostles. The first that make mention of Purgatory, are
Tertullian and Origin, whose authority is not so great, because the one was a
Montamst Heretic; and the other was condemned for many errors. In Augustines
time, which was 400 years after Christ it was spoken of but doubtfully.
Tnchit. c. 67.69.
Whether there shall be such a thing or no, it may be enquired, and either be
found out, or be kept secret from some faithful persons, In Esa. l. 28. c.
(...).
says Augustine. And Jerome says, that these things are to be left to the
judgment and knowledge of God. Grog. in Job 13. c. 20.
And Gregory the first, Bishop of Rome, who was after, Anno 600, says, because
we are redcemed, we have this benefit, that when we are taken away from the
habitation of our flesh, we are presently earied to beauenly rewards. Tertul.
de Cor. mil.
And the same Tertullian was the first, that spoke of praying for the dead, who
also consesseth, that if you require Scripture for it, you shall find nonc: but
tradition shall be pretended as the increaser; custom the confirmer: and faith
the obseruer of it. Yet it is to be acknowledged, that even the most approved
of the ancient, have prayed for the dead, as Augustine for his Mother Monica,
and Ambrose for Theodosius: but doubtingly because without ground in the Word.


Elymas. Then I hope you will yield this to be more ancient, then your not
praying for the dead, and your utter denying of Purgatory, as an invention
derived from the H^^^hen.


Paul. Their praying for the dead was not the same with yours: but either for
the augmentation of their glory, who were in Heaven, as Ambrose having said,
that Theodesius remained in the light, and gloried in the company of the
Saints: yet he prays, give perfect rest to thy servant Theodosius; Confess l.
9. c. 13.
or to express their affection, as Augustine, who says of his mother Monica;
I beleeus, that thou have done what I desire, but accept of the voluntaries of
my mouth. Or if they thought them damned; they prayed for a mitigation of their
pains; or holding that they might all be kept in one common place, till the
day of judgment, as La^tantius shows de divine. Draem. lib. 7. cap. 21. Iren.
lib. 5. They prayed for the hastening of their Deliverance. They prayed not for
souls in Purgatoric; neither did they, which held Purgatory, believe, that
venial sins were there done away, and temporal punishments satisfied for,
till after Anno 1000, as your Church now teaches; and therefore, even these
points, as you hold them are new, and unthought of by antiquity. And seeing no
such custom is grounded upon the Word of God, as Tertullian has confessed,
our denying thus to pray is more Apostolical, and so more ancient then either
yours or theirs.


Serg. Paul. But thus you will make the Church in the time of these holy
Fathers to have been no true Church, and them no true members, whom we all yet
have in high esteem.


Paul. It does not follow, because they erred in one thing in practice, through
too much affection, that they were no Church: for it is not any error, that
ouerturncth the Church; but errors razing the foundation, as has been before
declared.


Elymas. But these holy Fathers used the same things about the service of God
that we do, as holy Water, and Chrisme, both to the sick, and to the
baptized, and Exorcizing, and Crossing, and honored the Saints departed with
going to visit their Relics, and praying unto them, and commended a
Monastical life, and confession to a Priest, and works of penance, wherein
the very life of our Religion consists. And therefore if we be no true
Church, they were no true Church neither.


Paul. Although there were some tincture of these superstitions in the Church
in the days of the holy Fathers: yet there was great difference betwixt them
and you herein. They used the Cross, not for any confidence they had in it,
but as a sign of their profession, as a Aruobius testifies, saying; We do
neither worship, nor wish crosses. And Ambrose speaking of Helena, who found
the Cross of Christ, faith, Arnob. l. 8.
She found the title, and worshipped the King, but not the wood. Ambros de
Obit. Theo^os.
For this were a Gentile error, and a venity of the wicked, They anointed the
sick at the beginning of their sickness in the part grieved to ease them, as
Gregory Turoneusis says. Hist. Franc. l. 6. c. 7. But you to confer grace at
the end of sickness, when there is no more hope of life. They did not pray to
the Saints departed, as able to hear them; but in their soliloquies by way of
consabulation through a Prosopopeia. For they held, that the Saints departed
could not hear them: witness Saint Augustine, who to prove, that they know
not what is done, ox said here, brings in that place of Esai. L. de Cura. pr^
mont. c. 13.
63. Abraham knows us not: and 2 King. 22. I will gather thee to thy Fathers,
that thy eyes may not see the ewill to come. And they did commonly hold then,
that all the faithful departed remained in some secret place out of heaven,
where they had not the sight of God; as Iren. l. 5. Just. Martyr. qu. 60. and
76. Orig. Hom. 7. in Leuit. Chrysostom. Hom. 38. in 1 Cor. etc. And for worship they
gave them none, neither Doulia, nor Latria. For so says the same Augustine.
They are to be honored for imitation, not be worshipped for Religion. Aug. de
vera relig. c. 55.
And he uses the very word, expressing Doulia. We honor the Saints with
charitis, not with service. Neither did they use praying to them in their
public service. For so also Saint Augustine says. Aug. de Cinit. Dei lib.
22. c. 10.
The Martyrs are named at our sacrifice, as men of God, that have ^uercome the
world, but they are not called upon by the Priest that sacrifices. But you
pray unto them in all your Liturgyes, and worship them with Doulia. And for all
other things by you alleged, though they have been anciently used, yet their
beginning is not unknown unto us.


Elym. But you have not yet answered my argument, proving, that our case and
theirs is all one. For admit, that there were some little difference, yet this
cannot conclude against us, as no Church, if they were a true Church, seeing
we agree together in one kind of service.


Paul. They agreed not with you in errors against the foundation, and
therefore were not implicated in the same danger, as even in this about the
Saints departed, where the chief danger lies, viz. in worshipping them, and
trusting to them, as to Mediators, that shall prevail, and that have power to
help. But you shall not thus put me from the first thing propounded: viz. to
show the beginning of these superstitions. Pope Alexander first instituted Holy
Water, Anno 115. Sabel. Tom. 1. Council. Pope Hig^^^ Chry^^ne in Baptism, Anno
141. Eusebius. lib. 4 c. 10. An Exorcift was first ordained by Pope Caius, Anno
283. Sabel. The sign of the Cross was not used, but for signification 300
years; or if for blessing, with invocation upon him that was crucified, the
trust not being in it, but in Christ crucified. A material Cross or
Crucifixe, was not set up till 400 years after Christ: neither was it
appointed, till Anno 710, when the Trullan Council ordained, Cap. 82.
Policbron l. 5. c. 12. Can. 15.
that Christ should be pictured hanging upon the Cross. The first Cross
erected in England, was Anno 635, in the time of King Oswald. In the fifth
Carth. Council, Anno 409. the worshipping of Saints Relics, is declared to
be heathenish: and supplication was made to the Emperor, that Relics should
be abolished, In a Council at Laodu^ea, Anno 368, the worshipping of Angels is
condemned, as horrible idolatry. Petrus Gnapheus is no^ed to be the first,
that brought invocation upon the Saints into the public service, Anno 500:
Niceph. l. 15 c. 28.
and at every turn the mention of the Mother of our Lord. And about Anno 600,
Pope Gregory the first appointed your Liturgy with prayers to all the Saints,
as now it is. Anthony was the first that renouncing the world, led a solitary
life in the Wilderness, because of the hot persecutions of the Church, Anno
300. For so Frising says; Lib. 4. cap. 5.
There were in these days famous Princes of Cbrists Kingdom, Paul and Antony
the first Eremites. And Basilius first built Monasteries: Basil. Epis^. 63.
for he says that the Neocesareaus objected unto him the newness of a
Monastical life. Eustatius an Heretic extolled a Monastical life, and
condemned marriage, holding it necessary to salvation, to forsake all and to
turn Monk. Against him a Council was assembled at Gangra, Anno 324, and his
opinions were condemned, where they professed, that they honored true
Virginity, and withal the chaste bond of marriage, etc. Auticular confession to
a Priest began not, till An. 800. It was first appointed in Council. Cabiloneusi
2. c. 32. and coneil. Mogunt. in the time of Gregory 4. c. 26. Before if it
were used, yet it was not enjoined, yea, warning was given against it. Chrysostom.
hom. 4. de Laz.
Chrysostom says; Take heed that thou tell not thy sins to man, lest be
vpbraid thee; but show thy wounds to the Lord, Scal paradisi Grad.
that has a care of thee, that is gentle, that is the Physician. And Johannes
Climacus, An. 580. Before all things, let us confess our sins only to the
Lord our judge, and be ready at his command to confess them to all men. And
with confession began works of penance. For before, Chrysostom speaking, how
a man might attain peace with God, says, He has not commanded thee to pass
over the Mountains, Chrysostom. in Math. Hom. 55.
to sail over the Seas, to dig so much ground, to remain fasting, or to put
on sackcloth; but to give of that which thou have unto the poor.


Serg. Paul. But seeing you acknowledge most of these things to be very
ancient, and the Fathers which subscribed unto them with the Church in their
days, to be the true Church of God: Why have you utterly abolished all these
things? Had it not been better to have restored them only to that state
wherein they were in the time of the Fathers, cutting off the accessions that
have since been made?


Paul. No, by no means, for it would not have been so safe to hold these
customs after their manner, seeing they have since proved roots of most
pestilent weeds, lest in time, there should be danger of the same evils
coming on again. Even as it is no wisdom in taking away B^yars and Thorns
off a ground, to preserve the roots still. For from their praying for the dead
to express their affection, if happily they might increase their joys, or
mitigate their pains, sprung an opinion of a third place, wherein the souls
of the faithful are tormented, but may be helped out by praying for them.
From using a cross in the air for commemoration of their Christian
profession, sprung confidence, and adoration of the Cross. From mentioning the
Saints departed over their altars, praising God for them, sprung praying unto
them. From annoiling to heal sickness of the body, sprung annoiling to
confer grace to the soul. From a Monastical life taken up for necessity,
sprung up an opinion of the necessity of a Monkish life in all, that would be
perfect, and of the merit hereof.


Serg. Paul. You have not yet showed the first broaching of that doctrine
touching freewill, instification by works in part, uncertainty of faith, of
perfection, the merit of works, and of works of supererrogation: nor of
Christ's satisfaction only for eternal punishments, which you showed did
chiefly pull down the foundation. I pray you therefore now show the beginning
of these points also.


Paul. This whole brood was hatched almost at one time, viz. of the Schoolmen
about Anno 1200, or of the Council of Trent, Anno 1500. That man has freewill
to desire to trune unto God, as one wounded and half dead has to be
succored, was utterly rejected by the Fathers, especially after that occasion
was given by Pelagius an Hercticke, to look more narrowly into the truth
hereabout. Before, they speak somewhat uncertainly; De Sp. and lib. c. 3. de
dogmat. Ecclesiae c. 27. Cont. Epist. 2. Pelag. l. 3 c. 8.
but then Augustine says; Freewill anatleth to nothing but to sin. And
again, A holy thought, a good purpose, a godly counsel, and every motion of a
good will is from God. And again, freewill anaileth to nothing but to sin.
And with him consents Jerome against Pelagius: and Prosper, and Chrysostom
who says, that wicked men are altogether dead. Yea, to the days of Bernard
the same was held. For he says, We have power to will, Barn. de gra and lib.
arbuitrio.
but neither good nor evil: to will good is a profect, to will evil is a
defect. O -- r freewill makes us willing, but grace well willing. And nothing
is more frequent amongst the Fathers, then to teach, that whatsoever proccedeth
from a natural man is sin. Ieron. in Gal c. 3.
Hear Jerome for all, who says, without Christ all virtue is vice. This point
then is not yet four hundred years old.


Elymas. Nothing was more frequent in the mouths of the Fathers before
Pelagius, then freewill. Apol. 1. Lib 4 c. 71.
Justin Martyr says, that there were nothing in men worthy of praise, if they
had not equal power to turn themselves either way. Ireneus says; Man has
power to choose, even as the Augels. Wherefore their impugning of freewill
afterward was to be imputed to the heat of their opposition made to Pelagius,
who taug^^ that men had power to turn to God, and to keep his ^^mmandements
out of the liberty of their freewill.


Paul. That which you allege touching their oppugning Pelagius, may much more
truly be applied about their sayings, wherein they seem to be for the
freedom of man's will: for they had to do with the Marcionitel, and
Mannichces, who held a necessity of all things whereby men were carried either to
good or evil; and hence it came to pass, that they uttered such sayings as
these: but when they saw the danger of the Heresy touching free will ensuing,
they labored by speaking against it to quite themselves from the least
aspersion this way.


Serg. Paul. And truly this is most likely: for the proper time for a man to
express what he holds, is then, when disputation is moved about it, whereas
be speaks not so warily at other times, when be fears not that any hold
will be taken upon his sayings against the truth. And I am the rather
persuaded, that they were against all liberty of the will unto good, because
they so consentingly taught, that every thing proceeding from a natural man
before his conversion is sin.


Paul. Touching justification by works, or by inherent righteousness, and not
only by the righteousness. of Christ imputed by faith, none ever taught it,
till An. 1500. For Christ's righteousness only has ever heene rested upon by
the Fathers: Ieron in 2 Cor. 5. in ^ Cor. 1.
Jerome says, Christ has so receued the name of sin, as we are made the
righteousness of God in him, not ours, nor in us. Ambrose says, This is
appointed of God, that he which beloeueth in Christ should be saved without
works, having his sins freely forgiven through faith only. And Chrysostom
says, In Romans 3. Hom 7. Epist. 190.
So soon as a man believes, he is justified. Bernard says, Another man's
righteousness is assigned unto man, because he wanted his own, the
satisfaction of one is imputed to us all.


Elym. But there is a double justification: the first, which is only by faith,
and hereby a man passes from the state of sin into the estate of grace: and
the second, which is by inmherent righteousness, whereby a man of just
becomes more just and worthy of heaven. And of the first of these only the
Fathers spoke, not of the other.


Paul. They could not well speak of that, seeing it was unknown in their
days, and long since invented. And touching the merit of the best man's
righteousness. Bernard does utterly deny it, saying, The merits of men are not
such, Bernard Ser. 1. de An^^n.
as that for them eternal life should be due of right; or so as that God
should be unjust, if he did not therefore bestow eternal life: for to say
nothing, that allour merits are Gods gifts, and so man is for them a debtor
unto God, not God unto man; what are all merits to so great glory? Wherefore if
meriting be spoken of by the Fathers, they meant nothing else but to prevail
or obtain, or else they called good works merits, to set forth their dignity
in respect of the divine acceptance, that men might be encouraged hereunto.


Elym. You do altogether pervert their meaning: for they taught good works in
the regenerate to be properly meritorious, seeing perfect righteousness
according to the law is worthy of heaven, and such righteousness they taught,
that men through the grace of God inabling them, did attain unto in this life,
yea and that they could do and did more then the law required, and so merited
for others also.


Paul. You do most impudently wrong the Fathers: for none till above 1000
years after Christ, taught perfection of degrees in this life, but only
perfection through Christ, and a comparatiue perfection, some exceeding others;
but altogether against it. Saint. Angustine says, Charity, Epist. 29. ad
Hieron.
that cannot be increased is in no man bear, and that which may be increased
is in fault, because it is less, then it ought to be, by reason of which fault
there is no man just and sins not, by reason of which fault no living man
shall be justified in the sight of God. And Jerome says, to affirm that any
man lives so, as that he is without sin, is to take man out of man, and to
affirm that a man in the body is without the body, Ierom contra Pelag. Epist.
and rather to wish then to teach. And if they held, that no man can perfectly
keep the Law, then it is certain, that they taught not, that men could both
do all that the Law requires, and more also. If then they have spoken any
thing, wherein they may seem to be for supererogation, it is to be understood
either of outward things, or of some special commendable thing, which is not
commonly commanded to all, but commended to some. And so their doing more then
is required was only with reference unto others; who did not likewise as not
having that particular gift, Hom. 3. in 1. Cor.
or in exterials, wherein Chrysostom says, even the Philosophers exceeded the
Commandment of God.


Serg. Paul. I like this your interpretation of the Fathers very well, and am
hereby persuaded, that both perfect keeping of the Law and works of
supererrogation are novelties. Proced therefore to uncertainty of faith.


Paul. This uncertainty was not determined, not certainty of faith condemned,
before the Council of Trent Anno 1500. The Fathers are most plain for
assurance by faith. Aug. Tract 75. in Johan.
August: says, Christ is now in us, and we in him, but we believe this now,
then we shall know it, although we know it now also through believing, but
then we shall know it by bebolding it. Regist. lib. 6.187.
Gregory says; The soul that thirsts after God is first pricked with fear,
then with love, but when sear has been consumed with long anxiety of sorrow,
a certain security of presumption of pardon does arise. Hom. 14. in Romans 8.
And Chrysostom says: The supreme Essence, which does also bestow what it
promises, testifying unto us, who can any more doubt of this dignity
hereafter? And Bernard exhorts to believe without doubting, Bern in Cant.
Sermon. 8.
Whatsoever soul of you feels at any time in the secret of his conscience
the Spirit of the Son crying Abba Father, let it presume that it is beloved
with afatherly affection, and believe, doubting nothing.


Elym. They meant nothing else, but certainty on Gods part, but because man is
mutable, and all promiser run upon condition of his perseverance, they have
plainly taught elsewhere, that none can be certain by faith. Hear August.
for all, who says. Who of all the multitude of believers can presume that he
is in the number of believers as long as he is in this mortality.


Paul. They spoke in this manner to prevent carnal security, which follows
upon presumption, but they never impugned, but encouraged to assurance by faith.


Serg. Paul. There remains now only one point, wherein I desire to hear you
speak, viz. that of satis faction.


Paul. And this is none of their least errors, that Christ satisfied only for
eternal punishments, but for temporal due unto us for sin we our selves are
to satisfy: for as it is a plain derogation from the dignity of his passions.
Touching this therefore I say, as of the former points it was not taught
anciently, but the plain contary: Tertullian says, Tertul. de Baptis.
Guiltiness being taken away, the punishment is also taken away; and that he
may not seem to speak of eternal punishments only, he names death,
according as it was threatened, Genesis 2.17.
In the day that thou catest of it, thou shall dye the death, which death here
comprehends all punishments. And Saint Augustine says, E^cbit. c. 70.
Christ by taking upon him the punishment, and not the fault, has done away
both fault and punishment: Aug. de verb. Dom. Scr. 37.
and elsewhere more expressly; Christ had two good things, righteousness, and
immortality, we two evil things, sin and wortality, the one he took upon
him, the other he did not, and by taking upon him the one, he freed us from
both. As for satisfaction required of us, it is not, as he shows, for
punishment, but to show our repentance by our outward actions. So that
according to August. we are delivered from mortality as a punishment, and not
only from hell fire.


Elym. Howsoever you seem to make these learned Fathers to speak, it is
plain, that they meant only eternal punishments, borne by Christ for us. And
therefore they do usually speak of works of penance and alms, as having
force to purge and wash away sin. Chrysostom says, Hom. 1. in Genesis
The common Lord of us all, desirous to have all our sins washed away, has
invented this cure, which is made by fasting. Lib. de promis and prad. part. 2.
c. 2. Hom. 1.
And Prosper says, Alms cleanse the whole man. And Cesarius says, that a man
who by sinning has lost himself, does agains redeem himself by his
satisfaction.


Paul. Where is there a word in all these touching satisfaction for temporal
punishments? It may rather be inferred, if these speeches be strictly taken,
that we are able to do something to deliver our selves from sin, both in
respect of guilt and punishment temporal and eternal. Wherefore it must needs
be yielded, that these things were spoken improperly, that being ascribed to
the instrument or means, which is proper unto Christ. Satisfaction therefore,
as it is now taught in your Church, is rather to be referred to the Lateran
Council, Anno 1215, wherein the sacrament of penance was established, an
appendix whereof is satisfaction.


Elym. Because you have spoken of the sacrament of penance first appointed in
the Lateran Council, I will lay hold upon the occasion to put you to prove the
nouelty of the seven sacraments: for if seven have been anciently
acknowledged, this is not so new, as you would make the world believe.


Paul. I am very willing to follow you herein, and let the issue rest upon my
proving your seven Sacraments to be novelties. I say then, that this number was
not known, nor acknowledged by antiquity, but was first taught by Peter
Lombard and the Schoolmen following him, above 1000 years after Christ.
Epist. 118.
Saint Augustine says, the Sacraments of the New Testament are most few in
number. Isidorus An. 600 says, Lib. 6 Originum c. 19. Pasc. de Caena.
The Sacraments are Baptism and Chrisme, and the body and blood of Christ. And
Pascasius Anno 900; says likewise.


Elym. They say, these two are the chief indeed, but they exclude not the
rest. Hugo de Sancto Victore teaches seven sacraments, and of them he says
some are the principal, wherein salvation stands, Lib. de sacram. 7. part.
9. c. 6.
viz. Baptism and the Supper of the Lord; the rest though they be not so
necessary, yet they profit unto sanctification. And I could easily show, that
the ancientest Fathers have called every of these Sacraments.


Paul. I grant you without showing, that they called them sacraments, and so
they called any holy sign, according to Augustines definition; August. Epist.
5.
Every holy sigue is a Sacrament. But that there are any more, then two,
properly so called, they never taught, and even your Hugo, who acknowledges 7,
can be no ground for your 7, for he reckons not penance for one, but the
water of aspersion. And the very Schoolmen deny the rest to be sacraments,
Lib. 4.26.
properly so called. P. Lombard denies Matrimony to be a Sacrament properly
and univocally with the other sacraments, and Durand likewise upon that place.
Lib. 4. did. 24.
The same Lombard denies ordination to be properly a sacrament, and Alexander
de Hales, and Thomas Aquinas upon that place, etc.


Serg. Paul. This your dispute about the Sacraments has brought to my mind
another point yet ^^toucht about the holy Scriptures and Traditions. Can you
show, that it is a noueliy is hold, that together with the Canonical
Scriptures, Apocryphal books are to be received, and unwritten traditions, as
a rule of our says, or has it ever been held thus?


Paul. It is a nouelty to hold, that the Scriptures do not contain in them
all things necessary to salvation, and that Apocryphal books are to be
received as Canonical, and that traditious are necessary to salvation. For the
Fathers sought to hold all men only to the Scriptures: Hom. 1. in Psalm. 95.
Chrysostom says, If any thing be spoken without Scripture, the thought of
the bearers limpeth, sometimes yielding, and sometime doubting. And again, If
ye hears any saying, I have the holy Spirit, Sermon. de S. Sp.
but not speaking out of the Gospel, be speaks of himself, and the holy
Spirit is not in him. So Basil, reg. Mor. 8. and 28. Epist. 80. And touching
Apocryphal books, Cyril. Hierusalym, says; Haus nothing to do with
Apocryphal books. Catee. 4.
but read the canonical which are considently read in the Church. The Apostles
and first Bishops were much wiser and more religious then thou, who delivered
the scriptures unto us. Do not thou therefore, seeing thou art a child of the
Church, ges beyond their bounds. Athen in Synop.
Athanasius says, There are 22 books of the old Testament Canonical, but
there are other books which are not Canonical, which are only read of the
Catecumeni, as the book of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, etc. Ierom calls the
History of Susamus, Prafat. in Den.
of Bell and the Dragon fables, and says the same was the opinion of Eusebius,
Apollinarius, Methodius, etc. Baruch was not received as Canonical till the
Council of Florence, Anno 1439. And touching unwritten traditions, they
received none of old, but either such as were consonant to the holy Scriptures,
which were written in sense, though not in word, according to Augustine, of
which was the baptism of Infants and not to rebaptize: De Gen, ad lit. lib. 10
c. 23. Tertul de Coron. c. 23.
or customs in indifferent things according to Tertullian, who says, Do
thou not think, that it is lawful for every faithful Church to conceive and
constituent that which agrees to God, (...) to diseiplione, and profireth
(...) solnation? And these by the prestice of your own Church may be left off
again. For the thrice dipping in Baptisin, standing in time of prayer upon the
Lords day, tasting of milk and honcy in Baptism, etc. anciently received, are
now abrogated, and not held to bind.


Elym. I could reioyne with you about this argument, and bring many passages of
the Fathers showing their high esteem of traditions: but lest these disputes
should prove tedious to this noble person, and that he may not, being
fascinated with that which you have said, incline to your colorable Heresies,
I say that all, which you have produced to disgrace the Catholic Religion as
novel, are nothing but cauils. For if our Religion be new, and so fair
degenerated, as that the foundation is hereby overthrown, there was no
Religion, and so no true Church of God in the world for many hundred years,
seeing by your own confession, the Church which was above 1000 or 1300 years
ago, had many customs, and held many things which you do not at this day.
And with what face then can you allege them, as being on your side so commonly
as you do, as though your Church were all one with theirs, when as it is
plain to any that will understand, that they are our Fathers, and not yours;
and such as suffered death, our Martyrs, sealing up with their blood the Roman
Cathohke Religion, and not your new devised way of serving God without
crossing, Chrysme, Holy water, Prayers for the dead, devotion to the Saints,
etc. and full of carnal liberty, in all things pleasing to the flesh, as
marriages of Priests, and worldly living of all, without any renouncing of
secular affairs for the service of God, and repenting only with a little
grief, no works of penance being after required, with many other points of
licentiousness. If any held with this Religion in all these points, tell who
they were, when and where they lived, if you can, till within these hundred
years, and that is as late as the newest of our points, to grant you your own
saying.


Paul. Never were any so justly to be taxed for cauilling, as you: for what
can it else be, when all your points, in that manner you hold them, have been
plainly showed to be new, to fly to this general reason for evasion? The
Church in the time of these ancients, was the same with ours in all matters of
faith, as I have fully declared, neither can a few ceremonies since, more
corrupted, and therefore by us abolished, estrange our Church from theirs, no
more then the breaking down of the brazen Serpent, and serving God without it
in Hezekiahs days, estranged the Church then from the Church in the time of
Moses. As for the holy Martyrs, it is a most vain brag that they sealed your
Religion with their blood, which was not then in question. It was rather our
Religion, that they sealed, seeing they commonly suffered for such zeal to
Christ, as that together with him they would not worship Idols, as we also
refuse to do. For holding the same points with us in every particular, it is
not necessary to show any that did, it is sufficient to prove our Religion
true, and Apostolical, to have showed the rising up of all those rites, that
we ahue done away, to have been long after the Apostles days. And for carnal
liberty, whereby you seek to disgrace the truth, herein you blaspheme the very
liberty of the Gospel, after the manner of the malicious Pharisees, who cried
out upon Christ; Behold a glution, and drinker of wine, a friend of Publicans
and sinners. When he did no more then he might in taking liberty herein. For
even so we maintain liberty of marriage to all men, and reject your
superstitious austerities; because marriage is honorable amongst all men, and
we would not through a multitude of obseruances make Christ's easy yoke and
light burden, heavy, Heb. 13.4.
like to that under the Law, of which Saint Peter complains that it was such,
that neither we, nor our Fathers were able to bear. Act. 15.10.
And if experience may be heard, this your taking upon you to be stricter then
God, shall be abundantly convinced to opon a far wider gap to
licentiousness, seeing all he world ringeth of the carnality, uncleanness,
and dissoluteness of your very votaries and Priests, and of Rome it self
above all. And it is observed, that your very Confessions and appointments of
penance is turned into a fountain of liberty, seeing more rioes and disorders
are against the time of shrift in Italy committed, then all the year before.


Serg. Paul. But can you not show any that were of your reformed Religion for
substance and matter of faith from the time of the ancient Fathers, till
Luther. That was a very long distance of time of about 1000 years. Do you
hold that God was without a true visible Church all this time?


Paul. God was never without a true Church, neither was she hid long at any
time: For till the Pope was made an Idol, and idolatry with Images, and with
the Mass took place in the Church, and the Virgin Mary was made joint
mediator with Christ, it was a true Church, which was till about Anno 700. And
when the Latin Church was by these abominations corrupted, the Greek Church
still continued more sound: for they withstood the Popes supremacy, opposed
images, held no transubstantiation; neither subscribed to the points maintained
by the Romanists, till the Council of Florence, Anno 1439, at what time I have
also showed, how much this subscription was mis-liked by the body of that
Church. So that if no where else, yet in Grecia the true Church was to be
found, till then. But there wanted not oppugners of Images, and of the Popes
supremacy in other places at the same times. The Council of Franckford was
famous for determining against Images, as I have also declared. Between 700
and Anno 800 Albertus Gallus a French Bishop opposed himself against the Pope
in his Legate Boniface, Hist. Magd. Cent. 8. c. 10.
and with him one Clemens a presbyter, and Saemson, who were therefore
excommunicated by the Pope, and imprisoned. And about the same time Johan
Mailrosius and Claudius Clemens sent from Scotland, and first Professors of
learning in the University of Paris, denied to subscribe to the Romish
superstitions. Between 800 and 900 Claudius Taurinensis Bishop of Thurin in
Piemont, denied the Pope, to be an Apostolic Bishop, for he is not, said he,
an Apostolic Bishop, that sits in the Apostolic chair, but that
fulfilleth an Apostolic office. Whights way to the Church. p. 386.
He cast images out of the Church, and impugned the worshipping of the cross.
About that time were Ioh. Scotus also and Bertram that denied the real
presence, Anno 847.

Thergandus Bishop of Treniris inueighed against Pope Nicolas, calling him
Antichrist, Auentin: Reginold. lib. 2.
for which he was excommunicated, and afterward stain. Between An. 900 and
^000, Otho impugned the supremacy, Uhite ibid.
and Arnulphus called the Pope Antichrist. Between An. 1000 and 1100,
Berengarius impugned the real presence, of whom I have already spoken. About
that time Leaskerius an Archbishop in France was of the same opinion. Berweene
An. 1100, and 1200. A certain Bishop of Florence preached, Hist. Magd. Cent.
12.
that Antichrist was come, in the time of Pascalis the second. Also one
Francis an Abbor, and Petrus do Beuis a Priest, impugned the real presence,
with many other Popish points: and Bernard is famous for many points against
Popery. Between Anno 1200, Hist Magd. Cent. 13. c. 2.
and 1300, Gulielm. de Sancto amers, was banished for an heretic and had his
books burnt; and Robert Grosted Bishop of Lincoln, greatly opposed the Pope.
Between An. 1300 and 1400, was John Wickliffe professor of divinity in Oxford,
who opposed the Pope in sundry points. Hist. Magd. Cent. 14.
And out of Greece came diverse by reason of the Turkish tyranny, amongst whom
Marsilius Patauinus was of most note: he, maintained that the Pope had no power
over other Bishops, much less over Kings. Armachanus an Archb. in Ireland, and
Johannes de Rupeseissa were of the same opinion also. And after this John
Husse, and Jerome of Prague, with almost all the country of Bohemia, were
famous for standing for the truth.


Serg. Paul. But these were but a few in an age, neither could they make a
Church: how happened it, that there were no more till. Wickliffes time?


Paul. Where Bishops and learned teachers have been stirred up to stand for the
truth, there is no doubt, but as lights of the world they did inlighten many
more, though they be to us unknown. Neither was the mystery of iniquity
grown to that height till about Wickliffes time, and the days of the
succeeding Worthies, so that the Roman religion was not altogether so
dangerous: but now they being almost quite gone from Christ, their
superstitious devotion increasing toward the Virgin Mary, and the rest of the
Saints, satisfying for a man's own sins in part, being taught, and the merit of
works, and freedom of will set up, and the assurance of faith condemned, and
such horrible idolatry with the Mass more then ever committed, they which had
the Spirit of God in any measure within them could no longer forbear, but in
great companies utterly separate from the Church of Rome, lest whilst they
would be worshippers of Christ, they should become limbs of Antichrist, to
the destruction of their souls.


Elymas. Nay rather are ye now become limbs of Antichrist, by following Martin
Luther a Monk, that brake his Vow, and married a Nun, and was of a notorious
wicked life, and had consultation with the Devil, and so went to the Devil at
the last: and by following King Henry 8, a man so sensual and tyranicall; for
these and such like were your leaders to this Schism, and not any good Spirit,
as ye pretend.


Paul. In seeking to wound the truth through the sides of these men, you do
but according to your accustomed manner, it being one of the Pillars of your
Religion, to lay slanderous imputations upon your Adversaries, as a late Writer
of ours has notably showed. Willet Tetrastul. Papismi.
But as for Martin Luther, it is well known, that he was a man of great zeal
for the truth, and succeeded accordingly; your Pope and all your power not
being able to lay violent hands upon him, but that he was preserved to dye in
peace. If there were any thing taxable in him, in what holy man has there not
been likewise it is no prejudice to the truth, which he stood for: no more,
then Saint Paul's forepassed persecuting and blaspheming was to the Gospel. And
for King Henry 8, God can use any instrument to beat down the pride of such an
enemy as the Pope, as be used Nebuchadnezzar to chastise idolatrous Judah, and
the Syrian Presidents, and Roman Emperors, to destroy Christ's enemies, and to
abrogate the legal service by burning up the Temple, and yet this made nothing
the more for the credit of the Jews Religion, or discredit of the Christian
thus advanced. But because you have given me so just occasion, I say that if
the wickedness and miscrable ends of chief erectors of any Religion, be an
argument of a bad religion, as undoubtedly it is, the Religion of the Church of
Rome is abundantly convinced to be such; seeing so many Poper have been so
notoriously wicked, and perished so miserably, and such apparent judgments
have been executed upon others, that has helped to advance it. Gregory the
third, who drew up the Popedom to such a high pin, was a most wicked man: for
when Phocas, who had murdered Mauricius, Platina.
and was therefore greatly taxed by the Patriarch of Constantinople, for which
he was much offended with him, he sent his image to Rome, and Gregory
received it honorably, and flattereth with this parricide, but inioyed not
long the honor of universal Bishop thus attained, for he dyed within nine
months after. And Phocas the founder of the primacy proved soon after a
slothful beast, Pompon. Latus Paul. Diacon.
cruelly murdering many of the Nobles, rauishing many Matrons and Virgins,
wallowing in daily drunkenness, and acocrdingly was rewarded. For he was
taken by Priscus, and Heracleon, and his hands being fast cut off, then his
privy member, he was beheaded, and his body burnt in a brazen Bull, R. Barus
supplem. Chron. Nancl.
and all his posterity destroyed with him. Siluester the second was a Coniurer,
and was slain by the Devil, Job. Marius.
when he was saying Mass in the Chapel of the Cross of Jerusalem. John the
13 committed Incest with two of his Sifters, and was slain at the last in the
act of Adultery. Gregory the seventh put out the eyes of John the 15, and
killed him with famine in the Castle of Saint Angelo, that he might reign in
his stead; and having labored mightily to advance the papal Sea, he was
shortly cut off by a sudden death, and his body was drawn by the feet through
the streets, Fascic. Temp. Otho 1.
and pierced with spears by the Romans. Whereupon the History called
Fosciculus tempor^^, noreth, that the Bishops of Rome were now adays slain,
as in the Primitive Church, but were not made Martyrs as they, there was the
like death, but not the like cause: thy suffered, as wailde lambs following
the Lambr Christ, Plat. vit. pontif.
these as ran^^ing Wolves an empting a new Empire. Gregory the ninth dyed in
despaise. Boniface the eighth dyed of madness. Paul the second, having yoted
as much as ever did Hesiegabalus dyed of an Apoplexy. Alexander the sixth
committed Incest with his own daughter, whom also he married to his sonue,
Pasquil. Natal. comes Hist. l. 4.
and was at the last poisoned by him. Pius the fourth dyed in the very bosom
of his Concubine. Paul the third, when he had waxed old in a filthy course of
life, dyed, crying out, my sin is always against me. And what should I
reckon up more: whosoever desires to read further of them, let him look into
Pelanus Dan. part 2. p. 467: and Parker of the Gross, who shows what whores,
and Ganimedes by name, several Popes have had. Sergius had Marozia. Gregory
the seventh, Matildis. Alexander the sixth, Lucretia: all their daughters or
Sisters. Sextus the fourth had for his Ganimede Riarius. Julius the second,
Germanus. Leo the tenth, Hypolitus. Julius the third, Innocentius, etc. And
Napier, who in his exposition upon the Rouelation reckons up the number of
most notorious wicked Popes. Napier Revel. p. 138.
There have been thirteen adulterers: Three common Stewes-haunters: four
incestuous persons: eleven Sodomiticall persons: seven erectors of Stews, and
two and twenty Necromancers. And Henricus Echartus, who in his book called
Papa Pharisaizans reckons up the vilest heresies, wherewith Popes have been
tainted. Some Sadduces, some Montanists, Arrians, Nestorians, Eutychians, and
Epicures, and patrons of wickedness. Innocent 4, defended for gold any luxury
in the Clergy. Sixtus 4 gave liberty of Sodometry to the Cardinals. Alexander
4 sent into England for money, absolution to all perjured and wicked persons.


Serg Paul. Are these things true? is it possible, that so many monsters should
sit in the Apostolic chair? yet it is true, the office does not privilege
from sin, alse Judas being an Apostle should not have been a Devil, As Judas
therefore was no prejudice to the Apostolical office, no more it may be are
some wicked Popes to the religion by them maintained. Else by the like reason
the wickedness of some of your Bishops and Ministers would be an argument
against your religion.


Paul. For the truth of these things I have alleged my authors; who in these
sifting times would not have written thus, if they could have been disproued,
And howsoever the wickedness of ordinary persons of the Clergy or Laity cannot
minister an argument against their religion; yet when one, that is above all,
and as an Oracle, gives Edicts to all, and guides the ship as he pleases, is
noto^iously wicked: there needs no greater argument of a wicked religion.
Because the religion professed by us is not founded upon the Bishop or
Minister, but upon Gods Word; but the religion of the Church of Rome is founded
upon the Pope, seeing it is their common Plea, that their Church is founded
upon S. Peter, and his successors. Such then as the Pope is, such must the
religion built upon him needs be; for so much as the building always stands
and falls with the foundation. It is a silly shift to say, he may err, as he
is a man in manners, but not as Pope in doctrine. For what ground can there be,
that the holy Ghost will dwell to direct in the truth upon all occasions, in a
nasty sty of unclean spirits? For how is the holy Spirit, if not by abominable
sins, quenched and chaced away? It is a privilege of such as fear God,
Psalm. 25.12.
to be directed in the right; and not of Balaam, or Caiaphas, though they might
ex^raordinarily prophecy as Balaams Ass spoke.


Elywas. You must not think yet to bear us down thus, as Antichristian and
abominable in our religion: no, no, although all were, as you have said, yet
we want not the strongest argument of all, which must stop all mouths, the
very finger of God, which has often manifested it self, miracles wrought at
Saints sepulchers, and images, by exorcising of Priests to the casting out of
Devils, by Crosses, and Holy Water, which have often put the Devil to flight;
and almost all points of our religion have been confirmed by miraculous
revelations, to some holy persons of unsuspected credit, who have upon their
faith affirmed the same.


Paul. These miracles make much on your side indeed, to prove your religion
Antichristian, These. Revel.
and your Pope Antichrist, seeing it is said, that he should come with lying
wonders, and should cause fire to come down from heaven, to these ducing of
many? Miracles indeed had their use in the first propagating of the Gospel: 1
Cor. 14.
but they were for unbelievers, smce they have ceased as needless, even as (to
use the similitude of Gregory) the husbandman having newly planted an Orchard,
waters it: But when it is well rooted, he waters it no more. Deuteronomy. 23.
If any give a sign amongst the people of God, to prove any new matter in
religion, not propounded in the written Word of God, he is pronounced a false
Prophet. Moreover, many of your miracles have been proved coosenages, by which
we may guess what the rest are: and for revelations, they may well be counted
rather delusions of Satan, who is ready to tempt men according to their
humors, and superstitious Monks to more superstitions.


Serg. Paul. Are miracles then of so little force now? What means our Saniour
Christ when he makes this a sign of the true faith? Mark. 16.17.
He that believes, these signs shall follow, he shall cast out Devils, lay
his hands upon the sick and heal them, etc.


Paul. Miracles were very frequent indeed then, as was needful: but it was not
to be expected, that these signs should follow always, when al countries and
Nations being converted, the truth had gotten other sufficient testimony
without signs. Only God does something miraculously oftentimes for the
credit of his Gospel in all ages, as by punishing extraordinarily the enemies
of his truth, and blessing such as favor it. Thus the persecuting Emperors
were extraordinarily judged; and the first Christian Emperor extraordinarily
blessed, in that they all for the space of three hundred years lived most
turbulent lives, had most unquiet estates, and almost all of them suffered by
violent deaths, after a short reign: but Constantine the first Christian
Emperor lived long, was every where victorious, and then reigned in peace, and
dyed in peace. And of these miracles, blessed be God, we are full in this
kingdom: for Queen Mary that stood for Popery, had but a short time, was
extraordinarily disappointed of the hoped for successor of her own body, to
the amazement of all, and so was cut off in the prime of her age. But Queen
Elizabeth of blessed memory, had a long time, and the divine protection did
compass her about as a shield against all treasons, and conspiracies; so that
they were miraculously disappointed, and having reigned in peace, inticht her
kingdom more then ever, abated the pride of her enemies, and mightily succored
other distressed Protestants, in a good old age she departed in peace. And
since that time our gracious King, that now reigns, whom God long preserve:
how miraculously both he and we all under him have been delivered; and in what
peace he has and does still govern such mighty Nations, like another Solomon
in such tumultuous times: it is so well known, that I shall not need to
speak. And that blow, which your Religion had at Blacke-Friers, October 26 of
this year, by the only hand of God, both Teacher and people, to the number of
about an hundred persons, being suddenly cut off at one of your Sermons: and
the first, that has been public to our Countrymen, since the suppression of
Pope y, and that upon your November 5, at what time our overthrow (thanks be
to God) was in another year in vain attempted: that, I say, the like whereof
was never heard, was a very miracle to the confounding of your superstitions,
which you thought by degrees to bring in here again, and to crowde out the
truth. For howsoever we are all to tremble, and to take occasion to repent by
Gods judgments; yet when Corah, Dathan and Abiram with their company, are in
the very offering of their incense destroyed; their service as a conspiracy is
confounded, that all men may take heed of it, and the service of Moses and
Aaron honored. I could ascend higher to times past, and show miracles in the
fufferings of our Martyrs, and in the judgments upon your persecutors: and I
could enlarge my self to speak of the miraculous preservation of Geneua, and
of the wonderful success of the Protestants in France in former times, and of
some Kings there, and of the Bohemians in the time of John Husse: and it shall
suffice to have given this taste at home, and so near hand.


Elym. These outward things are no proofs, Eccl 9.2.
seeing all things fall out alike unto all. But in the midst of all your good
success, ye have not been able to enlarge your Religion, but only to a few
countries here in Europe: whereas the true Church is Catholic ouerspreading
all Nations, which mark is in the Church of Rome, but not in yours.


Paul. You abuse that Text of all things falling out alike to all. For that is
spoken only of the godly, and the wicked, which are religious and care not for
religion; and not of those that are zealous for their religion, be it true or
false, when they are all bound to embrace the truth. For in this case God has
ever put a plain difference betwixt those of his people that have worshipped
him aright, and that have been corrupted by idolatry, pouring down great and
manifest blessings upon the one sort, and apparent curses upon the other, as it
is at large set forth in the books of Judges, Samuel and the Kings: thus as
the great Vmpire over all, determining for the Truth, and against Error. As
for the Catholocisme, which you so much brag of; I have already showed, that
Grecia a part of the world not the furthest remote, has never wholly embraced
your Religion; and by your cruclties your Church has become so odious amongst
the Indians, that they abhor it therefore; and it is notoriously known, that
by your very images and faithlesnesse, the Turks have been hindered from
ruining to Christianity, and so have the sca^tered Jews. Our Church is
Apostolic, as has been proved, and therefore Catholic, though the time is
not yet come, since the reformation, of being enlarged to all parts, for so
neither was Christianity upon the sudden, though carried forth by extraordinary
instruments. But to yield the pretended universality of your Church so
corrupted: what tends this unto indeed, but to prove your Church to be
spiritual Babel, and your Pope to be the whore of Babel, seeing as she, so
Rome sits as a Queen, and rules over the Nations of the earth.


Serg. Paul. Fie, fie, Paul, this sauoureth rather of spleen, then of sound
judgment: for that Babylon is a persecuter of all Christians, and an open
oppugner of Christ, and so may with good reason indeed be reputed heathen
Rome, under the persecuting Emperors, but not Popish Rome, wherein Christ is
honored, and Christians are harbored.


Paul. Worthy Sir, I speak out of no spleen, but advisedly, pitying the
people, that being seduced by this whore, run headlong after her to their own
destruction. For, that popish Rome and not heathen Rome is that Babel, I prove
by these 2 invincible reasons. First, from her name, the great Whore, Reu.
17.1. verse. 5.
and the mother of whordomes and abhomiuations of the earth. Now whordome in
the Scripture phrase, as all know, is Idolatry, and yet every idolatrous nation
is not said to be a whore, but only that where God has been rightly
worshipped, but his worship is become corrupt by the bringing in of Idols: for
in this respect when Judah and Israel are said to have played the whore, neither
Babel nor Sodom, nor any other nation is taxed by this name. Whence is
necessarily follows, that Rome where God has been truly worshipped, but
since has been by Idols corrupted, must be meant by Babel that great whore;
and not heathen Rome, which was originally idolatrous. Again, the other part of
the name, the Mother of Whordomes, implies a place, from whence the idolatries
of other Countries have sprung, such as was not Heathen Rome, which received
her idolatries from other nations, as she subdued them, that they might the
more willingly obey the Roman State; but Popish Rome, the very mother of all
the Idolatries in all nations round about. Secondly, I reason from the end of
this Babel. Revel 18 2.
Babylon is fallen and is become the habitation of Devils, the bold of all foul
spirits, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful bird. And again, verse. 3.
She shall be burnt with fire. Heathen Rome falling, this desolation has not
succeeded, but was more worthily inhabited then ever before, with Christians in
stead of Ethnicks, and therefore this Babel is not that Rome, but Rome that now
is, whose judgments shall be according to her blessings, as the judgments of
Jerusalem, not to be once destroyed, and then repeopled again, but to be
burnt with fire, never to be again reedifyed, but to remain a perpetual
spectacle of desolation for the glory of Gods justice against such a sink of
abominations.


Serg. Paul. But you have not yet touched that note, which chiefly is pointed
at as the cause of Babels ruin. In her was found the blood of the Prophets,
and of the Saints, Reu. 18.24.
etc. What Prophets or Saints have been slain in Rome, since the Christians
bare sway? She has honored many Saints with canonizing them, but blood of
Saints she has shed none.


Paul. By Prophets, as all know, are understood Preachers of the Gospel, and
by Saints, godly and faithful people: for such in the holy Scriptures are
called saints, the Pope canonized saints not being known then. And of these,
what place in the world so full of the blood as Popish Rome, since she has
been the bellows to blow up the coals, that have burnt thousands of most
godly innocent people, and from her has been derived the bloody cruelty which
has been exercised by the Potentates of the earth against the numberless
shepherds and sheep of Christ's flock, to the destroying of them in most
inhumane and barbarous manner. I thank you therefore for putting me in mind
of this note; for by cruelty and bloodshed is the sin of the Church of Rome
come to the height, neither does any thing threaten so formidable judgments
against her as the cry of so much innocent blood, shed with such exquisite
torments, that if Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel were alive, he might be ashamed
that he could invent no more long lingering tormenting death, but cast those
that would not worship his Image, into a hot fiery furnace, so hot as that they
might be presently dispacht, when as the King of this Babel has an hundred
ways more tormenting, to destroy his oppugners, and a far more terrifying
course by imprisoning long, vilely dieting, cruelly racking, and at last
burning them in a lingering paineprotracting fire.


Serg. Paul. But it is not for their sanctity, that he deals thus with them,
but for their Heresies, for which he thinks them worthy of any torment, that
others being by them warned, may take heed of falling into the like.


Paul. This is his pretense indeed, but if it be heresy, then the pure milk
sucked out of the breasts of the old and new Testament without any foreign
mixture must be heresy, for such I have particularly showed in the beginning
of this Colloquy all our doctrine to be. It is therefore for zeal and sanctity
merely that we suffer, and if it were otherwise, yet the Pope must needs for
this be Antichrist, and popery Antichristianisme. For who is Antichrist, but he
that is against Christ? and who is against Christ, but he that teaches and
sets men on to do against Christ's teaching? If Christ then had bidden Peter
to put up his sword and not to strike therewith for his cause, in way of
revenge, upon those that were contrary minded, is not he Antichrist that
gloryeth in striking with the sword? If Christ rebuked the rash zeal of those
that would have called for fire from heaven to destroy such as refused to
entertain Christ; are not they Antichristian that with fire and faggot destroy
all? If Christ bad, let the tares and wheat grow together till the harvest,
lest whilst the tares be pulled out, the wheat be plucked up also; is not he
Antichrist that bids pluck up the tares howsoever, destroy the Heretics in
France and in Germany by the sword, and in England with Gunpowder, though many
Catholics perish together with them also? To say nothing of other things
wherein he is plainly against Christ.


Elym. You show your spite against his Holiness now indeed. How can you speak
thus without blushing, when as it is plainly set forth, as the note of
Antichrist, 1. John 4.1.
that he denies Christ to have come in the flesh: and to confess Christ come
in the flesh, the note of Gods Spirit; Wherefore the Pope cannot be Antichrist.
And if cruelty against Heretics be an argument to prove Antichrist, I pray
let your rulers take part with him herein; seeing that in cruelty they are no
whit inferior to Catholic rulers, if they exceed them not. For what holy
Priests, and zealous desmits have been spared from the sword, what private
professors of the Catholic Religion from most cruel usage, imprisoning and
spoiling since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, cill even of late,
when the clemency of a more merciful King abhorring from all tyranny, has
made their yoke somewhat easier?


Paul. You show either your ignorance or wilfulness in alleging that text of
Saint John. For who knows not, that there are more Antichrists then one? some
are open professed enemies to Christ; of whom St. John speaks, that those may
easily be known by their denying of Christ; but there is one called the
Antichrist, which I have also set forth, that sits in the Temple of God, and
comes with all decei^ablenesse, which things could not agree unto him, if he
plainly denied Christ; and this Antichrist your Pope may well be,
notwithstanding his outward profession of Christianity. And for your reply to
draw in our Governors into the same predicament for their cruelty. I wonder,
that you and your fellows are not ashamed to broach so many notorious lies, as
you have done touching all manner of cruelties exercised here in England,
against your sect, when as since the beginning of that most blessed Queens
reign (though there was just cause, and but your own measure should have bin
meted to you again, if all your sect had been rooted out with fire and sword
without partiality) not one Papist has been put to death for his religion.
But because by experience it was found dangerous to the State, to suffer
Priests and Jesuits to come into the land, their coming being for treason and
rebellion, they were proceeded against as traitors that presumed contrary to
the Law to enter this Kingdom. And lest there should be danger in the rest,
they have been confined and fined, as commmon policy requires, the more they
were kept under and restrained, the security of the State being the more; and
contrariwise the more their wealth and liberty was, the greater was the danger
of the Kingdom. Wherefore here has been no persecution of Religion, but of
rebellion, no execution done upon conscience, but upon treason, as your own
conscience cannot but witness with us.


Elym. There is no end, I see of wording with you, so many are your shifts and
colors at every turn: but I hope you have seen your best days, and both you
and your religion shall now down as fast, as ever it came up, and the
Catholic religion shall be again in every place restored, and then the deed
will prove the truth, and that your heresy is not of God, for then it could not
be resisted. Wherefore (most noble Governor) let not this Heretic seduce you,
but provide for your honor, peace, and safety by joining with Catholic
Princes, who alone almost rule all Europe, and would be glad, to see you become
a good Catholic also, and so to prosecute with all entire love, honor and
estimation.


Paul. Now you show your self in your colors indeed a true child of the
Devil, tempting by worldly honors and respects, as he did Christ. But (most
excellent Sergius) your wisdom I hope is such, that you will easily reject
these temptations as Christ did the Devils, with it is written, Psalm. 20.8.
They which trust in horses and chariots, or in worldly Princes shall fall
down, but such as trust in God shall stand up steadfastly. For mine own part I
doubt not, but the eager putting on of popish Potentates of late days to
overthrow the truth at once, is a presage of the ruin of that superstition
being even at the doors. For so the Christian Religion being most endangered in
the days of Eugenius, when the adversaries sought to destroy it all at once;
his rage was turned to be fatal to Gentilisme, being immediately after so put
down as that it was never able to make head again.


Serg. Paul. God forbid, that I through any fear or hope should be drawn to
that, which I so plainly now see to be dangerous to the soul. No, no, (thou
bewitching Elymas) I have given too much care to thy deceiuable reasons to
incline to so favorable an opinion of your Antichristianisme. From henceforth
I charge you to come at my Court no more, for I will no more have communion
with you, or such as you are, but only as I am commanded, I will as much as in
me lies have peace with all men. And thou Paul, (the true messenger of God)
shall at all times be welcome unto me. Many such Preachers God bless me and
my Dominion with all, for they are truly the servants of God, and all that
will be moved the rather for my countenance, let them hearken unto them, and
fly all communion with sophistical Jesuits and Priests: So shall I account
them good and loyal subjects to me in whom my heart shall trust, and they
shall escape the greatest and the most bewitching danger of the soul that ever
was.


FINIS.

