

MAYERES HIS TRAVELS: Containing a true Recapitulation of all the remarkable
passages which befell in the Authors Peregrination and Voyages, as namely in
these Employments following: viz. his

1 Voyage for the wars in Ireland in Queen E. R. 2 At Breda, under one of the
four English Colonel Regiments. 3 With Count Mansfield. 4 To Cales. 5 To the
I Will of Rhee.
Whereunto is added a speech the Author held with great King Hunger in his
journey over the Alps.

Collected and written by him who was both an actor, and an eye witness in the
above named several employments, the space of forty years, R. M. S. Gent.

Published with License and Authority.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for Richard Harper, and are to (...)

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and much honored John Potham, Knight and Baronet, a
poor Soldier wishes all happiness in this life, and eternal felicity in the
life to come.
RIGHT WORSHIPFUL,
IT is said that the silly Wren, the least of all Birds, takes her chiefest
shelter under the Eagles wings, and that the Princely Unicorn delighting in
Music would stand still to hear (after the sweet singing Philomela had sounded
out her melodious and silver sounding tunes) the poor Thrush to warble out her
chat, and so sometimes, that great Augustus (who made the World to tremble)
would vouchsafe to hear and read, the homely work of a rustic Shepherd, as well
as the learned and lofty Verse of Virgill: All which imboldneth me (poor
Vassal) to dedicate this poor Pamphlet, being the tragical discourse of my
lives Catastrophe to your noble self, Verse I dare not call, neither prose; it
is but a poor, plain, brief and true rehersall of my disasters in that little
service and poor travel that I have undergone, being the space of forty
years: Beseeching your noble self, to be the Eagle, to shelter this my poor
Wren-like work, under the shadow of your loving wings; and to hear the Rural
tune of a poor Rusticke Soldier clattering in an Iron coat, as well as Orpheus
with his dainty Music, clad in a Peacock colored suit, singing out his
delighting Sirens songs more then Philomela like, and as Augustus to daigne to
look down so low, as to take the view of tragical discourse of a poor
soldiers unfortunate passages, as the thrice noble verse of learned Spenser,
Draiton, and their fellows: happy shall I think my self, if you will not be
displeased at my presumption, but much more happy shall I be, if your Worship
will but give my poor widows mite your kind and favorable acceptance: I hope
the better, in regard I found your favor once in Bohemia, being utterly
unknown, being then (as I am still) very poor, it was not then, nor is not now
for any gift I sought or seek more then your noble and loving countenance, and
respect. Thus will I rest, leaving your noble self to the Lords protection, and
my self and my poor Catastrophe to the Worlds view, and sharp censure of
many viporous and malignant tongues.

Your Worships in all service, RANDULFH MAYERES.

GEntle Reader, I entreat thee, that if thou find any things amiss in this
Catalogue of my disasters, and thy self could have done much better, laugh
not this to scorn, but do that better thou can do, and give the glory to
God that has given thee those better parts: for poor man that I am, what I
have done, I have done it as no scholar but a poor soldier, not seen in any
poetical Fiction, or Aenigmaticall invention, much less in any patheticall
curiosity of dainty discourse, but plain as poor, for I can no better:
Wherefore I beseech thee speak sparingly, censure lovingly, judge charitably
of a poor unlearned soldiers Catastrophe: he is one that will not wrong thee
nor no man, but favors all, hates none, loves God, honors his King and
Country, and hopes to die in Gods fear, and after to live with him in glory,
and so I rest thine in all duty,

R. M.

TO be a soldier, is an honor; such
As all may speak but none commend too much.
To be a Poet, that does far transcend
Mortality: Man, has his proposed end:
But the Muse is immortal, upward flying
To what is ever-lasting, never dying.
But where these, in one Center shall combine,
Though soldiers terrene, and the Muse divine;
Yet both of them make a sweet harmony,
'Twixt Mars the god of war, and Mercury.
Great Caesar, famed in many a glorious sight,
Still, what he did by day wrote down by night
And was his own Chronologer: what he
Deserved in that, may be conferd on thee
(My worthy Friend) who nothing here sett'st
(But as it justly may be called thine own)
So, of those passages thou do descry down,
Thou have bin witness, both in ear and eye.
In the French wars thou have an Actor been,
And in the Irish, served the Maiden Queen
Eliza, of blessed memory: the skars
Thou wear'st about thee of the Belgic wars,
Thou also wast a sharer in the fate
Of the sad loss, in the Palatinate,
Thy worthy service has been known to be
Both in Cales Voyage, and the Isle Del-ree.
And needs must thou immortal glory win,
To give so fair account where thou have bin,
Both Arms and Arts thy meeter does express,
In thy praise therefore I could write no less.
Th. Haywood.

Humfrey Crowch To the Author Master Randulph Mayres.
TO thee brave Mayres whose spirit's not confined
Within the limits of a cowards mind,
For as the Elements of fire and water,
When as they meet do strive which shall be greater,
So fear and valor in a soldiers breast,
Do strive in volentars, and some that's pressed,
But like a flash of lightning valor did
Put life in thee, when fear struck others dead,
In a good cause valor made thee resolved,
To venture forth which made thee be extold,
And what thy youth performed in field and town,
Now crowns thy age with honor and renown,
To try the worst of ills thou tookst a pride,
As this Book shows which cannot be denide,
Hard lodging, hunger, cold, could not displant thee,
Nor yet grim death himself could ever daunt thee,
When cowards fled, and some that staid proved base,
Thou stout did brave King Hunger to his face,
Thy daring heart did clime the Alps so high,
Not high enough for thee, I grieve that I
Want matter to extol thee as I should,
Whose name deserves to be writ in gold.
The losing of Breda is thy relating,
The I Will of Ree which set the French a prating:
That though our men were beaten from that coast,
Thou show the French have no great cause to
And since to talk of wars is thy delight:
All the Bohemian wars thou do recite, boast,
Thou being an eyewitness of these things,
The news unto thy native Country brings.
Rest (worthy man) from all thy pains and toils,
For age, we know, the stoutest soldier foyles.
To the gentle Reader of Master Randulph Mayeres his travels.
GEntle Spectators of this Pamphlet small,
The Author does desire no praise at all,
His works praise him so worthily he writes,
To read his travels he the world incites,
The name of Poet he does here refuse,
Yet we may understand he has a Muse.
Soldier and Scholar, it seems he is belike,
For he can use his pen as well as Pike,
He is no Venus Darling, you shall know it,
A son of Mars, a Soldier, and a Poet:
So then regardlesse of vain Critics cavils,
Honor his person, and read over his travels.
H. C.

Imprimatur.

Th. Wykes.
May 12. 1638.
1
MY Muse is mounted and perforce will write,
Putting me on, to write some new found thing,
But I cannot from a shall^w brain indite
Any that is new, but must old tidings bring:
Yet still my Muse, she does me much reprove
And bids me cease, unless I write of love.
1 Nothing in this age is so delightful as lovetoyes, and lascivious rimes,
wherein youth takes his chiefest felicity, for Venus the great Goddess of Love,
with her three children base begotten, as Pride, Beauty, and Riches, with her
near Kinsman the great god Bacchus at her elbow, bears all the sway in these
days: so that one sheet of paper is more valued writ as a Love-toy, then a
Reame of paper writ in this nature.

2
And tells me that, Bellona's banished clear,
And hides her face, even as a coward base
And dare not once the goddess Love come near,
For love not war is holden all in grace:
But yet I cannot, but of war must speak,
And not of love although my heart should break.
2 Yet could I wish the wise to consider that as Venus has her three
delightful Daughters, and a frolic Kinsman: So has the Goddess Bellona's
three Handmaids, Fire, Sword, and Famine, which being sent abroad: make such
havoc of Venus Images, as nothing then, is so much in respect as Mars his
messengers, which indeed is poor soldiers, which in this age is most of all
men rejected: and disrespected, unless it be of some noble spirits, and the
learned Patrons of divine Contemptations, and Managers of Martial affairs.

3
Nor can I write as Satyrists use to do,
Against what, not some harsh invective verse,
Nor strive I can to put my Muse unto
The pleasure of fair Venus to rehearse:
Nor can I write, as fittest is indeed,
Of bloody Mars, often made my body bleed.
4
Then Muse give leave, for I am minded now,
To warble out the whole Catastrophey
Of the disasters I have wandered through,
They are intricate as is Menanders way,
A Labyrinth wherein I have labored sore,
And yet my labor still is more and more.
4 I call this my Catastrophe, for that it is the rehearsal of all, or most
what of my lives passage since I was able to bear Arms as a Soldier, being a
tragical discourse of a Soldier, a Traveller, a Prisoner, a Pilgrim, a
Beggar, and in some small measure a poor Scholar.

5
My labor has been for to travel much,
To search the secrets on this Orb of earth,
But yet, alas, my sorrows they were such
In Lethe's ditoh, that I have, lost my breath:
For nothing find I but the rolling stone,
That had no moss, nor none will grow upon.
5 This ditch or flood of Lethe, is the ditch or flood of all forgetfulness:
which made me forget my sorrows so quickly. The stone of Sisiphus is always
turning, yet never gets any thing unless it be filth, but is still barer and
barer, and so am I.

6
A Scholar once I did desire to be
In learning lore I took a great delight,
But ere the virtue, therein I could see
The States to me bore such a deadly spite,
Before my portion I could half possess,
They took it from me, left me motherlesse.
6 My mother died ere I came to any perfection in learning, which was my
undoing.

7
Then being young and fresh in youthful years,
My mind so green with every wave was tossed
Which to repent I do with many tears,
To see how fondly I my time then lost,
And eke how vainly I my time did spend,
And never thought, how want would come in the end.
7 I thought of no want, when I went first to the wars, which now makes me
come home by weeping cross, more is my sorrow.

8
For nothing then would relish with my taste,
But what was got in great Bellona's wars
Instead of Pen, with Pike my time I waste,
Still searching out where Mars did keep his jars
Til means and friends and hopes and all were gone
Then old and maimed I returned home.
8 He that puts the hazard of his fortunes being young, to the hope of friends
comfort being old, is more like to die a beggar in contempt, then at his death
to give a dole to the poor to gain him commendation.

9
Where that I hoped, I should justly find
True recompense for loss of means, and blood,
Since for my Nation I have been so kind,
To venture life and limb for Countries good,
But I instead of love and courtesy
Received loss, pain, grief and misery.
9 Here I end my Exordium.

10
But to begin my catalogue of woe,
And of the sorrows I have undergone,
And of my service done against my fo,
Of all the passage, you shall hear anon,
Tho simply done, pardon my want of skill,
It is the truth accept it for good will.
10 And begin my catalogue.

11
It is no Poem nor no Pamphlet rude,
The one I cannot learning I do want,
And into Pamphlets I durst nere intrude,
Nor thrust my self, because my brain's to scant,
To flourish up as Poets can do well,
Such dainty phrases I could never tell.
11 I am no Poet, nor am I a Pamphlet-maker, I want learning for the one, and
cunning practice and curious phrases for the other.

12
Yet Rural like the truth I will set forth,
Poor as it is, made by as poor a man,
And may be holden of as little worth,
Because a Soldier seems time to scan:
Into a verse to show the spite of fate,
Which he has bought at too too dear a rate.
12 Though it be not a work of Pean, I am sure it is not of Pan, for he was a
rich shepherd, and I am a poor soldier, and this is mine own work truly,
though never so homely.

13
For first of all a friend that was me near,
Entreated me whom I could not deny,
In Ireland in Arms for to appear
In complete course my loyalty to try:
In the behalf of that same noble Queen,
Whose like (I think) on earth was never seen.
13 The first service that ever I was in, was in Ireland, at a place called the
Curlewes, being then the great O-neile his Country, where was one of the worst
days that the English had in Ireland: for there was lost Sir Coniers Clifford
then Colonel, a noble Commander, Sir Alexander Radcliffe Lieutenant Colonel,
and brave Sir James Harrington, all of high birth and very noble, with a world
of English more, to the great grief of the Queen: There I staid still, and
served in diverse parts after, as at Dungannon where was good service, at the
Isle of Muck, wherein going on was drowned Sir Samuel Bagnall his Ancient,
which made many prognosticate worse success then fell out, also at Kinsale,
where was a lamentable sore Leager, and a long, but a happy for us in the end.

14
For when my hopes in learning it was lost,
I then took arms as holding it the best,
Since Fortune had my towardness so crossed,
I thought I could not be no better blessed
Then for my Queen and honored country fight,
For to maintain their true and lawful right.
15
Though I but one, yet one must needs begin
A number that is number numberless,
Then a soldier needly must come in,
To make the number be it more or less
(For why) I played a soldiers faithful part,
I did my best both with my hand and heart.
16
But after that a hard time I had been,
A soldier there my Queen being dead and gone
I got reward a shot may yet be seen,
And that was all and then away did come
Home into England to my Friends again,
Who did disdain my service, love and pain.
16 At the Queens death I came into England with a sore shot, not whole, yet
as welcome to my friends, as the poor Mariner makes water into his ship,
especially my stepmother.

17
And bad me go once more another Voyage,
And see if that I could find any worse,
For my own Father dear swore in his rage
The day that I was born, that he would curse
And rather wish me in untimely grave,
Then I one hour, a future life should have.
18
When I poor soul, had done nothing at all
But what was just and honorable both,
And for defending the State general,
The best I could my mind being very loath
To do that thing, might not me well beseem,
In the defense of Country and my Queen.
19
Which when I saw my Friends obdurity,
And that my entertainment it was such
And saw nothing but present misery
And that for love, my Friends hate me so much
A wished that ere, I might here live in scorn,
That I might die, where I was never born.
20
Then did I crave a Soldier pressed to be,
Which was well liked by the better sort
And did commend my love and duty free
And to this day I have their good report
That I would go unto the wars again,
To venture life, ere live with Friends disdain.
20 After this new supplies went for Ireland, I was pressed to go again, not much
unwillingly, seeing the refractory and harsh dealing of my dearest friends, for
as the old saying is, In prosperity a friend is easily found, but in adversity
not one of a thousand, so has it been with me, for ever when I came into
England with a full purse, the dearest and nearest Friends I had, would help
me to spend it and make it empty, but when I came home poor, I was not for
their company.

21
Which I did do, and then did much endure
A second time in Ireland again
And further means I never could procure,
Save that I got my labor for my pain.
For when Sir Carry Dougherthy was dead,
I came to England forced to beg my bread.
21 I served in Ireland until the last Rebellion in Loughfoyle, beginning at
the Diry by Sir Carry Dougherthy, in which time I served under the command of
Sir Oliver Saint John, after Lord Deputy, also Sir Edward York, Sir Richard
Hansard, Captain George Malary, and Sir George Flower.

22
Where that I found such simple courtesy,
As caused me again to leave the land,
And then I travaild into Italy,
When noble Payton did our Force command,
Under the Signior and Venetian State,
Where I bought wit at such an extreme rate.
22 After my second time coming from Ireland, I found such poor respect of my
friends that I traveled into Italy, and served under the English Regiment at
Venice, Sir Henry Payton being General, my Captain was Billingsley.

23
As that I did, beside, my loss of blood,
Endure the hard and cruel slavery
Even of the Turks where I found nothing good,
But all I got, was stripes and misery:
But God in mercy, after a time was pleased*
I from the Turkish slavery was eased.
23 But going an unfortunate Voyage to Sea for desire of gain, I got instead a
world of pain being taken prisoner by the Turks, where I remained a slave a
long time, but by Gods providence (beyond expectation of any humane reason, I
was by the help of the Christians, released, to wit, a man of Florence, who
brought me to Ligorne, a dainty Haven Town seated to the Sea upon the foot of
the River Arno; which runs up from thence to the rare and goodly City Florence,
but rather I may say the River Arno runs from Florence to Ligorne, being about
fifty miles.

24
And did return to Florence City fair,
Where now again I came to Italy,
And was ore-joy'd to see that City rare,
In my conceit the prime of Lombardie.
Tho many praise some other Cities more,
Yet do I think they are mistaken sore.
24 The saying is that Italy is the ganden of the World, and that Lombardy is
the garden of Italy, and Florence, the garden of Lombardy, which indeed it is,
for it is curious for building, delicatly seated, and very bravely peopled and
full of plenty, it has in it a very stately Grand Dome, or Church all of pure
checker work white and black Marble corner wise set, there is a great and
massy ball of beaten gold on the top of the high Steeple.

25
Tho Venice it be rich, and Genoa proud,
Padua be learned, and Belogna brave,
And mighty Rome for spaciousness abow'd,
Dainby, Verona, yet none of these you have:
So Dainby fair, a curious seat to see,
As Florence is within all Italy.
25 After I left Florence, I was at diverse curious Cities of mavelous beauty,
of which I have named some, especially Genoa, where the Marquess Spinola had a
curious house. Genoa exceeds for high building any place that ever I saw. Padua
is a dainty Academy, especially for Physic, and so is Mantua, Verona a very
fine City, as also Bellogna, Brussia, Bargamore, and many others, Rome me
thought was but a ragged great thing, and not very beautiful, the chiefest
things of note is the Bridge of Tyber, and Saint Angeloes, the Pyramides, the
Popes Palace and his gilded gate, with the great and Metropolitan Church of
Saint Peter: as also I must remember their Panthaon, which was the Temple of
the old Roman gods, which is a mighty thing built round either for fear their
gods should fall by the ears for prerogative Royal, as indeed it was, or else
for fear they should run out at the West end of the Church like stout gods,
and turn cowards.

26
But leaving Italy, thus after I
Had bin from England almost twice five years,
I past the Alps, those mighty Mountains high
Where I did weep more drops of brinish tears,
Then I got water for to drink that time,
Saving cold snow to slake the thirst was mine.
26 I came out of Italy over the Alps in winter, where I was not perished so
much with cold, but hungry, also being sixteen days without a bit of bread,
coming Hanibals way when their was no Convoy, upon which I made the following
Fiction.

27
Yet for my thirst it was not so extreme,
But that I could have undergone the same,
But for vilde hunger, I could find no mean,
It was so grievous and so much to blame,
That I was glad to satisfy his force
By eating bark from tree, and that was worse.
28
For I was glad passing that desert way,
Which Hanibal (they say) for's Army made
Weary by night, and traveling by day,
Where many a filthy root my taste assayed,
Before I came unto the Silvian Wood,
Where comfort none I found, nor nothing good.
29
Betwixt these mountains and these desert woods,
Me thought I heard a hollow sounding voice,
Come from the crags whereas poor silly shrubs
Do grow secure, there did I hear this noise:
Even as an echo sounding forth to me,
His name, his nature, and his quality.
30
Which when I heard, my senses was amazed
'Twixt hope and fear, (I stood) as one half dead
To hear a voice out from those rocks so raised,
To cry to me, and ask me for some bread:
When I poor man, had nothing for to eat,
Tears for my drink, and sorrow for my meat.
31
Alas (quoth I) my sorrow is too much,
And thou art hunger, I do know thee well,
I do not love companions to have such,
Nay, stay (quoth he) a tale I must thee tell:
How once in plenty thou did make no spare
Now have thou hunger, naught else for thy share.
A Speech made by the great King Hunger.
32
AM not I Hunger and of force will be,
The great Commander of each Monarchy,
When Pride does come, with riches in his hand,
Thinking my power he can perforce withstand
What is my plot, to bring him down to bow
And beck to me, (o) I shall tell thee how.
Envy I send, and sweet Ambition both
To pride and riches which are very loath
To part with either, until they have brought,
Both pride and riches and themselves to naught
By mortal war, or by such vain desires
As Envy, Pride, Ambition still requires
Then do I laugh to see their bravery
Brought down so low, as subject be to me
And being subject brought unto my thrall,
Their life is hateful, death is best of all.
For tho a mean, in all extremes there be,
Yet their no mean, nor mercy found in me
For I am hunger, and so extreme strong,
I Will make the wife to do her husband wrong.
Nay, I am hunger, and do prick so deep,
I Will make the strongest heart on earth to weep:
I Will make the naked man run as he were mad,
To beg a crust, and of the same be glad
To feed me hunger poor King that I am,
And think himself more then a happy man.
Nay, I command a strong beleagred Citiy,
And of their sorrows I do take no pity
When fire and sword and all the wrath of man,
Cannot them conquer, if I come I can
Nay, I can make them with old Me^iana weep,
And force them search even in the donghill
To find a Maggot if she be not their,
To eat their children and to make good cheer, deep,
And tyranny even such as this I do,
Yet thou vilde pride that puts me thereunto,
For if thou pride, with riches would assent
To give the poor, poor natures poor content,
And keep thy self from foul ambitious hate,
And be content and gripe no more estate,
But help the poor, and hurt him not at all
And come not in, base envies filthy thrall
Which ruins kingdoms much more may do thee
Although thou live in great security,
And when I hunger, knocks, and lets thee see
How that the poor is hunger-starved by me,
If thou would help them with thy poorest crumbs
That from the dainties of thy table comes.
What need I plead upon this woeful stage,
But that it is a more then Iron-age,
For pity mercy, and all love is fled,
But pride and envy never will be dead,
Until I ceaze upon their bodies brave,
Then do I bring envy and pride to grave.
Am not I King the strongest then on earth,
Save only he which gives all vital breath?
Which being said this (Hunge) voice was gone,
Yet I was left with hunger all alone.
The end of this Fiction.


33
Now after nineteen days were quite ore past,
Those desert Hills and Woods I left them all,
And unto Basil I did come at last,
And then with, the Rhine toward Germany did fall:
And shortly came to Strasburgh City brave,
Where loving entertainment that I have.
33 The first Town of note I came to on this side the Alps was Basil, being
seated very high on the Rhine.

34
For there I found an English Gentleman,
One Middleton a Corporal there was he,
Who does not spare, to do the best he can
In any kind, then for to comfort me.
For to a Gest-house he me present sent,
Where that I found good Christian like content.
34 Here at Strasburgh, I had kind entertainment, by the means of Master
Middleton: I lay there in the Gest-house being a very dainty stove to be in:
reasonable good meat and wine, with curious good lodging, where I lay five days.

35
Here did I stay five days my self to ease
And went to view the Churches fabrique fair,
And there I saw, the eye of man to please,
The Sun and Moon, and Heavens by motion rare,
How each from other does pass and impart
Strange for to see, all wrought by curious art.
35 Here in this Church is this work of wonder, for by motion you may see how
the whole Orb moves, also how the Sun and Moon passes the Heavens, as
also the four age of man, as infancy, youth, strength, and old ages, as also
the four quarters of the year, as Spring, Summer, Harvest, and Winter,
passing by motion with the four quarters of the hour, and then when the
Clock strikes, the brazen Cock crows and claps his wings.

36
Besides the crowing of a brazen Cock,
With dainty voice both audible and shrill,
Once in an hour by motion as a Clock,
And other wonders of exceeding skill,
Beside the Steeple, being called they say,
A wonder of the World as well it may.
36 For this Steeple it is builded eight square, exceeding high, all arches one
upon another, so that which way soever you pass you may see quite through it,
and for the curious workmanship to be in such a stone, I think the like is not
to be seen.

37
For though the Church of Florence builded be
Of checker-work, and Diamond wise to view,
Also the steeple curious work to see,
Graced with a ball of beaten gold so true:
Yet it is not like to Strasburgh steeple fair,
Nor for the building, it is not half so rare.
38
For that it is of such exceeding height,
Arch bound most dainty to spectators view,
Arch upon Arch by perfect art and slight,
He that nere saw it, scant will think it true,
That such a work within the World were wrought,
By mortal man, since man was made of naught.
39
Here did I see brought in by Burgers two
A man (they said) was called the wandering Jew
But I with him, had naught at all to do,
So that for me, he may be false or true,
For what he was as then I did not care,
My mind was more, my supper not to spare.
39 Here I saw this old Pilgrim, who Master Middleton told me was noted to be
the wandering Jew: but for my part I did take no great regard of him more then I
have writ.

40
A black tall man of stature that he was,
With visage stern, his color pale and wan,
And Pilgrim he both up and down did pass,
Within the town where I did see him than,
Groans, sighs and sobs, I hard him often give,
But what of him (they said) I scarce believe.
41
This town environed with the noble Rhine,
Governed by States within themselves all free
And guarded strong by soldiers brave and fine,
Stout men of body as a man shall see,
Courteous and kind, to strangers that they be
This can I say, for they were so to me.
41 This town of Strasburgh is a free State of it self, environed by the River
Rhine a very strong thing, and a brave Garrison of soldiers in it well
maintained: when I was there they wore red velvet Cassocks with the Flower
Deluce in blue cloth, and edged with silver very comely.

42
So now to Savrine that I take my way,
And through a desert and a mighty Wood,
Unto Panspoyce, but there I could not stay,
For there I found not any thing was good,
But harbor cold, and courtefie so much
I do not care, how seldom I have such.
42 I came by many other places I cannot name, also it is needless.

43
Then did I come to the Duke of Lorains land
And to the dainty City of Nancie,
Dainty it is and sweetly it does stand
For air most sweet and good commodity
For Corn and Cattle, Wood, and water fair,
It has enough and can to others spare.
43 If this City of Nancie be not of late ruinated, it is as fine a little
sweet thing as ever a man can see on earth for all outward blessings natural
for man's content: a little before I came to it, I was at a great Monastery
where was many English Jesuits, and other Priests called Saint Nicholai.

44
So now by Tow and Fow, Tholas, and Bar,
I pass my way, with cold and hunger both,
And tho indeed I come my Country war
To help my need, there is few, or none that does
Unless poor man I got a bit of bread
Which few would give for to relieve my need.
45
So on I came unto the Champion Plain,
Where fourteen days I travailed with woe,
For nothing had I, all within the same,
But what the Cloisters help me then unto
Some meat and drink, and harbor poor I had,
Tho it was poor, yet of it I was glad.
45 This Champion Country is a very scant Country for fire, but very rich of
Corn especially, also there is pretty good store of hard wine to keep out the
cold.

46
For winter it was cold, and I was poor,
My clothing thin, and barefoot then I was,
And all my limbs was numbed and grown so sore,
That ten miles on a day I could not pass,
Yet in the end I came to Paris City,
Where I did find some comfort, love and pity.
46 I will speak nothing of these parts of France, being all in Picardy and
Normandy, which every one almost knows they are so near hand.

47
So then to Roane where Merchants kind I found,
And then to Deep a dainty Haven town
Where I got shipping for our English ground,
And came to Dover poor and eke unknown,
But yet I had the Gest-house courtesy,
John Bangor then was in the Majoraltie.
47 John Bangor was Major, when I landed at Dover.

48
From him a Pass to London that I had,
Being both poor, lame and in misery,
Where when I came my heart indeed was glad,
For there I got good clothes even presently:
For that some moneys fell unto my lot,
That former sorrows they were all for^ot.
49
Then news was come of the Bohemian wars.
For which my mind was presently so bent
That I would see, how there would go the jars,
And did indeed, for thither that I went
With noble Gray and many worthy men,
Who did not come again not one of ten.
49 I went into Bohemia with Sir Andrew Gray being General we were not there
long before all was lost, yet for the time there was some sharp doings and
much loss.

50
For tho indeed the service it was short,
Because at first the hopes was very poor,
Yet Pilsen it can tell there was brave sport,
When all the ground with blood was turned gore,
And Prague can say and other parts indeed,
That in these wars many a brave heart did bleed.
51
Thus when I saw the hopes was poor and bare,
No staying then at all, there was for me
For nothing saw I fall unto my share,
But service hard with want and misery:
Away I came to the Palatinate,
And for my welcome there a shot I got.
52
There was in service to defend the land
Of Englishmen so brave a Regiment,
Whom noble Vere, as General did command
The like I never saw where ere I went.
For of a hundred scarce you could find ten,
But by their birth, or worth were Gentlemen.
53
Oxford and Essex noble Earls were there,
And many Gallants under their command,
Brave Rich and Wentworth and Burlassie were
With Colors flying, fair in field did stand
That noble Buroughs, and brave Herbert too,
Fairfax and Wilmot all their best to do.
53 Never went a more noble company of voluntary soldiers out of England, then
went to this Voyage of the Palatinate, and had worse success.

54
Knowls and kind Thornix they were not behind
With many Gallants here to try their luck,
And many mo, who was of noble mind,
Even as Bonithon and brave Captain Buck:
Who came to look for honor in the field,
For to the fo, that they would never yield.
55
Once here we had, hope of a noble day,
And was prepared with the Fo to fight,
When noble Oxford led our Vangard way
Having the Fo before us in our sight,
Thinking none other but without all doubt,
To end that war by then to fight it out.
55 This was the day that the Palatinate was lost, for if we had gone on, we
had such vantage, every way, especially in horse, as also our soldiers very
able, and as forward to go upon service, we had good store of Canon and all
mounted, our horse had given fire to the enemy, we had all things just in
readiness for the Battle: then Marquess Baden being General of the Field
betrayed the Country, and would not let us fight that night, so in the morning
the enemy was fled and got his trenches, and so we lost all.

56
Our forlorn hopes were ready, all drawn forth
And Doctor Burgess gave brave encouragement
To all our soldiers, who was of that worth
That all was ready, and to battle bent,
But Marquess Baden all our hopes then bard,
And all our pastime for that day was mard.
57
For after that our Canon mounted was
Fair for to play against the enemy,
Also our horse fallen on: like hearts of brass,
To show their valor and fidelity:
And we were ready, both with heart and hand
To fight our parts, as long as we could stand.
58
But present tidings came we should not fight,
But every man his quarter fair should keep
Because it grew, even some what to ward night,
Which made the heart of many a soldier weep:
To see how basely that same day was lost,
Which did indeed the Palsgraves Country cost.
59
For that same night, our fo their trenches got,
Which was more safe then any Castle strong,
Not caring then what we could do a jot,
And in the same they did remain so long:
Till that they had even so increased their force,
That they were able to give us the worse.
60
For winter coming, and our force grew weak,
Our fare being hard, and eke our payment bad,
Our Captains then, with us did all betake,
To several towns, and of the same were glad:
And there we did in Garrison remain,
Till we were forced to yield them up again.
61
But not with ease, this dare I tell you plain,
Nor with the loss of small or little blood,
But with hard war they did the Country gain,
With woeful spoil, and but with little good:
Town after town, when they were very poor,
For until then, we would not give them ore.
62
For there we kept unto Commission came
From Englands King unto our General,
And Chichester that Lord brought him the same,
With Frankindale we should deliver all:
Then we with honor marched quite away,
For in the country, there we might not stay.
62 After that most, nay, indeed all the Palatinate was lost both higher and
lower, yet my Lord kept Frankindale till my Lord of Chichester brought
Commission from King James, to deliver it up by way of composition.

63
Then every man had leave for to depart,
Unto his Country or where liked him best,
Being glad to march with poor and heavy heart,
To find some place where he might take his rest,
But many a man, this can I truly say
Did lose his life, in coming thence away.
64
But God above, did then preserve me so
That I got down along the noble Rhine,
And did me keep even from the mortal Fo,
That not one hurt I got in that same time,
But safely came to Utrich where indeed
I did get means for to relieve my need.
64 I got down the Rhine and came to Vtrich in the Netherlands, where I served
Sir Ferdinando Knightley until I came for England, to go over with the four
Regiments.

65
And here I stayed under the States a while,
Being under pay, of noble Knightley he
Thinking the best, and time so to beguile
Till he thought good, his Pass to give to me,
Then did I come to Englands shore again,
But here I staid not long for to be plain.
66
For that four noble Peers were ready bent
In foreign parts, their valor for to try,
And each of them a warlike Regiment,
Being men of courage and of spirits high,
Oxford and Essex, and Southampton three,
The fourth of these was noble Willoughby.
66 These four Peers had each a Regiment that went over at the first time
Breda was beleagred and won by the Enemy, and where (more was the pity) the
Lord Henry Earl of Oxford, with overheating himself at Treheyes Sconce, got
such a vehement surfeit, that at the Hage in short time after he died: as also
did the Earl of Southampton, and the young and noble Lord Wriothesley his
son, to the great grief of all the whole Regiments. At this Voyage I got a
shot in my head, and then I came for England.

67
These Nobles had Captains of high degree
To follow them, being men of high renown,
And each of them a worthy company,
Of soldiers stout, and of brave courage known:
But yet indeed this Voyage was not the best,
Two of the Earls did die besides the rest.
68
That in this great exploit did hope for gains,
And went with these same Lords their worths to try,
But had no more, but death even for their pains
As it did prove, and with them then went I,
But yet I came a Fool as I did go,
With one shot mo, that I got from the Fo.
69
Then presently a press was new prepared,
For noble Mansfield, dainty Voyage was that
As ever was in any age yet heard:
For hunger and extremes, I Will tell you what,
Yet can I scarcely now the same rehearse
(For why) I shame to put it in my verse.
69 This Voyage of Mansfields was the poorest that ever soldiers made, for if
they had lost their lives in service and fair fight, it had redownded to their
honor, but dying so basely as they did, being starved, was such a poor
proceeding as has not bin hard of.

70
It was so poor and bad and base withal,
That he declared I cannot well tell how,
For noble Mansfield so I will him call,
Was in no fault, this dare I swear and vow:
He did his best, his soldiers to maintain,
And honor to himself and them to gain.
71
For many went in this disastrous Voyage,
Brave noble hearts, and valor truly tried,
As noble Cromwell, Dutton, wise and sage,
That honored Ramsey, and gallant Rich beside,
And Sir Ralph Hopton that same noble Knight
Whose worth is more then I can write of right.
72
For when some others left their soldiers poor,
Those that were his, and left to hungervild,
He did not leave them, nor did give them ore,
But like a faithful Captain meek and mild:
Did them relieve, and left them safe and sound,
Though that it cost him many a hundred pound.
73
Now do I think I hear the vulgar cry,
That at this Voyage some fault, for sure there was,
(Else) with vild hunger, why did so many die
Upon shipboard, and not to land did pass:
The soldiers fault that was so bad at home,
The States would not, let them on their land come.
73 Now by the censure of the common and vulgar sort Count Mansfield was much
blamed, but altogether unjustly and unworthily, for he was a very noble
Gentleman and of a high spirit* stout and very courageous, wise and gentle, and
expert in the wars, he was ever loving to an honest soldier, but hated a
sharke, he had too many in this Press, more was the pity, for it killed his
noble, heart, when he was cut off from landing them, for (indeed) the fault
was neither his, nor any of the Commanders then appointed for that service, for
they were very noble Gentlemen: but the mayn cause of this much loss on
shipboard, was the very rogery and inhumane carriage of the vulgar pressed
soldiers, which made such spoil in all places of England as they went,
especially in Kent: that the tidings came both to the ears of the French King,
as also to the States: who hearing what hurt and inhumane parts they played in
their own Country: being a Kingdom of a commendable and civil government,
thought they would make havoc in theirs, where wars is kept a foot: therefore
to prevent a greater mischief, they would not a mit them to come to shore, and
this their own base carriage brought their own ruins: and this was the maine
cause of so much loss on shipboard.

74
O Getheringbarch, what woeful work was there,
When overboard so many men were thrown
That every morn, the water did appear,
With dead men's corpse for to be overflown!
O soldiers then, beware, take heed by this
In your own Country never do amiss.
74 Nothing can be more hateful to GOD, then for a soldier who is commanded
to fight for the truth of the Gospel, and for his King and Country to be a
traitor and enemy to it, and by any color or pretense to wrong the inhabitants
of his own Nation: as God knows too many of these soldiers did was then
pressed, therefore God showed his judgemen^ upon them.

75
But strive to do your King and Country good,
And not the Kingdom harm before you go,
For if you do, you sure will lose your blood,
If not thus basely, yet before your fo,
You shall have shame and with disgrace shall die,
For God is just, and justly will you try.
76
Then soldiers all bear you an honest mind,
And being pressed take hearts of valor then,
And to your Country, ere be true and kind,
And with your fo, be sure to fight like men,
So shall you gain credit and comfort brave,
And to your Country much more welcome have.
76 Nothing in a soldier is more honorable then to be well conditioned and
true to his Country.

77
Then after this another Voyage, I went
To Cadiz fair where Sack did make such spoil,
That soldiers had their wits therewith so spent,
That then with shame, the fo gave us the foil:
Besides commission it was counted bad,
And said the worst, that ere General had.
77 This Voyage is too well known, therefore I will say no more of it: but that I
went from Hull with Sir William Courtney, I had as good have had staid at home.

78
But what it was, I cannot truly tell
But by report, and fame may tell a lie,
For with edge-tools, I do not love to mell,
For they will cut, therefore I Will let them lie,
But how it was, I cannot truly say,
Many were glad they came so well away.
79
But presently we had another Press
Where I was sent into the North Country,
And did receive three hundred men no less,
All able men, as any man might see,
Where that indeed, I then Conductor was,
And brought them safe to Hull where they did pass.
79 This Voyage I went also from Hull with Captain Francis Conisby to the Long
Line, to General Morgan, then for Stoad Leager, but presently I came back.

80
Over the Seas with all the Northern men,
To Denmark's Voyage, and to the Leager poor
Which was at Stoad, but I with them as then
There did not stay but presently came ore,
Even from Long Line, where noble Conisby
Did send me back with Sir John Burlassie.
81
Now here I must the Muses summon all
With trumpets sound, chiefly Melpomene,
To aid me here, and show the heavy fall
Even of such Worthies as I dare well say
Will vex great Mars within his Court to find,
So many Worthies of so noble mind.
81 This I Will of Ree Voyage was not so poor as pitiful by reason of so great a
loss of noble Soldiers and great Commanders: the passages of it is too well
known, therefore I will say no more of it.

82
As here was lost, woe to that fatal chance,
And woe unto that more then dismal day,
That England had that overthrow by France,
Which makes the French for to presume and say,
From Englands yoke that they have eased their neck,
And brought brave England for to bow and beck.
83
As Well as they had formerly been kept
Under command of Englands Royal Kings,
Now that obedience they away have swept,
And of Heroic victory now sings
Having their green died with our Crimson gore,
Of noble blood, whose loss we may deplore.
84
But out (alas) what does the Frenchmen say,
And as the Spaniard; nay, the Bo^ish Dutch
Lay Sack enough but in the English way,
They need no fo, their valor is so much
The'le kill each other in their drunken fits,
For Bacchus is their god, and spoils their wits.
84 It is an ordinary brag of the Spaniard to give out: that throw but a Butt
of Sack in the way of the English, and with their own help killing one another
being drunk, will do more hurt in an English Army, then a thousand Spaniards
can do in Arms.

85
For Mars is banished quite, and valor to,
Unless it be in some brave minded men
Which are so few, alas what can they do,
When in a hundred scarce you shall find ten,
That ere is pressed but they are bred so base,
That they have, neither valor, truth nor grace.
85 And the Dutch braggeth that they have changed trades with the English, for
we have learned them to fight, and they us to drink, or else we have taken the
trade up at our own hands, never being any apprentices to the same, yet free,
without any order of L^w: So now we English are the drinkers, and the drunken
Dutchmen brave soldiers, more is the pity.

86
For any slave, if he be nere so bad,
Is holden good enough to serve the King,
Nay, any thief, whence ere he can be had
Which does good soldiers often to ruin bring,
For when they should do service as they ought,
Pressed to be gone, they are then to be sought.
87
Which makes brave hearts come often by weeping cross,
And lofe their lives by such disasters base,
Which might have honor, but comes home with loss,
Both of their lives, and with most vild disgrace
And then these slaves to England will come ore.
Saw nere the fo, yet beg for soldiers poor.
88
And tell you tales how Cannons they do rore,
And how great Mars his trumpet brave does found,
And how they are lamed and made exceeding poor
By that hard war, in which they nere were found,
But run away before it did begin,
To beg or steal, their former course of sin.
89
But why do I use this prolixity,
To speak of that which I can never mend?
Yet pray I will, and that most heartily,
That God and King would better soldiers send
Against the foes of his blessed royal blood,
For until then, that we shall nere do good.
90
Yet still me thinks the trumpets sound amayn,
Woe and alas, when shall I ever see
Such noble hearts tread English earth again,
As now was lost in this same I Will of Ree,
Rue we may call, and rue we may that day,
The Duke did find, ore Neptunes flood the way.
90 Gentle Reader give me leave this by the way to let thee understand, that at
our first going on, we had good sport, and very noble service, and bravely
performed, and with great credit to the Lord General the Duke: And tho at our
coming off we had the worse, yet the French for all their braging need not so
much boast of their gains or noble victory, for first and last they lost a
world of fine fellows: But indeed it was Gods providence, and foreseeing
determination. That we should know we were all at his disposing, and not as
some scandalous and filthy reproachful tongues did use to give out to the
derogation of the noble Dukes honor being the General all which for as far
forth (as I for my part) could ever discern, was altogether unjust, for never
could any General carry himself more lovingly to all his soldiers, then he
did not only to the Commanders and Officers, but even to the poorest
Sentinels, and none that was a soldier of worth and quality, will (I think) or
can justly say but he was truly noble, of a very amiable and loving disposition
to all that had any suit unto him. Some foul tongues ^ave out that at the
retreat and coming off that my Lord Duke was then on shipboard, but I am sure,
when it was dark night he was in the field, and brought to the Bridge a good
quantity both of shot and powder: For as he was of an amiable condition, so
was he of a stout and courageous spirit, ever forward to further an honest and
good soldier in his suite, but a coward or a man of a preposterous or foul
carriage he could never abide; but never man yet lived or died without enemies
(especially one so eminent) no more did he, much more was the pity.

91
Brave Rich and Burrows you there lost your breath,
And so did Bret and Bingley both beside,
And Radcliffe sweet, my Captain turned to earth,
Brave Coningam, whose fame yet never di'd,
Heidon and Blundell both two noble Knights.
With York and Thornix took their last good nights.
92
With many mo brave Captains of great fame,
Which lost their lives, and bodies turned to dust,
Whom I for we cannot but weep to name,
Why say I so, for to them that I must?
For sure I am, all flesh was born to die,
As was these Gallants most unhappily.
93
For formerly no age has ever known,
That Englishmen received such vile disgrace,
Nor Chronicle past memory has shown,
That bragging France did England so debase,
As it did then within this paultry I Will,
So many Worthies of their lives beguile.
94
Mars did envy against great Neptunes flood,
Great Neptune he was vexed at Mars again,
To see that I Will drowned with our English blood,
Which water had enough about the same:
But now their pits are filled with purple gore,
As they were filled with saltish brine before.
95
But for to leave this more then hapless place,
And those sweet souls in bliss that did therein,
For tho their bodies be interred so base,
Yet do their souls a Halleluia sing
Unto Jehovah the blessed God above,
Who often does visit whom he best does love.
96
But I poor man amongst all these worthy dead,
Did escape alive and came to English shore,
Being in my travel forced to beg my bread,
With woeful wounds which was both green and sore,
Until to London that at length I came
Where I poor man, a long time did lie lame.
97
But when I was recovered of the same,
Unto the Belgic States that I went ore,
And there indeed I did take arms again,
To see what Fortune would befall me more:
Thinking far better there to live in pay,
Then for to burden England any way.
98
But yet (alas) I had not there been long
Till Mastrick Leager fell out very sore
And cruel fate again did me that wrong,
That yet a shot unto my share fell more.
Beside I lost my noble Colonel good,
Stout and devout as on the earth ere stood.
98 Here at Mastrick I got another shot for my reward, and that was all the
preferment that fell to my share.

99
So I poor soul, being then disabled quite,
Was forced to take the Gesthouse courtesy,
Where comfortless and without all delight,
I did remayn in pain and misery:
Until poorly, recovered that I was,
Then left I arms and did to England pass.
100
For after that my limbs I got again,
I to my Country, then did make repair,
Where for my service, travel, loss, and pain,
I did request some pension for my share:
For I had served thirty years and more,
In constant service, never gave it ore.
101
For which poor I must need^ constrained be,
To end my days like to an Anchorist,
And with what means the Gentry will give me,
Content my self until I take my rest,
In earth's wide womb where I must rot to dust,
God grant my soul it may live with the just.
Now arms farewell, brave soldiers all adieu,
I was a soldier, but I am none now.
Yet is my heart to soldiers ever true,
For I to Mars have made a constant vow:
That I will be a servant to him still,
In what I can his service to fulfill.
For though I cannot do King, nor Country good,
Yet I a soldier from henceforth will be
To Jesus Christ, who shed his precious blood,
To save that soul, immortal is in me.
Thus will I rest, in faith and hope will I
Resolved be, and never fear to die.
Thus you have heard the whole Catastrophe
Of the disasters, I have wandered through,
Of the intricate Meanders weary way,
Though it be little, yet it is enough:
And he that covets, for to have it more
Let him begin, for now will I give ore.
FINIS.



