COR CHARTE APPENSAM ROSAM VICE CERNE SIGILLI SPRETA MORE TVI SALVS ID EGIT
AMOR IHS



THE PATTERN OF ALL PIOUS PRAYER, AND The epitomie of all Christian Catholic
Belief.

Being a Patheticall and Paraphrasticall meeter upon the Pater Noster, Ave
Maria, and Credo in Deum, etc.

Together with a divine Dittie made upon St. Patricks Day last past in honor
of the Christian Cross.

WITH Wholesome preparatives for Death and Judgment

ALSO, A short Panigyre on MARY- Land in America.

AT DOWAY, Superiorum Permissu, MDCXXXVI.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND TRVLY RELIGIOUS LADY, THE LADY Vizcountesse
BALTEMORI, etc.
1
VOuchsafe Religious Lady to make choice
('Among All your Virtues) of humility,
That your poor Suppliant justly may Rejoice
In the forefront of his Apology:
To frustrate All objections by this shift,
An humble heart A'cepts the meanest guist.
2
May you Accuse me of Presumption; no
Spare that pain (Madam) it is Already done,
J have accused my Self: And you I know
To pardon faults Confessed are easily won:
Let Zoylus snarle, let Momus look asquint,
Your worth will guard the Book, And, MARK PRAYER IN'Y.
WITH THE COURTEOUS Christian Reader thus I expostulate.
COurteous Reader, should I suffer known faults to pass without craving
pardon, I might be justly accused and condemned both of Ignorance and
Presumption; which I hope thy Charity will acquit me of when thou have read
this my reasonable Apology; The way to gain Remission is Confession, And in
this I cannot rightly excuse but rather accuse my self, in that assuming a
task fit for a more sublime Intelect: I have (peradventure) marred that which
a better Workman might have made Admirable; yet if good will may supply want of
skill, I hope we shall agree well enough.

I found the Latin something difficult to Rhyme too, especially the CREED; And
therefore having preocupated curious Censures, in confessing my fault I hope
thou will excuse and connive if thou find it any thing Defective either in
meeter or the length of the lines, there being some Articles in the CREED
overlong for my intended line, And upon necessity must pass without fraction
where Rhyme may not exactly be made, without destruction of reason. Any
indifferent Reader (I trust) will favorably pass over such faults as cannot
be helped: To conclude gentle Christian, permit me a little (after confession
of immateriall Defects) to say something in praise of the Work though not of
the Workman; The subject is old, therefore it is fit to be reverenced. The
Paraphrase is new (without Ostentation be it spoken) none having ever written
in this way before, And therefore to be loved for its raritie.

VALE.
He who composed what is here in print, Mark Prayer in it.
Ad Authorem.
TO make the English answer Latin phrase
In Meeter meet shows wit that is worthy Praise,
But where the Subjects Godly; Lines exceed,
All best Wits Apprehension there indeed,
More be thy Piety, for such essays,
Praised then thy Wit to frame such Heavenly lays.
I. P.

A PARAPHRASTICALL MEETER UPON PATER NOSTER.
CHarity's the gift of gifts, if we have lost her
Who can restore her to's but -- Pater noster:
For he in all distress our only weal is
And none but thou alone -- Qui es in Coelis:
Our souls bedrencht in sin with grace renew'em
For which -- Sanctificetur nomen tuum:
Those who do err reduce, and true light shew'em
Make have O Lord, -- Ad veniat regnum tuum:
To whom the Heavenly Quier sings Alleluia
It Is fit we say; -- Fiat voluntas tua:
We wish the same either in Joy or Sorrow
It Is due -- Sicut in Coelo and in terra:
As thou made all of naught thy power mainteyn'm
With bounty -- Panem nostrum Quotidianum:
And every day to show what due we Owe thee
We earnestly do beg -- Da nobis hodic:
It Is fit we should when we do merit most; pray
Dear Lord -- Et dimitte nobis debita nostra:
On this Condition else our prayer all lost is, --
Sicut and nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris:
Though we offend in wrath do not rebuke us,
O be propitious -- Et ne nos in ducas:
When by my self in private I alone am
Permit me not Ihesu: -- Jn tentaetionem:
In Sensuality let us not wallow,
Nor fall from thee -- Sed libera nos a malo:
This in thy name Ihesu we ask, And when
All Is done, we pray that thou may say -- Amen.
Ave Maria.
Who ever hopes for help from our Messia,
Must to his mother say -- Ave Maria:
To thy Sons Court being sent for by Subpaena,
We use thy Prayer, for thou art Gratia plena:
Those Prayers none can miss that daily seek 'em;
How can we fail, knowing that Dominus tecum
The holy Angel Gabriels words were very thus,
To thee Benedicta tu in Mulieribus:
We are persuaded that thou can protect us,
For thou art high in power Et benedictus:
Wherefore by thee sweet Mediatrix sue I
Unto that blessed, Fructus ventris tui:
Sick souls, Alas, whom can w'expect to case us,
But that Maid, Mothers Son, Emanuell-Ihesus:
To get admittance at this Gate, the nigh way
Is by thy powerful aid Sancta Maria:
Virgin of Virgins, in this case to thee I
Address my self as unto Matter Dei:
All sinful Souls, that for misdeeds are sorry thus
Do say, Ora pro nobis Peccatoribus:
And let us least our part in Heaven be lost, pray
O help Nunc et in hora, Mortis nostra:
Sweet Lady we entreat thee now and then,
To pray thy Son (our Lord) to say, Amen,
Credo in Deum, etc.
IVdg'd at the high Tribunal what shall we do,
If each in Tongue and Heart, cannot say Credo:
When storms arise, he with his breath can scatter 'em
Therefore I do confide In deum Patrem:
What ere men plot against him he can prevent 'em
Whose only Epithet's, Ommiptent em:
We nothing have but what from him we borrow,
For he is, Creatorem Coeli, et Terrae:
He made all things, and to man's use he blessed 'em
I believe in him: Et in Ihesum Christum:
Sweeter to me then Honey, or th'honey Comb
Is he whom God calls, Filium ejus vnicum:
He to Redeem us, when our Souls were lost came,
Therefore we rightly call him, Dominum-nostrum:
We cannot Retribute sufficient thanks to
Him, Qui conceptus est de spiritu Sancto:
The Prophets and the Sybels wrote at large when he
Should come to be, Natus ex Maria Virgin:
Our loving Lord, tendered our wretched State so
That he, Passus sub Pontio Pilato:
And meekely he for Man that does insult thus
Was Crucifixus Mortuus et Sepultus:
And that he Victory over Hell might win for us,
Our blessed Redeemer, Decendit ad inferos:
To give possession of the Heavenly Court to us,
He tertia die resurrexit a Mortuis:
All to confirm being of our welfare Zealous,
He crowned with triumph, Ascendit ad Caelos:
In splendant Glory that most Excellent is,
Sedet ad dextram Dei patris Omnipotentis:
At the end o'th World, (as verity does report to us
Inde ventarus judicare vivos et mortuous:
God as his Elect Children all has ranckt 'em,
Who in their Hearts say, Credo in Spirit um sanctum:
Yet woe is me (alas) I in mere Folly am,
Unless I believe -- Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam:
Who takes the name of Catholic upon him,
Also believes Sanctorum Communionem:
In this true Church, I that a Sinner fore am;
May find -- Remissionem peccatorum:
And all the faithful shall have this grace shown 'em
As they believe carnis Resurrectionem.
Let Christians look to it this does most concern 'em
Which is the Crown of all Vitam eternam:
Believe one God, believe his Church, and then,
Thou may enjoy Christ promises, Amen.
A DIVINE DITTIE, Made in Honor of the Crimson Cross.
To be Sung by them who please. To the tune of, From the fair Lavinian Shore,
etc.
YOu who take delight to know
Things that were done long ago,
By our Ancient Predecessors,
And their Catholic Successors.
Lend your attention
Let noe Fancies toss,
Your minds a stray
But regard what I say
For I mean to display,
The Honor of the Crimson Cross.
He or she, who has not bin
(In the Font that cleanses sin)
Marked with this sacred sign
Give me leave though noe Divine,
To make a question.
(Though some a strange gloss
Do set on the text)
Whether they be well fixed
In this world, for the next;
Since Christians are known by the Cross.
Our blessed Lord to give us breath
And Redeem our Souls from Death,
On a Cross was Crucified
At that time he Sanctified,
This Badge of Honor,
When with his lives loss,
After much p^ine
While his blood like to Rain,
From his wounds slowed amain,
He made it a Crimson Cross.
All the Christians Primative
To advance the Cross did strive,
Glorious Martyrs Valiantly
Death and Torments did defy.
Under this Ensign
Deeming but dross,
All things beside
When for CHRIST Crucified
They courageously Dyed,
To Honor the Crimson Cross.
Bishops and Confessors Grave,
This Celestial Banner have,
Fixed in Countries, Salvage and Rude,
To CHRIST'S Cross they have subdued,
Barbarous Nations
From their errors gross,
To CHRISTIAN Faith
As Antiquity saves
Both in Life, and Death,
They Honored the Crimson Cross.
Once 'twas Englands primest Honor
Chiefly called Saint Georges Banner,
Still the tree we all retain
Though the fruit on it most disdain.
But Ancient Customs,
Preserved from loss
Though just in sight
Of Heraldryes Right
We on Land, and Sea sight,
To Honor the Crimson Cross.
It the Devil does affright,
He dares not abide in sight
Where this holy sign is made
Wherefore it may well be said,
That he and the Puritan
With his false gloss,
Are near of kin
Neither dares enter in
If I once do begin
To arm my self with the Cross.
Blessed St. Patricke who 'at the first
(As Apostle) Ireland nursed
In the Faith Apostolic
Scoft by every Heretic,
He so Devoutly
Did Virtue engrosse,
That in short time
He converted that Clime
To CHRIST'S Faith then in Prime
And Honored the Crimson Cross.
Ireland then was sore oppressed
With foul things that did infest
And the People sore annoy
Which St. Patrick did destroy,
Snakes, Toades, and Adders,
O gainefull loss,
All by his Prayer
Quite Bannished were
Never more to come there
This Honors the Crimson Cross.
To his Honor and the Chutch,
Every seaventeenth day of March
Irish men do far, and near,
Crimsen Crosses that day wear
Then let true CHRITIANS
Esteem Wealth as dross,
And in all wants
Let us move our Complaints
Unto CHRIST by his Saints
And Honor the Crimson Cross.
AMEN,
Finis. COR CHARTE APPENSAM ROSAM VICE CERNE SIGILLI SPRETA MORE TVI SALVS ID
EGIT AMOR IHS


WHOLESOME PREPARATIVES FOR DEATH AND IVDGEMENT: VERY FIT TO BE APPLIED TO the
necessity of every true Catholic CHRISTIAN at all times; But more especially
in this present time of Mortality by the Plague of Pestilence occasioned.

Statutum est hominibus semel mori: Post hoc autem Judicium.

Hebr. 9.27. Superiorum Permissu, MDCXXXVI.

TO THE CHARITABLE READER.
GReat cause I had (Christian Reader) to invite thee by this Epistle
(Charitable,) for this poor Babe of my brain begotten in charity, desires to
have charitable nutrition, charitable Censure, and chiefly Charitable
acceptance; For the tender weakeling by reason of its Parents weakness,
(should it be rigidly dealt withal) would even perish in the very blast of an
overcurious or fastidious verdict; Therefore let Charity cover what
indiscretion has left naked, and let a loving heart excuse Defects of Art;
What I have here published was done at the (powerful) solicitation of a very
good Friend of mine, or else this rude work had only been for the workmans
own use: And as it was written to anticipate worse employment; so as a
Whetstone to his devotion, It might have (and I trust will) set a sharper edge
upon the same, And consequently produce more keen and piercing effects of
Charity, Fear of GOD, Obedience to his immaculate Spouse the Holy Catholic
and Apostolic CHURCH; Reverence to his Saints, Zeal of his Honor, Fervor in
true Religion, and in all pious and laudable Exercises that a CHRISTIAN ought
to practice. Among which, nothing can be more useful and necessary at all
times, And especially in this heavy time of Mortality, Then the thought of
DEATH and IVDGEMENT: Although it be a Subject that has been written upon by
diverse Angelical quils, (To whose Judgments I humbly prostrate mine;) yet I
know that a single Penny or a halfe-penny is as good silver and as Current
coin as a Shilling: To conclude, if any Fruit spring from this simple Seed, to
him be the honor who first inspired the motion,

AMEN.
He who composed what is here in print, His name in Anagram hear's: Mark
Prayer in it,
WHOLESOME PREPARATIVES FOR DEATH AND IVDGMENT.
1.
It Is fit that every minute Night and Day,
Whilst we draw breath in this terrestiall frame
We should reflect on the uncertain stay,
Lent's here, till we return from whence we came
This being pondered as it is most fit,
Much Ghostly comfort, we may reap by it.
2.
That He, or She, Young, Old, or Middle-aged,
Whose mind continually hereon is fixed,
Shall find Robustious storms, so far assuaged
(While earthly joy's with heavenly sorrows mixed)
That with a gentle gale the Soul does glide,
Over all Passions borne by Virtues tide.
3.
No sooner Borne, but subject unto Death,
(All Mortals are indeed borne to that end)
Noe Permanent Estate here underneath,
For all must pay this Tribute in the End,
Or Young, or Old, we must (nothing so sure)
All to the Grave, no means can us secure.
4.
Methusalu the Oldest: Solomon
The Wisest: Sampson strongest man, all these
Though they had wisdom, strength, long life al'sone
Death would not set them quit paying their fees,
What ever Holy-writ has Testified
Of them in Life, be sure youl'e read they Died.
5.
Cressus his Wealth, nor Alexanders Pomp,
Nor Caesar's (rarely Imitated) Honor
Could win on Earth Eternity; nor Camp,
Nor Court, nor City, can prescribe a manner,
How to shun this inevitable Doom,
All men must Dye, and then to Judgment come.
6.
As it is certain that we all must Dye,
(Since divine Statutes are Irrevocable,)
So that we may't expect continually
To know the time, we Mortals are unable;
Therefore we should from'th hour we first draw breath
Look for this certain, yet uncertain Death.
7.
That certain Doctrine of Gamaliels Scholar,
Statutum est hominibus semel mori,
Which is the Godly's joy, the Wicked's dolor,
The Prouds confusion, and the Humbles glory,
Is the elected theme of my Discourse,
In careless Christians to procure remorse.
8.
Yet least the only certainty of Death,
Should not be weyed, as Justice does require
Post hoc autem Judicium: After Death,
Some Judged to Bliss, some to Eternal Fire:
Me thinks the memory of these two points
Should (Palsie-like) shake proud Belshazers joints.
9.
Though it be true a Christian rather ought,
For the only love of God live Virtuously
If in our Hearts we still retain this thought
O Blessed Ihesu, thou for Sin did Dye;
And shall I wretch reitterate the same
Which caused thy cruel scourging Death, and shame.
10.
But yet alas, vilde Man is so propence
T'ingratitude, and Epicurian sloth
Does so consopiate and dull his sense
Him to awake, Mercy and Judgment both
(Being jointly used) do all too little seem,
Of God and Goodness, to win his Esteem.
11.
Indeed a tender hearted Man, or Woman,
That curiously in Pious Contemplation
Shall with Devotion daily call and Summon,
Within the Breast to scan our Saviors Passion:
May find most Charitable motives still,
As spurs to Good, as Bridles to all Ill.
12.
To such as these the memory of Death,
And after Judgment: Are both comfortable,
They knowing that this momentary Breath,
Does but detain them in a Life instable
Which having once forsaken, they are sure,
T'injoy a Life that ever shall endure.
13.
Yea to both Good, and Bad Memento mori,
is a most profitable Document
In all Discourse, and Concourse it is a story
Fit to be told, and heard, for most are bent
Unto forgetfulness; Nay, many strive,
The memory of Death away to drive.
14.
Tell a young Royster, of his vicious ways,
And bid him mend his life, (which is but short)
With a fastidious pish, he smiles and says
Forty years hence is time sufficient for it,
And yet too many of these Youngsters come,
By unexpected Death, to their long Home.
15.
Your Female Painters that will mend by Art
Natures defects, (to compass base desire)
Ask any one of them when she will depart
From folly, and do what our Lord require;
She Will say that when she is Old all shall be left,
Some times next Day, she is of Life bereft.
16.
Your Goatish-Leacher, counsel him to leave
Those sordid courses wherein he delights
Noe other answer you will from him receive,
But, why should I rob Nature of her rights;
He Will leave when he is unable more to sin,
Nor Death, nor Judgment, he regards a pin.
17.
The Gormandizing-Glutton that destroys,
More at one meal, then 20. poor would serve
If you demand why he all this enjoyes
While naked, and hungry Christ in the streets does starve
He puts off Charity, till Death arrests him,
Till then he thinks not on it nor him that blessed him.
18.
The bold Blasphemer (who audaciously)
Belcheth out Oaths, and Imprecations strange
Devising new for Curiosity,
As men their fashions, they their oaths do change:
Think you? if they of Death or Judgment thought
Such damned words could from their mouths be brought.
19.
The Grinding Usurers, the hard Oppressors,
Did these each minute think upon that Day,
That shall to Judgment summon all transgressors,
Sure conscience in their souls would bear more sway
But Satan still to train them in his path
Makes them to put far off the day of Wrath.
20.
Those Lukewarm Christians, that do at this day
(For worldly Honors and promotions sake)
With Heretics participate; they will say
Before they dye another course they will take,
But God in Judgment oftentimes prevents,
And by Deaths warrant frustrates their intents.
21.
It is a dangerous thing with God to dally,
(Whose eyes are open to discern all Hearts,)
Art thou well minded: stand not shall I, shall I,
Take hold of him, whilst he his Grace imparts,
Experience lamentable proves too well,
That millions for this fault now burn in Hell.
22.
To punish our remiss and careless Lives,
Our Lord has sent his Angel with commission
To take from wives their men, from men their wives
In many Families is this Division
In The Morn all sound, at Night all Dead and gone;
O, is not this a case fit to bemoane.
23.
If it be requisite at any season,
To think of Death, and judgment certainly
T'th time of Plague and Pestilence most reason
We have to look each day and hour to dye;
Woeful effects envite us to this care,
Many are seized by Death ere the'yr aware.
24.
Let every CHRSTIAN thus Expostulate,
With his own conscience every hour, and minute,
Is my state better then my Neighbors state,
(My friends, and Kindred, who have suffered int)
What privilege can I vile wretch pretend,
That heaven (more then they) should me defend.
25.
And if thou be protected from the same
Vaunt not thy self as though thy Merrits were
(Without Gods grace) the cause: No rather claim
Continuance of his love with trembling fear,
Glorify him, and still in this confide
That thousands better then thy self have dyed
26.
This meek acknowledgment of Heavenly aid
And thy unworthiness assure thy self
Is the best Antidote that can be made
Against the Plague, these will not wast thy pelf;
Not that I speak against Corporal provision,
For the holy Ghost says, honor the Physician.
27.
Art thou infected, be not heavy hearted,
But with alacrity thy self prepare
To take from him who has much Good imparted,
This little Ill, now't falls unto thy share;
In holy Job a perfect mirror see
God plagued him, yet he loved him, why not thee?
28.
And thou that with no Sickness art perplexed,
Be Charitable unto all that need,
Think every hour thy turn may be the next,
Prepare for that while yet thy self art freed:
Do good to all (as holy Scripture says)
And chiefly to the Family of Faith.
29.
Be conversant in Prayer and use the means
As God by means of Holy Church affords,
That when this sad Contagion thee restraines,
Thou being in heart resolved to be our Lords:
While all thy thoughts are in this order kept
Our Lord the will, will for the deed accept,
30.
Above all things have care to keep thy Soul
From the contagious malady of Sin,
While that best part's preserved from being foul
Then what estate so e're thy corpse be in,
Sickness and health, what it is the sender please
Thou shall at all assayes find Ghostly ease.
31.
Lastly in general, all you who be
(Because of this pestiferous Infection)
Sequestered and shut up from Company,
Be pleased herein to follow my direction:
Let this seclusion make you think what it is
The glorious Company above to misle.
32.
And from this meditation may proceed
An ardent fervor of their intercession,
Desire their prayers and merits in your need,
That CHRIST of bliss may give you full possession;
And let your memory evermore retain
The thought of Death and Judgment, joy and pain.
33.
Thus for their sakes who may want better means
I spend this Humble talent with goodwill,
Desiring nothing of them for my pains,
But that in their Devotions they may still
Remember me as I for them are zealous,
Sweet IHESVS both in Soul and Body heal us.
AMEN.
A BRIEF YET DEVOVT PRAYER TO THE GLORIOUS Citizens of the Celestial
JERUSALEM, very fit to be used in time of Mortality.
O! all you Celestial Inhabitants of the new JERUSALEM, Unto whose names and
memories our parish Churches were (by our pious progenitors) Erected, Dedicated
and Consecrated; We devoutly beg of you by that unbounded love wherewith our
common Lord has loved you, that you will make Intercession unto him in the
behalf of those parishes whose Churches yet reteyne your names; That our
merciful Lord will be pleased to revoke the destroying Angel lately sent out
with Commission to punish our sins with the Plague of Pestilence; And
although (such is the profaneness of these times) most of the Inhabitants
being miserably consopated and inebriated with heresy, do contemn your
suffrages, and seek (as far as they are able) utterly to annihilate that
Authority wherewith the King of all Kings has ennobled you. Yet O ye holy
company be pleased for their sakes who devoutly crave your patronage
protections, merits and Intercessions, to desire our Lord to be merciful to
all in general, and that he will not for the iniquity of the Disobedient
punish the Obedient; But rather in mercy spare the chafe for love of the
wheat, least plucking up the one he destroy the other, before the harvest of
separation is come. Pray for us O ye beloved of God, hear us O merciful
JESUS, and divert thine anger from us miserable wretches, who meekely come unto
thee, relying upon thy wonted favors; O be pitiful, spare us O benign
IHESV: To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, Be all glory for ever and
ever,

AMEN.

