CHVRCHES, THAT IS, Appropriate Places FOR Christian Worship; BOTH IN, AND
EVER SINCE THE APOSTLES TIMES. A Discourse at first more briefly delivered in a
College Chapel, and since enlarged.

BY JOSEPH MEDE B. D. and Fellow of Christ's College in CAMBRIDGE.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his Shop under
St Peter's Church in Cornhill. M DC XXXVIII.

REVmo. IN CHRISTO PATRI ET DOMINO SVO SVMME HONORANDO, DOMINO GVILIELMO DIVINA
PROVIDENTIA ARCHIEPISCOPO CANTVARIENSI, METROPOLITANO, TOTIVSQVE ANGLIAE
PRIMATI.

Hanc suam de Ecclesiarum (hoc est, Locorum cultui Christiano dicatorum) jam
inde ab Apostolorum temporibus antiquitate Dissertationem, Antiquitatis
Ecclesiasticae propugnatori, sublatique inter sacrum and profanum discriminis
assertori eximio, In grati and officiosi animi indicium Ea, qua decet,
submissione, and favoris spe DICAT CONSECRATQUE Revma Paternitatis ipsius
Cultor and Sacellanus observantissimus I. M.

PErlegi hanc Dissertationem Historicam de Christianarum Ecclesiarum
Antiquitate, cui Titulus est [Churches, etc. both in and ever since the
Apostles times.] in qua nihil reperio Fidei Orthodoxae, aut Historiae
Ecclesiasticae contrarium, quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur, ita
tamen, ut si non intra tres menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur, haec
Licentia sit omino irrita.

IUN. 4o. 1638. Rmo. in Christo Patri, and Dno. D. Arch. Cant. Sacellanus
Domesticus GUIL. BRAY.

CHVRCHES: THAT IS, APPROPRIATE Places for Christian Worship both in, and ever
since the Apostles times.
1 COR. 11. 22. Have ye not houses to eat and drink in? [(...);] Or despise ye
the CHVRCH of God?
IT is taken in a manner for granted by the most of our Reformed Writers, and
affirmed also by Joseph. Vice. com. de antiquis Missae ritibus. Vol. 3. l. 2.
c. 21.
some of the other side: That in the Apostles times, and in the Ages next after
them (whilst the Church lived under Pagan and persecuting Emperors)
Christians had no Oratories, or places set apart for Divine Worshipp; but that
they assembled here and there promiscuously, and uncertainly, as they pleased,
or the occasion served, in places of common use, and not otherwise. But that
this is an error, I intend to demonstrate by good evidence, taking my rise
from this passage of the Apostle, who reproving the Corinthians for using
profane banquetings and feastings in a sacred place; Have ye not Houses (says
he) to eat and drink in? (...); Or despise you the CHVRCH of God? Here I take
the word (...), or Church, to note, not the assembly, but the place appointed
for sacred duties, and that from the opposition thereof to (...), their own
Houses, (...), Have ye not houses to eat and drink in? These are places proper
for ordinary and common repast, and not the Church or house of God: which is
again repeated in the last verse of that Chapter (...), If any man hunger, let
him eat at home.

Thus most of the Fathers took (...) in this passage; namely, as most of the
words, signifying an assembly or company, are wont to be used also for the
place thereof: as (...), Synagoga, Collegium, etc.

St. AUSTIN is so plain, Quaest. 57. sup. levit.
as nothing can be more. For concerning expressions, where the continent is
called by the name of the thing contained, he instances in this of Ecclesia:
Sicut Ecclesia (says he) dicitur locus, quo Ecclesia congregatur. Nam Ecclesia
homines sunt, de quibus dicitur: Vt exhiberet sibi gloriosam Ecclesiam. Hanc
tamen vocari etiam ipsam Domum orationum, idem Apostolus testis est, ubi ait;
Nunquid domos non habetis ad manducandum and bibendum? an Ecclesiam Dei
contemnitis?

St. BASIL has the same notion in his Moralia. Reg. xxx. Quod non oportet Gr.
(...).
loca sacra, mistura eorum quae ad communem usum spectant, contumelia afficere.
Which he confirms thus; Et intravit Jesus in Templum Dei, and ejiciebat omnes
ementes and vendentes in Templo, and mensas numulariorum and cathedras
vendentium columbas evertit, and dicit eis; Scriptum est, Domus mea domus
orationis vocabitur, vos autem fecistis eam speluncam latronum. Et ad Cor. 1.
Nunquid domos non habetis ad manducandum and bibendum? aut Ecclesiam Dei
contemnitis? Si quis esurit, domi manducet, ut non in judicium conveniatis.

Again, in his Regulae compendiosius explicatae, Interog. and Respons 310.
answering that question, Nunquid in communi domo sacra oblatio debeat
celebrari: Quemadmodum, says he, verbum non permittit, ut vas ullum commune in
sancta introferatur, eodem modo etiam vetat, sancta in domo communi celebrari:
quum vetus Testamentum nihil isto modo fieri permittat; Domino item dicente,
plusquam templum est hic; Apostolo item, Nunquid domos non habetis ad
manducandum and bibendum? etc. Ex quibus erudimur, neque communem coenam in
Ecclesia edere and bibere, neque Dominicam coenam in privata domo contumelia
afficere: extra quam, si quis, cum necessitas poscat, locum domumve puriorem
delegerit tempore opportuno.

The Author also of the Commentaries upon the Epistles, amongst the works of
S. Hierom (whosoever he were) expounding Ecclesiam Dei contemnitis, by
Facientes eam Triclinium epularum, shows, he took Ecclesia here to signify
the place.

The self-same words are to be found in the Commentaries of Sedulius, as many
other passages of this Author verbatim; which I note by the way.

St. CHRYSOSTOM is of the same mind; Ecce quarta accusatio (says he) quod
non pauperes tantum, sed Ecclesia laeditur. Quemadmodum enim Dominicam coenam
privatam facis, ita and LOCVM, tanquam DOMO ECCLESIA usus. Ecclesia therefore
here with him is Locus.

And so it is with THEODORET, who paraphraseth the words on this manner: Si
acceditis, ut laute and opipare epulemini, hoc facite in domibus Hoc enim in
ECCLESIA est contumelia, and aperta insolentia. Quomodo enim non est absurdum,
intus in Templo Dei, praesente Domino qui communem nobis mensam apposuit; vos
quidem laute vivere, eos autem qui sunt pauperes, esurire, and propter
paupertatem erubescere?

THEOPHYLACT and OECUMENIUS follow the same track, as he that looks them shall
find.

I have produced thus largely the Glosses of the Fathers upon this Text; that
they might be as a preparative to my ensuing discourse, by removing or
mitigating, at the least, that prejudice which some have so deeply swallowed,
of an utter unlikelihood of any such places to have been in the Apostles times,
or the times near them. For if these Glosses of the Fathers be true, then were
there places called Ecclesiae, and consequently places appointed and set apart
for Christian assemblies to perform their solemn service to God in, even in
the Apostles times; Or suppose they be not true, or but doubtful, and not
necessary; yet thus much will follow howsoever, That these Fathers, who were
nearer to those Primitive times by above 1100. years then we are, and so had
better means to know what they had or had not, than we, supposed there were
such places, even in the Apostles times. If in the Apostles times, then no
doubt in the Ages next after them. And thus we shall gain something by this
Text, whether we accept this notion of the word Ecclesia, or not.

HAVING therefore gotten so good an entrance, we will now further enquire what
manner of places they were, or may be supposed to have been, which were
appropriated to such use; and that done, proceed to show by such testimonies or
footsteps of Antiquity, as time has left unto us; That there were such places
through every Age respectively, from the days of the Apostles unto the reign
of Constantine; that is, in every of the first 3. hundred years; For the first,
It is not to be imagined they were Isidorus Pelusiota. lib. 2. Epist. 246.
(...) Where note, that of two expressions of this in the same place, the words
(...) in the Printed Copy are deficient in the first of them; but to be
supplied out of this, the second, or repetition of the same thing, as the
Reader that considers it, will observe the Antithesis requires.
such goodly and stately structures as the Church had after the Empire became
Christian, and we now by Gods blessing enjoy; but such as the state and
condition of the times would permit; At the first, some capable and convenient
room within the walls or dwelling of some pious disciple, dedicated by the
religious bounty of the owner, to the use of the Church, and that usually an
(...), or (...), an upper room, such as the Latins call Coenaculum; being,
according to their manner of building, as the most large and capacious of any
other, so likewise the most retired and freeest from disturbance, and next to
heaven, as having no other room above it. For such uppermost places we find
they were wont then to make choice of, even for private devotions; as may be
gathered from what we read of S. Peter. Acts 10. (...); That he went up to
the house top to pray: for so (...) signifies, exusu Hellenistarum, and is
accordingly here rendered by the vulgar Latin, in superiora.

Such an Hyperoon as we speak of, was that remembered by the name of Coenacula
dicuntur, ad quae ^calis ascenditur. Fest. Inde Ennio Coenacula maxima coeli.
Coenaculum Sion, where, after our Savior was ascended, the Apostles and
Disciples (as we read in the Acts) assembled together daily for prayer and
supplication; and where being thus assembled, the holy Ghost came down upon
them in Cloven tongues of fire at the feast of Pentecost. For these traditions,
See Adricenius ex Nicephor. etc. and Bid infra, de locis sanct.
Concerning which, there has been a tradition in the Church; that this was
the same room wherein our blessed Savior, the night before his Passion,
celebrated the Passover with his Disciples, and instituted the mystical
Supper of his Body and Blood, for the sacred Rite of the Gospel: The same
place, where on the day of his Resurrection he came, and stood in the midst
of his Disciples, the doors being shut; and having showed them his hands and
his feet, said, Peace be unto you, As my Father has sent me, so I send you,
etc. John 20. The place where 8. days, or the Sunday after, he appeared in the
same manner again unto them being together, to satisfy the incredulity of
Thomas, who the first time was not with the rest: The place where James the
Brother of our Lord, was created by the Apostles, Bishop of Jerusalem: The
place where the 7. Deacons (whereof S. Stephen was one) were elected and
ordained: The place where the Apostles and Elders of the Church at Jerusalem
held that Council, and pattern of all Councels, for decision of that
question; Whether the Gentiles which believed were to be circumcised or not. And
for certain the place of this Coenaculu^ was afterward enclosed with a goodly
Church, known by the name of the Chur: SION, upon the top whereof it stood:
Insomuch that S. Hierome in his Epitaphio Paulae, Epist. 27.
made bold to apply that of the Psalm unto it; Fundamenta ejus in montibus
sanctis: diligit Dominus portas Sion super omnia tabernacula Jacob. How soon
this erection was made, I know not; but I believe it was much more ancient than
those other Churches erected in other places of that City by Constantine and
his Mother; because neither Eusebius, Socrates, Theodoret nor Sozomen make any
mention of the foundation thereof, as they do of the rest. It is called by S.
Cyril, who was Bishop of the place, (...) (...), the upper Church of the
Apostles; (...) (says he) (...). The holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles in
the likeness of fiery tongues here in Jerusalem in the UPPER CHURCH OF THE
APOSTLES. Cyril Hierosol. Cat. 16.

If this tradition be true, it should seem by it, that this Coenaculum, from
the time our blessed Savior first hallowed it by the institution and
celebration of his mystical Supper, was thenceforth devoted to be a place of
prayer and holy asse^blies. And surely no Ceremonies of dedication, no not of
Solomon's Temple it self, are comparable to those sacred guests whereby this
place was sanctified. This is the more easy to be believed, if the house were
the possession of some Disciple at least, if not of kindred also to our Savior
according to the flesh; which both reason persuades, and tradition likewise
confirms it to have been. And when we read of those first believers, that
such as had houses and lands sold them and brought the prices and laid them
down at the Apostles feet: it is nothing unlikely, but some likewise might give
their house unto the Apostles for the use of the Church to perform sacred
duties in. And thus perhaps should that tradition, whereof Venerable Bede tells
us, be understood; viz. That this Church of Sion was founded by the Apostles:
Not, that they erected that structure, but that the place, from the time it was
a Coenaculum was by them dedicated to be an house of prayer. His words are
these De locis sanctis. cap. 3. in Tom 3. In superiori Montis Sion planicie,
monachorum cellulae Ecclesiam magnam circundant, illic, ut perhibent, ab
Apostolis fundatam; eo quod IBI SPIRITVM SANCTVM acceperint: In qua etiam LOCVS
COENAE DOMINI venerabilis ostenditur.

And if this were so, why may I not think that this Coenaculum Sion was that
(...), whereof we read concerning the first Christian society at Jerusalem.
Acts. 2. 46. That they continued daily in the Temple and breaking bread [(...)]
in the House, ate their meat with gladness and singleness of heart? the
meaning being, that when they had performed their devotions daily in the
Temple, at the accustomed times of prayer there, they used to resort immediately
to this Coenaculum, and there having celebrated the mystical banquet of the
holy Eucharist, afterward took their ordinary and necessary repast with
gladness and singleness of heart. Apud Homerum passim.
For so (...) may be rendered for (...), and not domatim, or per domos, house by
house as we translate it; and so both the Syriack and Arabic renders it, and
the N. T. (as we shall see hereafter) elsewhere uses it. Moreover we find this
Coenaculu^ called (...) in the 2. ver. of this chap. And for the phrase of
breaking of bread, we know that the same a little before in the 42. ver. is
wont to be understood of the Communion of the Eucharist, and by the Syriack
Interpreter is expressly rendered by the Greek word, Fractio Eucharistiae, both
there and again chap. 20. ver. 7. according to that of S. Paul, The bread which
we break, etc. why should it not then be so taken here? If it be, then
according to the Interpretation we have given, this will also follow; that that
custom of the Church, to participate the Eucharist fasting and before dinner,
had its beginning from the first constitution of the Christian Church: A thing
not unworthy observation, if the interpretation be maintainable; of which let
the learned judge.

It was an (...), or Coenaculum also, where the Disciples at Troas came
together upon the first day of the week to break bread, or to celebrate the
holy Eucharist. Act 20. 7. where S. Paul preached unto them, and whence
Eutychus, being overcome with sleep, sitting in a window fell down (...), from
the third story or loft, and was taken up dead. Such a one seems also to have
been the place of the Churches assembly at Caesarea Cappadociae, by that which
is said Acts 18. 22. viz. That S. Paul sailing from Ephesus, landed at
Caesarea, where (...), having gone up and saluted the Church, he went down to
Antioch. Note, he went up to salute: whereby it should seem, that the place
where the Church was assembled, was some upper place. See Ludovic de Dieu upon
this place; where he tells us, that the Ethiopick translator so understood it,
rendering, and descendit Caesaream, and ascendit in Domum Christianorum (.i.
Ecclesiam) and salutavit eos, and abiit Antiochiam. Such as these, I suppose,
were the places at first set apart for holy meetings, much like to our private
Chapels now in great men's houses, though not for so general an use.

In process of time, as the multitude of believers increased, some wealthy and
devout Christian gave his whole house or Mansion place, either whilst he
lived, if he could spare it, or bequeathed it at his death, unto the Saints, to
be set apart and accommodated for sacred assemblies, and religious uses.

At length, as the multitude of believers still more increased, and the Church
grew more able; they built them structures of purpose, partly in the
Coemiteries of Martyrs, partly in other public places: even as the Jews
(whose religion was no more the Empires than theirs) had, nevertheless, their
Synagogues in all Cities and places where they lived among the Gentiles.

IN THE FIRST CENTURIE.
THIS being premised, I proceed now (as I promised) to show, that there were
such places as I have described, appointed and set apart among Christians for
their religious assemblies and solemn address unto the divine Majesty,
through every one of the first three Centuries particularly; and that therefore
they assembled not promiscuously, and at hap hazard, but in appropriate places;
unless necessity sometimes forced them to do otherwise.

For the times of the Apostles therefore, or first Century in particular, which
ends with the death of S. John the Evangelist, I prove it, first, from the Text
I premised, not to be despised or profaned with common banquettings: at least
from the authority of the Fathers, who by their so expounding it, give us to
understand, they thought it not improbable, that there were such places in the
Apostles times. For the further strengthening of this kind of argument, know
also, that Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 16.
in that discourse of his, where he endeavors to prove, that the Essenes, or
(...), which Philo describes, were the first Christian Society of the Jewish
nation at Alexandria, converted by S. Mark; amongst other Characteristical
notes (as he (...).
calls them) or badges of Christianity (however he were mistaken in his
conclusion or inference) alleges this for one of the first, that they had
sacred Houses, called (...), or worshipping places, that is, Churches. His
words are these. Deinceps ubi eorum domicilia quaenam essent descripserat
(nempe Philo) de Ecclesiis in vari^s locis extructis sic loquitur: Est in
quoque agro aedes sacra, quae appellatur (...), vel (...), in quo illi ab aliis
(...).
soli agentes, (...).
sanctae religiosaeque vitae mysteria obeunt: N. B.
nihilque eo vel cibi, vel potionis, vel aliarum rerum, quae ad corporis usum
necessariae sunt, important, He means the Books of the Law, the Prophets, and
Psalms, and like things of sacred use.
sed leges and oracula a prophetis divinitus edita, and hymnos, aliaque quibus
scientia and pietas erga Deum crescat and perficiatur. Afterward reciting some
other customs and particular observances of their discipline; as their
frequent assemblies in their (...), to hear the Scriptures read and
interpreted; the distinction of places for men and women; their manner of
singing Hymns and Psalms by a Praecentor, the rest answering, Author Constable.
Ap. vocat (...) lib. 2. c. (...). al. 61. Alius David hymnos cana and populus
(...), idest, (...), extremitates versuum; non versuum initia, ut male Intepres
Bovius.
(...), the extremes of the verses; the degrees of their Hierarchy, like those
of Deacons and Bishops, and some other the like, he concludes; Quod (...): That
Philo wrote these things, as one having knowledge of the customs at the
beginning delivered by the Apostles, is manifest to any one. But whether that
be so manifest or not, this I am sure is; that Eusebius believed the antiquity
of Churches or Oratories of Christians to have been from the Apostles times;
yea, to have been an Apostolical ordinance, or else he mightily forgot
himself, to bring that for an argument or badge to prove Philo's Essenes to be
S. Marks Christians: then which otherwise there could not be a stronger
argument to evince the contrary to what he intended. Now who could know this
better than Eusebius, who had searched into and perused all the writings and
monuments of Christian antiquity then extant, for the compiling of his
Ecclesiastical history, and his Commentaries of the He mentions it Hist. Eccl.
li. 5. cap. 1.
Acts of Martyrs now perished?

Add to this, what I a little before observed out of Bid, de locis sanctis;
of a tradition, that the Church of Sion was founded by the Apostles. And so I
leave my first argument.

My next argument why may I not take one above other in the Apostles
salutatio^s, as their peculiar? Salute such a one, (...), and the Church at his
house. As Colos. 4. 15. of Nymphas (...), Salute Nymphas and the Church at his
house. To Philemon also; To Philemon our dear brother and fellow labourer (to
Appia our beloved, and Archippus our fellow-souldier,) (...), and to the Church
at thy house. See, he forgets it not after a parenthesis, neither attributes it
to Archippus, but as proper to Philemon alone. The like he has of Aquila and
Priscilla two several times, once sending salutation to them, Romans 16. Salute
Priscilla and Aquila, and the Church at their house* Again sending salutation
from them, 1 Cor. 16. 19. Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord,
with the Church at their house. Which I understand not, to be spoken of their
families as it is commonly expounded, but of the congregation of the Saints,
there wont to assemble for the performance of divine duties; that is, (...).
Whence (if it be granted) it will follow; First, that the Churches then, used
to assemble, not in mutable and promiscuous, but in definite and appropriate
places. Secondly, that those who are here saluted with that appendix, were such
as, in their several Cities, had bestowed and dedicated some part, or some
place within their dwellings, to be an Oratory for the Church to assemble in,
for the performance of divine duties according to the rule of the Gospel;
Nymphas at Colosse, Philemon at Laodicea (for there Archippus, who is saluted
with him, was Bishop, says Lib. 7. c. penul.
Author constit. Apost. as Philemon himself was afterward of the neighboring
City Colosse:) Aquila and Priscilla first at Rome, till Claudius banished the^
with the rest of the Jews from thence, Acts 18. 2. afterward at Ephesus, Ibid
ver. 19. whence S. Paul wrote that first Epistle to the Corinthians.

I am not the first (I think) who have taken these words in such a sense.
Oecumenius in two or three of these places (if I understand him) goes the same
way, though he mention the other exposition also: As to that of Aquila and
Priscilla, Romans 16. his note is; Adeo virtute spectati erant, ut suam etiam
domum Ecclesiam fecerint. Vel dicitur hoc, Quia omnes domestici fideles erant,
ut jam Domus esset Ecclesia. He mentions as I said both interpretations. So
upon that of Nymphas, Col. 4. His words are, Magni nominis hic vir erat, nam
domum suam fecerat Ecclesiam. And unless this be the meaning, why should this
appendant be so singularly mentioned in the salutations of some, and not of
others? and that not once, but again, if the same names be again remembered, as
of Aquila and Priscilla. Had none in those Catalogues of salutation, Christian
families, but some one only who is thus remembered? It is very improbable, nay
if we peruse them well, we shall find they had, but otherwise expressed; as in
that prolix Catalogue, Romans 16. we find Aristobulus and Narcissus saluted
with their household, Asyncritus, Phlegon, etc. with the brethren which are with
them; others, with the Saints which are with them. 2 Timothy 4. 19. The household
of Onesiphorus. This therefore so singular an Appendix must mean some singular
thing, not common to them with the rest, but peculiar to them alone: And what
should this be but what I have showed?

Now because this exposition concludes chiefly for a Coenaculum devoted to be
an house of prayer: let us see, if out of a Pagan writer, who lived about the
end of this Centurie, we can learn what manner of ones they were. For Or
whosoever else were the Author thereof under Trajan, whose then fresh success
in subduing the Parthians and Arabians (contrary to the unlucky presages of
some) his scope seems to have been to gratulate. See Iacobus Micyllus in
Argumento.
Lucian in his Dialogue Philopatris, by way of derision (sed ridentem dicere
verum quid vetat?) brings in one Critias, telling, how some Christians went
about to persuade him, to be of their religion; and that they brought him to
the place of their assembly, being an Hyperoon, which he describes thus:
Pertransivimus (says he) ferreas portas, and aerea limina; multisque jam
superatis scalis, in Domum aurato fastigio insignem ascendimus, qualem Homerus
Menalai fingit esse: atque ipse quidem omnia contemplabar, -- video autem, non
Helenam, sed mehercle viros in faciem inclinatos and pallescentes. So he.

Theophilus, a potent man in Antioch (the same, as is supposed, to whom S. Luke
(who was also an Antiochean) inscribes both his Gospel and Acts of the
Apostles) who, being converted unto the Faith by S. Peter, converted his house
into a Church, where S. Peter had his first See, or Episcopal Residence. This
tradition is derived out of the Recognitions of Clemens, where it is first
found. Which, though it be an Apocryphal writing, yet is of no small
antiquity; and this passage is of such a nature, as it cannot be well imagined,
to what end it should be devised or fained.

The like is reported of the house of Pudens, a Roman Senator and Martyr, in
the Acta Pudentis; That it was turned into a Church after his Martyrdom. This
is that Pudens mentioned by the Apostle in the 2. Epist. to Timothy, and
coupled with Linus: Pudens and Linus (says he) salute you. All this comes not
of nothing; but surely argues some such custom to have been in those times.

I will seal up all my proofs for this Clemens (a man of the Apostolical
age, in his genuine Page 52. Vid. Graec.
Epistle ad Corinthios: Debemus omnia rite and ordine facere, quaecunque nos
Dominus peragere jussit: praestitutis temporibus oblationes and liturgias
obire. Neque enim temere vel inordinate voluit ista fieri, sed statutis
temporibus and horis. VBI etiam, and A QVIBVS peragi vult, ipse excellissima
sua voluntate definivit; ut religiose omnia, secundum beneplacitum ejus,
adimpleta, voluntati ipsius accepta essent. Here Clemens says expressly, That
the Lord had ordained (even now in the Gospel) as well appropriate places
WHERE, as appropriate Times and Persons (that is Priests) When and WHEREBY he
would be solemnly served, that so all things might be done religiously and in
order. Who then can believe, that in the Apostles times (when this Clemens
lived) the places were not distinct for holy services, as well as the Times and
Persons were; or that Clemens would have spoken in this manner, unless he had
known it so to have been? The Corinthians, it seems, in that their notorious
sedition and discord, had violated this order; at the correction whereof this
passage aymeth.

This one passage therefore makes all my former proofs credible, and may
supply their defect, where they are not enough convictive. And it is the more
precious, in regard of the penury of written Monuments by any Disciples of the
Apostles remaining unto us of that Primitive Age.

If any man shall ask, where this divine ordinance, which Clemens here
mentions, is to be found? I answer, in the Analogy of the old Testament;
whence this principle is taught us: That, as the divine Majesty it self is
most sacred and incommunicable, (the reason why the worship and service given
unto him must be communicated with no other) so is it likewise a part of that
honor we owe unto his most sacred, singular and incommunicable eminency, that
the things wherewith he is served, should not be promiscuous and common, but
appropriate and set apart to that end and purpose. And thus I conclude the
first Seculum.

IN THE SECOND CENTURIE. Ab An. 100. ad 200.

NOW for the second, and that too for the beginning thereof, we have a witness
not to be rejected, the holy Martyr Ignatius who suffered An. 107. and wrote
the most of his Epistles in his bonds. He in his confessed Epistle ad Magnesios
speaks thus: Omnes ad orandum in idem loci convenite, una sit communis
precatio, una men's, una spes in charitate and fide inculpata in Iesum Christu^:
quo nihil praestantius est. Omnes velut VNVS, ad TEMPLVM Dei [(...)]
concurrite, quemadmodum ad VNVM Altar, ad VNVM Iesum Christum Pontifice^
ingeniti Dei. Lo here a Temple with an Altar in it, whither the Magnesians are
exhorted to gather themselves together to pray; To come together in one place,
that so they might all join together in one common prayer, spirited with one
inte^tion, with one and the same hope in the Charity and Faith they have to
Christ ward: Secondly, to come thither as one, that is, in unity of affection
and brotherly love one toward another, as if all were but one and not many,
even as the Altar, before which they presented themselves, was but one, and the
high Priest and Mediator between them and the Father, Jesus Christ, but One.

For it is to be observed that in those primitive times they had but One Altar
in a Church, as a Symbol, both that they worshipped but One God through One
Mediator Jesus Christ, and also of the unity the Church ought to have in it
self: whence Ignatius, not only here, but also in his Epist to the
Philadelphians urges the unity of the Altar for a monitive to the congregation
to agree together in one. For Vnum Altar (says he) omni Ecclesiae, and unus
Episcopus cum Presbyterio and Diaconis conservis meis. This custom of One Altar
is still retained by the Greek Church. The contrary use is a transgression of
the Latins, not only symbolically implying, but really introducing, (as they
handle it) a (...), or multiplying of Gods and Mediators, instead of that One
God, and One Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.

Nay more than this: It should seem, that in those first times, before
Diocesses were divided into those lesser and subordinate Churches, we now call
Parishes, and Presbyters assigned to the^, they had not only One Altar in one
Chur or Dominicu^, but one Altar to a Church, taking Chu: for the Company or
Corporatio^ of the Faithful, united under one Bishop or Pastor; and that was
in the City and place where the Bishop had his See and Residence: like as the
Jews had but one Altar and Temple for the whole Nation, united under one high
Priest. And yet, as the Jews had their Synagogues, so perhaps might they have
more Oratories than one, though their Altar were but one, there namely where
the Bishop was. Die Solis, says Just. Mart. omniu^, qui vel in oppidis vel
ruri degunt, in eunde^ locu conventus fit; Namely, as he there tells us, to
celebrate and participate the holy Eucharist. Why was this, but because they
had not many places to celebrate in? And unless this were so, whence came it
else, that a Schismatical Bishop was said co^stituere or collocare aliud
Altar: and that a Bishop and an Altar are made correlatives. See S. Cyprian Ep
40, 72, 73. and de unitate Ecclesiae. And thus perhaps is Ignatius also to be
understood in that fore-quoted passage of his: (...), Vnu^ Altar omni
Ecclesiae, and unus Episcopus cum Presbyterio and Diaconis. Howsoever, I here
determine nothing, but refer it to the judgment of those who are better
skilled in Antiquity: only adding this, that if it were so, yet now that
Parishes are divided into several Presbyteries as their proper Cures, every
one of them being as it were, a little Diocese, the reason and signification of
unity is the same, to have but One Altar in a Parish Church.

To this testimony of Ignatius of the use in his time, I will add another of
his, in his Epistle ad Antiochenos, where, in his salutes he speaks thus:
(...), I salute the keepers of the HOLY DOORS the Deaconisses which are in
Christ: that is, the Doors the women entered in at. For so we may learn from
the Compiler of the Apostolical Co^stitutio^s, Li. 2. c (...) al. 61.
describing a Ch: assembly: Stent ostiarii, says he, ad introitus virorum,
illos custodientes; Diaconissae ad introitus foeminarum. But if they had in
Ignatius his time Holy doors, (or as some render it sacra vestibula) who can
believe also but they had holy Houses?

This Epistle indeed is none of the confessed ones. The title is accepted
against; as that Ignatius wrote no Epistle ad Antiochenos, because Eusebius,
and after him S. Hierom, when they rehearse his Epistles, make no mention of
any such. Yet were the Antiochians his flock, his pastoral charge. Who would
not then think it unlikely, that, amongst so many Epistles written to other
Churches in his going that long journey from Antioch to Rome, to receive the
crown of Martyrdom (yea to Smyrna through which he had passed) he should not
remember with one farewell Epistle that Church whereof he was Bishop and
Pastor, as well as the rest? Thus much I dare say; that this is as strong an
argument every whit, to persuade that he wrote such an Epistle (especially
there being one extant under that Title) as Eusebius his silence (for S. Hierom
did but follow his steps) is that he did not. For why should it be thought more
necessary, that Eusebius should have met with all the Epistles of Ignatius in
the Library of Aelia or Jerusalem (whence he Lib. 6. c. 14 al. 21. Vid. Graec.
professes to have collected the whole matter of his History) then he did with
all the works and Commentaries of some other Ecclesiastical men whom he
mentions; many of whose writings, besides those he rehearses, he confesses
not to have come to his hands, or knowledge, either what, or how many they
were? See him Hist. Li. 5. c. In Graeco 27.
26. and Li. 6 c. In Graeco 12.
10. This will be yet more considerable, if we remember, that some Books, even
of the Canon of the N. Test. were not known to some Churches at the same time
with the rest, and therefore a while doubted of, after they had notice of them.
Besides it is to be noted, that Eusebius in express terms undertakes only to
recite those Epistles of Ignatius, which he wrote, as he passed through Asia:
but after his coming into Europe (whence those Epistles are dated, which he
mentions not) whether any thing were written by him or not, he informs us
nothing. Nay, which is yet more; Vedelius grants the words and sentences of
this Epistle to be the most of them, by their style and character the words and
sentences of Ignatius; but he would have them therefore to be taken out of some
of his other Epistles; to wit, according to a new and strange conceit of his,
that the genuine Epistles of Ignatius have been robbed and guelded of much of
their conte^ts, to make up more Epistles under new Titles. he excepts only in
this Epistle against the salutatio^s at the end thereof; because there were not
so many, or no such (...) Vid. Epiplaen. Exposit. Fidei cathol. c. 21. De
duobus ultimis, Constable. Apost. l. 8. cap. 24, 26.
Church-offices in Ignatius his time, as are there mentioned. But what is this
else, but to beg the question? Till therefore some body shall not only affirm,
but prove, there were no such, no not in the Church of Antioch ( See Act. 11.
26. Socr. lib. 6. c. 8. Theod. lib. 2. c. 24.
whence diverse Ecclesiastical customs had their first beginning, which were
afterward imitated by the rest of the Churches) I can see no just cause
hitherto, why I should not believe this passage, as well as the rest, and so
the whole Epistle to have had Ignatius for its Author. And so I leave it.

For the middle of this Seculu^, or thereabouts, In Tom. 1. Biblioth. Patris
edit. Pariscens. ex Archivo Viennensi.
extant two short Epistles of PIUS the 1. Bishop of Rome to one Iustus
Viennensis; none of the Decretals (for they are indeed cou^terfeit) but others
diverse from the^, which no man has yet, that I know of, proved to be
suppositious. In the first whereof there is mention made of one Euprepia, a
pious and devout Matron, who consigned the title of her house unto the Church
for the use of sacred assemblies. Antequam Roma exiisses, says he, soror
nostra Euprepia (sicut been recordaris) titulum domus suae pauperibus
assignavit: ubi nunc cum pauperibus nostris commorantes, The word Missa seem^s
to have been long used in Italy before it was elsewhere.
Missas agimus. He seems by pauperes, to note the Clergy, which in his other
Epistle he calls Senatus pauperum, Salutat te Senatus pauperum: Otherwise the
whole Christian flock might be so called; according to that in the Gospel,
Pauperes Euangelizantur. (Mat. 11. 5. Luc. 7. 22.) and that of Esa. cap. 61.
applied by our Savior Luc. 4. The Lord has anointed me to preach the Gospel
to the poor: and according to that in the Parable Luc. 14. 21. Introduc
pauperes, Bring in hither the poor. Perhaps in those perilous times, they
were wont to make their donations of this kind under such covert names.

In his 2. Epistle to the same Iustus he mentions certain Martyrs, who had then
newly (as he there speaks) triu^phed over the world: Amongst which he mentio^s
one Pastor, by Office a Presbyter; who before his death, had erected or created
a Titulus, that is, a Church, as that name is vulgarly known to signify:
Presbyter Pastor (says he) Titulum condidit, and digne in Domino obiit. Why
the Roman Chu: called such places by the name of Tituli, whether because by
their dedication the name of Christ our Lord was, as it were, inscribed upon
them, (as the manner then was to set the names or titles of the owners upon
their Houses and possessions;) and so it would concur in notion with those
other names of (...) and Basilica, The Lords and the Kings: or whether because
they gave a title of Cure or denomination to the Presbyters, to whom they were
committed (for the chief or Episcopal Church I doubt whether it were so called
or not) let others determine.

I shall not do amiss, I think, if I add to this testimony a passage of
Theophilus Antiochenus (who lived at the same time) which though, I grant to be
indifferent to be otherwise understood; yet seems very prone to be construed
for our purpose: It is to be found in his second Book ad Autolycum; where
having compared the world to the Sea, he follows the Allegory thus; Quemadmodum
(says he) in Mari insulae quaedam prominent habitabiles, frugiferae, and
quibus est aqua salubris, necnon navalia, and portus commodi, quo se naufragi
reciperent; Sic Deus dedit mundo, qui peccatorum tempestatibus and naufragiis
jactatur, Synagogas, quas Ecclesias sanct as nominamus. [gr. (...)] in quibus
veritatis doctrina fervet, ad quas confugiunt veritatis studiosi, quot quot
salvari, Deique judicium and iram evitare volunt. It is ambiguous what he means
here by Ecclesiae: but if it were probable, that Synagoga were here taken, as
it is usually in the N. T. for a place; then might we determine, that Ecclesia
were so taken also, and not for a Company or Assembly only.

Well, howsoever Ecclesia be taken in this passage (which I reckon not upon)
yet thus much I am sure of, that toward the end of this Century, it was used
for a place of sacred Clemens Alexandr. (who then lived) Lib. 7. Strom where
speaking of the Church or (...), says he, (...), I call not now THE PLACE, but
the congregation of the Elect, Ecclesia: whereby it appears, that in his time
Ecclesia was used for the place of the assembly of the Elect, (...), as he calls
them, that is, of the Saints, and not for the congregation only. For otherwise
this caution needed not. And so himself uses it in that story of the young man,
Clem, Alex in Opere, Quis sit ille dives, qui salvetur, Apud Eusebius. Hist. Ecc.
lib. 3. cap. 17. (...)
who^ S. John committed to a Bishop of Asia to be instructed and trained up in
the Christian piety and discipline, and who afterward was by ill company
withdrawn to lewd and debauched courses, and became Captain of a band of
robbers in the Mountains. Also in this Century undoubtedly were extant those
fabrics in the Coemiteries of S. Peter, in the vaticane, and of S. Paul in via
ostiensi (which could be no other then some Christian Oratories) whereof Gaius
speaks, in Eusebius. and calls Tropaea Apostolorum. lib. 2. cap. 24.
For there when S. John, after a time coming again to visit the Churches,
demanded of the Bishop an account of the charge he had committed to him; The
Bishop answers, He is become a villain and a robber, (...), and now instead of
the Church, he has laid hold of a Mountain, with a company like himself. To
conclude, if the name were in Clemens his time, undoubtedly the thing was. And
this is my proof for the latter end of this Centurie.

IN THE THIRD CENTURIE. Ab Anno 200. ad 300.

NOW are we arrived at the third Seculum, and the last under the Ethnic and
persecuting Emperors: Wherein the Testimonies of the Christians Oratories do
abound, and are such as will outface any that shall dare contradict them.

For the beginning of this Centurie, Tertullian shall give in evidence. 1. In
his Book De Idololatria. Where declaiming against some Christian Artificers,
who, because it was their occupation and trade, thought it lawful to make
Idols for the Gentiles, so themselves worshipped them not; he speaks thus: Tota
die, ad hanc partem zelus fidei perorabit, ingemens Christianum ab Idolis in
ECCLESIAM venire, de adversaria officina in DOMVM DEI venire; attollere ad Deum
patrem manus matres Idolorum, his manibus adorare, quae (nempe in operibus
suis) foris (.i. in Templis Gentium) adversus Deum adorantur; eas manus
admovere Corpori Domini, quae Daemoniis corpora conferunt. Mark here, DOMVS
DEI, and ECCLESIA expounded by it; In Ecclesiam venire, id est, In Domum Dei
venire; and both of them set in opposition to an Idol-shop.

Of this DOMUS DEI or House of God, in his Book adversus Valentinianos, he
describes unto us the form and posture, upon this occasion. He compares the
Valentinian heresy, in respect of their affected secrecy, and reservednesse
in hiding the mysteries of their doctrine, to the Eleusinian Holies, whose
Temple had many Curtains and Doors, through which those, that were to be
initiated, were 5. years in passing, before they could be admitted unto the
Adytum or sacrarie, where the Deity was: Whereas contrariwise, he proves out
of Scripture, the badge and genius of the Religion of Christ, to consist in a
Dove-like simplicity and opennesse, and accordingly had its Oratories or Houses
of worship, not like that of the Eleusinian Holies, concealed with multiplicity
of walls, vails, turnings and windings, but agreeable to, and as it were
figuring its disposition. For Nostrae Columbae domus (says he) simplex, etiam
in editis and apertis; and ad lucem. Amat figuram Sp. sancti, Orientem Christi
figuram: Nihil veritas erubescit, etc....Nostrae Columbae domus.i. Domus
religionis nostrae columbinae, or Catholici Christi gregis, qui Columba
figuratur; namely, as he said a little before, Christum Columba demonstrare
solitaest, serpens vero tentare; meaning, as I suppose, not so much Christ
personal, as Christ mystical, that is, the Disciples, or Religion of Christ.
For it is the conclusion of his proofs brought out of Scripture, to show, that
simplicity was the livery of Christ's Disciples or Religion; In summa, says he,
Christum columba demonstrare solita est, etc. And otherwise, that solita est
would scarcely be true; since Christ personal is but once pointed out by a
Dove, namely, at his Baptism. This House, says he, is simplex, that is, Sine
tot portarum and sipariorum involucris: Also in editis and apertis, places
which Doves delight in: (...) Cyril. Hier.
Et ad lucem. i toward the place whence light springs, or the Sunrising: For
Amat figuram Sp. sancti. i. the Dove, as also Orientem Christi, figuram:
wherein he alludes to that Oriens exalto, or Dayspring from on high, in
Zacharies Benedictus, and has reference to the word, Et ad lucem. i. ad locum
vel plagam lucis. For, that the Churches of Christians anciently were turned
toward the East, appears by the Author of the Lib. 2. cap. 57. al. 61.
Apostolical Constitutions, which surely are as ancient as Tertullian Domus
sit oblonga, ad Orientem conversa, says he; Besides it appears out of Apol.
cap. 16.
Tertullian himself, that Christians then worshipped toward the East, and
therefore more than probable, their houses were sited and accommodated
accordingly. Thus I have done my best to clear this passage, because the
Author is crabbed and obscure.

There are two or three De Spect. cap. 25. Ad Vxor: lib. 2. c. 9. De coron.
milit. c. 3. De velandis virginibus. cap. 3. and 13.
more places in the same Father, where the Christian Oratories are mentioned by
the name of Ecclesia: but because the ambiguous and indifferent signification
of this word, either for a Place or an Assembly, makes them not convictive,
unless some circumstance be annexed, which determines it: I will only produce
that De corona Militis, Chap. 3. where concerning the Sacrament of Baptism he
speaks thus: Aquam adituri, ibidem, sed and aliquanto prius in ECCLESIA, sub
Antistitis manu contestamur, nos renunciare Diabolo, and Pompae and Angelis
ejus. Dehinc ter mergitamur. I say Ecclesia here signifies the Place. For the
clearing whereof, know, that the Baptisteries, or places of water for Baptism,
in those elder times, were not, as now our Fonts are, within the Church, but
without, and often in places very remote from it. When therefore Tertullian
here says; That those, who were to be baptized, first made their
abrenunciation in the Church sub manu Antistitis (that is, as I suppose, the
Bishop or Priest laying hands upon them, either in the mean time, or as soon as
they had done) and afterward again at the Water: He must needs by Ecclesia mean
the Place; otherwise, if it were taken for the Assembly of the faithful, the
Church in that sense was present also at the Water. But Ecclesia here and the
Water are supposed to be two distinct places; in both of which (according to
the rite of the African Churches) Abrenunciation was to be performed: Aquam
adituri, IBIDEM (.i. apud aquam) sed and aliquando prius in ECCLESIA,
contestamur, nos renunciare Diabolo, etc. And thus much for the testimony of
Tertullian.

My next witness is Hippolytus, who flourished between the twentieth and
thirtieth year of this Century in the reign of Alexander Mammeae. He in his
Treatise De consummatione mundi seu de Antichristo, describing the signs and
impieties which should precede the persecution of Antichrist (as he conceived
thereof,) has this passage concerning the irreligion and profaneness which
should then reign: (...), Templa Dei domorum communium instar erunt, ubique
Ecclesiarum eversiones fient, scripturae contemnentur. And in his description
of the persecution it self, This: (...) IEPA (...) Ex Psalm. 79. 2. and caeteris
similibus juxta LXX.
(...), etc. Sacrae Ecclesiarum aedes instar Pomorum custodiae erunt,
pretiosumque corpus and sanguis non extabit in diebus illis, Liturgia
extinguetur, Psalmorum decantio cessabit, scripturarum recitatio non audietur.
No man of reason can believe, but that he that speaks thus, knew and was well
acquainted with such Places in his own time; though his description be of that
which was to be in time to come. For it would be a mavelous conceit, to think
he prophesied of them, having never seen them. Nay, a profane Testimony will
further confirm us, he needed not: For Lampridius reports of this Alexander
Mammeae (in whose time Hippolytus lived) Quod cum Christiani, Cap. 49.
quendam locum, qui publicus fuerat, occupassent; contra Popinarii dicerent
sibi eum deberi: rescripsit Imperator, Melius esse, ut quomodocunque illic Deus
colatur, quam Popinariis dedatur.

About the middle of this Century flourished that famous Gregory of
Neocaesarea, surnamed Thaumaturgus. He in his Epistola Canonica (as the Greeks
call it) describing the 5. degrees or admissions of Poenitents, according to
the discipline of his time (which he calls (...), and (...)) (...) (says he)
est extra portam (...), ORATORII, ubi peccatorem stantem oportet fideles
ingredientes orare, ut pro se precentur. (...) (.i. Auditio) est intra portam
in loco qui (...) dicitur, ubi oportet eum qui peccavit stare usque ad
Catechumenos, and illinc egredi. (...) (.i. substratio) (...) N^AOY (...), ut
intra TEMPLI portam consistens cum Catechumenis egrediatur. (...) (.i.
congregatio, seu consistentia) est ut cum fidelibus consistat, and cum
catechumenis non egrediatur. Postremo est (...) participatio Sacramentorum. Who
sees not here, that Christians in his time had Oratories or sacred Houses to
worship in, and those accommodated with distinct places of remoter and nearer
admission?

Nay further we find in this Gregory's life written by Gregory Nissen, that
he was himself a great Founder and erecter of these sacred Edifices; whereof
the Church built by him at Neocaesarea in Pontus, (where he was Bishop) was
still standing in Gregory Nissens time. Hear his words, where he relates the
speedy and wonderful success this Thaumaturgus had in the conversion of that
City: Cum omnibus omnia fieret, says he, tantum sibi auxilio spiritus repent
populu^ adjunxit, ut ad TEMPLI fabricationem animum adjiceret (gr. (...)) cum
omnes offerendo, tam pecunias quam operas suas, studium ejus adjuvarent. Hoc
est, Templum, quod usque hodie ostenditur: quod magnus ille vir statim
aggressus, quasi fundamentum atque (...) Sacerdotii sui (.i. Episcopatus) in
maxim conspicuo urbis loco constituit. He adds besides, that, whereas in his
own time there had happened a most grievous Earthquake; Quo omnia tam publica
quam privata aedificia disjecta essent; solum illud Templum Gregorianum
illaesum and inconcussum mansisse.

Nor is this all; He tells in the same place, how that a little before the
persecution of Decius (which was Anno Christi 252.) this Thaumaturgus, having
converted, not the City of Neocaesarea only, but the whole territory adjoining,
to the faith of Christ, [(...), the converts pulling down their Idol-Altars,
and Idol-Temples, and in every place erecting (...), Oratorias in nomine
Christi Aedes, stirred up the fury and indignation of the Emperor.

About the same time with this Gregory, lived S. Cyprian at Carthage. In him I
observe the Christian Oratories twice remembered; once by the name of
Domnicum.i. (...); another time of Ecclesia. The first in his Book De opere and
eleemosynis, speaking against communicating the holy Eucharist without an
offering. Matrona, says he, quae in Ecclesia Christi locuples and dives es,
Dominicum (sacrificium) celebrare te credis, quae corbonam omnino non respicis?
quae in DOMINICVM sine sacrificio venis, quae partem de sacrificio quod pauper
obtulit, sumis? The other in his 55. Epist. or 3. ad Cornelium; where
declaiming against some lapsed Christians, who having in time of persecution
sacrificed unto Idols, would nevertheless, without due penance and
satisfaction, be admitted again into the Church: If this be once permitted
(says he) Quid superest quam ut ECCLESIA Capitolio cedat; and recedentibus
sacerdotibus ac Domini nostri ALTAR removentibus, in Cleri nostri sacrum
venerandumque consessum (.i. in Presbyterium, seu (...)) simulacra atque Idola
cum Aris suis transeant? Note, that Ecclesia here and Capitolium, Christ's House
and Jupiters Temple, stand in opposition one to the other; also that Capitolium
by Antonomasia is put for a Gentile Temple in general; that in the one (to
wit, Ecclesia) was Altar Domini nostri, and sacer venerandusque consessus
Cleri; in the other, Idola and simulacra cum Aris Diaboli.

Contemporary with S. Cyprian was that famed Dionysius Alexandrinus, He was
made Bishop, Anno 249. lived until 260. viz. Cypr.
made Bishop somewhat before him, but outlived him some 5. years, namely
until 265. There is an Epistle of his extant (which is part of the Canon Law
of the Greek Church) to one Basilides, resolving certain quaeres of his;
Amongst the rest, whether a woman during the time of her separation might enter
into the Church or not; To which, his answer is negative. This Quaere he
expresses thus; De mulieribus quae sunt in abscessu, an eas sic affectas
oporteat DOMVM DEI ingredi, gr. (...). By which, and his answer thereunto we
learn not only, that the Christians had then Houses of worship, but a religious
respect also to difference them from common places.

And here, because the time fitly presents it in our way, take notice, for some
reason that we shall hear of ere we have done: That this of the Christians
having such houses for their devotions, was a thing publicly known to the
Gentiles themselves, together with the name whereby they called them: as
appears by two Imperial Rescripts, the one of Galienus about the year 260.
recorded by Eusebius. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 12. which calls them (...), Worshipping
Places; which having been a little before, in the persecution of Valerianus his
Father, taken from the Christians, and then in the hands of the Gentiles,
Galienus graciously restored them unto them, with liberty freely to exercise
their Religion. The words of the Rescript, so much of them as is needful to
our purpose, are these: Imperator Caesar, Publius Licinius, Galienus, etc.
Dionysio, Puniae, Demetrio, and caeteris Episcopis, salutem. Meae munificentiae
beneficium per universum divulgari Orbem praecepi: Vt (...).i. a locis
religionis cultui dicatis discedatur. Et propterea vos mearum literarum
exemplari uti poteritis, quo nemo deinceps vobis quicquam facessat molestiae,
etc.

The other is of Aurelianus, De libris Sibyllinis inspiciendis, when the
Marcomanni invaded the Empire, Anno Chapter 271. recorded by Vopiscus, in these
words: Miror vos, Patres sancti (he writes to the Senate) tamdiu de aperiendis
Sibyllinis dubitasse libris; perinde quasi in Christianorum ECCLESIA non in
TEMPLO Deorum omnium tractaretis; that is, in the Capitol, where the Senate
used sometimes to sit.

Add to this, if you please, that which Eusebius relates of this Emperor, to
wit, that when Paulus Samosatenus, being deposed by the Council from his
Bishopric, and Domnus chosen in his room, would not yield up the possession of
the Church (...): The matter being brought before Aurelianus the Emperor, he
decrees, that it should be given to those of the Sect, unto whom the Bishops of
Rome and Italy should send Letters of communion: Sic demum Paulus (says
Eusebius) a seculari potestate, summo cum dedecore, ex ECCLESIA expellitur. For
that by (...) is here meant the Christians Oratorie or house of sacred assembly
at Antioch, (and not the Bishops house, as some would have it) appears, both
because Eusebius elsewhere so uses it, as namely Lib. 8. cap. ult. and Lib. 9.
cap. TH. as also, because he expounds himself presently by Ecclesia, when he
says: Sic Paulus summo cum dedecore a potestate seculari, ex Ecclesia
exigitur. For surely he meant not, that he was by the secular arm cast out of
the Church, as Church is taken for the company of the Faithful, but as it
signifies the Place of sacred assembly, where this Paulus kept possession,
after he was deposed for heresy by the Council.

But what need we trouble our selves thus to gather up Testimonies for the
latter half of this Seculum? I have one Testimony behind, which will dispatch
it all at once, yea, and if need be, depose for the whole also. It is that of
Eusebius in his eighth Book Hist. Eccl. in the beginning: where describing
those peaceful and halcyonian days, which the Church enjoyed for many years,
from the time of the Martyrdom of S. Cyprian unto that most direful
persecution of Diocletian, and how wonderfully the number of Christians was
advanced during that time, he speaks on this manner: Quomodo quisquam
infinita illos hominum turba frequentatos conventus coetuu^que in singulis
urbibus congregatorum multitudinem, illustresque in (...).
ORATORIIS concursus describere valeat? Quorum causa, quum in (...).
ANTIQVIS illis AEDIFICIIS satis amplius loci non haberent (vel antiquis illis
aedificiis haudquaquam amplius contenti) (...)....
amplas spatiosasque in omnibus urbibus ex fundamentis erexerunt ECCLESIAS. Lo
here, how in those Halcyonian days, Christians had not only Churches or Houses
of worship, but such as might then be called (...), ancient aedifices; which
how far it may reach, let others judge: Secondly, that the number of Christians
being grown so great, that those ancient Fabrics were no longer sufficient to
contain them, they erected new and more spacious ones in every City from the
foundations: And all this testified by one that himself lived and saw part of
those times. These sacred Aedifices, Diocletian, and those other surrogated
Emperors, (which contained that direful ten years persecution begun by him)
commanded by their Edicts to be every where demolished, as we may read in the
same Eusebius at large. The like whereunto seems never to have happened in any
of the former persecutions; in which they were only taken from the Christians;
but again, when the persecution ceased, for the most part restored unto them:
as in the former persecution they were by Galienus, under the name of (...).

And thus I think I have proved, by good and sufficient Testimonies, that
Christians had Oratories or Churches, that is, appropriate Places for Christian
worship in every of the first 300. years: I am well assured (whosoever be
Judge) long before the days of Constantine. I will add to these authorities
two or three reasons, why they must, in all likelihood, have had such Places;
First, because it is certain, that in their sacred assemblies they used then to
worship and pray toward the East: which how it could be done with any order
and conveniencie, is not easy to be conceived; unless we suppose the Places
wherein they worshipped to have been situated and accommodated accordingly;
that is, chosen and appointed to that end. Secondly, because of their
discipline, which required distinct and regular Places in their assemblies, for
the Poenitentes, Auditores, Catechumeni, and Fideles, and therefore argues
they met not in every place promiscuously, but in Places already fitted and
accommodated for that purpose. Lastly, because they had before their eyes an
example and pattern in the Proseuchais and Synagogues of the Jews, from whom
their Religion had its beginning; which though as contrary to the Religion of
the Empire as theirs, Wheresoever ten men of Israel were, there ought to be
built a Synagogue. Maimon. in Tephilla. cap. 11.. 1.
yet had places appropriate for the exercise thereof, wheresoever they lived
dispersed among the Gentiles. Who can believe, that such a pattern should not
invite the Christians to an imitation of the same, though we should suppose,
there were no other reasons to induce them, but that of ordinary conveniencie.

ANSWER TO THE OBJECTIONS.
I Come now to answer the Objections brought by such as maintain the contrary
opinion, Object. 1.
which are two. First, say they, It is not likely, no not possible, they should
have any such places living under a Pagan and persecuting State and Empire. I
answer: this Objection is already confuted by matter of fact. For it is to be
noted, that the greatest and most cruel Persecutions, and the 5. last of the
ten, fall with in the third or last Centurie. In which, that Christians had
Oratories or Houses of Christian worship, we have before proved by most
indubitate and irrefragable testimonies: But if in this, why not as well in the
former Ages, wherein the persecutions were, as no more in number, so far less
bitter? For it is to be taken notice of, that these Persecutions were not
continual, but as it were by fits, and those of the 2. first Centuries of no
long durance: so as the Churches enjoyed long times of peace and quietness
between them.

Besides, why should it seem to any one less credible, that Christians should
have their Oratories or Houses of worship under the Roman Empire, whilst the
State thereof was yet Gentile and opposite to the faith of Christ; then that
they had them in the Kingdom of Persia, which never was Christian? For, that
they had them there as old as the days of Constantine, Sozomen testifies,
Lib. 2. c. 8. The occasion of the demolishing whereof by K. Isdigerdes, and of
that most barbarous persecution of the Christians of those Countries for 30.
years together, about the year 400. Theodoret relates Lib. 5. cap. 38.
namely, that one Audas, out of an indiscreet and unseasonable zeal, (though
otherwise a virtuous and godly Bishop) having demolished the Persians Pyraeum,
or Temple where the Fire was worshipped, and refusing to build it up again, as
was enjoined him; the King thereupon mightily enraged, caused all the
Christians Oratories or Churches in his Dominions to be demolished likewise,
and that horrible persecution before mentioned, to storm against them. Could
the Christians find means and opportunity to erect Churches, that is, houses
for their Religion under a Pagan government in Persia, and could they not under
the Roman Empire?

The other Objection is from the Authors of Apologies against the Gentiles,
Object. 2.
Origin against Celsus, Minutius Felix, Arnobius, and Lactantius, who when the
Gentiles object Atheism to the Christians, as having no Templa, no Arae, no
Simulacra; these Authors are so far from pleading they had any such, that they
answer by way of concession, not only granting they had none, but (which is
more) affirming, they ought not to have, and condemning the Gentiles which had.
Celsus, says Origin, ait nos Araru^, and statuaru^, Temploru^que fundationes
fugere: Origin denies it not, but gives the reason: Templorum fundationes
fugimus, quia ubi per Jesus doctrinam comperimus, quemadmodum colendus sit Deus;
ea nos evitamus, quae sub pietatis praetextu and opinione quadam impios
reddant, qui a vero per Iesum cultu aberrando falluntur, qui utique solus est
vericultus via, vereque illud profatur, Ego sum via, veritas, and vita.

MINUTIUS FELIX when Caecilius objects, Cur occultare and abscondere, quicquid
illud quod colunt magnopere nituntur....Cur nullas aras habent? Templa nulla?
nulla not a Simulacra?.....nisi illud quod colunt and interprimunt aut
puniendum est, aut pudendum; brings in his Octavius answering thus: Putatis
autem nos occultare quod colimus, si Delubra and Aras non habemus? Quod enim
simulacrum Deo fingam, cum sirecte existimes, sit Dei homo ipse simulacrum?
Templum quod ei extruam, cum totus hic mundus, ejus opera fabricatus, eum
capere non possit? and cum homo laxius maneam, intra unam Aediculam vim tantae
Majestatis includam? nonne melius in nostra dedicandus est mente? in nostro imo
consecrandus est pectore?

ARNOBIUS In hac consuestis part crimen nobis maximum impietatis affigere,
quod neque Aedes sacras venerationis ad officia extruamus, non Deorum alicujus
Simulacrum constituamus aut formam, non altaria fabricemus, non Aras. He denies
none of this, but answers: Templa quaerimus in Deorum quos usus? aut in cujus
rei necessitatem, aut dicitis esse constructa, aut esse rursus aedificanda
censetis? etc.....

LACTANTIUS condemns the Gentiles for having them: Institut. adversus Gentes.
lib. 2. cap. 2.
Cur, inquit, oculos in coelum non tollitis? and, advocatis Deorum nominibus,
in aperto sacrificia celebratis? Cur ad parietes and ligna and lapides
potissimum, quam illo spectatis, ubi Deos esse creditis? Quid sibi Templa? Quid
Arae volunt? quid deniq, ipsa simulacra? Who would now think, that Christians
had any Churches or Houses of worship in these Authors days?

This Objection indeed looks very big at the first sight, but it is no more but
a show, and we shall deal well enough with it. For we are to take notice, that
these Authors all four of them lived and wrote within, and after the third
Seculum was begun, and the eldest of them Minutius Felix after Tertullian;
Origin after him: yea, why do I say, after the third Seculum was begun, or
within it? when as 2. of them, Arnobius and Lactantius, lived and wrote rather
after it was ended, and in the beginning of the fourth; Arnobius in the time of
the Persecution of Diocletian, Lactantius somewhat after him: for he was his
Scholar and dedicates his Institutions adversus Gentes, to Constantine the
Great.

Now then remember, what authorities and testimonies were even now produced for
the Christians Oratories all that Seculu^ throughout, not probabilities only,
but such as are altogether irrefragable and past contradiction. This they seem
not to have considered, unless they dissembled it, who so securely urge these
passages, to infer a Conclusion point-blanck against evidence of Fact. As for
example (I will allege no more, but what is out of possibility to be denied or
eluded.) Had the Christians no Oratories or Churches in Gregory Thaumaturgus
his time? Had they none in S. Cyprians? Had they none in the days of Dionysius
Alexandrinus? Had they none, when Galienus released their (...)? Had they none
in those halcyonian days whereof Eusebius speaks, when the multitude of
Christians was grown so great, that (...), the ancient Aedifices were no longer
able to contain their Assemblies; but that they were fain to build new and
spacious Churches in every City from the foundations? Had they none, when the
Edict of Diocletian came forth for demolishing them? For all these were before,
that either Arnobius or Lactantius wrote. Let those therefore, who put so much
confidence in these passages, tell us, before they conclude, how to untie this
knott, and then they shall say something.

What then, will you say, is the meaning of these passages, and how may they be
satisfied, and this scruple taken off? I answer: The Gentiles in these
Objections had a peculiar notion of what they called a Temple, and these
Fathers and Authors, in their disputes with them, answer them according unto
it. For they defined a Temple by an Idol and the enclosure of a Deity; not of
the statue or Image only, but of the Demon himself: that is, they supposed
their gods by the power of spells and magical consecrations, to be retained and
shut up in their Temples, as birds in a Cage, or the devil within a circle;
that so their suppliants might know where to have them, when they had occasion
to seek unto them; and that, for such retaining or circumscribing of them in a
certain Place, an Idol was necessary, as the center of their collocation. Thus
much Origin himself will inform us in those his disputes against Celsus, as in
his 3. Book page 135. Editionis Graecolat; where he describes, (...), Temples
and Idols to be places where Demons are (...), enthroned or seated, either
having praeoccupied such places of themselves, (...), or brought thither by
certain ceremonies and magical invocations, do as it were dwell there. And
again, Lib. 7. page 385. in fin. telling us, that Demons (...), set in those
kind of forms and places, (viz. Idols and Temples) (...), etc. and either
lodged and confined thither by magical consecrations, or otherwise having
praeoccupied the places of themselves; where they are delightfully fed and
refreshed (for so the Gentiles thought) with the nidor and savor of the
Sacrifices. I shall not need to produce the rest of his sayings to the same
purpose; let him that will, consult him further in the end of that 7. Book page
389. and a little before p. 387. in fine. To this confining of gods in Temples
(that so those that had occasion to use their help might not be to seek, but
know where to find them;) that also of Menander cited by Justin Martyr, in his
De Monarchia Dei, has reference.

(...) (says he) (...), -- (...).

No God pleases me that gads abroad,
None that leaves his house shall come in my Book,
-- A just and good God ought
To tarry at home to save those that placed him.
According to this notion of a Temple, these Authors alleged grant, that
Christians, neither had any Temples, no nor ought to have; Forasmuch as the God
whom they worshipped, was such a one as filled the heaven and the earth, and
dwelt not in Temples made with hands. And because the Gentiles appropriated the
name of a Temple to this notion of encloistering a Deity by an Idol; therefore
the Christians of those first Ages, for the most part, abstained therefrom,
especially when they had to deal with Gentiles; calling their houses of
Worship Ecclesiae, or (...) (whence is the Dutch and our English Kurk and
Church) in Latin Dominica; (...) and (...), that is, Oratories, or (...), or
(...), or the like: seldom (...), or Templa; that appellation being grown, by
the use of both sides, into a name of distinction of the houses of Gentile
superstition from those of Christian Worship. Which that I affirm, not upon
bare conjecture, these examples will make manifest. First that of Aurelian the
Emperor, before alleged, in his Epistle to the Senate, According to this
notion of Templum, Tertul. c. 15. de Idololatria. Si Templis renunciasti,
neseceris Templum janu^^ tuam. Et de corona mil. Excubabit (nempe) Christianus)
pro Templis quibus renunciavit? and coenabit illic ubi Apostolo non placet? Id
est, in Idolaeo. 1 Cor. cap. 8. 10.
De libris Sibyllinis inspiciendis: Miror vos, Patres sancti, tamdiu de
aperiendis Sibyllinis dubitasse libris, perinde quasi in Christianorum
ECCLESIA, non in TEMPLO Deorum omnium tractaretis. And that of Zeno Veronensis
in his Sermon de Continentia: Proponimus itaque, ut saepe contingit, in unum
sibi convenire diversae religionis diem, quo tibi ECCLESIA, illis adeunda sint
TEMPLA. (He speaks of a Christian woman married to a Gentile.) That also of S.
Hierom in his Epistle ad Riparium, saying of Julian the Apostate, Quod
sanctorum BASILICAS, aut de struxerit, aut in TEMPLA converterit. Thus they
spoke, when they would distinguish: Otherwise, now and then, the Christian
Fathers use the words (...) or Templum, for Ecclesia; but respecting the Temple
of the true God at Jerusalem, not the notion of the Gentiles.

That this answer is true and genuine, I Galienus and Aurelian; and a
controversy about one of them referred unto the latter; when also the
Emperors Edicts flew about in every City for demolishing them. Why therefore
do they object in this manner, but because, for the defect of something they
thought thereto necessary, they esteemed not those Oratories for Temples?

Secondly, because in that dispute between Origin and Celsus, it is supposed by
both, that the Persians and Jews were, as concerning this matter, in like
condition with the Christians; neither of both enduring to worship their Gods
in Temples. Hear Origin speak, Lib. 7. p. 385, 386. Licet Scythae, Afrique
Numidae, and impii Seres aliaeque gentes, ut Celsus ait....atque etiam Persae
aversentur TEMPLA, ARAS, STATVAS, non eandem aversandi causam, esse illis and
nobis: and a little after; Inter abhorrentes a statuarum, templorum, ararum
ceremoniis, Scythae, Numidae, impiique Seres and Persae, aliis moventur
rationibus, quam Christiani and Iudaei, quibus religio est sic numen colere.
Illarum enim gentium, nemo ab his alienus est....quod intelligat, Daemonas
DEVINCTOS haerere CERTIS LOCIS and STATVIS, sive incantatos quibusda^ magicis
carminibus, sive alias incubantes locis semel praeoccupatis, ubi lurconum more
se oblectant victimarum nidoribus.....Caeterum, Christiani homines, and Iudaei,
sibi temperant ab his, propter illud legis; Dominum Deum tuum timebis, and ipsi
soli servies: item propter illud; Non erunt tibi alieni Diipraeter me, and, Non
facies tibi ipsi simulacrum, etc. Lo here, it is all one with Origin to have
Templa, as it was to worship So with Tertullian in the places before alleged
in the margin Renunciasse Templis dicitur qui Idolis.
other gods: as it was a little before with Minutius Felix his Octavius (if you
mark it) to have Delubra and Simulacra.

Yet certain, neither Celsus nor Origin, whatsoever they here say of the
Persians and Jews, were ignorant, that the Persians had their S^rabo ^^. 15. in
append ad Herodot. Theod. li. 5. c. 38. Yea ^e de (...) Nanea in Elyma de
Perfidis. 1 Mac. 6. 2. 2 Mac. c. 1. ver. 13.
Pyraea or Pyrathaea (Houses where the Fire was worshipped) though without
Images or Statues: also, that the Jews had both then, and also formerly, their
Synagogues and Proseuchae, in the places and Countries where they were
dispersed; and once a most glorious and magnificent Temple or Sanctuary: Ergo,
by Temples they understand not houses of prayer and religious rites in the
general; i. (...) not (...)
but (...), places where Demons were incloistered by the position of an Idol,
or consecrated Statue. And here let me add (because it is not impertinent)
what I have observed in reading the Itinerarium of Benjamin Tudelensis the Jew;
namely, that he expresses constantly after this manner, the Oratories of Jews,
Turks, and Christians by differing names: those of the Jews he calls (...).i.
Houses of assembly, or Synagogues: The Turkish Mosquees (...) Houses of prayer;
but the Christian Churches, because of Images (yea that renowned Church of S.
Sophie it self) he called always (...) BAMOTH, the name of the Idol-Temples in
the old Testament, which we translate High Places. This I note for an example
of that pronenesse in Religions of a contrary Rite, thus to distinguish, as
other things, so their Places of worship by diversity of names, though they
communicate in the same common nature and use.

Arnobius (whose words were as pressing as any of the rest, yet) in the self
same Books acknowledges the Christians Oratories by the name of CONVENTICULA,
or Meeting places; by that name endeavoring I suppose, to express the Greek
word (...). The place is about the end of his 4. Book adversus Gentes: Quod si
haberet vos (says he) aliqua vestris pro religionibus indignatio, has potius
literas (he means the Poets absurd and blasphemous fictions and tales of their
gods) hos exurere debuistis olim libros; istos demoliri, dissolvere Theatra
haec potius, in quibus infamiae numinu^ propudiosis quotidie publica^tur in
fabulis (of this their scurrilous dishonouring of their gods upon the Stage he
had spoken much before) Nam nostra quide^ scripta, cur ignibus meruerint dari?
cur immaniter CONVENTICVLA dirui? in quibus Liturgiae Christianae discriptio.
summus Orator Deus, pax cunctis and venia postulatur, magistratibus,
exercitibus, Regibus, familiaribus, inimicis, adhuc vitam degentibus, and
resolutis corporum vinctione, etc.He alludes unto the burning of the Books of
Scripture and demolition of the Christians Oratories by Diocletian; of which
see Eusebius, Lib. 8. cap. 3. And know from hence when Arnobius wrote.

Nay Origin himself, one of the first brought to depose against us, (if Rufinus
his Translator, deserve any credit) will in his Homily upon the 9. chap. of
Joshua testify both for Churches and Altars among Christians in his time. For,
thus he allegorizeth there the story of the Gibeonites, whose lives Joshua and
the flders spared, but gave them no better entertainme^t, than to be hewers of
wood and drawers of water for the Congregation, and for the Altar of the Lord.
Sunt quidam in Ecclesia (says he) credentes quidem, and habentes fidem in
Deum, and acquiescentes in omnibus divinis praeceptis, quique etiam erga servos
Dei religiosi sunt and servire eis cupiunt; sed and ad ornatu^ ECCLESIAE vel
ministerium satis prompti paratique sunt: in actibus vero suis, and
conversatione propria, obscoenitatibus and vitiis involuti, nec omnino
deponentes veteremhominem cum actibus suis, sed involuti vetustis vitiis and
obscoenitatibus suis, sicut and isti (.i. Gabeonitae) pannis and calceamentis
veteribus obtecti; praeter hoc, quod in Deum credunt, and erga servos Dei, vel
ECCLESIAE cultum (.i. ornatum) videntur esse devoti, nihil adhibent
emendationis vel innovationis in mores, etc..... And a little after: Veruntamen
sciendum est, quantum ex hujuscemodi figuraru^ adumbrationibus edocemur, quod
si qui tales sunt in nobis, quorum fides hoc tantu^modo habet, ut ad ECCLESIAM
venia^t, and inclinent caput suum sacerdotibus (mark here a custom) officia
exhibeant, servos Dei honore^t, ad ornatum quoque ALTARIS vel ECCLESIAE aliquid
conferant, non tamen adhibent studium, ut etiam mores suos excolant, actus
emendent, vitia deponant, castitatem colant, iracundiam mitigent, avaritiam
reprimant:.....sciant, sibi, qui tales sunt, qui emendare se nolunt, sed in his
usque in senectutem ultimam per severant, partem, sortenque ab Jesus Domino cum
Gabeonitis esse tribuendam.

Thus Origin by his Interpreter. And if any where Rufinus may be trusted, sure
he may in this, forasmuch as in his Peroration in Epist. ad Romanos, he has
given us his word, that in his translation of this and the next Book, he took
not his wonted liberty, to insert or alter any thing, but simply expressed
every thing, as he found it. Hear his words. Illa (says he) quae in Jesus Nava
and in Iudicum librum and in 36, 37, and 38. Psalm. scripsimus, simpliciter
expressimus ut invenimus, and non multo cum labor transtulimus. Vide locum and
Erasmi Censuram. Lib. Origin.Besides, he that but considers the matter,
together with the brevity of this Homily, cannot see a possibility, how these
passages can be an addition or supplement of the Translators, unless he made
the whole Homily: because the contents of them are the only argument thereof,
and being taken from it, nothing would be remaining.

Lastly, because the fore-alledged words of Lactantius are so usually brought
against us, though they be nothing urgent, and his time be altogether repugnant
to any such inference: yet absolutely to take away all scruple, let us hear
him also, Instit. Lib. 5. c. 2. expressly giving evidence for us, and that even
by the name of Templum. Ego (says he) cum in Bithynia literas oratorias
accitus docerem; contigissetque eodem tempore, ut Dei Templum everteretur: duo
extiterunt ibidem, qui jacenti atque abjectae veitati (the Christian verity)
nescio, utrum superbius an importunius, insultarunt. See the rest which
follows. This was when the Edict of Diocletian came forth for the demolishing
of the Christians Churches.

And thus, having removed that stumbling stone, which has been the main
inducement to the contrary opinion, so prejudicial to those works of religious
bounty and piety: I hope my proofs will find the freer passage with those of
understanding and judgment; to whose pious consideration I have devoted this
my Discourse.

FINIS.

