THE REVERENCE OF GODS HOUSE A Sermon preached at St. Mary's in Cambridge,
Before THE UNIVERSITIE ON St. MATTHIES day, Anno 1635/6.

BY JOSEPH MEDE B.D. and late Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

LEVIT. 19. 30. Reverence my Sanctuary. Council. Gangrense Anno Christi 325.
can. 5. (...).

Si quis docet, domum Dei contemptibilem esse, Anathema sit.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for John Clark, and are to be sold at his Shop under
St. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1638.

PErlegi hanc Concionem, cui Titulus est, [ The Reverence of Gods House] and
dignissimam judico, quae typis mandetur.

Ex Aedibus Lambethanis October. 23. 1638. Rmo in Christo Patri, and Dno D. Arch:
Cant. Sacellanus Domesticus. GUIL: BRAY.

THE REVERENCE OF GODS HOUSE.
ECCLESIASTES C. 5. verse. 1. Look to thy foot [or feet] when thou come to the
House of God: and be more ready to obey, then to offer the sacrifice of fools;
for they know not that they do evil.
SOLOMON, whom God chose to build that sacred and glorious Temple to his Name,
it has pleased his holy Spirit to make also our principal Instructor how we
ought to demean our selves in such sacred places. This appears, as by that
his solemn and famous prayer made at the dedication thereof, so also by this
Scripture which I have now begun to read; the first seven verses of this
chapter, if we will rightly understand them, being wholly spent upon that
argument, and containing praecepts and instructions fitted to the several
duties of holy worship we are to perform, both at our coming thither, and
whilst we remain there.

To unfold them all, were too much for the shortness of the time allotted me:
May it please you therefore to vouchsafe me your Christian patience, and
charitable attention, whilst I utter my thoughts upon the words I have now
read. For the better and more distinct explication whereof, consider in them
these two parts: An Admonition, and a Caution. 1. An Admonition of reverent and
awful demeanor when we come to Gods House; Look to thy foot, or feet, when
thou come to the House of God. 2. A Caution, Not to praeferre the secondary
Service of God before the first and principal; Be more ready to obey, than to
offer the sacrifice of fools; for they know not, that they do evil. In the
first or Admonition I will consider two things. 1. The Place, Gods House. 2.
The Duty of those who come thither; Look to thy feet. Of these in order, and
first of the Place, Gods House.

SECTION 1.
THE House of God is the place set apart for his worship and service, and so
has peculiar Relation unto him: wherewith being invested, it becomes sacred
and holy; not only whilst divine duties are performed therein, as some
erroneously affirm, but as long as it is for such use: namely according to the
nature of other sacred things, which continue their state of separatenesse and
sanctity, so long as that relation they have unto God (wherein this Sanctity
consists) be not quite abolished.

To erect and set apart such places as these for the exercise of the Rites of
Religion, is derived from the instinct of nature, and approved of God from the
beginning. It began not with that Tabernacle or ambulatorie Temple which Moses
caused to be made by Gods appointment at Mount Sinai; but was much more
ancient. Noah built an Altar, as soon as he came out of the Ark: Abraham,
Isaak, and Jacob, (wheresoever they came to pitch their Tents) erected places
for divine worship, (that is, Altars with their septs and enclosures) without
any special appointment from God. Iaakob in particular vowed a place for
divine worship, by the name of Gods House, where he would pay the tithes of all
that God should give him, Genesis 28. Lo here a Church endowed! Yea Moses
himself, Exodus 33. 7. before the Ark and that glorious Tabernacle were yet
made, pitched a Tabernacle, for the same purpose, without the Camp, whither
every one that sought the Lord was to go. And all this was done tanqua^ recepti
moris, as a thing of custom, and as mankind by tradition had learned to
accommodate the worship of their God, by appropriating some place to that use;
nature teaching them, that the work was honored and dignified by the
peculiarnesse of the place appointed for the same, and that if any work were so
to be honored, there was nothing it more beseemed, than the worship and
service of Almighty God, the most peculiar and incommunicable act of all other.

Nay more than this: It was believed in those elder times, that that Country or
Territory, wherein no Place was set apart for the worship of God, was
unhallowed and unclean. Which I think, I rightly gather from that Story in the
Book of Josua, of the Altar built by Reuben, Gad, and the half Tribe of
Manasseh upon the bank of the River Jordan: which Joshua and the Elders, as
their words intimate, supposed they had done, lest the land of their
possession, being by the River Jordan cut off from the land of Canaan, where
the Lords Tabernacle was, and so having no place therein consecrated to the
worship of their God, might otherwise be an unclean and unhallowed habitation.
Hear the words of Phineas and the Princes sent to dissuade them, Joshua 22. 19
and judge whether they import not as I have said. If the land (say they) of
your possession be Note that our Copies of the Lxx here corruptly read (...)
for (...).
unclean, then pass ye over unto the Land of the possession of the LORD where
the LORDS Tabernacle dwells, and take possession amongst us: but rebel not
against the LORD, nor against us, in building you an Altar, besides the Altar
of the LORD your God.

Now concerning the condition and property of Places thus sanctified or
hallowed, what it is; whence can we learn better, than from that which the
Lord spoke unto Moses, Exodus 20. immediately after he had pronounced the
Decalogue from Mount Sinai: where premising, that they should not make with Him
gods of gold and gods of silver; but that they should make him an Altar of
earth (as namely their ambulatory state then permitted, otherwise of stone) and
thereon sacrifice their burnt offerings and peace offerings: he adds; In all
places where I record my Name, I will come unto thee and bless thee, (...) In
every place where the remembrance or memorial of my Name shall be; or,
wheresoever that is, which I have, or shall appoint to be the remembrance or
memorial of my Name and presence, there I will come unto thee, and bless
thee. Lo here a description of the Place set apart for divine worship: It is
the Place where God records his Name, and comes unto men to bless them. Two
things are here specified; the monument, record or memorial of Gods Name:
secondly, His coming or meeting there with men. Of both let us enquire
distinctly, what they mean.

I know, it would not be untrue, to say in general, that Gods Name is recorded
or remembered in that place upon which his Name is called, or which is called by
his Name (as the Scripture speaks) that is, which is dedicate to his worship
and service: but there is some more special thing intended here; namely, the
Memorial or Monument of Gods Name, is that token or Symbol whereby he
testifies his Covenant and commerce with men. Now although the Ark called the
Ark of the Covenant, or Testimony (wherein lay the two Tables ^i. Heb. 9 4.
the Book or Articles of the Covenant, and Manna, the Bread of the Covenant)
were afterward made for this purpose, to be the standing Memorial of Gods
Name and presence with his people yet cannot that be here, either only, or
specially aimed at; because when these words were spoken, it had no being, nor
was there yet any commandment given concerning the making thereof. Wherefore
the Record here mentioned, I understand with a more general reference to any
Memorial, whereby Gods Covenant and commerce with men was testified: Such as
were the Sacrifices, immediately before spoken of, and the seat of them the
Altar; which therefore may seem to be in some sort, the more particularly here
pointed unto. For that these were Rites of remembrance, whereby the Name of God
was commemorated or recorded, and his Covenant with men renewed and testified,
might be easily proved. Whence it is, that that which was burned upon the Altar
is so often called the Memorial; as in Leviticus the 2. 5. 6. and 24.
chapters. Accordingly the son of Syrach tells us, c. 45. 16. that Aaron was
chosen out of all men living, to offer Sacrifices to the Lord, incense and a
sweet savor, for a Memorial, to make reconciliation for his people. Add also
that, Isay 66. 3. Qui recordatur thure, quasi qui benedicat Idolo. He that
without true contrition and humiliation before the Lord) records, or makes
remembrance, with incense, is as if he blessed an Idol. But I must not stay too
long upon this.

You will say; What is all this to us, now in the time of the Gospel? I
answer, Yes. For did not Christ ordain the holy Eucharist to be the Memorial
of his Name in the New Testament? This (says he) is my Body, (...), Do this
for my commemoration, or in Memorial of me. And what if I should affirm, that
Christ is as much present here, as the Lord was upon the Mercy-seat between the
Cherubins. Why should not then the Place of this Memorial under the Gospel
have some semblable sanctity to that, where the Name of God was recorded in
the Law? And though we be not now tied to one only Place, as those under the
Law were; and that God hears the faithful prayers of his Servants,
wheresoever they are made unto him, (as also he did then:) yet should not the
Places of his Memorial be promiscuous and common, but set apart to the sacred
purpose. In a word, all those sacred Memorials of the Jewish Temple are both
comprehended and excelled in this One of Christians, the Sacrifices,
Shewbread, and Ark of the Covenant; Christ's Body and Blood in the Eucharist
being all these unto us in the New Testament, agreeably to that of the Apostle,
Romans 3. 25. God has set forth Jesus Christ to be our (...) through faith in
his blood, that is, our Propitiatory or Mercy seat, for so it is called in the
Greek both of the old and new Testament, nor is the word I think ever used but
in that sense, unless in Ezech. 43. for the Settle of the Altar.

But you will say, This Christian Memorial is not always actually present in
our Churches, as some one or other at least of those in the Law were in the
Temple. I answer; It is enough, it is wont to be; as the Chair of estate loses
not its relation and due respect, though the King be not always there. And
remember, that the Ark of the Covenant was not in Jerusalem, when Daniel opened
his windows and prayed thitherward; yea that it was wanting in the Holy Place
(I mean that sacred Cabinet made by Moses) all the time of the second (or
Zorobabels) Temple, and yet the place esteemed notwithstanding as if it had
been there.

You will yet except and say; That in the Old Testament those things were
appointed by divine Law and Commandment; but in the New we find no such thing.
I answer, in things for which we find no new Rule given in the New Testament,
there we are referred and left to the analogy of the Old. This the Apostles
proof taken from thence for the maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel, 1
Cor. 9. [ viz. Thus were they, Ergo so God has ordained that we] will give us
to understand: likewise the practice of the Church in baptizing Infants,
derived surely from the analogy of Circumcision: The hallowing of every first
day of the week, as one in every seven, from the analogy of the Jewish
Sabbath, and other the like. St. Hierome witnesses the same in that saying of
his, Ad Evegrium.
Vt sciamus, traditiones Apostolicas sumptas ex Vet. Test. quod Aaron, and
Filii ejus, at que Levitae in Templo fuerunt; hoc sibi Episcopi, Presbyteri, at
que Diaconi vendicant in Ecclesia. That we may know (says he) that the
Apostolic traditions were derived from the Old Testament: that which Aaron,
his Sons, and the Levites were in the Temple, the same do Bishops, Priests and
Deacons claim in the Church. For we are to consider, that the end of Christ's
coming into the world was not properly to give new laws unto men, but to
accomplish the Law already given, and to publish the Gospel of reconciliation,
Matthew. 5. 17, 18
through his Name, to those who had transgressed it. Whence it is that we find
not the style of the New Testament to carry a form of enacting Laws, almost
any where: but those which are there mentioned, to be brought in occasionally,
only by way of proof, of interpretation, exhortation, application, or the
like, and not as by way of constitution or re-enacting. Mean while, lest I
should be mistaken, mark well that I said not, the Old Testament was to be
our rule simply in the case mentioned, but the Analogy thereof only; that is,
this regulation is to be made according to that proportion, which the
difference of the two Covenants, and the things in them admits, and no further;
the more particular application and limitation of which Analogy, is to be
referred to the judgment and prudence of the Church.

There comes here very fitly into my mind a passage of Clemens (a man of the
Apostolic age, Philip. 4. 3.
he whose name St. Paul says was written in the Book of life) in his genuine
Epistle Ad Corinthios, lately set forth, page 52. (...) (says he) (...) that
is; All those duties, which the Lord has commanded us to do, we ought to do
them regularly and orderly: Our Oblations and divine Services to celebrate them
on set and appointed times. For so he has ordained, not that we should do
them at hap hazard, and without order, but at certain determined days and
times. Where also, and by who^ he will have them executed, himself has defined
according to his supreme will. But where has the Lord defined these things,
unless he has left us to the Analogy of the Old Testament?

It follows in the text alleged; There I will come unto thee, and bless
thee. In the Place where the Lords Memorial is, where his Colors, as I may so
speak, are displayed and set up, there, in a special manner, he vouchsafes his
presence with the sons of men to bless them: or to speak rotunde, Where his
memorial is, there His (...) SHECINAH or (...) is (as the Hebrew Masters term
it) that is, His GLORY. The Gentiles ascribed the presence of their gods to the
places where Images and Statues were erected and consecrated for them. Hermes
Trism. in Asclepio. Athenag. Legate. pro Christ. Origin contra Cells. lib. 7. and
3. Eusebius. Praepar. Ev. lib. 5. c. 15.
But such personal similitudes the God of Israel abhorres, and forbids to be
made unto Him; yet promises his presence in every place where the Memorial or
record of his Name shall be; but of his own appointment, not of man's devising.
For thus, I suppose, is the text there to be understood, and to be construed by
way of Antithesis or opposition: You shall not make with me gods of silver, nor
gods of gold: An Altar only of earth or of Verse. 25.
stone shall thou make unto me, to offer thy Sacrifices upon. For in every
place, where I shall record my Name, I will come unto thee, and bless thee.
And here take notice, that for this reason the Tabernacle of the Lord was
called (...) The Tabernacle of meeting; not of men's meeting together, as is
commonly supposed, when we translate it, Tabernacle of the Congregation, but of
Gods meeting there with men. I have a good author for it. For so the Lord
himself gives the reason of the name in three several places of the Law; (...)
The Tabernacle of meeting, where I will meet with you. See Exodus 29. 42. 30.
36. Number. 17. 4. and Masius in Ios. c. 18.

SECTION 2.
THus WE have seen, what is the condition and property of that Place, which in
my Text is called Gods House. But before I proceed to speak of the Duty of
those who come thither (which was the second thing I propounded) there is one
thing yet to be cleared, concerning that which I last mentioned; namely, How
God is said to come unto, to be present with men in one place more than
another; seeing his Presence fills every place, heaven being his throne, and the
whole earth his footstool. For although we read often in holy Scripture of
such a SHECINAH or specialitie of the divine presence, and have it often in our
mouths; yet, what it is, and wherein the Ratio thereof consists, is seldom,
if at all, enquired into. When we speak of Churches, we content our selves to
say, that Gods special presence there is in his Word and Sacraments: But
though it be true, that the Divine Majesty is there specially present where his
Word and Sacraments are; yet seems not this speciality of presence to be the
same with his Word and Sacraments, but a diverse relation from them. This may
be gathered, in some sort, out of those words of Exodus, whereupon we have so
long dwelt, as where the recording of Gods Name, and his coming thither, are
spoken of as two: but is more strongly evinced by such instances of Scripture,
where the Lord is said to have been specially present in places where this
Record of his Word and Sacraments was not; as for example, to Moses in the
Bush, to Iaacob at Bethel, and the like. The true Ratio therefore of this
SHECINAH or Speciality of divine presence must be sought, and defined by
something which is common to al these, and not by that which is proper to some
only.

Well then, to hold you no longer in suspense: this Specification of the divine
presence, whereby God is said to be in one place more than another; I suppose
(under correction) to consist in his train or retinue. A King is there where
his Court is, where his train and retinue are: So God the Lord of Hosts is
there specially present, where the heavenly Guard, the blessed Angels keep
their sacred station and rendevous.

That this is consonant to the revelation of holy Scripture, I show first from
the collection of inference which the Patriarch Jacob makes, upon that divine
vision of his at Bethel: Genesis 28.
where having seen a ladder reaching from heaven to earth, and the Angels of
God ascending and descending upon it: Surely (says he) the Lord is in this
place, and I knew it not. How dreadful is this place! It is no other but the
House of God, even the gate of heaven; that is, Heavens Guildnall, Heavens
Court; namely because of the Angels. For the Gate was wont to be the Judgment
Hall, and the Place where Kings and Senators used to sit, attended by their
guard and ministers.

Secondly, I prove it from that interpretative expression used in the New
Testament of the Lords descent upon Mount Sinai, when the Law was given;
intimating that the specification of the presence of the Divine Majesty there,
also consisted in the Angelical retinue there encamping. For so St. Steven,
Act. 7. 53. You who have received the Law by the disposition of Angels, and
have not kept it. St. Paul twice; First, Gal. 3. 19. The Law was added because
of transgressions, (...), ordained by Angels in the hand of a mediator. And
again, Heb. 2. 2. he calls the Law, (...), the word spoken by Angels. Howbeit
in the story it self we find no such thing expressed, but only that the Lord
descended upon the Mount in a fiery and smoking cloud, accompanied with
thunders and lightnings, with an earthquake, and the voice of a trumpet.
Whence then should this expression of St. Steven and the Apostle proceed, but
from a supposition, that the special presence of the Divine Majesty,
wheresoever it is said to be, consisted in the encamping of his sacred retinue
the Angels: for that of himself, he, who fills the heaven and the earth,
could not descend, nor be in one place more than another?

Yea all the Apparitions of the Divine Majesty in Scripture are described by
this retinue: That of the Ancient of days coming to judgment, Dan. 7. 10.
Thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before him; to wit, of Angels. Whence we read in the Gospel, that
Christ our Savior shall come in the glory of his Father, that is, with an host
of Angels, as the Holy Ghost himself in the same places expounds it. For (...)
or Glory here signifies the presence of the Divine Majesty.

In the same style, of the same Appearing prophecieth Enoch, the seventh from
Adam, in the Epistle of St. Jude. (...), Behold, the Lord comes with his holy
Myriads, or ten thousands. For so it ought to be rendered, and not as we have
it, with ten thousand of his Saints. Wherefore here the vulgar Latin comes
nearer, which has, Ecce, Venit Dominus in sanctis millibus suis. A like
expression whereunto of the Divine presence we shall find in Moses Blessing,
Deuteronomy. 33. The Lord (says he) came That is, came unto them resting upon Sinai.
Compare Psalm. 68. verse. 17. or 18.
from Sinai unto them, (.i. unto Israel) and rose up from Seir unto them, he
shined forth from mount Paran, he came with his holy ten thousands, or holy
myriads, (for so it should be translated; then it follows) from his right hand
went a fiery law for them. From whence perhaps that notion of the Jewish
Doctors, followed by St. Steven and the Apostle, that the Law was given by
Angels, had its beginning. And thus you have heard out of Scripture, what that
is, whereby the special presence of the Divine Majesty is (as I suppose)
defined, that is, wherein it consists; namely, such as is applyable to all
places, wherein he is said to be thus present, even to Heaven it self his
throne and seat of glory, the proper place (as every one knows) of Angelical
residence.

Now, according to this manner of presence, is the Divine Majesty to be
acknowledged present, in the Places, where his Name is recorded: as in his
Temple under the Law, and in our Christian Oratories, or Churches under the
Gospel; namely, that the heavenly Guard there attend, and keep their
rendevous, as in their Masters House: according to that vision which the
Prophet Isay had thereof, Isay 6. I saw the Lord (says he) sitting upon a
Throne high and lifted up, and his train filled the Temple, [Lxx, and John 12.
(...) that is, the Angels and Seraphims his stipatores; as may be gathered from
that which immediately follows, where it is said, The Seraphims cried one unto
another, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord God of hoasts; the whole earth is full of
his Glory.

This King Agrippa in De Bello Iud. lib. 2. cap. 16.
Josephus intimates, in that Oration he is said to have made unto the Jews, a
little before that fatal siege, dehorting them from rebelling against the
Romans. Where speaking to the people hard by, and in view of that sacred
Temple, he has these words: (...), I call to witness your sacred Temple, and
To whom some think that voice may be referred before the destruction of the
Temple, Migremus hinc.
the holy Angels of God; namely, which encampe there.

The same is employed in that of the 138. Psalm, according to the translation
of the Lxx. and Vulgar: (...), In conspectu Angelorum psallam tibi, adorabo ad
Templum sanctum tuum, and confitebor Nomini tuo.i. Before the Angels I will
sing praise unto thee, I will worship toward thy holy Temple, and praise thy
Name.

And according to this sense I understand that of Solomon in this Book of
Ecclesiastes within a two or three verses of my Text, concerning vows to be
made in Gods House: When thou vowest a vow, defer not to pay it -- Better it
is, thou should not vow, than vow and not pay. Suffer not thy mouth to cause
thy flesh to sin, neither say thou BEFORE THE ANGEL, It was an error -- that
is, Let not such a foolish excuse come from thee in the house of God, before
the holy Angels. For note, that the word Angel may be taken As tree for trees,
leaf for leaves, Genesis 3. 2, 7, etc.
collectively, for more than one.

For this cause all the curtains of the Tabernacle were filled with the
pictures of Cherubins, and the walls of Solomon's Temple within with carved
Cherubins; the Ark of the Testimony overspread and covered with two mighty
Cherubins, having their faces looking toward it and the Mercy-seat ((...))
with their wings stretched forth on high, called Heb. 9. 5. The Cherubins of
glory, that is, of the divine Presence: all to signify, that where Gods sacred
Memorial is, the ensign of his Covenant and commerce with men; there the
blessed Angels out of duty give their attendance.

Nor is it to be overpassed, that the Jews at this day continue the like
opinion of their modern places of worship: namely, that the blessed Angels
frequent their assemblies, and praise and laud God with them in their
Synagogues: notwithstanding they have no other memorial of his there, than an
imitative one only; to wit, a Chest with a volume or roll of the Law therein,
in stead of the Ark with the two Tables. For thus speaks the Seder Tephilloth
or Form of prayer used by the Jews of Portugal: O Lord our God, the Angels
that supernall company, gathered together with thy people Israel here below,
do crown thee with praises, and all together do thrice redouble and cry that
spoken of by thy Prophet: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of hoasts, the whole earth
is full of his glory. They allude to Isayes Vision of the Glory of God,
abovementioned.

You will say; Such a presence of Angels perhaps there was in that Temple under
the Law; but there is no such thing in the Gospel? No? why? Are the Memorials
of Gods Covenant, his Insignia in the Gospel, less worthy of their
attendance, than those of the Law? or have the Angels, since the nature of man,
Jesus Christ our Lord, became their Head and King, gotten an exemption from
this service? Surely, not. St. Paul, if we will understand and believe him,
supposes the contrary, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, chap. 11. verse.
10. where treating of a comely and decent accommodation to be observed in
Church assemblies, and in particular of women's being covered or veiled there,
he enforces it from this presence of Angels. For this (says he) ought the
woman to have a covering on her head, (...), because of the Angels; namely,
which are there present. For otherwise the reason holds not, that she should
more be covered in the Place of Prayer, than any where else, unless the Angels
be more there, than elsewhere. This place much troubles the Expositors: But
see, what it is, to admit a truth: for now there is no difficulty in it.

And that the ancient Fathers conceived no less venerably of their Christian
Oratories in this particular, than the Jews did of their Temple, appears by
St. Chrysostom, who is very frequent in urging an awful and reverent
behavior in Gods house from this motive of Angelical presence. As in his
Homily In Morali.
36. in 1 Cor. where reproving the irreverent behavior of his Auditory in that
Church, in talking, walking, saluting, and the like, (which he says, was
peculiar unto them, and such as no Christians elsewhere in the world presumed
to do) he enforces his reproof, with words that come home to our purpose: Non
tonstrina, inquit, neque unguentaria of ficina, neque ulla alia opificum qui
sunt in foro, taberna, est Ecclesia; sed Locus Angelorum, Locus
Archangelorum,regia Dei, ipsum coelum. The Church ( says he) is no Barbers, or
Drug-sellers shop, nor any other craftsmans or merchants workhouse or warehouse
in the market place; but the place of Angels, the place of Archangels, the
palace of God, heaven it self.

And in his 4. Hom. de incomprehensibili Dei natura, toward the end; Cogita
apud quem proxime stas, quibuscum invoces Deum; scil. cum Cherubim, cum
Seraphim, cum omnibus coeli Virtutibus: animadverte quos habeas socios: satis
hoc tibi sit ad sobrietatem, cum recorder is te corpore constantem, and carne
coagmentatum admitti cum Virtutibus incorporeis celebrare omnium Dominum. Think
near whom thou stand, with whom thou invocatest God; namely, with Cherubims
and Seraphims, and all the Power of heaven: consider but what companions thou
have: let it be sufficient to persuade thee to sobriety, when thou remembrest,
that thou, who art compounded of flesh and blood, art admitted with the
incorpore all Powers, to celebrate the common Lord of all. But all this you
will say, the Angels may do in Heaven? well, let it be so, yet is it not
altogether out of our way: but the next places I shall bring, will not be so
eluded.

Namely that in his 15. Homily upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, against those
that laughed in the Church: Regiam quidem ingrediens, and habitu, and aspectu,
and incessu, and omnibus aliis te ornas and componis. Hic autem vere est Regia,
and plane hic talia qualia coelestia, and rides? Atque scio quidem, quod tu non
vides. Audi autem, quod ubique adsunt Angeli, and maxim in Domo Dei adsistunt
Regi, and omnia sunt impleta incorporeis illis Potestatibus. When thou go
into a Kings Palace, thou composest thy self to a comeliness in thy habit, in
thy look, in thy gate, and in all thy whole guise. But here is indeed the
Palace of a King, and the like attendance to that in heaven, and do thou
laugh? I know well enough thou see it not. But hear thou me, and know, that
Angels are every where, and that, chiefly in the house of God, they attend upon
their King, where all is filled with incorporeall Powers.;

The like unto this you shall find in his 24. Homily upon the Acts of the
Apostles. Know thou not, that thou stand here with Angels, that with them
thou singest, with them thou laudest God with hymns? and do thou laugh? See
the rest.

I will allege but one passage more of his, lest I should grow tedious, and
that is out of his 6. Book de Sacerdotio, not very far from the beginning,
where speaking of the time when the holy Eucharist is celebrated: (...) (says
he) Then the Angels stand by the Priest, and the whole Quire resounds with
celestial Powers, and the place about the Altar is filled with them, in honor
of him who is laid thereon, that is, of his Memorial. Compare with it a like
passage in his 3. Hom de incompreben sibili Det natura; Item Hom. 1. de verbis
Isaiae.

St. Ambrose acknowledges the same in c. 1. Luc. Non dubites assistere
Angelum, quando Christus assistit, Christus immolatur.

Yea Tertullian (in whose time, which was within 200. years after Christ, some
will scarcely believe, that Christians had any such places as Churches at all)
if I understand him, intimates as much in his lib. de Oratione c. 12. where
reprehending the irreverent gesture of some in sitting at the time of prayer in
the Church: Siquidem (says he) irreverens est assidere sub conspectu,
contraque conspectum ejus, quem cum maxim reverearis ac venereris: quanto
magis sub conspectu Dei vivi, ANGELO adhuc ORATIONIS adstante, factum illud
irreligiosissimum est; nisi exprobramus Deo, quod nos oration fatigaverit? If it
be an irreverent thing to sit in the sight and before him, whom thou in a
special manner honor and reverencest: how much more is it an act most
irreligious to do it in the presence of the living God, the ANGEL OF PRAYER
yet standing by; unless we upbraid God, that we have wearied our selves with
praying? Mark, In the presence of the living God, the Angel of prayer standing
by] that is, in the presence of the living God specified by his Angel; the
latter being an explanation of the former. It is like unto that in this chapter
of my Text; Say not thou before the Angel, It was an error: yet I believe not
borrowed thence; forasmuch as the Lxx, whose translation Tertullian was only
acquainted with, and every where follows, have no mention of Angel in that
place, but of God; rendering it, (...), Say not before the presence of God.
Which shows how they understood it.

I cite the passages of these Fathers thus at large, lest I might to some seem
to broach a novelty. And though some of those of St. Chrysostom be
hyperbolically expressed; yet for the maine and substance of what he intended,
I believe it to be true, and ground my belief upon the authority of St. Paul
before alleged, (...), Because of the Angels. If any shall say, whatsoever
were then, they will not believe there is any such kind of presence in our
Churches now: I must tell them; If it be so, it is because of our irreverent
and unseemly behavior in them, which makes those blessed spirits loath our
company. For though they be invisible and incorporeall creatures, yet can they
not look into our hearts, (that is God their Masters prerogative) but are
witnesses of our outward behavior and actions only; and it was a case of
external decorum, wherein the Apostle mentions this presence of theirs for a
motive or reason: For this cause ought the woman to have a covering on her
head, because of the Angels. For they love not to behold any thing that is
uncomely and unbeseeming, but fly from it: and if we lose their company, the
best members of our congregation are wanting.

Thus you have heard what is the dignity and prerogative of Gods House. Who now
that considers and believes this, (and there was a time when it was believed)
will not say with the Patriarch Jacob, when he saw the Angels ascending and
descending at Bethel, Quam reverenda sunt haec loca! How reverend are these
places! For every Place where the Name of God is recorded is Bethel, where the
Angels of God are ascending and descending, that is, God in a special manner
present and meeting with men. How seemly therefore, orderly and awfully should
we compose our selves in them? how reverent should our manner be at our coming
into them? which is the second thing I propounded to speak of. Thus much
therefore of Gods House; I come now to the Duty of those who come thither;
Look to thy feet when thou come to the House of God.

SECTION 3.
LOOK TO THY FEET, (...): for so the Cethib or textuall reading has it; the
Masorites in the margin note another reading (...) in the singular number. But
which way soever of the two it be read, the sense is still the same; Look to
thy foot being to be expounded plurally Look to thy feet, as in other places of
Scripture. The symbolicall application of this precept to the purifying and
ridding the mind of corrupt and fleshly thoughts, though it be useful, and
the thing it self true, yet I will let pass, as being not argumentative; and
betake my self wholly to the (...) or literal meaning, which the symbolicall
or tropologicall signification destroys not, but presupposes. The meaning
therefore in general is: Have a care, that thy feet be as they should be, when
thou go, (or come) to the house of God. But what is that? Most of the
Interpreters (says Aben Ezra) compare it with that which is said of
Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 19. (...) He did not his feet, that is, He washed them
not. So here, Look to thy feet, when thou go to the House of God, is as much
as to say, Come not into Gods House illot is pedibus, with unwashed feet. This
is true, but goes not far enough. For I suppose here is an allusion in
particular to that rite of Discalceation used by the Jews and other nations of
the Orient, at their coming into sacred places; namely, that whereof the Lord
spoke to Moses, Ex. 3. and again to Joshua, Ios. 5. Exue calceamenta tua de
pedibus tuis; locus enim in quo stas, terra sancta est. Put thy shoes from off
thy feet; for the place whereon thou stand is holy ground.

For although the verb (...) here used, signifies properly motum a loco, that
is, to go; and not in locum, to come, (in which respect the rite of washing
the feet perhaps, being a preparatory act, might agree better with it) yet is
it not always so used: besides, it is an usual trope in Scripture, ex
antecedente intelligere consequens; which has place here. That whereby I
gather it, is because the precepts following my text, whereunto this word of
motion belongs (...), (.i. in common) are, not of things to be done, when we
are going to the House of God, but when we are come thither: as, when thou
come to the House of God, be not rash nor hasty to utter any thing before
God, etc. When thou come to the House of God, and make a vow before him,
defer not to pay it, -- neither say thou before the Angel, etc. -- To which may
be added the latter part of my text, When thou come to the House of God, be
more ready to hear, or obey, than to offer the sacrifice of fools. All, as
you see, are of things to be done, when we are come unto Gods house. Therefore
(...) which is common to them, should rather note motu^ in termino ad quem; not
when thou go, but when thou come to the House of God; Accordingly the
vulgar Latin has ingrediens Domum Dei.
and accordingly this admonition of care to be had of the feet, to intend
something to be observed, when we come there, rather than when we are going
thither. Which was, as I have said, among the Jews and other Nations, of the
Orient especially, that rite of Discalceation, or putting off their shoes,
still used and continued amongst them unto this day, when they come into their
Temples and sacred places.

Which that I affirm not without good warrant, in case any one shall doubt
thereof, these testimonies following will sufficiently evidence; First, that
symbol of Pythagoras, Apud I amblich. Protrept. 21.
(...); OFFER SACRIFICE AND WORSHIP WITH THY SHOES OFF. What mystical or
symbolicall sense he intended, I enquire not: but it is plain, his expression
alludes to some such custom then used by those who came to worship in the
Temples of their gods.

Wherein that my collection fails me not, Edit. Paris. p. 95.
Justin Martyr will bear me witness in his second Apol. where he tells us,
That those who came to worship in the Sanctuaries and Temples of the Gentiles,
were commanded by their Priests (...),.i. to put off their shoes. Which their
gods learned (says he) by way of imitation, from that which the Lord spoke to
Moses out of the flaming Bush: Loose thy shoes from off thy feet, for the
place whereon thou stand is holy ground. This testimony for the antiquity of
the practice is without exception. Yet by the Fathers good leave I am prone to
think, that those words unto Moses gave not the first beginning unto it; but
were an admonition only of the divine presence, thereby commanding the rite
then accustomed in places so hallowed: and that therefore it was rather, as
other religious rites, derived unto the Gentiles by tradition from the
Patriarchs before Moses; of whom both the Jews, and those Nations of the
Orient, which agreed with them in this custom, were descended. Concerning
whose present custom, Drusius in his notes upon Joshua affirms, Quod etiam
nunc apud plerasque Orientis gentes, piaculum sit, calceato pede Templorum
pavimenta calcasse: That even to this day, among most of the nations of the
Orient, it is reputed a piaculary crime, to tread upon the pavements of their
Temples with their shoes on their feet.

For the Jews in particular, that this rite of veneration was anciently used by
them in places sanctified by the divine presence, Maymonides puts us out of
doubt, telling us in his Bech habechirah, cap. 7. That it was not lawful for a
man to come into the mountain of Gods House, with HIS SHOES ON HIS FEET, or
with his staff, or in his working garment, or with dust on his feet, and the
like. The same has Rabbi Solomon upon the 19. of Leviticus, verse. 30.

It is further confirmed by their modern practice in their Synagogues; even
here in these Western and colder parts of the world: where though no such
custom be in use, as in the Orient, nor our manners with conveniencie capable
thereof; yet they still observe it, as far as the guise of the West will
permit them; an argument it descends unto them by a strong and rooted tradition
from their forefathers. My author is Buxtorf Synagog. Iudaic. lib. 5. c. 5.
where he has these words: Ante Synagogam vel Scholam ipsorum ferrum quoddam
habent immuratum; ad quod quilibet calceos immundos, aut coenosos abstergere
tenetur; idque Solomonis authoritate, qui, Custodi, ait, pedem tuum -- Quis
quis crepidis indutus est, is eas immundas de pedibus suis detrahere enetur --
prout scriptum est; Solve calceamenta tua de pedibus tuis, etc..i. Before their
Synagogues they have a certain iron fastened in a wall; whereat every one is
bound to make clean his foul or dirty shoes; and that by the authority of
Solomon, who says, Look to thy foot, etc. Whosoever has slippers on, is
bound, they being foul, to put them quite off, (viz. before he enters into the
Synagogue) according as it is written: Loose thy shoes from off thy feet, etc.

And for the Mahumetans, what they do in their Mosquees, Bartlemew Georgivez,
who was a long time a captive amongst them, can best inform us, in his Book de
ritu and ceremoniis Turcarum. Quicunque (says he) veniunt ad orationem, debent
abluere manus, pedes, etc. postremo ter spargunt aquam super capita, recitando
haec verba, ELHEMDV LILLANI, (.i. gloria Deo meo:) Deinde exutis calceamentis
Patsmagh dictis, iisque ante januam Templi relictis, introeunt, alii NVDIS
PEDIBVS, alii habentes munda calceamenta Mesth dicta..i. Such as come to pray,
their duty is first to wash their hands, feet, etc. at last they sprinkle water
over their heads thrice, repeating these words, ELHEMDV LILLANI, that is, Glory
be to my God. Then putting off their shoes, called Patsmagh, and leaving them
before the door of the Temple, they enter, some barefooted, others having a
clean kind of Sandall, which they call Mesth: namely as the custom is with
us, when we pull off our hats, to wear a cap.

Lastly, that we may not want an instance among Christians: Zaga Zabo an
Ethiopian Bishop, sent Ambassador from David King of the Abyssines to John the
3. King of Portugal, above an hundred years since; in his Description of the
Religion and rites of the Abyssine Christians, thus informs us: Prohibitum est
apud nos ( says he) ne aut gentes, aut canes, aut alia hujusmodi animalia, in
Templa nostra intrent. Item non datur potestas nobis adeundi Templum, nisi
NVDIS PEDIBVS; neque licet nobis inipso Templo ridere, obambulare, aut de rebus
prophanis loqui, neque spuere, aut screare in ipso Templo. Quia Ecclesiae
Aethiopum non sunt similes terrae illi, ubi populus Israel comedit Agnum
paschalem decedens ab Aegypto (in quo loco, propter terrae pollutionem, jussit
eos Deus comedere indutos calceamentis and zonis accintos) sed similes sunt
monti Sinai, ubi Dominus locutus est Mosi, dicens: Exue calceamenta tua de
pedibus tuis, quoniam terra quam pedes tui premunt, sancta est..i. It is
prohibited amongst us, that either Pagans or dogs, or any other beasts should
come into our Churches. Moreover, it is not permitted to us to go into the
Church, but BARE FOOTED; nor is it lawful for us in the Church Eadem plane
Iudaeorum magistri prohibent a suis in Synagogis fieri, apud Maimoniem Misnae
Part. 1. lib. 2. Tract. 7. De benedictionibus and conse^r. per preces quae and
in Templo olim observari solita. Et Greg. Nazian. i^ orat. fun. pro patre
laudat matrem suam Nonnam, quod in Templo D^ine vocem quadem emitteret nisi de
rebus mysticis and divinis neq^e unquam tergum altari obverteret, aut sacrum
pa^i nentum conspueret. De quibus L^ctor pro pr^dentia sua statuat, an and
q(...)^sque nobis (...). conducat.
to laugh, or to walk up and down, or to speak of secular matters; no not to
spit, hauk or hem in the Church. Because the Churches of Aethiopia are not like
unto that Land, where Moses, ready to depart out of Egypt, eat the Paschal
Lamb (where, because of the pollution of the country, God commanded them to eat
it with their shoes on their feet, and their loins girded) but they are like
unto Mount Sinai, where God spoke unto Moses, saying; Put off thy shoes from
thy feet, for the ground whereon thy feet treads is holy. Thus Zaga Zabo of
the Abyssine Christians, whereof he was a Bishop. And till the contrary be
showed me, I am prone to believe that some other Christians of the Jacobite
sect may have the like custom, as it is certain that in most of their rites
they agree with them.

Now the religious guise of the Jews and other Nations of the Orient, having
anciently been (and still being) such as you have heard, when they entered into
their Temples, or remained in them; the words of my text, Look to thy foot or
feet, being taken for an expression borrowed from, and alluding thereto, will
have the same sense; as if we, inflecting them to our manners, should say; Look
unto thy head (.i. have a care thy head be fitted as it ought to be) when thou
come into the House of God; meaning that he should put off his hat, or be
uncovered, when he comes thither, and use such other reverence, as is wont to
accompany it. For know, that the Holy Ghost, mentioning or specifying but one
rite, is yet so to be understood, as implying therewith the rest of the same
order accustomed to go with it; according to that usual trope of Scripture,
by a part, or that which is more notable or obvious in any kind or rank of
things to imply the rest; the rule whereby we interpret the Decalogue, and is
the more fitly appliable here, because this guise of Discalceation was a
leading ceremony to the other gestures of sacred veneration then used, as that
of putting off the hat (in civil use at least) is wont to be with us. Not as
if Solomon or the Holy Ghost in this Admonition intended the outward ceremony
only, and no more, (that were ridiculous to imagine) but the whole act of
sacred reverence commenced in the heart and affection, whereof this was the
accustomed and leading gesture: to wit, the very same, and all that which the
Lord commands in that original law, Levit. 19. 30. Sanctuarium meum
reveremini, Reverence my Sanctuary; which Ionathans Targum explaineth; Ye shall
go to the House of my Sanctuary with reverence; Solomon paralleleth here with,
Look to thy foot when thou go to the House of God. For so is the manner of
Scripture almost everywhere, under the name of the gesture only, to understand
and imply the whole duty of veneration, which such gesture represents and
imports.

But as this is most true, so is it on the other side as false, if any shall
from hence collect, That therefore the outward worship may securely be
neglected (in time and place where and when it may be done) so the inward be
performed. Nay the contrary follows. For if the inward worship be chiefly
intended, when the outward or bodily is only named, as it is granted; is it
not then absurd to imagine, that where that which is not expressly named is
meant, there that which is only mentioned should be excluded? Nay surely, where
the outward is mentioned (as here in my Text) there no doubt, but the outward,
in one kind or other, is a part of the duty commanded, whatsoever besides it
be intended. And because it is a disease almost proper to our time (for our
forefathers were mostly sick of the other extreme) so far to slight and
disesteeme (that I may not say, disdain) the worship of God by the body, as to
think it may be omitted and neglected, even in time and place convenient, as in
Gods House and public service, without all guilt of sin: Give me therefore
leave to propound a few considerations, for the cure of such as are sick of
that malady. For as that which seems but some lighter symptom at the first,
if the cure thereof be neglected and contemned, often times proves fatal, and
destroys life it self; so may this. I would have them therefore consider;

1. That we all look not only for the glorification of our souls, but of our
bodies in the life to come: Now a reward presupposes a work. It is meet and
right therefore we should worship and glorify God here in this life with the
body as well as the soul, if we look that God should one day glorify both.

2. That as the outward worship without the inward is dead, so the inward
without the outward is not complete; even as the glorification of the soul
separate from the body is not, nor shall not be consummate, till the body be
again united unto it.

3. That those who derogate so much from bodily worship, in the service of the
true GOD, as kneeling, bowing, and the like, make by consequent Idolatry a sin
far less heinous in degree than it is. For is not Idolatry to communicate
that honor with a creature, which is due unto the Creator alone? By how much
therefore the worship of gesture and posture is less due unto God, when we do
our homage unto him; by so much is the sin the less heinous and grievous, when
the same is given unto an Idol. For I believe, they will not deny, but part of
the sin of Idolatry consists even in the outward worship given unto an Idol,
as kneeling, bowing, and falling down before it, and the like.

4. Lastly, that although bodily worship, being considered in it self, be one
of the minor a legis, of the lesser things of the law, and the honor done unto
God thereby of no great value (though not of none) in his fight: yet may a
voluntary and presumptuous neglect, even of so small a duty, be a great and
heinous sin; because such a neglect proceeds from a profane disposition and
election of the heart. For a sin is not always to be esteemed according to the
value of the duty omitted, but from the hearts election in omitting it. Non est
bonum per se (says Seneca) munda vestis, Epist. 93.
sed mundae vestis electio, quia non in re bonum est, sed in electione: that
is, A clean garment has no goodness of it self, but it is the election of a
clean garment which commends; because the goodness consists not in the
thing, but in the election thereof. So say I here: it is not the value of merit
of the work, which aggravates the sin in omitting the doing thereof, but the
election not to do it.

Now therefore to return to my hypothesis. By that which has been delivered
it appears, That it is not only lawful to use some reverentiall gesture,
when we come into Gods House (which yet some think, they are very liberal, if
they grant) but that it is a duty commanded by God himself, and so no
will worship: As namely in that divine admonition given first to Moses, and
afterward to Joshua; Put thy shoes from off thy feet, etc. in that Law,
Reverence my Sanctuary; in this instruction by Solomon, Look to thy feet when
thou come to the House of God: That the Saints and people of God in the old
Testament, and Christians in the New, have used such reverence: That the
neglect thereof is condemned of profaneness, by the practice of Jews, Seneca
2 lib. 7. not. qq. c. 30. Intramus Templa compositi, ad sacrificium accessuri
vultum submittimus, togam adducimus, in omne argumentum modestiae fingimur.
Gentiles, Pagans, Mahumetans, all Religions whatsoever. If any be to be
excepted ( proh pudor and dolor) it is our selves.

But without doubt, in this we are not in the right, nor was it so from the
beginning. Whatsoever is dedicated unto God, in general, or (to speak in the
phrase of Scripture) whatsoever is called by his Name, that is, is His by
peculiar relation, ought to be used with a different respect from things
common: and Gods House (as you have heard) has something singular from the
rest. Should we then come into it, as into a Barn or Stable? It was not once
good manners so to come into a man's house. For our blessed Savior, when he
sent forth his Disciples to preach the Gospel, Mat. 10. said, (...), when ye
enter into an house, salute it. Why should we not think it a part of religious
manners to do something answerable, when we come into the House of God? that
is, to bless the Master thereof (you know, how far that word extends) and
if not to say, God be here, (which has been the form, and is somewhere
still, when we enter into a man's House) yet to say with Jacob at Bethel, God is
here, and to testify in some manner or other, as the Saints of God were wont
to do, that we acknowledge it; and that both at our first coming thither, and
while we continue there; for the one follows from the other. And because I
paralleled before that Oriental rite of Discalceation (whereunto I supposed
the words of my Text to have reference) with ours of uncovering the head, by
the name of a leading ceremony: if any shall therefore ask me, what other
gesture I employed thereby, as fitting to accompany this, in the case we speak
of: I answer, That belongs to the discretion of our Superiors, and the
authority of the Church to appoint, not to me to determine. For here, as in
other ceremonies, the Church is not tied, but has liberty to ordain (having
respect to the analogy of the old Testament) what she shall judge most suitable
and agreeable to the time, place, and manners of the people where she lives.
But if I may without offense or presumption, speak what I think; then I say,
That adoration, or bowing of the body, with some short ejaculation, (which the
Church of Israel used in their Temple, together with discalceation, and which
the Christians of the Orient use at this day, and time out of mind have done
at their ingresse into their Churches) is of all other the most seemly, ready
and fitting to our manners: which yet I submit: namely, according to that of the
132. Psalm. ver. 7. Introibimus in Tabernacula ejus, incurvabimus nos scabello
pedum ejus: We will go into his Tabernacle, and worship before (or toward) his
Footstool; that is, the Ark of the Covenant of Mercy seat; which you shall
find thus styled, 1 Chronicles. 28. 2.

And according to that Psalm. 5. 8. I will enter into thine House in the
multitude of thy mercies; in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple,
(.i. (...); for they stood in the Courts when they worshipped) which is the
form the Jews use at this day, when they come first into their places of
worship, and so might we too, for any thing I know. The ordinary form among
the Greeks is that of the publican, God be merciful to me a sinner: yet
sometimes they premise this of the Psalm before it.

SECTION 4.
ANd thus I have done with the first part of my text, which for distinction
sake I called the Admonition: I come now to the second, which I termed a
Caution; Be more ready to obey, than to offer the sacrifice of fools: as much
as to say, Prefer not the secundary service of God before the first and
principal. Our translation has, Be more ready to hear, than, etc. whereby
some have taken occasion childishly to apply this Scripture against that
custom of a short and private prayer at our first coming into the Church,
before we join with the congregation. For we should (say they) rather hear
and listen to what the Minister is reading or speaking (as Solomon here bids
us) than at such a time to betake our selves to any private devotion; which,
say they, is but the sacrifice of fools. But I would themselves who thus
argue, were as wise as they should be. For if they were, they would consider,
both that Solomon (according to the time wherein he spoke) must needs mean of
another kind of Sacrifice, than what so loose a notion imports; namely of
such as were then used in the Temple he had built; and besides that this sense
of theirs directly thwarts the purport and meaning of the words going before:
which is, that we ought to use some sign of reverence when we come into the
house of God; such, as according to the custom of the West, is this. But
though none of these things were, yet would this text be nothing to their
purpose. Forasmuch as by Hearing in this place is not meant auricular hearing,
but practical, that is, obedience to Gods commandments, according as the
Vulgar has, Melior est obedientia quam victimae stultorum. For it is the same
with that proverbial sentence of Scripture, Obedience is better than sacrifice;
which Samuel used in that bitter reproof of K. Saul, for sparing Agag, 1 Samuel
15.
and the best of the spoil of the Amalekites, upon a pretense of sacrificing
to the Lord in Gilgal. Has the Lord (says he) as great delight in
burnt-offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? behold, to
obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams. The word
here twice rendered obey, is (...) the same which is in my text, and it is an
ordinary signification thereof in Scripture. The case is clear.

But was not the offering of Sacrifice, will some man say, part of the
obedience due unto the divine Law? How come they then to be thus opposed one to
the other? Give me leave therefore, before I give my full explication of this
passage, to enquire and consider of some others, of much more difficulty in
this respect, yet their meaning conducing to the understanding of this.

There are diverse places in Scripture disparaging and vilifying sacrifices; yea
so far, as if sacrifice were a service, which God neither appointed nor
approved. As Psalm. 51. Thou desire not sacrifice ( says David,) else would I
have given it thee; but thou delightest not in burnt-offerings. The sacrifice
of God is a troubled spirit: a broken and contrite heart, O God thou will not
despise. Hosea 6. 6. I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Michah 6. verse. 6, 7,
8. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the most
High? shall I come before him with burnt-offerings, with calves of a year old?
7. Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, and with ten thousands of
rivers of oil? shall I give my first borne for my transgression, the fruit of
my body for the sin of my soul? 8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good;
and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy,
and to walk humbly with thy God? Nay Ier. 7. ver. 21, 22. he seems to say
expressly, that he never commanded them: Put ( says he) your burnt-offerings
unto your sacrifices, and eat flesh. For I spoke not unto your Fathers, nor
commanded them, in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt,
concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices: But this thing commanded I them,
saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people: and
walk ye in the ways that I have commanded you, that it may be well with you.

Yet nothing is more plain, than that God ordained Sacrifices at Mount Sinai.
How then shall this difficulty be resolved? Some, and those of the ancients
too, have affirmed, that these ordinances of Sacrifice were not given to Israel
at first, nor prima intention Dei; but were (as they call them) (...),
superinducta, afterward imposed upon them, when they had committed idolatry in
making and worshipping the golden Calfe. But the contrary to this is also
apparent. For to pass by Cain and Abels sacrifices, and the sacrifices of Noah
and Abraham; when the Lord pronounced the Decalogue from Mount Sinai, he added
this, as it were an appendix thereto: Ye shall not make with me gods of silver,
neither shall ye make unto you gods of gold: Only an Altar thou shall make
unto me, and shall sacrifice thereon thy burnt offerings, and thy
peace offerings, thy sheep, and thine oxen, etc. and this before Moses came
down from the Mount, or the Calfe was yet made. Nay, more than all this, when
Moses and Aaron were sent unto Pharaoh, the effect of their Embassy was, Exodus
3. 18. and 5. 1, 3, 8.
The God of the Hebrews says, Let my people go, that they may sacrifice unto
me, three days journey in the wilderness.; And when Pharaob would have given
them leave to have sacrificed to their God in the Land: Exodus 8. 27.
No (says Moses) we will go three days journey into the wilderness, and
there sacrifice to the Lord our God, as he has commanded us. What shall we
answer then to those passages of Scripture, where God disclaimeth sacrifice,
saying, he required no such service at his peoples hands; yea, that he
commanded them no such thing, when he brought them out of the Land of Egypt?

For the assoyling of this difficulty, according to the differing quality of
the passages, which are, or may be produced to this purpose, I lay down these
three propositions. 1. That, according to the propriety and genius of the
Hebrew tongue, a Comparative sense is often expressed after the form of an
Antithesis: As in that of Joel, Rent your hearts, and not your garments: that
is, more, or rather than your garments. Prove. 8. 10. Receive my instruction,
and not silver: that is, rather than silver; as the words following teach us to
construe it: And knowledge rather than choice gold. Likewise in the New
Testament: Lay not up treasures for your selves on earth, but lay up for your
selves treasures in heaven. i. Treasures in heaven, rather than treasures on
earth; have more care to lay up the one, than the other.

According to this construction only, without more ado, some of the aforesaid
passages will be discharged of their difficulty: as namely that of Hosea, I
desired mercy and not sacrifice,.i. more or rather than sacrifice; as the
following words give us to understand, which are: And the knowledge of God more
than burnt offerings; and according as the same sense is elsewhere expressed;
as Prove. 21. 3. To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord,
than sacrifice. But all will not be thus salved.

Wherefore I lay down this second proposition; That antecedenter it is true,
that God commanded not sacrifice should be offered unto him, neither when the
Law was given, nor before; but consequenter, consequently only. For the
understanding whereof, we must know, That Sacrifice was a rite whereby men
renewed a covenant with God, by making atonement for their sin. Therefore it
presupposed a breach and transgression of the Law. But the will of God was not,
that men should transgress his Law, and violate the covenant he had made with
them, but that they should observe and keep it; which if they did, sacrifice
would have no place. This is that I mean, when I say, That God required not,
nor commanded sacrifice antecedently, but that men should keep his
Commandments. But in case sin were committed, and the Articles of his
covenant violated, then and in such a state God ordained, and admitted of
Sacrifice for a rite of atonement and redintegration of his covenant with men:
that is, he commanded Sacrifice only consequenter, as a remedy if sin were
committed. And if those Ancients could be thus understood, who say, that
sacrifice was not ordained when the Law was first given, but after it was
transgressed; namely, if their meaning were only, that the ordinance of
sacrifice presupposed a transgression of the Law, then their assertion were
true; but otherwise historically taken, it cannot be defended. Now according to
this proposition is that of Jeremy chap. 7. to be understood, (or if there be
any other like it:) I spoke not unto your Fathers, nor commanded them, in the
day that I brought them out of the Land of Egypt, concerning burnt-offerings
and sacrifices: But this thing commanded I them; Obey my voice, and I will be
your God, and ye shall be my people: and walk ye in all the ways that I have
commanded you, that it may be well with you.

My third proposition is this: That when sacrifice was to be offered, in case
of sin; yet even then God accepted not thereof primario, primarily and for it
self; as though any refreshment or emolument accrued to him thereby, (as the
Gentiles fondly supposed of their gods) but secundarily only, as a testimony
of the conscience of the offerer, desiring, with humble repentance, to glorify
him with a present, and by that rite to renew a covenant with him. For
Sacrifice (as I have said) was oblatio foederalis. Now Almighty God renewes a
covenant with, or receives again into his favor, none but the repentant
sinner, and therefore accepts of sacrifice in no other regard, but as a token
and effect of this. Otherwise it is an abomination unto him, as whereby men
professed a desire of being reconciled unto God, when they had offended him,
and yet had no such meaning. Hence God rejects all sacrifices wherein there is
no contrition, nor purpose to forsake sin, and keep his commandments, which
are the parts of repentance. So is to be taken that in the first of Isay: To
what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices? -- Bring no more vain
oblations; incense is an abomination unto me -- Wash ye, make you clean, put
away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil -- then
(if you offer sacrifice unto me) though your sins be as scarlet, they shall
be as white as snow, etc. -- And that Isay the last: To this man I look, to him
that is poor and of a contrite spirit. He that kills an ox (namely
otherwise) is as if he slew a man: be that sacrifices a lamb (unless he comes
with this disposition) as if he cut off a dogs neck, he that offers an
oblation, as if he offered blood, he that burns incense, as if he blessed an
Idol. And surely, he that blesses an Idol, is so far from renewing a
covenant with the Lord his God, that he breaks it. So did they, who without
conscience of repentance presumed to come before him with a sacrifice, not
procure atonement, but aggravate their breach.

According to one of these three senses are all passages in the Old Testament,
disparaging and rejecting sacrifices, literally to be understood: Namely, when
men preferred them before the greater things of the law; valued them out of
their degree, as an antecedent duty; or placed their efficacy in the naked
rite, as if ought accrued to God thereby: God would no longer own them for any
ordinance of his; nor indeed in that disguise put upon them were they. I will
except only one passage out of the number, which I suppose to have a singular
meaning; to wit, that of David in the 51. Psalm, which the ancient
translations thus express: Quoniam si voluisses sacrificium, dedissem utique;
sed holocaustis non oblectaberis (vel, holocaustum non acceptabis.) Sacrificium
Deo spiritus contribulatus, etc. -- If thou would have had a sacrifice, I
would have offered it; but thou will accept no burnt-offering, etc. -- For this
seems to be meant of that special case of adultery and murder, which David
here deploreth: for which sins the Lord had provided no sacrifice in his law.
Wherefore David in this his poenitentiall confession tells him, That if he had
appointed any sacrifice for expiation of this kind of sin, he would have
given it him: but he had ordained none, save only a broken spirit and a
contrite heart: which, thou O God (says he) wilt not despise, but accept that
alone for a sacrifice in this case, without which, sacrifice in no case, is
accepted.

Now out of this discourse we are sufficiently furnished for the understanding
of this caution of Solomon in my Text: Be more ready to obey, than to offer
the sacrifice of fools; or as the words in the Original import, Be more
approaching God with a purpose and resolution of obedience to his commandments,
than with the sacrifice of fools; that is, Have a care, rather to approach the
Divine Majesty with an offering of an obedientiall disposition, than with the
bare and naked rite; but the sense is still the same, namely, the House of God
at Jerusalem was an House of sacrifice, which they who came thither to worship,
offered unto the Divine Majesty, to make way for their prayers and
supplications unto him, or to find favor in his sight. Solomon therefore
gives them here a caveat, not to place their religion, either only or chiefly
in the external rite, but in their readiness to hear and keep the
Commandments of GOD; without which, that rite alone would avail them nothing,
but be no better than the sacrifice of fools, who when they do evil, think
they do well. For without this readiness to obey, this purpose of heart to
live according to his Commandments, God accepts of no sacrifice from those who
approach him, nor will pardon their transgressions when they come before him.
He therefore that makes no conscience of sinning against God, and yet thinks
to be expiate by sacrifice, is an ignorant fool; how wise and religious
soever he may think himself to be, or appear unto men, by the multitude or
greatness of his sacrifices. The reason, because the Lord requires obedience
antecedently and absolutely, but sacrifice consequently only: and then too,
not primario, or chiefly and for it self, but secundarily only, as a
testimony of contrition, and a ready desire and purpose in the offerer, to
continue in his favor by obedience.

This is Solomon's the Preachers meaning Wherein behold, as in a glass, the
condition of all external service of God in general; as that which he
accepts no otherwise than secundarily; namely, as issuing from a heart
respectively affected with that devotion it imports. For God, as he is a
living God, so he requires a living worship. But as the body without the soul
is but a carcass; so is all external and bodily worship, wherein the pulse of
the hearts devotion beats not.

But if this be so, you will say, it were better to use no external worship
at all of course, as we do the worship of the body in the gestures of bowing,
kneeling, standing, and the like, than to incur this danger of serving God
with a dead and hypocritical service; because it is not like, the heart will
be always duly affected, when the outward worship shall be required. I
answer; Where there is a true and real intent to honor God with outward and
bodily worship, there the act is not hypocrisy, though accompanied with many
defects and imperfections. Here therefore that rule of our Savior touching the
greater and lesser things of the law must have place: Matthew. 23. 23. and Luke
11. 42.
(...), (...), These things (.i. the greater things of the Law) we ought to
do, and not to leave the other (though the lesser) undone. For otherwise, if
this reasoning were admitted, a man might upon the same ground absent himself
from coming to Church upon the days and times appointed, or come thither but
now and then, alleging the indisposition of his heart to join with the Church
in her public worship at other times: Or if he came thither, act a mute, and
when others sing and praise God, to be altogether silent, and not open his
mouth, nor to say Amen, when others do. For all these are external services;
and the service of the voice and gesture are in this respect all one, there is
no difference. But who would not think this to be very absurd? We should
rather upon every such occasion rouse and stir up our affections with fit and
seasonable meditations, that what the order and decency of a Church-assembly
requires to be done of every member outwardly, we may likewise do devoutly and
acceptably. These things we ought to do, and not leave the other undone.

But you will say, What if I cannot bring my heart unto that religious fear
and devotion, which the outward worship I should perform requires? I could
say that some of the outward worship which a man performs in a
Church-assembly, he does not as a singular man, but as a member of the
Congregation. But howsoever, I answer: Let the worship of thy body, in such a
case, be at least a confession and acknowledgement before God, of that love,
fear, and esteem of his Divine Majesty thou ought to have, but have not.
For though to come before God without that inward devotion requisite, be a
sin: yet to confess and acknowledge, by what our outward gesture imports,
the duty we owe unto him, but are defective in, I hope is not; no more than the
confession of any other sin. For our worship, in such a case, if we will so
intend it, is an act of repentance: and as the modern Greeks are wont to call
their Adorations (...), Repentances; so may we in this case make ours to be;
namely, as if we said, Lord, I ought to come before thee with that religious
fear, humble reverence, and lifting up of heart, which the gesture, the
posture, I here present, imports: but Lord be merciful to me a sinner. If
any man's heart be so profane and irreligious, as not to acknowledge thus much:
I yield, that such a one might better spare his labor, and not come into the
presence of God at all. Otherwise I conclude still with our blessed Saviors
determination in the like case, Those greater things we ought to do, and not
to leave the other undone. *

FINIS.

