A MOST CERTAIN AND TRVE RELATION OF A STRANGE MONSTER OR SERPENT Found in the
left Ventricle of the heart of JOHN PENNANT, Gentleman, of the age of 21.
years.

By Edward May Doctor of Philosophy and Physic, and professor Elect of them,
in the College of the Academy of Noblemen, called the Musaeum Minervae:
Physician also extraordinary unto her most Sacred Majesty, Queen of great
Brittany, etc.

LONDON. Printed by George Miller, MDCXXXIX.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD AND highly renowned Peer of this Kingdom,
EDWARD Earl of Dorset, etc. Knight of the most Noble order of the garter, Lord
High Chamberlain unto her most Sovereign Majesty, QVEENE of great Brittane,
etc. And one of the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable privy Council.
Edward May wishes all health and glory.
My LORD,
FOR this Treatise I seek no patronage, for if the Relation and the Author
cannot defend themselves, let them both suffer. A Swallow flies better then a
Swanne, though his wing be less: And one little Diamond will buy 17. of those
stones that were drawn to S. Paul's Church of 17. Tons: yet whether this
Description of mine be good, or great, worthy or otherwise, it is not dedicated
to your Honor as a matter presuming toward your worth, or presence, but as a
public obligation in the face of the world, of my future and more solid
gratitude: You have honored me before the Noble Peers, and highest
Counselors of the Kingdom: You have otherwise done me real favors, what am
I, or what is in me that you have not conquered? and not by these benefits to
me only, but these many years my observations of your most Noble nature, your
more then humane parts, your vast and incredible comprehension of all things,
both essential and accidental to your place and dignity. Your innumerable
merits and that universal acclamation of all men whatsoever, have made me,
more your humble servant then you know, and when after a short space God shall
give me to sit a little quiet, tending mine own affairs, your Lordship shall
see, not by my writings but by my doings, that I am more your Lordships then
any French or thrice devoted servant.

A Preface to the Reader.
WHat my designs are in the publishing of this History, the Reader may find
every where in it, to be no other then the Conservation of the works of God,
and nature, and preservation of men: but for the Printing of it in English, I
have neither end nor intent: For these two years it has been neglected by
me, and perused up and down in the hands of the best, and best learned, who
have desired satisfaction, touching so rare an ostent: for the young Gentleman
in whom it was found, deceased the 6t. of October, in the year of our Lord,
1637. My intention in this Description was for the Continent, and not for our
Islands only, wherefore J stayed my hand till some opportunity to publish some
other Lattine Treatises of mine own with it; which many years have been
desired: But now this being still out of my hands, and licensed for the press
before any notice given me; for the satisfaction of our own nation, and for the
benefit of them who desired the printing of it, I have freely given way to
pleasure any who shall desire to read it: wherefore if Pla^onicall and
specificall Jdeas do correspond: and the readers honest mind answer my sincere
truth and good wishes, I have my end.

The Contents.
. 1. THe Preface.. 2. The History it self.. 3. The Occasion of this
description: and who were present.. 4. How Hippocrates and the Ancients are to
be understood, who said that the heart was not subject to any disease: as also
an enumeration of diseases of the heart.. 5. How such Monsters are begotten or
bred in the heart.. 6. That these strange generations are caused by the
Temperament individual.. 7. What light and help men may have by such
relations, and such resolution of this difficulty as in the former Paragraph is
set down: and how that in latent causes some exterior signature, or beams
discover the disease. 8. That all creatures, things in the world, and diseases
have their radij, as well as the Stars of Heaven: prooved by Friar Bacon, and
that most learned Philosopher Alkindus, and by reasons and experience, and that
there is no action but per radios, and that there is no action immediatione
suppositi, but only immediatione virtutis.. 9. How some Physicians have
prescribed against such diseases.. 10. One reason why these occult maladies are
so seldom found, and never cured: the many benefits of frequent dissections.
Errata.
Page 2. lin. 12. put in to. p. 4. l. 37. read Caprizant, l. 38. open. p 13.
l. 25. Aorts. p. 12. l. 16. yet. p. 19. l. 3. conventu concitiata. p 27. l. 25
Kirannides. p. 28. l. 7. discovered. 32. l. 14. Regulus ^atus l. 21.
essentiator.

depiction of heart with parasitic worm depiction of parasitic worm

That the 7. of October, this 1637 an Embrion of this form and dimentions, as
is here described was found in the left Ventricle of the heart of John Pennant
Gentleman, of the age of 21. years, or thereabouts, We who saw it testify
under our hands:

Edward May Doctor of Physic. Jacob Heydon Surgeon. Elizabeth Herris Aunt unto
the said John Pennant. Dorothy Pennant Mother to the said John Pennant. Richard
Berry. ^ Mrs. Gentleman's mark. This is my wives mark I testify. George
Gentleman.


TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR THEODORE MAIHERNE KNIGHT, CHIEF PHYSICIAN UNTO
HIS MOST Sovereign Majesty, KING of great Brittany, etc. Edward May wishes
all health.
. I.
SIR,
AMong those many favors you have afforded me, your private, sweet, most
familiar and long Colloquies with me have been singular: While you laying aside
important affairs, out of an admirable candor and love to Learning, (in which
few excel you) vouchsafe sometimes to treat with me concerning occult
Philosophy and most sacred medicines: In one of which meetings, as I had laid
open what I had found in the Sinister Ventricle of the heart of a young
Gentleman, which you desired me to describe while the Species were yet fresh in
my memory, as others many both Physicians and Friends have done also: So here I
have done it: And do first communicate it unto your self, as a small (...) of
my certain knowledge of your great and admirable perfections in many Sciences,
nececessary him who is Physician to Princes; and of my singular estimation of
them: As also to sow some seeds of future Discourses, both new and worthy of
that saving and divine Magic which we both profess: Well knowing that good
use may be made of this History by all Physicians, and profit unto many, as I
have partly declared in the Subsequents.

It is an ostent and prodigy, strange and incredible which J am to paint: And
if in many Physicians of best esteem, and sincerity I had not found Relations
very like it, mine own heart would not have given credit to mine own eyes and
hands when first I found it: But you have found one like it in the heart of a
Noble Lord; but when you have seen this, I shall know whether so grown, or of
this form, or otherwise: Let the Vulgar and Ignorant, believe it, or not
believe it, Physicians and knowing men (as you do) will receive it: And
therefore briefly the certain History and true Relation is this.

. 2.
THe seventh of October this year current, 1637 the Lady Herris wife unto Sir
Francis Herris Knight, came unto me and desired that I would bring a Surgeon
with me, to dissect the body of her Nephew John Pennant, the night before
deceased, to satisfy his friends concerning the causes of his long sickness
and of his death: And that his mother, to whom my self had once or twice given
help some years before concerning the Stone, might be ascertained whether her
Son died of the Stone or no? Upon which entreaty I sent for Master Jacob
Heydon Surgeon, dwelling against the Castle Tavern behind St. Clements Church
in the Strand, who with his Manservant came unto me: And in a word we went to
the house and Chamber where the dead man lay: We dissected the natural Region
and found the bladder of the young man full of purulent and ulcerous matter:
The upper parts of it broken, and all of it rotten: The right kidney quite
consumed, the left tumified as big as any two kidneys, and full of sanious
matter: All the inward and carnose parts eaten away and nothing remaining but
exterior skins.

No where did we find in his body either Stone or gravel. The Spleen and Liver
not affected in any discernable degree, only part of the Liver was grown unto
the Costall membranes, by reason of his writing profession.

We ascending to the Vital Region, found the Lungs reasonable good, the heart
more globose and dilated, then long; the right Ventricle of an ash color
shrivelled, and wrinkled like a leather purse without money, and not any thing
at all in it: the Pericardium, and Nervous Membrane, which conteyneth that
illustrious liquour of the Lungs, in which the heart does bath its self, was
quite dried also: The left Ventricle of the heart, being felt by the Surgions
hand, appeared to him to be as hard as a stone, and much greater then the
right: which upon the first sight gave us some cause of wonder, seeing (as you
know) the right Ventricle is much greater then the left: Wherefore I wished M.
Heydon to make incision, upon which issued out a very great quantity of blood;
and to speak the whole verity, all the blood that was in his body left, was
gathered to the left Ventricle, and contained in it Here those men may be
handsomely questioned (who say that the pulse is nothing else but the impulse,
of blood into the Arteryes or the Systole of the heart) what was become of the
pulse in this man all the while that the whole blood betook it self into the
heart, here was either a living man without pulse, or pulse without the Systole
of the heart. For what could the arteryes receive where nothing was to be
received? or how could there be pulse where was no impulse into the arteryes?
The pulse the doubtless ^s from another cause, and is a far other matter
then most men conceive: for there are in a sound man 4450 pulsations in an
hour, in a sick man sometimes in some percute fevers and diseases above
35600, and more, which cannot be from so many several expressions and
receptions of blood; for it is impossible the heart should make compression,
and the arteryes apartion, so often in that space. Nay in Dicrot: Capizant. and
other inordinate pulses, diverse pulses strike in less space then the mouth of
an arterey can go, much more then in less times then it can open, shut, and
open again, which 3. acts are requisite to the beginning of a second pulse.
But of this I have largely treated in my 3, Book De Febribus.


No sooner was that Ventricle emptied, but M. Heydon still complaining of the
greatness and hardness of the same, my self seeming to neglect his words,
because the left Ventricle is thrice as thick of flesh as the right is in
sound men for conservation of Vital Spirits; I directed him to an other
disquisition: but he keeping his hand still upon the heart, would not leave it,
but said again that it was of a strange greatness and hardness; whereupon I
desired him to cut the Orifice wider: by which means we presently perceived a
carnouse substance, as it seemed to us wreathed together in foldes like a worm
or Serpent, the self same form expressed in the first Iconography: at which
we both much wondered, and I entreated him to separate it from the heart, which
he did, and we carried it from the body to the window, and there laid it out,
in those just dimensions which are here expressed in the second figure.

The body was white of the very color of the whitest skin of man's body: but
the skin was bright and shining, as if it had been varnished over; the head
all bloody, and so like the head of a Serpent, that the Lady Herris then
shivered to see it, and since has often spoken it, that she was inwardly
troubled at it, because the head of it was so truly like the head of a Snake.

The thighs and branches were of flesh color, as also all these fibraes,
strings, nerves, or whatsoever else they were.

After much contemplation and conjectures what strange thing that part of the
heart had brought forth unto us, I resolved to try the certainty, and to make
full exploration, both for mine own experience and satisfaction, as also to
give true testimony to others that should hear of it: And thereupon I searched
all parts of it, to find whether it were a pituitose and bloody Collection, or
the like: Or a true organicall body, and Conception: J first searched the head
and found it of a thick substance, bloody and glandulous about the neck,
somewhat broken, (as J conceived) by a sudden or violent separation of it from
the heart, which yet seemed to me to come from it easily enough.

The body I searched likewise with a bodkin between the Legs or Thighs, and I
found it perforate, or hollow, and a solid body, to the very length of a silver
bodkin, as is here described: At which the Spectators wondered. And as not
crediting me, some of them took the bodkin after me, made trial themselves,
and remained satisfied, that there was a gut, Vein or Artery, or some such
Analogicall thing that was to serve that Monster for uses natural: Amongst
whom the Lady Herris and the Surgian made trial after me with their own
hands, and have given their hands that this Relation is true. This Lady
dwells at the sign of the Sugar loaf in S. James street in the Convent
Garden.

. 3.
THis strange and monstrous Embryon borne in the said Ventricle, which as
Hippocrates says is nourished neither with meats nor drinks, Sed pura and
illustri substantia, taking aliment from the blood purified out of the next
Cisterne; made me (importuned with other occasions then) to leave this new and
rare Spectacle in the charge of the Surgion, who had a great desire to conserve
it, had not the Mother desired that it should be buried where it was borne;
saying and repeating, As it came with him, so it shall go with him: Wherefore
the Mother staying in the place departed not till she had seen him sow it up
again into the body after my going away.

Which as soon as I heard, I presently described the form of it at home,
inter rariora a me reperta: And thus this History had always been buried from
the World, (the Mother having thus buried the Creature) if your self and
others had not desired a figure and narration of it, which caused me to take
the hands, and minds of some of them who were present: Who being nearest the
young man, were most likely to say the best, and therefore being besides people
of good fame and reputation might be credited; considering that they would say
nothing at all either against their own house, or against verity more then
what apparent and clear truth should necessitate them unto: Which from
themselves and under their hands, here I have done.

There were also diverse others, such as dwelled in the house, and some that
came in, who beheld it, after whom I have no leisure to enquire: But such who
will scarce believe their Creed, or any true man's word, or that men have senses
(which have always been reputed incorrupted Witnesses,) may go into the high
buildings upon the Street in Saint Giles Parish, and at the corner house next
the green Dragon where the Young Man died; they may make further inquisition.

Since which time the Mother has remooved her self into Bloomesbury near
unto the house of one Master Nurse, who directed me to her lodgings; a man well
known in all that Region.

Mistress Gentleman dwells near unto S. Clements Church in the Strand, and
the Surgeon, or his man can direct them to the house.

Moreover that day all of us that were present at this sight related to our
friends, wives, or husbands what we had found, as they will testify.

The History therefore being verified by as much testimony as humane persuasion
need require: Except nothing but oath will content some, which if it shall be
found necessary to Authority: It will most readily come forth also and obey: It
is most requisite that something be said of this or any such like matters
generated in man's heart, both for the manner of their generation and the way of
their cure, and by what means such rare and incredible causes of death may be
found out in time and taken away.

. 4.
SUch matters as these were worthy of your self, and a man of your long
experience. Yet because this strange generation was found by me, I will consult
with your learning, rather then by any hasty resolution, determine and
discourse a little to state a question of no small difficulty; Hip de morbis
Avicen l. 3. se^ 11.
since Hippocrates first has given the occasion, which was this; Cor nullo
morbo laborat: the heart labors of no disease: and Prince Avicen, cor
longinquum anocumentis, the heart is far remote from dangers. And yet contrary
to these: Very many Physicians enumerate these diseases of the heart; the
Marasmus, Syncope, the Cordiack passion Lypothymy, Apostems, Ulcers,
Botheralia, Corrosion of Sublimate; and I dare add, diseases which afflict the
heart by reason of distillations from the head in some who have had the
unction: Tremors also and palpitations of the heart; as Peter Ebanus in his
Book de Venenis: And the Paralysis of the heart, as old Aurelianus in his
second Book of Slowpassions: After Haerophylus and Erasistratus have observed.

And now of late Skinkius and others have found worms in Cordis capsula, which
is the Pericardium: But I speak more precisely and punctually, that now in the
left Ventricle of the heart, this Worm or Serpent has been found: Which the
Mother of the Young Man says, was at least of three years growth, for so long
he complained of his breast, and as she says would never button his Doublet
in the Morning, but be open breasted in all weathers, till he had washed his
hands and face, and was subject to palpitations.

Now then that we may judge whether Hippocrates, and Avicen direct their
speeches: these reasons are to be admitted.

in medio medij pectoris, says Avicen, in the middle of the middle of the
breast: which Mathematically is not true: for so the basis or upper part, or
caput only is placed in an Equidistance from the diaphragma (the inferior
furcula,) and the Clanicula, (and the furcula superior) and between the
Vertebra of the back and the anterior Sternon.

non invenitur panniculus compar ei in spissitudine, ut sit ei Clypeus and
tutamen: Hip. l. de Cord.
that no pannicle is comparable unto it, that it may be a shield and defense
unto the heart.

Avicen adds, that the heart it self is created of strong flesh, that it may
be longinquum anocumentis, in quo contextae sunt species villarum fortium:
Diverse strong strings admirably woven together do bind and strengthen the
heart, and give it aptitude for motion, and resistance. Hippocrates long before
Avicen says the same, and things of greater consequence: Cor est musculus
fortis, etc. The heart is a strong muscle, non nervo, sed densitate carnis and
constrictione: Hip. ubi supra.
not by his nervous nature, but by solidity of flesh and constriction: And in
the heart there lie hidden diverse skins like spiders webs extended, which do
so bind and shut the ends of the forts, that no man ignorant, knows how to
take out the heart, but will take up one for an other. Neither can water or
wind penetrate into the heart: and more; Cor tunicam habet circumdatam, and est
in ipsa humor modicus, etc. Vt cor sanum in custodia floreseat: habet autem
humiditatem tantam quanta sat is est aestuanti in medelam: hunc humorem cor
emungit bibendo ipsum assumens and consumens, pulmonis nimiram potum lambens:
He speaks further of the cover called the Epiglottis, that nothing may enter
that way but what is convenient; So that seeing the heart is fortified with
such strength of ribbs, with such covers, such skins, such fortitude of
substance, such density of flesh, such excellence of liquour, such curious
filaments, that nothing can enter, hurt, or come near the heart to make it
sick: but that it is able to defend it self, both by its own situation,
strength, and happy condition in very many respects, and keep out or put back
whatsoever also by force shall come near unto it: It remains that the heart
is not, neither can be subject to any disease, or at least not easily.

Yea those other men who enumerate the diseases of the heart; grant, as
chiefly Valescus de Tharanta and the Arabians all confess that a Syncope
happens, or else death as soon as any disease approaches, or hurt touches
the substance of the heart; also Avicen, Petrus de Ebano relate that the
forementi-oned diseases kill as soon as any of them touch the substance of the
heart: So also Herophylus coefessed that sudden death followed if a Paralysis
once surprised the heart: And for Bothors or Phlegmo's, or Erisipelas or the
like, they say that they are diseases of the heart initiative only, and not
subjective, to dwell there any time.

And indeed I am fully persuaded that the heart suffers a marasmus privative,
by negation of due transmission from other parts, rather then that marcor
should follow ad cordis substantiae ariditatem; for if any part have good
substance in it, the heart has; and therefore Hippocrates says, that quando
fontes resiccati fuerint homo moritur: that the Ventricles have the last
humidity in them: wherefore Galen seems to desert his Master in saying, a
cordis ariditate incipere malum. Viz, veram senectutem and interitum naturalem.
Whereas he should have said the contrary: that the aridity of the heart
follows the desiccation and want of due transmission of other parts: Ye if J
may speak my mind freely, Hippocrates is not to be taken simply, that the
heart cannot be any ways affected; but perhaps in the sense of Galen, that the
heart suffers little or no pain by reason the substance of the heart has
but little sensation, having but one little nerve for feeling from the sixth
Conjugation, and that is somewhat obscure also. Gal. 2. pla. 8.
Or if he mean, as indeed I am sure he does, that diseases do not affect
the heart; he is to be understood that ordinarily they do not, but very
seldom, by reason of the carnous parts, Cor solidum ac densum ut ab humore non
aegrotet, and propterea nullus morbus in cord aboritur, caput autem and Splen
maxim sunt morbis abnoxia, His speech is evidently comparative; else we see
very often that which he never saw in all his long life and experience: And
indeed we see now very frequently the heart affected with Imposthumes, with
Worms, with Abscesses, with Fleamy concretion both in the Ears of the heart
and Ventricles, yea and now with a Serpent: And yet men live diverse years with
them, and many other diseases both per essentiam and Consensum, all kind of
distempers both equal and unequal, of which the Ancients have left no memory
nor mention unto us, with which the Books of late Physicians are repleate.
Wherefore the propositions of the Ancient Physicians must have a friendly
interpretation; or else men's hearts now a days are more passible and obnoxious
unto diseases then in former ages, which by me as yet cannot easily be
admitted: We are forced therefore to conclude that the heart per essentiam and
primario and subjective may be afflicted with a disease and cause of death, and
it cannot otherwise be conceived, seeing such creatures are begotten in it; yet
doubtless exterior diseases kill sooner then innate.

. 5.
BUt this then begets a greater question, how this Monster or such as this
should be begotten or bred in the heart, so defended, as has been said, more
then all the body, and in the most defended part of the heart, the left
Ventricle three times thicker of flesh and substance then the right? as also of
what matter? seeing that Cell is possessed and replenished with the best,
purest and most illustrious liquor in the body, the blood Arteriall and the
vital spirits.

There are who conceive that pervious passages may be found for little Worms
and the like to enter into the heart: but they must give a better way then any
that J have yet seen do, as also the Worms must be very little. Others say,
that such matters are caused by the ill habit of the heart; by which if they
mean the substance of the heart, it is not to be received, till the heart has
been hurt by ill distributions and transmissions which in our case is
otherwise: for half of the heart, the left Ventricle, (the Matrix of this
Serpent) was solid and still good: Wherefore it is not in the ill habit of the
substance.

Others think that those Worms which create sometimes the mal della luna, as
the Italians term it, living in the pericardium, and gnawing the heart: Of
which there are innumerable Stories.

Heben flreit lib de peste tells us one, of a Prince to whose heart a white
Worm was found cleaving with a sharp and horny nose.

Alexius pedemont anus, lib. 1. Sceret. tells us of an other: and so Math:
Corvar: lib. 2. c. 28. Consult. med.

In Stowe's Cronnicle ad annum 1586. of Q Elizabeth, a matter of this nature,
in an Horse is recorded as a memorable thing in these words.

The Seventeenth day of March, a strange thing happened, the like whereof before
has not been heard of in our time. Master Dorington of Spaldwick in the
County of Huntington Esquire, one of her Majesty's Gentlemen Pentioners, had an
horse which died suddenly, and being ripped to see the cause of his death,
there was found in the hole of the heart of the same horse, a Worm which lay
on a round heap in a kall or skinn, of the likeness of a Toade; which being
taken out and spread abroad, was in form and fashion not easy to be
described: The length of which worm divided into many grains to the number of
fifty (spread from the body like the branches of a Tree) was from the snout to
the end of the longest grain seventeene inches, having sour issues in the
grains from which dropped forth a red water: The body in bigness round about
was three inches and a half, the color whereof was very like a Mackerel. This
monstrous worm found in manner aforesaid, crawling to have got away, was
stabbed in with a dagger and died; which being dried was showed to many
honorable personages of this Realm.

If this Horse-worme or Serpent be Chronicled, how much more may this be
memorized for Posterity? Or that which you have, or that which you told me was
found in the heart of the Lord Boclew.

By reason these were found in Men, that in an Horse: and this found by me of
greater length, and more certain form, then that which they could not tell
how to describe.

As also those pieces of black flesh generated in the left Ventricle, of which
Benivenius historizeth one, C. 35. de abdit is, in form of a Medler, upon the
Artery; and Vesalius, lib. 1. c. 5. de humani corporis fabrica, speaks of a
most Noble and learned Personage, in the left Ventricle of whose heart, two
pounds of black glandulous flesh were found; the heart extended like a
pregnant womb.

Yea and those pituitose carnosities and other matters, so often seen in the
left Ventricle, by Neretus Neretius that famous Physician of Florence, and
Erastus, part. 5. disputat. de feb, putrid: may be generated in the
pericardium, either by drinks of ill condition sliding into the Trachaea, and
so into the Arteries, and the heart: Cornelius Gemmad de Naturae divinis
characterismis:
and sometimes some small seeds or attomes of creeping creatures; which
Cornelius Gemma sets forth sufficiently, and historiseth many strange
matters in this kind, as some to vomit Yeeles and Serpents of strange forms:
and it is a common saying of the Pedemontanes, and such as drink the waters of
the Alps; that every such man borne has a Frog to his brother. Such things
may pass into the stomak, but rarely into the heart.

. 6.
BUt that which I have to say, is this; that these strange and extraordinary
generations are caused from the temperament individual, for you well know that
there is a double temperament; the one Specificall, the other individual; the
one is fixum and unalterable, the other is temperamentum fluxum, and
accidental.

As for the Specificall temperament, although the vital acts cease, yet the
specificall act is never changed; for you see that the parts of this or that
animal, retain their specificall virtue when they are dead: as herbs, or
those parts of herbs, as leave, seeds or roots, keep their property, and
retain their own heates or savours, when they are cut away, or taken up from
the ground: Yea and there are certain specifike atoms which always continue
after putrefaction, and extreme dryness in the fixed salt.

Lucret. lib. 1.
Sunt igitur solida primordia simplicitate
Quae minimis stipata cohaerent partibus art
Non ex ullorum conventa conciliatu
Sed magis aeterna pollentia simplicitate
Vnde neque avelli quicquam neque diminui jam
Concedit natura reservans semina rebus.
This temperament is proper to every creature: for Man has his temperament,
the Lion his, hysopp his, and the rose his own: For God made every thing,
secundum species suas, and in genere suo producat aqua in species suas, and
omne volatile secundum genus suum.

Et Deus fecit bestias juxta species suas and omne reptile terrae in genere
suo, and producat terra animamin genere suo, etc.

Wherefore the Specificall temperament of Socrates does not differ from the
temperament of Hippocrates, Plato, Cato, or any other man: which may be well
put against Aristotle, who thought the souls of men did differ in nobility one
from an other: which difference can no way be founded upon the temperament
specifically, but rather upon the jndividuall, which is but the accidental
constitution of the Individualls of the same species; which follows some
peculiar determination of the horoscopant; or else upon some other special
help, or hinderance; as from the singular site of Heaven, ascension of
Stars, aspect in flux, the aliment of parents, either more or less
elaborate; and many other matters every creature borne has according to the
felicity or infelicity of his generation: especially Man, who of all other
creatures is nourished with most variety of meats and drinks: We also see
every day that such men are more hot, and vivacious, who are borne either in
the Stars of Leo, or the Sun Orientiall: they also to be of more suculent
habit, who are born within the second quadrate of the Moon: and such to be
least vital, who are born in the silence of the Moon, herbs also gathered the
Moon, decreasing, have less force: and the very soil often does either so
augment, ordwarfe plants, and herbs, and give them such strange conditions,
that they are found degenerat, and scarcely the same herbs: As for the
prolifick matter, it breeds (as Physicians say) a male, or female, as it is
more or less concocted: There are also diverse conjunct matters, which help
or hinder generation, as such matter does which differs much a punctis
specificis, or a semine, for the sperma may be much, which is materia augment
ativa, but the seed is so little of which a giant is generated, that as novum
lumen says: it can be no greater at first moment of conception, then in
proportion to the 8200. part of a grain of wheat; which confirms that of
Aristotle, that the fortieth day after conception, homo formica non major; from
which augmentative matter it is (which is made of various and alterative
aliment) that children differ so much from both their own parents: hence one
sweates and swears at the sight of a Cat: and an other forsakes the table at
the sight of a Pigg or Goose; the reasons of which antipathies and diversities,
are founded in the latent matter spermatike, as if the Mother of one, somewhat
before her Son was begotten, had eaten a mouse; and the other fed upon the
ears of a Jew.

All which is said to illustrate, that there is in many men, a certain connate
matter and obedientall, susceptible of diverse diseases, and infelicities:
Wherefore it was not so anciently, as worthily said; Foelicissimum est been
nasci, it is a most happy thing to be well borne.

And from this Diatheses and ill dispositions may many a strange sickness in
after ages spring, as time, diet and other accidents do alter or intend the
heat, cold, or acrimony of the humor and blood, or some other quality.

I pray Sir, note well the faithful Relation of a most understanding and
sincere man, M. John Whistler, one of the Benchers of Graies-Inn and Recorder
of Oxford, who upon my Narration of this History of John Pennant (the very same
day, or the next that I found the Serpent;) told me that in his younger days
himself was a great Cock-Master, and one of his old fighting Cocks beginning
to droope, he thought it best to cut off his head, which as soon as it was
done, there appeared and shot out between the skinns another head and neck,
like that of his Cock, but it was a kind of gelly (as he conceived) with a
very fine skin upon it, with a bill and a little comb: The rest was not
searched, which perhaps was bred of some Egg in the body of the Cock, which
kind of Conceptions are very rare, yet the sacred Scripture makes mention of
Cockatrices: Which doubtless cannot be bred but of some humor or blood
exalted to some extraordinary and preternaturall degree of heat, cold, or
sharpness, or some other quality: Which first the natural heat and valor of
that bird prooveth: Secondly his martial profession and terrible battles
performed almost to death, all his life long; as also being begotten of such
like Ancestors, himself also excelling in heat and fiery spirits accidental.

Compare this Young-mans state also with this history; his right kidny wholly
consumed, his left tumified as big as any two kidneys or three, full of
ulcerous matter: So likewise his bladder full of ulcer, and rottenness, and
nothing in his body to be found the cause of this: Wherefore the sharpness and
extraordinary heat of the blood or some such like quality was the cause of the
Ulcers, and so also consequently of that extraordinary production in the heart:
For nothing else appears whatsoever may be conceived: And this accidental
temperament of the blood, I take to be the cause of this which we found in the
heart: For in the heart (if any where) was the greatest heat, and if in any
part of the heart in the left Ventricle, the principal receptacle of arteriall
blood and spirits: And I have more to confirm me in this opinion, having
certain knowledge both of the diet of his Mother and Grandmother also, and of
his own: Which I am not willing to make public; but to make private use of
it to my self.

All which shall not by me be intended to prejudice any other better judgment
concerning other like conceits; by reason that passages to that Ventricle may
be sometimes pervious, although very rarely: But to inform you of some
peculiar knowledge that I have of this man's History; which may give us great
light concerning others of like condition.

I could here discourse how the imagination produces strange things in men;
and works not only in our own bodies, but also in hyle mundi, as Friar Bacon
prooveth, To. Bacon. l. de Coelo and mundo
and Prince Avicen: But this I will not attempt, except you shall judge this
Relation may be beneficial to any, and then I shall discuss it out at large.

. 7.
BUt to me the resolution of this matter seems very profitable to know how
these things may be bred in men, for I suppose, men from hence will take
special care to alter the accidental temperament of humors, if they find them
excel in any high degree of heat, cold, sharpnes, or the like, such as have
in them inconvenience and danger, and to deal with learned Physicians in time.

So also is the knowledge of singular use and benefit to know when men are
affected with any such disease, and how they may be cured.

As for the knowledge of abstruse and secret affections, where perhaps no dolor
gives certitude of the place affected, as in diseases by consent, when some
other parts are more afflicted, such skill is worthy of a Physician, and at any
rate to be procured: But how or where shall we have it? Who writes of it? Who
has so much as ever dreamed of any such help to mankind? For mine own part I
never yet read of any Signa pathognomonica of any such disease: Neither do I
know where to find one grain of instruction in this, as also in diverse other
diseases (which I can nominate) more then from mine own observation and care.
Wherefore if I set down one thing which is not common nor else where to be
found. I hope you will take it as my good wish unto the Commonwealth of
Physicians, and I will lay my ground upon two Histories of mine own: the one
was in December, anno. 1634. For being sent for to a young gentleman whose name
was Arthur Buckeridge son unto M. Arthur Buckeridge now of Tottenham Gentleman,
who was sick of that kind of pox which our Country people call the Flocks,
which were many, flat headed, white, and wrought along, as if worms had made
certain crooked furrows among them, which when at first I beheld, I was very
diffident in my self of doing any cure, because I never-knew any of that
disease and manner saved: Yet while the friends of the Youth declared unto me
what an ingenious child and scholar he was, and what hopes all his friends had
of him: I still beheld the variegation, or vermiculation of that kind of
variolae: And because no Physician in all my reading ever gave me the least
light or help to cure them: J more studiously searching the cause of their
form, strongly apprehended that that outward work and waving could proceed
from no cause, but from putrefaction caused of worms; and that God and nature
did assist in so great a difficulty, showing by this external signature the
internal cause, taking therefore my Indicative from the Conjunctive (as Galen
counsels very well) J prescribed chiefly against worms and inward
putrefaction, and in very short space he was restored to his health: And while
I write these things, the yong-man (whom J never saw since) comes in to my
house to search after me, and to give me thanks so long after, being shortly to
go for Oxford: Wherefore to confirm this History I sent unto the Young-mans
Apothecary to see what was yet upon file, to ascertaine what I say; and it is
returned me, that two of my bills are yet there remaining: As also one honest
Gentleman remembers well that I then expressed as much and told his friends
that I intended to prescribe against the worms principally.

The other History was of this John Pennant, whom we dissected; who was well
known unto me, as his friends and others well can assure it, in whom as is
likewise sufficiently known, I very often noted this, that he had an excellent
Eye, but extraordinarily sharp, and like the Eye of a Serpent, and so much I
have spoken of it, that diverse Gentlemen and good Scholars did make answer
unto me that heard of his long diseases of the supposed stone, or ulcer of the
bladder: that pains and griefs did sharpen men's aspects: But finding what we
have seen in him, thus much shall mine own observation teach me ever; Let
others do, or believe as little as they please, that secret, unusual and
strange inward diseases, do send forth some radios, or signatures from the
center, Analogicall to the circumference, by which we may find the causes if
we be diligent and careful: And this is that which I would commend, of which I
know no man that has written one word as yet: Which although at first it
seems new, yet if men will well consider it and what I shall say I doubt not
but they will be confirmed, that it is an accurate and a most necessary
observation, and a chief Window to see into the most secret diseases and
Closets of the body and heart also.

And first as an introduction to belief what helps Physicians may have from
beams and signatures. All learned Physicians will thus far go with me,
that this was that admirable way of the old Magitians to find out the natures
of medicines, from their peculiar beams, signatures and similitudes, and that
there is no Simple or medicine Specifical (as they say) or excellent for any
disease or very few, but we are able to make the radij or signatures to
appear, from which those learned Magi did, or might find out the properties
and virtues of those Simples or medicines, and this you know to be true, and
this way you all know that Sponsa Solis or the Kiramides of the Synas went, as
that book of the King of Persia shows, which I lent unto you; and you have no
doubt many volumes of Physicians as well as others who have written of this
argument. Wherefore seeing it is so clear that signatures and beams have so
excellently and clearly discovered the virtues of all medicines latent and
abstruse. Shall we conceive that God and Nature are deficient in affording
outwardly some helps to know the inward, secret and strangest maladies? It
cannot be: For to what purpose is it, that the Simples have virtues medicinal,
and for every disease, if some diseases may not be disvered, and how can they
be discovevered within, to which no eye can come? from which nothing is
received, as in some other diseases. Some are known by time, as Fevers,
keeping Period: Some by place or part affected, as Cholick, Angine, Stone in
the reins, and the like. Some by excretions, as Dissenteries. Some by such
like and others more or less: But there is no means to discover such a thing
as this that has given occasion of all this discourse, for nothing was
excerned of it any ways, or from it that could give any light: No topicall
grief so great as that in his reins and bladder, he did complain of his
breast and of a beating there sometimes; but Palpitatio cordis is signum
commune. Neither did this man complain as he did always of his other
affections. Neither can it be imagined how such a substance growing and
receiving daily augmentation in his heart could be discovered by the wit of
man, but by some outward thing singular and unusual, as a special radius of
what was within.

. 8.
I trust then that this speculation and practice will in time be thought of,
and that it may, I will set this signature upon it (although seldom or scarce
ever noted by any except by Friar Bacon in his Book de Caelo and mundo, etc.
More especially by that incomparable sage Alkinaus, the most learned man that
the East since his time, or long before has brought forth unto the world: that
every thing has his radios proprios, as well as the stars of Heaven have:
Alkindus his words are these, in his Treatise de radijs, as a firm
conclusion, and sufficiently there by him confirmed; Agite ergo cum mundus
Elementaris sit exemplum mundi, it a quod quaelibet res in ipso contenta ipsius
speciem continet. Manifestum est quod omnis res huj us mundt sive sit
substantia, sive accidens, radios facit suo modo ad instar siderum, alioquin
figuram mundi syderci ad plenum non haberet. But this we will manifest to the
sense in some few (says he) the fire transmitteth his beams to a certain
distance: the earth sends out her beams of cold, of medicine, and of health;
and medicines taken into the body, or outwardly applied, diffuse their beams
through the wholebody of him that receives them: the collision of solid bodies
makes a sound which diffuseth it self by the beams of the thing moved: and
every colored body sends out his beams, by which it is perceived, and this
is subtely known in most other things: by which by vive reason it is
certainly known to be true in all things; taking this therefore for truth we
say, that every thing which has actual existence in the elementary world,
sendes forth his beams, which fill the elementary world after their manner,
whereupon every place of this world contains the beams of all things which
are actually existent in every place: And as every thing differs from other;
so the beams of every thing do differ in effect and nature from the beams of
all other things, by which it comes to pass that the operation of the beams
is diverse in all diverse things: Thus far, and much more Alkindus to the
same and like effect: Yet I will ad some few instances more. The several
smelles of all things in the world, are their several radij which do discover
themselves unto us, and we perceive them to be many times where we see them
not: We smell Roses, Musk, Civit, Amber, Quinces, Apples, Plants and herbs
of all sorts, and very many other things in rooms or boxes, before we come
near them: and we are most times assured of such things to be near us, by
their proper and peculiar emanations, or irradiations, which are their
specific beams, darting out and diffusing themselves from one center, unto a
certain distance, according to the virtue of the species or his proper nature,
which may doubtless also be intended, or remitted, or varied, and so make
strong projection, according to the rectitude of line, or else be debilitated
according to the proportion of obliquation: but this I insist not upon.

Fetted things also have their radios, according to their own proper nature,
and there is the same reason of them in all points according to their species:
The colors of other things are also beams: and the very truth is, that as all
things in the world have their proper radios: so all the actions that they
have is by virtue of these radij: and as Alkindus says, by these beams is
exercised in conjunctum localiter, aut in seperatum: which the Schoolmen call
immediatio virtutis, or immediatio suppositi: in both, nothing is done sine
radijs, nor truly known: As for example, If two men come close together, one
cannot strike another, Immediatione suppositi, except the animales radij
actuate the nerves and muscles of the hand, and therefore immediatio virtutis
is supposed. These spirits are the radij animales, and by these every action
arbitrary or not arbitrary is effected in or by man, and every other creature.

And as clear to us is that action which is performed immediatione virtutis in
other creatures; for we see an Adamant to draw iron at a distance: A looking
Glass to represent the Images of things separated from the glass: And this we
know must be by some Emission or projection of beams one toward another, as
well as by the Emission of the animal spirits from the brain into the nerves.
And a mavelous wonder it has been to me to see how Mineralls purified and
defecated from heterogeniall mixtures, finding themselves free do strike out
themselves in any liquour into branches and Stars, as is acknowledged by
Physicians, calling them medicinas stell at as, as Mercurius Stellatus: Regulas
Antimonij Stellatas, etc. and not only Minerals do thus, but the Salt of
vegetables, and animals I have made so, that they will do the like: So that it
is evident that every thing in the world has his beams; and it cannot, nor
ought not to be otherwise, since the nine times most blessed and most glorious
Essentator of all things who has been so diffusive, as to branch out himself
into every thing visible and invisible, that any thing should not have some
likeness unto him who made all things summaratione, and with as great
perfections as their several species were capable of. And for them therefore
not to show themselves, and who was their Father, it is impossible.

Coelum est in terra sed modo terrestri:
Terra est in Coelo, sed modo Coelesti:
Yea even putrid humors, and material causes of diseases, as being natural
things though corrupted are good: and have their beams and their signatures in
savours, pustles, bubos, spots, and tokens without, of diverse sorts according
to the several species of the humor putrified within, or from the commixtion
with other causes by which a Physician is much instructed, what is within, and
how to take heed himself; and to come home to the very point, and cause of all
this Discourse, we see in all kind of Animals in the world (and I doubt not but
your incredible desire to know and excellent natural sagacity has often
observed) that according as their arteriall blood is exalted, such radij are in
their Eyes; as we see in some men more then others, and in Cocks, and in
Serpents: A Cock has an Eye whose radij are almost exalted to the beams of
the Eye of a Serpent: And doubtless such blood had this man, and such spirits
of an incredible heat or acrimony: The Eye is an Index animi, which cannot
otherwise be then by the radij or spirits of it, much more then does it show
the blood arteriall upon which those spirits are founded; and thus from the Eye
I have made it evident, that we may know much of the left Ventricle of the
heart where the arteriall blood is elaborated and made: And thus in other
matters, if from the radij or signatures exterior we play the good Magitians
and diligently consider them: I am persuaded we may have a singular help and
insight to cure the most hidden and most dangerous diseases of all, and such as
otherwise cannot be known. You see Sir, I have founded my sentence upon God,
Nature, and Experience, and if it be hidden or not believed by any, it is to
them incredible who have gross conceptions, small skill, as J am sure your
great insight and wisdom will and can better confirm: For what is that which
makes some men wiser then others? Magis sapiens est and dicitur qui minus
perceptibilia percipit de rebus and earum conditionibus, says that wise man
Alkindus: There is no doubt therefore (as the same man says) but that they who
are informed with an holy desire of wisdom will labor much to comprehend the
secret conditions of things, as the ancient Physicians did who with wonderful
sagacity searched for that skill which we enjoy: As for such as are neither
wise nor have desire of wisdom, I leave them to Ptolemey that other miracle
of knowledge to instruct the world of them; Reprehendunt insipientes quod non
comprehendunt, unwise men reprehend all that they do not comprehend.

. 9.
IT remains only that something be said of the cure of such Conceptions if by
any Physician they be perceived in time: Either by pulsation of the heart or by
any external sign or signature, or Syndrome.

There are some who use no alterants nor other piece of art then to kill and
dissolve such conceptions: and they confide in this.. Succi Allij, Nasturtij,
Raphani, ana..j. detur and statim curabitur. So Schenckins from Stockerus.
Others thus.. Tanaceti ramulum in umbra siccatum, in pulverem redactum
cribellatumque, cui addatur pulvis sequens,. Rad gentian. Rad. Paeoniae longae,
ana..j. Myrrhae,.ss. misce, tere and cum uti volueris...j. Et cum guttula aquae
ut solum madefiat misce, deinde inunge os and lahra infantis aut patientis ter
aut quater, and una cum caeteris medicamentis eijcientur. So Schenckins. This I
grant is good for worms that cause Epileptike fits in children, but for such
as lie deeper in the pericardium and the left Ventricle, it is not likely they
will be sensible of, at so great a distance and enclosure: I rather think that
the use of some oils which are more penetrative, may do more good, as some
drops of Olei de Sabina in aqua juventutis, Raimundi or Olei ex Baccis Iuniperi
ob ejus penetrativam virtutem may with some continuance or with the success
before mentioned be more efficacious: But why am I so large speaking to you?
But to lay some grounds of future discourses with you, concerning both
preservation and cure of such latent maladies, rather then here to set them out.

. 10.
Yet for conclusion I have only this one thing to note unto the world: how
that these which seem so rare, strange, and incurable mischiefs, might be
more familiarly known, and easily cured, if it were not for a babish, or a
kind of cockney disposition in our common people, who think their children or
friends murdered after they are dead, if a Surgion should but pierce any part
of their skins with a knife: by which it comes to pass, that few of those
innumerable and mavelous conceptions, which kill the parents in which they
are bred, (as your self with admiration have knowingly spoken to me of their
infinite number which are generated in man's body) can ever be found out, or
cured: so great a monster is begotten in the blood of fools, and fearful
people, which destroys the common good of mankind in a very great
proportion: whereas that knowledge of their generations, which Physicians have,
is commonly from the dissections of the bodies of Noble Personages, and of the
Gentry, who with their friends about them have been bred to more fortitude,
and are more wise and communicative, as most of our medicinal histories, you
know confirm, and your self likewise has told me of some. All virtuous and
heroic souls know that when their particle of divine perfection is returned
to him that gave it, that then their bodies are to serve the universe (as that
pious Bishop knew) who when he had given away all besides his body, at last
gave that also for the good of the living, when it should be found dead, and
therefore bequeathed it to the Physicians to dissect it: but doubtless our
Tradesmen, their wives and children, and our sugar-sop citizens are compounded
of a rarer, noli me tangere, when they are dead then when they were alive; And
though Nobles and Princes may be cut in pieces, yet is it piacular, and the
loss of grace for ever with them, if a Physician should but intimate such a
matter as decently but to open any part of their most intemerate Impes.

But what good more frequent dissections might do, what portentuous matters
they might discover, and how facile they might find the causes, and their
cure, you sufficiently know, and in part others may by this history understand:
And although the learning and knowledge of some Physicians of our age be
singular, and grown to such an happy degree of perfection, yet there are by
dissections every day something to be learned: and how much the internal do
simbolize with external, as in part I have discovered, and J will yet give out
one illustration more: let but Physicians well note their patients
complections, and colors (for this time I will only speak of the face) and
let them take afterward if they come to dissect them notice of their livers,
and if they be diligent, in few dissections they shall be able, looking into
any man's face whatsoever, to know the affections very manifestly of his liver.
Sir, under favor, and with you J have thus much freedom as to tell some of my
brother Physicians and Surgions, that the inspections and dissections which
they celebrate over the world, are not to enable men to talk of names, parts
and places, but to do, and to be able to judge of things hidden and secret,
that they may not be deceived touching the causes of men's diseases: this is the
chiefest end, and yet how few study out of entrails this learning, I need not
intimate unto you.

The ways of nature, by which operations are effected, as also the
continuation of parts and vessels, their communication, and to find the causes
of sicknesses, their epigeneses, their metastases, their apostases, their
palyndromyes.

The ways of Simptomes, reasons of revulsions and the like, are the next: and
so much subordinate to the other, and of less necessity, as obuious
inspections show this to be more facile, and with less labor to be attained
then that; the other therefore not being so well perfected to our days, I have
by this extraordinary occasion, and out of my good wishes, ventured to speak a
word by you, unto such as are wise in our own profession, since Physicians
should be (...), as our dictators word is, like Gods, what is in us in good
skill, and good will, for the safety of mankind: that as it was said of his
days, so it may of ours, in little diebu; raro animae descendebant ad infernum:
in their days, souls seldom descended into hell, if any at last forsaking
divine grace shall descend; yet that hell may gape a long time ere it receive
them, and that others may have time to shake hands with Heaven, that our
profession, the noblest and wisest of all others, (I speak of professions
which concern this life only, not of professions supernatural) may still be
esteemed divinest (as the old Physicians were crowned deservedly, and related
among the Gods, above all others) while by our means, miserable men are
restored to the only blessing of this life, health; and (as I said) be
preserved from that great and eternal gulf of infelicity, Hell (many of them
not being in state of grace, because sick upon their sins) and lastly, made
live till they be friends and sons of God, and so rich as to come to Heaven:
our Savior Christ crowning us with such happy minds, as to be made
instruments and means of many men's eternal salvation, by occasion of their
temporal restitution.

FINIS.

