True news from (...) and also Out of Worcestershire.



Printed at London for William Barley.

True news from Mecare.
AFter the discomfiture given to the common enemy at Turnehault, the. 14. day
of January, was bruted thorough Anwarp, Brusels, Gant, and other chief towns
now holding for the king of Spain, and that of that small number that
efc^ped, some were returned to these towns before named, to give notice of
their ill fortune: at this time I say there was much lamentation made for the
death of many Commanders. And many priests in their mumbling manner sung
solemn dirges, and breathed out many bitter curses against the honorable
alders of our miserable distressed Countries of Flaunders: namely, sir Robert
Sidney, and sir Frauncis Vere: rai^ing on them with such vnreuerent terms as
in this place is not fit to be spoken. But at last seeing and knowing it
prevailed not, they ceased not sending the names of certain saints to the
soldiers written in small pieces of paper to wear on their breasts pind,
sanctified with many ceremonies against the next time they should encounter us
or any enemies whatsoever.

After which, upon the Sunday seuen-night after, being the

3. of the same month (...) Soldiers and the^^ (...) into an orchard, or
(...) walking, where the people use their holydaies recreation, and drink that
on the Sunday which they got the wecke before, which was some three English
miles from Lile in the way to Deuenter and Be^una, where they drank so much,
and swear so abhominably, that on the sudden God did show them a fearful
example, as Geo^g^ Clarke merchant, and Cornelius Decus^e^ affirmed, who were
at Lile the same time, and did by credible ^^tters maintain as much: the manner
whereof is here set down as near as may be gathered.

F^^st there was heard a fearful and grievous thunder about two a'clocke in
the afternoon, and suddenly the wind began to blow very violently: ^t which
sudden alteration one in the (...) called Peter Gens ^ried sacrament, (...)
owns land now? and thinking to rise pu^^ing his cloak and swearing very
blasphemously, was by a tree that the wind blew down presently killed, others
holding their hands out* stood looking for the lightning laughing, saying, now
the devil come^ again: but God to show his omnipotent power, and to warn
others from blaspheming his name or abusing his sabothes, struck some of them
dead with thunderbolts, and some blind with lightning: so that few escaped,
but that God did show them some mark or other of his heavy indignation, for
their drunkenness and blasphemy.

Also there was seen over the towns Saint Thomas, Ard, Aras, and Callice in the
air, four horsemen in black armor, and black lances following one another
with mighty haste, running toward the West, as it were against the Sun: But
at last the sun angry it seemed with their menaces, grew black, and
suddenly caused fearful lightning and thunder, the clouds opening and
shutting very fearfully: Insomuch they thought it had been doomes day. And
thus they continued for three hours together, and after that there was found
blood in the high way to Betuna, which those of the town affirmed to rain
from heaven. Insomuch that some of the soldiers of the town being in the
fields playing at hand-ball one Si^e came into the town albedropt with blood.
Likewise being enforced by the blood that rained to leave their sport and fly
to houses, many of which went to Mecare. And see how this fell as a fatal
sign to them: for the very same night certain soldiers of the count of saint
Paul and the marshall Be^on having divided themselves into companies appointed
to meet at this village, called Mecare understanding that those soldiers had
passed the river of Some some ten days before, and got spoils in the marshall
Berons, and count saint Paul's quarters, and therefore they vowed in this saly of
free boot to revenge themselves at full, and so they did: for in the night they
came and fired the village and seized on all they could find worth the carriage
for their lawful purchase; by occasion of which fire, many were forced to leap
from windows, and falling, brake their legs, necks and arms, which the
county of saint Paul's soldiers seeing departed, thinking themselves
sufficiently revenged.

Also the very same night those of the towns Ard, Aras, Saint Thoma^, and
Callice, did see in the air an angel with a crown on his head, and a sword
in one of his hands, which twice or thrice appeared like a sword of fire,
still remoouing up and down the air, sometime over one of the towns, sometime
over another. And in the air was heard a fearful noise for the space of an
hour together: and after the noise as certain merchants affirm the Angel
was heard to weep very grievously in the air, and was seen to spread his
arm toward the Weast, spreading his hand, as warning them to beware lest the
sword of gods wrath fell amongst them.

Now after these fearful sights in the air, there rose a great mist, which
gave such a stinking smell, that the people of Ard were forced to shut their
doors and windows, that before stood to behold these sights in the air, and
their cattle not able to see where they were, or not able to abide the smell
of the grass, while this fog continued, made haste to come home to their stals
along the dikes, as they were wont, and not seeing where they were, fell into
diches and rivers by the way and were drowned, which caused great sorrow to the
townsmen, and drew them almost into despair by this sudden toke^ of his
heavy displeasure.

Also there was seen in the air after this fearful and noisome foggy mist, a
bloody cross which stood just in the same quarter w^^re the sun grew dark,
and where the sudden fog first arose: to which the angel again appearing,
pointed by stretching out his hand, and was seen just over Saint Thomas and
Callice.

Also there was seen a Wagon broken all to pieces as it were in a burning
cloud, which in the breaking was h^a^d to make a great noise in the air whereat
the people were much astonished, and do since stand in great fear least the
Lord of hosts should rise in battle against them, and overthrow them with
their horses and chariots as he did those of Pharao following the children of
Israel. And certain it is, that since this fearful sight many fearing Gods
just judgment on them for their carrying arms in unjust wars, have since left
their companies and are now joined with the king of France: and it is thought,
which I pray God may prove so that more will follow: for those of our poor
country of Flaunders, as Anwarpe, Brusel^, Gant, Ard, and Callice, with
Grauelin. Dunkercke, and the rest do find their states worse then the
children of Isreal's was, being oppressed by Pharaos cruelty with making brick
and other manuel labor: for Pharao, did after the sight of many of Gods
wonders, and plagues showed on him, suffer the poor oppressed to depart: but
this Pharao of Spain notwithstanding Gods many fearful examples showed, will
not suffer our poor oppressed Belgians to live in peace, but still lays more
taskes and paiable duties to the maintaining of his unjust wars then Pharao did
on the children of Israel: for both their goods, wives, maids, and lives are at
the Spaniards command, or at leastwise control, god yet in mercy move the
heart of some man to be a Moses to my country men, and either by miracles or
by the sword release them, their wives, and children from the hands of those
wicked and bloody minded Spaniardes: for their shoulders are almost broken with
bearing the yoke of his oppression. God for his mercy sake when it pleases
him, release them. Mean space, being as I thank God I am, free from his
tyranny, I will (as I am bound daily) pray for the rest of my countrymen, that
God may give them patience and true faith in Jesus Christ, til it please him to
release them.

Thus much I thought good to advertise you according to my last promise, when
we parted at Quient: and in any thing you have occasion to use me in these
parts, I pray command me in part requital of your many favors: for absence
cannot make me forget my friends, and so farewell in God.

From Abuile in Picardy this 26. of January. 1597. James Drucateen.

True news out of Worcestershire.
AMongst the many of Gods fearful miracles, showed on us here in England, as
sliding of grounds, remoouing of highwaies, mighty floudes by great abundance
of rain, fearful lightnings and thunders, great fire from heaven, sudden
earthquakes, strange and deformed children borne, great dearth of corn, mighty
plagues and pestilence, death of many good and godly benefactors, as the late
lord Mayor for instance, much strife in the church by sects and schisms, with
fearful threatenings of the foe of Spain in his attempts of invasion,
amongst (I say) all these fearful warnings sent us by God to draw us to
amendment of life, and to cease from our former wickedness, wherein how
wissully we transgress, let every one examine their conscience, and then no
doubt but God will send the remorce of those consciences, to draw us to a
newness of life, lest like Jerusalem, Sodom and Gomorrha, and many other
countries yet fresh in memory, we feel Gods judgment when we would repent
and amend: if we might sind time amongst al these tokens of Gods kindled anger
behold one token more, which might move us upon the knees of our hearts to
ask God forgiveness for our sins, though he had never sent us other token
to affright us, or move us to remember our swearing, drunkenness, whoredom,
covetousness, and rapes, and murders and such like. For now behold the Lord has
sent us no example of nine days wonder, as the wicked account all tokens
whatsoever, but he has sent us a heavy example, an example of affliction, a
grievous and almost incredible disease of sudden lamenesse, beginning, not at
the heart nor head, but at the very toe of the foot, and can by no means be
cured, for from the toe it goes into the foot, from thence into the leg, and
so upwards still, and still as it ascends higher, the place it leaves, dies,
and if it once get to the thigh, then no way but death for the party infected,
for there is no means to cure it but cutting off the legs and arms.
Wheresoever it begins, it begins like a tingling, or pain like the gowt,
and in four and twenty hours it will grow red, and in six hours after, it
will be as black as a shoe, and be stone dead, and dies always upwards,
either in the legs or arms, insomuch that some have lost both their legs,
others both their arms, being cut off, and yet are living, a heavy
consideration, which the ungodly regard not.

For proof of what I say, because many are incredulous, there is a man in
Westminster named Hugh Alee, whose son Edward Alee was taken with the same
disease, whose leg being cut off at the knee was found so dead, that th^re
came not above two drops of blood from it, and the disease is so stinking, that
the surgeons are feign to fold mufflers three double about their noses and
mouths, when they come to dress them. And all this disease only reigns
within ten miles of Worcester round about every way, and in Worcester it
self, so that there are at this day above a hundred infected, and almost half
as many are dead already of it, and some that look to it in time, escape: it
spares neither men nor women, insomuch that many do leave to ride that way
fearing the disease, whereby the poor country is like to be undone, except
that by the prayers of the faithful and godly the Lord be moved to stay his
hands. But yet it seems that he does not only show us wonders, but has
likewise assigned many men to be hard hearted and incredulous of Gods wonders,
the proof was seen in a man of Worcester, who heareing of this strange
disease, said he did not believe that there could be such a sudden disease:
which one hearing, rebuked him, but notwithstanding he continued in his
obstinat misdoubt, til a surgeon carried him from house to house of the
infected, and showed him, in some places legs cut off, and in other places
arms, and in many places men dead by this disease: which he seeing, as
dispairing, in that he had been so doubtful, went home unto his house, and in
very angui^^ died, rauing and crying for Gods mercy, which many men may take
for example, that do distrust in the omnipotent power of God, thinking their
weak judgment can comprehend Gods many threatening examples. But why do we
wonder at his misbeleefe, when almost in every place men are misbeleuing and
dispairing, and are given to violent slaughters? For proof of which, a man
about S. Katherines was found so wilful in his own wicked opinion, that he
drowned himself, hanging a great weight of lead about his neck, thinking by
that means never to have bin found: but yet for all his wilful act god cast him
aland, only to show us that he will not that man shall (relying on his own
policy) hide any thing from God, for he searches the reins and heart, and
knows the very thoughts of al men how just or unjust soever. But for all this we
are careless of his heavy plagues and fearful examples, til either in
despair or wilfulnes we feel his punishments: for now in this age men are
only studying how to live and carry credit in this world, thorough worldly
riches, which howsoever it be gotten they regard not, be it by murder,
oppression, perjury, slander and usury: the proof whereof appeared in a man
dwelling in Kent, who went about to build a fair house, telling a friend of
his he meant to let it w^ll when it was finished, and said likewise, that he
would let it to the poor, not to the rich, making every chamber a tenement,
and then he knew the poor will take it at such a rate, that of x. pound a year,
if it were all in one, he would make forty almost, being thus in teneme^ts
divided, and in this determination went forward with his building til it was
half finished. But see how God showed his judgment upon him, because he meant
to extort upon ye poor: for when he had builded half the house, his money grew
so short that he could proceed no further, whereat many in the country made a
great mocking, which at last came to his care, in so much that going through the
streets of the town, many would vnderlook him and say, Is this he that will
build houses to beggar the poor? but he lacks money: Mary says one, and I Will
lend him a penny: wherefore answers another? mary to buy a rope to hang him in
for his good mind. Thus many times he was mocked, til at last moved with bitter
anguish, and deeply vexed in mind, he went greeuing that any should see his
face any more, and in that house which he was building went and hanged
himself. And this may serve for a warning to many Landlords in these days
that do not build houses as minding thereby to let them the better cheap, but
rather to raise the rents, to the utter undoing of a common wealth, and only
impouerishing to the poor of England, for many nowadaies take in as much
ground as to make a hog fly, and when their hog is dead, then they board the
stie, and that a poor man and his wife must pay viii. d. or xii. d. a week,
having neither chimny nor chamber, such a one, as when 2 or 3 are set together
by a fire made upon the ground for want of a harth, the^ (I say) the house is
so full that the dog must stand at the door, as having no rowme in the house:
which is a lamentable case, if it were looked into, and no doubt makes a great
many beggars in a year, and is besides a cover of much mischief: for
whatsoever they be, or howsoever they live, if they pay them their money well,
they regard not. And in these places adulterets, thieves, consoliers, and such
like are daily harbored, which I pray God wise magistrates may look into,
that it prove not a just plague to this country of England, and bring not
remediless hurts to this blessed commonwealth, which God in his great mercy
defend us from, and open our eyes to see his displeasure kindled against us,
and every man to repent him of his former wicked life, that we may all with
Abraham and the blessed ones live in joy with Christ everlastingly.

Amen.
FINIS.

