RELIGION AND ALEGIANCE: IN TWO SERMONS Preached before the KINGS MAJESTY:

The one on the fourth of July, Anno 1627. At OATLANDS.

The other on the 29. of July the same year, At ALDERTON.

By ROGER MAYNVVARING Doctor in Divinity, one of his Majesty's Chaplains in
Ordinary: and then, in his Month of Attendance.

By His MAJESTY'S Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for RICHARD BADGER. 1627.

THE FIRST SERMON, Preached before the KINGS Majesty at Oatlands, on the
fourth day of July, 1627.
ECCLESIASTES 8. 2. I counsel thee, to keep the Kings commandment, and that
in regard of the oath of God.
V^um ponitur in definitione multi^udinis. Thom. 1^. 11. 2. ad 4.
Unity is the foundation of all difference and Distinction; Distinctio est, ex
quaoritur multitudo. Sua^ rez Me^ap^.
Distinction the mother of Multitude; Multitude and number infer Relation;
which is the knot and confederation of things different, by reason of some
Amicabilia ad alterum, veni^u^t ex amicb^l^bus quae sunt ^omini ad seips u^.
Thom. 1. 99. 1. ad 3. ex (...) Eth. 9. ^ap. 8.
Respect they bear unto each other. These Reltions and Respects challenge
Duties correspondent; according as they stand in distance or deerenesse, afar
off, or near conioyn'd.

Of all Relations, the first and most original is that between the Creator,
and the Creature; whereby that which is made depends upon the Maker thereof,
both in Constitution and Preservation: for which, the Creature does ever owe to
the Creator, the actual and perpetual performance of that, which, to yts
Nature is most agreeable: which duty is called Natural. And sometimes also is
the Creature bound to submit in those things, that are quite and clean against
the natural, both inclination, and operation thereof; if the Creators pleasure
be so to command it: which dutiful submission is called by the Divines, an
Obedientiall capacity, in that which is made, by all means to do homage to
him that made it of mere nothing.

The next, is that between Husband and Spouse; a respect, which even Ethnic
Antiquity called and accounted (...) Rodogin. col. 1314. D^onys. Halicar. lib.
2. Pro. 6. 35.
Sacred: the foul violation of which sacred Bed and bond of Matrimony, was
ever counted heinous; and justly recompensed with that wound and dishonor,
that could never be blotted out.

Upon this, followed that third bond of reference which is between Parents,
and Children; where, if dutiful obedience be not performed by them that
received, to them that gave their being; the malediction is no less then this,
Pro. 2^. 20.
that their light shall be put out in obscure darkness, Pro. 30. 17.
the Ravens of the valleys to pick out their eyes, and the young Eagles to
eat them up.

In the fourth place, did likewise accrue that necessary dependence of the
Servant on his Lord; God having so ordained, that the eyes of Servants should
look unto the hand of their Masters; Psalm. 123. 2.
and the eyes of the Handmaid, unto the hand of her Mistress.

From all which forenam'd Respects, there did arise that most high, sacred, and
transcendent Relation, which naturally grows between The (...) Philo. de Nom.
mu^at. (...) Synes. de regno. fol. 8.
Lords Anointed, and their loyal Subjects: to, and over whom, their lawful
Sovereigns are no less then Fathers, Psalm. 82. 6.
Lords, Kings, and Gods on earth.

Now, as the Duties comporting with all these several Relations, if they shall
be answerably done, are the cause of all the prosperity, happiness, and
felicity which does befall them in their several stations: so is it, in the
world, the only cause of all tranquillity, peace, and order; and those things,
which distinction, number, and disparitie of Condition have made Different, it
most effectually reduces to Union: that, as of One there arose many, so, by
this means, do Multitudes become to be made One again. Which happy Reunion,
(...) Arist. polit. 1. cap. 2. Natura non facit vnum ad multa, sed vnum ad
vnum. To^t. Genesis 13. fol. 784.
Nature does by all means much affect: but the effecting thereof is the maine
and most gracious work of (...) Dionys^. Areopag. c^elest. Hier. cap. 1. Act.
4. 32. 1 Cor. 10. 17.
Religion. Which the wisdom of Solomon well seeing, and the Spirit that was
in him well searching into, he sends forth the sententious dictates of his
divine and Royal wisdom, fenced with no less reason, then the fortress of
Religion; in these words following: I counselthee, to keep the Kings
commandment, and that in regard of the oath of God.

This is Gods Text, and the Kings: and for the sake of all Kings was it
written. And as the King is the sacred and supreme Head of two Bodies, the one
Spiritual, the other Secular: so, this high and royal Text contains in it
two parts correspondent: The one Civil, which is a Counsel of or a politic
caution; I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment: the other Spiritual,
which is a devout or religious reason; And that in regard of the oath of God.
The First part is founded upon the Second; the Second is the ground of the
First: Religion the stay of Polity; which, if it be truly taught, devoutly
followed, and sincerely practiced, is the root of all virtues; the foundation
of all well-ordered Commonweales; and the wellhead, from whence, all, even
temporal felicity does flow. The zeal, and feruor of which Religion, if at
any time it fall into a wane or declination, contempt or derision, portends
evermore, the Ruin and desolation of that State and Kingdom, where, the
service and worship of him who sits in heaven, is set at naught: and fills the
world with terrible examples of Gods revenging Justice, and most irefull
indignation.

Now, in the first part, do lie these particulars.

Rex, a King.

Mandatum Regis, the Commandment of a King.

Custodia Mandati, the Keeping of, and obedience to this Commandment.

Consilium, Counsel to pursue, and practice this obedience.

Counselor, who gives this most divine and Royal Counsel; which is no less
then Solomon: who (as we all know) was,

1. A King, and the Son of a King.

2. A King, and the wisest of all Kings.

3. A King, and a Preaching King.

4. A King, and a very Fair (if not the Fairest and clearest) Type of him, who
was the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

To ingeminate again, the parts of the Text: 1. Rex, Sentiunt eum, Deum esse
solum, in cuius (...) po^estate sunt, a quo sunt secund^, po^t que^ primi, ante
omnes. Inde est Imperator, vnde and homo, antequam Imperalor: inde potestas
illi, vnde and spiritus. Tertul. Apolog. cop. 30. Eccles. 5. ^.
a King: and what is higher (in heaven or earth) then a King? God only
excepted, who is excelso excelsior: higher then the highest. 2. Mandatum Regis:
and what is stronger then it? For ver. 4. Sermo eius potestate plenus. 3.
Obedience to this Commandment: and what more rightful, just, and equal with
men? what with God more acceptable? 4. Counsel, to follow this: what more
needful, wise, or gracious? 5. And all this from such a Counselor, then
which, none ever greater, but he alone, of whom it was said, Ecce plus quam
Solomon, hic: Be^old, a greater then Solomon, S. Mat. 12. 42.
is here.

A King: This is the Suppositum, 1. Point.
or Person on whose behalf this Counsel is given: and it is a Rule of that
Science, whose Maxims are privileged from error; that, (...) Arist. Metaph.
lib. 1. cap. 1.
Actiones sunt suppositorum; Indiuidualls challenge all actiuity as peculiar
unto them. Now, all things that work, and have any operation, must (of
necessity) work by some Power, or ability which is in them. All Power is
either such as is Created, and derived from some higher Cause, or such, as is
Uncreated, and Independent. Of this last kind, is that Power which is in God
alone; who is (...)
selfe-able in all things, and most puissant of himself, and from, and by no
other. All Powers created are of God; S. Ioh. 19. 11.
no power, unless it be given from above: Romans 13. 1.
And all powers, that are of this sort, are ordained of God. Among all the
Powers that be ordained of God, the Regal is most high, strong and large:
Kings above all, inferior to none, to no man, to no multitudes of men, to no
Angel, to no order of Angels. For though in Angel^s esse in supremo
perfectionis gradu, proximosque Deo. Suarez de Ang. lib. 1. cap. 1. number. 6.
Nature, Order, and Place, the Angels be superior to men: yet, to Powers and
persons Royal, they are not, in regard of any dependence that Princes have of
them: Their Power then the Primum dei, deinde Regis est, vt nulli sub^^ciatur.
Ecphanta Phythagor, lib. de Regno apud Stob^um. fol. 335.
highest. No Power, in the world, or in the Hierarchy of the Church, can lay
restraint upon these (...). Strabo. lib. 9. (...). Suidas verbo, (...)
supreames; therefore theirs the strongest. And the largest it is, for that no
parts within their Dominions, no persons under their Jurisdictions (be they
never so great) can be privileged from their Power; nor be exempted from
their care, be they never so mean. To this Power, the highest and greatest
Peer must stoop, and cast down his Coronet, at the footstool of his
Sovereign. The poorest creature, which lies by the wall, or goes by the
high-way-side, is not without sundry and sensible tokens of that (...), Philo.
de vita Mosis.
sweet and Royal care, and providence; which extends it self to the lowest
of his Subjects. The way, they pass by, is the Kings highway. The Laws,
which make provision for their relief, take their binding force from the
Supreme will of their (...). Arist. Eth. 8. cap. 13.
Liege-Lord. The bread, that feeds their hungry souls, the poor rags,
which hide their nakedness, al are the fruit and superfluity of that happy
plenty and abundance caused by a wise and (...). Phllo. Allegor. legis.
peaceable government. Whereas, if we should come to hear the dread-full and
confused noise of war, and to see those garments rolled in blood, if
plough-shares should be turned into swords, and sithes into spears; then
Famine of bread, and cleanness of teeth, Esaias 9 5.
and dearth of al good things, would be the iu^t and most deserved punishment,
of all, both their, and our sins.

Now, to this high, large, and most constraining Power of Kings, not only
(...). Polyb. Histor. lib. 6. fol. 452.
Nature, but even God himself gives from heaven, most full and ample
testimony: and that this Power is not merely humane, but Superhumane, and
indeed no less then a Power Divine, (...). Herodot. apud (...). fol. 326.
(...). Synes de regno. page 20.
Though Majesty (says Herodotus) be shrouded under Mortality, yet is it
endowed with such a Power from above, as bears no small resemblance with the
Deity. For if it were of men, or if that Power which is dispersed in
Communities and multitudes, were collected and settled in the King; then might
this Power be thought humane, and to rise from men. But, because God would have
men to conceive quite otherwise of Regal Sovereignty; therefore himself
pronounces this of them, who wear Crowns on their heads, sit upon Thrones,
and with Scepters in their hands rule Nations; I said ye are Gods. Psalm. 82. 6.


That sublime Power therefore which resides in earthly Potentates, is
Communi^^^* nihil sui consert Regibus* Spalet* Tom. 2. 5 29.
not a Deriuation, or Collection of humane power scattered among many, and
gathered into one head; but a participation of Gods own Omnipotency, which he
never did communicate to any Summum Imp^rium nunqu^ suisse populo demandatum.
D^. Sarau. fol. 175.
multitudes of men in the world, but, only, and immediately, to his own
Vicegerents. And, that is his meaning when he says, Pro. ^. 15.
By me Kings reign; Kings they are, by m^ Vnctio Regum in cap^^e, vt
significaretur, quod instituebantur Principes per Deum. To stat. ad 1. Reg.
fol. 287. Proinde, licet communicatio potestatis, quandoque sit per conse^sum
homin^^ at potestas ipsa immediate est ^ D^o, cui^s est po^testas. Roffens. de
potestat. Pap^. fol. 283.
immediate constitution; and by me also, do they Rule, and exercise their so
high and large Authority.

This therefore may be well conceived to be the cause, wherefore God does plead
in Scripture, and that so mainely, not only for the Souer aignty, but also for
the Security of his Anointed; I said ye are Gods: and he says it in no
secret, but standing in Synagoga Deorum; for so the Psalm begins, as if he
would have all the world take knowledge of what he said. Pro. 8. 15.
Then, Per me Reges regnant. After that, Psalm. 105. 15.
Nolite tangere Christos meos. And lastly, Eccles. 10. 20.
Curse not the King; Ne detrahas Regi (says the Vulgar) Traduce not, detract
not from the King. Put all together. 1. I said ye are Cods. 2. By me Kings
reign. 3. Touch not mine Anointed. 4. And speak not amiss of the King, no
not in thy secret thought. And take we these sentences asunder again, thus:

1. I said ye are Gods: there is their sublime and independent Sovereignty.

2. Per me Reges regnant: there is their irresistable Authority.

3. Nolite tangere Christos meos: there is their sacred and anointed Majesty,
with the security of their royal State, and persons.

4. In cogitatione tua, Regi ne detrahas: speak not ill of the King, in thy
thought: there is the tendering, and preserving of their great and precious
Names from obloquie; and the safety, and indemnity of their Royal fame and
glory.

To put then, an end to this first point: Royalty is an Honor, wherein, Kings
are stated immediately from God. (...). Dio. Cass. lib. 53. An pote^^as Adami
in fi^ios, ac Nepotes, Ade^que omnes vhique homines, ex consensu filiorum ac
nepotum dependel, an a solo Deo, ac natura profluit? Roff. de potestat. Papae
fol. 282.
Fathers they are, and who gave Fathers Authority over their Families, but he
alone, from whom all the Father hood in heaven and earth is named? The power of
Princes then, is both ^ure diuino naturali Reges regnant, and iure diuino
naturali homines a Regibus regi debent. Spalet. Tom. 2. fol. 529.
Natural, and Divine, not from any consent or allowance of men. And he that
gaine-saies this, transgreditur terminos quos posuerunt Patres, says Antonin
3. par, tit. 3. cap. 2.
Antonine. Not therefore, in any Nusqua^ inuenie Regem aliauem Iudeorum, populi
suffragijs crea^^: quin, si primus ille erate, de signunaretur a Deo, vel a
Proph^ta, ex Dei iussu, vel sort aut alia ratione qu^ Deus indicasset. Pinaed.
de Reb. Salo^non lib. 2. cap. 2.
consent of Men, not in Grace, not in any Municipall Law, Ephesians. 3. 15.
or Local custom, not in any law National, nor yet in the law of Nations,
which, consent of men, and tract of time, has made forcible; not finally, in
the Pope, or any People is Regal preheminencie founded; for (...). Damascen.
orthod. fidei lib. 2. cap. 11. fol. 112.
Adam had Dominion settled in him, before ever there was either Pope, or People:
neither Popes nor Regnum etiam congregatum subest Regi, regi^que pot^stati.
Spalet. Tom. 2. fol. 531.
Populous Multitudes have any right to give, or take, in this case. So that
Royalty is a Prehemencie wherein Monarchs are invested, immediately from a
God; For by him do they reign. And likewise Sacred to God himself; For he
who touches them, touches the apple of Gods own eye: and therefore, Touch
not mine anointed.

Supreme also it is, and Independent upon any Man, Men, or Angels; and for
this says he; They are Gods: whose glorious and dreadful Person^m sustinent
(scil Reges) cu^ maiestatem inuiolabil^m impressit i^se (scil. ^^us) and (...)
Eccles. 5. 9.
Names, must not be meddled with by any wicked tongues, or pens, nor mingled
with any lewd perverse or deprauing thoughts; and for this, Curse not the King
in thy thought.

And yet notwithstanding this; they are to be sustained, and supplied by the
hands and helps of men; for The King himself is served by the (...).
field; and Re^dite quae Caesaris, Casari: Render as due, not give as
arbitrary, for, for this cause pay we tribute, says the great Apostle. God
alone it is, who has set Crowns on their heads, put scepters, yea and
revenging swords into their hands, settled them in their thrones; for this, do
their Royalties render to God (as a due debt) that great Care, Pains, and
Providence which they sustain in the ruling over, and preserving of their
people in wealth, peace, and godliness: (...)* S. Chrysostom ad Romans 13.
Penditur tributum ^d sustentationem Principis, and ad satisfaciendum naturali
obligationi, in dando stipendium iu stum laboranti in nostr^vtilitatem. Suarez
de legib ^ol. 311. Sic Musculus, Locis, cap. de Magistrate. 2. Point.
and for this, do the people render, as due, to them again, by natural and
original Justice, tribute, to whom tribute, custom, to whom custom
appertains.

The second point was, Mandatum Regis; the Commandment of the King. Now, a
Mandate or Command is a signification of his will, who has power to send it
forth. Five several Intimations of the will are observed by the Divines. 1.
Either, when a man does undertake the transacting, and doing of any thing
himself, and that is a clear intimation of his will, by reason that all
actions rise from the Voluntas (...) actionis origo. Tertul. de P^eniten. ^ol.
437.
will: whose proper sway is, to set on work all the powers of the soul, and
parts of the body. Or 2. when some Counsel is given for ought to be
dispatched, by which the Will and Pleasure of him who gives the Counsel, is
signified; and that which is counseled, is shown possible to be done, and
that, in reason, it ought not to be left Permitting also of any thing to be
done, where there is power to hinder it, is a clear intimation (at least,) of
a kind of resolution, to have it done. Resolute and Mandatory forbidding,
commanding of any thing, is the most undoubted and express declaration of his
will, who has Power and Jurisdiction, so to derive his pleasure.

Now then, a Commandment is an act descending from three most eminent
faculties of the humane soul. First, from the Understanding, finding out by
exact discourse, advice, and counsel, what is to be done, by which Intellectus
extensione fit practicus. I^ban. Scot. ad prim. Prolog. quaest. 4. number. 2.
extensions of reason, the Intellectual part draws to practice. Secondly,
from the Iudicij verbu^ hoc. faciendum est.
Judgment, decreeing and resolving what is the meetest to be done, amongst
many particulars. And lastly, from the Imperij verb^u: fac hoc. Greg. de Val.
Tom. 2. in ^2. col. 243.
Imperial sway of the Will, which fastens a Command on all other powers, to
do their parts, for the dispatch of such designs, as Reason has found out,
and Judgment thought meet or necessary to be done.

To draw then toward some conclusion of the point in hand; (...). Joseph.
Antiquital. lib. 11* cap* 4.
All the significations of a Royal pleasure, are, and ought to be, to all
Loyal Subjects, in the nature, and force of a Command: As well, for that none
may, nor can search into the high discourse, and deep Counsels of Kings;
seeing their hearts are so deep, by reason of their distance from common men,
even as the heavens are in respect of the earth. Pro. 25. 3.
Therefore said he, who was wise in heart, and deep in Counsel, The heavens
for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of a King is unsearchable.
As also, for that none may dare to call in question the Reges, suo solius
iudicio, reseruauit Deus; qui stans in Synago^ga deorum (i. e. Regum) dijudicat
eos. Roff. de potestat. Papae. fol. 291.
Judgment of a King, because, the Quia per cor Regis gubernatur regnum, ne
cesse est regnum esse in potestate Dei, in cuius manu, cor Regis est. Tostat.
ad Math. 4 quaest. 50. (...). Nazian. orat. 27. fol. 471.
heart of a King is in the hand of God, and he turns it which way he
pleases. Who then may question that, which, God does proclaim from heaven to
be in his hands, and at his guidance? And for his Sovereign will (which gives
a binding force, to all his Royal Edicts, concluded out of the Reasons of
State, and depth of Counsel) N^fas est, in d^b^um vocare etus potes^a^em, cui
omnium g^berna^io supremo consiat (...) iudicio. Council. Tolet 6* cap. 14. Si
quis, potestati Regiae, quae non est (i^xta Aposto^^) nisi a De^, contumaci*
and instito spiritu, etc. obtemperare Irrefrigabiliter noluerit;
An^thematiz^tur. Council Meldense. apud Roff. de potestat. Papae. lib. 2. cap.
5. Romans 13.
who may dare resist it, without incurable waste and breach of Conscience?
seeing the Apostle speaks under terms of so great terror; that he who
resists commits a sin done with an high hand, for he resists the ordinance of
God* and so contracts an heinous guilt, and incurres likewise the heauiest
punishment: for, to his own soul does he receive Damnation.

Nay, though any King in the world should command flatly against the Law of
God, yet were his Power no otherwise at all, to be resisted, but, for the not
doing of His will, in that which is clearly unlawful, to endure with
patience, whatsoever penalty His pleasure should inflict upon them, who in this
case would desire rather to obey God then Man. By which patient and meek
suffering of their Sovereigns pleasure, they should become glorious Martyrs:
whereas, by resisting of His will, they should for ever endure the pain, and
stain of odious Traitors, and impious Malefactors.

But, on the other side; if any King shall command that, which stands not in
any opposition to the original Laws of God, Nature, Nations, and the Gospel;
R^x non peccat, suam legem non obseruans, in ijs quae solum decca^t subditos,
no^ autem princi^e^ ipsum: neque enim caput discordat corpori sinon sit
subiectum ijs omnibus, quibu^ reliquum corpu^ subditum est, nisi in ijs rebus,
quae ae que ipsum, ac reliquum corpus recipient. Vasquez in 1^. d^sp. 137.
cap. 3. ex Soto lib. 1. de Just. q. 6. a. 7.
(though it be not correspondent in every circumstance, to Laws National, and
Municipall) no Subject may, without hazard of his own Damnation, in rebelling
against God, question, or disobey the will and pleasure of his Sovereign. For,
as a Father of the Country, he commands what his pleasure is, out of counsel
and judgment. As a King of Subjects, he inioynes it. As a Lord over Gods
inheritance, he exacts it. Et, quisquis, hoc summum obtinet Imperium, sieve is
si^ vnus Rex, sieve pauci Nobiles, vel ipse populus vniuersus. supra omnes leges
sunt. Ratio h^c est, quod nemo sibi ferat legem, sed subdi^is: suis se legibus
nemo adstringit. D^. Sarau. de Impera^d. Author lib. 2. cap. 3. Huc accedit and
illa ratio, quod neque ^uis legibus teneri possi^ (scil. Rex) cum nemo sit
seipso superior, nemo a seipso cogi possit, and leges a superiore tantum
sciscantur, denturque inferioribus: neque antecedentiu^ Principum, cum par in
parem, non habet imperium: neque populi, cum ipse populo superior sit.
Barclaius contra Monarchomach. lib. 3. cap. 16. Quare qui Reges legibus
subijciunt, Ne quid prae^clari pro Repub. audeant, impediunt, and calumnijs
Improbissimi cuiusuis exponu^^. D^. Sarau. ^ol. 174 Romans 13. 2.
As a Supreme head of the body, he advises it. As a Defendour of the Faith,
he requires it as their homage. As a Protector of their persons, lives, and
states, he deserves it. And as the Sovereign procurer of all the happiness,
peace, and welfare, which they enjoy, who are under him, he does most Hoc ^rit
ius Regis 1 Samuel 8. 6. h^c est* potestas legitima, non tyrannica, nec violenta.
Spalet. tom. 2. full. 251. Et ide^, quando Rex, propria negotia, non poffit
expedire per proprias res ac seruos, possit, pro negotijs proprijs, tollere.
res and seruos alioru^; and i^^o mod^ dicebat Deus, quod p^rtiuebat ad ius
Regis. 1 Samuel 8. 6. Gu^iel. Occa^. tracta^. 2. lib. 2. cap. 25. Tributa esse
maxim e naturalia, and praese far iustitiam: quia exiguntur de rebus
proprijs. Nauar. apud Suarez de legib. fol. 300 (...). Naz. Orat 27. fol. 471.
Kings may justly command the goods and bodies of all their Subjects, in time
both of War, and Peace, for any public necessity or vtility. B. Bilson.
d^ff. fol. 356.
justly claim it at their hands. To Kings therefore, in all these respects,
nothing can be denied (without manifest and sinful violation of Law and
Conscience) that may answer their Royal state and Excellency: that may further
the supply of their Urgent Necessities: that may be for the security of their
Royal persons (whose lives are worth millio^s of others:) that may serve for
the Protection of their Kingdoms, Territories, and Dominions: that may enable
them to yield Relief, aid, and succor to their dear and Royal Confederates
and Allies: or that may be for the defense, and Propagation of that sacred and
precious Truth; the public profession whereof, They do maintain by their
Laws, and Prerogatives Royal.

The third point is Obedience. 3. Point.
Obedience is a willing and Understanding act of an Inferior, done at the
command, and to the honor of a Superior. Reasonable then, Rationabile
obsequtum.
and Willing, Romans 12. 1.
must it be: Violenced-duties, forced and extorted actions, are not within the
compass of true Obedience. Voluntary service is that which pleases God and
Man: And so well does this suit with the nature of God, (to whom all things
ought to yield most willing obedience) that he pronounces it better then
sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15. 22.
and to hearken, better then the fat of Rams.

Every will therefore, and Inclination that is in the Creature, is charged with
the duty of Obedience toward the Maker of it. To this end, God has planted a
double Capacity, and possibility in the Creature, to submit to his pleasure:
The one is Natural, by which, the Creature, in all yts actions, that follow,
and flow from yts form, does actually and perpetually serve the Creator: as
the Heavens, in moving; the Earth, in standing still; the Fire, in burning; the
Air, and Water, in refreshing, cooling, and flowing.

The other capacity, is called Obedientiall: whereby the Creature is ever ready
to do that which is contrary to yts own Nature; if the Makers pleasure be to
command it so. And with this Obedience, did the Earth fearfully shrink, and
fali asunder, Number. 16 32.
to swallow up those Rebels against God, and the King; so to give them a
sudden and ready passage into hell, by a direct and straight diameter. Thus,
did the waters stand on heaps, Exodus 14. 2^.
and leave the Channel dry, that Gods people might find amaruelous way, Wisd.
19. 5.
and his enemies a strange death. Thus, did stones yield to be lifted up
against their nature, into the air, that they might fall back, Iosuah 10. 11.
and recoyle with greater violence, to bruise and brain the enemies of his
people. Thus, did the Fire of the Babilonian-Furnace refresh the three
Children. Dan. 3. 27.
And thus, in fine, did the Sun stand still in Gibeon, ^os. 10. 12.
and the Moon, in the Valley of Aialon; to give the longer light, and lesser
heat to them, who fought for him, that made both Sun and Moon.

Now, this Power which God has over, and this kind of Subjection which he
receives from the Creature, is a privilege, and prerogative, which God has
reserved only to himself; and not commn^icated, at any time, to any King, or
Caesar, to have, or to receive Regularly: but only, by way of Impetration, and
extraordinary Dispensation, for dispatch of some miraculous work, as it was in
Moses, and Iosuah.

All the Obedience therefore, that Man can challenge from man, is, in part,
Natural; as agreeable and convenient to their inclinations: and, in part, In
re morali, actio hominis, vt homo est, ea dicitur, quae libera est. Azor.
Instit. lib. 1. ^ap. 1.
Moral, in as much as it is Free and Willing. And this, of right, may every
Superior exact of his Inferior, as a due debt: And every Inferior, must
yield it unto his lawful Superior, for the same reason. Children, to Parents,
in discipline, and Domesticalls: Servants, to their Lords, in their respective
and obliged duties: Soldiers, to their Commanders, in Martial affairs, and
feats of Arms: People, to their Pastors, in Conscientious-duties and matters
of Salvation: Subjects, to their lawful Sovereigns, in the high
Concernements, of State and Policy. And This is that Obedience, wherewith we
are all charged in this Text, by the Word of God, and Wisdom of Sal^mon.

To draw then toward an end of this third point: We may observe, that, in the
Text, there is a double, nay a treble Majesty: The Divine Majesty of him,
^er. 10. 10.
who is the Living God, and everlasting King; The Majesty of King Solomon,
that gives the Counsel; And the Majesty of all Kings, on whose behalf this
Counsel is given. And, did we well consider the King, that gives the Counsel;
and the King, that is now to receive the Obedience; and the King, for whose
sake it is to be given; and the Reason, why: In regard of the oath of God: it
were reason sufficient, without any more ado, to persuade all Rationall-men,
to accept of this Counsel.

But, there be Pretenders of Conscience, against Obedience; of Religion,
against Allegiance; of Humane Laws, against Divine; of Positive, against
Natural; and so, of Man's Wisdom, against the will and wisdom of God; and
of their own Counsels, against the Counsel of Solomon. These men (no doubt)
may be wise in their generation, but wiser then Solomon no man can think
them: nor (as I hope) do they think themselves so, for if they did, of such
there were little hope. Some there were, in the days of (...). Justin. Martyr:
dialog. cum Trypho. fol. 312.
Justin Martyr, who were so strongly conceited of their own ways, as to
think themselves wiser then the Scriptures. Upon them, and the like,
Testimonijs diuinis lites sua^ praeferunt. -- Qui enim Testimonia diuina non
sequntur, pondus humani testimounij perdid^r^n^. S. August. contra Donatistas.
Tom. 2. Epist. 50.
Saint Augustine, (against the Donatists,) lets fall this sentence, as an heavy
beam to bruise their hayrie scalps: They (says he) who prefer their own
desires of contention, before divine and humane testimonies; deserve, that,
neither their words should be ever held for Laws, nor their deeds taken for
Precedents. Now therefore, Salom^ns wisdom is great, and his Counsel deep,
and able to persuade; and, if these men's wisdom be from above, as Salomos
was, it is no doubt Quae autem de sur^um est sapientia, suadibilis, bonis
consentiens. S. Iacobi Epist. cap. 3. ver. 17.
perswadeable: And, if I wished it were, and that they would be perswad^d, (as
some have been) I would propound unto their view, a few short Considerations,
which, (if they would please well, and seriously to weigh them) might (with
facility) remove, as well, all their Speculatiue, as, Practique errcurs.

First, if they would please to consider, that, though such Assemblies, as are
the Highest, and greatest Representations of a Kingdom, be most Sacred and
honorable, and necessary also for those ends to which they were at first
instituted: yet know we must, that, ordained they were not to this end, to
contribute any In regnis h^^editarijs, populus and P^oce^es nihil saciunt;
solum cum plausu proclamant. Roff. de pot. Papae. fol. 290. Communi^as, nihl
sui con^ert Regibus, nisi ad summum person. nam determinet; and patius, personam
applicat diuinae potestati, quam diuinam potestatem pers^nae. Spalet. tom. 2.
fol. 529. Populus nihil contulit: Christi Domini, non Christi pop^li sunt. Oleo
sancto infuso, signare id, Deus voluit, and consignare. Winton. Respons. ad
Math. Tort. fol. 384.
Right to Kings, whereby to challenge Tributary aids and Subsidiary helps;
but for the more equal Imposing, and more easy Exacting of that, which, unto
Kings does appertain, by Obligati^ Pendendi Tributum, it a naturalis est
Principi, and per se orta ex ratione Iustitiae, v^ non poffit quis excusari,
propter appar^tem ini^stitiam, vel nimium grauamen. Suarez de legib. fol. 316.
Natural and Original Law, and Justice; as their proper Inheritance annexed
to their Imperial Crowns, from their very births. And therefore, if, by a
Tres conditiones Tributorum, scilicet legitima potestas, iusta causa ac debita
proportio, quaa plane videntur sufficientes ad iustitiam Tributi, and ita illas
tantum* ponunt Castro and Medina. Suarez de legibus lib. 5. cap. 17. number. 1.
Acceptationem populi, non esse conditionem necessariam, ex vi iuris naturalis,
aut Gentium, neque ex iure Communi. Suarez vbi supra, number. 3.
Magistrate, that is Supreme; if, upon a Necessity, extreme and urgent; such
Subsidiary helps be required: aa Proportion being held respectively to the
abilities of the Persons charged, and the Sum, or Quantity so required,
surmount not (too remarkeably) the use and charge for which it was levied; very
hard would it be for any man in the world, that should not accordingly satisfy
such demands; to defend his Conscience, from that heavy prejudice of resisting
the Ordinance of God, and receiving to himself Damnation: though every of
those Circumstances be not observed, which by the Municipall Laws is required.

Secondly, if they would consider the Importunities, that often may be; the
urgent and pressing Necessities of State, that cannot stay (without certain
and apparent danger) for the Motion, and Revolution of so great and vast a
body, as such Assemblies are; nor yet abide those long and pawsing
Deliberations, when they are assembled; nor stand upon the answering of those
jealous and ouerwary cautions, and objections made by some, who (wedded
overmuch to the love of Epidemicall and Popular errors) are bent to cross
the Just and lawful designs of their wise and gracious Sovereigns: and that,
under the plausible shows of singular liberty, and freedom; which, if their
Consciences might speak, would appear nothing more then the satisfying either
of private humors, passions, or purposes.

Importance, weight, and moment of the present affairs; for which such helps
are required.

1. It is for the honor of his Sacred Majesty; and to enable him to do that
which he has promised in the word of a King: that is, to give supply to those
Wars, which, the Resolutions of his own Subjects represented in the high
Court of Parliament, caused him to undertake; and that, with the highest
Protestations, and fullest Assurances from them, to yield him all those
Subsidiarie helps that way, which, the Power, or Love of Subjects, could
possibly reach unto.

2. 2 Samuel 18. ^. Tu, vn^s, pro december A^^llibus computaris.
It is for the Security of his Royal State and Person, which ought ever to be
most dear and tender unto us: his Life being worth Millions of ours.

3. It is for the Safety and Protection of his Majesty's Kingdoms,
Territories, and Dominions.

4. It is for the Relief, and Succor of his Royal and Confederate Uncle the
King of Denmark; who, in a Cause that much nearer concerns us, then it does
himself, has hazarded his life, Crown, and Kingdom; as they well know.

5. It is also, for the Securing, and Preserving of all our Lives, Goods and
States, and the Preventing of Foreign Invasions, by bitter and sub^ile
enemies of ours, both intended, and proiected.

6. And lastly: It is for the Defense, and Propagation of that Sacred and
Precious Truth, which we all profess to follow, protest our Interest in, and
resolve to die for; if need require, and occasion be offered.

Treasures of wealth are dispended within this Realm, upon purposes of
infinite less importance: Nay, to lewd and vile uses, much is spent and with
wonderful alacrity quite cast away: what within, and what without the body;
upon back, and belly, upon fingers, and feet, Rings and Roses, rioting, and
drunkenness, in chambering, and wantonness, in pride, and vanity, in lust,
and luxury, in strife, and envy; So that, if God come to claim his Tenth; or
the King his Tribute, the Devil is gone away with all. So that, we cannot say,
as S. August. tom. 10. Homil. 48.
Saint Augustine yet sometimes said, Quod non accipit Christus, tollit fiscus:
but where the Devil has devoured all, there, God and the King, do loose
their right. ^ S. Ioh. 5. 19.
Mundus totus in maligno positus.

Advantage this their Recusancy in Temporalls gives to the common Adversary:
who, for disobedience in Spiritualls, has hitherto alone inherited that Name.
For, that, which we our selves condemn in them, blame them for so doing, and
profess to hate that Religion, that teaches them so to do; that is, to
refuse subjection unto Princes, in Spiritualls: The same (if not worse) some of
our own side now (if ours they be) dare to practice. For, in Temporalls they
submit to his Majesty; though he be no Defendour, but a Suppressour of their
Religion. Of their Lives, and States, indeed, his Majesty is a most gracious
Protector; but of their Religion not so: Of our Lives, States, Faith, and
Religion, is his Sacred Majesty a most gracious Defendour, by his Laws, and
Prerogative Royal; and in his own Person, a most glorious Example of zealous
and active Devotion. Therefore, we must needs be argued of less Conscience,
and more ingratitude, both to God, and the King; if in Temporal things, we
obey not. They, in Spiritualls, deny Subjection, wherein they may perhaps
frame unto themselves some reasons of probability, that their offense is not
so heinous. If we, in Temporalls, shall be Refractary, what color of reason
can possibly we find out, to make our defense withal, without the utter
shaming of our selves, and laying a stain (that cannot easily be washed out)
upon that Religion, which his Majesty does so graciously maintain, and our
selves Profess?

Obedience to this Counsel of grace; and observe the Command of his
Sovereign; as Solomon here advises: is so far from being a good man, or a
good Christian, or a good Subject, that he is not worthy to be reputed amongst
the Reasonables; (...). 2 Thessalonians. 32. (...). ^ S. Pet. 2. 12.
but such as the Apostle calls absurd and unreasonable men. And, if they shall
now at length think upon this Transcendent duty, to do it with all
Obedience, and Alacrity; to God, shall they do that, which, to him, will be
most acceptable: to his Anointed, shall they give great content, in the
performance of that promise, we all made to his Majesty, by way of
Representation, in that high and honorable Court of Parliament: to their dear
and Native Country, shall they do that, which, by Nature they are bound to
do: to themselves, shall they do well, yea, their own souls shall they
reward with good, and their Consciences with perpetual Peace, Amen.

Et sic, liberaui animam meam. FINIS.
THE SECOND SERMON: Preached before the KINGS Majesty at Alderton, on the 29.
of July, 1627.
ECCLES. 8. VER. 2. -- And that, in regard of the Oath of God.
THis Text is Scripture, and the Word of God. The Word of God is a Mystery most
deep and Sacred: Sacred, as well for the things it does contain, which are
the Treasures of wonderful depths; as for the Fountain from whence it flows,
to wit, the sublimity of Gods most blessed Understanding; to Theologia e^^ de
his, quae sunt soli Intellectui Diuino Naturali^^r cognita. Johan. Scot.
prolog. Senten. qu. 3^. and 2d^. laterali. number. 7.
whom, the Scriptures are even naturally known, and with much more facility
understood; then by Us, matters of Sense and Reason can possibly be discerned.
From hence it is, that Clemens says, (...). Clemens Alex. Stromat. lib. 4.
f^l. 346.
Scripturas esse validas ac ratas, ex Omnipotenti Authoritate: from that
Omnipotent and authenticke Copy, which is in the mind of God, are we secured
of Scriptures infallibility, and taught (in most dutiful manner) to submit to
Scriptures Authority.

Now, the Commandments of God in Scripture, though they differ in Matter and
Manner of Revelation; yet have they the same Author, and one and the same end.
If God please to command for himself, ^rou. 7. 1.
and say, Keep my Commandments; no man will deny, but that all Audience and
Obedience is to be given to it. And, if God command for the King (as here he
does) and say, Keep the Kings Commandment, it is all from one Author, and of
the same Authority; with the same Conscience, and Reverence to be received;
for the same Reason, with the same Religion, and under the same Obligation to
be observed. For, as in things to be believed, we rest in the credit of him
that speaks; So, in Hoc est insigne (...), vt absqu^ (...) ob^diat
Imperanti^n^c vllamrationem exposc^^t imperij. Chrysostom. tom 2. col. 63. Edit.
Basil.
Matters of Fact, and to be done, we content our selves with the Authority of
him that commands.

This Text was rendered in two parts: First, a Caution: and Secondly, a Reason,
to enforce the same. In the first, there Rex, a King: then, Mandatum Regis,
then, Custodia then, Counsel, to pursue and practice this Obedience: which was
left untouched.

Now therefore, Counsel is not any profane thing; But, by the verdict of the
Heathen, called and accounted Sacred. Plato styles it a (...). Plato in Theag.
Sacred Engine. Besides this, the Scriptures do auerre, That the first step to
wise Counsel is the Gift of Understanding; this Understanding is of God. There
is a spirit in man (says Job) but the inspiration of the Almighty gives
Understanding. Job 32. 8.
This is so bright and clear a Lamp, in this dark house, of Sin, Mortality,
and Ignorance, wherein we dwell; that Solomon calls it, Prou. 20. 27.
The Candle of the Almighty. Now, this Understanding is the Mother of
Knowledge: Knowledge brings up to the maturity of Wisdom and Prudence: These
two are the Parents of wise Counsel. Prou. 1. 5.
Therefore Solomon says, That a man of Understanding, shall attain unto wise
Counsels. Prou. 20. 5.
Counsel then, draws deep, and is far-fetched; from Understanding, and
Knowledge, from Wisdom and Prudence, all these from God; who is the
vnemptiable Fountain of all Perfection.

I will then finish this Point, with certain Aphorisms: and the first shall
be;

1 That, as there is nothing more high, deep, or sacred than Wise Counsel;
So, neither is there any way to prevent dangerous Sequeles in a Commonwealth,
more effectual; then the Sovereign Counsel of Those, who are Wise in Heart,
and Mighty in Power.

2 That, no way so pregnant, to raise up a Damme against the ouer-flowing of
Wickedness, and superfluity of Naughtiness, and those fearful Evils, into
which our sins are like to sink us; as hearkening to the Counselors of
Peace.

3 Nothing more seasonable, in this Age, wherein Profaneness has so far
ouer-run Piety; Pride, Meekness; and Vice, in a manner, drowned all Virtue
and Modesty; as to boar the ears of men, that they may give all Audience and
Obedience to wise Counsel.

4 Nothing more the cause of so little fear of God, and Reverence toward Man
(as there is in these days) then is the supine-slacking of this Obedience.

5 And ( in^fine) nothing so much the cause of this Neglect, and (in a manner)
Contempt of all dutiful submitting to Supreme authority; as the want of that
Discipline and due Correction, wherewith men ought to be framed, and smoothed
in their Minority, and tender age. Dutiful obedience being eu^r the effect of
moral and wel-disposed Minds; of Regular and wel-composed Affections. And most
certain it is, That, if the hand of Discipline be not held more straightly,
over this late and stif-necked Brood, that is now growing to Maturity in the
world; nothing is more to be expected, then that the coming- Generation will
bring in such a Torrent of Vice and Corruption, as will overrun the World,
with Rudeness, Lewdness, and extreme Barbaritie; and bring upon us that Curse
which Esaias threatens to them, who ought timely to repress such intemperancies;
Esaias 3. 5.
That the Child shall behave himself proudly against the Ancient, and the Base
against the Honorable: and which, in time will grow to such Monsters, as the
same Prophet speaks of (in another place) who being but a little pinched with
hunger, or touched with the least Calamity, Esaias ^. 21.
will Curse their King and their God, and look upward: not being a whit
ashamed of themselves, or afraid of humane or divine Revenge. For, what makes
the Nature of Man more stiff and inflexible, than hardening in sin? What
more desperate and daring, then Impunity, in their evil moral dispositions;
and never to suffer that smart of Correction, which is meet for the back of
Fools? Hence it comes to pass, that the hearts of men, (in their tender
years) being never subdued, with any Religious Awe; nor acquainted with any
Reverence or godly fear toward their Superiors; do afterward (in their riper
times) become so desperate and audacious, so lewd, and licentious, as to be so
far from honoring the Person of the Ruler, that they dare, with great
boldness, Traduce his Actions. I will end this Point with an observation of
(...). Plutarch. de Curiositat.
Plutarch, who comparing these Tempters of Supreme Authority; says, They be
like unto certain Ouer-curious Men, that desiring to try conclusions with
Poison, do taste it themselves; whereby it comes to pass, that, together with
an Experimental Conclusion of their knowledge, they draw upon themselves (and
that most justly) the fatal conclusion of their Lives.

I should now speak of the Counselor, Solomon: which was my Fifth
Circumsta^ce; and, I hope, you know, he gave a Wise man's Counsel, and the
Counsel of a Prophet: But I must pass to the Second general Part of the Text.

For Preparation whereunto, and that I may derive both my Discourse, and your
Contemplation, to the view thereof: We must know, That this World is not One
thing only, but many things; yet fairly disposed, and fitly ordered: and for
this cause, it is called a Mundus est ornata Dei ordinatio, constans societate
Caeli, ac terrae. Apul. de mundo.
World; that is, a Trim and goodly Ornament. Now, no Ornament can be without
Order, but a tumultuous Motion and Confusion. Ordo, est parium dispariumque,
rerum, sua cuique, loca tribuens dispositio. S. August. Ciuit. l. 19. c. 13.
Sic Gerson. Considerat. 13^. part. 12.
Order therefore (as Saint Augustine says) facit quiescere: Order gives to
every thing its proper place, and so procures, and preserues Rest and Quiet
thereunto. In Order therefore, of necessity, must be those two things which
Iustine Martyr calls Just. Martyr. ad Or^hod. fol. 434.
(...) and (...); Transcendencie, and Lowliness: Sublimitie, and Inferioritie:
Supremacy, and Subordination: Majesty and Subjection.

Now, that which is most high and supreme (be it in Heaven above, or on Earth
beneath) that is ever the best. Which, that wise and illuminate Heathen
Ecphantas did see full well, when he said, (...) Ecp^ant. apud Stobaeum. fol.
330.
In Heaven, God; on earth, the King is chief: (...). Idem ibid. fol. 332.
Of Creatures Man, of Men, the King most sacred is.

Now, a Natural Ground it is, That look what is (...). Phil^ Iud. lib. 2.
legis Alleg.
best and most divine, that ought to Rule; and what is of a lower strain of
Goodness, that ought to be at Command, and in Subjection. And so, in
Goodness, God being the highest, of necessity all Condere legem* unus est ex
pr^cipuis actibu^ gubernationis Reipub. ita praecipuam and superiorem requirit
pot^statem* aec autem p^te^i^s primario est in Deo, et per essentiam. Suarez de
legibus, lib. 1. cap. 8. n. 8. Esaias 33. 22.
Power, as well of Dominion, as of Jurisdiction, originally resides in him. And
hence is that of the Prophet Esaiah: The Lord God is our Lawgiver; the Lord
God is our Judge; the Lord God is our King. In the first, we do believe that
our Persons to him are acceptable: In the second, that our Actions to him are
accountable: In the third, that our Substance is liable to his honor and
service, as Solomon, elsewhere, Prou. 3. 9.
says; Honor God with thy Substance, and with the first fruits of all thine
Increase. And, from that natural Right that is in D^o, nat^^aliter competit
supremu^ dominiu^ rerum omnium: and home, etiam natura^^ter, est Deosubiectus:
ex hac ergo subiectione, ex part himi^is, and potestate, ex part Dei,
fundamenatum ^abent leg^s diuinae Iuxta illud, Esaias 33. 22. Suarez de legib.
lib. 1. cap. 8. n. 8. Deu^, autho^itate propria, leges far potest, and coger^
ad ^arum ^bseruationem, et ^unire, transgr^sseres. Suarez vbisupr^.
God, to give Laws unto the Creature, and by them to govern all things; and
from that natural Obligation which is in Man, to submit to the Creators Law;
is supported, and held up all the Credit, Reverence, and Obedience, which is
due to all Laws both of God, Nature, and Men, and all that Power, which is
derived to Men, be they Kings, or Priests* is wholly, and immediately
transmitted from Potestas legislati^a primario and per essentiam, in Deo est;
communicatur autem Regibus ^er qua^dam participationem: Iuxta illud Sap. 6.
Audite Reges, quoniam data est v^bis a Domino potestas: Non enim est po^estas,
nisi a Deo. Rom* 13* Suarez de legib. lib. 1. cap. 8. n. 8.
God; in whom is the Plenitude of all Power.

To the King then, as the best, and highest under God, and after God, the most
divine; is communicated all Power; of Qui est dominus aliquarum personarum, est
dominus rerum, ad easdem pers^na* spectantium. Occam. tractat. 2. lib. 2. cap.
22. Omnia, quae sun^ in r^g^o, sunt Regis, quoad potestatem vtendi eis, pro
bono communi. Occam. vbisupra. cap. 25.
Dominion over the States, and Persons; and of Jurisdiction over the Deeds and
Actions of mortal men.

Nor yet, does Gods Providence stay here; but goes further: and as he is the
Fountain of those Powers, and does derive them to, and bestow them on, and
settle them in, all Earthly Potentates; for the endless good of all
Generations of Men: So has he a special care to see that Power both feared,
and obeyed in Them, who are the Dispensers of his Power, and Ministers of his
Providence. And for this cause therefore, does he himself, call for in his
Word, the Actual and perpetual discharge of that natural Obligation, which
lies upon all the Sons of Adam, To yield all Reverence, and Obedience to the
sacred Mandates of their Sovereigns: and not only so; but fetches Reasons,
and fills his mouth with Arguments, to press, and persuade the same. And
further, to this purpose not only uses Reason, but Religion too (which is the
Queen of all Virtues, and Crown of all Reason) And that, inregard of the Oath
of God; that so we might thereby conceive, That, where the reason of
Persuasion is more sacred; there the Transgression is more vile and finfull.

TO fall then, upon the Text: God is the Author of all Power; of the Being; of
the deriuing thereof unto Men: of the Care and Providence over it: of the
Obedience done unto it. This Care is manifested in his Word: his Word is the
seed of all Religion: Religion the Root of all rightly informed Conscience:
Conscience the Mother of Allegiance: Allegiance the Mistress of Obedience:
Obedience the Way of Life (says T^ties vitae reddimur, quoties obediential.
Sanctus Gregot. (...) 1 Samuel cap. 4.
Saint Gregory) For, no sooner are we rendered to the Paths of our Obedience,
but we are set upon the Borders of Eternal Life. That God therefore, who, by
Religion, brings us* to Obey them that Reign over us; by Obedience shall bring
us also to a Crown; if, with Conscience to his Commandment, we perform the
same: And that, in regard of the Oath of God.

And that, Text.
in regard of the Oath of God. THe Interpreters, on this Text, are divided into
two Regiments.

1 Some say, That here is meant the Oath of Religion. 2 Others, the Oath of
Allegiance. Both are great and Sacred.
And first; If the Oath of Religion be God is a Party; and so it is
Iuramentum Dei, not only a great Oath; as Omnia Dei magna; for so, all Oaths
are Iuramenta Dei: But for that God is the most high and Sacred Person, to
whom, we, by solemn protestation, impledge our selves.

Secondly: If the Oath of Allegiance God is a Witness, and an Undertaker both:
And so this is the Oath of God too: and a great Oath* wherein, God becomes a
Witness that we have Sworn; and an Undertaker for us, that we shall perform
Faith, and true Allegiance to his Anointed King. Howeuer we take it, It is a
Reason; and the Reason is Religion; and religiously to be observed. Obedience
therefore is the Conclusion intended, and Religion, the Reason represented, to
draw on the Conclusion.

The whole matter of this Part of the Text, Points. 4.
may be resolved into four Points.

Religion is; and wherein it does consist.

Power and Property it has, to persuade Obedience to God, and the King. For,
as a Reason, it ought to Persuade men; as a Virtue, Moral men; as a Religious
Vow, Religious and Devout men, to Obedience.

Objections have been framed against her, and what Aspersions have been cast
upon this Queen of Graces; by a world of Enemies, whose endeavor has ever
been, not only to Traduce her Fame, but to suppress her very Being.

Regard, All (in whom there is as yet any Impression of this Virtue of
Religion) ought to have, that, they cause not the Name of God to be
blasphemed, nor the way of Truth to be euill-spoken off, by pretending
Religion, as a Reason to persuade Rebellion, or Disobedience in any wise, to
Supreme Authority.

FIrst, Point. 1.
What Religion is: God, who, by his Will, Goodness, and Power, is the Author,
and Cause of all Things, the same God, by his Providence, is the End for which
they were Created; Prou. 16. 4.
For he Created all things for himself. This Providence is twofold: The first
is termed Natural; Gentiles, did acknowledge. One of them says, That
impossible it is, that so huge a Tantum opus, non s^ne Custode stare. Senec.
lib. de prouidentia.
Frame, as this Worlds compass is, should stand without some special Guardian
to protect and ouer-looke it. And that Nature (says Natura, vt est sub primo
agente intellectuali, operatur propter finem. Arist physic. 2. cap. 7.
another) which works under the command, and moves at the instance of the
First and most Understanding Agent; drives at some End, which it desires, and
labors to attain; and unto which, it is secretly and vndiscernably guided, by
that Supreme Mouer, who sets all the world on wheels. Saint Secundum illam
primam, coelest a Superius or^linari infer iusque terrestria, lumm^ria
sidereque ^utg^re, dici noctisque vices agitari, aquis terram fundatam interlui
atque circun^lui, aerem altius superfundi, arbus^a and animalia concipi and
nasci, crescere and senescere, occidere. -- In bac autem altera, signa dari,
doseri et discere, agros coli, socie^a^es administrari, art^s excerceri. S.
August. de Genes. ad Lit. lib. 8. cap. 9.
Augustine calls this kind of Providence, a close and hidden Government, of
Things in Heaven above, and Earth beneath. For by This (says he) The Night
exchangeth with the Day: The Sun by day, the Moon and Stars by night do
take their turn: By this, the Earth as Center stands* the Waters flow upon the
Surface of the Earth* the Air, like oil, does flote upon the waters: By This,
all Living things do breed, increase, decay, and fall to dust again: By This,
do Angels fly to do his will, and Man does haste unto his work: By This,
the Fields are tilled, and bles't with fruitful increase; Arts and Sciences
are learned; and Cities, Nations, and Societies of men are settled and preserved
in Peace, and Order.

Providence is that, which is called Moral; distinctly guiding Reasonables
(both Men, and Angels) ^o such several Ends, as their deliberate and willing
Actions may with Justice bring them to: Which Providence moral, does mainely
depend upon the dispensation of divine Graces; and those Supernatur all
Motions, Eleuations, and Directions heavenly, that may render Men to their last
End, and chiefest good. Of all which, Religion is the maine: For, it is, not
only a Sacred and divine impression, whereby the (...). Trism^gist. Principium
Religionis, rite sentire de Deo. Sanct. Chrys^st.

Ag^oscere aute^ Deu^, nihil ali^^ est, quam in Deum credere, deque, eo, vt par
est, sentire. Xisti Bethulei Comment. ad Lactant. lib. 4. cap. 28.


Understanding Part is possessed with most high and peerless Thoughts of God;
and the Part affectiue rapt with Admiration of that Glory and Excellency that
shines in him; But also a Dix^mus, Religionis nomen a vinculo pietati^ esse
deductum; quod hominem sibi, Deus religauerit, and pietate constrinxerit.
Lactant. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 28. Dictam ess'e Re^gione^ quod quasi in fascc^*
Domini, vincti, and relegati sumus. S. Hieron. ad Amos 9.
Binder, that Ties and Confederates our Souls to God.

For, though nothing that we can Do, or Say; Promise, or Swear; Vow, or
Protest; adds any farther Right, gives any other Title unto God, whereby to
challenge other Sovereignty over us, then what originally he has; Yet do our
Religious Vows and Oaths add (and that very much) to our Obligation unto
him. Religion is the Belt or Girdle that does claspe the Soul to God. And many
ways does this Religion, tie us. In Baptism, by a Vow; whereby, at our first
Entrance, we do, in express and solemn manner, Impledge our Souls to God,
and voluntarily resign and swear our selves to his Service: with a
Protestation to renounce all contrary Powers. In the Sacrament of the Altar are
we tied by a divine Indenture, sealed with the Blood of Christ. To his Word,
are we tied by Deratione virtutis Th^ologicae est, ^t vniat nos Deo immediate,
per actum internum, proxime a se el^citum. Suarez de Relig. lib. 3. cap. 3.
number. 2.
Faith: To his Promises by Hope; And by Love, are we engaged to his infinite
Goodness: By Gratitude, to his Benefits: By Fidelity, to his Covenant: And by
Justice, to that Religio est cultus D^o debitus, rationesuae excellentiae.
Suarez de Relig. lib. 1. c. 9.
excellent Glory that shines in him.

And not only does our Religion bind us unto God; But, from many other things
are we Tedered, by this Oath of God. Humane Laws, Shame, Disgrace, and Fear
of Punishment; the hope of obtaining our wished Desires, may tie, and often do
manacle our External Actions: But to the very secret (...). Athenag. l^gat*
pro Chri^i. fol 36 (...). ibid. supra.
Thoughts, and most inward Cogitations, Religion is a Curb. The Hands it ties
from Violence; the Tongue from speaking; the Ear from hearing Blasphemy,
Slander, or Detraction; the Eyes from beholding Vanity; the Heart from evil
Thoughts; the Head from wicked Imaginations; the Feet from running swift to
vile Excess: On all these, Religion lays a most sweet and easy yoke.

And beside all these, Religion prays; it Adores, and falls low before his
Footstool: It offers up Praise and Thanksgiving: Observes days assigned;
honors Places consecrated to his Service; and desiring to yield no Reverence
to any Nimirum Religio, very cultu^ est; superstitio, falsi. Lactant. lib. 4.
cap. 28.
false Deity; does thereby shun the one Extreme of Superstition: and laboring
to give all Reverence to the True and Living God, does hereby also bawke the
common Road of Profanation. With most willing and devout Obedience, paies
She Vows to God; Tithes to the Tribe of his Inheritance; and Tribute to his
anointed Kings: laboring ever, by most dutiful Obedience, to submit, wherein
it is commanded; and by sorrowful Repentance to satisfy, wherein it has
offended. And all this, in that most dear affection; with that most sweet
Devotion; in that most pure Intention, and humble Adoration of that God, whose
it is, and whom it desires to Obey. For, even as the virtue of Obedience ever
eyes the Precept or Command; So Religion teaches to refer Obedience to the
honor and glory of that high God, who gives the Precept.

To conclude then, this first Point: Religion is our Vow: It is the Tie and
Bond that does knit our Souls to God; and the Mistress that learnes us to
refer all our Actions to his Glory. Without Religion therefore, and without
God. Take away Religion (faith Si Religio t^llitur, nulla nobis rati^ cum coel^
est. Lactant. Instit^t. lib. 3. c* 10.
Lactantius) and men have no more to do with Heaven. If therefore, we had no
faith toward God; No fear of the holy One; No love of things not seen, but
eternal in the Heavens; No taste of the Powers of the Life to come; No
expectance of a Resurrection, nor hope of that Reward laid up for righteous
souls; but lived without all hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12.
then were we, not only of all Men, 1 Cor. 15. 19.
but even of all Creatures, the most miserable: and so much the more, by how
much, God has given us more Understanding then the Beasts of the Field, and
made us wiser then the Fowls of the Air; whereby we become able to Reflect
upon our own wretchedness, which to do, the Beasts of the Field are in no
wise able.

The second Circumstance is, What Religion has to win Obedience to the God
of Heaven, and to all that is called God on Earth. And that appears by This;
That the Wisest of Men persuades to Obedience by it. And yet farther then this;
The Power of Religion is seen by her Property; This Property is a Passion;
This Passion is Love; and that kind of Love, which, by the Divines, is called
Appretiatiue: the Love of singular esteem, regard, and honor, which true
Religion ever bears to Powers and Persons Royal. And this affection of
Religion is expressed in this; That Regal Sublimity is, by her Command, placed
so near the Presence of the Deity. For, as the Honor and Reverence which is
due to God, and the King, do both (in Et sic, per qua^dam nomni^ ex^ensionem,
illud, quod pertinet ad (...) Principis, s^il. disputare de e^^s iudc^o,
anopor^ea^ e^m s^qui, sceundum quand^m similitudinem, sacr^l^gium dicitur.
Thom. 2^. 2ae. quaest 99. Art. 1. ad pri^um.

Obedien^iam erga Principes, cum Dcicul^^, and timore, s^mper co^iunctum esse.
Calvin. ad Sanctum Matthew. cap. 22. verse. 21.


some manner) appertain to one Table; so is it (for the most part) conjoined
in one Text, thorowout the Scriptures.

My Son, fear God, and the King.

Give to Caesar, the Things that are Caesar's; and to God, the Things that are
Gods.

Fear God: Honor the King.

Keep the Kings Commandment; And that, in regard of the Oath of God.

So that, Prou. 24. 21. St. Matt. 22. 21.
if it speak of Fear, or Reverence; of Supply, or Maintenance; of Honor, or
Obedience; Religion is the Reason to persuade All; 1 Pet. 2. 17. Eccles. 8.
Because It has the Affection, and Persuades, because It Loves; and nothing is
more dutiful then Love, 1 Cor. 13
that bears all things.

Now, if we demand the Reason, why Religion does thus associate God, and the
King, It may be conceived to be, from Causes: Either from the Communion of
Names: For God, is not only said to be Standing in Synagoga Deorum; Psalm 82.
in the Assembly of Princes, as One of them; But does also vouchsafe them the
Participation of his own most blessed Name. A Privilege, which He never did
impart to any Creature, but only unto such, as are most near, and dear unto
him; namely, to Psalm. 82. 6.
Kings, Psalm. 8. 5.
Angels, and St. loh. 10. 35. Constantini dictum ad Episcopos, Vos estu nobis
Di^ a Deo d^ti. citat. Did. 96. cap. Satis.
Priests, whom alone, the Scriptures honor with that high and noble Grace, to
be called Gods.

Or else, from the Propinquitie, and neere-bordering of such Offenses, as
reflect God, and his anointed King. That, the Sin of the next affinity unto
Sacrilege is Disloyalty unto Princes, was the Proximum s^crilegio crimen, quod
Majestatis est, dictur* lib. 1. (...) Iul. May.
Rule of Vlpian: The highest Crime (says he) that can reflect upon heavenly
Majesty, is Sacrilege; the next door to This, is Rebellion, and Disobedience
unto Kings. And hence it comes to pass (from this N^erenesse) that
Sacrilegious Persons, who are not afraid to rob God of his Tithes, and Christ
of his Patrimony, (the only (...)
Tribute which the World must for ever owe, and pay to God, for his Universal
Dominion and Providence over the World) fall incontinently upon Kings, and make
no bones to tie their hands, or clip their wings, or depresse that Regale
Culmen, unto which God has advanced them with his own immediate hand.

Paritie of Beneficence, which, Men enjoy from God, and sacred Kings. Homo, per
se, potest iniuriam fa^ere Deo, suo modo, infi^itam; recompe^sare autem, ad
equalitatem, non potest, non solu^ per seipsum, suisque, viribus, sed, nec per
auxilium gratiae, quia semper infinite distat a persona of^ensa. Suarez de
Relig. lib. 3. cap. 7. number.
Impossible it is for any Creature in the world, 12. Psalm. 16. 2
to answer, or proportion divine Beneficence. My Goodness extends not unto
thee (says David.) Nor, likewise, can a King receive ought from the People,
that may consist in that Indiuisibility of Justice, or have that Condignity, as
to Merit or Recompense (in rigor) Imperial Excellence in it self, or Regal
Providence over the World. For there is no way (as yet) in the world, found
out, for Men to Recompense God; or (...). Philo Iud. de D^^alog.
Children to requite their Parents; much less Him, who is Pater Patriae, and
has the Care of all; and is, (as ^ may term him) a general Parent.

Now, as Justice (properly so called) intercedes not between God and Man; nor
between the Prince, being a Inter patrem and ^ilium, non est proprie Ius,
Caiet. 2. 2. q. 57 a^t. 8. and Sot^ lib. 1. de Just* q. 1. art* 4. ex Suarez de
Relig. lib. 3. cap. 4. number. 17.
Father; and the People, as Children; (for Justice is between Equals) So
cannot Justice ^e any Rule, or Medium, whereby to give God, or the King, his
Right. Those Parts of Justice therefore, which the Divines call Potentiall; as
Religion, Piety, Devotion, Gratitude, and most dutiful and submisse Obedience
(all which respect not Equals, but Superiors) are chosen and assigned, to pay
God and the King their right, in some proportion: For though the Acts of these
Virtues have not any exact definition of, or hold any equal proportion with
Justice, yet, some semblance they may be said to have therewith; forasmuch as
the affections of these Graces are of great extent, and largeness; and are
ever laboring most durifully to Submit, in what they are enjoined; and most
abundantly to Satisfy and make amends, wherein they have Transgressed. And how
far, a Religiously-affected Mind, a pious and devout Affection, the
Impression of true Thankfulness, will reach and extend it self toward God;
may easily be discerned by Mary's Oil, St. Ioh. 12. 3.
and Martha's Toil to entertain their Lord: St. Luc. 10. 41.
by Zacheu's half, and Peter's All, St. Luc. 19. 8.
left for their Lords sake: by those willing Hearts and ready hands, St. Matt.
19. 27.
to pull out of their heads so many Eyes, Gal. 4. 15.
to please their dear Apostle; and by that world of Treasures poured out upon
Christ, and his Service, while the world was in love with Religion. And to the
King, how far, the like Affections will go, may be seen by that Unanimous
Acclamation of those right-loyall, and well-affected People to their Prince;
Iosuah* 1. 16.
All that thou command us, will we do; and whithersoeuer thou sendest us,
will we go.

And further, for a more full inlightning of our minds in this Point; what
force Religion has to work Obedience: We must know, that it is a Maxim
Solemn with the Schoolmen, That, the Virtue of Religion is not only a
Transcendent amongst the other Virtues (as well Divine as Moral) But, that She
does also sit as Queen and Empress of them all: at who^e Sovereign Command,
those sacred Habits of acquired and infused Graces, are sent forth about the
exercise of their several Acts: Saying to Faith, Believe; to Hope, Rely; to
Love, Adhere; to Prudence, advise well; to Justice, divide aright; to
Fortitude, endure with Patience, and do valiantly; to Temperance, Abstain; to
Repentance, grieve for Sin; Eccles. 9. 10.
and to Obedience, whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it with thy might.

To draw then to a Conclusion of this Point: As Men rule Beasts, so Passions
rule Men, and Virtues, command Passions; and so, God has made Religion to
command Virtues, and to set them to, and see them bestirre themselves about
their several Works. Religion therefore (as Solomon says of Wisdom) has
built Prou. 9. 1.
her self a House, and therein a glorious Throne; and sat Her down thereon,
with the Divine Graces on her right hand; on her left hand, the Virtues moral;
Before her Throne, Devotion and Adoration; Behind her Chair of State,
Humility, Repentance, and Obedience: And all These come to Her, as did the
People, and the Publicans to Saint John the Baptist, to receive their Charge;
Saying each One, And what shall we do? St. Luc. 3. 10. 12.


Deu^, suis rebus, rationales creatur as praefecit, posuit (inquit) ibi
hominem, quem finx^rat. Philo de (...)
If Men therefore, are made (as Philo says) to rule Beasts, Let not rebellious
and unruly Passions, overrule us; Let Virtues sway our Passions, and Religion
command our Virtues, both Divine, and Moral; both toward God, and his anointed
King; for both must go together, as, in Gods Command, and Solomon's Counsel,
so, in Man's Obedience: And, That which God has joined, Let no man dare to
sever. And, if we be Rationals, let Reason guide us; if Moral men, let Virtues
rule us; if Christian men, let Religion sway us; for this is Gods Reason.
Natural Reason may be reasoned with, cauill'd at, and (be it never so
conuincing) disputed against; Religion may not: Romans 9. 20.
What art thou, O Man? (says that great Apostle) For so does He rebate the
Insolency of such as dare dispute with God Religion persuades Angels; Sic
retundit Apostolus. Sanct. August.
makes Devils tremble; Good men it ouercomes; and from the worst of Men, it
draws some Good: Great is the Power of true Religion, and it preuailes: All
things in Heaven, and Earth, do Her homage: the greatest, as feeling her
Power; the least, as not exemp^ed from her Care. And indeed, of Her, we can
confess no less then ^hi^, That her Words are Oracles, her Sayings are
Sentences; her Rules, Irr^uocable Truths; her Reasons* Demonstrations, her
Certainties, Syllogismes; her Counsels, peremptory Commands; her Ways are
Peace; and the fruit of her Works is Immortality.

Now, for the third Point; Most true Tertullian says) That Christian Religion,
not being a home-borne, but a Scit se, peregrinam in terris agere, inter
extraneos, facile inimicos inu^^ire. Tert^l. Apolog. aduers. Gent. C. ^*
Pilgrim here on earth; most easy it is for Her, in this case, to find few
Friends, and many Enemies. For, no sooner did the Feathers of this true
Religion begin to grow, and She able to fly abroad into the world; but,
presently, the mortal Enemy coined This, as a Rasor to clip her wings, and
cause her to fall down, into the Clutches of those Birds of Prey, that were
euerready to devour her; Namely, That Christian Religion was a Exitiabilis
superstitio. Tacit. Annal. lib. 15.
fatal Superstition; and the Genus hominum, superstitionis n^uae and
male^icae. Sucton. in Neron. cap. 16.
Professors thereof (as Sueton calls them) the Authors of new and scandalous
Incantations. Which misconceiued -Enmity, against the Gospel, while the Truth
and Goodness thereof, was unto the world utterly unknown; was in cause,
wherefore, the Professors thereof were so cruelly hated, condemned, and
persecuted, for the space of 300. years: duting which time, The Heathen raged,
Psalm. 2. 1. ^.
and the People imagined a vain thing: The Kings of the Earth stood up, and
the Rulers took Counsel against the Lord, and against his Christ.

For first, They did quarrel the Christians, as the cause of all those
Troubles, and calamities, which, at any time befell the Roman Commonweal;
which (as Tertullian says) was but a Praetexentes ad odi^ defensionem, illam
quoque vanitatem, quod existiment, omnis publicae cladis, o^nis popularis
incommodi, Chriflines esse causam. Tertul Apologet. cap. 39.
Mask, or Veil for their Malice; and (as Saint Augustine observes) a ready
way to create Vt nobis, i^fensissimas reddant, ineruditora^ turbas. Sanctus
August. lib. Ci^. 2. cap. 3.
Mischief to the harmless Christians, from such as had not Judgment to
weigh the cause. If therefore any Fire, or Combus^ion, had fallen upon any
Town or City. if, any fearful Earthquake had shaken or swallowed up (as
sometimes it did) any City, Town, or Territory: If any Haec bella, quibus
mundus iste co^teritur, maximeque Romanae Vrbis recentem a Barbaris
vastationem, Christianae Religi^ni t^ib^^nt. Sanct. August. Ci^it. 2. cap. 2.
Goth, Vandall, or other barbarous Natian had made any Inrodes upon the Bounds
of the Roman Empire: If Si Tyberis ascondit^^ maenia, si Nylus non ascand^^ in
(...) c^elum stetit, si terra m^uet, si f^mes, silues statim Christianos ad
Leone^. Tertull. Apolog. ^. 3^. (...). 126.
Tybers swelling waves did but strike the walls of Rome, and threaten
Inundation: If Nilus flowed not on the Fields to make them fertile: If the
Heavens did at any time become Brass, and the Earth (Iron* If any Plague,
Famine, or public Calamity had (...). (...) ad Or^hodox. quaest.
wasted the People: all was laid upon the late Enchanting Superstition (as they
termed it) of Christian Religion.

The (...). Euagrius lib. ^. ca. 41. contra Z^simum. Ita Iust^n. Mart. in
solution^ quaestions 26.
Fathers therefore, to purge the Christian Faith, of such causeless
Imputations; did, (by way of Retortion) cause the edge of these Objections to
recoile upon the Heathen. What sore Calamities (says Orovos; qua^tae clades,
Orbem and ^rbem ceciderant* legimus Hierapolin, and Delon, and R^^do^, and Co^n
Insul^s, multis cum miltibus bominum pessum abi^sse: mem^rat and Plato maiore^
Asiae, ac Affricae terra^, Atlantico mari ereptam. Tertul. Apologet. cap 39.
Tertullian) befell those most famous and fortunate Islands; Hierapolis, Delos,
Rbodes, and Choos? Who in cause, That the Atlantique Sea swallowed up so vast a
portion of the African, and Asian Continents? What in cause, That Carthage gave
Rome such a defeat, as that a whole Fama te^ui^, quae propi^r vero est, ^aud
plus fuisse modi^, Tit. Liu. lib. 33. cap. 12. Occid^ssesupr^ ducenta millia.
Idem vbisupra. Nemo adhuc, Romae, Deu^ verum adorabat, cum Han^ib^l apud
Cannas, per Romanos Annulos caedes suas metiebatur. Tertull. Apolog. c. 39.
Bushel was filled with the Rings that were taken from the fingers of the
Slain? Where could they lay the fault, when the Onmes Dij vestri ab omnibus
col bantur, c^m ipsum capitoliu^ Senones occup^uerunt. Idem vbi supra.
Senones took the Capitol? All this being long before the Name of Christ, or
any of his Race, was known, or heard of in the world.

When thou hear (says Cum dicas plurimos couqueri, quod bella crebrius
surgant, quo ^ues, quod fames saeuiant, quodque imbres ac pluuias serena longa
suspendent, nobis imputari: tacere vltra non oportet, quemadmodum Hebraei, in
Deserto, mortem Sc^ismatici illius Core, and sociorum, in Mosem re^ere^an^,
ingrati in Deum and Mosen: Ita ^i, ^ui^scemodi mala, quae Deu^ ob eorum
flagitia immittebat, ingrati in Christum, and seruos eius, Christia^is
ascribebant. Sanctus Cyprian. ad De^etrian. tom. 2. Ea ^ala, quae, pro suorum
morum peruer ^it^^e, merito patiti^^tur, bl^sphemantes, Christ^ imputant.
Sanct* August. Ci^it. lib. 1. cap. 3.
S. Cyprian) such Complaints made by the Heathen, of so often Wars, Plagues,
and Famines, and that all is cast upon the Christians, answer thus; That as the
Rebellious Jews did impute it to Moses their Prince, that so many Murmurers of
Core and his Company, were in a moment swallowed up (which indeed was for their
Sin of Murmuring against God, and their King.) Even so do ye Heathen impute
those things to Christ and his Followers, which God most instly inflicts on
you, for your horrible Impieties.

And call to Rec^lant erg^ nob^cum, antequam Christius venisse^ in Care,
antequam eius nomen, c^, cui frustra inuident, gloria, populis innotesceret:
quibus cal^mitatibus, Res Romanae, multipliciter varieque contritae sunt.
Sanctius August. Ciuit. 2. cap. 3.
mind (sait Saint Augustine) how Rome (while the world was Heathen) has been
scourged; and if any Plagues, at this time, light upon the world, it is, for
resisting that Gospel, which God has decreed to be preached to all Nations;
and for their hateful endeavor, to Suppress that Church, which God has
foretold should be glorious from East to West.

Secondly, (...). Qu^ru^ libidines Mysteria nominant. A^^enag. legate: pro
Christian. page 35.
They did object, That Christian Religion was the Mother of Impurities: And for
This, they may thank a certain Nam, quaecu^que erant, Gnostico^u^ port ^o,
vel al orum (...) Christianis ascribe^ant. Baron. A^n. 143. ^um. 4.
Sect of foul and Nasty Heretics, who styled themselves by the name of
Gnostics, from the skill they^ did profess; as the only knowing men alive:
There was (says Epiphanius) in the Lives and Mysteries of these Monsters (
Indid^^unt ^bi nomen Christia^um ad hoc, vt Ge^tes per ipsos ^ffen^^ntur
Epiphan. ^aeres. 27.
who did notwithstanding arrogate unto themselves the Christian Name) such
unspeakable wickedness, as did send forth that noisome Turpis operationis
caenosa male olentia Epiph. ^aeres. 26.
Savor, Vt ^urpem ignominiae Notam vniuersae Christi^norum multitudini
in^erent. Eusebius Histor. lib. 4. cap 7.
which did Inuolue the whole Christian Name in Infamy. Tertul. Apolog. cap. 7.
Justin. M^rt. orat. ad Ant. pium, apud Baron. Ann. 120. number. 20. and 31.
Tertullian calls them the Ouerthrowers of Candlesticks; and thereupon
committing, in the dark, most detestable and unspeakable Polutions; which, in
their Putride Language, they termed The Paying of that due debt they owed unto
the flesh; which, common Modesty can find no Art to express, without doing
violence to Chaste and Christian Ears. Of this foul Stain caused by these
odious Heretics to the Professors of the Gospel, the Authors speak (in
effect) thus much: The Flagitious and heinous Lives of such Miscreants, masking
under the Christian Name, Dicimur s^el^ratissimi, de sacramento Infanticidij,
and p^bulo inde, and post conuiuium, incesto; quod euers^res luminum, etc.
Tertu^. Apolog. cap. 7. Qui, ad nostrae doctrinae n^tam, and infomiam illud
disseminabant. Origin. contra Caelsum, lib. 6. His, Diabolusvs usu^ est,
ministris, sacrosanto Dei verbo, petulanter, impieque obtrectandi. Eusebius.
Histor. lib. 4 c. 7* Ipsi ad detracti^nem diuini ^ominis and Ecclesiae. --
(...) sunt. Irenae. lib. 1. cap 24. apud Baron. Ann. 120. number. 25.
did open the petulant and unbridled mouths of Heathen men, to stamp the note
of perpetual shame upon the Christian Religion; and to make the world believe,
as if She had been the Mother of incomparable and unspeakable Impurities:
Which ugly blot, once laid upon the Christian Name, soon fled both far and
wide. Caeter^m, insignis verae and catholicae Ecclesiae splendour, ijsdem
vir^utum vestigijs incedens, and purae diuinae viuendi rationis Instituti^, sic
mirandum in mod^m entituit, vt, defor^is infamiae labes, ^^mulcum tempore
deleta: vt nemo, ex illo tempore, turpem aliquam dedec^ris maculam, fidei
^ostrae auderet infer. Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 7.
Till at last, the splendour of the Christian Lives, and invincible verity of
their Doctrine did so prevail, and triumph so victoriously over the Lives and
Tongues of all her Enemies, that no man, ever after, durst so much as bark, or
hiss at our Profession.

The third Imputation: That Christan Religion was a seditious Doctrine, and did
contain dangerous Principles, and such, as were adverse to the Imperial
Crowns, and dignities of Kings and Princes. And this the Devil did, Intending
thereby, to defeat that famous Prophecy of Esaias; where it is said, Esaias 49. 25.
Kings shall be thy Nursing-Fathers, and Queens thy Nursing-Mothers: And also
to Incense and Irritate that Power, which is best able to Suppress, or to
advance it: knowing right well, (himself being a Ephesians. 2. 2.
Prince of the Air, and Job 41. 34.
a King over all the Children of Pride) the just and natural Jealousy that is
in Earthly Potentates, over their Royal Dignities, and Prerogatives: and that,
their Eccles. 10. 4.
Sacred Spirits are aver ready to be raised, against all that shall lift it
self up against their Irresistible Power. This weapon was first framed, and
sharpened too, against the Lord himself. St. Luc. 23. 2.
Him have we found (say the Jews) subuerting the Nation, and forbidding to pay
Tribute to Caesar: And likewise, in that Intangling Question, and Tempting
Problem, St. Matthew. 22.
Is it lawful to pay Tribute to Caesar? But He cleared the Point (and that
most fully) with his own Deed and Doctrine both; By his Doctrine, when he
said, Reddite quae Caesaris, Caesari; For, by Res, eius esse censetur, cuius,
iure praesert, vel nomen, vel imaginem; Brugenf. ad Sanct Matthew. cap. 22. verse.
20. Ius supremi dominij, penes ^um man^t, qui insculpta imagine sua, nummum
edidit, va^oren. q, praescribit. Ide^^ ibid. Regum est potestas fabricandi,
c^dendi, mutandi, augendi, minue^d^ m^netam eius^ pretium, ac aestimationem.
Azor. Institut. tom. 2. lib. 11. col. 1217. Atqui, nummus, Caefarem vebis
dominari, testatur, vt tacita qu ^ vestra approbotione, perierit, ac erepta sit
libertas, quam obtenditis, calu. ad Sanct Matthew, 22. verse. 21.
natural Justice, has Caesar a Right unto, and a Portion in that, which
bears his Image, and Superscription; and which, from his Authority alone,
receives Price and Valuation. So, by his own Deed, when he sent the Apostle
Saint Peter to the Sea, to fetch Money (by Miracle) out of the Mint of the
Fishes mouth, rather then He would give offense, or let Caesar be scanted of
his Right. And this, our Blessed Lord did with that Readiness; not expecting
any Parliament, at Rome, or in Judea, to be first assembled; Nor had Caesar,
at this time, any Wars in hand, the whole world being then at Peace.
Remarkable it is, That Securus affirmo, potuisse Dominum christu^, tempore
mortalitatis surae, disponere de temporalibus omnibus; and Reges, ac Principes,
regnis, dominijsque priuare. ^ellarm. contra Barclaium. S^ hanc potestast^m
tribuit Christ^ Bellarminus, tanquam D^o, fatemur id omn^s. Spalet. tom. 2.
page 512.
Christ Jesus our Lord, who might (and that justly) have arraied himself with
the Glory of all the Kingdoms in the world: Taken all their Christus, haeres
vniuersorum cons^i^utus, propter eminentiale Dominiu^ inomnes Creaturas,
ratione filiationis, sieve propter exal^ationem supra Angeles, sieve vuod
recuperauit i^lud plenum dominium, quod Adam perdidit. Spal^t. tom. 2. page 498.
did, nor would do: Chrisuis ver^ habuit ius Regis saper omnes a^ios Reges:
q^amuis c^nol^eritvti, et temporaliter regnare. Vasq. tom. 1. in 3^m. disputat.
17. cap. 2. cum multis alijs ibid. (...). Athanof. tom. 1. de sanctiss. Deip.
The habit of all Regency was in him: the Exercise he would not have: Non
eripit. terr^na, qui regna dat coelestia. ex hymna Sedulij profesto Sanctorum
In^ocent. vide Vasq. tom. 1. in 3am. disput. ^7. cap. 1. number 9.
So unmeet a thing (He thought) it was for Him, who came to this end, to bestow
upon them, heavenly, to take from Kings, their earthly Crowns. Tribute,
therefore receive He would not, but Pay he would; And, no sooner was He
demanded, but (to make himself exemplary to all his Race) Pay he did: And,
for denying so to do, his pleasure clearly was, That neither Himself, nor
His should ever suffer: And therefore St. Mat. 17. 26.
Pay it (he says) for Me, and Thee.

Briefly then, (to finish this Point) we may resolve, That Christian Religion
was never the cause of any dangerous Sequale, Cross, or Calamity, to any
Commonwealth; nor was it ever prejudicial, but aduantageous to all States and
Kingdoms, while it had all due Reverence done unto it: 1 Samuel 6. 19.
But, if the Arc be irreuerently handled, it may bring a Plague upon the
Philistims.

Christian Religion never taught any Untruth, or persuaded any (...). Athenag.
Legate. pro Christian fol. 36. (...). Th^ophil. Antioch. ad Ant^lyc. lib. 3. p.
127. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7.
Impuritie, or unclean thing, but the Contrary. For, by it, are Men called,
not to Uncleanness, but to Holiness. And that Grace which came down from
heaven, teaches to deny all Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, and to keep
themselves unspotted of the world; and that, under the Pain of that eternal
Loss of Heaven, and of that intolerable Sense of Hellfire. For no Whore
monger, nor Adulterer, nor any unclean person shall have any Inheritance in
the Kingdom of God, Tit. 2. 11, 1^*
or of Christ: For without shall be Dogs and Sorcerers, Ephesians. 5. 5.
and Idolaters, Apoc. 22. 15.
and whatsoever loves, or makes a Lie. Nor did Christian Religion ever teach
Men, to be Wolves within, and Sheep without: to be Devils within, and Angels
without: St. Mat. 24. 51.
Noe, to Hypocrisy, it gives a Portion, where shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth; To Vainglory, no better Recompense then the Praise of Men: for Amen
dico vobis (says our Lord) They have their Reward; St. Matthew. 6. 2.
All, they shall have, they have already. It is that they Loved and looked
for, they have it; and, though it be as much as nothing, yet let them expect no
other.

Christian (...). Theophil. Antioch, ad Autolyc. l 3. p. 126.
Religion never taught any Soul, (that thought it self tied by This Oath of
God) to deny Subjection, or Obedience to any lawful Sovereign. But even to the
most Impious, Infidel, and Idola^rous Princes, such as were Nero, Julian,
Dioclesian; yea, to such as pursued as well their Persons as Profession with
implacable Rage, and intolerable Torments; Christian Religion ever taught,
(...). Tatian. Assyr. orat. ad Gracos. sol, 144.
Christian men ever performed (and believed themselves ever tied by this Oath
of God so to do) most willing Obedience; notwithstanding all the bitter and
Inuectiue (...). Tatian. Astyr. orat. contra Graecos. fol. 142.
Eloquence of her most learned and subtle 1 Porphyrius. 2 Celsus. 3 Lucian. 4
In^ian.
Enemies, to persuade the contrary. For, this learned they from Christ, the
head of their Race, who taught it with his own Mouth, Did it his in own
Person, when he said, Give that for Me and Thee. Thus did his Followers, as
they had learned of him, and so they Taught, Saint Peter (that was sent to
teach the Jews, 1 Pet. 2. 13.) Saint Paul (who was enjoined to preach unto the
Gentiles, Romans 13) not only preaches this Point, but presses it with
Arguments, fetched from Gods Ordinance, from Man's Conscience, from Imperial
Wrath and Vengeance, from that last and terrible sentence of Damnation (for he
that resists, receives Damnation.) From within, from without, from home, from
abroad; from above, from beneath; from Heaven, from Hell and Damnation it
self; does the Apostle fetch Arguments to persuade this Transce^dent Duty. No
mention, nor so much as any touch of any Limitation, Caution, Protestation, or
Pragmaticall Sanction, in all the holy Scriptures; to bar Kings of that
Obedience, which, by natural Right to them does appertain; In any case
whatsoever, but only, where their Commands stand in a clear and direct In
talibus no^ ^bedientes, mortaliter Peccant: nisi foret illud quod praecipitur,
contra praeceptum Dei, vel in salutis Dispendium, Angel. sum. verb obed.
opposition, to the Law of God. If Nebuchadnezar had not erected an Image, and
commanded the People to fall down and worship it; Dan. 1. 6.
If Antiochus ( (...), Athen^us. Deip. lib. 5.
the mad) had not, by his Decree, constrained the Machabees to eat
Swines-flesh; If the Heathen Emperors had not compelled the Christians to cast
Incense into the fire of Idols; If these Kings had commanded no more then the
Persons, and some of the Purses of the People; surely They, for their
disobedience, would never have suffered a Temporal, nor, for their Bonum, sine
quo p^test esse salus, dimitti ^ebet, propter obedient* am. Angel. Sum. verb.
Obedientia.
Obedience, ever feared an eternal fire.

And this is a Truth so solid and fundamental, that it has the clear and
express Text and testimony of holy Writ: is grounded on the perpetual
practice of all the Primitive Saints, and Martyrs: has the consent of all the
holy Bishops and Catholic Writers. No Orthodox Father, did, by word, or
writing, teach any resistance for the space of a thousand yee^es. Lichfield
l^b. 4. cap. 19. Sec. 19. All the worthy Fathers, and Bishops of the Church,
persuaded themselves, that they owed al duty to Kings, though Heret^kes and
Infidels. D^. Field lib. 5. c. 30.
Never any good, or learned man taught, or thought the contrary, till the
Devil, of late, infused it into the heads of those Two fiery and entailed
Foxes of the world, the Bellarmin. de Laic. cap. 6. Snarez defens. fidei
Cathol. cap. 3.
Roman Jesuits, and Parraeus ad Romans 13. Hotemannus, Franc^gall. cap. 6.
Boucherius lib. 2. cap. 2* de abdica. Henr. 3. Keckerman. System. p^lit. ca.
32. Brutus v^dic, quaest. 2. page 56.
German Puritans.

To put an end then, to this whole matter. It may clearly (by what has been
already spoken) appear unto all, of indifferent and impartial Judgment; how
many are the Paradoxes, which They run themselves into, who ( in this case)
do, in so stiff a manner, Refuse Obedience to Supreme Authority.

For (first) what a Paradox is it in Divinity; to opine, 1. Parad^x.
That Religion is an Oratresse to persuade Rebellion, or Disobedience to sacred
and anointed Kings? This being the Weapon wherewith Saint Dent talem exercitum,
tales (...), tales Marit^s, tales ^oniuges, tales Parents, tales filios, tales
(...), tales serous, tales Reges, t^l^s ^ud^ces, tales d b^torum redd ^^res,
and exact^^es^^ sius fisci, q^a^es (...) doctrina Christi^na. (...). 2. epist.
5. ad Mar^ellin.
Augustine did ward the blows of Heathenish Objections made against the
Christians: Give us (if you can) such Cons^ls, such Prouincials* such Husbands,
such Wives; such Parents* such Children; such Master, such Servants; such
Debtors, such Creditors; such Judges, such Officers; such Kings, such People or
Subjects; such Publicians, such Tribute-Prayers as Christians are, and the
Doctrine they profess, teaches them to be. And (indeed) impossible it is,
That, of Religion (which is the Mistress of Obedience) any man should learn
the evil Lesson of Disobedience.

Again; 2. Paradox.
What a Paradox is this in Nature; to think, That the Part should not con^orme
it self to the whole, Omnis pars debet se con^or mare toti.
Nature having stamped this Law, and it being the very Imprease of Natures
light; That every Part ought, in right, to Comply with the whole, or greater
Part. So, in all the Councels of the Church, and Parliaments of the world, has
it ever been, since the world began; without which yielding of the lesser to
the greater Side, or Number, no Laws could ever have been agreed upon, nor
the World, or the Church ever enjoyed any peaceable or happy days. Now, these
Refusers of Obedience, have quite forgotten, their very yee^ding to the mayor
part: For, what a handful are They, compared with almost two hundred thousand
men, which have willingly submitted, and lead the way of most dutiful
Obedience. toward his Majesty? And therefore, these Recusants must of
necessity follow them, in so good a Rule, and Precedent; unless they will have
Men think, that the very Light of natural Illumination is damped in them.

Thirdly, 3. Paradox.
What a Paradox is this in point of Policy, to imagine, that a part of the
Republique (though the greater) should submit their shoulders to the Burden of
the whole? For in every well-ordered Commonwealth, as, by Distributive
Justice, each person has a share in the Profits and Honors therein; So, by
the same Justice ought he to bear a part in the Taxes and Burdens thereof:
For, it has the ground from that Res transit cum oncre. Regula Iuris.
Rule, That every Commodity that passes unto any man, carries with it a
certain Burden correspondent. Nay, this is founded expressly on the Apostles
words; Where he teaches, (and that from the very sense of Nature) That the
Members ought to have the same care one of another; 1. Cor. 12. 25.
much more, of the whole, or greater part. For any Members therefore, in this
case, to enjoy a Privilege, is to prei^dice the Qui p^ccat in Regem, pcccat
quodammodo, in omnes s^bi subditos* Occam, tract^t. 2. l. 2. c, 25.
whole, and so, to extinguish and overthrow the Safety and wel-^are, as well of
the N^turall, as of the Politic Corporation; and the Sacred Constitution of
both.

Fourt^ly, 4. Paradox.
What a Paradox is this in Loyalty, (and that very soul) to far to depresse
supreme Authority, and to Suut. (...) ar^od^^t, ne numis al^^m v^lent: si ^
is^i ita sub^jc^ volu^t: v^, e^^am ipsis, su^i^ctus sit Princeps* Dr Sarau de
Imperandi Author^ (...). 175.
tie the hands, and clip the wings of sacred Kings; and to attempt the keeping
of them within such straight and intolerable Bounds, as not to be able to
command that from their Subjects, which, the Laws of God and Nature do most
plentifully allow them, yea, though it be for the singular Behoof, Benefit,
and Advancement of the Vid^re viri sa^^entes, quanquam libertatis amantissi^i,
Sum^um Imperium, (...) leg^m A^gustias coerceatur; non posse cum vtilitate
Publica exer^eri. Dr. Sarau. fol. 174.
Commonweal; as at this Time, and in this Case, it is clearly manifest?

Fifthly, What a Parodox is this, in the Practique Observation of humane Laws;
5. Paradox.
so far to prefer them in our Practice, as to cause them hereby, to
prejudice and preponderate divine Determinations? and so, through a kind of
preposterous Zeal unto the One, to eleuate the Authority of the Other? It
being a certain truth, That so far are humane Laws in force, as they Lex
nulla valeat contra ius diuinum. Laelius de priuileg. Eccles. 122.
derogate not, from the Eternal Law of God, and naturally Impressed Light. In
prejudice of which Laws of God, and Nature, if any man in the world should
observe the Constitutions of Men, he did sin mortally. Neither do Man's Laws
exact Obedience any farther, then so far, as the observance which they
require, may not cause men to Rush over the everlasting bounds, of Laws,
divine.

Sixthly, 6. Paradox.
is this, in Humanity, and moral honesty? That, what one Friend usually does
for another: One Christian, nay one Man for another: nay, What a Turk will do
for a Christian, and a Christian for a Turk, and a Jew for both; What (and
much more) the Primitive Christians did at the command of such Princes, who did
pursue their Persons and Religion with cruel Torments, and bitter Contumelies;
the same (and much less) Christian men should deny to a Christian King; and
such a King, of so great Goodness, and Patience, Justice, and Clemency,
Wisdom, and Prudence, Piety, and pure Conscience; that of Him, we may say as
Eadmer said of Saint Dunstane; That he is Ea^mer. Histor. Nouor. lib. 1. in
Princip. Act. 13. 22.
Vir, totus ex Virtutibus factus. Or as the Scripture says of David the King
of Israel, A man after Gods own heart; yea, and after the heart of all good
men, I am sure. And to say this, is no Soloecisme: For this, if we say not, we
shall be found Liars against God, who has made him so. There was never such a
thing heard in Israel.

Lastly, 7. Paradox.
What a Paradox is this in point of Patience, for any man to disobey the
Commandments of a King, requiring but what, by Scripture, and Nature, is
allowed him; and for Disobedience, to resolve to Suffer, and in so Suffering,
to think themselves Martyrs?

By whom, such Impressions as these, are made in their minds, is not hard to
conjecture. I will say no more of it, then what the Author of the imperfect
work said sometime in the like case, Toll erg^, hoc vitium de Clero, ne velint
popul^ placere, and sine labor, omn^a viti^ resecantur. Author operi^
imperfecti: tom. ^. col. 917. Edit. (...).
Toll hoc Vitium de Clero; Remouefro^ Clergy men, that vicious and ambitious
appetite, to please the Peoples humors, and to sew pillowes under their
elbowes; and all things shall succee'd right well, both in Church and
Commonwealth.

But, as for any Conformity that such Recusants may have, in their
supposed-dese^ued Sufferings, with Martyrs, (Who altogether suffered for
Righteousnesse-sake) I (for my part) can conceive none at all. Core, Dathan,
and Abiron, whom, for their Murmuring against the King, God suddenly sunk into
hell fire, might as well allege, that their Sufferings had some semblance with
that of the Three Children in the Babylon-Furnace. And Josephus Autiquit. lib.
18. cap. 1. and lib. 20. c. 2.
Theudas, and Judas, the two Incendiaries of the People, in the days of
Caesar's Tribute; might as well pretend, their cause to be like the Machabees.
And the two Malefactors, who were crucified With our Lord at the same time,
might as well have said, That (for the sense and semblance of Bodily pains)
their Sufferings were not unlike His; But for the Cause, they differed as far
as Light and Darkness: And the Cause it is, not the Pain, that makes up a
Martyrs definition.

So that, I resolve all, into this Conclusion: Those Persons can have no
Conformity with Christ in their Sufferings (as Martyrs have) who, in their
Doings, run clean cross to his Example and Doctrine both: That Cause cannot
be good, nor that Conscience well warranted in what it does, that is not able
to defend it self in what it does, or suffers: 1 Neither by any Law or light
of Nature. 2 Nor by any Text, or Testimony of holy Scripture. 3 Nor by any Rule
of Moral honesty. 4 Nor by any Original Law or Justice. 5 Nor guide it self
in what it does, or suffers, by any reasonable, or wellgrounded Precedent from
Them, who, for their Wisdom and Religion, have been Exemplary in their
Generations.
And now for the fourth and last Part. Regard.
The Regard, which we are to have to Religion.

Religion (as I said) is an Oath: the Oath of God: yea, and our Oath too: for
it ties us to God: Regard it then we must, and ought, because an Oath, for that
it is Gods Oath, and our own Oath also.

1 Regard it we must, as a Rule, to direct. 2 As a Reason to persuade us. 3 As
a Virtue, yea a Queen of Graces to Control and Command us. 4 As a Vow, that
strictly binds us unto God.
As a Rule of direction: Voluntas humana eatenus bona eft; quatenus continuatur
diuinae voluntati, vt principio moun^nti, and conso^matur ci, vt
Reguladirigeneti etc. Bonauent. ad 2 um. did. 35. Art. 2. qu. 1. Conclus.
The Schoolmen have a Maxim, and they take it from the Scriptures; That the
will of Man being cross, and unhappy in it self, becomes then most right, and
equal, when it receives Motion, or Direction from the will of God, revealed in
his Word. This Word then, which is the Seed of Religion, is the Rule of
Direction too. A dangerous thing therefore it is, to suffer Men, in any
Christian Commonwealth, to drink in that Phanaticall, and Erroneous Spirit,
which teaches them to relinquish those clear and common Rules of Natures
light, and supernaturally-reuealed Truth, by which all men ought to be guided;
and to reduce all things, to the Dictates of a private Conscience; and (
Enthusiast-like) so pertinaciously to adhere thereunto; that they cannot be
beaten from them; Reason, Religion, Royal Iniunction, Nor by the
Representation of any (be they never so great) Vrgencies of State, Neither by
Mercy received, Justice inflicted, Nor by Examples of Those, who have strewed
unto them the way of most dutiful Submission in this kind.

Regard it also we must as a Reason, that ought ever to be most potent, and
able to persuade us: For this was the very Style and Character of the ancient
Saints, which they did professedly both Believe and Practice; Propter Dominum a
ternum Domino temporali s^ruie^ant. Sanctus August. (...) Psalm. 124.
That for their most blessed Lords sake, who is eternal in the Heavens, they
did yield all Reverence and Obedience unto their Temporal Lords and Kings on
earth; Reigned they never so Despotically, nay never so Tyrannically, or with
never so little Clemency.

To Regard it likewise, as the Queen Empress of all other Graces are we
bound: without whose Active and Imperial Charge, the exercise of all other
Virtues (as well Divine as Moral) will prove remiss and idle. Religion being
the only Grace that can bring to pass (as St. 2 Pet. ^. 8.
Peter speaks) That we neither become barren, nor unfruitful in the kuowledge
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And, in the fourth place; We stand Religion, by which, our Souls are
Confederate to God; And to believe, that we can do nothing contrary to the
Principles thereof; without the fearful Violation of that Oath, whereunto, God
himself is not only a Witness, and a Party, but an Undertaker. For whersoeuer
these Bonds of Religion are wilfully and against Conscience violated, there the
very Light of Nature, and Dictates of Right Reason are trampled under foot;
Humanity, and moral Honesty find themselves grieved: the Conscience wounded
cries secret Shame and Horror to that Soul, that wilfully rusheth over such
clear and open Land-markes: This tender -hearted Matron, Religion, weeps
bitterly, to see the sinful Transgression of that Positive Charge, Eccles. 5.
4.
which says; Vow to God, and defer not to Pay.

But fifthly, above all; To Regard it: because the Dis-regard of it Imposes
upon God himself, most heavy. Preiudices: causes his Name to be blasphemed,
and the way of his Truth to be euill-spoken of: Takes from God the honor of
being reputed the highest Truth: fastens upon him an opinion of Ignorance:
Charges that God, that cannot Lie, as if he did favor Falsehood, when we call
for him, to stand by, not only as a Witness, but as an Undertaker to our
Faithless Protestations: Impleades him as unfaithful in his own Promises
unto Men; and ( in fine) bereaues him of that very Esteem, Regard, and Honor,
which done unto a mortal Man, is worthily counted vile and hateful; and was
never done to God, without some fearful Token of Di^ine Vengeance.

Look we then (and that seriously) to our Rule, to our Reason, to our
Religion, to the Oath of God, to the Commandments of God, to the Counsel of
God, to God himself, to our own Conscien^^ toward all These; to Gods W^ath
and Vengeance threatened to the Contemners of All, or any of These: to his
Temporal and Eternal Promises to such, as have an Eye of Regard to every of
These. So shall we be good and f^ithfull Servants unto God, and to his anointed
King, most dutiful and Obedient Subjects (the One whereof can in no wise be
without the Other.) And so, we being restored to the Paths of our dutiful
Obedience, we shall be (in Gods good time) rendered at the Gates of Eternal
Paradise.

And so, Viuat Rex, and Vincat Veritas: The Blessing of Life and Peace be upon
the Head of his most Sacred Majesty, that He may Live long, and long; and
Reign gloriously over us, and Triumph Victoriously over His Enemies; and so
become an Invincible Defendor of this Faith, Religion, and Truth: that so, this
Truth, Faith, and Religion, may defend Him; in His most Sacred Person, in His
Imperial Power, and in His Royal Posterity for evermore.

And, Let all those, who love God, and the King, say Amen: Even so Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

