THE HEIR AN EXCELLENT COMEDY.

As it was lately Acted by the Company of the Revels.

Writren by T. M. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. for Thomas Jones, and are to be sold at his shop in
Chancery Lane, ouer-against the Roles, and in Westminster Hall.

TO MY HONORED friend, master Thomas May, upon his Comedy, The Heir.
THe Heir being borne, was in his tender age
Rockt in the Cradle of a private Stage,
Where lifted up by many a willing hand,
The child does from the first day fairly stand,
Since, having gathered strength, he dares prefer
His steps into the public Theater
The World: where he dispaires not but to find
A doom from men more able, but less kind.
I but his Usher am, yet if my word
May pass, I dare be bound he will afford
Things must deserve a welcome, it well known
Such as best writers would have wished their own.
You shall observe his words in order meet,
And often stealing on, with equal feet
Slide into equal numbers, with such grace
As each word had been molded for that place.
You shall perceive an amorous passion, spun
Into so smooth a web, as had the sun,
When he pursued the swiftly flying Maid,
Courted her in such language she had staid,
A love so well expressed must be the same,
The Author felt himself from his fair flame.
The whole plot does like it self disclose
Through the five Acts, as does a Look, that goes
With letters, for till every one be known,
The Lock's as fast as if you had found none.
And where his sportiue Muse does draw a thread
Of mirth, chaste Matrons may not blush to read.
(...) have I thought it fitter to reveal
(...) want of art (dear friend) then to conceal
(...) It did appea^e I did not mean
(...) thy well-wrought Comicke-Sceane,
(...) might judge my (...) rather to be,
(...) my self, th^^ give it thee;
(...) thee none but what thou have
(...)* and what must my faint breath outlast.
(...) this garment (though (...) be
(...) measure) only made for thee,
(...) to (...), it is cause the stuff
(...) allow^d me, was not large enough.
Thomas Car^^

AN EXCELLENT COMEDY CALLED the Heir.
Enter Polimetes, Roscio. Pol. ROscio.


To. My Lord.


Pol. Have thou divulged the news
That my son died at Athens.

Ros. Yes my Lord,
With every circumstance, the time, the place,
And manner of his death; that it is believed
And told for news with as much confidence
As if twere writ in Gallobelgicus.

Pol. That Is well, that is very well, now Roscio
Follows my part, I must express a grief
Not usual, not like a well left heir
For his dead father, or a lusty Widow
For her old husband, must I counterfeit,
But in a deeper, a far deeper strain
Weep like a Father for his only son,
Is not that hard to do, ha, Roscio?

To. Oh no my Lord,
Not for your skill, has not your Lordship seen
A player personate Ieronimo?

Pol. By th'masse it is true, I have seen the knave paint grief
In such a lively color, that for false
And acted passion he has drawn true tears
From the spectators eyes, Ladies in the boxes
Kept time with sighs, and tears to his sad accents
As had he truly bin the new man he seemd.
Well then I Will near despair; but tell me thou
Thou that have still been privy to my bosom,
How will this project take?

Rosc. Rarely my Lord,
^hen now my thinks, I see your Lordships house
(...) with suitors of the noblest rank,
And my young Lady your supposed Heir
(...) more with woing then the Grecian Queen
In the long absence of her wandering Lord.
There^s not a ruinous nobility
In all this kingdom, but conceiues a hope
Now to ^ebuild his fortunes on this match.

Pol. Those are not they I look for, no, my ne^^
Are spread for other game, the rich and greedy
Those that have wealth enough, yet gape for more
They are for me,

Ros Others will come my Lord,
All sorts of fish will press upon your nets,
Then in your Lordships wisdom it must lie
To cull the great ones, and reject the fry.

Pol. Nay fear not that, there is none shall have access
To see my daughter, or to speak to her,
But such as I approve, and aim to catch.

To. The jest will be, my Lord, when you shall see
How your aspiring suitors will put on
The face of greatness, and belly their fortunes
Consume themselves in show, wasting like Merchants
Their present wealth in rigging a fair ship
For some ill venture de voyage, that undoes vm.
Here comes a youth with letters from the Court,
Bought of some favorite at such a price
As will for ever sink him, yet alas
^all's to no purpose, he must loose the prize.

Pol. This was a jest well thought of, the conceit
Will feed me fat, with sport that it shall make,
Besides the large adventures it brings home
Unto my daughter. How now. enter servant

S^r. My Lord, Count Virro is come to see you.


Pol. Conduct him in; So, so, it takes already
See Roscio see, this is the very man
My project aymd at, the rich Count that known
No end of his large wealth, yet gapes for more
There was no other loadstone could attract
His Iron heart, for could beauty have moved him,
Nature has been no niggard to my girl,
But I must to my grief, here comes the Count.

Enter Count Virro. Vir. Is your Lord a sleep?


To. No Sir.
I think not, my Lord, Count Virro.

Vir. How do you Sir.


Pol. I do entreat your Lordship pardon, my grief and some want of sleep have
made me at this time unmannerly, not fit to entertain guests of your worth.


Vir Alas Sir I know your grief.


To. It Was that that fetched you hither. aside.


Vir. Y'haue lost a worthy and a hopeful son,
But heaven that always gives, will sometimes take
And that the best, there is no balsome left us
To cure such wounds as these but patience,
There Is no disputing with the acts of heaven,
But if there were, in what could you accuse
Those powers that else have been so liberal to you,
And left you yet one comfort in your age:
A fair and virtuous daughter.

Ros. Now it begins.


Vir. Your blood is not extinct, nor your age childlesse, from that fair
branch that's left may come much fruit to glad posterity, think on that my
Lord.


Pol. Nay heaven forbid I should repine at what the
Justice of those powers ordain, it has pleased
Them to confine my care only to one, and to
See her well bestowd is all the comfort I now
Must look for, but if it had pleased heaven that
My son, ah my Eugenio. he weeps.

Vir. Alas good Gentleman.


Ros. Fore heaven he does it rarely.


Vir, But Sir, remember your self, remember your
Daughter, let not your grief for the dead make
You forget the living, whose hopes, and fortunes
Depend upon your safety.

Pol. Oh my good Lord, you never had a soon.


Ros. Unless they were bastards, and for them no
Doubt but he has done as other Lords do.

Pol. And therefore cannot tell what it is to loose
A son, a good son, and an only son.

Vir. I would, my Lord, I could as well redress
As I can take compassion of your grief
You should soon find an ease.

Pol. Pray Pardon me my Lord, if I forget my self toward you at this time, if
it please you visit my house ofter you shall be welcome.


Vir. You would feign sleep my Lord, I Will take my leave ^^auen send you
comfort, I shall make bold shortly to visit you.


Pol. You shall be wondrous welcome,
Wait on my Lord out there. exit Virr^.
So now he is gone, how think thou Roscio,
Will not this Gudgeon bite?

To. No doubt my Lord,
So fair a bayte would catch a cunning fish.

Po^. And such a one is he, he ever loved
The beauty of my girl, but that's not it
Can draw the earth bred thoughts of his gross soul
Gold is the God of his idolatry,
(...) hope of which I Will feed him, till at length
I make him fasten, and Ixion like
For his loved Juno graspe an empty clowd.

Ros. How stands my young Lady affected to him.


Pol. There Is all the difficulty, we must win her to love (...), I doubt the
peevish Gyrle will think him too (...), he is well near threescore: in this
business I must ^eaue somewhat to thy wit and care, praise him beyond all
measure.


Ros. Your Lordship ever found me trusty.


Pol. If thou effect it, I will make thee happy. exeunt


Enter Philocles, Clerimont. Phi. Eugenios sister then is the rich heir
By his decease.

Cler. Yes, and the fair one too,
She needs no gloss that fortune can set on her,
Her beauty of it self were prize enough
To make a king turn beggar for.

Phil. Hoy day,
What in love Clerimont, I lay my life it is so,
Thou could not praise her with such passion else.

Cler. I know not, but I slept well enough last night,
But if thou sawst her once, I would not give
A farthing for thy life, I tell thee Philocles
One fight of her would make thee cry, ay me,
Sigh, and look pale, me thinks I do imagine
How like an Idolatrous lover thou would look
Through the eyelids, know no body.

Phi. It Is very well, but how did your worship escape
You have seen her.

Cler. True, but I have an
Antidote, and I can teach it thee.

Phi. When
I have need on it I Will desire it.

Cler. And twill
Be worth thy learning, when thou shall see the
Tyranny of that same seuruy boy, and what fools
He makes of us; shall I describe the beast?

Phi. What beast?


Cler. A lover.


Phi. Do.


Cler. Then to be brief, I will pass over the opinion of your ancient
fathers, as likewise those strange Loves spoken of in the Authenticke histories
of chivalry Amadis du Gaul, Parismus, the Knight of the Sun, or the witty
Knight Don Quixot de la Manca, where those brave men, neither Enchantments,
Giants, Wind-mils, nor flocks of sheep could vanquish, are made the trophyes
of tryumphing love.


Phi. Prithee come to the matter.


Cler. Neither will I mention the complaints of Sir Guy for the fair Phelis,
nor the travels of Parismus for the love of the beauteous Laurana, nor lastly,
the most sad penance of the ingenious knight Don Quixot upon the mountains of
Scienna Morenna, moou^d by the unjust disdain of the Lady Dulcinea del Toboso,
(...) or our modern Authors, I will not so much as name them, no not that
excellent treatise of Tullies Love, written by the Master of Art.


Phi. I would thou would pass over this passing over of Authors, and speak
thine own judgment.


Cler. Why then to be brief, I think a Lover looks like an Ass.


Phi. I can describe him better then so my self, he looks like a man that had
sitten up at Cards all night, or a stale Drunkard wakened in the midst of his
sleep.


Cler. But Philocles, I would not have thee see this Lady, she has a bewitching
look.


Phi. How dare thou venture man, what strange medicine have thou found, Ovid
near taught it thee, I doubt I guess thy remedy, for love, go to a bawdy
house or so, is it not?


Cler. Faith, and that is a good way I can tell you, we younger brothers are
beholding to it, alas we must not fall in love and choose whom we like best,
we have no Ioyntures for vm, as you blessed heirs can have.


Phi. Well I have found you Sir, and prithee tell me, how got'st thou Wenches?


Cler. Why I can want no Panders, I lie in the Constables house.


Phi. And there you may whore by authority,
But Clerimont, I doubt this Parragon
That thou so praisest, is some il favored Wench
Whom thou would have me laugh at for commending.

Cler. By heaven I spoke in earnest, trust your eyes,
I Will show you her.

Phi. How can thou do it?
Thou know this Ladies father is to mine
A deadly enemy, nor is his house,
Open to any of our kindred.

Cler. That Is no matter,
My lodging's the next door to this Lords house,
And my back Window looks into his Garden,
There every morning fair Leucothoe,
(For so I hear her named) walking alone,
To please her senses makes Aurora blush,
To see on brighter then her (...) appear.

Phi. Well I will see her the^^* Exeunt.


Enter Franklin, Fancisco, Luce grauida. Franc. Yet for her sake be advised
better Sir,

Frank. Impudent Rascal, can look me in the face,
And know how thou have wronged me, thou have
Dishonored my Daughter, made a whore on her.

Franc. Gentle Sir,
The wrong my love has made to your fair Daughter
It Is now too late to wish undone again,
But if you please, it may be yet closed up
Without dishonor, I will marry her.

Frank. Marry her, she has a hot catch of that, marry a Beggar, what Iointure
can thou make her?


Franc. Sir I am poor I must confess,
Fortune has blessed you better, but I swear
By all things that can bind, it was not your wealth
Was the foundation of my true built love,
It was her single uncompounded self,
Her self without addition that I loved,
Which shall for ever in my sight outweigh
All other women's fortunes, and themselves,
And were I great, as great as I could wish
My self for her advancement, no such bar
As Fortunes inequality should stand
Betwixt our loves.

Luce. Good Father hear me.


Frank. Do thou not blush to call me father, Strumpet I Will make thee an
example.


Luce. But hear me
Sir, my shame will be your own.

Frank. No more I say, Francisco leave my house, I charge You come not here.


Franc. I must obey and will,
Dear Luce be constant.

Luce. Till death

Exit Francisco. Frank. Here Is a fine wedding toward, the
Bridegroom when he comes for his bride,
Shall find her great with child by another man,
Passion a me minion, how have you hid it so long?

Luc. Fearing your anger Sit, I strived to hide it.


Frank. Hide it one day more then, or be damned,
Hide it till Shallow be married to thee,
And then let him do his worst.

Lu. Sir I should too much wrong him.


Frank. Wrong him, there be great Ladies have done the like, it is no news to
see a bride with child.


Lu. Good Sir.


Frank. Then be wise, lay the child to him, he is a rich man, tother's a beggar.


Lu. I dare not Sir.


Frank. Do it I say, and he shall father it.


Lu. He knows he never touch me Sir.


Frank. That's all one, lay it to him, we will out face him it is his: but hark, he
is coming, I hear the Music, swear thou will do thy best to make him
think it is his, swear quickly.


Lu. I do.


Frank. Go step aside, and come when thy que is, thou shall hear us talk.
Luce aside.


Enter Shallow with Music. Sha. Morrow Father.


Frank. Son bridegroom welcome, you have been looked for here.


Sha. My Tailor a little disappointed me, but is my Bride ready.


Frank. Yes long ago, but you and I will talk a little, send in your Music.


Sha. Go wait within, and tell me father, did she not
Think it long till I came.

Frank, I warrant
Her she did, she loves* you not a little.

Sha. Nay that I dare swear, she has given me many
Tastes of her affection.

Frank. What before you
Were married.

Sha. I mean, in the way
Of honesty father.

Fran. Nay that I doubt,
Young wits love to be trying, and to say
Truth, I see not how a woman can deny a man
Of your youth and person upon those terms,
You Will not be known ont now.

Shall. I have kissed
Her or so.

Fran. Come, come, I know you are no
Fool, I should think you a very Ass, nay I tell
You plainly, I should be loath to marry my
Daughter to you if I thought you had not tried
Her in so long acquaintance, but you have tried
Her, and she poor soul could not deny you.

Sha. Ha ha hae.


Frank. Faith tell me son, it is but a
Merry question, she is yours.

Sha. Upon my
Virginity father.

Frank. Swear not by that,
I Will nere believe you.

Sha. Why then as I am
A Gentleman I never did it that I remember.

Frank. That you remember, oh is it thereabouts.


Luc. Heel take it upon him presently.


Frank. You have been so familiar with her,
You have forgot the times, but did you never
Come in half fudled, and then in a kind humor,
Caetera quis nescit.

Sha. Indeed I was wont to serve my mothers maide^ so when I came half foxt as
you said, and then next morning I should laugh to my self.


Frank. Why there it goes, I thought to have chid you son Shallow, I knew
what you had done, it is too apparent, I would not have people take notice of it
pray God she hide her great belly as she goes to Church to day.


Sha. Why father is she with child?


Frank. As if you knew not that, fie, fie, leave your dissembling now.


Sha. Sure it cannot be mine.


Frank. How Is this, you would not make my daughter a whore, would you? this is
but to try if you can stir my choler, your wits have strange tricks, do
things over night when you are merry, and then deny vm. But stay, here she
comes alone, step aside, she shall not seevs,


they step aside. Lu. Ah my dear Shallow, thou needst not have made
Such have, my heart thou know was firm enough
To thee, but I may blame my own fond love,
That could not deny thee.

Shall. She Is with child indeed, it swells,

Fran. You would not believe me, it is a good wench,
She does it handsomely.

Luc. But yet I know if
Thou had bin thy self, thou would near have
Offered it, it was drink that made thee.

Shall. Yes sure, I was drunk when I did it, for I had
Forgot it* I lay my life twill prove a girl
Because it was got in drink.

Lu. I am ashamd to see any body.


Frank. Alas poor wretch, go comfort her, Luce.


Shall. Sweet heart, nay never be ashamd, I was a little too hasty, but I Will
make thee amends, we will be married presently.


Fran. Be cheery Luce, you were man and wife before, it wanted but the ceremony
of the Church, and that shall be presently done.


Shall. I I, sweet heart, as soon as may be.


Frank. But now I think ont son Shallow, your wedding must not now be
public, as we intended it.


Shall. Why so?


Frank. Because I would not have people take notice of this fault, we will go to
Church, only we three, the Minister and the Cleark, that's witnesses enough, so
the time being unknown, people will think you were married before.


Shall. But will it stand with my worship to be married in private.


Frank. Yes, yes, the greatest do it, when they have been (...) before hand,
there is no other way to save your bri^es credit.


Shall. Come lets about it presently.


F^ank. This is closd up beyond our wishes.


Exeunt, manet Luce. Luc. I am undone, unless, thy wit Francisco,
Can find some means to free me from this fool,
Who would have thought the sot could be so gross
To take upon him what he never did,
To his own shame, I Will send to my Francisco,
And I must loose no time, for I am dead,
If not delivered from this loathed bed.

Actus secundus.
Enter Philocles, Clerimont at the window. Cler. SEE Philocles, yonder is that
happy shade,
That often vailes the fair Lucothoe,
And this her usual hour, she will not be long,
Then thou shall tell me, if so rare an object
Ere blessed thine eyes before.

Phil. Well, I would see her once,
Were but to try thy judgment Cleremont.

Cler. And when thou do, remember what I told thee,
I would not be so sick, but soft look to thy heart,
Yonder she comes, and that's her waiting woman.
Leucothoe and Psecas in the garden. Now gaze thy fill, speak man how likest
thou her.

Leu. Psecas.


Psecas. Madam.


Leu. What flower was that
That thou were telling such a story of
Last night to me.

Pse. It Is call Narcissus Madam*
It bears the name of that too beauteous boy,
That lost himself by loving of himself,
Who viewing in afaire and cristall stream
Those lips that only he could never kiss,
Dotes on the shadow, which to reach in vain
Striving, he drwones thus scorning all beside
For the loved shadow the fairer substance did.

Leu. Fie fie, I like not these impossible tales,
A man to fall in love with his own shadow,
And died for love, it is most ridiculous.

Pse. Madam I know not, I have often seen
Both men and women court the looking glass
With so much seeming contentation,
That I could think this true, nay wear it about vm
As lovers do their Mistress counterfeit.

Leu. Tha^s not for love, but to correct their beauties
And draw from others admiration,
For all the comfort that our faces give
Unto our selves is but reflection
Of that fair likeing that another takes.

Cler. I would we were a little nearer vm
We might but hear what talk these wenches have
When they are alone, I warrant some good stuff.

Phi. It Is happiness enough for me to see
The motion of her lips.

Cler. I ^aith is it there abouts.
Why Philocles, what lost already man,
Struck dead with one poor glance, look up for shame
And tell me how thou likest my judgment now,
Now thou do see.

Phi. Ah Cleremont too well,
Too well I see what I shall never taste,
You Ladies beauty: she must needs be cruel
(Though her fair shape deny it) to the son
Of him that is her fathers enemy,
That, Cleremont, that fatal difference
Checkes my desire, and sinkes my rising hopes,
But love's a torrent violent if stopped,
And I am desperately mad: I must
^ must be hers, or else I must not be.

Cler. Contain that passion that will else ouerwhelme
All virtue in you, all that is called man,
And should be yours, take my advice my heart
My life to second you, let us consult,
You may find time to speak to her and woe her.

Phi. May, nay I will in spite of destiny,
(...) women and faint hearted fools complain
In languishing despair, a manly love
Dares show it self and press to his desires
Through thickest troops of horid opposites,
Were there a thousand waking Dragons set
To keep that golden fruit: I would attempt
To pluck and taste it, it is the danger crowns
A brave atchieuement: what if I should go
And boldly woo her in her fathers house
In spite enmity, what could they say?

Cle. Twere madness that not wisdom rash attempts
Betray the means, but never work the end.

Phi. She would not hate a man for loving her,
Or if she did, better be once deemed
Then live for ever hapless.

Cle. But take time,
The second thoughts our wise men say are best.

Pli. Delaye's a double death, no I have thought
A means, that straight I Will put in execution,
I Will write a Letter to her presently,
Take how it will.

Cle. A Letter, who shall carry it?


Pli. I Will tell thee when I have done, have thou Pen and Ink in thy Chamber.


Cle. Yes, there is one upon the Table, I Will stay here at the window, and watch
whether she stay or not, what a sudden change is this.


Leu. Did not count Virro promise to be hear
To day at dinner.

Pse. Yes Madame that he did, and I dare swear
He will not break.

Leu. He needs not, he is rich enough, unless
He should break in knavery, as some of our M^^^hants do now adays.

Pse. Break promise Madame I mean, and that he will not
For your sake, you know his business.

Leu. I would I did not, he might spare his pains
And that unusual cost, that he bestows
In pranking up himself, and please me better
He would not please his Tailor and his Barbar,
For they got more for your sake by their Lord
Then they got this twenty years before.

Leu. Ah Psecas, Psecas, can my father think
That I can love Count Virro, one so old
(That were enough to make a match unfit)
But one so base, a man that never loved
For any thing called good, but dross and pelf,
One that would never, had my brother lived
Have moved this suit, no I can never love him,
But can thou keep a secret firmly Psecas.

Pse. Doubt me not Madame.


Leu. Well I Will tell thee then,
I love, alas, I dare not say I love him,
But there is a young and noble Gentleman,
Lord Euphues son, my fathers enemy.
A man whom natures prodigality
Stretched even to envy in the making up,
Once from a Window my pleased eye beheld
This youthful Gallant as he rode the street,
On a coruetting Courser, who it seemed
Knew his fair load, and with a proud disdain
Checked the base earth, my father being by
I ask't his name, he told me Philocles,
The son and Heir of his great enemy:
Judge Psecas then, how my divided breast,
Suffered between two meeting contraries,
Hatred and Love, but Loves a deity,
And must prevail against mortals, whose command
Not ^oue himself could ever yet withstand.

Cle. What is the letter done already, I see these Lovers have nimble
inventions, but how will you send it.


Phi. What a question's that, see thou this stone.


Cle. Ah, then I see your drift, this stone must guide your
Fleeting Letter in the Air, and carry it to that
Fair Mark you aim at.

Phi. Hard by her.


Cle. I think you would not hit her with such stones as this,
Lady look to your self, he that now throws one
Stone at you, hopes to hit you with two.

Phi. But prithee tell me what do think this Letter may do.


Cle. Well I hope,
It Is ten to one this Lady often has seen you,
You never lived obscure in Syracuse,
Nor walked the streets unknown, and who can tell
What place you bear in her affections,
Loved or mislik'd; if bad, this letter sent,
Will make her show her scorn, if otherwise,
Fear not a woman's wit, she will find a time
To answer your kind Letter, and express
What you desire she should, then send it boldly,
You have a fairer make there.

Phi. Cupid guide my arm,
Oh be as just blind God as thou art great,
And with that powerful hand, that golden shaft
That I was wounded, wound you tender breast,
There is no salue^ but that, no cure for me,

Cle. See what a wonder it strikes vm in, how it should come.


Phi. She Will wonder more to see what man it comes from.


Cle. I like her well, yet she is not afraid to open it:
She starts, stay mark her action when she has read the Letter.
She reads "LEt it wrong this Letter that it came,
"From one that trembled to subscribe his name,
"Fearing your hate, O let not hate descend,
"Nor make you cruel to so vowed a friend,
"If you will not promise love, grant but access,
"And let me know my woes are past redress,
"Be just then beauteous Judge, and like the laws
"Condemn me not till you have heard my cause,
"Which when you have, from those fair lips return
"Either my life in love, or death in scorn.
Yours or not, Philocles.


Am I awake or dream I, is it true
Or does my flattering fancy but suggest
What I most covet.

Pse. Madame the words are there,
I Will swear it canna be, nor be illusion.

Leu. It is too good for truth.


Phi. Mock me not fortune,
She kissed it, saw thou her, by heaven she kissed it.

Cle. And with a look that relisht love, not scorn,

Leu. This Letter may be forged, I much desire to know the certainty, Psecas
thy help must further me.


Pse. I Will not be wanting.


Leu. Here comes my father, he must not see this.


Pse. No nor your the other sweet heart, he is with him yonder.


Enter Polimetes, Virro, Roscio. Pol. Nay noble Count you are too old a Soldier
To take a maids first no, for a denial,
They will be nice at first, men must pursue
That will obtain, woe her my Lord and take her,
You have my free consent if you can get hers,
Yonder she walks alone, go comfort her.

Virro I Will do the best I may, but we old men
Are but cold comfort, I thank your Lordships love.

Pol. I wonder Roscio that the peevish Girl
Comes on so slowly on peswasions
That I can use, do move the setting forth
Count Virroes greatness, wealth and dignity
Seems not to affect her, Roscio.

Roscio. I doubt the cause my Lord,
For were not that, I dare engage my life,
She would be won to love him, she has placed
Already her affections on some other.

Poli. How should I find it out

Ros. Why thus my Lord
There Is never man nor woman that ere loved,
But chose some bosom friend whose close converse,
Sweeten their joys, and ease their burdened minds
Of such a working secret, thus no doubt
Has my young Lady done, and but her woman,
Who should it be, it is she must out with it,
Her secrecy if wit cannot orereach,
Gold shall corrupt, leave that to me my Lord,
But if her Ladies heart do yet stand free
And vnbequeath'd to any, your command
And fathers jurisdiction enterpos'd
Will make her love the Count, no kind of m^^ne^
must want to draw her.

Pol. Thou art my Oracle,
My Brain, my Soul, my very being Roscio,
Walk on and speed whilst I but second thee.

Cle. It is even so, Count Virro is your rival,
See how the old Ape smugs up his moldy chap^
To seize the bit.

Phi. He must not if I live,
But yet her father brings him that has the means
That I should ever want.

Cle. If he do marry her
Revenge it nobly, make him a Cuckold boy,

Phi. Thou jests that feels it not, prithee lets go,

Cle. Stay, I Will not curse him briefly for thy sake,
If thou do marry her may thou be made
A Cuckold without profit, and nere get
An Office by it, nor favor at the Court,
But may thy large ill gotten treasury
Be spent in her bought lust, and thine own gold
Bring thee adulterers, so farewell good Count.

Exeunt Phiocles. Enter Servant. Ser. My Lord, there is a Messenger within
Desires access, has business of import,
Which to no ear but yours he must impart.

Enter Eugenio disguised. Pol. Admit him, now friend, your business with me.


Ser. If you be the Lord Polimetes.


Pol. The same.


Euge. My Lord, I come from Athens with such news
As I dare say is welcome though unlooked for,
Your son Eugenio lives whom you so long
Thought dead and mourned for.

Pol. How, lives.


Euge. Upon my life my Lord I saw him well
Within these few days.

Pol. Thanks for thy good news,
Toward him Roscio, but now tell me friend
Have thou revealed this news to any man
In Syracuse but me.

Eu. To none my Lord,
At every place where I have staid in town,
Enquiring for your Lordships house, I heard
These tragic, but false news, the contrary
I still conceald, though knew, intending first
Your Lordships ear should drink it.

Pol. Worthy f^iend.
I now must thank your wisdom as your love
In this well carried action, I Will requite it,
Mean time pray use my house, and still continue your
Silence in this business, Roscio make him welcome, and
Part as little from him as you can for fear.

To. Think it done, my Lord.


Pol. Psecas come hither.


Vi^ Be like your self, let not a cruel doom
Pass those fair lips, that never were ordained
To kill, but to revive.

Leu. Neither my Lord
Lies in the power to do.

Vir. Yes sweet to me.
Whom your scorn kills, and pity will revive.

Leu. Pity is showed to men in misery.


Vir. And so am I, if not relieved by you.


Leu. Twere pride in me, my Lord, to think it so.


Vir. I am your beauties captive.


Leu. Then my Lord,
What greater gift then freedom can I give,
It Is that that Captives most desires, and that
You shall command, you are free from me my Lord,

Vir. Your beauty contradicts that freedom Lady.


Pol. come noble Count, I must for this time interrupt you
You Will find time enough within to talk.

Vir. I Will wait upon your Lordship. exeunt manet Euge. solus.


Euge. Thus in disguise I have discovered all,
And found the cause of my reported death,
Which did at first amaze me, but it is well,
It Is to draw on the match between my sister
And this rich Count, heaven grant it be content
As well as fortune to her, but I fear
She cannot love his age, how it succeedes
I shall perceive, and whilst unknown I stay,
I cannot hurt the project, help I may. Exit.

Enter Francisco, Sumner. Fran. This will make good work for you in the
spiritual
Court, Shallow is a rich man.

Sum. I marry Sir,
Those are the men we look for, there is somewhat
To be got, the Court has many businesses at this
Time, but they are little worth, a few waiting
Women got with child by Seruingmen or so, scarce
Worth the citing.

Fran. Do not their Masters get
Vm with child sometimes.

Sum. Yes no doubt, but
They have got a trick to put vm off upon their
Men, and for a little portion save their
Own credits; besides, these private marriages
Are much out of our way, we cannot know when
There is a fault.

Fran. Well, these are no
Starters I warrant you, Shallow shall not deny it,
And for the Wench she need not confess it, she h^s
A mark that will betray her.

Sum. I thank you
Sir for your good intelligence, I hope it is certain.

Franc. Fear not that, is your citation ready.


Sum. I have it here.


Franc. Well step aside, and come when I call, I hear vm coming. Exit Sumner.


Enter Franklin, Shallow, Luce, Parson. Frank. Set forward there, Francisco
what make you here.


Franc. I come to claim my right, Parson take heed,
Thou art the Author of adultery
If thou conioyne this couple, she is my wife.

Frank. you saucebox.


Shall. Father, I thought she had been mine, I hope I shall not loose her thus.


Frank. Francisco, dare not to interrupt us, for I swear thou shall endure the
laws extremity
For thy presumption.

Franc. do your worst, I fear not,
I was contracted to her.

Frank. What witness have you.


Franc. Heaven is my witness, whose imperial eye saw our contract.


Shall. What an Ass is this to talk of contracting, he that will get a wench,
must make her bigger as I have done, and not contract.


Franc. Sir, you are abused.


Shall. Why so.


Franc. The wife you go to marry is with child, and by another.


Shall. A good iesty faith, make me believe that.


Franc. How comes this fool possessed, he never touched her I dare swear.


Frank. No more Francisco as you will answer it,
Parson set forward there.

Franc. stay,
If this will not suffice, Sumner come forth.

Frank. A Sumner, we are all betrayed. Enter Sumner.


Sum. God save you all, I think you guess my business,
These are to cite to the spiritual Court
You master Shallow, and you mistress Luce,
Ask not the cause, for it is apparent here,
A carnal copulation, ante matrimonium.

Frank. This was a bar unlooked for, spiteful Francisco

Franc. Injurious Franklin, could the laws divine,
Or humane suffer, such an impious act,
That thou should take my true and lawful wife,
And great with child by me, to give t'another,
Gulling his poor simplicity.

Shall. Do you mean me Sir.


Sum. Gallants Farewell, my writ shall be obeyed.


Frank. Summer it shall. exit Summer


Par. I Will take my leave, there is nothing now for me to do

Frank. Farewell good master Parson. exit Parson


Frank. Francisco can thou say thou ever louedst my daughter, and would
thou thus disgrace her openly.


Franc. No, I would win her thus,
And did you hold her credit half so dear
As I, or her content, you would not thus
Take her from me, and thrust her against her will
On this rich fool.

Sha. You are very bold with me Sir.


Franc. Let me have news what happens dearest Luce.


Luc. Else let me die. exit Francisco.


Frank. This was your doing Luce, it had been
Impossible he should ere have known the time
So truly else, but I Will take an order next time
For you babbling.

Sha. What Is the matter father.


Fran. We may
Thank you for it, this was your haste that will
Now shame us all, you must be doing a fore your
Time.

Sha. It Was but a trick of youth father,

Frank. And threrefore now you must eene stand in a
White sheet for all to gaze at.

Sha. How,
I would be loath to wear a surplesse now, it is a
Disgrace the house of the Shallowes never knew*

Fran. All the hope is, officers may be bribed, and so they will, twere a hard
world for us to live in else.


Shall. You say true father, if twere not for corruption, every poor rascal
might have justice as well as one of us, and that were a shame. exeunt Shall.
Luce


Frank. This was a cunning stratagem well laid,
But yet Francisco thou have not won the prize:
What should I do, I must not let this cause
Proceed to trial in the open Court,
For then my daughters oath will cast the child
Upon Francisco: no, I have found a better,
I will before the next Court day provide
Some needy Parson, one whose poverty
Shall make him fear no Cannons, he shall marry
My daughter to rich Shallow, when it is done
Ou^ gold shall make a silence in the Court. Exit*

Enter Philocles, Psecas. Pse. I must return your answer to my Lady,
He tell her you will come.

Phil. Come,
And such a Angel call, I should forget
All Offices of Nature, all that men
Wish in their second thoughts, ere such a duty
Commend my service to her, and to you
My thanks for this kind Message. exit Psecas.
I never breathed till now, never till now now
Did my life relish sweetness, break not heart,
Crack not ye feeble Ministers of nature
With inundation of such swelling joy,
To great to bear without expression:
The Lady writes that she has known me long
By sight, and loved me, and she seems to thank
Her stars she loves, and is beloved again,
She speake^ my very thoughts, by heaven it is strange
And happy when affections thus can meet;
She further writes at such an hour to day,
Her fathers absence, and all household spi^s
Fitly remoou'd, shall give access to me
Vnmarkt to visit her, where she alone
Will entertain discourse and welcome me.
I hope it is truly meant, why should I fear,
But wisdom bids me fear: fie, fie, it is base,
To wrong a creature of that excellence,
With such suspicion I should iniure her,
I will as soon suspect an angel false,
Treason near lodged within so fair a breast,
No, if her hand betray me, I will will run
On any danger, it is alike to me
To dye, or find her false, for on her truth
Hangs my chief being, well I Will lose no time
No not a minute, dearest love I come,
To meet my sweetest wishes I will fly,
Heaven and my truth, shield me from treachery. Exit.

Actus Tertius.
Enter Polimetes, Roscio, Eugenio, Psecas. Pol. I Cannot credit it, nor think
that she
Of all the noble youth in Sicilly,
Should make so strange a choice, that none but he,
None but the son of my vowed enemy
Must be her mate, it strikes me to amaze,
Minion take heed, do not belie your Mistress.

Pse. Mercy forsake me if I do my Lord,
You charged me to confess the truth to you,
Which I have fully done, and presently
I Will bring you where concealed, you shall both see
Their priuacy and hear their conference.

Pol. Well I believe thee wench, and will reward
Thy trust in this, go get thee in again
And bring me word when Philocles is come,
Sir you will be secret to our purpose.

Euge. As your own breast my Lord.


Pol. I shall rest thankful to you:
This stranger must be soothd lest he mar all.

Rosc. This was well found out my Lord, you now have means to take your enemy.


Pol. With blessed occasion I will so pursue
As childlesse Euphes shall for ever rue.
Rise in thy blackest look direst Nemesis
Assistant to my purpose, help m^ glut
My thirsty soul with blood. This bold young man
To his rash love shall sacrifice his life.

Ros. What course you intend, to ruin him.


Pol. Why kill him presently.


To. Oh no my Lord,
You Will rue that action, think not that the Law
Will let such murder sleep unpunished.

Pol. Should I now let him go now I have caught him

Ros. Yes Sir, to catch him faster, and more safely.


Pol. How should that be? speak man.


Ros. Why thus my Lord;
You know the law speaks death to any man
That steals an Heir without her friends consent,
This must he do, his love will prompt him to it,
For he can never hope by your consent
To marry her, and she it is like will give
Content, for women's love is violent,
Then mark their passage you shall easly find
How to surprise them at your will my Lord.

Pol. Thou art my Oracle dear Roscio,
Here Is Psecas come again; how now what news?

Pse. My Lord they both are coming please you withdraw, you shall both hear
and see what you desire.


Enter Philocles and Leucothoe. Leu. Ye are welcome Noble Sir and did my power,
Answer my love your visitation,
Sold be more free, and your deserved welcome
Expressed in better fashion.

Phi. Best of Ladies,
It is so well, so excellently well,
Coming from your wished love, my barren thanke^
Wants language for it, there lies in your fair looks
More entertainment then in all the pomp
That the vain Persian ever taught the world,
Your presence is the welcome I expected,
That makes it perfect.

Leu. It Is your noble thought
Makes good what is wanting here, but gentle friend,
For so I now dare call you.

Pol. It Is well Minion you are bold
Enough I see to choose your friends without my leave.

Phi. It Is my ambition ever to be yours.


Leu. Think me not light, dear Philocles, so soon
To grant thee love, that others might have sought
With eagerest pursuit, and not obtained,
But I was yours by fate, and long have been,
Before you wood Leucothoe was won,
And yours without resistance.

Phi. Oh my Stars
It Was your kind influence, that whist I slept
In dullest ignorance, contrived for me
The way to crown me with felicity.

Pol. You may be deceived though,
You have no such great reason
To thank your Stars if you knew all.

Phil. And know fair Mistress you have met a love,
That time, nor fate, nor death can ever change,
A man that but in you can have no being:
Let this kiss seal my faith.

Leu. And this mine.


Pol. Nay to it again, your sweet meat shall have sour sauce.


Phi. But sweet, amongst all these Roses there is one thorn
That pricks and galls me, our parents enmity
Will cross our loves, I do assure my son
This father never will give his consent.

Leu. No so I think, he moves me still to Virro
That old crazed Count, and with such vehemence
I dare scarce bide his presence if I deny him;
Therefore we must be speedy in our course,
And take without his leave what he denies.

Pol. I thank you for that good daughter.


Ros. I told you Sir twould come to this at last.


Phi. Oh thou have spoke my wishes, and has showed
Thy self in love as true as beautiful;
Then let us away dearest Leucothoe,
My fortunes are not poor, then fear no want,
This constant love of ours may prove so happy,
To reconcile our parents enmity.

Leu. Heaven grant it may.


Po. Never by this means yongster.


Leu. But soft now I think better ont I Will not go.


Phi. Why dearest, is thy love so quickly cold?


Leu. No, but i will not venture thee, thine is the danger,
Thou know it is death by law to steal an heir,
And my dear brothers most untimely death,
Has lately made me one, what if thou should be taken.

Phi. Oh fear not that, had I a thousand lives,
They were too small a venture for such prise,
I tell thee sweet, a face not half so fair
As thine, has armed whole actions in the field,
And brought a thousand ships to Tenedos,
To sack lamented Troy, and should I fear
To venture one poor life, and such a life
As would be lost in nor possessing thee:
Come come, make that no scruple, when shall we go.

Leu. This present evening, for to morrow morning
My father looks that I should give consent
To marry with the Count,

Phil. Best of all, would twere this present hour,
I Will go prepare, but shall I call thee here.

Leu. Oh no, we will meet.


Phi. Where dearest.


Leu. East from the City by a Rivers side,
Not distant half a mile there stands a grove,
Where often riding by I have observed
A little Hermitage, there I will stay
If I be first, if you, do you the like,
Let th'houre be ten, then shall I best escape.

Phi. Nere sweeter comfort came from Angels lips
I know the place, and will be ready there
Before the hour: I Will bring a friend with me
As true as mine own heart, one Clerimont,
That may do us good if danger happen.

Leu. Use your pleasure.


Phi. Dearest farewell,
Hours will seem years till we are met again. exeunt.

Pol. Ah Sirrah, this geere goes well, god a mercy girl
For thy intelligence, why this is as much as a
Man could desire, the time, place, and every thing;
I warrant vm they pass no further, well
Go thou in and wait upon thy Mistress, she is
Melancholy till she see her sweet heart again, but
When she does, she shall not see him long,
Not a word of what is past among us for your life.

Pse. I warrant you my Lord.


Pol. I Will not so much as show an angry look,
Or any token that I know any of their proceedings,
But Rosio, we must lay the place strongly, if they
Should escape us, I were pritily fooled now after all
This.

Ros. Why it is impossible my Lord, we will go
Strong enough, besides I think it fit we took
An Officer along with us to countenance it the
Better.

Pol. Thou say well, go get one,
I Will go my self along with you too, I love
To see sport though I am old, you will go
Along with us to Sir.

Eu. I Sir, you shall
Command my service when you are ready.

Pol. Now Euphues, what I did but barely act
Thy bleeding heart shall feel, loss of a son
If Law can have his course, as who can let it,
I know thou think mine dead, and in thy heart
Laughest at my falling house, but let them laugh
That win the prize, things nere are known till ended.

Exeunt. Pol. and Ros. Eugenio solus. Eug. Well I like my sisters choice, she
has taken a man
Whose very looks and carriage speak him
Worthy, besides he is Noble, his fortunes sufficient,
They both love each other, what can my father
More desire, that he gapes so after this old
Count* that comes for the estate, as the other upon
My soul does not, but pure spotless love, but
Now his plot is for revenge upon his old enemy:
Fie, Fie it is bloody and unchristian, my soul
Abhors such acts, this match may rather
Reconcile our houses, and I desire where worth
Is to have friendship, as on my soul it is there.
Well Philocles I hope to call thee brother.
Somewhat I Will do, I Will go persuade Count Virro
Not to love her, I know the way, and I Will but
Tell him truth her brother lives, that will
Cool his love quickly; but soft, here comes
The Count as fit as may be.

Enter Virro. Vir. She loves me not yet, but that is no matter,
I shall have her, her father says I shall,
And I dare take his word, maids are quickly
Ouer-rul'd, ah, ah, me thinks I am grown younger
Then I was by twenty years, this Fortune
Cast upon me, is better then Medeas charm, to
Make an old man young again, to have a
Lords estate freely bestowed, and with it such
A beauty as should warm Nectors blood,
Make old Priam lusty. Fortune I see thou love me
Now, I Will build a Temple to thee shortly, and
Adore thee as the greatest deity. Now what are you.

Euge. A poor Scholar my Lord, one that
Am little beholding to Fortune.

Vir. So are most of your profession,
Thou should t^ke some more thriuing
Occupation, to be a judges man, they are
The brauest now adays, or a Cardinals
Pander, that were ^ good profession and gainefull.

Euge. But not lawful, my Lord.


Verro. Lawful,
That Cardinal may come to be Pope, and
Then he could pardon thee and himself too.

Eu. My Lord I was brought up a Scholar.
And I thank your counsel, My
Lord, I have some for you, and therefore I
Came.

Vir. For me, what I prithee.


Eu. It Is weighty and concerns you near.


Vir. Speak, what is it?


Eu. My Lord, you are to marry old Polimetes Daughter.


Vir. And Heir.


Eu. No Heir
My Lord, her Brother is alive.

Vir. How, Thou art mad.


Eu. My Lord,
What I speak is true, and to my knowledge
His father gives it out in policy to marry his
Daughter the better, to hook in suitors, and
Specially aimed at you, thinking you rich
And covetous, and now he has caught you.

Vir. But do thou mock me.


Eu. Let me be ever miserable if I speak
Not truth, as sure as I am here Eugenio lives,
I know it, and know him, where he is.

Vir. Where prithee.


Eu. Not a days journey hence,
Where his father enioyn'd him to stay till your
Match, and sends word to him of this plot:
Besides, I ouer-hard the old Lord and his man
Roscio, laughing at you for being caught thus.

Vir. Why, were thou at the house then.

Eu. Yes, But had scuruy entertainment
Which I have thus revenged

Vir. Beshrew my heart I know not what
To think on it, til like enough, this Lord was
Always cunning beyond measure, and it
Amazed me that he should grow so exreme
Kind to me on the sudden to offer me all this:
Besides this fellow is so confident, and on
No ends of couznage that I can see; well,
I would feign enjoy her, the Wench is
Delicate, but I would have the estate too, and
not be guld, what shall I do, now brains
If ever you will, help your Master.

Eu. It stings him.

Vir. Well, so, Sir,
What may I call your name?

Eu. Irus my Lord.

Vir. Your name as well as your attire
Speakers you poor.

Eu. I am so.

Vir. And very poor.

Eu. Very poor.

Vir. Would you not gladly take a course
To get money, and a great some of money.

Eu. Is gladly if your Lordship would but
Show me the way.

Vir. Hark ye.

Eu. Oh my Lord, Conscience.

Vir. Fie, never
Talk of the Conscience, and for Law thou art
Free, for all men think him dead, and
His father will be ashamed to follow it
Having already given him for dead,
And then who can know it, come be wise,
Five hundredth crowns I Will give.

Eu. Well, it is poverty that does it, and not I,
When shall I be paid.

Vir. When thou have done it.

Eu. Well give me your
Hand for it my Lord

Vir. Thou shall.

Eu. In writing, to be paid when I have
Poisoned him, and think it done.

Vir. Now thou
But love has made me bold, the time has been,
In such a place as this I should have feared
Each rolling leaf, and trembled at a reed
Stird in the Mooneshine, my fearful fancy
Would frame a thousand apparisions,
And work some fear out of my very shadow:
I wonder Philocles is tardy thus,
When last we parted every hour, he said,
Would seem a year till we were met again,
It should not seem so by the have he makes
I Will sit and rest me, come I know he will.

Enter Philocles and Clerimont. Phi. This Clerimont this is the happy place
Where I shall meet the sum of all my joys,
And be possessed of such a treasury
As would enrich a Monarch.

Leu. This is his voice,
My Philocles.

Phi. My life, my soul, what here before me,
Oh thou do still out go me, and do make
All my endeauours poor in the requital
Of thy large favors, but I forget my self.
Sweet bid my friend here welcome, this is he
That I dare trust next mine own hearth with secrets.
But why art thou disguised thus.

Leu. I durst not venture else to make escape.

Phi. Even now me thinks I stand as I would wish
With all my wealth about me, such a love
And such a friend, what can be added more
To make a man live happy, thou dark grove
That have been called the seat of Melancholy,
And shelter for the discontented spirits;
Sure thou art wrong, thou seemst to me a place
Of solace and content, a Paradise
That give me more then ever Court could do
Or richest Palace, blessed be thy fair shades,
Let birds of music ever chant it here,
No croking Raven, or ill booding Owl
Make here their balefull hahitation
Frighting thy walks, but may thou be a grove
Where loves fair Queen may take delight to sport:
For under thee two faithful Lovers meet,
Why is my fair Leucothoe so sad.

Leu. I know no cause, but I would feign be gone.


Phi. Whether sweet.


Leu. Any whether from hen^e.
My thoughts divine of treason, whence I know not,
There is no creature knows our meeting here
But one, and that's my maid, she has been trusty
And will be still I hope, but yet I would
She did not know it, prithee lets away
Any where else, we are secure from danger.

Phi. Then lets remove, but prithee be not sad.
noise within. What noise is that.

Leu. Ay me.


Phi. Oh fear not Love. draw.


Eer Polimedes, Roscio, Eugenio and Officers. Pol. Upon vm Officers, yonder
they are.


Phi. Thieves, Villains.


Pol. Thou art the Thief and the Villain too,
Give me my Daughter thou rauisher.

Phi. First take my life.


Pol. Upon vm I say. fight.
Knock vm down Officers if they resist, they are taken.

Leu. Oh they are lost, ah wicked, wicked Psecas;

Pol. So keep vm fast, we will have vm faster shortly, and for you Minion, I Will
tie a clog about your neck for running away any more.


Leu. Yet do but hear me father.


Pol. Call me not father thou disobedient wretch,
Thou Runaway, thou art no child of mine,
My Daughter nere wore Breeches.

Leu. Oh Sir, my Mother would have done as much
For love of you, if need had so required,
Think not my mind transformed as my habit.

Pol. Officers away with vm, peace Stumpet,
You may discharge him, he is but an assistant.

Leu. Oh stay and hear me yet, hear but a word
And that my last it may be, do not spill
The life of him in whom my life subsists,
Kill not two lives in one, remember Sir,
I was your Daughter once, once you did love me,
And tell me then, what fault can be so great,
To make a father murderer of his child,
For so you are in taking of his life.
Oh think not Sir that I will stay behind him
Whilst there be Aspes, and Knives, and burning Coals*
No Roman dame shall in her great example
Outgoe my love.

Phi. Oh where will sorrow stay,
Is there no end in grief or in my death
Not punishment enough for my offense,
But must her grief be added to afflict me;
Dry up those Pearls dearest Leucothoe,
Or thou will make me doubly miserable,
Preserve that life, that I may after death
Live in my better part, take comfort dear,
People would curse me, if such beauty should
For me miscarry, no, live happy thou,
And let me suffer what the law inflicts.

Leu. My offense was as great as thine,
And why should not my punishment.

Pol. Come have you done, Officers away with him.
Exit Philocles. I Will be your keeper, but I Will look better to you.
But Rosy you and I must about the business:
sir let it be your charge to watch my Daughter,
And see she send no message any whither,
Nor receive any.

Eu. It shall my Lord. exeunt manet Eu. and Leu.
I Will be an Argus, none shall come here I warrant you,
My very heart bleedes to see two such lovers so
Faithfully parted so. I must condemn my father,
He Is too cruel in this hard action, and did not
Nature forbid it, I could rail at him, to reake
His long fostred malice against Lord Euphues thus
Upon his son, the faithful lover of his own
Daughter, and upon her, for should it come to pass
As he expects it shall, I think to would kill her
Too, she takes it --: See in what strange amazement
Now she stands, her grief has spent it self so
Far that it has left her senseless, it greeues
Me thus to see her, I can scarce forbear revealing
Of my self to her, but that I keep it for a
Better occasion when things shall better answer to
My purpose: Lady.

Leu. What are you.


Eu. In that my Lord your father has appointed
To give attendance on you.

Leu. On me, alas I need no attendance,
He might bestow his care better for me.

Eu. I came but lately to him, nor do I mean
Long to stay with him, in the mean time Lady
Might I but do you any service.

Leu. All service is too late, my hopes are deseperate.


Eu. Madame, I have a feeling of your woe,
A greater your own brother could not have,
And think not that I come suborned by any
To undermine your secrets, I am true,
By all the gods I am, for further trial
Command me any thing, send me on any message
I Will do it faithfully, or any thing else
That my poor power can compass.

Leu. Oh strange fate
Have I lost pity in a fathers heart,
And shall I find it in a stranger: Sir
I shall not live to thank you, but my prayers
Shall go with you.

Eu. It Is not for thanks or need
But for the service that I owe to virtue
I would do this.

Leu. Surely this man
Is nobly bred, how ere his habit give him:
But Sir, all physic comes to me too late,
There is no hope my Philocles should live*

Eu. Unless the King were pleased to grant his pardon,
Twe're good that he were moved.

Leu. Ah who should do it,
I fear me it is in vain, Count Virro
And my father both will cross it, but I would venture
If I could get but thither.

Eu. That's in my power
To give you liberty, your father left me
To be your keeper, but in an act
So meritorious as this, I will not hinder you,
Nay I will wait upon you to the Court.

Leu. A thousand thanks to you, well i will go,
Grant oh you powers above, if Virgins tears,
If a true loves prayers had ever power
To move compassion grant it now to me,
Armed with so strong a vigor, my weak words
They may pierce deep into his kingly breast,
And force out mercy in spite of all opposers.

Eu. Come lets away. exeunt.


Actus quartus.
Enter Francisco reading a letter. Fran. MY dearest Luce, were thy old Sire as
just
As thou art truly constant, our firm love
Had never met these oppositions,
All my designs as yet, all practices
That I have used, I see are frustrated,
For as my fair intelligencer writes,
He will before the next court day provide
Some careless person* that in spite of laws
Shall marry her to Shallow, this being done,
He means to hold the Cou^ts severity
To by a golden bit, and so he may,
Al^^ it is too true, I must prevent it,
And that in time, before it grow too far;
But how, there lies the point of difficulty:
But what strange sight is this that greetes mine eyes,
Alphonso my old Captain, sure it is he.

Enter Al^phonso. Al. Thus once again from twenty years exile,
Tossed by the storms of fortune too and fro,
Has gracious heaven given me leave to tread
My native earth of Sicily and draw
That air that fed me in my infancy.

Fr. It Is he, most noble Captain, oh what power
Has been so gracious as to bless mine eyes
Once more with sight of my most honored master.

Al. Kind y^uth the tears of joy that I have spent
To greet my native country have quite robbed
Mine eyes of moisture, and have left me none
To answer thy affection, but tell me,
Tell me how thou have lived in Syracuse
These five years here, since that vnluckly storm
Divided us at Sea.

Fr. Faith poorly Sir,
As one that knows no kindred nor alliance,
Unknown of any have I shifted out,
But I have heard you say that I was borne
In Syracuse, tell me what stock I come of,
What parentage, how mean so ere they be,
They cannon well be poorer then my self,
Speak, do you know them Sir?

Al. Yes very well,
And I am glad the fates have brought me home,
For thy dear sake, that I may now disclose
Thy honorable birth.

Fr. Honorable?


Al. Yes noble youth, thou art the second son
To old Lord Euphues, a man more worthy
And truly noble never drew this air;
Thy name's Lysandro, this discovery
Will be as welcome to your friends as you.

Fr. You do amaze me Sir.


Al. I Will tell you all,
It was my fortune, twenty a year ago,
Upon the Tyrrhene shore, whose sea diuides
This I Will from Italy, to keep a fort
Under your noble father, where your self
Then but a child, was left to my tuition,
When suddenly the rude assailing force
Of strong Italian Pirates so preuaild,
As to surprisall of the fort and us.
Your name and noble birth I then conceald,
Fearing some outrage from the enmity
Of those fell Pirates, and since from your self
I purposely have kept the knowlenge of it.
As loath to grieve your present misery
With knowledge of what fortunes you had lost,
That this is true, you straight shall see the effect,
I Will go acquaint your father with the tokens,
And make his oreioyde heart leap to embrace
Thee his new found and long forgotten son:

Fr. Worthy Captain, your presence was always
Welcome to me, but this unlooked for news, I
Cannot suddenly digest.

Al. Well I Will go to him presently. exit Alphonso.


Fr. Now my dear Luce, I shall find means to quite
Thy love, that could descend so low as I
When I was nothing, and with such affection,
This was my suit still to the powers above,
To make me worthy of thy constant love.
Exit Francisco. But i will about the project I intended.

Enter Virro and Polimetes. Pol. Why now my Lord you are nearer to her love
then ever you were yet, your rival by this accident shall be removed out of
the way, for before the scorneful girl would never fancy any man else.


Vir. I conceive you Sir.


Pol. I labourd it for your sake as much as for my
Own, to remove your rival and my enemy, you
Have your love, and I have my revenge.

Vir. I shall live my Lord to give you thanks, but aside.
It Will be after a strange manner, if Irus has
Dispatched what he was hired too, then my kind
Lord I shall be a little too cunning for you.

Pol. My Lord you are gracious with the King.


Vir. I thank his Majesty, I have his care before another man.


Pol. Then see no pardon be granted, you may stop any thing; I knew Euphues
will be soliciting for his son.


Vir. I warrant you my Lord no pardon passes whilst I am there, i will be a bar
betwixt him and the King, but hark the King approaches.


Enter the King with attendants. Ambo. Health to your Majesty.


King. Count Virro, and Lord Polimetes welcome,
You have been strangers at the Court of late;
But I can well excuse you Count, you are about a wife,
A young one and a fair one too they say,
Get me young soldiers Count, but speak
When is the day, I mean to be your guest,
You shall not steal a martiage.

Vir. I thank your Majesty, but the marriage that I intended is stolen to my
hand, and by another.


King. Stolen, how man.


Vir. My promised wife
Is lately stolen away by Philocles,
Lord Euphues son against her fathers will,
Who followed vm and apprehended them,
The Law may right us Sir, if it may have course.

King. No reason but the law should have his course.


Enter Euphues. Euph. Pardon dread Sovereign, pardon for my son.


King. Your son, Lord Euphues, what is his offense.


Euph. No heinous one my Liege, no plot of treason
Against your royal person or your state,
These aged cheeks would blush to beg a pardon
For such a foul offense, no crying murder
Has steyned his innocent hands, his fault was love,
Love my dear Liege, unfortunately he took
The Daughter and Heir of Lord Polimetes,
Who follows him and seeks exstremity.

Pol. I seek but Law, I am abused my Liege,
Justice is all I beg, my Daughters stolen,
Staff of my age, let the law do me right,

Vir. To his just prayers do I bend my knee
My promised wife is stolen, and by the son
Of that injurious Lord, justice I crave.

Euph. Be like those powers above, whose place on earth
You represent, show mercy gracious King,
For they are merciful.

Pol. Mercy is but the Kings prerogative,
It Is Justice is his office, doing that
He can wrong no man, no man can complain,
But mercy showed often takes way relief
From the wronged party that the Law would give him:

Eup. The Law is blind and speaks in general terms,
She cannot pity where occasion serves,
The living law can moderate her rigor,
And that's the King.

Pol. The King I hope in this will not do so,

Eup. It Is malice makes thee speak,
Hard hearted Lord, had thou no other way
To wreake thy cankred and long fostred hate
Upon my he^d but thus, thus bloudily
By my sons suffering, and for such a fault
As thou should love him rather, is thy daughter
Disparaged by his love, is his blood base,
Or are his fortunes sunk, this law was made
For such like cautions, to restrain the base
From wronging noble persons by attempts
Of such a kind, but where equality
Meets in the match, the fault is pardonable.

Leu. Mercy my Sovereign, mercy gracious King.


Pol. Minion who sent for you, twere more modesty
For you to be at home.

King. Let her alone, speak Lady,
I charge you no man interupt her. Enter Leucothoe

Leu. If ever pity touched that princely breast,
If ever Virgins tears had power to move,
Or if you ever loved and felt the pangs
That other lovers do, pity great King,
Pity and pardon two unhappy Lovers.

King. Your life is not in question.


Leu. Yes royal Sir
If Law condemn my Philocles, he and I
Have but one heart, and can have but one fate.

Eu. Excellent virtue thou had not this from thy father.


King. There Is Music in her voice, and in her face
More then a mortal beauty* Oh my heart,
I shall be lost in passion if I hear her,
I Will here no more, convey her from my presence,
Quickly I say.

Eu. This is strange.


Vir. I told you what he would do, I knew
He would not here of a pardon, and I against it,
He respects me.

Pol. No doubt he does my Lord*
I like this passage well.

King. But stay,
Stay Lady, let me hear you, beshrew my heart
My mind was running of another matter.

Vir. Where the devil has his mind bin all this while,
Perhaps he heard none of us neither,
We may eene tell our tales again.

Pol. No sure he heard us, but it is very strange.


King. It Is such a tempting poison I draw in,
I cannot stay my draught, rise up Lady.

Leu. Never until your graces pardon raise me,
There Is pity in your eye, oh show it Sir,
Say Pardon gracious King, it is but a word
And short, but welcome as the breath of life.

King. I Will further here the manner of this fact,
Avoid the presence all, all but the Lady,
And come not till I send.

Pol. I like not this.


Vir. Nor I here is mad dancing.


Eu. Heaven bless thy suit thou mirror of thy sex,
And best example of true constant love,
That in the Sea of thy transcendent virtues
Drown'st all thy fathers malice, and redeem'st
More in my thoughts then all thy kin can lose. exeunt.

King. Now Lady what would you do to save the life
Of him you love so dearly.

Leu. I cannot think that thought I would not do,
Lay it in my power, and beyond my power
I would attempt.

King. You would be thankful then
To me if I should grant his pardon.

Leu. If ever I were thankful to the gods
For all that I call mine, my health and being,
Could I to you be unthankful for a gift
I value more then those, without which
These blessings were but wearisome.

King. Those that are thankful study to requite
A courtesy, would you do so? would you requite
This favor*

Leu. I cannot Sir,
For all the service I can do your Grace
Is but my duty, you are my Sovereign,
And all my deeds to you are debts not merits,
But to those powers above that can requite,
That from their vastlesse treasures hope rewards,
More out of grace then merit on us mortals,
To those i will ever pray that they would give you
More blessings then I have skill to ask.

King. Nay but Leucothoe, this lies in thy power to requite, thy love will make
requital, will thou love me?


Leu. I ever did my Lord.
I was instructed from my infancy,
To love and honor you my Sovereign.

King. But in a nearer bond of love.


Leu. There is no nearer nor no truer love
Then that a loyal subject bears a Prince.

King. Still thou will not conceive me* I must deal plain
With you, will thou lie with me, and I will seal his
Pardon presently; nay more, ile^heape upon you
Both all favors, all honors that a Prince can give.

Leu. Oh me unhappy, in what a sad dilemma stands my choice.
Either to lose the man my soul most loves,
Or save him by a deed of such dishonor
As he will ever loath me for, and hate
To draw that breath that was so basely kept.
Name any thing but that to save his life,
I know you do but tempt my frailty Sir,
I know your royal thoughts could never stoop
^o such a soul dishonorable act.

King. Bethink your self, there is no way but that,
I swear by Heaven never to pardon him
But upon those conditions.

Leu. Oh I am miserable.


King. Thou art not if not wilful, yield Leucothoe,
It shall be secret, Philocles for his life
Shall thank thy love, but never know the price
Thou paidst for it; be wise thou heardst me swear,
I cannot now show mercy, thou may save him,
And if he dye, it is thou that art the Tyrant.

Leu. I should be so if I should save him thus,
Nay I should be a Traitor to your grace,
Betray your soul to such a foe as lust,
But since your oath is past, dear Philocles
I Will show to thee an honest cruelty,
And rather follow thee in spotless death,
Then buy with sinning a dishonored life.

King. Yet pity me Leucothoe, cure the wound
Thine eyes has made, pity a begging King,
Vncharme the charms of thy bewitching face,
Or thou will leave me dead: will nothing move thee,
Thou art a Witch, a Traitor, thou have sought
By unresisted spells thy sovereigns life:
Who are about us there, call in the Lords again,
Lord Pol^^^tes, take your daughter to you,
Keep her at home.

Pol. I will my Liege, Rosio see her there I wonder what is done.


King. Euphues I have taken a solemn oath
Never to grant a pardon to thy s^nne.

Euph. O say not so my Liege, your grace I know
Has mercy for a greater fault then this.

King. My oath is past and cannot be recalled.


Pol. This is beyond our wishes.


Vir. What made him swear this I wonder.


Euph. A heavy oath to me and most unlooked for,
Your justice Sir has set the period
Unto a loyal house, a Family
That have bin props of the Sicylian crown,
That with their bloods in many an honored field,
Against the hot French, and Neopolitan
Have served for you and your great Ancestors,
Their children now can never more do so,
Farewell my Sovereign, whilst I in tears
Spend the s^d rem^an^ of my childlesse age,
I Will pray for your long life and happy reign,
And may your Grace and your Posterity
At need find hands as good and hearts as true
As ours have ever been.

King. Farewell good old man.


Eup. For you my Lord, your cruelty has deserved
A c^rse from me, but I can utter none,
Your Daughters goodness has weighed down your malice
Heaven prosper her.

Poly. Amen.


King. He is an honest man and truly noble,
Oh my rash oath, my lust, that was the cause,
Would any price would buy it in again.

Vi. Your Majesty is just.


Pol. It Is a happy Land
Where the King squares his actions by the law.

King. Away, you are base and bloody,
That feeds your malice with pretense of justice,
It Is such as you make Princes tirranous,
And hated of their subjects, but look to it,
Look your own heads stands fast for if the law
Do find a hole in your coats, beg no mercy.

Vir. Pardon us my Lord, we were wronged.


Pol. And sought redress but by a lawful course.


King. Well leave me alone.


Vir. Fare well my Liege, now let him chafe alone.


Pol. Now we have our ends. exeunt.


King. Is there no means to save him no way,
To g^^ a dispensation for an oath,
(...) that I know except the Court of Rome
Will grant one, that's well thought on,
I will not spare for gold, and that will do it,
Nicanor.

Nica. Sir.


King. What book is that
Thou had from Paris about the price of sins.

Nic. It Is called the Texes of the Apostolical Chancery.


Kin. Is there a price for any sin set down.


Nic. A my Sir, how heinous ere it be,
Or of what nature, for such a sum of money
As is set down there, it shall be remitted

Kin. That's well, go fetch the book presently. exit Nic.


Nic. I will my Lord.


Kin. Sure there is perjury
Among the rest, and I shall know what rate
It bears before I have committed it.
How now have brought it.

Nic. Yes Sir.


Kin. Read, I would know the price of perjury,

Nic I shall find it quickly, here is an Index. he reads Imp. For murder of all
kinds of a Clergy man, of a lay man, of father, mother, Son, brother, sister,
wife.


Kin. Read till you come at perjury.


Nic. Item, for impoysoning, enchantments, witchcraft,
Sacrilege, simony, and their kind and
Branches. Item, pro lapsu carnis, fornication
Adultery, incest without any exception or
Distinction; for sodomy, Brutality, or any of
That kind.

Kin. My heart shakes with horror
To hear the names of such detested sins,
Can these be bought for any price of money,
Or do these merchants but deceive the world
With their false Wares* no more of that foul book,
I will know what I came to know,
I would not for the world redeem my oath
By such a c^urse as this, no more Nicanor
Unless thou find a price for Atheism.

Nic. Here Is none for that my Lord, his Holiness
Can pardon that in no man but himself.

Kin. Well this is not the way,
I have thought of another that may prove,
And both discharge my oath and save his life,
Nicanor run presently, call Matho hither,
Matho the Lawyer, command him to make have,
I long to be resolved.

Nic. I run Sir.


King. He is a subtle Lawyer, and may find
Some point, that in the Laws obscurity
^ee hid from us, some point may do us good,
I have seen some of his profession
Out of case as plain, as clear as day
To our weak judgments, and no doubt at first
Meant like our thoughts by those that made the Law,
Pick out such hard inextricable doubts,
That they have spun a suit of seven year long,
And lead their hood wink Clients in a wood,
A most irremoueable Labyrinth,
Till they have quite consumed vm, this they can do
In other cases, why not as well in this.
I have seen others could extend the Law
Upon the wrack, or cut it short again
To their own private profits, as that thief
Cruel Procrustes served his hapless guests,
To fi^ them to his bed; Well I shall see,
I would Nicanor were returned again,
I would feign ease my conscience of that oath,
That rash and inconsiderate oath I took,
But see, here they are coming. Enter Matho.

Ma. Health to my Sovereign.


King. Matho, welcome.
I sent for thee about a business
I would entreat thy help in.

Ma. Your Highness may command my service
In that, or any thing lies in my power.

King. It Is to decide a case that troubles me.


Ma. If it lie within the compass of my knowledge,
I will resolve your Highness presently.

King. Then thus it is, Lord Euphues son,
Young Philocles, has lately stolen away
The Daughter and Heir of Lord Polimetes,
Who is his enemy, he following him hard
Has apprehended him, and brings him to his trial
To morrow morning: thou have heard this news.

Ma. I have my Liege, and every circumstance
That can be thought on in the business.

King. And what will be the issue by the Law.


Ma. He must dye for it, the case is plain,
Unless your grace will grant his pardon.

King. But can there be no means thought upon
To save him by the Law.

Matho. None my Lord.


King. Surely there may, speak man, I Will give thee
Double Fees.

Ma. It cannot be my Liege, the Statutes is plain.


King. Nay now thou art too honest, thou should do
As other Lawyers do, first take my money,
And then tell me thou can do me good.

Ma. I dare not undertake it, could it be done,
I Would go as far as any man would do.

King. Yes if twere to cut a poor man's throat you could,
For some rich griping Landlord you could grin'd
The face of his poor Tenant, stretch the Law
To serve his turn, and guided by his Angels,
Speak Oracles more then the tongues of men,
Then you could find exceptions, reseruations,
Stand at a word, a silible, a letter,
Or coin some scruples out of your own brains,
But in a cause so full of equity
So charitable as this, you can find nothing,
I shall for ever hate all your profession.

Ma. I do beseech your Highness to excuse me,
I cannot do more then your laws will let me,
Nor falsify my knowledge nor my conscience.

King. Then I am miserable, rise Matho rise,
I do not discommend thy honesty,
But blame my own hard fate, ay Philocles
I would redeem thy life at any price,
But the Stars cross it, cruel fate condemns thee.

Exeunt. Enter Constable and Watch. Con. Come fellow watchmen, for now you are
my fellows,

Watch. I^ pleases you to call us so master Constable.


Con. I do it to encourage you in your office, it is a trick that we
commanders have, your great Captains call your soldiers fellow soldiers to
encourage them.


2. Watch. Indeed and so they do, I heard master Curate trading a story book
the other day to that purpose.


Con. Well I must show now what you have to do, for I my self before I came to
this prefermity, was as simple as one of you, and for your better destruction,
I will deride my speech into two parts. First, what is a watchman. Secondly,
what is the office of a watchman. For the first, fany man ask me what is a
watchman, I may answer him, he is a man as others are, nay a tradesman, as a
Vintner, a Tailor, or the like, for they have long bills.


^. Wat. He tells us true neighbor, we have bills indeed.


Con. For the second, what is his office; I answer, he may by virtue of his
office reprehend any person, or persons, that w^lke the streets too late at a
seasonable hour.


4. Wat may we indeed master Constable.


Con. Nay, if you meet any of those rogues at seasonable hours, you may by
virtue of your office commit him to prison, and then ask him whither he was
going.


^. Watch. Why that's as much as my Lord Mayor does.


Con. True, my Lord Mayor can do no more then you in that point.


2. Wat. But master constable what if he should resist us.


Con. Why if he do resist, you may knock him down, and then ^id him stand,
and come before the Constable. So (...) you are sufficiently cnstructed
concerning you office take your stands, you shall hear rogues walking at these
seasonable hours, I warrant you, stand close.


Enter Eugenio. Purpose, now do I take as much care to be apprehended,
As others do to escape the watch, I must speak
To be ouerheard, and plainly too, or else these dolts
Will never conceive me.

Con. Hark who goes by?


Eu. Oh my conscience, my conscience, the teror of a Guilty conscience.


Con. How, conscience talks he of,
He Is an honest man, I warant him, let him pass

2. Wa. I I, let him pass, good night honest gentleman.


Eu. These are wise officers, I must be plainer yet.
That gold, that cursed gold, that made me poison him
Made me poison Eugenio.

Con. How made me poison him, he is a knave I warrant him.


3. Wa. M. Constable has found him already,

Con. I warant you a knave cannot pass me, go reprehend him, I Will take his
excommunication my self.


1. Wa. Come before the constable

2. Wa. Come before the Constable.


Con. Sirrah, sirrah, you would have escaped
Would you, no sirrah you shall know the Kings
Officers have eyes to hear such roagues as you,
Come sirrah, confess who it was you poisoned, he
Looks like a notable rogue.

1. Wa. I do not like
His looks.

2. Wa. nor I.


Con. You would deny it
Would you sir, we shall sift you,

Eu. Alas master

Con. I cannot now deny what I have said
You over heard me, I poisoned Eugenio son to
Lord Polimetes.

1. Wa. Oh rascal.


2. Wa. my
Young Landlord.

Con. Let him alone, the law
Shall punish him, but sir where did you poison
Him.

Eu. About a days journey hence, as he was
Coming hom from Athens I met him, and
Poisoned him.

Con. But sirrah who set you a work
Confess, I shall find out the whole ne^^ of there
Rogues, speak.

Eu. Count Virro hired me to do it.


Con. Oh lying Rascal.


1. Wat. Nay he that will steal will lie.


2. Wat. I Will believe nothing he says.


3. Wat. Be lie a man of worship.


4. Wat. A noble man

Con. Away with him, I Will hear no more, remit him to
Prison; Sirrah, you shall hear of these things
To morrow, where you would be loath to hear vm.
Come lets go. exeunt.

Actus quintus.
Enter Franklin, Shallow, Luce, Francisco in a Parsons habit, and a true Parson
otherwise attyred. Frank. I Will take your counsel Sir, I Will not be seen in it,
but meet you when it is done, you will marry them.


Fran. Fear not that Sir, I Will do the deed.


Frank. I shall rest thankful to you, till then I Will leave you.


Sha. I pray father leave us, we know how to behave our selves alone, me
thinks Luce we are too many by two yet.


Luce. You are merry Sir. exeunt manet Franklin.


Frank. Now they are sure or never, poor Francisco
Thou metst thy match, when thou durst undertake
To ouerreach me with tricks, where is now your Sumner?
Fore heaven I cannot but applaud my brain,
To take my daughter even against her will,
And great with child by another, her shame published,
She cited to the Court, and yet bestow her
On such a fortune as rich Shallow is,
Nay that which is the Masterpiece of all,
Make him believe it is his, though he nere touched her,
If men nere met with crosses in the world,
There were no difference twixt the wise and fools,
(...) i will go meet vm, when it is done, I fear not. exit.

Enter Francisco, Parson, Shallow, Luce. Fran. Nay fret not now, you have been
worse abusd
If you had married her, she never loved you.

Luce. I ever scorned thy folly and hated thee, though
Sometimes before my father I would make an Ass
Of thee.

Shall. Oh women, monstrous women,
Little does her father know who has married her.

Luce. Yes, he knows the Parson married me,
And you can witness that.

Fran. And he shall know the Parson will lie with her.


Shall. Well Parson, I will be revenged on all thy coat,
I will not plough an Acre of ground for you to
Tyth, I Will rather pasture my neighbors cattle
For nothing.

Par. Oh be more charitable Sir, bid God give vm joy.


Shall. I care not greatly if I do, he is not the first
Parson that has taken a gentleman's leauings.

Fran. How mean you Sir?


Shall. You guess my meaning, I hope to have good luck
To horseflesh now she is a Parsons wife.

Fran. You have lain with her then Sir.


Shall. I cannot tell you that, but if you saw a woman with child without lying
with a man, then perhaps I have not.


Luce. Impudent Coxcombe, dare thou say that ever thou layst with me, did
thou ever so much as kiss my hand in private.


Shall. These things must not be spoken of in company.


Luce. Thou know I ever hated thee.


Shall. But when you were in the good humor you would tell me another tale.


Luce. The fool is mad, by heaven my Francisco I am wronged. He discouers
himself.


Fran. Then I must change my note, sirrah, unsay
What you have spoken, swear here before
The Parson and my self, you never touched her, or
I Will cut thy throat, it is Francisco threatens thee.

Shall. I am in a sweet case, what should I do now, h^^
Father thinks I have lain with her, if I deny it
Heel have about with me, if I say I have, this
Young rogue will cut my throat.

Fran. Come will you swear.


Shall. I would I were fairly off, I would lose my wench with all my heart, I
swear.


Fran. So, now thou art free from any imputation that his tongue can stick upon
thee.


Enter Franklin. Frank. Well now I see it is do^e.


Shall. Here Is one
Shall (...) with you.

Frank. God give you joy son
^

Fran. I thank you father.


Frank. How'^ this, Francisco in the Parsons habit,

Fran I have married her as you bad me Sir, but this
Was the truer Parson of the two, he tied the
(...) and this Gentleman is our witness*

(...) (...) undone, Strumpet thou have betrayed thy (...) beggary, to shame
beside^, and that in open Court, (...) what thou have sought, hang, beg, and
starve, i will (...).


(...) Good Sir.


S^^l. I told you what would come on it.


(...) How did your wisdom lose her?


(...) (...) you see* I was beguild, and so were you.


(...) (...) take her, thou see the portion thou art like ^o have.


Fran. It Is such a portion as will ever please (...) for her sake be not
unnatural.


(...) Do not reject me father.


Fran. But for the fault (...) were for, or shame she should endure in (...),
behold her yet an untouched Virgin, Cushion come (...) Shallow, take your child
unto you, make (...) prove as wise as the father.


Hosting^ the Cushion at him. Frank This is more strange then ^^ther, ah Luce,
we^^
(...) so subtle to deceive thy self, and me; well
(...), it is thine own choice.

(...) Sir we can force no bounty from you, and there^^^^ must rest content
with what your pleasure is.


Enter Euphues, Alphonso. (...) (...) he is my Lord, that is he in the Parsons
(...) thus disguisd about the business I told you of Lysandro, see your noble
father.


Eu. Welcome my long lost son from all the storms
Of frowning fortune that thou have endured
Into thy fathers arms.

Luce. I^ my Francisco noble.


Frank. Lord Euphues son, I am amazed.


Eup. I hear Lysandro that you are married.


Francisco. Yes my Lord, this is my Bride, the Daughter and Heir of this rich
Gentleman, it was only she that when my state was nothing, my poor self and
Parentage unknown, vouchsaf't to know, nay grace me with her love, her
constant love.


Euph. Such merit must not be forgot my son,
Daughter much joy attend upon your choice.

Fran. Now wants but your consent.


Frank. Which with a willing heart I do bestow,
Pardon me worthy son, I have so long
Been hard to you, it was ignorance
Of what you were, and care I took for her.

Fran. Your care ^^edes no Apo^ogy.


Euph. But now Lysandro I must make thee sad
Upon thy wedding day, and let thee know
There is no pure and uncompounded joy
Lent to (...), in depth of woe
Thou (...) the knowledge of thy parentage,
Thy elder (...) Philocles must dye,
And (...), our name and house
Had (...) ever, had not gracious heaven
Sent as a (...) to my (...) age,
Thy long lost self supporter of the name.

Franc. But can there ^e no means to save his life.


Euph. (...) none, the King has taken an oath
Never to (...) him, but since they say
His (...) r^pents, and feign would save him.

Fran^, Then (...) wretched, like a man long blind,
That comes at last (...) see the wished for son,
But find it in eclipse, such is my case,
To meet in this dark woe my dearest friends,

Eu. Had you not heard this news before Lysandro?


Fran. Yes Sir, and did lament,
As for a worthy stranger, but nere knew
My sorrow stood engaged by such a tie
As brotherhood, where may we see him Sir?

Eu. This morning he is arraigned, put of that habit
You are in, and go along with me, leave your
Friends hear awhile.

Fran. Farewell father,
Dear Luce till soon farewell, naught but so sad
A chance, could make me cloudy now. Exeunt

Frank: Well Luce thy choice has proved better then we
Expected, but this cloud of grief has dimde
Our mirth, but will I hope blow over,
Heaven grant it may.
And signior Shallow, though you have mist what
My love meant you once, pray be my guest.

Shall. I thank you Sir, I Will not be strange. Exeunt


Enter King, Nicanor. King. Nicanor, I would find some privy place
Where I might stand unseen, unknown of any,
To hear the arraignment of young Philocles.

Ni. The Judges are now entering, please you Sir
Here to ascend, you may both hear and see.

King. Well I Will go up,
And like a jealous husband here and see
That that will strike me dead, am I a King
And cannot pardon such a small offense,
I cannot do it, nor am I Caesar now,
Lust ha^ vncrown'd me, and my rash taken oath
H^s (...) of a Kings prerogative,
Come come Nicanor, help me to ascend,
And ^ee that fault that I want power to mend. Ascendant

(...)* Judges, Virro, Polimetes, Euphues, Francisco, Leucothoe, Clerimont,
Roscio. 1. Iu. Bring forth the prisoner, where are the witnesses?


Pol. Here my Lords, I am the wronged party,
And the fact my man, here besides the Officers
That took them can justify.

2. Iu. That Is enough.


Enter Philocles with a guard. 1. Iu. Philocles stand to the Bar, and answer
to such
Crimes as shall be here objected against thy life.
Read the enditement.

Phi. Spare that labor,
I do confess the fact that I am charged with,
And speak as much as my accusers can,
As much as all the witnesses can prove,
It Was I that stole away the Daughter and Heir
Of the Lord Polimetes, which were to do again
Rather then lose her, I again would venture,
This was the fact, your sentence honored fathers.

Cler. It Is brave and resolute.


1. Iu. A heavy sentence noble Philocles,
And such a one, as I could wish my self
Off from this place, some other might deliver,
You must dye for it, death is your sentence.

Phi. Which I embrace with willingness, now my Lord, to Pol.
Is your hate glutted yet, or is my life
Too poor a sacrifice to appease the rancor
Of your inueterate malice, if it be to
Invent some scandal that may after blot
My reputation, father dry your tears,
Weep not for me, my death shall leave no stain
Upon your blood, nor blot on your fair name*
The honored ashes of my ancestors
May still rest quiet in their tear wet Vrnes
For any fact of mine, I might have lived
If heaven had not prevented it, and found
Death for some foul dishonorable act.
Brother farewell, no sooner have I found to Francisco
But I must leave thy wished for company.
Farewell my dearest love, live thou still happy,
And may some one of more desert then I,
Be blessed in the enjoying what I loose,
I need not wish him happiness that has thee,
For (...) bring it may he prove as good
(...) worthy.

(...) dearest Philocles,
(...) for any man but thee
(...) good my Lords
(...) both together
(...) alike, why should the law
(...) and lay it all on him,
(...) would we could as lawfully
(...) he should not dye for this,
(...) Constable leading Eugenio. (...), whose that you have brought there?
(...) A benefactor, if it please your Lordships,
(...) him in my watch last night.
^

(...) Wha^'s his offense?


Con, murder.


(...) No master Constable, it was but poisoning of a man.


(...) (...) a fool.


(...) (...) for ever, all will out.


(...) What proofs have you against him?


(...) His own profession if it please your honor.


(...) And (...) ill profession, to be a murderer, thou
(...) has confe^^ the fact.

(...). Yes my Lord, he cannot deny it.


(...) Did he not name the party who it was that he had (...)


Con. marry with reuerance be it spoken.
(...) my Lord Polimetes his son.

(...) How Is this

1. Iu He di'd long sense at Athens.


(...) I cannot tell what I should think of it,
(...) the man that lately brought me news
^

(...) (...) to the bar, thou (...) thy accusation
(...) say.

Eug. Ah my good Lord,
(...) deny what I have said,
(...), as my bleeding heart
Was making confession of my crime.

C^n. I told him an^ shall please your Lordships
(...) Kings officers had eyes to hear such rascals.

1. Iu. You have bin careful in your office Constable,
You may now leave your Prisoner,

Con. I Will leave the fell on with your Lordship.


1. Iu. Farewell good

Con. Murder I see will out. exit Con.
Why did thou poison him.

Eug. I was poor,
And want made me be hired.

2. Iu. Hired, by whom?


Eu. By Count Virro,
There he stands.

Vir. I do beseech your Lordships not to credit
What this base fellow speaks, I am innocent.

1. Iu. I do believe you are, sirrah speak truth,
You have not long to live.

Eu. Please it your Lordship
I may relate the manner.

3. Iu. do.


Eug. Eugenio was alive when first the news
Was spread in Syracuse he was dead,
Which false report Count Virro crediting,
Became an earnest suitor to his Sister
Thinking her Heir, but finding afterward
Her brother lived, and coming home
Not a days journey hence, he sent me to him,
And with a promise of five hundred crowns
Hired me to poison him, that this is true
Here Is his own hand to witness it against him,
Please it your Lordships to peruse the writing.

1. Iu. This is his hand.


2. Iu. Sure as I live,
I have seen Warrants from him with just these
Carracters.

3. Iu. Besides me thinks this fellows
Tale is likely.

Pol. It Is too true,
This fellows sudden going from my house
Put me into a fear.

1. Iu. Count Virro, stand to the bar,
What can you say to clear you of this murder?

Vir. Nothing my Lords, I must confess the fact.


2. Iu. Why then against you both do I pronounce.
Sentence of death.

Amb. The Law is just.


Pol. Wretch that I am, is my dissembled grief
Turned to true sorrow, were my acted tears
But Prophesies of my ensuing woe,
And is he truly dead. oh pardon me
De^ie Ghost of my Eugenio, it was my fault
That called this hasty vengeance from the Gods,
And shortened thus thy life, for whilst with tricks
^^ought to fasten wealth upon our house,
^^rought a Canniball to be the grave
Of me and mine, base bloody murderous Count.

V^r. Vile Cousner, cheating Lord, dissembler.


^. Iu. Peace, stop the mouth of malediction there,
This is no place to rail in.

(...) Ye just powers,
^^at to the quality of man's offense,
^ ^^pe your correcting rods, and punish there
Where he has sinned, did not my bleeding heart
(...) such a heavy share in this days woe,
^ could with a free soul applaud your justice.

Pol. Lord Euphues and Philocles forgive me
To make amends, I know's impossible
For what my malice wrought, but I would feign
(...) that might testify my grief
(...) repentance.

Eu. This is that I looked for.


(...) Y^^re kind too late my Lord, had you bin thus
(...) required, you had saved your self and me,
(...) sons, but if your grief be true
(...) you heartily.

Phi. And I,

(...) Now comes my que, my Lord Polimetes,
(...) correction let me ask one question.

(...) What question? speak.


Eu. if this young Lord
(...), would you bestow your Daughter
(...) upon him, would you Lord?

(...) As willingly as I would breath my self.


(...) Then dry all your eyes,
(...) hear shall have a cause to week, to Phil.
(...), Leucothoe is no Heir,
(...) lives, and that cleares you Count Virro
(...) murder.

All. How, lives?


Eu. Yes lives to call thee brother Philocles.


He discouers himself. Leu. Oh my dear Brother.


Pol. My son,
Welcome from death.

Eu. Pardon me good my Lord that I thus long
Have from your knowledge kept my self concealed,
My end was honest.

Pol. I see it was,
And now son Philocles give me thy hand,
Here take thy wife, she loves thee I dare swear,
And for the wrong that I intended thee,
Her portion shall be double what I meant it.

Phi. I thank your Lordship.


Pol. Brother Euphues,
I hope all enmity is now forgot
Betwixt our houses.

Eu. Let it be ever so, I do embrace your love.


Vir. Well my life is saved yet, though my wench be lost,
God give you joy.

Phi. Thanks good my Lord.


1. Iu. How suddenly this tragic scene is charged,
And turned to Comedy

2. Iu. It Is very strange. The King speaks from (...)


Pol. Let us conclude within.


King. Stay,
And take my joy with you.

Eup. His Majesty
Is coming down, let us attend. Enter King.

King. These iarres are well closed up, now Philocles,
What my rash oath deni'de me, this blessed how^e
And happy accident has brought to pass,
The saving of thy life.

Phi. A life my Liege,
That shall be ever ready to be spent
Upon your service.

King. Thanks good Philocles,
But where is the man whose happy presence brought
All this unlooked for sport: where is Eugenio?

Eu. Here my dread Liege.


King. Welcome to (...)
Welcome Eugenio, prithee ask some boon
That may requite the good that thou have done.

Eu. I thank your Majesty, what I have done
Needs no requital, but I have a suite
Unto Lord Euphues, please it your Majesty
To be to him an inte^cessor for me,
I make no question but I shall obtain.

King. What is it? speak, it shall be granted thee.


Eu. That it would please him to bestow on me
His Niece, the fair and virtuous Lady Laeda.

Euph. With all my heart, I know 'twill please her well,
I have often heard her praise Eugenio,
It shall be done within.

King. Then here all strife ends,
I Will be your guest my self to day, and help
To solemnize this double marriage.

Pol. Your royal presence shall much honor us.


King. Then lead away, the happy knot you tie,
Concludes in love two houses enmity.

FINIS.
EPILOGVS.
Our Authors heir if it be legitimate
It Is his, if not, he dares the worst of fate,
For if a Bastard, charity is such,
That what you give, it cannot be too much,
And he, and we, vow if it may be shown,
To do as much for yours, as for our own.
FINIS.

