THE GOLDEN Mean. Lately written, as occasion served, to a great LORD.
Discoursing The Nobleness of perfect Virtue in extremes.

LONDON: Printed for Ieffery Chorlton.

1613.

TO THE BEST Worthy Reader.
SIR:
(as for any other Nobler titles they are but separable Accidents) if Virtue be
not too partially ouerswayed by Fortune, I have here cast into a small Volumne
a large sum of Love. Such a love as is rather warranted by a dutiful
observance then any shadow of Complement. I may once open my self when either
Opinion is without ears, or Suggestion without eyes. Here you may view and
read Virtue personated in moderation: here you may know and prove Moderation
to be the life of Virtue. Be a president to your self what you should be; as
you are a president to others of what you are. It suffices me that I mask in
the true simpleness of a loyal honesty, and there shall no time steal from
my remembrance, wherein I will fail to witness the payment of a due debt of
thankfulness to one principally great in being Nobly styled in his own
worthiness.

THE Golden Mean.
MEN, as they are all the sons of their Mothers, are all the subjects of
misery; borne to live few days in many dangers whose glory (if they were
Monarchs of their own desires) may be well compared to their shadows in the
Sun; For, as the bodies shadow is at Morning before us, at Noone beside us,
and at Night behind us; so is earthly glory, at Morning or in the prime before
us, in a goodly luster; at Noone or in the full, besides us, in a violent heat;
at Night or in the wane, behind us, in a neglected pity. The difference is
amongst some, that at Noone, or in the Meridian of their greatness, in stead of
having their glory beside them, they are beside their glory. But such
undoubtedly, are rather strangers to the blood of Virtue, then any way endued
with the spirit of perfect Noblenes. But so unsettled are the grounds of
frailties courses, as here is yet not the total sum of being miserable. If men
could as well frame their minds to their change of fortunes, as their change
of misfortunes does corrupt their minds, greatness would as truly welcome
calamity, as the base do rejoice in being great. Heereunto not the outward
actions of the body, but the inward remper of the mind must be framed, since
the first are but hand-maides to the latter. Even as one lying in the bed of
visitation and death, does not therefore die because he is sick, but because
he lives (for the deprivation of life is death, not sickness) so the mind of
man divided by the consumption and disease of humor, being touched with
affliction, is not therefore miserable because it suffers misery, but because
it has once tasted (and bin lifted up to) happiness.

The Golden Mean, so aunciently commended, is only there perfectly observed,
where true Wisdom and true Nobility are the special ornaments of a prepared
mind: In which, if those two meet, is figuratively included an allusion to the
Sea: which, though clouds rain down into it waters from above, and waters
send floods here beneath, yet does it retain all, either without Iosse of
saltness, or any show of ouerflowing: The mind of a Wise and Noble man is
such, that what or how many gusts and tides of adversity assault him, they may
at all times rather arm, then at any time oppress him, since his resolution
cannot ouerflow with the rudeness of passion; for that his excellent and
refyned temperature will ever retain the salt of judgment and moderation; the
one proving a Wise, the other a Noble man.

In sorrows or adversities nothing is so fearful as fear it self; which
pashion of weakness is so below the heart of virtue, that a mind trained up
in the exercises of honor, cannot as much as let fall one look to behold it.
If it be inquired what it is, or to what useful end, either of ease or
policy, it may be employed? in the first will be found little less then a
desperate baseness; in the latter nothing more then an ungrounded
desperateness. A man in the float of prosperity to fear that he may fall,
argues both the distrust of his own merit, or the danger of his disposition.
A man in the ebb of his plenty, to fear a worse mischief then that of being
poor or despised, argues both his unworthiness in procuring, and his
impatiencie in bearing his fortune.

Fear with hope, is the ready witness of baseness: Fear without hope, the
proclaimer of folly. And if there can be any misery superlatiue, or if it were
possible that there could be an extreme in measure, it is in the fear of
those twain; yet doubtless the heauiest of the two torments is to fear
without hope. Either of which, to a mind Noble and virtuous, are so much a
stranger, as there cannot be found an interpretor, who to an honorable
resolution can enforce either the construction or understanding thereof For it
is as merely impossible for a great and excellent spirit to conceive thoughts
tending to baseness, as for the base to apprehend the singular designs
belonging to the Noble minded. Soon then it is to be observed; that the
distinction between a worthy and a servile person, must be rather sound out in
the quality of their minds, then the command of authority and complement. In
which it is also further to be observed, that in the composition of their
minds, there is as great and exquisite choice to be made, as well how as wherein
the excellency of such a composition must be remarked. The servile weakness of
such, whose education, nature, experience, and wisdom cannot claim any
prioritie in desert, is so great, as it only shows that it distasteth not
calamity, so long as it is full fed with the happiness of plenty and ease. In
the worthy and desertful it is nothing s^: for they truly considering the
custom and necessity (as they are men) of feeling change of states, do ever
arm their resolution before it come for calamity, as when it comes, in it,
against calamity; wherein if the great and virtuous accidentally (not to
speak of divine providence) fall, they therein chiefly show the virtue of
their greatness, and the greatness of their virtue, in that they know they then
feel no more then at all times they were ordained to bear. Such refer all
accidents of infelicitie, to the incidence of their frailty; measuring that
being Men, they are but the miseries of men that befall them. It was (not to be
tedious in examples) a wonderful nobleness and constancy in ^socacius, a
chief man of Antioch, who standing at the Bar of judgment, was spoken too
by Posaeus the Sovereign, who said; See thou not Isocacius in what plight
thou art? ISOCACIVS answered him, I see it (quoth. he) and marvel not; for since
I am my self humane, I am come into an humane misery.

Rare and wonderfullwas the courage and temperance of this vnimited Nobleman:
and surely, where the mind is conformable to remember it is carried in a body
of Flesh, Discretion is the plotter, and moderation the actor of a notable
work. This work, as it is to be continued with singular fortitude, so must
there a foundation be laid of an especial wisdom; for he who will climb to
the full height of deserved glory, must ascend by the degrees of deserving
forecast: which forecast, is even the groundwork or basis of perfect Virtue
in extremity. It behooves then a Noble and wiseman so to order the frame of
his mind, that in what Sunshine of greatnessoeuer he be, he may ever expect a
storm to onercloude his eminence. And this is to be done by iudicially
examining, what the greatest temporal blessings a pproued by the vulgar
opinion, in their own properties are, and how subject to monthly, daily,
hourly alteration: As what riches are they (as wealth is understood) whom
poverty and famine may not suddenly follow? what honor is that (as pollitique
dignity is understood) whose power, whose largeness, whose dependences may
not be followed by blemish, by envy, or by extreme contempt? what Kingdom is
that (as command and worldly government is understood) to which may not ruin
be ordained, depopulation, and mischief?

Prosperity and adversity are not by long times often sundred; for sometimes
is scant an hours difference between a Ihrone and a Cottage: whereby all men
may know that the condition of every man is changeable; and the wise may know
that whatsocuer may happen to another, may happen to himself.

In ancient Records Pompey for wealth, Seianus for honor, Ptolomy for
Kingdoms, are memorable: yet was Pompey for all his wealth poor, and begd.
Seianus for all his honor disgraced and executed: Ptolomy for all his Kingdoms
forgotten and extinguished. If we would inquire into our own modern
Chronicles; we may read of VVoolsey the Cardinal, abounding in riches and
abounding in misery: ROBERT, Earl of ESSEX, propt up in honors, and cast
down by envy. Many of the Henry's, Kings of much power and small fortune:
other our Histories mention, who might as fitly be here induced, but that
those being freshest in memory, and all within the compass of one age, will
sooner stir up our hearts, and work an impressio^ in our beliefes, then
others who are with us of less credit, because of more antiquity.

Another effectual consideration to the building of this excellent work of a
resolved and prepared mind, is even in the foundation to be thought on. For if
there be no certainty in Wealth, in Honor, in Sovereignty (in the fruition
of whom, chiefly, if not only, rests the Paradise of an earthly Heaven)
much less assurance may be dreamed of in any inferior pleasures: for which a
wiseman (who is the true Nobleman) ought thus to resolve, that he is not lord
of his own mind who is undaunted, as long as his fortunes are ministers to his
will: but when he is cast down, or rather cast away in his hopes, undone in
his expectation, set below his own heart, vnfriended, and the subject of
vncomforting pity: He then who now witnesses by his moderation in those
sadnesses, the courage of his Nobleness, by the Nobleness of his Wisdom,
is both perfectly wise in being so courageous, and as perfectly courageous in
being so noble. It was well said of one, that A calm Sea and a fair VVinde
proves not a Sailers skill. A sure Pilot is proved in a doubtful storm, and a
wise noble mind is truly tried in the storm of adversity, not in the calm
of felicity. Fortune enuies nothing more then a settled and well governed
resolution; and such a Mariner deserves remembrance to posterity, who in
Shipwreck dies, embracing the Maste, rather then he who faintly for fear of
drowning leapes into the Sea.

Lastly, if neither the respect of the instabilitie of humane endowments,
neither the regard of honor, being prone to fall, nor the vnstaidnesse of
Kingdoms (the Scepter being the highest flight of Ambition) cannot imprint in
the mind an abandoning of itself, by reputing earthly delights and
acquisitions to be in their own nature, as in their own nature they are,
passable and uncertain; yet may the surenesse of paying a debt (which cannot
be excused) to death, be a main and singular motive to a noble and wise man,
for sufferance of all changes of conditions and estates, with the
sweetely-vnited blessings, Judgment and content. He that remembers that he
lives a life, cannot but forethinke that he must dye a death: If he look
into what life it self is, he shall find (by experience of the past, and
proof of the present age) that it is none other but a journey to death. If a
man examine the scope of his own desires, they will fall out to be a desiring
to hasten to his grave Death and the grave (two tortures to the memory of
worldly foolish men) are the only principa^l ends to which the vanity of
pleasures run at: For men in wealth, in honor, in government, desire the
time to come; the one in hope of increase of his gain, the other of his
greatness, the third^ of Empire. So what else do they but covet by growing
elder in days, to fly to the full race of their living, which is death? Of
this a (...) Nobleman should-not; and a true wise man cannot fear. It was an
answer (worthy the fpeker,) of the Philosopher, who hearing of his Sons death
said: When I had begotten him I well knew he should dye: and who would be so
ignorant as not to confess that whosoever is brought out of the womb is
destined also to the sepulcher of the earth? To a man prepared by the light of
the minds virtue, this is ever seeming necessary, as well willingly to restore
that when it is required of him, though it were by death, as to enjoy that
which is given him if it were his life, since one being borne into the one,
cannot escape the other. The Mind should ever keep measure, what of
necessity it must suffer let it not fear: what is doubtful that it may
suffer, let it always look for: So shall it not be afflicted before
afflictions do come; nor unprovided when they are come.

All men, yea all things, must be freed by an end, though the end be not a
like to all, neither in manner or time; some forgo their lives in the middle
of their time, some in the dawning of their life, some live till they are even
weary of living, some dying naturally, some violently, others enforcedly, many
(in respect of men) casually, but all at some time dying. In this kind then it
is questionable, whether it be more foolish not to know, or more shameful not
to embrace nature: He that lives well needs not to fear the vglines of
death appearing in any form, or in any disguise; if he first resolve, that
whenever or howsoever he comes, yet it is but death, and it must come.

Some one that is to travail of necessity upon the hazard of his life, unto
Constantinople by land, being vnexperienc't in the dangers, and the many
miseries of his ioumey, for his better instructions, seeks comfort in the
council of another, who has bought knowledge of the way with the price of many
weary and distressed paces, and being come, learnes this for an app^ued
certainty, that first the journey it self is long and tedious, the way
troublesome and uneven, the change of airs infectious and unhealthy, the
deserts wast and uncomfortable, directions chargeable and uncertain, here
thieves prepared to spoil, there beasts set all on rauine, surety no where,
danger on all hands, and what is the worst of these adventures; if he obtain
the scope of his desires, and arrive even to the furthest of his journey, yet
shall he there find a Turk that is Emperor, cruel in nature, boundless in
command, faithless of truth, treacherous and full of the blood of Christians:
what comfort rests to be hoped for from this afflicted trauailler, or what
should he do? To go is the hazard of life, to stay the certainty of death:
now the Noblenes of Wisdom must direct, and the Virtue of Nobleness
encourage his resolution, to resolve a steaddines of mind to countermaund the
heaviness of both fortunes: And it behoues such a man, so travailing, to be
prepared, as well to bear danger when he mee^es with it, as to be instructed
before, that there is danger to be met with. In like manner is every man borne
to greatness, so likewise borne to journey to death. To which ere he come,
(death being the furthest home of all our travails) we must know that we are
to pass through the miseries of mortallity, and particularly inform our
selves that life it self (how short soever) in respect of it is frailty, is
long and tedious, the manner of living troublesome and uneven, the change of
estates infectious to the mind, unhealthy to the soul, the wilderness of
opinion and judgment wasted by the cause, and comfortless in the effects of
folly: directions to reformation chargeable, if we respect our ignorance,
uncertain if we remember our wilfulness: Here on the one side are thieves,
even our affections to spoil us of virtue; there on the other side Beasts,
which are defects of reason, set on to devour us; even our manner of living is
a bait to allure us from the surety of life, and when we are come to the
deadly sickness that must finish our course, the worst of evil is, that
having past all the quicksands and perils of life, we have within us death it
self in our own consciences to bring us to death.

Nothing is left therefore to a man borne to live, but a stayed and a sure
resolution to be armed to die. In which he is to care, not where he shall
die, or in what manner, or in what estate, but that he must die, and in what
mind, and in what memorable virtues.

Here, the foundation to the erecting the Masterpiece of the Golden Mean
being laid now upon these or some other considerations, not much differing from
these; a Noble wise man is then to know his own worth, whereby calamity may not
cast him so down, as that he cannot call to mind that he has been once
happy; as greatness might not so lift him up as that he should be secure that
he could never be unhappy.

It is much needful that worthy personages having merit to commend their
blood, and birth to make goodly their merit, should in such sort be both
knowers and directors of their own virtues, as neither honorable estimation
should so purchase the opinion of vanity, to be blown up with the simplicity
of pride; neither a too low descent to the weakness of seruilitie, that they
are become the miracles of pity. He that knows himself, not that he is so
much a great man as a good man; knows likewise it is a labor of as rare
desert to preserve Goodness, as to find it; as on the other part, the merely
ambitious rather study to find greatness, then being found and enjoyed to
preserve it. Such principles ingenerall, being by a discerning judgment
cont^iued, the contriuer cannot be far from the parts that lead to this Golden
Mean.

It is many times seen that those who lead their lives according to the
measure of their will and power, do not measure their will and power according
to the frailty of their lives; yet certainly they lead an evil life who are
still beginning to live, for that life is ever imperfect which has learned but
the first only rule to goodness: certain other, then chiefly begin to live
when they are certain to end the race of so living by death; and some also
there are, who end their lives before they can well be said to have begun to
live.

Most men subject to those vnhappinesses, like things floating on the water,
do not go, but are carried; not the counsel of providence directs their
steps to go by the staff of discretion, but they are wholly rather carried by
the violent stream of opinion and conceit, precisely termed Humor. To unmask
the vizour that hides the deformity of this customarie vileness, much guilt
is to be laid on the change of the times, or indeed on the change of men in the
times. For, whiles the World was yet in her infancy, neither was such plenty
of temptation to inuit, neither was vanity so plentiful to tempt the
happiness of that age to the miseries of this: But as days grow more
numberles in number, so men in those days waxed more irregular in manners:
which irregularitie of manners, increased by the deprauation of reason in men
of all conditions; in fools ever, in the wise often; for even the wise do
themselves, not seldom suffer an eclipse of reason.

The difference that is, is for that such a defect proceeds rather out of the
firmitie of Nature, then out of any subjection of the mind: for, where the
mind is subjected to the grossenes of error, there does the man so for the
time (so subjected) forsake the course of Wisdom, which like a fixed Star
should (how soever the heavens move) be immovable, and unmoved in the Center
of his place; and such as so is, is truly said to be true Nobleness, true
Virtue, true Wisdom.

Even as one that is to frame a goodly building on a delightful plot of
ground, does first prouidently forecast as well of the hazards and hindrances
that may come, as the charge which daily must come. Amongst which must
principally be considered, the title of the right, and what claim may belayd
thereto, and what means may be used to remove that claim. Then the necessity
of provision, the casual change of weather, the weariness of working; for all
which, if interaccidents of extremity should happen remedies for the same must
be thought on. So a man in his mind wisely resolved to the building of this
excellent frame of the Golden Mean, on the plot of a prepared resolution, must
endeavor to provide cures against the fates of extremity. A few of which
extremities that do many times assault the temper of a Noble virtue, it shall
not much differ from the purpose and present to point at.

With men of Honor and Nobility, the chief misfortunes that can, or do
usually, happen, are either Disfavor, Neglect, Six Miseries that may befall a
Noble man.
forfeite of Estate, Banishment, Imprisonment, or Death. The remedies against
all which, shall easily in particular be subserted.

Disfavor, often times 1 Disfauor.
comes either through Privy malice, selfe-vnworthynesse, Envy, or sometimes
through the variableness of an unguided Prince inclination: To each (...)
those, a wise man may, and a good man will soon apply a medicine, and in tha^
a recovery. To deser^ the grace of a Prince is an^ honorable happiness; yo^ is
not the loss of it (being once deserved) a misery; especially to wise men,
since wise men may be made subject, but never subjects to misery: calamity
may exercise, but not ouersway their virtues: misfortune may be an usurping
tyrant to pain them, but never a received sovereign to command them: If the
Prince his gracious favor be lost through the privy malice Privy Malice 1.
cause of Disfavor.
of some, who fill the ears of Majesty with the dis^ord of slander and
untruth, grounded upon the sandy foundation of uncertain discontent, or
dishonorable revenge, then has a wise Noble man, out of those very wrongs,
strong arguments to perswad his reason, that there is much reason why he
should be persuaded to moderation: for being innocent of any voluntary action
or intent that might make his faith questionable, or his serui^ dangerous, or
his merit (...) less value then a voy^ of general commenda^, has formerly
(...), his own cleerenes^ may ever rest upon the unmoved pillars of his own^
Noble integrity.

Where a man in grace Selfe-vnworthynes, 2. cause of Disfavor.
with his Sovereign falls from it by a selfe-vnworthynesse, it is far
otherwise: and undoubtedly, whosoever is so impoisoned with the diseases of his
mind, or the infirmity of his body has great and principal causes to move him
to seek for remedy against the dispertion of the one, and the asper^ion of the
latter. To this ^elfe-unworthynes, either in ^inde or body, may be re^erred
Ambition, the Mo^her of disloial plots and practices: Discontent, the Nurse
(...) conspiracies; Couetous^es, that kindling fires with the fuel of
Monopolies, is enforced to quench them with the tears of disgrace, and that
which soon follows thereon, Contempt. ^aine-glory, or Pride, which whiles
with Pompeys mind it cannot brook the title of a superior, is with Pompeys
fortunes cast down beneath the pity of their equals. Faction, which like
foolish fly in the cand^ labors her own dea^ with other diseases, (...) many
to be tediously rected: or to this self-(...), through the infi^mitie of the
body, which more especially consists in action, may be referred Riot, in all
men a madness, in Noble men a blemish, and to good Princes most displeasant; or
Quarrelling, which ever brings danger, with too late repentance; or
Wantonness, the overthrow of many goodly kindreds and familyes; or
Scurrilitie, with other such like. Since when mention was made of the
unworthi^esse of body, it is not any defect in Nature, or natural proportion,
but in manners outwardly acted: For many times it is commonly seen, that where
Nature has failed in some parts of the outward man, she has oftentimes
supplied those wants with a pregnancy of mind.

A president whereof is (not to borrow of ancient Histories,) even in the
CHRONICLES of our present memories, in the person of ROBERT, the late Earl of
SALISBVRY, a man whose vneuenes (...) shape was perfected with the perfect
furniture of (...) reaching and industrio^ wit. So was the crookedness of
Aesape made straight in the sweetness (...) his invention. And Scorates, that
odd man of Athens, is said to have said of himself, that education and Art in
him, had changed the course of Natures unfurnished workmanship.

Of these, and such imperfections of body, (...) is not here intended, but of
such as by their own selfe-vnworthines in body in mind, and often in both,
do loose the intrest, their Blood, Birth, and Nobleness (being noble indeed
by those both) has in their Princes opinion.

A remedy against self-unworthinesse; must be found out in a selfe-reformation;
which being sincerely performed, the follyes of the past times belong not to
the reformed.

If one should call such a one (as has bin known for a notorious robber.)
Thief, being certainly sorrowful, penitent, and accomptable for all his
errors in that kind, doubtless it were much indiscretion in the Agent to
speak so to him, and more in the Patient to esteem it as spoken of him, since
wise and good men as they do not repute those things theirs which they have not
done, so must they neither acknowledge for theirs which they now presently do
not. Non vocamus ^nostra quae non ipsi fecimus, at quae non ipsi facimus, as
the right sense of the old Verse contains.

So then: Has a great PEER loft his Princes favor, because he deserved to
loose it? let not this deiect or caft him down in mind, since as by a change
from good to worser he forewent his Princes love, or rather his Princes
louehim; So yet by a change from bad to better, he still is worthy of a
repossession of that love, though he repossesse it not: And what worth cannot
be seen by the public little eye of the great world, by reason of his being
clouded from the Sun of his life and glory, his Prince; let it be so much
the more seen by the private great eye of his own little world (even himself
and his own comforts) and teach him to know the difference between a great
and a good man, the one preferring virtue only for greatness, the other
preferring greatness for the greatness of virtue only.

Another cause, which Envy the 3. cause of Disfavor.
not seldom procures disfavor from the Prince, is that old enemy to desert
Envy, who is so ancient a Courtier, and so tried in the passages of all ages,
that such a man as is in favor with his Sovereign, deserving so to be, and
imagining himself to be without the compass of Envy, is too securely, and in
that security, too simply armed against his own ruin.

Here now is a broad path, leading, or more truly teaching the ready course
to the excellent mean of Temperance and Moderation. Every man ought to rejoice
and solace himself in his own perfections: for it is as beast-like not to
know his proper value at all, as it is devilish to know it too much.
Humble-Pride is a proud humility, and such as exercise it with innocence
rather then curiosity, do but show the difference between a nobly and
generous, and a basely fantastical Nature. Whereby then should a man be
persuaded that he is an imbracer of virtue, more then in that he is prosecuted
by the restless venom of the envious.

Has this secret mischief displaced any desertfull favorite of the benefit
of the favor royal? assuredly he has little cause to distaste it any thing,
or to be moved from the commendation of a resolved mind, that as he shall by
tempering his disgrace with sufferance, increase the honor of his merit, so
shall he give matter still of more envy to the envious, who are oftentimes as
much afflicted with the patience, as they are with the prosperity of the party
envied.

It is better to be envied then pitied: pity proceeding out of a cold
charity toward the miserable: envy out of a corruption of quality against
the virtuous: If it be objected that the loss of a Princes favor, through the
instigation of some envious opposite, has most cause to afflict a noble mind,
in that his enemy has prevailed against him; the same reason may be answered
with the same reason. That such an enemy cannot be said to prevail, who fights
with the weapons of a dishonorable treachery; and what greater triumph or
conquest can a Wise or a Noble man wish to enjoy, then to torment his adversary
with the perfections of his virtue? But in the mean time envy ouerrules? True,
and here is an inducement to a steady moderation, in that it is but envy. But
the Princes favor is by this means lost? So is a Noble man's selfe-worthinesse
by the same means found: and it is a greater blemish to the judgment of a
Prince so traduced, not to examine the particulars why he does reject a worthy
subject, then to the subjects worthiness, without particular examinations from
his Prince to be rejected. So, neither then should envy remove, but for that it
is envy, confirm and strengthen a noble resolution.

Sometimes the variableness The Princes inconstancy, the last cause of
Disfavor.
of the Princes inclination, his addiction to change from royal Virtues to
horrible Vices, is the reason of his disfavour with those who are of the best
desert: Such and of such conditions were ill England, RICHARD the second, in
Rome, NERO, in Sicile, DIONISIVS, and such are for the most part all Tyrants,
who if they exercise not their (...) over the lives, yet certainly exercise it
over the hearts of their faithfullest subjects. Such Princes are rather vvanton
in their favors then judicious, and the weakness of virtue is the cause of
that deprivation of judgment. How happy is that man who has lost that grace
(with a Prince of that condition) which he may rest confident he never surely
had?

And above many other motives, this is most general and most effectual to
rectify a wise man's mind, for such a one as lays the foundations of his
hopes on the moveable sands of his Princes favor, is like a foolish Merchant
that adventures all his substance in a broken vessel: and he that relyes on
the vnhappinesses of such favor, must of necessity banish al Noble
resolutions from his dissignes, for it is a headlong folly, and a wilful
detraction that such a one seeks, if he do not as well resolve to endeavor to
preserve and continue his Princes grace, as to find and enjoy it.

Now this is a direct, or indeed indirect running away from the maine work of
goodness: for to as many vices as the Nature and life of a wicked man may be
inclined, to (...) many must he address ^imselfe to be a bawd, if not an actor
in them; and of all unhappiness this is the first. Certainly good Clerks have
said, and experience does witness, that an exact Courtier is ^eldome a good
man; for not to speak of general enormities in particular; Courtiers are most
times given over to those two wonderful madnesses Pride and Riot, Pride
countenancing their Riot, and RIOT making glorious their Pride. What a blessing
(for it is more then a happiness) the (...) of those common errors (...) the
wiseman will acknowledge, and the fortunate Noble may prove.

Princes sometimes an^ Quinquennium Neronis.
unguided in their dispositions, and then he^ who is nearest in fauo^ is in
greatest danger of his place, which happening many times, puts him in many
fears, in so much as even the ground work that bears up his ambition is
shaken with every breath of an unpleasant word: And what misery then can that
be, to be out of this misery; especially when the Prince is of a changeable
and divided mind? So that he that will ingeniously look into the worst of a
Princes dis^auour (himself not detected of unworthiness) may likewise
ingeniously confess that there is much gain in such a loss.

Of other miseries (which Of Neglect.
are so reputed amongst men) that may happen to (...) Noble (...), Neglect
(...) (...) another, that (...), when his service for his (...), or advise for
the (...), or endeavors to (...) his Sovereign, are (...) not commended, or
(...) least not rewarded; here is required indeed much virtue to conquer that
part of man which is merely man, and to stand resolute upon the guard of his
own worthynesse. This Neglect in a Prince, comes from an insensible
ingratitude, or want of (...) quickness in the faculties of his soul. If from
ingratitude, (a sin (...) full in all men, but in Kings, estates, or (...)
nours horrible) then (...) fortune, or (if you so (...) to term it) misery of
(...) is (...) to be (...) for by how much a (...) is vnt hankfull in rewarding
the service of his subject, by so much the more is he engaged to all memories
of being a dishonorable debtor.

And though a man is bound to pay the best of his service either to his KING or
COUNTRY, in the safety of the one, and preservation of the other, and duty to
both, yet so are both his KING and Country interchangeably bound to favor,
cherish, and respect worth in a worthy deseruer. But if Neglect proceed out of
a want of judgment, or a decerning Virtue, then has the neglected much mo^
cause to bear that iniu^ A man is not to expect thanks from a Ox, or Horse,
for feeding, (...) ring, dressing and smoothing of him, because it is an Ox or
a Horse (...) whom he does it. Truel^ a governor of people that can eat,
clothe an^ feed another man's labors, and cannot give acknowledgement at least
to him who by the working of his brains, expense of his blood, and consumption
of his estate, or such like services, does in peace feed and clothe his King
and Country, such a ruler ^ffers, in this, little from a ^east, that has not
reason, or at least the use of ^eason.

But if Neglect come ^om the vnsteddinesse of ^he common people, then (...) is
nothing strange: for (...) they are won in an ^oure, so are they lost in a
minunte; and whosoever co^etech popular applause, ^or depends upon the (...) of
the vulgar, does with the dog in Esope, (...) carnes, captare vmbres;
^imbrace clouds, and beget Centaures; and does justly deserve no commendations
at all for so seeking to be commended.

If yet it be fit to inqui^ further into the maine construction, what, or of
what value and, moment this Neglect is, experience (...) others will learn us
to be Schoolmasters to our selves; for let a man be n^uer so iminent in
authority under his PRINCE, let him have what greatness he can imagine, and
what adoration and reueren^ the humility of the public wonder can given Let
his words be observed as Oracles, his commands as Laws, his displeasure ^s
death, yet with the flight of a thought if upon some dislike grounded or
ungrounded, the King at any time shorten his Royal fa^our, or the Law in any
point take hold on him, ^hereby he appears to ^he judgment of the world, to
be entering into ^he way of misery, how ^ensibly and how soon (...) all
hefeele an alteration of those large flatteries which the seruilitie of the
^ncertaine people promi^ed?

A witness hereof in his time was, and in this time may be, John, that great
and last Duke of No (...) THVMBERLAN (...) whose pride and (...) were at once
hastened by the too much confident he had in the hearts of the Cominaltie; with
what speed was he disgran^ of his Sovereign, (...) of the Lords, and (...) of
the multitude (...) who is only covetous of any (...), though (...) be change
from the good to the worst? A just man therefore (whose soundness of mind
like (...) Center of the earth (...) ever unmoved) by the light of those few
(...) dent reasons may understand how easy it is for the popular judgment as
^ell in distinctions of mi^eries as of happiness to ^rre: for as they account
^states and conditions miserable, which are not (...) with the vanity of
outward glory, or fullness of substance; so do they likewise reckon that
felicity the truest happiness, whose dignity and migh^inesse is like the
blazing Star, for the present, as strange as fearful: and for a wise, a
good ^noble spirit to be (...) with the neglect of (...) in such creatures,
would be strong proof that he never (...) the perfect relish eythe^ of
perfect wisdom, perfect goodness, or perfect Nobility.

Like as has before Forfeiture of Estate.
been said of Neglect, (...) much or more may be inferred of that misery
called the forfeiture (...) Estate, that is, of all (...) plenty or fullness of
temporal substance, as with worldly men the name and possession of riches does
include. Of all (...) there miseries this in the judgment of such as (...) not
truly directed by true^ judgment of such as are not truly directed by truest
judgment, is reputed the most miserable: Insomuch as most men think, and so
thinking, so resolve, that Death, in any form, is much more tolerable then
beggary (for so they term poverty) by any casualty.

One example or president to both Noble and understanding men, of what
commendation the abandoning of rich fortunes, being reported by Quintus
Curtius, may be remembered with immortal glory, of Abdo-hominas, a poor man;
rich in all plenty, except plenty of riches, to whom Alexander of MACEDON,
profferring the Kingdom of Sidon to him, who was before but a Gardener, was
by him refused, who replied that he would take no care to loose that which he
never cared to enjoy. The History is worthy, and the answer full of
observation, and will be ever memorable.

Of all other things, free spirits and wise men should least respect the loss
of temporal wealth, which is no part of a man.

Riches were fitly by the Philosophers called bona Fortunae, uncertain
endowments; to figure unto us, that as fortune is ever variable, so should her
benefits be reputed but unconstant friends: in regard whereof they were
excluded from the gifts as well of the body as of the mind, that is, neither
Health, Beautic or virtues of any sort, did need the ornament of those gifts
of Fortune.

A good man, if of his own industry and merit, he has purchased unto
himself wealth, has little reason to grieve at the loss of them, since he
remains still as perfect in the cunning of gayning as when he first began: but
another of more abundance, whose possessions come to him by inheritance,
without any care of his own, he has no reason at all to distaste the seizure
of his estate, since he does forgo but that which he never labored for. Truly
in respect of this it behooves every resolved mind to bear the courage of the
wise man of GREECE, that said, he at all times carried all what was his with
him wheresoever he went.

Wisdom, Temperance, Valor, Justice, are the substance and hereditary
possessions of a perfectly happy man, and these riches cannot be forfaited,
except by a decay of Virtue, they cannot be seized except the owner cast them
off, they cannot suffer contempt so long as they be nourished in a noble
mind. Indeed riches are to a good man like a light silken Cloak upon his
back, who is else provided against the extreamitie of cold with warm furs:
So he that has his own goodness and resolution to warm him in all winters
of adversity, needs wealth but as a thin silken Cloak upon a furred Gown,
rather to show the vanity of his disposition, then any useful employment to
the sustenance of life.

If nature be provided for against hunger with meat; against frosts with
apparel; against contempt with comeliness, the desire of money or large
Lordships, argues but the base filthiness of an unsatisfied covetousness.

There may be objected, that o my estate being forfeited, mine Heirs are
beggard, and the antiquity of my ancestors house made the spectacle of ruin.

This being admitted, it is soon answered, that the houses of most
continuance, and personages of Noblest births account that antiquity of best
estimation which is derived from the longest descent, in which they shall
find, that the first of their honors were gotten by him, who was in as low an
ebb of fullness, as he is now at the present: for all greatness had a
beginning, and the beginning of that greatness is desert. Am I Noble, let me
know that this nobleness is the least part of mine; for my fathers won it by
their virtue, they had the glory, but I enjoy the Titles. Have I robbed mine
Heirs of those Titles, Honors, or Possessions? let them strive to have more
honor in deserving more, that their Successors may as much remember their
virtues, as I have remembered the virtues of my Ancestors. Questionless
howsoever the reputation of a continued Family in ancient Honors, be preferred
above any men of latter greatness, of some whose worth has raised his house
to a noble style, yet is it in the laws of reason most reasonable; that he
should deserve more respect, that by his own atchiuements has purchased
dignity, then others that only have it by the privilege of blood, since the
one wears but the shadows of his Predecessors triumphs, the other the
substance of his own

Poverty is no burden to them as can sustain it, is no enemy to such as will
embrace it: He is only miserable that knows not to be content with his
Fortune, especially if his fall be procured by his own errors. Then the
surest, the Noblest, the only means to redeem public calamity, is by a
public (and yet inward profession of sufferance; for in all persons and
personages, reformation of folly is a work of more praise then the working of
folly is a cause of disgrace.

What misery can it then be to be eased of that care, which only brings care
in the possession. Of all mischiefs, the greatest mischief is to be a rich
man, with a rich man's mind. There is no more reason why a merely covetous man
should love Gold, but for that it is yellow or fair; Pastures, because they
are green; and so has the envious much more reason to Co^uer abundance of
wealth, because other men should want it. A covetous miser, is rightly a
malicious consumer, for in heaping for himself, he consumes the maintenance of
the needy: yet it is to be noted, that plenty is not always to be dispraised,
if the having of it do no^ procure a scarcity. But what loss is so great in
a worldly estate (considering how weak it is more then in opinion) which a
wise man should not bear with moderation?

It is a misery to want, but a greater misery to have too much: but for a good
man to hug the love of abundance, that he should imagine the loss of it,
should make him miserable, I must conclude this point that he has neither
goodness nor resolution: if goodness, his content should be his best estate; if
resolution, his want cannot be esteemed the worst poverty, since extremity is
a singular teacher to learn us that we are men, and that there is both a
divine power and a providence above us; the one consisting in being a God, the
other in having a Godhead.

The difference between Of Banishment.
a wise man, reformed by counsel and instruction, and an ignorant man,
informed in will and folly, is, that the wife will make good use of all
adversity, when the ignorant thinks all adversity intolerable. This is proved
in the greatness of a Noble courage, when it is enforced to forsake (either upon
public disgrace, or some private causes) the comforts of his friends and
Country, which men of low hearts) do account a misery of mischiefs, and
reckon that banishment is a bad kind of torture.

It may not be denied but that such may be the unworthiness of the action for
which a man is banished, that his own conscience will in all places be a
tormentor to his memory, and then the wound which he bears with him can never
by change of place or time be wholly cured. Such a one, another of this latter
times, well compared to the wounded Do in Virgill, Lipsius.
who (as the Poet says) fled over Hills and Mountains to escape death, but all
in vain; for still in her sides the Bow-mans killing Arrowe sticks. So, those
men who have the arrow of some mischievous art, piercing their afflicted
hearts, although they be banished from the place where they have committed
villainy, yet they do but go from it, they cannot forget it. They fly the
detraction of their sin, but cannot shun it; or if they could shun the deed
(as they cannot) what can that avail when the doer is the man himself?

In good men, who through diverse misfortunes are sequestered from their native
Countries upon wrongful or slight occasions it is nothing so: for to them if
they rightly (as being good they will) instruct themselves in the first rules
of wisdom, all Countries are a home. A noble and free resolution is a
stranger no where; in which respect men perfectly wise, are said to be
perfectly valiant, since as true wisdom is perfect valor, so is true
valor perfect moderation.

Many men have abandoned their Countries, and made themselves voluntary exiles
upon a desire and greedy hope of gain, or better prosperity: such have been
the Romans, Romulus and Aeneas; of the Patauynes, Antenor; of the Britains (if
the history be of credit) even our own Brute; yet truly the end of those
men was no^ way glorious; for they may more rightly be called fugitives and
(...), then exiles or trauailers.

He deserved well of the Commonwealth of Athens, who having instituted
excellent laws for the state public, took Oat^ of the Magistrates tha^ his
laws should be day^ and duly practiced, (...) his return from a iourne^
which he was to undertake: the oath being received, the good man freely
lived banished from his Country, never returning, that for the safety of his
Country, his laws might ^ee kept inviolable: Yet ^as this wise man so far in
this banishment from reproof, that his action and memory in his action, will
never be forgotten.

Of all accidents that can happen to a prepared mind, this of banishment has
little cause to trouble the quiet calm of a steady resolution. It is often
seen that sundry persons for rarities sake, for moral instruction in
complement or in behavior, willingly some times travail into foreign lands,
and there spend their time for three, six, ten years or more with great
delight, taking pleasure and content in so growing old: Even so (...) like
manner let a good man resolve him self tha^ this hard word of banishment is
but a journey of pleasure into some outlanding country, not proposing or
limitting to the mind a time of coming back, but always minding some fit
employment why he should go: as if ^ee were but Ambassador from his own to
some unknown Prince: and with what dishonor can an Ambassador be blemished,
who in the service of his Sovereign leaves his life as a pledge of his duty?
It may be in the bonds of Nature, some man will esteem it an heavy misfortune
to forsake, or (as in the vvorst sense they term it) to be thrust from the
fruition of the comfort of his Friends, Children, Allies, and Kinsfolks: such
a thought can no more move the temper of a resolved mind; the^ it should do
if he were to leave the world, since in dying, and in being banished, here is
the difference, that the one necessity is commanded by an unchangeable decree
from Heaven, the other by a severe imposition of man; both being a seueration
of old friends.

What a madness were it in any to repute death (being thereto naturally
called) a misery? Even so let him think of banishment, and withal, compare
the great fortunes that some have attained unto in that estate of (...), with
the possibility of his own.

THOMAS MOV^RAY, Duke of Norffolke, in the Reign of RICHARD the second, being
by the said King, by reason of the Kings youth and indiscretion; and in regard
of some other differences between Mowbray and other Princes of the blood, upon
an appeal of Treason, banished; was so far from being heerewith dejected, that
adding practice to the nobleness of his courage, he undertook a glorious
war in the land of Palestine, against the common enemy of God and Truth, the
Turk, and willingly made his blood a sacrifice to the redemption of his Fame.
Happy man, that sought out death with victory, before that death could make
him unhappy by finding him out with overthrow: Happy banishment, which has
been the means of such a memory, and happy cause of banishment that was the
first occasion to such means of being memorable.

In like manner, Hem^ of Richmond, being for his interest in the Crown by that
monster of men and Kings, RICHARD the third, found (by his even carriage and
well tempered moderation) such favor and love in the Courts and hearts of
foreign Princes, as that being strengthened with their strengths, and
encouraged by his own right and virtue, he not only returned to challenge but
to recover his own, and to purge the Land of so intolerable mischief as the
government of that cruel usurper and bloody King had made it sigh under.
Happy banishment, in so glorifying that Prince: Happy Prince, in so disposing
that banishment: for it is certainly true, that not any accident of misfortune
(as the world accounts) but the mind of the patient in suffering, or not
suffering, makes it a misery.

If examples be of any force (as they must be) by the president of former times
to instruct the present, then may Pompey for greatness, Affricanus for
Counsel, Hanyball for courage, and Ovid for wit, tell us that banishment does
not always happen to miserable men, except their own impatiencie work their
own calamity.

In short, a Wise and Noble man, by what has been said, may consider what
might more have been said, to the building in this life this structure of the
Golden Mean against the storms and infelicitie of being a banished man, since
a wise man resolved in all trials, is never confined within the limits of
place, but upon all necessary occurrents does repute himself even in his birth
to be the worlds Citizen.

Here yet follows Imprisonment; which often happening to men of great place
and quality, is not thought the least kind of misery, which men of such
minds do with their bodies restraint lock up and imprison all the best
faculties of their reason, forcing Reason to be a slave to Fortune, and
rewarding the excellent dignity of the soul, with the corruption of Judgment
and Nature.

Such a man as is kept within the inforcement of restraint, must imitate that
Daedalus whom the ancient Poets feign to have wings, with which he fled from
that inaccessible Castle where he was detained with his son Icarus a prisoner.

The Moral cannot but give matter of note and application: lcarus the son
betokens or may betoken the incapacitie of men's bodies, and Daedalus the
quickenesse of mind: both which, being the one with the other imprisoned; the
one, which is the body, personated in Icarus, for want of moderation falls into
the attempt of escape: the other, which is the mind, pattern'd in Dedalus,
conquers adversity by flying from it in bearing it: ^ The GOLDEN MEAN super
at ferendo; tryumphs on the rigor of imprisonment by the freedom of a noble
mind.

To a man armed in his extremities, often trials are but as many often praises,
and every trial gives a several crown of commendation in bearing many
troubles with one and the selfsame resolution.

If the use of imprisonment be but only a little made use of, it will be found
that there is no means under the ordinances of Heaven so available for a man
to consider the misery of greatness, as the feeling the misery (so
mistermed) of imprisonment.

Men, accompanied with the employment of worthy thoughts, are never less idle
then when they are alone, never more seriously busied then when they are only
busied (and have time so to be busied) with remembering that they are men: not
that such a remembrance should cast them lower then the consideration of
frailty, but raise them higher then the acting of folly; not to depresse the
motions persuading temperance, but to rectify the persuasions moving to
virtue: He is stronger that conquers his own passions, then he that after
winning many Countries, becomes a passionate conqueror.

The life of instruction is reading, and leisure the life of reading, and a
retired restraint the life of leisure: which restraint is only terrible in
being called imprisonment. One that for a great some of money would pledge
himself to live in a chamber a ye^re or two, or seven, will not think such
an indurance a misery, because the hope of gain does lessen or rather
annihillate the severity of that iniunction.

Miserable men, and Miserable mankind that will undertake such an affliction
for bettering of their temporal estates, which being imposed for the bettering
of the estate of their reason and judgment, they account insufferable.
Baseness of Nature that suffers that for greediness, which being had, is not
certain one hour to be possessed, and yet will in the same kind forgo that
which being once possessed is never lost; O the furniture of the mind, which
being indeed the true lasting and only best Riches! variety of books are
sweet companions, and plenty of noble thoughts happy recreations: If I be a
prisoner I will either talk with my Library, or sport with my thoughts, since
one being learned, will prove sure instructers, the latter being Noble, worthy
delights.

A man that is restrained from liberty, has the liberty of retaining his own
worthynesse, as worthily may be seen in Massinissa who being made captive to
Scipio, told him, thou must SCIPIO (quoth. he) enjoy the benefit of thy fortune,
by taking from me my life, or of thy mercy by lo^sing my bonds: Take my life
thou freest me from bonds, free me from bonds, thou bindest me in bonds
of love; but if thou let me live a cap tiue, know Scipio I have a heart
that did never, nor ever can seele servile capti^ty.

It is certain that such as see their friends in bondage and in durance, who
have Noble minds, see them, and see them not: they see them as men, but not as
they are more then men.

Imprisonment is an excellent preparation to goodness, since ever after, in
all fortunes, a man that has been a prisoner may know by himself how
subject a humane estate is to the brittlenesse of alteration; and he that does
not much amend his errors by this kind of trial, is neither destined to be an
attemptor of any notable virtue, or a desire of any virtuous note. It is a
mild Tutor, to teach as well how to govern as how to serve; for he who can
serve adversity with meekness, can guide prosperity with discretion.

He who is a prisoner, has herein great cause to find his friend, for such
as are engaged in a promise of love, that loves not the person for his fortune,
will show likewise that they fear not his misfortune, because they love his
person. The saying is old, and verified in this age of the World, that a man
may have many friends and yet little friendship: but here a man shall soon be
taught to distinguish the difference betvveene friendship and friends, although
it is not to be urged that therefore it is fit that every one who would know
truly his friends, should make himself, or be made a prisoner; but that
every one being a prisoner should then have fit time to know how he is
esteemed.

Imprisonment is not of such virtue in it self that men should seek to be
prisoners, thereby to be happy, but being by casualtie enforced upon any, the
use thereof may be so happy, that he who is imprisoned may not think himself
miserable.

Even as he who being followed by the memory of some evil act, though he have
his body at liberty, yet is still imprisoned in the guilt of his (...) So he
that reformeth the crookedness of his condition, by the imitation of goodness,
though his body be imprisoned, has by the selfsame reason the freedom of
the mind.

Imprisonment is a gentle sickness, not to kill, but to chasten the patient:
and as men naturally proud may be humbled, but will never be humble, so men of
a meek condition may be launced for the recovery of health, but not wounded to
the hastening of death: which a Wise and Noble man, well fore-casting, may arm
himself against reputed miseries, and amongst them all, against this one of
imprisonment, that whenever it should come to him, it should come to him
rather to exercise then to overthrow him.

Finally, amongst such Of Death.
men, whose reason is ouerswayed by nature, Death is reckoned for a misery, and
is to them a misery indeed, but to others guided by the refined light of
Judgment: it is esteemed (as it is) the only remedy and securest ease
against misery.

Death to a wiseman cannot come unlooked for, nor to a good man vnwisht for:
since the wise, knowing that they must die, know likewise that resolution is
the best comfort to welcome death, and the good being confident of their own
innocencies, desire the change of a better life.

He that will overcome affliction by sufferance, bear calamity with courage,
weary out fear with hope, let him be resolute, that the worst of trials is
death; and for that be armed whenever it shall come, and be ready to embrace
it.

If a Noble or a Wise man after disfavor of his Prince, neglect of his
Country, forfeiture of his Estate, banishment from his Friends, imprisonment
of his Person, or any other esteemed extremes be threatened, with the loss of
his head, or execution in any manner, certainly he has great cause to
rejoice; for he is not worthy to see any end of his sorrows, who is not
prepared to meet it with a merry heart.

The end of all sorrows is Death, if the party to die be truly reconciled to
his God and to his conscience.

The old Poets did fitly feign Death to be the child of the Night, and Sleep
to be the Sister of Death; wisely including, that as Night and Sleep wrap up
all in stillness, so should Death more perfectly finish the course of evils, by
burying them in a grave, never to arise.

And no doubt, but herein Death and Night have much affinity, that as the
Night is fearful, because dark; but sweet, because giving rest: So is Death
in his shaddowe (which is the night of opinion) before it, comes full of
horror, but in substance (which is the quickening to a better life) when it
comes, full of joys.

It may be here objected, that to die for some supposed offense by an enforced
death, is scandalous, and therefore miserable.

But it may be answered, that such an objection betokens but the fear of
frailty. For if it be examined, we must consesse that the hour of death ^uen
to them that most ^oke for and desire it, is ^ncertaine, and they cannot be so
provided at an ^stant as others that ^now the instant when they are to suffer.

Herein men destined (...) death for some offense, ^re (as it may seem) ^ore
happy in their end, ^hen they are unhappy in their disorder of living that has
brought them (...) that end.

Men, appointed to die, knowing the time certain, have reason, and no doubt,
do accordingly fit themselves to forsake and cast off all those parts and
thoughts that might make them mortal, then others who only dream of a dying
time, but not resolving that they draw nearer to the time, are many times
suddenly taken in the fullness of their filthiness, and in the high tide of
acting unlawful pleasures or abuses: and here surely between the manner of
dying, the last is most fearful, since the former, knowing the minute in
which they are to depart from the World, do by the stroke of Justice enjoy
that benefit which wise and good men do in mercy sigh and hope for.

Death is a happy Haven, and men shipwrackt in the Sea of this earth cannot but
covet it: It is a safe Inn, and men poasting in the iourneyes of weariness,
cannot but seek it: It is a path to blessedness, and such as are good will
find it: It is a banquet of all goodness, and such as be blessed have found it.

He is unworthy to live that is not worthy enough to dye, and he is not
unworthy to dye that has lived worthily. The woman that demanded of Jupiter
that he would give to her two sons the greatest happiness that could be
bestowed from heaven on men, had the same night her sons both dead, as if the
greatest humane felicity were to be freed from being humane.

To conclude (for something has been said of this before) he which will
wisely and nobly practice the observation of the Golden Mean, and show the
greatness of Virtue in extremes, must keep truce with his passions, and
prepare his courage with this resolution, that Misery is no Misery; for that is
only a misery which is lasting, and thought so: and reputed misery is not
lasting, because death out wears it; is not thought so because death will
finish it: in the resolving on the one Wisdom will prove a Noble mind, in
the other Nobleness will pattern out a wiseman: for moderation in extremes
make perfect both.

In the view of what has been said, under the titles of a wise and a Noble
man, are comprehended all men, of all degrees and fortunes, whose Virtues do
make them wise; as their wisdom does make them Noble. For wisdom
consists not only in gray heads, but in a steady providence how to do, and
Nobleness consists not only in an Honorable race; but in a prudent
resolution what to do. Wisdom informs the mind, and NOBLENESS commends
the actions; in so much as every one who can act wisely, and deliberate Nobly,
squaring his resolution to resolve steaddinesse in both fortunes, may of merit
be enrolled amongst the memorable: and be remembered by the desertfull to be
truly wise because Noble: to be perfectly Noble because wise.

FINIS.

