(...)pain to have forgyuenes, or else both fere or doubt that god will not
save him, or else puts his salvation between fere and hope, as thus, Nota.
he has some hope and trust, that almighty god will be merciful unto him,
and yet he does somewhat fear and doubts whether that god will so do or the
contrary, now who soever thus does or in any wise fear or doubt, he shall
never have forgyuenes for his sins as long as he so does, Nota.
though that he be sorry for them, and be in mind and will to live well and to
make amends, nor though he be shreuen and ask and pray for pardon, and say
Good lord I beseech ye of forgyuenes and mercy, and for to save me, yet shall
not this nor any other prayer, Nota.
nor good deed that he ca^ do, obtain and get him mercy and forgyuenes, Good
deed.
for almighty God has not promised, nor will not, pardone and save, but only
those sinners which do steadfastly believe i^ him and do surely trust to his
promise, Timidis et incredulis pers^^ illoru^ erit i^ stagno, igni. Ardente ^c.
que (...) mors ^^unda. (...) ^0.21.
that he will pardone and save them, and therefore if a man dye having any fere
or doubt of forgyuenes and salvation, than shall he be condemned and cast in
to the prison of hell, and there have everlasting pains, for beside his
other sins, he did sin in ferynge and doubting, for i^ that he did
mystruste God* and did think and fear, that he would break and not perform
his promise, and so helpke^^d

(...)shall they be sure to keep them selves in the very true and perfyte
says, and in the right way to heaven You shall understand that though the
artycles of our faith be above reason, yet there is none contrary and against
reason, as we shall clearly se and know in the kingdom of everlasting joy.

Thus you have seen now how a man may dye well, and have everlasting life i^
heaven, by the most mercyful goodness, and promise of our most mercyful
sauyoure Ihesu Christ, unto whom be given here ever more most praise, laud,
and honor. Amen. By your lover i^ almighty god for whom I beseech you to say,
Jesus have mercy upon my soul.

AMEN.
Imprynted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the George next to saint
Dunstones church by Wyllyam Myddelton.

WYLLYAM MVDDYLTON
W M^

printer's or publisher's device


