A PATTERN For WOMEN: Setting forth the most Christian life, and most
comfortable death of Mrs. LVCY late wife to the worshipful Roger Thornton
Esquire, of Little Wratting in Suffolk.

Whereunto is annexed a most pithy and perswasiue discourse of that most
learned and holy Father IEROM, being his last speech before his death, which is
able to rouse up the most drowzy and dead in sin.

And finally, the last most heavenly prayer of the said IEROM, a singular help
for a poor soul, wrestling with the pangs of death, to address herself
toward her SAVIOVR.

By I. M. Bachelour of Divinity.

LONDON, Printed by Edw. Griffin for John Marriot, and are to be sold at his
shop in S. Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleet Street, 1619.

TO THE ETERNAL MEMORY OF THAT MOST RENOWNED AND BEST DESERVING GENTLEWOMAN
LVCY, LATE WIFE TO ROGER THORNTON ESQVIRE, WHO DYED IN WRATTING PARVA IN
SVFFOLK, DECEMBER: 21. ANNO SALVTIS HVMANAE 1618 BUT EVER LIVES WITH GOD.

JOHN MAYER THE MOST UNWORTHY PASTOR OF THAT CHVRCH, AS HIS LAST BOVNDEN DVTY
TOWARD HER, HIS LOVING PATRONESS CONSECRATETH THIS SLENDER PAPER MONVMENT.

TO THE WORSHIPFVL and singularly religious ROGER THORNTON Esquire, my very
good Friend and Patron, and to the hopeful branches of his late cut off Vine,
the comfortable fellowship of God the Holy GHOST.

IT is a saying: Dies dolore^ minuit: Time lesseneth grief: which if it be
true, I may seem to miss of my mark, by bringing again to remembrance your
inestimable loss: seeing to remember a grievous accident, is to rub ever a
sore, and to increase patne, when time had well nigh worn it away. But to set
fourth the praises of the dead, and to arect monuments to their memory, are (I
know not how) though no subsidia mortuorum salues unto the dead, yet solamina
viuoru^, by the practice of all ages, comforts of friends suruiuing. And not
without cause, seeing it is promised, that the memory of the inst shall be
blessed, and the name of the wicked shall rot, Pro. 10-17. Wherefore in all
ages, men have been carried, as it were, by a secret instinct thus to seek the
continuance of the good memory of their deceased dear ones, and so have had
some solace by the remaining shadow which they could not have by the fading
substance. Thus laakob set up a pillar to his best beloved Rachel, and Absalom
being conscious to himself of his ill deserts, Genesis 35.20.
for which it was likely, that his memory should not without a Monument, set up
a noted pillar in his life time, to continue his name after death, 2 Samuel
18.18. The Man solemn built by Artemisia to her decre husband deceased, has
been, for the statclinesse, one of the seven wonders of the world: And it is
incredible to recoum what costly Pyramides Turkish Emperors have built for the
continuance of name. And some have doted so far, not content to have the
memories of their friends thus continued, as of excelient men and women they
have delighted, in procuring divine honors unto them, as unto he and she gods.
But the witty scoff of Agesilaus King of the Lacedaemonians may well be
applied unto such, who when the Thraceans would needs put divine honors upon
him for his good deserts toward them, said: Deos vosipsos prius facite, rum
deisicandorum hominum potestatem vobis esse credam. First make your selves
gods, and then I will believe that yeo have power to make other men gods. We
are not of those Christians, that do thus, robbing God of his honor, honor
the Saints of God departed, or such as by excessine cost robbing the poor,
seek to enrich the tombs of the dead. As rom says of the costly Churches and
Monasteries built to the honor of Saints, so may we justly say here. Quis tam
insipiens est, vt non intelligat, quod talia aedificia non cedunt ad
Deigloriam, sed ad mundi pompam? Who is so foolish, that he does not understand
that such buildings tend not to the glory of God, but to wordly pomp? And
again, Qualis potest esse iustitia munerare mortuos, and spoliare viuos? What
righteousness can this be to honor the dead, and to spoil the living? we
print and paint, carue and grave, enely for their just commendation, that we
may remember, that as their memory lives upon earth amongst men, so their
soulos live always amongst Angels in heaven; and that having them still, as
patterns before our eyes, we may be whetted on to an imitation of their
virtues, who have so happily run their race, finished their course; and
already received the crown of righteousness. This Worthy, whom I here
describe, deserved more cost then I have, or was able to bestow, and I confess
that her excellency compared with the simplicity of this rapsody, or hastened
labor of mine, has hither to deterred me from making it public. But now,
because I see it is expected, and I might otherwise be blamed at many hands,
for neglect of so great good deserts, I have adventured it forth, and if I have
not so fully displayed her colors, as I might, the fault was in your too great
secrecy, through which, her singular, pious, and charitable acts done by her
in so great closenes, were hidden from my knowledge, so that I could not insert
them. And because it is for her memory, that I have done this, I have divided
it, deuoting to her as is most proper, the dedication, and to you the
consolation. Wherefore take that which is yours, and whereof ye have inst
cause, having a wife, a mother already so highly advanced in heaven: of who I
may without flattery, to my knowledge, Pro. 31.29.
use the words of Lemuels mother, Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou
furmountest them all. It is not, if it be duly considered, your loss, and but
her gain, though I confess it a great loss to us all, for with the loss
gain redounds unto us. Whilst she liucd, we could have only the comfort of
one in the journey with us, now she is dead, we may have the comfort of one,
our iourney-fellow safely come to the end of the way. And this is a double
comfort, the one for that one of our near fellow members is gone from misery
to glory, the other for that in her we have been more confirmed, who saw her
joyful end, so many as walk after him. For we ought to rejoice with those
that rejoice, and it was the ancient enstome of the Church of God, and now is
to give God thanks for the happy departure of good Christians, in regard of
their breaking the ice before us, to the confirming of our hope, when we shall
follow after. Unto this monument, for the further garnishing, I have added a
discourse of another Saint dying long ago, which deserves to be engraven in
marble with a pen of iron. And this I have done to supply my wants, through
defect of memory, in setting down her speeches and prayers: For look what is
here spoken in exhorting, in comforting, in reforming, and in praying, was all
in effect spoken by her, if a register here of had been made. And I have made
this addition the rather, that all the world may know, that in what faith, and
hope, and affections, and judgments, good Christians amongst us dye now a
days in the same faith and affections the most learned and holy servants of
God died twelve hundred years ago. For let who so will look with a single eye
into this Treatise, and he shall plainly see, that Ierom held a particular
faith, prayed only to God, professing great boldness, for that Christ was his
brother, renounced all merit of his own works, and believed to pass
immediately to be auen, being shaken with no fear of purgatory fire, with many
points more, which may easily be gathered. But I forget my self, I write too
long an Epistle before so brief a work. I conclude therefore, and pray the
God of comfort to fill you with true heavenly comfort to the end. Amen.

Your Worships in all duty to be commanded in the Lord. I. M.

Luke 2.29, 30. Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to
thy word: For mine eyes have seen thy salvation.


THese are the words of Simeon an old man that feared God, who in all
likelihood by reading the Prophecy of Daniel, Chap. 1.9. and finding out that
about this was the time of the Messiah, prayed to the Lord, that he might be
so happy, as to see him before his death, whereunto the Lord condescending,
promises that he should not die before he had seen his Savior. And
accordingly moving him by the Spirit to go to the Temple, when his Savior
being now a child of forty days old, was brought thither with an offering
according to the Law, he granted him his hearts desire, and gave him a sight of
him, whom for joy he takes into his arms, and yields himself to dye, in
singing, Lord now let thou thy servant depart etc.

In these words are two things: Simeons sight, and Simeons joy: His sight, Mine
eyes have seen thy salvation: His joy, Lord now let thou thy servant
depart in peace according to to thy Word.

For the first: Mine eyes: that is, not only the eye of my mind, with which I
saw him long ago, but also the eyes of my body. Thy salvation that is, thy
Son, by whom the salvation of the Elect is wrought, who for this excellency
above other saviors, is called Salvation.

Son of God, and their eternal salvation wrought by him. This favor had
Simeon and Anna, and many faithful, both men and women in those days who not
only with the eyes of their mind, but even with their bodily eyes also saw
their salvation. And all the faithful in all ages, both before and since the
birth of Jesus, have been made partakers of this favor, with their eyes to
see their salvation. Of Abraham the the Lord says; Ioh. 8.56.
Abraham desired to see my day, and saw it, and rejoiced: And of the rest S.
Paul to the Hebrews says, Heb. 11.13
They all diea in faith, and obtained not the promises, but saw them a far
off. And since the death of Jesus, all the believers have seen, and have
herein been more blessed then they which seeing with their bodily eyes
believed. According to which the Lord Jesus himself teaches, when Thomas
would not believe till he had seen with his bodily eyes Jesus risen again, and
felt him with his hands, saying; O Thomas, thou have seen, Ioh. 20.29.
and believed, blessed are they that have not seen, and yet believe. So that
it is a greater favor not to see with the eyes of the body, and yet to
believe, then to see with these eyes, and so to believe. And of this favor did
this our dear sister partake, whilst she lived in this world, her eyes did see
her salvation, she did constantly heleeue in Jesus Christ, and only relied
upon him for the obtaining of everlasting life. And whereas some things do
trouble the sight of the eyes, and some things again do help and clear it,
she that obtained a more clear sight by removing the hindrances, and using
the helps most carefully. The things that trouble the sight are sins, and the
thing that helps, is the eye-salue of the Spirit, that is the annoynting of
the Holy Ghost. For the Church of Laodicea living in sin is reproved, as
miserable, Reu. 3.17, 18.
poor, and blind, and for remedy is counseled to buy eye-salue of the
Spirit. Even as the bodily eye (says S. Augustine) which is made to behold the
light, Aug. Mat. Hom. 18.
if dust or any offensive thing rusheth into it, it is so troubled, as that it
is not only not able to behold the light, but must be hidden from it, as not
able to endure the light, for that it now becomes hurtful to the eye: so the
eye of the mind, by sin is made unable to behold the Lords Salvation, yea it
is rather troubled at it. This excellent Saint of God knowing this, did always
most carefully shun all sin, keeping a most diligent watch over her ways,
and by the daily humble acknowledgement of her infirmities, had her eyes
cleared from the dust of sin. And as touching the annoynting, this was
plentifully diffused upon her soul, there being in her a most fragrant smell
of all Christian graces.

First, she was anointed with a heavenly zeal as Mary the sister of Lazarus,
Luc. 10.42
who thought that one thing necessary her delight, was to sit at the feet of
Christ, with all diligence to hear him preaching in the ministry of his holy
word.

Neither the length of the way, the cold and wet of the winter, neither the
businesses of the world could hinder her feet from coming to the house of God.
Upon the Lords days, upon Lecture-daies, and upon every occasion of
preaching, she was seen with the forwardest about the Lords Service. In her
private family, prayers morning and evening, reading of the Scriptures, and
singing of Psalms, were never wanting in many years. Besides, that the
Sermons were most carefully rehearsed, servants and children duly enstructed,
and many heavenly speeches by her continually ministered, to the breeding of
grace in the hearers. By this heavenly exercizing of her self, then she had
her conversation in heaven, Phil. 3.20.
and so could not but see her salvation there laid up. Sicut corpus quod aeris
puritate perfruitur, etc. Even as the body (faith Chrysostom) which lives in
pure and clear air, Chrysostom. Matthew. Hom. 2.
enjoys health, and a more clear sight, but if in a thick or smoakie air,
it is much annoied hereby: So the soul, which is exercised in heavenly, sees
the things of God more clearly, whereas the smokines of manifold worldly
businesses much troubles the sight.

Secondly, she was anointed with wisdom, Abigail, who is said to be of
excellent understanding. She did not lose her time in hearing, reading,
discourse, and meditation; but profited more then many more ancient, to apply
that of David unto her: Psalm. 119.100.
I am become wiser then the ancient, because I keep thy commandments. Such
was her understanding, as that she could readily recite sit texts of Scripture
for any purpose, and find them out, and for harder places, by singular labor,
she attained good skill herein. She was not like the dull Hebrews, Heb. 5.
that were like babes in understanding, when by reason of the time they might
have been Doctors: but her knowledge with the time increased, so as that like
a teacher, she was capable of great mysteries. Old nature was not so in her, as
that she should be blinded from perceiving the things of God, but the new
Spirit gave her an understanding of all things, 1 Cor. 2.14.
as it is said; The natural man perceives not the things of God, but the
spiritual man discerueth all things: She had doubtless then a clear sight of
her salvation given by God, seeing that they which are thus enlightened, 1 Cor.
2.12
have received the Spirit of God, whereby they know the things given them of
God.

Thirdly, Dorcas, Acts 9.35.
her love was exceeding great, both toward God, and toward her neighbor. Of
God, her love was so great, as that she burnt with the fire of earnest zeal
for his glory, stoutly, even beyond the strength of her sex opposing sin, and
maintaining virtue in those that were about her: As David, Psalm. 101.7
in setting forth his zeal, so it may truly be said of her; A wicked person
shall not stand in my sight. If any were near in alliance, or great in worldly
respects, yet if they were not orious for finne, she took no delight, but
rather a lothing of their company. 2 For the love of God, she kept a continual
watch over her ways, lest she should offend against his holy will: no child
is more afraid of offending the father or master, then she of offending God. 3
Because that notwithstanding all watches, sin cannot altogether be kept out,
she was not a little troubled for her frailties and falls, being always glad
when the Lord took the matter into his own hands, by chastizing her with
sickness: for then, and in health time also, she did much complain of her
sins and forgetfulness, for which it was necessary to be corrected. Her
continual bewailing, and often mourning, even with tears, when wicked cursed
speakers were in presence, did plainly show such an heart as Lots, so taken up
with the love of God, as that hearing and seeing any thing against God, 2 Pet.
2 8.
could not but vex the heart inwardly with sorrow.

Of her neighbor she had also a true love, not in word, but in deed: She had
love of almsdeeds, which she plentifully performed to the poor, as Job, Job
31.16, 17.
not eating her mosells alone, but the fatherless did eat part with her, from
her youth up, the poor were nou rished up with her, Verse. 20.
their loins blessed her, for that they were kept warm with her fleeces.
Whilst she lived, the hungry could not go unfed, the naked unclothed, the
sick unvisited, plentifully the Lord had dealt unto her, plentifully she gave
to the Lord again in his poor members, appointing continual relief to be
given to the sick and needy, in such places of great poverty, as wherein she
lived not. 2 She showed love, by admonishing the disorderly, instructing the
ignorant, and exhorting the backward in religion, by all means provoking to
love and good works. O how great was her care, that her whole household and all
her neighbors might serve the Lord, that it might go well with them for ever.
3 Her love was exceeding great toward Gods Ministers and all Saints, rejoicing
always to entertain such, and to be in their company. 4 Her love was such
toward all, as that she would not give offense to any, by speaking ill of
them, neither did she delight as many do, to hear ill reports against others.
Wherefore her religion was not vain, 1 Cor. 13.
as all is without love, but it was a true religion, her purity was in heart
and in truth, and blessed are the pure in heart, Mat. 5.1.
for they shall see God. Her life was a continual laying up of treasure in
heaven, and therefore she could not but see heaven to be her dwelling place.
She led a right Angelical life, as Icrom truly speaks; Ieron: epist: 14
part: 3. cap: 1.
Sine hac monasteria sunt tartara, homines sunt damones, etc. Without this,
famlies are hels, and men are devils: But with this, families are paradices,
and men are Angel.: and if Angels, they see their salvation.

Fourthly, Mary the blessed mother of Christ, who being so highly graced by
God, Luc. 2.48.
yet acknowledges hearse fe his humble handmayden: Although she had something,
whereof others are proud, as birth, riches, and estimation, yet she was the
same lowly handmaid of the Lord. 1 Through humility, she made herself equal
to those that be of low degree, being even a companion of the poor ones that
fear the Lord. 2 She despised the ornaments of vanity, which other women so
much delight in, her outward habit did show the inward lowlines and modesty of
her mind. 3 She strove against the sharpness of her natural disposition, and
by striving did attain a great measure of meekness and gentleness, learning
of him that said, Matthew. 11.
Learn of me that I am meek and gentle, and ye shall find rest unto your
souls. 4 Like the poor Publican, she was always humbled in the sight of her
sins, in health and sickness never flattering herself with any thing which
she had done, but always bewailing her unworthiness and sins, with which
she said, that she always found herself compassed about. 5 Because she
thought herself worthy of greater punishments, she did humbly in all her
sufferings submit herself to whatsoever it should please the Lord to lay upon
her, verily persuading herself, that no sickness or grief came by chance,
but by Gods providence: Without murmuring or impatient complaining she buckled
her shoulders to to the yoke, often affirming, that she respected not any
sufferings here, Iam. 4.6.
so that she might go to heaven hereafter. Now to the humble it is promised,
that the Lord is near, though he despises the proud a far off. Esa. 66.2.
The Lord that inhabiteth eternity (says the Prophet) is near, and has
respect to the humble that tremble at his word: and if the Lord be near, he
is seen by the humble to be their salvation. Aug: Mat: Ser: 5.
This is the step (says Augustine) whereby we ascend up unto God: begin at the
step, if thou will come up to him. Whatsoever a man does (says Chrysostom) if
there be not humility, Chrysostom: Matthew: Hom: 15.
but vaineglory, the soul suffers shipwreck, though it be even in the haven
of tranquillity: Et quid infoelicius potest homini accidere, quam in ipsa
tranquilitatis portu naufragium facere: By humility then she sat safely in the
haven, and saw the shore, she gat up unto the step, and beheld God her
faluation.

Fifthly, Sarah, 1 Pet. 3.6.
who reverenced her husband, whose example is most carnestly by S. Peter
commended to all wives, promising, that thus they become the daughters of
Sarah, not being terrified with any fear. Whetfore having this virtue also
added, she was doubtless without fear steadfast in the faith of her salvation.

Unruly wines, like unto Rachel the wife of Iaacob, Genesis 30.1.
quarrelling with their husbands, 2 Samuel 6.
or like Michol the wife of David, mocking their husbands, or like lezabel the
wife of Ahab, 1 Kin. 21.
imperious over their husbands, and helping them forward in sin, or like
Peninnah the wife of Elkana puffed up, 1 Samuel 1.
because of their fruitfulness, or like the daughters of lerusalem, vainly
decking themselves without end in superfluous implements to the needless cost
of their husbands, these and the like have such a mist or dark clowd of black
sins before their eyes, as that they cannot see this salvation: they may have
hope indeed, but their hope is presumption, the end of which is damnation.

Now as this elect servant of God was beautified with these graces in her
health, so they remained in her, without being dimmed in her last sickness.

1. For heavenly zeal, she gave a sure instance hereof in the beginning of
this sickness, by commanding her servants not to trouble her with any worldly
affairs, for now she would wholly be settled to heaven. And indeed she lay in
her sick bed as in heaven, full of heavenly speeches, and of heavenly comfort.
Now all her practice was praying, confessing of sins, singing P^almes, and
godl^ conference.

2. For wisdom, when strength of body falled her, this was strong yet in he.
euon unto the end; most wisely she spoke to every thing, with much
understanding producing sundry places of the holy Scriptures. Being much
troubled for her sins, and buffetted by the temptations of Satan, she said,
that she had yet much assurance, because that, Mat. 11.28
Come unto me (says the Lord) all you that are weary and beauy laden, and I
will refresh you: He bids to come, said she, and come all, yea even such
wretches as I am. Again, Lue. 10.
Mary (said she) that had chosen the better part, was promised, that it should
never be taken from her, and the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance: And again, the Church says, Come; and the Spirit says, Come who
so will, and drink of the water of life freely. Another time being dealt
withal about willingness to depart out of this world, yea said she, Lot was
a worthy man, yet he was feign to be pulled out of Sodom. Another time, after
great trouble of mind, being restored again to comfort by prayer Thou art a
God (said she) that hear prayer, therefore to thee shall all flesh come,
with many like sayings excellently applied, which I cannot repeat again.

3. For true love, that still abounded in her toward God, her love did
wonderfully show it self, by the great care which she had all the time of her
painful sickness, that nothing in her passions might proceed from her, to
scandalize that holy profession, which she had entertained, whereby God might
be dishonored; and by her great remorse and sorrow for any behauior amiss in
her greatest extremity. No heart could be pricked more for sin, then her
tender heart was, for her slips in her greatest passions, she wished rather to
be as Lazarus, then to be any way a scandal, or means of the opening of
wicked mouths against the Gospel. Oh that we had all in our health and freedom
from distractions, that tenderness of heart and affection toward Gods glory,
so should not blasphemous mouths be set so wide open to speak evil of our
Christian profession, neither should so many stumble and be hindered from the
right way. She exceeded also still in love of her neighbors, as her alms were
always great, so now much more willing, that both money and cloth should be
plentifully given to the poor round about. She thewed a right mother like
affection to her children, commending to them in patticular the fear of God,
and the love of the virtuous, and charity to the poor, with many other good
exhortations; to her maidens likewise, she had memorable speeches of
instruction and admonition, and the like

4. For Humility, she did with all patience bear her sickness, no
discontented speeches, no impatient complainings, no distempered groanings were
heard to come from her: but when she had greatest pangs, her mourning was
inward, and when she had any little time of respit, she was very cheerful,
singing and talking comfortably.

A most happy woman then was she, Simeons most delightful sight was her sight,
in health and sickness to the last, with her eyes she did see her salvation.

2. For the joy: Now let thou thy servant depart in peace] Let depart,
or dismissest, or let loose, (...), even as a man let loose out of prison,
or held longer then he would from the place which he desires to go unto, but
now sent away. Inpeace, that is, in joy and comfort, for such as depart in
peace go away comfortably.

Simeon obtaining this favor to see the Lords salvation, did joyfully dispose
himself to go out of this world, and every Simeou, that is, every faithful
person is likewise joyful and comfortable against the terrors of death,
whenever it comes. The changing of their hairs into gray in old age, the
wrinckling of their faces, their deaf ears, dirnme eyes, their lame and aching
limbs, summoning to death, do not dismay them. If their streights be such, as
that they see nothing but death before their eyes, yet they rejoice with Paul,
saying: I have fought a good fight, I have run a good race, now remains for
me the crown of righteousness, etc.

And great reason is there, that the faithful should cheer up themselves when
death approaches, because there is nothing in death to hinder, but all things
to further their joy. For death is nothing but a letting loose of the soul to
go to Christ, for which cause Paul speaking here of says, Phil. 1.17.
desiring to be loosed and to be with Christ, which is best of all. Now who
would be grieved to be let loose, and not rather rejoice to be let loose from
the straight prison of the body, that the soul may enjoy the liberty of its
proper Country, viz. heaven, from whence it came.

2. Death is nothing, but an vncloathing, a putting off of base rags, that we
may be clothed with glorious apparel: 2 Cor. 5.3.
We sigh desiring to be unclothed, not that we may be lest naked, but that we
may be clothed upon, that death may be swallowed up of life. Our body
wherewith we are now clothed is moitall, the clothing to come is immortal,
never wearing away, it is heaven which is glorious and everlasting.

3. Death is nothing else but a sweet sleep after long and toylesome labor.
For blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, they rest fro their labors,
says the Spirit, and their works follow them.

After the hard brunt of the jews malicious onset, Steven is said to have
fallen asleep: And who is not glad when the time of rest comes after long and
painful labor?

4. Death is nothing else but a committing of the soul into the hands of holy
Angels, to be carried into the company of Patriarchs and Prophets to live
together in continual feasting and joy. For when Lazarus dyed, the Angels
carried him into Abraham's bosom: Luc. 16.
and the faithful are said to sit down in the kingdom of Heaven with
Abraham, Luc. 13.29.
Isaak and Iaacob. And who would be afraid or grieved to go into such company,
to live in so joy full a place, whatsoever he must forsake in this world?
seeing that here many bitter morsels are mixed with our sweet bits, but there
is all sweet and pleasant meat without any dram of bitterness.

But it will against this be objected, Ob.
that if this be the case of the faithful, then many that live a good life, and
express greatest zeal, do show littie sign of their faith toward their
end, seeing they are wonderfully uncomfortable, and oftentimes loath to depart.

I answer, that this may happen even in the true faithful servants of God, and
yet their faith remain unshaken.

First, through the desire of bringing more glory to God, and of heaping up a
greater treasure in Heaven: Thus Hezekiah pleaded for life in his great sickness
because says he, the living, the living they shall praise thee; he he did
earnestly desire, because that he was yet young and able to live to gloritie
God more in this world. Even as the laboring man that serves a good master, if
his wages be offered him before the end of the day, that he may be dismissed,
he is loath to receive them yet, because he had rather hold out in the service
of so bountiful a master, and do him a full days work: so the faithful
person, though he be assured of Heaven when he dies, yet he had rather
continue, whilst ability serves to do God more service in this world, before
his dismiss, that doing a full days work, he may partake the more of the
Lords bounty.

Secondly, this salleth out sometime through the violence or the disease, the
greatness of the pain be^umming the sense for a time, so a that there is no
feeling of comfort, but great heaviness. Thus the Lord lesus himself in his
extreaine passions was in a wonderful agony, and heavy, till that the Angels
came and comforted him: and much more the weak members of Christ, when their
passions are extreme, must needs be heavy and uncomfortable, and loath to come
near death for a season. Even as the Labourer in the extreme heat of the day
being pained with toil and the weather, is without all comfort, although he be
sure of his wages at night: so the faithful soul being scorched with the heat
of extreme pangs, has no feeling of comfort, although he be assured of his
reward at the last.

Thirdly, this falls out through Satan's temptations, who then assaulteth most
busily, when we are weakest, and herein he often prevails so far, as that
the patient can find no comfort, though he prays again and again. Thus S.
Paul, when he was most highly favored of God, had the buffettings of Satan, by
which he was exceedingly cast down, 2 Cor. 12.
and prayed once, twice, thrice before that he could receive any comfort. Even
as the manly Soldier, who having fought valiantly, and a breach being made now
in the wall, through which he is entering the city, is notwithstanding much
daunted by the desperate Adversary, which makes the passage very hard and
painful unto him, insomuch as for a time there is nothing but horror before
his eyes, though he sees the resistance to be so weak, as that he cannot
possibly be kept from the spoil: So the Christian soldier sighting manfully
all his life time, and the breach being now made in his last sickness, though
he sees the riches of the new lerusalem, from which he cannot be stopped, yet
by Satan, now growing de perate, he is so resisted, as that his brunt is very
grievous, and he is much dismayed. It is not so even with wie ked persons, for
they lie upon their sick beds oftentimes with more comfort, and even quietly
depart out of this world: but this is partly because their pangs are not so
great, they being spared here to be the more tormented hereafter, and partly
because the Deuid having them in his suare, is no way troublesome unto them,
but rather as an Angel of light speaks all peace and comfort, till they be
in the midst of his laws: As Elishahs servant led the Syrians with hope, 2
King. 6.
till they were taken in the midst of their enemies.

Wherefore let no faithful person be discouraged for the brunts which the
godly suffer in their sickness, neither let the wicked be encouraged for the
easy passage of some of the common sort: for it remains firm: Such as see
by faith their salvation shall depart in peace, and none else. Had we not an
instance of this in our faithful sister? She had brunts of temptations,
brunts of pangs, and part of her day yet in the course of nature remaining, and
young children, amongst whom she might think profitably to spend her time to
Gods glory: yet howsoever these things might trouble her joy, yet they could
not all take it from her. For upon the Saturday growing very weak, and being
much troubled for a time, she yet professed her steadfast assurance, willing one
that was then about to go to a friend of hers (a Gentle woman that had labored,
but could not find assurance) to commend her unto her, and certify her what
joy she had, saying that she undoubtedly should rather have the like. Soon
after this being through this joy revived in her spirit, she arose from her
bed, and sang most sweetly saying, that it put her in mind of the singing in
heaven. The next day being the Lords day, when she heard the family singing
below in the house, she said, that she should be singing, ere, long in heaven.
That night being prayed for sundry times, when mention was made of restitution
to health in prayer, she seemed not to be much moved, but when heaven was
mentioned, and being received thither, she said aloud, Amen; Soon after
midnight, she said, that she had agreat conflict, neither could we conceive
what she felt, but soon after most comsortably, He is come (said she) he is
come, the Devil is overcome, the world is ouercom, and the slesh is overcome:
Into thy hands (o father) I cemmend my spirit: and so fell asleep, her eyes
being shut, and teeth set. But breath being perceived to be in her, they strove
to revive her, which was a great trouble unto her: Yet through the mercy of God
she obtained her old comfort again, by many signs testifying her assurance
to the end, and departed upon the Mun day-night, quietly falling at it were,
into a sleep. And so she is departed in peace, and rests in joy with her
beloved Savior. So then happy is she, but woe is us from whom she is departed,
we may justly weep and lament. Her husband may lament, from whom is departed a
heavenly, wise, humble, loving and obedient wife Her children may lament, from
whom is departed a mother by nature, a mother by grace, who, as the Apostle,
labored till Christ was formed in them. The poor may lament, from whom is
departed a faithful Patroness, full of good works toward them. We
Ministers may lament, from whom is departed a careful hearer, yea, an helper
in our labors. Women may lament, from whom is departed the ornament of women.
And all the neighbors round about may lament, both men and women, from whom is
departed a great light, a star shining in a dark place, following which, we
may be sure to see light. She is departed, but her memory diueth, and shall
live, for the memorial of the just shall be blessed. Pro. 10.10.
And let her memory live in us, as long as we live, we treading in the same
steps, and being transformed into the same image of heauenlinesse, wisdom,
love, and humility, that when we shall be infeebled, and death shall approach,
we may also joyfully dispose our selves heereunto, and say, Lord now let
thou thy sevuint depart in peace, according to thy word, for mine eyes have
seen thy saltiation: Which the Lord grant unto us for his mercies take in
lesus Christ: To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory, now and for cuermore, Awen.

The last words of that holy and learned father Ierom, who died the 96 year of
his age, Anno Dommi 422. translated out of Latin: and transferred hither as
most a uaileable to stir up true Piety, and to mortifi. worldly Vanity, and to
prepare to a comfortable departure.
WHen the time of his death was now come, through a hot burning-Feuer, he
willed his sons to come together about him, whom like young-plants he had
established from their youth vp-ward. Whose mourning, when his grave
countenance beheld, through piety, and mercy being moved a little while hereat,
he sighed in his Spirit, and weeping, lifting up his eyes, he spoke thus: O my
son Euse bius, why do thou shed those unprofitable tears, is it not a
vain thing to shed tears over the dead? What man living is there that shall
not see the dissolution of this mortal body? Dare thou speak against that,
which the Lord has once spoken, and thou have heard, seeing thou know, that
no man can resist his will? Now I beseech thee (O son) walk not according to
the flesh, cease to weep, surely the weapons of our warfare are not carnal.
Then with a merry countenance, and cheerful voice he said unto the rest: Let
sadness cease, let mourning be put away, let there be one voice of joy amongst
you all: for behold the acceptable time, behold the day of iubilation, and of
gladness above all the days of my life, in which the faithful Lord according
to his word, does open his hand, that he may call back (to the supernall
Country recovered by the precious death of his own son) my soul hitherto
in banishment in the prison of this death, for the guilt of my forefather Alam.
O most dearly beloved sons, do not hinder my joy, do not seek to keep
from the earth that which helongeth unto it. For ye ought, as the Ministers,
and household Servants, and friends of God to aspire after spiritual things,
that ye may be an example unto others. Why do ye, that are spiritual pour
out those so many vnfruitrull tears? Let the remembrance of sin make you
always to weep, be as ready to weep, as you have been to offend. Weep if
any man dies in sin; for, if when a wicked man ari seth from death by
repentance, the Angels reioyc. in heaven; surely if any man, that has bin
good, dies in sin, the Angels sorrow. But bewaise not me, as one dying, but
rejoice with me, as one touching the haven of salvation. What is weaker than
the miseries of this life, which is compassed bout with so many troops of
sorrows and passions, as that there is almost no hour, wherein any living man
whatsoever may pass free from sorrow? If the rich man be pressed on every
side with fear, lest he should loose, that which he does possess; if the
poor man be never it rest, that he may get ^iches; if a good man does on this
side fear the daager of the Deaill; and on that side, lest the ship of this
mortal body should suffer shipwreck in the sea of this world; and no age, or
sex, or condition does pass free from sorrow, as long as it remains in the
misery of this life. If ye know any thing in me an hinderance to my journey,
sorrow. Alas how many of those, that sail through this great, and spacious
sea, (in which are so many diverse kinds of enemies wrestling together,
according to the quantity of each ones strength) after much happiness in
sailing, after many victories, thinking even now to obtain their wished for
end, have come in this very hour into the snare of perditict by some
diabelicall suggestion? Alas, how many does both life and same here recommend,
over whom, by the only consenting unto sin, cruel death, and ruin hangs?
Therefore, whilst ye live, fear (o brethren); the fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom; our life is a warfare upon earth, he that overcomes
here, shall be crowned elsewhere. Whilst we are coucred with this skin, v.e
have no complete victory. If our forefather had feared, he had never fallen.
Presumption of a man's self is the beginning of all evils, and he that fears
not, does presume upon himself. How can any man laden with gold go securely
amongst thieves? What other thing does our Sautour teach us, but to fear, when
he says Watch for ye know not at what hour the thief will come. S. Peter
says, 1 Pet. 5.
Be ye sober, brethren, and watch, because your adversary the devil goes
about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. No man dwells
securely amongst serpents. He which is more holy, and more wise, let him
always fear more, for he which is higher, if he falls, receives the
greater fall. A choice one is the Devils prey, he cares not for taking the
wicked, because they are his own already. That wise man Solomon fell, and his
Father David, a man after Gods own heart. Fear (O brethren) again I pray you
fear on every side, for blessed is the man that fears the Lord: if tents be
pitched against him, his heart shall not be afraid, if war rises up against
him, herein he shall have hope. The perfect fear of the Lord casts vain
fear out of doors. Love has no vain fear, love and the fear of God are
one, which the Prophet considering cries out and says: Psalm. 26.
Settle thy fear within me. Who is there amongst you, Psalm. 98.
that desires to see good days, let him come hither, and be enlightened, and
his face shall not be confounded. He that fears the Lord shall do good
things, and his soul shall dwell in good, and his seed shall inherit the Land.
For the Lord is a sure stay to those that fear him; and he will declare his
will unto them: If ye do any good, take heed, that ye fear. Many do good
things, whose fruit the desire of the praise of men does steal away. There
were ten Virgins, and yet half of them were shut out of heavens door.
Alas how many are at this day regenerate by holy baptism, and have the name
of Christians, for whom it had been better, that they had never been? For the
pains of hell, which the Pagans shall suffer, are far lesser, then the
pains of wicked Christians. I would to God, that the greater part were not
such. The ship that is cuery where sound is drowned by one little hole. Men
have gone out of the way in this large wilderness, some submitting their
necks to the yoke of covetousness; others, like most filthy swine, being
held in the filth of luxury, others occupied about the wresting away of things
unprofitable: whence it comes to pass, that the use of reason being cast
away, they doing like brute beasts are made like unto them, and have not found
the way to the new City Jerusalem. Such a man's way is an hundredth fould
streighter, then it is thought to be, and yet it is large to all such as truly
fear. Christ promises to come to the Ceuturion fearing, but denies to come
to the pettie-King presuming. All do not truly obey the Gospel. The time
shall come, says the Apostle, wherein men will not suffer wholesome doctrine.
Many preach, but all do not preach the truth. They bind the hearts of simple
men in sins. They bind heavy burdens in the least sins, and pass over
greatest sins winking with the eye. There is a false Doctor, a doubtful
sword: on the one side he cutteth with his example, and work; on the other
side he smites and kills with deceitful, and wicked words. How should the
fire gine cold, and the water heat, how should the stone go upward, and how
should the filthy man preach chastely? And if he does preach, what profit
comes hereby to the Hearers? What can he that hears say, but why do thou
preach with thy voice that which thou deniest with thy work? He that speaks
well with his tongue, and lives ill, damneth himself. Behold the Psalmist
shows, how acceptable such preaching is unto the Lord. To the Sinner, says
God, Psalm. 50.
Why do thou declare my righteousness, and take my word into thy mouth,
seeing thou hate to be reformed? Many read great things, and learn hard
things, dispute subtly, and speak finely, that they may be honored of the
people, that they may be counted masters of the common sort, and yet do
nothing. If ye believe experience, believe me, the holiness of life does more
move the hearts of men, then fine speeches. Be Doers, and so preach: doing
without preaching prevails, Math. 7.
but not preaching without doing. God has not said, he that preaches the
will of my Father, but he that does it. I dispraise not preaching, but only in
those, that do not the things, which they preach. A Teacher of subtle words
only, and not of works is a certain light breathing into the ears, and a
smoke soon passing away without fruit. Understand (o brethren) understand
what I say: he does much better, that preaches and does, then he, that
does, and preaches not. If I only do good, I profit my self alone: but if
I both preach and do, I profit my self, and others also: According to which
it is said; They which instruct others in righteousness shall shine as the
stars for ever, and ever. For Preachers are a light to inlighten with their
doctrine hearts dim, and blind by reason of the cloud of sin, and that
with the light of Christ, that shines in darkness. They are also for the
seasoning of the word, which is the food of the soul, when it is joined with
good works. The duty of preaching is enjoined every one that knows; if he
be a Doer. Yea that I may say more, he that knows, and does only, and
teaches not others shall give account to the Lord therefore. For seeing,
according to the Apostle John, He that hates his brother is a murderer, and
he that has this worlds goods, and sees his brother in need, and yet
shuts up his bowels against him, has not the love of God in him: How much
more is he a Murderer and without the love of God, who seeing his brother out
of the way, and oppressed with deadly sins, and yet knowing, how to do it,
does not Minister unto him the word of doctrine? Fear O ye Rectours and
Teachers, to whom the Lord inioyneth the duty of preaching, that we should
minister unto his people the word of the Lord. For look, how many die in their
sins, through your example, or negligence, so many will the Lord require at
your hand. For by how much the higher ye be in degree, by so much ye shall be
tortured with the greater torments. Ye are not Lords, but shepherds. There is
one Lord, and one chief Shepherd, which knows his sheep, and will require
them at your hands. Alas how many are this day in the Church, not Shepherds,
but Hirelings, to whom the sheep of Christ do nothing pertain? Moreover,
that I may speak truly, and as themselves know, they are ravening Wolves,
which tear and disperse the sheep. Certainly nothing is worse, nothing more
abominable, then when they scatter the sheep, which ought to keep them. Alas
what is done at this day by some, not shepherds of the Church, but Destroiers,
which are not the lesser part? They do vnsatiablie devour, even like hell, the
goods, and labors of men, and do not only not reform them, from their
sins, but even they themselves do draw them to things unlawful, either by
their own negligence, or by their most wicked instruments, or by their
ungodly works in such sort, as that I must needs say, if God should leave
them being such unpunished, he should be no longer God. And therefore as I
have often said (my most dear sons) serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice
before him with trembling, lay hold upon his righteousness, least ye perish
from the right way. Taste, and see, how sweet the Lord is. The rich have
wanted, and been hungry, and such as have slept here in their riches, and
pleasures have found nothing; but such as seek after the Lord, do want no good
thing. I have bin young, and now am old, yet never did I see the righteous
forsaken to the end, nor his seed wanting bread. Be ye followers of poverty,
that ye may be his followers, who when he was in the likeness of God upholding
all things by the word of his power, in whose house are riches, and glory, yet
he abased himself, taking upon him the form of a servant and was borne poor,
and penurious, and was more than poor, and penurious, all the time that he
lived here, and died most poor, and was buried: whereupon, The foxes, says
he, Luc. 10.
have holes, and the birds of the air nests, but the Son of man has not
whereupon to lay his head. He also bids the Apostles not to carry scrip or
satchell; and he advised the young man to sell such things as he bad, and to
give to the (...) it is impossible (...) and in riches, and to (...) Christ. Is
there (...), There riches be (...) is more (...)? Do not all evils a^^e out of
pride as out of one root? For when a man is made rich, and the glory of his
house is increased, does he not wax proud? and if he be proud, are not his
ways ever polluted? and then the rich man sitting in secret with his riches,
does devise how he may slay the innocent. His eyes look upon the poor, and he
lays wait in secret, that he may catch him, as a Lion in his den, saying in
his heart, God has forgotten, he has turned away his face, and will never
see. But when the Lord through patience does use more delay in executing
iudegment, he is more full of anger, and therefore he is an hundredth times
more to be feared, when he does patiently tolerate evils, than when he does
hastily punish. For God does sometime suffer the good to be vexed of the evil,
and of the proud, so that they make long furrows upon their backs, and
continue in their wickedness. But though the Lord seems a little to forget the
poor, yet he will not ever forget to be merciful: for he is the helper of the
fatherless, and the protector of the poor; he resists the proud, and gives
grace to the humble. He breaks the arm of the sinner, and wicked one, and
hears the desire of the poor, and judges the cause of the fatherless, and
of the humble, that the proud man upon earth may not exalt himself any more.
Wherefore (my most dearly beloved sons) if ye will be poor, be humbled under
the mighty hand of God, that ye may not loose those things, which ye do.
Poverty is no whit acceptable unto God without humility. He chose rather to
take flesh of blessed Mary for her humility, than for any other virtue. For as
out of the only root of pride all evils do arise, so out of the only root of
humility, all good things are bred. Learn of our Savior, who being gentle,
and humble in heart, abased himself for us, becoming obedient even to the
death of the Cross. For which cause I say unto you, if ye will be humble, be
obedient to every humane power for Gods cause. He is not obedient, but
negligent, who expects to be bidden the secoud time it is said, that Peter,
and Andrew at the voice of one bidding left their nets, and all that they had,
and followed the steps of the Lord. True obedience always wishes in nothing
to follow a man's own will, but the will of another. For Christ left this for
an example unto us in his last supper, when having washed the feet of his
disciples, he said unto Peter, that unless he would yield unto him, he should
have no part with him. Wherefore (my most beloved sons) as ye have one name,
so have one will, and one will, for it is a good and pleasant thing for brethren
to dwell together in unity. Let no man be greater, or less amongst you, but
after the example of Christ, let every man be greatest in humility. Let the
greatest amongst you in humility become a fellow to the least, when he does
well, but when he sins, let him lift up himself against vice through the
zeal of righteousness. Never make any covenant with sin, let a man be loved
so, as that his vice may be hated. It is a great sign of love to reprove a man
in all the least offenses. Vain humility does oftentimes much hurt. It is no
true humility to suffer vices by holding a man's peace. Cry out, cease not,
lift up thy voice as a trumpet, says he to Esaias, tell my people of their sins:
and I would to God, that every creature could cry out against sin, because
that, although the sinner does not fear God, he would yet be afraid of men.
The negligence, and vain humility of the shepherd makes, that the Wolves can
be bold against the Lambs. Look not upon the countenance of the mighty, for
there is no acceptance of persons before God. Do in all things that which is
just, ye must rather obey God than men. If ye conceal the truth for fear of
the mighty, do ye not consider in your selves, that your righteousness does
not exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees? Do not honor a rich
man more than a poor man, unless he be better: Yea, that I may speak truly,
honor rather a poor man; for in a poor man does shine the image of Christ, in
a rich man the image of the world. We all come from one root of flesh, we are
all bred members of one another in the same body, whereof the head is Jesus
Christ. What honor then has the rich and mighty man merited more than the
poor man? Peradventure, because he is rich and mighty; but if it be thus, why
do we preach, that the glory of the world is to be despised? Surely I think,
that no man is to be honored for the use of evil things. If thou honor
the rich more than the poor, thou preferrest the world before God, and if thou
love any thing in the world more than God, thou art not worthy of God. Give,
I pray you, the things of God, unto God, and the things of the world unto the
world. Let goodness every where be honored, let wickedness be every where
disgraced. But because I am speaking of those that do glory in their fading
riches, and of those, that are proud of a certain nobility of the filthy
flesh, which is soon to return to ashes, and of vain, and light power and
dignity (for they are lifted up by the blast of some foolish titles, and do
tread others under feet through contempt, and by this they think, that they
obtain that glory, which the Lord has prepared only for the humble, and for
the contemners of this world) what should I speak of them, as it is meet? woe
to you that hasten to the kingdom of heaven through the way of riches, seeing
that it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. These are not my words, but the
words of Christ; if this sentence be reuocable, Christ is no more God. The
heaven and the earth (says he) shall pass away, but my words shall not pass
away. Bewail (o ye miserable Nobles, and Potentates) the titles of vnslable
fortune, because ye are blinded with the fumes of the honors, and falfe
dignities of this world, when as the thread of your brittle life shall
peradventure be cut off this night, and ye shall be tormented in hell, more
than others, world without end, living in continual dying. Ye are not amongst
the laborers in the world; yea ye do not only not endure labor with men, but
ye do not suffer the laborers to live; therefore ye shall be scourged not with
men, but with devils. For by how much your glory, and joy has bin the greater
in this world, by so much the greater punishment is prepared for you in hell.
We confess, that Christ chose twelve Apostles, amongst whom Bartholomew only
was of noble descent, and Matthew only was rich, before that he was received
into the Apostleship, the rest were poor fishermen. Now hear wherefore I have
related this. If Christ be true, and all, which I have heard out of his mouth
he true, amongst such kind of men, scarce one of a thousand is to be sound fit
for the kingdom of heaven. But such of them, as do not believe me, shall
after a short time feel it, when they are placed in torments. Yet some man
blinded from the light of the truth, will now marvel: to whom, if he would
ask me hereabout, I would answer. Do we not believe, that a man is damned for
one sin? and if it be so, how can he be saved, that lives in an hundredth
thousand sins? But what other thing is the rich man, fed with the air of
fading honor, but a rotten vessel full of all sins? Where is covetousness?
where is pride? Is it not in the rich, in the noble, in the great ones? Are
they not also thieves, which do violently prey upon the hire of the poor? and
press them down, and kill them? who dowicked things out of the plenty of the
Lords house, which they have received, that they might give to the poor?
Certainly they add to superfluity in diet, superfluity in apparel, having
no regard to the poor, that dye through cold and nakedness. They rear up
palaces, and great buildings, that they may be seen, when the poor dye in
the streets. They provide feasts often for other rich men, that they may fill
their bellies with most delicate dishes, when the poor perish through samine.
What other is their life but sin? if the belly be filled with such plenty of
meat, is not surfeit at the doors? And what should I say more, when the tongue
of every man would fail in telling the thousands of sins, which they do?
Neither do they acknowledge God, unless it be by dream; neither do they
think, that they shall dye, as I suppose: for he that thinks that he shall
dye, and that God shall judge him, does not easily fall into sin. He is
verily over weak, and miserable, that has not the remembrance of these
things. Therefore to speak truly, if they did acknowledge God their judge, and
believed, that they heard, they would at the least wise not sin so securely.
Why do these most milerable men go to the Church to be present at divine
mysteries? whether that they may behold the countenances of fair women? this
is their meditation, preaching, and knowledge of God. If they look into Gods
law, it is but, that travailing by sea, or by land, they may gather money to
themselves, and their children by often watches, and distractions of mind,
that they may be the first in changing their suites, through the wonderful
invention of the workman. But miserable men, what do ye, do ye not
consider, that you destroy your body before the time, and slay your soul?
whence come weaknesses, and so untimely deaths, but of the much plenty of
meats, and of the often use of women? Do ye think to mock God? ye do
certainly mock your selves: for the body ye forget the soul, and ye destroy
both body and soul before the time. But delay not to do, what ye do; change
your garments often, lest your Nobility should decay, if any man should
exceed you, that ye may receive shame and confusion in hell. Where shall your
feasts, where shall your delicare dishes then be, where your costly wines, mixed
with honey, and spices? Banquet, and be drunken, for ye shall do no more so
after death, but being in hell torments, ye shall with the rich man desire the
least drop of water, and shall not obtain it. Take your comfort in surfets,
fulfill your pleasures, sow in corruption, that of corruption ye may reap
that sentence, which the just judge will give in the great day of judgment,
saying, Go ye cursed into heli sire, prepared for the Devil, and his angels.
O stenle heart! that do not fear, that such a doom hangs over thy head,
for the slender comforts of this world. If thou look for that day so
terrible and cruel, wherein thou shall give account, not only for thy
surfets, and vain apparel, and drunkenness, and of thy time lost, but also
of every evil thought, why art thou not amended? Why do thou wretch defer
from day to day to turn unto the Lord? why do thou not now repent thee of
thy sins? Behold, death makes haste, running night and day, that it may
tear thee in pieces: behold the Devil makes haste to catch thee: behold thy
riches shall fail thee; behold the worms wait for that body, which thou
do nourish so daintily, that they may gnaw upon it, until such time as
being received to the soul, it may together suffer endless punishments. Why
do thou seek comfort by vanities, wandering in the by-waies of this world?
Thou can not find true riches, and glory, and pleasant things here, because
they are not: but if thou seek for true joys, hasten to that heavenly
glory, for which thou were made. There doubtless are those true joys, which
the eye has not seen, nor the care heard, nor the heart conceived. Let go (I
pray thee) fading, and momentanie things, and seek things everlasting. But why
do I speak of these men, that will not cease from sin, through love and
fear of God, or for the terror of death, and torments following after, but are
grieved, if they cannot do the wicked things, which they desire? Woe, woe unto
yo^ wretches, that laugh here, for ye shall mourn; woe be to you, because ye
desire these temporal joys, ye shall suffer, though most nilling, the pains
of hell. Behold, ye have but a little time remaining, fill up the measure of
your wickedness, that all the wrath of God may come upon you. Enjoy this short
time in sports, drunkenness, and dancings, and wantonness: let not your time
be spent without these. Why delay you, whilst ye live, gather for your
children riches, honors, preferments, increase your nobility, and name, that
your children also may fulfill that, which ye have done, that ye may
altogether suffer the greater tortures in hell. But some man will say, the Lord
is good, and merciful, and receives in mercy every sinner that comes unto
him. This is true indeed I confess, the Lord is better, than he is thought to
be, he spares, as is meet, every one, that comes unto him. Is he not a most
kind God, that tolerateth so great injuries done unto him by sinners, giving
them space to amend? But thou must know this, that as he is kind in forbearing
so he is just in punishing. But some man, perchance, will say again; he which
has done evil all his life, becoming penitent at the very point of death,
obteineth pardon of the Lord. O how false an opinion, and how false a
meditation is this? Scarce one of a hundredth thousand, whose life has bin
always ill, has found this favor at the Lords hands. A man begotten, and
altogether nourished up in sin, which has neither seen nor known God,
neither has bin willing to hear of him, neither takes notice of his sins,
nor what repentance is, being altogether bound up in secular businesses, whom
the strait of forsaking his sons presses, whom weakness paineth, whom the
sorrow of riches, and temporal goods now about to be lost shakes, when he
sees, that he cannot enjoy them any longer, can such a man make repentance
acceptable unto God, who would not repent, if he did think, that he could be
healed? I may verily conclude truly, that he which does not fear to offend
God, whilst he is young, and sound, shall not be found worthy in death of the
Lords pardon. What repentance is that, which a man receives only, because he
sees, that he can live no longer? who, if he should recover from his sickness
again, would become worse than he was before. I know no mean monyed men, who
having repented them in their extremide, have waxed well again in body, and
worse in life. I hold this, I think this to be true, and have learned it by
manifold experience, that he atteineth no good end, that has always led an ill
life, which has not seared to sin, but has always lived in the vanities of
the world. Precious (says he) in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his
Saints, and most accursed the death of the wicked. And therefore (my beloved
sons) gird your selves with power, be ye mighty sons, and fear not the
slender power of the rich and mighty here, in the doing of righteousness. For
he, that suffers for righteousness is blessed, and if he suffers death, he
is more blessed. If thou desire to have life through Christ, fear not death
for Christ: for thou can not endure those things for Christ, which are worthy
of the glory to come, which shall be revealed, when our glory, which is from
above, shall appear. Let him not look for a reward that does not labor; the
name of a Christian alone does not suffice, but if thou be a Christian,
imitate Christ. He has in vain the name of a Christian, who follows the
Devil. He is no Christian, but an Antichrist, according to that of John: Ye
have heard that Antichrist comes, and now there be many Antichrists. Will thou therefore reign with Christ, then suffer with Christ. If Christ, the Lord
and King, who has a name above all names, ought to suffer, that he might enter
into his glory, what hope have thou to enter without pains? O how foolish are
we, and slow of heart to believe? We will here pass our time in pleasure with
the world, and afterward reign with Christ. Seeing the master entered naked,
shall the servant expect to enter being laden with the superfluity of apparel
of gold and pearls? He was full of fastings, this man of surfets and ryotings:
he died upon the cross for him, this man sleeps upon a delicate bed. Shall
servants do that, which the Lord does not? The Lord promises his kingdom to
the sons of Zebedee, if they could drink the cup, that he should drink. Be
ye wise, come hither, and hear me, and I will tell you the things, which I
have heard and known. It is good to cleave to the Lord, and to walk, as he
has walked. Even as Christ has laid down his life for us, so we, if need be,
ought to lay down our life for the truth, which is God himself. He that
loves his life in this world, shall loose it. Christ has suffered for us,
leaving unto us an example, that we should follow his steps. Let him not think
himself a Christian, which does not find himself ready to die for Christ Let
the minister of Christ follow Christ. Answer me (o thou man) which art a
Christian only in name and in word: do thou hold and preach the faith of
Christ? this is a good thing, but where be thy works? faith without works is
dead. Let me tell thee truly, thou which praisest Christ with thy word, and
not with thy work, do indeed deny who if thou did believe his sayings,
thou would at the least be afraid, and blush to commit sin. And if thou
do believe, and do evil, thou art to be punished an hundredth fold more. Is
not the sin, which is done out of malice infinitely worse, than that which is
done out of ignorance? The Angel sinned, and the man sinned, the one could
find pardon, the other not. For what cause? the Angel sinned out of malice,
man sinned out of the Devils suggestion. Where upon say I, thou doubtless
can have none excuse, if thou say that thou sinnest by the Devils
suggestion, even as he did, because thy suggestion is not like unto his. He
knew not yet, what the Devils suggestion meant, neither how greatly sin would
displease: but thou know well, and beleeuest, as thou say, and yet
co^mittest so many thousand fins? And what shall I conclude? they that are such
Christians believe him in word, and lie unto him with their tongue, but their
heart is not right with him, neither have they faith in his testament. If any
man loves Christ, if any man be a true Christian, and specially a Priest, in
whom, as it were in a glass, perfection does shine, he must deny himself,
that he may be altogether dead unto the world; because that unless a grain of
corn falling upon the earth, dies, it remains alone. He wandreth in the
way, that hastens to go by riches, and delights. It is a sign of manifest
damnation to follow the pleasures of this world, and to be beloved of the
world. The Lord does often correct, and chaslise those, whom be loves. If ye
must glory in the world, glory willingly in your tribulatious, and adversities:
for Christ promised these unto his Disciples, whom he loved even unto the end,
and that in sign of his chief love, when in his last supper he said, Verily I
say unto you, ye shall wail, and weep, but the world shall rejoice. Rejoice
(my most beloved sionnes) when the world hates you. Desire to suffer
contumelies, and reproaches of men, because ye shall be blessed, when men shall
curse you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely
for the son of man's sake. Know, that ye are not of the world, for if ye were
of the world, the world would love his own. Think it all joy, when ye have
many reproaches, and oppositions in the world, knowing that even out of these
does arise valor, and patience, and patience has its perfect work. Virtues
are tried by patience, even as gold by the fire. He that has other virtues
without patience, carries gold in earthen vessels. In your patience only
(said our Savior) ye shall possess your souls. Valor is joined unto
patience, a patient man is of a valiant mind, and he which is penitent, and
valiant, may securely hope for the good things of the life to come. Keep
patience in your mind, and whilst ye have time exercise it in your works.
For patience is a covering whereby our ship saileth securely in the storms of
this world, what wind soever blows, without any fear of danger. Let
reproachful words move none of you to revenge, or hatred of your neighbor. Be
ye merciful even as your Father is merciful, who does rain upon the just,
and the unjust, and makes his Sun to shine upon the good, and the bad. He
shall have judgment without mercy that does not exercise mercy, and mercy
reioiceth against judgment. If ye will not from your hearts forgive such as
offend you, neither will your Father forgive you. He does in vain ask for
mercy, which denies mercy to others. Herein is our virtue established,
herein stands our stipend, and reward, if we lone our friends in God, and
our enemies for God. That wicked servant, which received mercy, and denied
mercy to his Fellow-seruant, did therefore deserve to have the severity of
justice. Justice without mercy is cruelty, and therefore mercy is to be
mingled with justice. All our law is in mercy, God could have condemned all in
justice, whom he saved in mercy. Wherefore he that wants mercy, is no
Christian. It is almost imposlible, that a merciful, and godly man should not
pacify Gods anger. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obraine mercy. A
man without mercy is, as a ship in the midst of the sea in every part full
of holes. The Priest, which dissereth from the men of this world in apparel,
yet agrees with them in life. Cerainely there is no beast in the world so
cruel, asan evil Priest, for he death not suffer himself to be am ended, and
can never hear the truth, and that I may smish in a word, he excceds all men
in naeghtinesse. Alas how much has covetousness grown in some, that are
spiritual in habit, and name, yea, that I may speak truly, covetousness is
the cause of this spiritualitie; who truly are ravening Wolves in sheep
clothing. If thou see a Priest covetous, and without mercy, fly more from
him, then from a Serpent. There are some, which think that all the fruit,
that they are to bring forth is to build Churches, and Monasteries in a
wonderful manner, whose covetousness is so great, that they think the world,
and all things too little for them. Their mind, and thoughts are altogether
set upon this, that they may pick other men's purses. Our Savior reproving
such, says, Woe to you that build the tombs of the Prophets. Behold they that
build Monasteries, and set up Churches of rare workemanshippe seem to do a
goodly work: but if they show mercy to the poor, that is a good work
indeed. Would thou have thy work to please God, provide, that the poor may
have joy of it, what Church is more dear to God, then man? Ye are the Temple
of God, says the Apostle, when thou reachest out thy hand unto the poor, when
thou succourest a man in his necessity. When thou bring the wandering in to
the right-way, Oh, what an admirable temple, and acceptable unto God have thou
built. Break thy bread unto the hungry, and bring the poor wandering into thy
house, Let not man excuse himself, and say, I have nothing to give to the
poor, if thou have any garment, or any other thing besides very neeessaries,
and do not succout a poore-man in want, thou art a thief, and a Robber. We
are (beloned) only Stewards and not Possessours of things temporal. One man
has so much more, then he needs, as an hundredth might hue upon, which
perish thorough famine. He, that has a little, and giuoth nor, robbes one,
but such rob beth so many, as he gives not unto being in want. But perchance
thou will say (o Wretch) it is mine own, my Parents left it me. How could they
leave that to thee, which was not their own? if it were their own, whence had
they it, who gave it unto them? what brought they with them, when they came
into the world, what shall they carry away, when they go out? Certainly such
things of the poor as we possess will cry for vengeance in the day of
judgment before the eyes of Gods justice. The law of nature requires this,
that what we desire should be done unto us, we should do unto other. What
other thing does the old law publish, and if thou ask the doctrine of the
Gospel, what other thing does it infinuate? These truly shall be Witnesses
before GOD the judge. What therefore should I say to these, that only gather
together stones, and erect walls aloft, that their work may appear to the eyes
of man, and that the building may be praised? Who is so foolish, as that he
understands not, that such buildings are not to the praise of God, but for
worldly pomp. But some man will say, what, is it not good to build
Monasteries, and Churches, that God may be honored thereby: I answer, it is
good, so that the poor in the mean while cry not to God against such. How
can I build an house pleasing unto God, or to his Saints of those moneys, for
which the poor cry out? What justice can it be to reward the dead, and to
spoil the living, and out of the want of the poor to offer unto God? Certes
if this justice should please God, he should be the companion of violence, and
if it displeases God, it cannot please the Saints. Wherefore (most beloved
sons) as newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may
grow thereby, if ye have tasted, how sweet the Lord is. For verily, if ye be
not as new born, Bibes, yea shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. A newborn Babe seeing a fair woman is not delighted, beholding gorgeous apparel
he does not desire it: Being hurt he dwells not in anger, he does not
remember, nor hate therefore, he follows his father, and does not forsake his
mother. And therefore let no man think, that he shall attain the kingdom of
heaven, unless he be a follower of this innocence, viz: of chastity contempt
of the world, of love and patience, following Christ, and resting in the bosom
of the church his mother. Put off (most beloved) the old man, and put on the
armor of God, that ye may stand against the treacheries of the Devil. Let
your weapons, wherewith ye fight, be chas^itie, patience, humility, and
charity: for these are weapons against the subtleties of the Devil, wherewith
if ye be armed, ye shall gird your loins with fortitude, and strengthen your
arm, and when ye shall be in the battle, ye shall laugh, your house shall
truly be founded upon a sure rock, which is Christ. Luxury is the sword of
the Devil, as how many does he slay with that sword, and there is no sin,
whereby the Devil does so often overcome. For as chastity does equal a man
unto the Angels, so luxury does make a man like to the brute beasts: yea, to
speak truly, it makes him worse, than a beast. We do not read of any other
sin, that God said, that he repented that he made man for it. The works of
luxury are these, it weakneth the body, and does always, as it were, destroy
a man by death, it brands the good name, it emptieth the purse, it sets a work
to steal, it causes murder, it dulls the memory, it takes away the heart, it
blindes the eyes of either man, and prouokes the wrath of God above other
sins. It springs from gluttony, as from a root, and for no other sin has
God exercised so manifest judgment as for that, without all mercy. For this
sin, God brought the flood upon the world, he burnt Sodom, and Gomorrah, and
slew many other men. This is the net of the Devil, if any man be taken herein,
he is not soon let loose again. In this so grievous a battle no men can
overcome, unless he flies, none can firmly endure, unless he times the
flesh. He that uses wine, carries fire in his bosom. Be not drunken with
wine, says the A postle, where in is luxury. This brunt is not borne but by
abstinence, and fasting. Wine hurts, but the countenance of a woman an
hundredth fold more. A beautiful woman is the devils dart, whereby a man is
soon drawn into luxury. Let no man living be confident in this, if thou
be a Saint, yet thou art not secure. Can a man hide fire in his bosom, and
his garments not burn? or walk upon coals, and his feet not burn? A man
and a woman together are fire and towe, and the Devil never cease blowing to
kindle it. Many most holy men have fallen by this vice for their security,
therefore fear (o my sonaes) and if in other sins, much more in this. But,
to speak truly, a new kind of fornication is committed by many of the
spiritualty now a days. Alas, what shall I say, men do not now blush, but
glory in doing evil. There is some kind of bashfulnesse, tho but a little in
women; but in men this evil has so increased, that he is counted a fool,
that is not expert in these things. What should I say more? This is their holy
day keeping, this is their preaching for this come they to the Church, that
they may see fair women, and that they may talk with them, that the desire of
filthiness may the more increase thereby. But (o wretched man) why do thou
glory in this evil? Thou sinnest an hundredth times more than the woman. She
is weak, and thou think thy self strong: she sits at home, and thou
wandering abroad seekesta thousand waics to entangle her, and sometime
compellest her by force; and when thou do these things, because God holds his
peace, thou think that he is like unto thee. But the time will come,
wherein he will reprove thee, and set thy sins before thy face. Wherefore (o
my sons) be ye wise as serpents, innocent as doves, and fight manfully
against the old serpent. O love one another, I have received this not of man,
but of my Savior, who says, This is my commandment, that ye love one
another. As out of one root many branches do spring, so out of charity spring
all virtues. If I speak with the tongues of men, and angels, and have not
love, I am nothing, says the Apostle. He that has love is benign, and
patient. He has true love, which does not only love the nearest unto him by
kindred, and in the flesh, as the heathen do, but which loves his enemy, even
as his friend. By this one thing a man may know, that he abides in love, if he
loves him that is against him. There are very many that love, but they love
amiss, for in loving man they oftentimes loose the love of God. They which
love any thing more than God are not worthy of God. In all virtues temperance
is required, virtue must always keep a mean. To love too much, or too little
is evil. All love, that hurts, is to be anoyded. Through too much love some
have fallen into fill thinesse, through too little some have fallen into envy.
Overmuch love would always see the thing, which it loves. This love is
ignorant of justice, and truth it wants reason, it knows no measure, neither
can it think any thing, but that, which it loves. It is impossible, that a
man, which has such love, should offer acceptable prayers unto God, or please
God. This love is not charity, but folly. We ought to love all our brethren,
as our selves, but yet so, as that we love not their vices. It is love to
punish sin, it is just to love more the better man. Men are so to be loved,
that goodness may be exalted, and vice disgraced. He that is without true
love, is without God, because God is love, and love is God. He that dwells in
love has already begun to dwell in heaven. Where there is true love, there is
no envy, no ambition, no backbiting, no murmuring, or mocking, but one, and
the same will. Therefore I beseech you, whilsi ye have time, that ye receive
not the grace of God in vain. In this short time of our life let us sow, and
so we shall reap in due time. The days of man are short; our life is cut off
as a weauers thread, death comes as a thief, and every man's works follow
him. Whilst ye have light, walk not in darkness, he that walks in darkness
knows not whither be goes. Your light is Christ, which does shine in
darkness; come there fore unto him, the living stone, rejected indeed or men,
but chosen of God, that ye as living stones may be built upon him, and ye may
carry your selves in all things, as the ministers of God, in much patience, in
tribulations, in necessities, in streights, in scourges, in prisons, in
labors, in fastings, in chastity, in long-suffering, in the Holy Ghost, and
in love unfeigned, in the word of truth, and in the virtue of God. Let there not
be a lie told amongst you, for every liar is abominable unto God. God is truth,
and lying is opposite to truth. Fly every idle word, for of every idle and
vain word, we must give account unto God. Love silence, where there is much
talking, there cannot but be much lying. The speech bewraieth, what a man is.
Let no word come from your mouth, which may not savor of Christ, always
meditate upon Gods law. Surely nothing hurts a man more, then evil society,
for such is a man made, as they are, whose society he uses. The Wolf never
dwells with the Lamb. A chaste man flies the society of the luxurious. I think
it impostible for a man to remain long in good works, that uses evil
society every day. With the holy, says the Psalmist, thou shall be holy, with
the innocent, thou shall be innecent, and with the froward, thou shall learn
frowardness. For even as evil company hurts, so good company profits,
Nothing can be compared to this treasure, he that has found good Companions,
has found life, and flows with riches. And to speak truly, very seldom is
a man made either good or evil, but by company. The heart of a child is like
unto a table, wherein nothing is (at the first) engraven; therefore what he
receives from company, he reteineth even unto old age, whether it be good, or
bad. Let youth keep company with men of years, and wisdom: for if he be
linked to one like unto himself, by daily fellowshippe, he shall fall from
folly, to folly. Above all things (my sons) swear not, neither by heaven,
not by earth, nor by any other Oath. Out of whose mouth, Oaths are heard, in
him is little knowledge, and love of God. If it be not true which I swear, I
do in effect deny God: for God has for bidden, to take his name in vain. Be
instant in continual prayers. Frequent, and devout prayer does much avail.
Prayer does lift up a man from earth to heaven, and makes him to speak with
God. He obteineth grace of God, if his Prayer be devout, and mixed with tears.
Hezechiah (by his prayers, and tears) did presently obtain grace of the Lord,
so that the sentence was changed, which had bin denounced. At the prayers of
Elias, the beauen gave rain, which had been shut up three years, and six
months. If ye want any thing, ask it of the Lord by prayer, and weeping,
being no whit doubtful: for whosoever has faith, but so much as a grain of
mustard seed, whatsoever he shall ask, shall be granted unto him. The same
Lord, that then was, is now also rich in all things: wherefore let God now be
your hope, your joy, your thinking, and your desire. For of him, in him, and
through him are all things, in whom we live, and move, and have our being, and
without whom we are nothing. And now (o my sons) I shall not speak many
things to you, for the hour is come, unto which I was borne, upon this
condition I came into the world, that I might go out again. The Lord spared
not his own son, but made them to die upon the Cross for us all, by whose
death our death is dead: for none of us lives to himself, but dies, whether
we live, we live to the Lord, and if we die, we die to the Lord, therefore
whether we live, or die we are the Lords: and for this cause Christ is called
the Lord of the living, and of the dead. For if Christ be dead, surely the
servant is not about his Master, we must also die, and if he be risen again,
we have also most sirme hope, that we shall rise again, and if he be risen to
die no more, neither shall we die any more after our resurrection, but shall
always abide with him in glory. When Christ died, a man like unto us died, that
the body of sin might be destroyed, that we might be made one body together
with him. Wherefore (my beloved sons) although I now die, I believe, that my
Redeemer lives, and that I shall rise up out of the earth, at the last day,
and shall be covered again with this skin, and in this my flesh I shall see
him my Savior, whom I my self shall see, who now speak, whom ye see now
dying, and not any other for me. And these very eyes, whereby I now see you,
shall look upon him. Wherefore rejoice with me, and sing, cast away the
garments of mourning, and heaviness, praise the Lord, sing a Psalm unto his
name, give glory to his praise, for hitherto I have walked through fire, and
water, and behold now he refreshes me. I will enter into the house of the
Lord, that I may pay my vows from day to day. Oh how great a game it is to me
to die? Because Christ shall be my life again: Behold the earthly house of
this habitation, is dissolved, that another may succeed not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens. Behold I put off this mortal clothing, that I may
put on immortal. Hitherto I have bin in pilgrimage, now I return to my
country. Behold I now receive the prize, for which I ran in the race, I touch
the haven, which I have desired with so great a desire. Behold I am carried
from darkness to light, from dangers to safety, from poverty to riches,
from battle to victory, from heaviness to joy, from a temporal life to
eternal; and from a filthy stincke to a most sweet smell. Here I am blind,
there I am enlightened, here I am wounded, there I am healed, here I am always
made heavy, there I am made joyful, living here I am dead, there I am truly
made alive. The life, in this world, is no life, but death, a deceitful life,
a life laden with sorrows, weak, vmbraticall, deceitful. Now thou
flourishest, by and by thou witherest, it is a frail, a momentany, a fading
life. Wherein look how much thou growest, so much thou decreasest, when thou
go more forward, thou drawest nearer to death. O life full of snares, how
many men do thou entangle in the world? How many through thee do endure the
torments of hell? How blessed is he, that acknowledges thy deceits, how much
more blessed is he, that cares not for thy flatteries, and how most blessed is
he, that is well rid of thee? O sweet, and pleasant death, thou art truly no
death, that bestowest true life. Thou put away fevers and wounds, thou
quenchest hunger, and thirst. O most just death, good unto the good, and rough
unto the evil, thou humblest the proud, rich and mighty, and exaltest the
humble. Thou openest the way to eternal punishment to the evil, and to
eternal reward to the just. After these, and other grave, and comfortable
speeches, he uttered this heavenly prayer following.

The Prayer of Jerome being now ready to die.
OHoly Jesus; my virtue, my resuge, my taker up, my deliverer, and my praise,
in whom I have hoped, in whom I have belecued, and whom I have loved, my chief
sweetness, my tower of strength, and my hope even from my youth. Call me (o
the Guide of my life) and I will answer thee. Stretch forth the right hand of
thy clemency to the work of thine own hands, which thou (the creature of all
things) have made of the mire of the earth, and joined together with bones, and
nerves, to whom thou dying have given life, and mercy. Bid me come (o Lord) do
not delay, it is time that dust return to the dust, and that the Spirit
return to thee the Savior, who have sent it hither. Open to me the gate of
life, for thou have promised me, that thou would receive it, when thou did
hang upon the cross for me. Come (my beloved) let me lay hold upon thee, and
not let thee go, bring me into thy house. Thou art my Taker up, my glory, and
the lifter up of mine head, my salvation, and my blessing. Receive me (o
merciful God) according to the multitude of thy mercies. Thou dying,
receiuedst the Theife upon the Cross, running unto thee. O eternal
blessedness, let me possess thee. Inlighte (with the light of thine eternal
sight) me blind man crying by the way, Jesus, thou son of David, have mercy
upon me. O invisible lights, what joy can I have, when I sit in darkness, and
see not the light of heaven? O light, without which, there is no truth, there
is no discretion, no wisdom, no goodness, inlighten mine eyes, that I sleep
not in death, that my enemy say not, I have prevailed against him. My soul is
weary of my life, I speak in the bitterness of my soul, I am sick, my life
is weakened through poverty, my bones are fried, as it were in a frying pan.
And therefore I run to thee Lord, the Physician. Heal me (O Lord) and I
shall be healed; save me (o Lord) and I shall be saved, and I shall not be
confounded, because I put my trust in thee. But who am I (most holy God, that I
should speak so boldly unto thee. I am a sinner, altogether begotten, borne
and brought up in sins. I am a rotten carcass, a slinking vessel, even
worms meat. Woe is me (o Lord) spare me, what victory is it, if fighting
with me, thou should overcome me, who am less, then the stubble before the
fire? Forgive all my sins, lift me poor Wretch out of the mire. O Lord, if
thou will give me leave, I will say, that thou ought not to put me away,
coming unto thee, because thou art my God. Thy flesh is of my flesh, and thy
bones of my bones: For, for this cause, not leaving the right hand of the
Father, thou have cleaued to my nature, and becamest God, and man. And why
did thou this so hard, and unthought of thing, but that I might come
confidently unto thee, as unto a brother, and that thou might mercifully
communicate unto me thy diety? Wherefore arise, help me (o Lord) arise, and
reject me not finally. Even as the Heart braies after the river of water, so my
soul thirsts after thee, the living fountain, that it may drink waters of
joy out of the fountain of my Savior, and never thirst again. O Lord, when
will thou have regard, and restore my soul from evil deeds, and my da^^ing
from the Lyons^? If my sins were weighed, whereby I have deserved thine
anger, and my calamity were put in the balance, it would be heavier, then the
sand of the sea, and if thou stay a little longer, I shall find tribulation,
and sorrow. Come (the joy of my Spirit) that I may delight in thee, reveal
unto me thy mercy, the joy of mine heart. Let me find thee, my desire. Even
as a servant longs for the end of his work, so I long for thee (O LORD.) Let
my request come into thy sight, that thy hand may save me. I have bin a great
sinner in my life time, and done much evil in thy sight. I have not known
thee, I have bin ungrateful for thy benefits, I have not praised thee, as I
ought, I have often co^cealed thy truth; when thou did knock at the door of
my heart, I was slow to let thee in reverently. I have loved my rotten body,
which goes away like a shadow, with too much affection. I have defiled my
mouth with vain words, my mind has not bin always in thy testimony, I have
not turned mine eyes from beholding vanity, I have polluted mine ears with
unprofitable words, I have not stretched out my hands oftentimes, to the
necessities of my neighbors, I have made have (with my feet) to iniquity.
What should I say more? from the sole of my foot to the crown of my head,
there is no whole part in me. Surely unless dying upon the cross thou had
helped me, my soul had dwelt in hell. O holy Jesus, I am part of so great a
price, for me have thou shed thy precious blood, o reject me not. I am the
ship, that have wandered, (o good Shepherd) look me up, and bring me to thy
fold, that thou may est be justified in thy sayings. For thou have promised
me, that at what hour soever a sinner repents, he shall be saved. I am
grieved, I know my sins, and mine iniquity are always before me. Truly I am
not worthy to be called thy Son, for I have sinned against heaven, and before
thee. Speak joy, and comfort in mine ear, turn away thy face from my sins,
blot out mine iniquities according to thy great mercy. Cast me not away from
thy sight, neither deal with me according to my sins, but help me, o God
of my salvation, and for the honor of thy name, deliver me. Deal benignly
with me according to thy good will, that I may dwell in thy house all the days
of my life, that I may praise thee together with those, that dwell there for
ever and ever. Arise and make haste (o the most beloved husband of my soul) do
not consider, that it is tawney, and black through sin. Show her thy face,
utter thy voice in her ears, for thy voice is pleasant, and thy face is
comely. Turn not away from me, shun not thy servant at this hour. I wait
upon thee (O Lord) I believe to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
living. Therefore come (my beloved) let us go out together into the field, and
see, if the vine has flourished. Turn my mourning into joy, incline thine
ear unto me, make haste to deliver me out of this vale of tears and miseries.

Trinitati in vnitate Gloria.

