HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

blazon of Prince Frederick

blazon of Princess Elizabeth

portrait of Prince Frederick and Princess Elizabeth


An English-Royall Pedigree: Common to the two most Noble Princes Lately Married.
FRIDERICK, first Prince of the Imperial, blood sprung from glorious
Charle-Magne, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bauier, Elector and
Arch-Sewer of the holy Roman Empire, and knight of the renowned order of the
Garter.

interlocking hearts

and

ELIZABETH, Infanta of Albion, Princess Palatine, Duchess of Bauier, the
only Daughter of our most gracious King James and Qu^ene Anne.

Being both of them in one, and the same degree of lineall descent from Edward
the Third, the victorious King of England.

EDward the Third of this name, King of England, France and Ireland, the Author
and first Knight of the renowned order of the Garter, and Vicar general of the
Empire.

John of Gant, Knight of the Garter Earl of Richmond, Darbie, Leicester and
Lincoln, Palatine of Chester, Duke of Lancaster and Aquitaine, heigh Steward
of England, great Constable of France, and in the right of his second Wife,
King of Castille and Leon, the Fourth Son of King Edward the Third.

John Beaufort Earl of Somerset, Marquise John of Gant, and brother to Henry
the Fourth King of England.

I Ane Beaufort, Daughter to the Earle-Marquise John, married to the most
virtuous, valorous, and learned Prince, James the First, King of Scotland.

I Ames the Second, Son and heir of James the First, of Scotland, and of
Queen Jane of England.

I Ames the Third, Son and heir of James the Second.

I Ames the Fourth, Soune and heir of James the Third.

I Ames the Fifth, Knight of the renowned James the Fourth.

MArie surnamed Clarabella, for her Dowag^r of France, and Princess apparent
of England, France, and Ireland, as being the great grand child of the most
prudent and puissant Prince Henry the Seventh King of England, and the only
Daughter and heir of the most noble Britanish Prince James the Fifth King of
Scotland.

CHarles-Iames surnamed the Concorder Britains King of Concord, the Mary and
of her second husband, the most comely and noble Prince Henry Lord Darley,
Earl of Rosse, Duke of Albanie Knight of the renowned order of Saint Michaell,
and King of Scotland; being her Majesty's nearest and dearest cousin, and the
great grand child of the foresaid King Henry the Seventh.

ELizabeth surnamed the Beloved, the only Daughter of our most gracious King
James and Queen Anne.

PHilippa Daughter to John of Gant, and ^iste^ Henry the Fourth King of
England, and to John Earl of Sommers^t Marquise Dorset married to John King of
Portugal.

EDward King of Portugal, Son to King John, by his wife Queen Phillippe of
Lancaster.

LEonora Daughter to King Edward of Portugal married to the most noble and
virtuous Prince Friderick the Third, Archduke of Austria and Emperor.

CVnegund Daughter of Friderick the Emperor, and Leonora, and Sister of the
glorious Emperor Maximilian the First, married to A^bert the Fourth, Duke of
Bauier.

SVsanne Daughter to the right noble, learned, and prudent Prince Albert the
Fourth, by his Wife Cunegund of Austria, married to the right generous Prince
Casimire Marquise of Brandeburg and Duke of Pomerane.

MArie Dau^hter to Casimere Marquis of Brandeburg by his Wife Susanne of
Bauier, married to Friderick the Third of this name Prince Palatine Elector and
Arch-Sewer of the holy Roman Empire, Duke of Bau^ere, Earl of Obrink Simmer
and Spanheim, who was a Prince peaceable and learned and a singular Patron to
Scholars; he likewise planted the reformed Religion in his City of Heidelberg.

LOdouick the Fifth Elector of this Name, Prince Palatine and Duke of Bauier,
and Bipontz, Earl of Simmer and Spanheim, Son to Fridericke the Third, a
Prince godly and virtuous, care^ull to establish justice Policy and peace in
his Princedome he enriched the famous College of Heidelberg with new revenues.

FRiderick the fourth of this Name, Prince Palatine, Elector, and Arch-sewer of
the sacred Roman Empire, Duke of Bauier Son to Lodouick the Fifth aforesaid;
he was a Prince endued with many heroical parts, a lover of learning, and of
the learned, the most magnificent housekeeper of all the German Princes* he
was exceeding officious to our gracious Sovereign King James, and very kind
and courteous, both to English and S^ottish Trauailers.

FRiderick the Fifth of this Name, the inheritor of his noble fathers Princele
dignity, virtue and worth, Son in law to our most gracious King James and
Queen Anne.

Being both of them almost in one and the same degree of lineall descent (as I
can show) from 25. Emperors of Romans Greeks and Germans, and from 30
Kings of diverse Kingdoms and Countries.

This Royal an^ Princely Pedigree, is by the Author dedicated to the right
noble Lady, Elizabeth Vicountesse Hadington, Wife to the most valorous rescuer
of our King, John Lord Ramsey* Vicount Hadington.

Imprinted at London for Henry Gosson.

James Maxwell.


