THE Meeting of Gallants at an Ordinary: OR The Walks in Powles.

VERITAS VIRESCIT VULNERE
T C
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by T. C. and are to be sold by Matthew Law, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard. 1604.

A Dialogue between War, Famine, and the Pestilence, blazing their several
Evils.
The Genius of War. FAmine and Pestilence, Cowards of Hell,
That strike in peace, when the whole worlds vnarmde:
Tripping up souls of Beggars, limblesse wretches,
Hole-stopping Prisoners, miserable Catchpoles,
Whom one vocation stabs, dare you Furies
Confront the Ghost of crimson passing War?
Thou bleake-cheekt wretch, one of my plenteous wounds
Would make thee a good color.

Famine. I Defye,
Thy blood and thee, it is that which I destroy,
I Will starve thee War for this.

War. Alas weak Famine;
Why, a Tailor is the saridest man thou killt
That lives by bread, thou dare not touch a Farmer,
No nor his griping Son in Law that weds
His daughter with a dowry of stuffed Barnes,
Thou runst away from these, such makes thee fly,
And there thou lightst upon the Laborers mawe,
Breakst into poor men's stomachs, and there driuct
The sting of Hunger like a Dastard.

Famine. BAstard,
Peace War, least I betray thy monstrous births
Thou know I can derive thee.

Pestilence. And I both.

War. ANd I repugne you both, you hags of Realms,
Thou Witch of Famine, and Drab of plagues:
Thou that make men eat slouenly, and seed
On excrements of Beasts, and at one meal
Swallow a hundred pound in very Doues-dung.

Famine. Therein thou tellst my glory and rich power.

War. And thou.

Pestilence. BEware War how thou speak of me,
I have friends here in England, though some dead
Some still can show, where I was borne and bred;
Therefore be wary in pronouncing me:
Many have took my part, whose Carcases
Lie now ten sadome deep: many alive
Can show their skars in my contagious Duarrell:
War, I surpass the fury of thy stroke,
Say that an Army forty thousand strong,
Enter thy crimson lists, and of that number,
Perchance the fourth part falls, marked with red death?
Why, I stay forty thousand in one Battle,
Full of blew wounds, whose cold clay Bodies look
Like speckled Marble.
As for lame persons, and maimed Soldiers
There I outstrip thee too; how many Swarms
Of bruised and cracked people did I leave,
Their Groines sore pier'st with pestilentiall Shot:
Their Arme-pits digd with Blaines, and vlcerous Sores,
Lurking like poisoned Bullets in their flesh?
Othersome shot in the eye with Carbuncles,
Their Lies as monstrous as the Sarazens.

War. THou plaguey woman, cease thy infectious brags,
Thou pestilent strumpet, base and common murdress, e
What men of mark or memory have fell
In they poor purple Battle, say thou'st slain
Four hundred Silkweauers, poor Silk-wormes, vanished
As many Tapsters, Chamberlaines, and Ostlers,
Dare thou contend with me thou freckled-Harlet,
And match thy durty Glories, with the Splendour
Of Kingly Tragedies acted by me?
When I have dyed the green stage of the field,
Red with the blood of Monarchs, and rich states,
How many Dukes and Earls, have I drunk by
At one courageous Rows? O Summer Devil,
Thou wast but made as Rats bane to kill Bawds,
To poison Drunkards, vomiting out their Souls
Into the Bulk of Hell, to infect the Corpse
Of Pewter-buttonde Serieants, such as these
Uenome whole Realms: and as Physicians say,
Poisons with poison, must be forest away.

Pestilence. War, twit not me with double damned Bawdes,
Or prostituted Harlots, I leave them
For my French Nephewe, he reigns over these:
I Will show you both how I excel you both.
Who ever read that Usurers dyed in War
Grasping a Sword, or in an iron year,
Languisht with Famine? but by me surprizde
Even in their Counting houses, as they sat
Amongst their golden Hills: when I have changed
Their Gold into dead tokens, with the touch
Of my pale-spotted, and infectious Rod,
When with a sudden start and ghastly look,
They have left counting Coin, to count their flesh,
And sum up their last usury on their Breasts,
All their whole wealth, locked in their bony Chests.

War. ARe Usurers then the proudest Acts thou playdst?
Pack-Penny fathers, Covetous rooting Moles,
That have their gold thrice higher then their souls:
Is this the Top of all thy glorious Laughters,
To aim them at my princely Massacres?
Poor Dame of Pestilence, and Hag of Famine,
I pity your weak furies.

Famine. OH I could eat you both,
I am so torn with Hunger, and with Rage:
What is not flinty Famine, gasping Dearth,
Worthy to be in rank weth dusty War?
And little Pestilence, are not my Acts
More stony-pittilesse then thine, or thine?
What is it to dye stamped full of drunken wounds,
Which makes a man reele quickly to his Grave,
Without the sting of Torments, or the sense
Of chawing Death by peecemeale? vndons and done,
In the forth part of a poor short Minute?
It Is but a bloody flumber, a read dream,
Not worthy to be named a torturing Death,
Nor thine thou most infectieus City name,
That for thy Pride art plagued, bearst the shape
Of running Pestilence, those which thou strikest
Were death within few days upon their hearts,
Or else presage amendment: when I reign,
Heaven puts on a bresse, to be as hard in blessing,
As the earth fruitless in increasing. Oh,
I rack the vatnes and Sinews, lancks the lungs,
Freeze all the passages, plough up the Mawe:
My torment lingers like a suit in Law,
What are you both to me insolent Evils?
Join both your furies, they weigh light to mine.
And what art thou War, that so want thy good?
But like a Barber-Surgion that lets blood.

War. Out Lenten Harlot.

Pestilence. Out on you both, and if all matter fails,
I Will show my glory in these following Tales.

FINIS.

THE MEETING of Gallants at an Ordinary.
Where the Fat Host tells Tales at the upper end of the Table.
Sig. Shuttlecocke. WHat Signior Ginglespur, the first Gallant I met in
Powles, since the one and thirty day, or the decease of July, and I may fitly
call it the decease, for there deceast above three hundred that day, a shrewde
Prologue marry to the Tragedy that followed: and yet I speak somewhat
improperly to call it a Prologue, because those that tied were all out of their
Parts; What dare you venture Sig. at the latter end of a Fraye now? I mean
not at a Fraye with swords and Bucklers, but with sores and Carbunckles: I
protest you are a strong Mettalde Gentleman, because you do not fear the
dangerous Featherbeds of London, nor to be tossed in a perilous Blancket, or to
lie in the fellows of those sheets that two dead Bodies were wrapped in some
three months before. Nay I can tell you, there is many an honest house in
London well stockt before with large linneu, where now remains not above two
sheets and a half, (...) so the good man of the house driven to lie in the
one sheet for shift, till the pair be washed and dried: for you know ten
wound out of one house, must for shame carry five pair of sheets with them,
being co^find and put to boord-wages, the only Knights policy to save charges
in victualles. But soft Signior, what may he be that stalkt by us now in a
ruinous suit of apparel, with his Page out at Elbowes: it is a strange sight in
Powles Signior, me thinks, to see a broken Page follow a seamerent Master.


Sig. Ginglespurre. What do you wonder at that sight now? it is a Limb (...)
the fashion, and as commendable to go ragged after a plague, as to have an
Ancient full of holes and Tatters after a Battle: And I have seen five
hundred of the same rank in apparel, for most of your choice and curious
Gallants came up in clothes, because they thought it very dangerous to deal
with Satin this plague-time, being Devil enough without the plague: beside
there has been a great Dearth of Taytors, the property of whose deaths were
wonderful, for they were took from Hell to Heaven: All these were Motives
sufficient to persuade Gentlemen as they loved their lives, to come up in their
old suits, and be very respective and careful how they make themselves
new-ones, and to venture upon a Burchen-lane Hose and Doublet, were even to
shun the villainous Jaws of Charibdis, and fall into the large swallow of
Scylla, the devouring Catch-pole of the Sea: for their bomba^t (...) wicked
enough in the best and soundest seas^, and there is as much peril between the
wings and the skirts of one of their Doublets, as in all the liberties of
London, take Saint Tools Parish, and all the most infected plac^s of England.

Well, I have almost mard their market, for Gentlemen especially, those that
love to smell sweet, for they are the worst Milliners in a Kingdom, and their
suits bear the mu^iest perfume of any thing breathing, unless it were an
Usurers Night-cappe again: And indeed that sents worse then the strong breath
of Ajax, where his seuenfold shield is turnde to a Stool with a hole in it.
But see yonder, Signior Stramazoon and Signior Kickshawe, now of a sudden
allighted in Powles with their durtie Boots, lets encoun^er them at the fifth
Pillar, in them you shall find my talk verified, and the fashion truly
pictured. What Signior, both well met upon the old worn Brass, the Moon
has had above six great Bellies since we walked here last together, and layne
in as often: Me thinks Signiors, this middle of Powles looks strange and
bare, like a long-hayrde Gentleman new powlde, washed and shaued, and I may
fitly say shaued, for there was never a lusty Shauer seen walking here this
half year: especially if he loved his life, he would revolt from Duke
Humfrey, and rather be a Wood-cleauer in the Country, then a chest-breaker in
London: But what Gallants march up a pace now, Signiors; how are the high ways
filled to London?


Sig. Shuttlecocke. Every man's head here is full of the Proclamation, and the
honest black Gentleman the Term, has ^ept a great Hall at Westminster
again: all the Tauernes in Kings-streete will be Emperors, Innes and Alehouses
at least Marquesses a piece: Now Cooks begin to make more Coffins then
Carpenters, and bury more whole meat then Sextons, few Bells are heard a
nights beside old John Clappers, the Bellmans: And Gentlemen it was time for you
to come, for I know many an honest Tradesman that would have come down to you
else, and set up their shops in the Country, had you not venturde up the
sooner; and he that would have brande it, and been a vaineglorious silken Ass
all the last Summer, might have made a Suit o^ Satin cheaper in the
Plague-time, then a Suit of Marry-muffe in the Tearme-time; there was not so
much Ueluet stirring, as would have been a Cover to a little Book in Octano,
or seamde a Lie^enants Buffe-doublet; A French-hood would have been more
wondered at in London, then the Polonians with their long-tayld Gaberdines, and
which was most lamentable, there was never a Gilt Spur to b^ seen all the
St^and over, never a Feather wagging in all F^etstreete, unless some Country
Forehorse came by, by mere chance, with a Raine-beaten Feather in his
Costrill; the street looking for all the world like a Sunday morning at six
of the Clock, three hours before service, and the Bells ringing all about
London, a^ if the Coronation day had been half a year long.


Sig. Stramazon. Trust me Gentlemen a very sore discourse.


Sig. Shuttlecocke. I could tell you now the miserable state and pitiful cas^
of many Tradesmen whose wares lay dead on their hands by the burying of their
servants, and how those were held especially very dangerous and perilous Trades
that has any woollen about them, for the infection being for the most part a
Londoner, loved to be lapt warm, and therefore was said to skip into woollen
clothes, and lie smothring in a shag-hayrde Rugge, or an old fashionde
Couerlid: to come which, I have hard of some this last Summer that would not
venture into an U^holsters shop amongst dangerous Rugges, and
Feather-bed-tikes, no, although they had been sure to have been made Aldermen
when they came out again: such wa^ their infectious conceyte of a harmless
necessary Couerlid, and would stop their foolish Noses, when they past through
Watlingstreet by a Rank of Woollen Drapers. And this makes me call to memory
the strange and wonderful dressing of a Coach that scudded through London the
ninth of August, for I put the day in my Table-booke, because it was worthy the
registing.

This fearful pitiful Coach was all hung with Ru^ from the top to the toe
of the Boot, to keep the leather and the nails from infection; the very
Nosthrills of the Coachhorses were stopped with hearb-grace, that I pitied the
poor Beasts being almost windlesse, and having then more Grace in their Noses,
then their Master had in all his bosom, and thus they ran through Cornewell
just in the middle of the street, with such a violent Trample as if the Devil
had been Coachman.


Sig. Kickshow. A very excellent Folly, that the name of the Plague should take
the wall of a Coach, and drive his Worship down into the Channel.

But see how we have lost our selves, Powles is changde into Gallants, and
those which I saw come up in old Taffala Doublets yesterday, are slipped into
nine yardes of Satin to day.


Sig. Stramazon. And Signiors, we in especial care have sent our Pages to
enquire out a pair of honest clean Tailors, which are hard to be found,
because there was such a number of Botchers the last Summer: and I think it
one of Hercules Labors, to find two whole Tailors about London, that has not
been Plagued for their stealing, or else for sowing of false seeds, which
peep out before their Seasons.


Sig. Ginglespur. But what, dare you venture to an Ordinary: hark, the
Quarter-Iarkes are up for a Leaven; I know an honest Host about London, that
has barreld up news for Gallants, like Pickled Oysters, marry your Ordinary
will cost you two shillings, but the Tales that lie in Brine will be worth
sixpence of the money: for you know it is great charges to keep Tales long, and
therefore he must be somewhat considered for the laying out of his Language:
for blind Gue you know has six^pence at the least for groping in the Dark.


Sig. Stramazon. Yea; but Signior Gingle-spur, you see we are altogether
unfurnished for an Ordinary till the Tailor cut us out and new mould us: and
to rank amongst. Galla^ts in old Apparel, why their very Apish Pages would
break Jests upon our Elbowes, and dominere ou^ our worn doublets most
tyrannically.


Sig. Gingle-spur. Puh. Signior Stramazoon, you turn the Bias the wrong way,
you doubt where there is no doubt, I will conduct you to an Ordinary where you
shall eat private amongst Essex Gentlemen of your fashioned rank in
Apparel, who as yet wait for fresh Clothes, as you for new Taylers, and
account it more commendable to come up in seamerent Suites, and whole Bodies,
then to have infectious torn Bodies, and sound Suites.


Sig. Kickshaw. I^ it be so, Signior, (hark a Quarter strikes) we are for
you, we will follow you, for I love to he^re Tales when a merry. Corpulent
Host bandies them out of his Flop-mouth; but how far must we march now like
tottre^ Soldiers after a Fray, to their Nuncions?


Sig. Shuttlecocke. Why, if you throw your eyes but a little before you, you
may see the sign and token that beckens his Guest to him; do you hear the
Clapper of his Tongue now?


Sig. Stramazoon. S^oote, the mad Bulchin squeakes thriller the^ the Saun^ Bell
at Westminster.


Sig. Shuttlecocke. Nay, now you shall hear him ring lustily at our entrance,
stop your ears if you love the^, for one of his words will run about your
brains louder the^ the Drum at ye Beare-garde^.

Entering into the Ordinary.
Host. What Gallant^ are you come, are you come? welcome Gentlemen; I have
news enough for you all, welcome again, and again: I am so fat and purste,
I cannot speak loud enough, but I am sure you hear me, or you shall hear
me: Welcome, welcome Gelt^men, I have Tales, and ^ailes for you: seat your
selves Gallantes, enter Boys and Beardes with dishes and Platters; I will be
with you again in a trice ere you look for me.


Sig. Shuttlecocke. Now Signiors how like you mine Host? did I not tell you he
was a mad round knave, and a merry on^ too: and if you chance to talk of
fat Sir John Old-castle, he will tell you, he was his great Grandfather, and
not much unlike him in Paunch, if you mark him well by all descriptions: and
see where he appears again. He told you he would not be long from you, let
his humor have scope enough I pray, and there is no doubt but his Tales will
make us laugh are we be out of our Porridge: How now mine Host?


Host. O my Gallant of Gallants, my Top and Top Gallant, how many Horses have
thou kilde in the Country with the hunting of Harlottries; go too, was I with
you, you mad wagges? and I have been a merry knave this s^ and forty
years, my Bullyes, my Boys.


Sig Kickshaw. Yea, but my honest-larded Host, where be these Tales now?


Host. I have them at my tongues end my Gallant Bullyes of five and twenty, my
dainty liberal Landlords I have them for you: you shall never take me
unprovided for Gentlemen, I keep them like Anchouises to relish your drink
wel^ stop your mouths gallants, and I will stuff your cares I warrant you, and
fi^t I begin with a Tipsie Uint^er in London.


Of a Vintner in London, dying in a humor.
THis discourse that follows, G^tlemen-gallants, is of a lightheaded Uintner,
who scorning to be only drunk in his own Seller, would get up betimes in the
morning, to be down of his Nose thrice before evening: he was a man of all
Tauernes, and excellent Musician at the Sackbut, and your only dauncer of the
canaries: this st^ange Wine-sucker had a humor this time of infection, to
feign himself sick, and indeed he had swallowed down many Tauerne-tokens, and
was infected much ^th the plague of drunkenness: but howsoever, sick he would
be, for the humor had possessed him, when to the comforting of his poor
heart, he powrde dawne a leaven shillings in Rose of Solace, more then would
have ^erde all the sick persons in the Pesthouse; and yet for all that he felt
himself ill at his stomach aft^wards, wherefore his request was, reporting
himself very feeble, to have two men hired with ^xpence a piece, to transport
him over the way to his friends house: but when he saw he was deluded, and had
no body to carry him, ^e flung his Gown about him very desperately, took his
^wne legs, and away he went with himself as coragiously, as the best stalker
in Europe: where being allighted, not long after, he rounded one in the ear in
private, and bad that the great Bell should be towlde for him, the great Bell of
all, and with all possible speed that might be: that done, he gagged open the
Windows, and when the Bell was towling, cried, louder yet; I hear thee not
Master Bell: then strutting up and down the chamber, spoke to the Audience in
this wise.

Is It possible a man should walk in such perfect memory and have the Bell towle
for him? sure I never heard of any that did the like before me.

Thus by towling of the great Bell, all the Parish rang of him, diverse
opinions went of him, and not without cause or matter to work upon: In
conclusion, within few days after, he was found to be the man indeed, whose
part he did but play before; his Pulses were angry with him, and began to beat
him; all his Pores fell out with him; the Bell towld for him in sadness, rung out
in gladness, and there was the end of his drunken madness; such a ridiculour
humor of dying was never heard of before: and I hope never shall be again,
now he is out of England.

Sig. Stramazon. This was a strange fellow mine Host, and worthy Stowes
Chronicle.


Host. Nay Gallants I Will fit you, and now I will serve in another as good as
Uineger and Pepper to your Roast-beefe.


Sig. Kickshawe. Lets have it; lets taste on it mine Host, my noble fat Actor.


How a young fellow was even bespoke and iested to death by Harlots.
THere was a company of intolerable light Women assembled together, wh^ all
the time of infection, lived upon Citizens servants: young Nouices that made
their Masters Baggs die of the Plague at home, whilst they took Sanctuary in
the Country. Mistake me not, I mean not the best rank of servants: but
underlings, and bogish So^tes, such as have not wit to distinguish Companies,
and avoid the temptation of Harlots, which make men more miserable then
Dericke. These light-heelde Wagtailes who where ar^de (as they term it)
against all weathers of Plague and Pestilence; carrying always a French
Supersedies about them for the sickness, were determined being half Tipsie,
and as light now in their Heads, as any where else: to execute a Jest upon a
young unfruitful Fellow which should have had the Banes of Matrimony asked
between him and a woman of their Religion, which would have proved Bane
indeed, and worse then Rattes-bane, to have been coupled with a Harlot: But
note the event of a bespeaking Jest, these women gave it out that he was dead,
sent to the Sexton of the Church in all have to have the Bell rung out for him,
which was suddenly heard, and many coming to enquire of the Sexton, his name
was spread over all the parish, (he little dreaming of that dead report bring
as then in perfect health and memory,) on the morrow as the custom is, the
Searchers came to the house where he lay to discharge their office, asking for
the dead Body, and in what Room it lay, who hearing himself named, in such a
cold shape almost struck dead indeed with their words, replied with a hasty
Countenance (for he could play a Ghost well,) that he was the man: At which
the Searchers started, and thought he had been new risen from under the
Table; when vomiting out some two or three deepe-fecht Oaths; he asked what
villain it was which made that Jest of him: but whether the c^nceit struck
cold to his heart or whether the strumpets were Witches I know not, (the next
degree to a Harlot is a Bawd, or a Witch,) but this yongster daunced the
shaking of one s^eete within few days after, and then the Search^s lost not
their labors, and therefore I conclude thus. That Fate lights sudden tha'ts
bespoke before,
A Harlots tongue is worse then a Plague Sore.


Well timde my little round and thick Host, have you any more of these in your
fat Budget?

I have them, my Gallant Bullies, and here comes one fitly for sauce to your
Capon.

Of one that fell drunk off from his Horse, taken for a Londoner, dead.
IN a certain country-towne not far of, there was a boon companion lighted
amongst good fellows, as they call good fellows now a days, which are those
that can drink best, for your excellent drunkard, is your notable Gallant, and
he that can pass away clear without paying the Host in the Chimney-Corner, he
is the king of Cannes, and the Emperor of Alehouses, this fellow tying his
Horse by the Bridle upon the red Lattis of the window, could not bridle
himself so well, but afterward proved more Beast then his Horse, being so
overwhelmed with whole Cans, hoopes, and such drunken devices, that his English
Crown weighed lighter by ten grains at his coming forth, then at his
entering in: and it was easier now for his Horse to get up a Top of Powles,
then he to get up upon his Horse, the stirrup plaide mock-holy-day with him,
and made a fool of his foot: at last with much ado he fell flounce into the
Saddle, and away he scudded out at towns end, where he thought every Tree he
saw had been rising up to stop him: so strangly are the senses of drunkards
tossed and transported, that at the very instant, they think the worlds drowned
again; so this staggering Monster imagined he was riding upon a Sea-mare: but
before he was Ten Gallops from the towne-side, his briane plaide him a Iades
trick, and kicked him over, down he fell. When the Horse soberer then the
master stood still and wonderd at him for a Beast; but durst not say so much;
by and by Passingers passing too and fro, beholding his lamentable downfall,
called out to one another to view that pitiful Spectacle, people flockt about
him more and more, but none durst venture within two Poles length, nor some
within the length of Powles: every one gave up his verdit, and all concluding
in one that he was some coward Londoner, who thought to fly from the sickness,
which as it seemed, made after him amayne, and struck him beside his borfe:
thus all agreed in one tale, some bemoning the the death of the man, othersome,
wishing that all Curmudgins, Pennifathers, and fox* ^urd ^rers were served of
the same sauce: who taking their flight out of London, left poor
Silke-weauers, Tapsters, and Water-bearers, to fight it out against sore
enemies. In a word, all the town was in an uproar, the Constable standing
aloof off, stopping his Nose like a Gentleman-usher, durst not come within two
stones cast by no means: no, if he might presently have been made Constable in
the hundred: Every Townseman at his wise Nonplus, nothing but looking and
wondering, yet some wiser then some, and those I think were the Watchmen,
told them flatly and plainly, that the body must be removed in any case, and
that Eytempore: it would infect all the Air round about else. These horesons
seemed to have some wit yet, and their politic counsel was took, and
embra^st amongst them, but all the cunning was how to remove him without taking
the wind of him: whereupon two or three weather wise Stinkards plucked up
handfalls of Grass, and tossed them into the Air, and then whoopeing and
hollowing, ^old them the wind blewe sweetly for the purpose, for it stood full
on his Back-part, then all agreed to remove him with certain long Instruments,
sending home for hooks and strong Ropes, as if they had been pulling down a
house of Fire: but this was rather a Tilt-boate cast away, and all the people
drowned within: to conclude, these long devices were brought to remove him
without a writ; when by mere chance past by one of the wisest of the town
next the Constable, for so it appeared afterward, by the horns of his device,
who being certifesd of the story, and what they went about to do, brake into
these words openly.

Why my good fellows, friends and honest neighbors, true you what you venture
upon, will you needs draw the plague to you, by hook or by crook, you will
say perhaps your poles are long enough. Why you never heard or read: that long
devices take soonest ^tien, and that there is no vilder thing in the word, then
the smell of a Rope to bring a man to his end, that you all know.

Wherefore to avoid al farther inconueni^nces, dangerous and infectious, hearken
to my exployt: If you drag him along the fields, our hounds may take the sent
of him, a very dangerous matter: if you bury him in the fields, a hundred to
^ne but the ground will be rotten this winter; wherefore your only way must be
to set him lie as he does, without moving, and every good fellow to bring his
Arme-full of straw, heap it upon him, and round about him, and so in
conclusion burn out the infection as he lies: every man threw up his old Cap
at this, Straw was brought and thrown upon him by Arm ^ulls, all this while
the drowned fellow lay still without moving, dreaming of full cannes, E^psters,
and Beere-barrells* when presently they put fire to the straw, which kept such
a brogging and a cracking, that up* started the drunkard, like a thing made of
fireworkes, the flame playing with his Nose, and his Beard looking like flaming
Apolloes, as our Poets please to term it, who burst into these reeling words
when he spied the fire hizzing about his pate.

What is the Top of Powles on fire again? or is the^e a fire in the
Powle-head? why then Drawers, quench me with double Beer. The folks in the
Town all in amaze, some running this way, some that way, knew him at last by
his staggering tongue, for he was no far dl^et, though they imagined he had
dwelt at London, so stopping his Horse which ran away from the fiery Planet
his Master, as though the Devil had bac^t him, every one laughed at the Jest,
closed it up in an Alehouse, where before Cu^ing the most part of them were all
as drunk as himself.

Sit you merry still, Gentlemen Gallants, your Dish of Tales is your best
cheer, and to please you my noble Bullies, I would do that I did not this
thirty years, Caper, Caper, my Gallant Boys, although I crack my Shins, and
my Guts sink a handful lower. I Will doote, my lusty Lad^, I Will doote.

With that the Host gave a lazy Caper, and broke his Shins for Joy, the
Reckoning was appeazed, the Room discharged, and so I leave them in Powles
where I found them.

Host. And now I return to more pleasant Arguments, Gentlemen Gallants, to
make you laugh ere you be quite out of your Capen: this that I discourse of now
is a pretty merry accident that happened about Shoreditch, although the
intent was sad and Tragical, yet the event was mirthfull and pleasant: The
goodman (or rather as I may fi^liet term him, the bad-man of a House) being
sorely pesterd with the death of servants, and to avoid all suspicion of the
Pestilence from his house above all others, did very craf^ily and subtly
compound with the Masters of the Pestcart, to such away by night as they past
by, all that should chance to die in his house, having three or sour servants
down at once, and told them that he knew one of them would be ready for them
by that time the Cart came by, and to clear his house of all suspicion, the
dead body should be^ laid upon as^all, some five or fire houses of: where,
there they should entertain him and take him in amongst his dead companions:
To conclude, night drew on-ward, and the servant concluded his l^e, ^d
according to their appointment was e^stalde to be made knight of the Pestcart.
But here comes in the excellent ^elt, Gentlemen* Gallants of five and twenty,
about the dark and pitt^ season of the night: a sh^acke drunkard, (or one
drunk at the sign of the Ship,) new cast from the shore of an Alehouse, and
his brains sore beaten with the cruel tempests of Ale and Beer, fell Flounce
v^on a low stall hard by the house, there being little difference in the
Carcass, for the other was dead, and he was dead-drunke, (the worse death of
the ^waine) there taking v^ his drunken Lodging, and the Pest-cart coming by,
they made no more ad^, but taking him sa^ the dead Body, placed him amongst
his companions, and away they ^rred with him to the Pesthouse: but there is an
(...) Proverbs, and now confirmed true, a Drunken man never takes harm: to
the Appre^ation of which, for all his lying with infections Be dfellow^, the
next morning a little before he should be burie^, he streaht and yaw^ as
wholesomely, as the best Tinker in all Banburie, and returned to his old Vomit
again, and was drunck^ in Shoreditch before (...).


Gingle-spur* This was a pretty Commedie of Errors, my round Host.


Host. O my Bullies, there was many such a part plaide upon the Stage both of
the City and the Sub^urbs.

Moreover my Gallants, some did noble Exployts, whose names I shame to publish,
in hiring Porters and base ^ssalles to carry their servants out in Sackes so
White-chappell, and such out places to poor men's houses: that work to them,
and therefore durst do no otherwise but receive them, though to their vttee
ruins, and detestable noysomn^e, fearing to displease them for their ^uenge
afterward, as in putting their work from them to others for their utter
undoing: how many such prankes think you have been plain in the same fashion
only to entertain Customers, to keep their shops open, and the Foreheads of
their doors from (Lord have mercy upon us) many I could set down here and
publish them to the world, together with all their strange shifts, and
uncharitable devices.

Whereof one especially, notable and politic may even lead you to the rest
and drive you into Imagination of many the like: for one to bury four or five
persons out of his house, and yet neither the Sexton of the same Parish, nor
any else of his Neighbors in the street where he dwelles in to have
intelligence of it, (but all things be they never so l^king, break sorth at
the last) this being the cunning and close practice; politickly to indent with
the Sexton of some other Church (as dwelling in one Parish) to fee the Sexton
of another by a prelie piece of Silver, to bury all that die in the same house
in his Churchyard, which void all suspicion of the Plague from his shop, which
may be at the least some six or seven Parish Churches off; or at another to
practice the like; nothing but compounding with a ravenous Sexton that lives
upon dead Carcasses, for no Trades were so much in use as Coffinmakers and
Sextons, they were the Lawers the last Uacation, and bad there bountiful Fees
of their Graue-clients; wherefore they prayed as the Countrie-folkes at
Hartford did, (If report be no liar) very impiously and barbarously, that the
sickness might last till the last Christmas; and this was their uncharitable
meanings, and the unchristian effect of their wishes: that they might have the
Term kept at Hartford, and the Sextons there Term still here in London; but
Winchester made a Goose of Hartford, and ended the strife: Thus like Monsters
of Nature they wished in their Barbarous hearts, that their desires might take
such effects: and for the greedy Lucre of a few private and mean persons, to
suck up the life of thousands.

Many other maruelious events happened, both in the City, and else where. As
for example, In dead man's place at Saint Mary-ouerus; a man servant bring
buried at seven of the clock in the morning, and the grave standing open for
more dead Commodities, at four of the clock in the same evening, he was got
up alive again by strange miracle: which to be true and certain, hundreds of
people can (...) that saw him act like a country Ghost in his white peackled
Sheet. And it was not a thing unknown on the other side, that the Countries
were stricken, and that very grievously, many dying there: many going thither
likewise fell down suddenly and dyed, men on Horseback riding thither,
strangely stricken in the midst of there iourneys, sorcst either to light ^ff, or
fall ^ff, and dye: and for certain and substantial report, many the last year
were buried near unto hye-waies in the same order, in their clothes as they
were, booted and spurd^ even as they lighted off, ^owld into Ditches. Pits and
Hedges so lamentably, so rudely, and unchristianlike, that it would have made a
pitiful, and remorcefull eye blood-shot, to see such a r^thfull and
disordered Object: and a true heart bleed outright, (but not such a one as
mine, Gallants, for my heart b^eds nothing but Alegant,) how commonly we saw
herr, the husband and the wife buried together, a weeping Spectacle containing
much sorrow: how often were whole households emptied to fill up Graves? and how
sore the violence of that stroke was, that struck ten persons out of one
house, being a thing dreadful to apprehend and think upon; with many
marvelous and strange Accidents. But let not this make you sad, Gallants: sit
you merry still: Here my dainty Bullyes, I Will put you all in one Goblet, and wash
all these Tales in a Cup of Sack.


FINIS.

