THE IMPERIAL AND PRINCELY PEDIGREE OF THE TWO MOST NOBLE and virtuous Princes
lately married, FRIDERICK the Fifth of this Name, Prince Palatine, Duke of
Bauiere, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, First Prince of the
Imperial blood, sprung from glorious CHARLE-MAIGNE, and ELIZABETH Infanta of
Albion, Princess Palatine, Duchess of Bauiere, the only Daughter of our most
gracious Sovereign CHARLES-IAMES. depiction of Frederick V and Elizabeth of
Bohemia. Both from Augustus and Augusta spring,
One and the same, ROBERT ELIZABETH
Both in one month Jove to the light did bring,
Augustus named; which this good presage has,
Augustus Fate, one day must them befall,
And him Augustus, her Augusta call.

Being both of them on their most noble Fathers side lineally descended, He in
the ninth, She in the tenth degree, (which numbers in them united, make up King
James his auspicious and luckie number of ninteene) from two most noble,
virtuous and worthy Princes, ROBERT Prince Palatine and Emperor, and ELIZABETH
princess Palatine and Empress.

1 ROBERT surnamed the Noble, Prince Palatine, Duke of Bauiere, Knight of the
most noble order of the Garter, King and Emperor of Romans and Germans; a
Prince renowned for his great spirit, quick wit, heroical courage, for his
love and study of Justice, and his careful endeavoring to repair the ancient
glory of the Empire. His great uncle ROBERT the first of this name, did once
choose EDWARD the 3. the victorious King of England, to be Emperor, as
LODOVICK his great great Grandfather had likewise chosen RICHARD Earl of
Cornwall, son of King JOHN, to be Emperor. The said Prince ROBERT, being the
3 of this name, came into England with a goodly company, as FABIAN writes, to
see the magnificence of the Court, and the commodities of the Country: who of
King HENRY the 4. was honorably received, and feasted, and during his abode
lodged at Saint John's, and lastly, conveyed toward the sea side, where either
departed from other with exchange of rich and precious gifts; for this ROBERT
was a Prince of great bounty, liberality and magnificence, says the said
English author Fabian. His wife Elizabeth, Princess Palatine, and Empress;
was a Lady of great virtue, piety, bounty, chastety, and charity toward the
poor: and brought him forth many fine children.

2 STEVEN Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bauiere and Bipontz, Earl of
Obrink, Veldentz, and Spanheim, Landgraue of Alsace, the youngest of ROBERT the
Emperors five sons by his wife ELIZABETH the Empress: for his elder
childrens Race in process of time did fail.

2 MARGARITE the eldest daughter of Robert the Emperor by his wife Elizabeth
the Empress, married to the most noble and valorous Prince Charles surnamed
Marcelle or the Warlike, Duke of Lorraine, from whom I have derived our
hopeful prince Charles his pedigree, as well on his most noble Mothers, as on
his Fathers side, and yet more, from Emperors, Kings and princes or the name of
Charles to the number of nine, besides those of other names.

3 FREDERICK Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bauiere, Earl of Simmer,
Obrink and Spanheim, son to Prince STEVEN.

3 ELizabeth Alias Isabelle, Duchess of Lorraine the eldest daughter of
prince Charles the Warlike; by his wife Margarite, married to Reny Duke of
Aniow, Calabrie and Bar, Earl of Prouence and Guise, and King of Sicily and
Naples.

4 JOHN the first of this name, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bauiere,
Earl of Simmer, Veldentz and Spanheim, son to Prince FREDERICK.

4 IOlanthe Duchess of Lorraine eldest daughter of Reny Duke of Aniow, King
of Sicile, and Naples, by his wife Elizabeth, married to Friderick Earl of
Vadimont of the ancient and honorable stock of the Dukes of Bullion.

5 JOHN the Second of this Name, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bauiere,
Earl of Simmer, Veldentz and Spanheim, son to Prince JOHN the First; he is
celebrated to have been a Prince very learned, well seen in antiquities, and
a great favorer and fosterer of the Muses.

5 REny Duke of Lorraine, Calabrie, and Bar, Earl of Vadimont, King of
Sicile, Naples and Aragon son to Earl Friderick, by his wife Iolanthe
Duchess of Loraine.

6 FREDERICK the Third of this name; prince Palatine, Elector and Archsewer of
the holy Roman Empire, Duke of Bauiere, Earl of Obrink, Simmer, and
Spanheim, son to Prince JOHN the Second; a Prince father-like, peaceable,
learned, a singular Patron to Scholars: he likewise planted the reformed
Religion in his City of Heidelberge.

6 CLaude de Lorraine Duke of Guise and Aumale, son to Reny Duke of Lorraine
and King of Sicile and Naples, brother to prince Antonie; all of them, princes
of great spirit, prudence and heroical courage.

7 LODOVICK the fifth Elector of this Name, Prince Palatine Elector and Arch
sewer of the sacred Roman Empire, Duke of Bauiere and Biponts, Earl of
Simmer and Spanheim, son to Prince FRIDERICK the 3. a Prince godly, and
virtuous, careful to establish Justice, policy and peace in his Princedome:
he enriched the famous College of Heidelberg with new revenues.

7 MArie de Lorraine Duchess of Longouille daughter of prince Claude, a Lady
of a heroical heart married to the most noble and worthy Britannish prince,
James the 5. King of Scotland, and knight of the most noble order of the
Garter, Grandchild of the most prudent and puissant prince Henry the 7. King of
England.

8 FFRIDERICK the fourth of this name, Prince Palatine, Elector and Arch-sewer
of the sacred Roman Empire, Duke of Bauiere and son to Prince LODVICK; a
prince endued with many heroical parts, a lover of learning and of the
learned, the most magnificent housekeeper of all the German Princes; he was
exceeding officious toward our Sovereign, King JAMES, and very kind and
courteous, both to English and Scottish trauailers.

8 MArie, surnamed Clarabelle, for her incomparable bounty and beauty and
fortitude of mind; the only child of King James the 5. and Marie de
Lorraine, Qneene heir of Scotland, Queen Dowager of France, and princess
apparent of England, France, and Ireland, after the death of King Francis the
2. her first husband, married to her nearest and dearest Coosin, the most comely
and noble prince, Henry Lord Darley Earl of Rosse, Duke of Albanie King of
Scotland, and Knight of the most noble order of S. Michaell. It pleasing God to
disappoint all the policies and practices of the devil and evil men tending
to the hinderance of the foresaid happy marriage.

9 FRIDERICK the fifth of this Name, the Inheritor of his Noble Fathers Princely
dignity, virtue, and worth; son in Law to our most gracious Sovereign
Charles-Iames, of whom I will utter this one thing, worthy of observation;
that they are both in one, and the same degree of lineall descent (as I can
show) from 20. Emperors and as many Kings of diverse countries.

9 CHarles-Iames surnamed the Concorder, Britains King of concord, the only
Son and heir of King Henry and Queen Mary of Scotland.

10 ELizabeth, surnamed the Beloved, the mirror of mildness, courtesy and
humanity, the only daughter of our most gracious Sovereign King James, and of
his most noble wife Queen Anne, the dear sister of our late peerlesse prince
Henry, surnamed the glory of Gallants; and of prince Charles Albions
hearts-ioy, whose Pedigree I have derived from Otho once Earl of York and
Emperor, brother to Henry Prince Palatine: and likewise from prince Albert
Marquis of Brandeburge, who for his incomparable courage was called the
Achilles of Germany, wishing that like as prince Charles was borne on his day,
and does participate of his blood, so he may likewise inherit his heroical
prowess and one day be enstiled the Achilles of Britanny.



This Imperial Princely Pedigree is Dedicated by the Author to the valorous
rescuer of our King, the right honorable John Lord Ramsey, Vicount Hadington,
whose Eagle, heaven make to soar as high, as ever did the Eagle of his noble
ancesters, John Lord Ramsey Earl Bothwell, and William Lord Ramsey Earl of
Fife.

James Maxwell.

FINIS.

