THE Art of Navigations wherein is contained all the rules, declarations,
secrets, and aduises, which for good Navigations are necessary and ought to be
known and practiced: and are very profitable for all kind of Mariners, made by
(master Peter de Medina) directed to the right excellent and renowned Lord, don
Philippe, prince of Spain, and of both Siciles.

And now newely translated out of Spanish into English by John Frampton.

1581.

Imprinted at London, by Thomas Dawson, dwelling at the three Cranes in the
Vinetree, and are there to be sold.

To the right woorshipfull, master Edward Dier Esquier, John Frampton wishes
health, and perfect felicity with increase of honor.
COnsidering with my self (right worshippefull,) that friendship and bounden
duty, does force many times men to do things, which if they were in the
free choice of him that does the^, to leave the^ undone without any conceived
discurtesie, not only he would not do them, but also, not as much as think
of them. This I say that forced by friendship, and also moved by persuasion
of certain pylottes, and Masters of ships, I determined to translate this
book of the art of Navigations, compiled by Master Peter de Medina a
spaniarde, in the year of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1545. And because the work
is so principalle that in our time, the like in all respects has not been
set forth in our tongue, considering it instructs, and teaches all the
whole art of Navigations in all points, and is in as like sort necessary for
the Mariner, as the accidens is for the Gramarian, the weapon for the soldier,
the Tool for the workman, the Guide for the blind, the instructor for the
learner: and finally, comparable to a glass, wherein all the course of the
world, the Seas, the Winds, the Altitudes of the sun, Moon, and Stars,
are to be seen, and known, as far as naturalle reason may extend to. And
beesides, the pleasure that I minded to do, to the aforesaid persons, who
moved me thereunto, as also to satisfy my good and continual desire, which I
have, to help, and bring to light this good and profitable art of
Navigations, whereby all men that are desirous to know, the secreete of this
noble art, may profit themselves threewith by reading it in our English
tongue, especially the Pylottes, Masters, and Mariners, considering their lives
and lyuinges do stand there upon. And seeing as I believe and trust, they
shall gather much fruit theer by, and that by little and little, these
sciences shall remain as well in our countries as in any other whatsoever. And
seeing this work so necessary for the common wealth, setting all other private
business aside I took in hand to translate this book, being perused and
allowed by the chief Pilot, and learned Cosmographers of the famous
contractacion house of Seuil for the increase and knowledge of matters of
Navigations, for the subjects of Spain, which work so excellent tried and
approved by the learned: And for this our England so fit, and by me now thus
translated out of Spanish into English, I dedicate to your worship before al
others, for that I know you to have the art of Navigations inhigh account, and
as highly to esteem al men that endeavor the knowledge of the same, beseeching
you to accept of my good will and to be a protector of the same work. And so
beseeching the almighty, to give your worship long life, and the advancement
in this common weal, that the good people wish unto you, that authority may
enable you to do, that good, that your good inclination does naturally move
you unto.

From London this fourth of August. 1581. Your worshippes to command. John
Frampton.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE TO THE right excellent and renowned Lord, Don Phillip
Prince of Spain, and of both Siciles, etc. Set forth by Master Peter de
Medina, the Author of the Art of Navigations.
THE subjects are accustomed to serve their Lord right excellent and renowned
Prince and Lord, with that which seems (...) them to be most conformable to
their will, and so some there be that serve with things that are delightful
to the eye, and others to the taste. Others there are which do imploye their
persons in labors, and also others in diverse other matters: And seeing I am
desirous to be of the number of those, I sought by what means I might put it
in effect, and for that my ability is not sufficient to do^ greater service: I
determined to make a book of the Art of Navigations, and to offer it in the
service of your highness. Two things have moved me to this most mighty
Lord. The first is, to see how great service your highness (...) receive by
the Navigations, at also how great profit comes thereby to all the common
^^^alth of Christendom. And this being so, it appears that by the
Navigations, your Royal Senorie is amplified and extented into so great part
of the world. And that which is newlye discovered is more then five thousand
leagues of the Sea coaste, where does contain so many regions, kingdoms, and
provinces, where are found so many nations and diversity of people, and many
other things in such sort by good reason it is called the new world. So
that by means of the Navigations, there has been brought and is brought into
your highness Country of Spain, so many ships laden with Gold and Silver,
that the same thereof cannot be accounted. As also such great quantity of
sweet Drugges, and other things of great value and price: And this is little in
respect, right excellent Lord, of the great number of people which do sail,
not only to places known, but also to such as are far of, and unknown, and
of such at is no knowledge of, they procure by sailing to seek and know, And
seeing how long and dangerous ways they make by Sea, and f^we of them that
sail do know what does appertain to the Art of Navigations* The cause is,
there are no instructors thereof, nor books whereby they may attain to it, so
that your highness may understand, although the Navigations be of such
antiquity, and more then three thousand years (...) it began, and a thing of
such importance, that the life of man goes thereupon. And who can manifest the
number of ships and people, which only do sail out of Spain to all parts
of the world, or who can reckon the multitude of people which do consist only
upon the Navigations, with their goods, riches, trades, merchandise, and other
things: And for all this, there are no masters which do teach this Art,
nor knowledge of an^ that unto this day have written the manner of sailing:
Even so, the most sort of Pilottes have the use of Navigations, no otherwise
but every one following his own opinion and judgment, where^f it happens
many times in one ship two or three Pilottes, the one says according to his
reckoning, the ship goes sailing upon the land, the other sa^eth, according
to his reckoning, the land is far of from him, and the cause thereof is,
that there wants true knowledge of Navigations, and hereby it happens many
times both ships and people are lost, and others sustain great dangers and
losses. All which being by me considered, and chiefly seeing the Majesty of
the Emperor, father unto your highness, and our Lord many times puts his
imperial person unto the danger of the Sea. Wherefore I being desirous to
serve your highness in this, and to do good to such as are Sailers, by
giving them rules and aduises how they may make their Navigations certain
without hazard of ignorance, I have framed and devised an Art of Navigations
so orderly, that the Pilottes and other persons which do sail, shall find
them selves so able therewith, that of it self, or with very little help,
they shall know and very plainly understand that which they treat of,
seeing it is so necessary, and so much stands them upon to know, as a thing
which does importe to many their honors, lives, and goods: Truth it is, most
mighty Lord, that weying my strength with the weight of my judgment, and
finding my self of small sufficiency, I greatly disputed with my self, if
for my small knowledge I should hold my peace, seeing that I knew it to be
ouermuche boldness to make a work and to direct it to your highness, but
animating my self, and trusting in your accustomed clemency and magnanimity,
I put my self under the shadow of your favor, and so most humbly beseeching
you to receive this my little service with that Royal courtesy that unto others
you are accustomed to do. And being perused by your highness, it may win
so much favor whereby it may pass safely through all places, yelding great
benefit and service unto your highness, as also profit to such as use the
Navigations, that thereby they may understand the perfect knowledge thereof.

A preamble of the author upon the Art of Navigations, wherein is declared the
great excellency of the said art.
Among all other virtues some are so much the greater, by how much it is
comunicated of amongst others, whereby the virtue of Justice is most perfect
among other virtues, for it does most communicate and participat withal, so
that among all arts the art of Navigations is more excellent then others, for
it does not oenly communicate with them, but does shut up into it, the most
principal of them, that is to say, Arithmeticke, Geometry, and Astrology.
These have excellency among the Mathematicals, by the most true show that is
made of their conclusions. And that this art has his beginning and greatness
among other arts, it appears by three reasons following.

The first, by reason of his subtillitie.

The second, by reason of his certainty*

The third, by reason of his profit.

For the first, who is sufficient to speak of so great a mystery that a man
with a compass, and certain strekes marked in a card, does know how to go
round about the world, and knows both by day and night whether he shall
come, and from whence he shall depart, and how much he shall go from one place
to another, and that he go certainly in his right way, by so long and so large
a thing as the sea is, where is no way no sign thereof, it is a mystery very
difficult. And so it was considered by Solomon: who says, that one of the
hardest things to be found, is the way of a ship in the sea, for she follows
not any way, nor leaves any sign where she went, And who is able to speak of
so great a secret, that with a round instrument no greater then the palm of a
man's hand called Astrolabio, the roundnesse of the heaven is measured, being
so great that the understanding of man cannot atteine thereunto. And therewith
is taken the height of the sun, passing it by a very little and subtle place,
being much greater then all the earth and the sea. And it is known how nere
and how far off it is from us: And in like manner the height of the stars
are taken, and by this we are so certainly guided, that so much as one point
fails not. Likewise who can speak of the secret and ^inenes of the compass,
that being made with as much paper as a man's hand, and with certain streekes
marked thereon, does note the winds. And with a little iron put into it, is
made an instrument that does move of it self, with only the natural virtue
that a stone has given unto it, and moving without the help of any thing,
shows where is the East, the West, the North, and the South. And likewise the
thirty two winds which the Navigations has, and this is shows not only in
one place but in all places, and it shows it so certainly that thereby they
do it, and are certain of their purpose and pretense as many as are sailors in
the sea. For the second, the certainetie of this art is so great, that it
seems the knowledge of one man not to be sufficient to ordain it, nor yet
of many men, more then God provided a special grace and understanding for that
purpose, it is proved wherein it happens that a pilot comes sailing, and a
storm takes him three hundredth leages in the sea, and the day very cloudie,
and the night so dark that standing in the poope of the ship, which is the
hinder part, he sees not the fore part of her, and scantly the maste, and
making many turns in the seas, running from one part to another, rising and
descending, with a vehemency of the winds and strength of the sea, and yet
for all this, by the certainetie of the art, he knows the way that she has
gone, and the place where she is, and being come to the land, she goes to
the port although it be in the night, not seeing the land, likewise it
happens many times, as the pilor goes sailing, he finds a rock or shoolde
CC. leagues in the sea from any land, and marketh the place where he is,
although he sees not wherewith to mark it, for he sees but the heaven and
the water, and in it is not any thing wherewithal to mark or make any sign,
because al does move, but marketh it in his card by the land, he sees in it
and according to the art, which the card has, it is so certain, that he and
others both by day and night do know how to preserve and keep them selves
from that place going aside from it, because they would receive no hurt,
although it be under the water, that nothing of it is seen, whereby is
concluded that although the other arts have truth, this has more by reason
of the demonstration so certain, which shows to keep a man from hurt and
danger that he sees not. For the third, I say there is no art of any that man
uses, so profitable nor so good as this art of Navigations is, and this to be
true it seems well, because by it we have knowledge of diverse and sundry
things in the world, and also of the trade with all parts of the world. And
if navigations should cease, men should be driven to live straightly, for that
they should lack many things which are necessary for the life of man.

Also here is to be noted, that among al arts which men do use and practice,
none is of so great peril and labor as the art of Navigations, and chiefly in
these days, seeing it is so greatly increased and well near the hol^ roundnes
of the world is sailed about: it is strange to consider that the ancient
writers, neither saw it, no^ thought of it, but rather held it for
impossible: it is worthy to be noted, that I have seen many times a Pilote
come from the East India, who has been one year upon the way, and from our
Indias four or five months, passing such great dangers and troubles that
many times they have been at the point of death, and being come home to their
natural country, all has been so forgotten of them, as if it had past in
adream, and so they procure to return with so geart good will, as though they
went to a thing of pleasure. I think that covetousness of goods is not the
cause thereof, nor any other worldly gain, but I take it to come of the will
of God, that although it be a thing so natural to fear death, and great
labor, yet all these labors and fears which they pass in the same
Navigations, are by them forgotten, for if they should remember and fear them,
there is none that would sail on the sea: And seeing the wise pilot that so
often times puts his life in hassarde; and not only his own, but in his
knowledge is put in trust the lives and goods of many: wherefore if any person
will understand the art of Navigations, let him peruse this book and art, and
study therein, and he shall find plainly all things set forth necessary for
the same, whereby pleasing God he will grant, to his way the end which he
desires.

The end of the preamble.
Errors escaped.
Fol. 1. page 2, line 14. he in. for he is in. Fol. 2. page 2, line 36. and in
planetes. for and in plants. Fol. 3. page 1. line 31. prospectiue. for
perspectiue. Fol. 3. page 2. line 2. the ten heavens. for the tenth heaven.
Fol. 11. page 1. line. 23. the king Iuba. the king I^b^. Fol. 14. page. 1. line
47. one high. for no high. Fol. 15. page 1. line 20. the 1. for the first. Fol.
30. page 1. line 22. is taken for one sphera Esphera, for is taken one spera,
Esphera. Fol. 30. page. 2. line 1. is in auxe for is in his auxe. Fol. 34. page
2. line 23. your are distant. for you are so much distant. Fol. 45. page 1.
line 3. how soever it be. for how great soever it be. Fol. 58. page 2 line 9.
and of the guardes of his moving, for of the guardes and of his moving. Fol.
58. page 2. line 22. the month of bozina. for the mouth of bozina. Fol. 64.
page 2. line 3. he be in the head at three. for he be in the head, at three.
Fol. 69. page 2. line 27. go one any viage. for go on any viage.
The table of the books and Chapters that are contained in the Art of
Navigations.
The first book treating of the world, of his order and composition. CAp. 1.
What thing the world is, and how it is compounded of the heavens and elements,
it declares the number of the heavens and their monings. Cap. 2. Wherein is
declared the three mouings which the eight heaven has, and how they are
known. Cap 3. How the heaven has a round figure or shape, and by 5. reasons
how it was convenient it should be so. Cap. 4. Of the noblenes of the heaven
and of his col^or. Cap. 5. Of the tenth heaven called the first moveable and of
his moving. Cap 6. Of the nienth heaven called Christa^ino or heaven of water,
it declares how there is a heaven of water and of his quality. Cap. 7. Of the
eight heaven which is the firmament or the starrie heaven, and of the light of
the stars and their greatness. Chap. 8. How it is understood that the sun
does enter into the signs, and the cause wherefore they have the name of
beasts. Cap. 9. What thing a sign is, and what likeness it has with that
which it is compared unto, and what day of the year the sun enters into
every sign. Cap. 10. Of the seuens heavens, of planets, and of their mouings,
and how they make impression, and cause generation and corruption in the lower
bodies. Cap. 11. Of the elementall region, and how it is divided into 4.
elements. Cap. 12. How those elements do shut up one another, and why the
water does not cover all the earth. Cap. 13. How the earth and the water, both
elements do make one round body. Cap. 14. How the earth is situated in the
midst of the world. Cap. 15. How the earth is quiet and moves not. Cap. 16.
Of the foundation of the earth, and how it may be said that the earth is the
foundation of the world.
The second book of the sea and his mouings, and how the Navigations was
invented. CAp. 1. What thing the sea is, and wherefore it was called Occean.
Cap. 2. How the sea does apperteine to the perfection of the world, and
without it the world would perish, and how the water is ingendered in it.
Cap. 3. By what means the water of the sea is salt, and how it is more
convenient it should be so, and better for the Navigations. Cap. 4. Of the
difference of mouings which the Occean sea has. Cap. 5. What the cause is that
the sea never ouerfloweth above her bounds, nor is augme^ted. Cap. 6. Of the
excellency of the navigations, and the antiquity thereof. Cap. 7. How that by
some tokens of the sun and moan shall be known when will come any tempest. Cap.
8. Of the fires and lights that appears in ships which do sail when there
is any storm. Cap. 9. Of other certain signs, whereby may be known when
storms will happen in the sea.
The third book of the winds, their qualities and names, and how we ought to
sail with them. CAp. 1. What thing the wind is, and of what quallitie, and
how it is ingendered. Cap. 2. How the wind does not move right up nor down,
nor contrariwise, but his moving is in circle manner of water and earth. Cap.
3. wherefore the wind is not always equal alike, but at sometimes more
vehemente, and at other times calm, and wherefore it moves to contrary place.
Cap. 4. Of the wherling of the wind and what is the cause thereof. Cap. 5. Of
the winds which are named in the cards of Navigations, and of the number of
them and their names. Cap. 6. How the winds, contained in the cards of
Navigations do compass about the roundnesse of the world for to sail by
them. A card to sail by, wherein is contained the Navigations of the most
part of Europe, Africa, and Indias or new world, with the distance of leagues
and height of degrees that euerything has. Cap. 7. Of the order that the
cards of navigations has. Cap. 8. Of the accounte which the Pilote ought to
have of his way when he sayleth with a wind that differs from his course.
Cap. 9. How the Pilot should know sailing by any manner of course, where the
Meridian is. Cap. 10. Wherein is largely discoursed this rule above written.
Cap. 11. How the Pilotte ought to choose his course for the place whether he
minds to sail. Cap. 12. How he ought to prick his card to know the place
that the ship is in. Cap. 13. How the Pilotte ought to know that his card
is just and certain, that there be no error in his Navigations. Cap. 14. Of
the number of leagues that is counted for a degree in every course of the
Navigations. Cap. 15. Of the number and measure, and of how many parts every
degree is compounded.
The fourth book of the height of the Sun, and how the Navigations ought to
be ruled thereby. CHapter. 1. Wherein is declared. 17. chief principles which
ought to be known in the height of the Sun. Cap. 2. Of the excellency of
the Sun, and of his mouinges. Cap. 3. Of the year when the Sun goes in
his circle, and of other manner of years, and how the leap year is counted.
Cap. 4. What thing a shadow is, and how the shadows ought to be looked on
which the Sun makes for to take his height. Cap. 5. Wherein is declared
what thing is the height of the Sun, and how it ought to be taken to know
the place wherein a man is. Here follows the rules of the height of the Sun.
THe first rule when the Sun and the shadow goes toward the North. The 2.
When the Sun is at the North, and the shadow at South, and the declination
and height is more then 90. degrees. The 3. When the Sun is at North, and the
shadows at the South, and the declination and height is just. 90. degrees. The
4. The Sun at the North, and the shadows at South, and the height and
declination come not to 90. degrees. The. 5. The Sun in the Equinoctial, and
the height to be less then 90. degrees. The 6. When the height is taken in 90.
degrees, and whether there be any declination in the Sun or no. The 7. When
the Sun and the shadows goes to the South. The 8. The Sun at South, and
the shadows at North, and the declination and height are more then 90.
degrees. The 9. The Sun at South, and the shadows at North, and the height
and declination are 90. degrees just. The 10. The Sun at South, and the
shadows at North, and the height and declination come not to 90. degrees.
Cap. 6. By the rules of the height of the Sun the degrees are to be learned, a
man is of one side or part of the Equinoctial line, more then of any of the
other parts. Cap. 7. Wherefore all the rules of the height of the Sun are
reduced into 90. degrees, more then any other number. Cap. 8. Wherefore do we
say that a man is from the Sun the degrees that are taken in the Astrolabio,
less then 90. Cap. 9. How it is understood that a man has the Sun upon
his head. Cap. 10. How to know the height of the sun it must be seen
whether it be a leap year, or what year it is. A rule to know the leap
year. Tables of the declination or a departing that the Sun makes from the
Equinoctial line, in every day of the 4. years, as well to the North part as
to the South. A Calendar of the Saints days through the whole year, with a
declaration of the principal feasts. A rule to know the Dominicall letter
every year.
Cap. 11. How that by the Calendar above written, a man shall know the month
and the day wherein he is.
The fifth book of the height of the Pooles. CHapter 1. What thing a pole is,
and how among the Poles, the roundnes of the world is divided. Cap. 2. How the
height of the Pole Articke is to be taken, and the cause wherefore he is
taken. Cap. 3. How the account is to be understood which is taken of the pole
Artick, or North. Cap. 4. Of the North star, and of the gwards, and of his
moving. Cap. 5. That according unto the course the gwardes are in, shall be
known how many degrees the North star is under or above the Pole. Cap. 6.
How the rules of the height of the North star ought to be applied, and how
they ought to be added unto, or taken away, according to the place where the
gwardes are. Cap. 7. Wherein is declared certain doubts that in this moving of
the North star may be had. Cap. 8. How the height of the North star may
be taken, although the gwards be not seen. Cap. 9. How the altitude of the
North star may be taken, although the Horizon be not seen. Cap. 10. A
Clock by the North star, whereby is known what hour of the night it is in
any time, or place a man is in. Cap. 11. How the height of the Pole Antarticke
should be taken.
The sixth book of the compasses to sail by. CHapter 1. Of the compasses of
Navigations, and of the de^ects they may have, and how they may be amended.
Cap. 2. How the winds of the compass may be understood, and how the Sun
passes by them every day. Cap. 3. Wherein is declared the opinion had of the
Northesting, and Northwesting of the compasses. Cap. 4. Of the inconveniences
that may follow by the Northeasting and Northwesting of the compasses. Cap. 5.
Of the regard or allowance which the compasses of Navigations have, and how it
ought not to be given them. Cap. 6. Of an instrument whereby the compasses may
be marked and known if they be true.
The seventh book of the Moon, and (...) her increasing and diminishing does
serve in the Navigations. CHapter 1. What thing the Moon is, and wherefore her
light is not always equal but continually it increases, or diminishes. Cap.
2. Of the golden number, and how it amounts from one to nineteen, and
wherefore no more not less. A rule to know the golden number of every year.
Cap. 3. Wherein is declared the day and hour that the Moon makes conjunction
in every month of the year for ever. Cap. 4. Of the short account or
reckoning without any book to know in short time how many days old the
Moon is in any month of the year. Cap. 5. How by the days of the Moon and
the course where the Sun ought to stand, may be known in what hour the tide
will come. Cap. 6. Wherein is declared more at large the Chapter above, with a
show thereof. Cap. 7. How that by the hour wherein the conjunction was,
shall be taken out the ^ide, and the regard or allowance that shall be given to the
Rivers.
The eight book of the days of the year. CHapter 1. What thing a day is, and
how it is reckoned, and in how many parts it is divided. Cap. 2. How that
in all the artificial day the Sun rises and sets different unto such
as dwell in the world. Cap. 3. How that under the Equinoctial the days and
nights are always equal. Cap. 4. How the days and nights go always
increasing or diminishing unto such as dwell out of the Equinoctial line.
Cap. 5. How that the increasing and diminishing of the day is not equal in
all places. A Table of the hours and minutes that such as dwell in any
distance from the Equinoctial line, have in the greatest day of the year.
Cap. 6. Of the hours and minutes which they have every day of the year in
the height of 40. degrees. Cap. 7. Of the hours and minutes that the Sun
does rise and set every day in the year. The last Chapter, how the Sun does
give his light in equal time of the year, to all such as dwell in the world.

The end of the Table.
The first book of the world, his order and Composition.
THe first chapter, what thing the world is, how it is compounded of heavens
and elements, the number of the heavens are declared and there moouings.
THe world according to the Philosophers, is universal, for all things, it
confesneth therein, the heuens, ye stars, the earth, and the sea, with all the
other elements, and altogether is called the world. For as Ptholomie says
it is always moving and has no time of rest: Seeing this vniuersallitie
which we call world, is compounded and ordained into two distinct regions
(that is to say) the region Celestial, and the Region elementall



The first which is the region celestial, is altogether shining, void, and free
from al variation, alteration and corruption. This according to the opinion of
some ancient authors is divided into niene heavens (that is to say) seven of
the planets, the eight is the firmament where the fixed stars are, the nienth
the first moveable: of that opinion was Ptholomie the great, and after him
Thebit, Alfragano, Albategni, and others which in astronomy did floorishe, more
the late Astronomers (that is to say) the wise king Don Alonso, John de
Liueris, George Purbachio, John de Monte Rey, and others do bring it very
probable.

That upon the nienth sphere there is another tenth, which is the first
moveable, it is alone, and they prove that there are ten heavens moveable by
the moouinges of the eight heaven. Hereof is written upon the first chapter of
the sphere, that ye late Astronomers saw fixed stars in ye heaven to have three
moouings, which were found in the eight sphere, which are these following one
is the first moveable, that is to say of the tenth sphere which is the moving
of every day, the which in four and twenty hours makes a reuolutio^ from ye
east to the west and this is made upon the two poles of the world Articke and
Antarticke.

It has another moving of the nienth sphere, and is called the second
moveable, for it is always according too the succession of the signs from the
Weste into the East, against the moving of the first moveable, which moving
is made upon the poles of the Zodiac, and this according as King Don Alonso
says, is called Auge of the fixed stars, the third moving is of him self,
and is called the moving of tripidacion, or according to the saying of the
said King the moving of access and recesse of the eyghte Sphere, and is made
upon two little circles in the concauety of the nienth sphere, in the
beginning of Aries and Libra equally discribed in such sort that as to every
one of the heavens should not be given more then one moving of it self, and
the eight heaven should have three moouings.

Hereof it comes that two of them are improper to him but are caused of
other two superior heavens, that is to say of the nienth and tenth, upon
these ten heavens or mouable spheres we put the eleventh, which according to
the learned is called the imperial heaven, that is by reason of his great
brightness, which always continues firm in one manner of order, without any
moving, and of this there are some reasons, whereby we are persuaded, whereof
there are two things noted.

The first is, that any manner of thing that moves from a place modueth his
place either in all, or in part, so that which does move moves into some
place, forotherwise it were immovable, therefore any of the moveable heavens
moves place either altogether in him self or his parts, therefore he is in
some place but not in any inferior sphere, for the place must compass about
that which is put into the place, therefore he in a superior sphere. And it
is convenient that there be some heaven steadfast and greater, wherein it may
move.

The second reason, is that there is put a difference in the heaven, that is to
say, before and after, on the right side and on the lefe, not in respect of as
much as touches us, but for the nature of the things, So the Philosopher
says in the second of the heaven and the world, this cannot be preserved
by the moveable spheres, the cause is that in the moveable Spheres, the part
that now is at the right side, shall be at the left. And the part that is
now above shall be underneath, as experience shows, whereupon it
follows, that it is convenient there be a fixed heaven, which in the
behalf of the thing, is found the difference that is alleged. This is the
imperial heaven, as it is said, which is higher then all other heavens. It
has great dignity, by reason of his brightness, cleanness, establitie, and
pureness, here is the Celestial Court, where they dwell that are of good
fortune, enjoying of GOD, whereas the Apostle says, nor eye has seen, nor
ear has heard, nor can enter into the heart of man, that which GOD has
made ready for such as love him.

The second chapter wherein is declared, the three moouings which the eight
heaven has and how they are known.
I Have said in the chapter before that in the eight heaven are found three
moouinges different, and that some Astronomers were of opinion, that there were
only niene sphers moveable and others had opinion of ten, and because that
in this the ancient authors, and the writers do not agree, I will show you
the reasons, that were of these opinions of ye which is to be understood, the
first, Astronomers maintained that there were only eight heavens. This they
obtained by the moving of the stars. For the stars move not of themselves,
but in their circles, so says the Philosopher in the second of the heaven and
the world, that the stars are fixed in the circle, as the knot in ye table:
so yt by their moouings the difference that is between the planets which
move, and the fixed stars are known, these in their moouinges are known to
be different (...) one from the other, in swiftnes and in ^lownesse and by
their place, but the fixed ^ar^es are so many in number that they cannot be
toth prehended.

The long experience and observation of the Astronomers, attemed to the
knowledge that ^n do move together in equal distance and neerenesse and
continually the one does keep with the other, so that their moving is one so
the Philosopher understands in the first of the heaven and the world,
therefore I say that these Astronomers understood that in the eight heaven was
only the continual moving, that is from the East to the Wea^^, and that the
was the (...) moveable, it seems that the said Philosopher did so understand
it in the place before aleadged, where he says that all the fixed stares are
(...) the first indueable, and for this reason, there are so man^e there, and
in (...) one of the inferiors ^d more but one.

There was other Astronomers, that were not content to put only eight sphers
but they atteined to the nienth. And the reason was because they saw the eight
heaven to have two moouinges different, the one is as aforesaid from the East
to the Weast, and the other contrary to it: (that is to say) from the West into
the East, and this motion is so slow, that in A hundred years it is scarsely
to be perceived.

This moving Ptholomie declares in the seventh of the Almagesto, with most
strong and certain reasons, so that these two different moouinges being
considered, they came to the knoweledge, that the eight heaven was not the
first moveable, for the first mouable has one only moving of himself most
simple, the late Astronomers by their large speculatio^, found fyxed Stars
which moved sometimes from the Weast too the North, And to the South, and
more swiftely to the East then too the Weast, and at other times more swiftely
toward the North then too the South, The which Demonstration, because with
only two (...) aforesaid it could not be determined, they put another
third: moving, and this is one of him self which is made in two small
cyrcles in the head of Aries and Libra, So that as the tyght Sphere has three
moouings, it is not only necessary to put the nienth, but also the tenth: the
reason is because one simple body, ought to have but one only simple moving,
and that is unto him proper and natural, so says the Philosopher in the
first of the heaven and the world, if they have any more moouinges, they are
improper to him.

And seeing that the eight heaven is a simple body, as the Philosopher
understands it in the same place, it is convenient that of these three
moouinges, one of them be proper and natural to him and the other two
improper. Likewise the moving that is not proper to him, unto another is
proper and natural. And seeing that it is not an inferior sphere, it is
convenient to grant, that upon the eight heaven are other two moouinges of
whom is caused these two moouinges aforesaid, so that as the Philosopher
says, the eight heaven was the first moveable. It is to be understood, that
he and the Astronomers of his time, believed that the eight heaven had only
the moving of every day. And they came not too the knowledge of the others,
because they were not determined upon, but in a very long continuance of time.

The third Chapter how the heaven has a round figure and of five reasons
whereby it was convenient (...) should be so.
THE wisdom of the everlasting father which treated and di^^^sed all things,
ordained that the heaven should be round up these reason^ following.

The first by reason of the similietude.

The second, up reason of the commodity.

The third for necessity, Unto the first, touching similitude or likeness,
because the sensible world, is made unto the ^^^nesse of the world
imaginat^^^, wherein is no beginning nor ending, and for this cause the
sensible world has a form or figure, after the manne^ of a sphere* in the
which cannot be. assigned or marked, beginning nor ending, For the second, of
the commodity or profit this is because in all bodies and Super, fimetros, the
which are four principally Oual Piramidal, Colu^al, (...) the Sphere is of
gra^ter body and of all figures the round figure or form does co^teiue
most, and seeing that the round body is the greater, it follows that all
things which have that form or shape are profitable in the world.

The third which is of necessity, for if the world were of another form or
shape then round, as like unto a Tryangle or Quadrangle or of another form
it would follow that some place should be ^^^ptie, or some body without a
place, therefore an empty place cannot be put according to nature, for nature
it self does abhor it so much, that more easily it consents that which
is heavy too rise up, or that which is light too descend, then too permit
an emptye place. So says the maker of ye comme^taries* rather the heaven will
descend find the earth ascend, then nature to permit any thing empty,

A ristotle brings in other two reasons, to prove that the heaven is round.

The first reason is, that unto the first and noble body is (...) the first
and most noble Figure or shape. The heaven is the most noble and fyrstbodye
and the round figure is (...) perfect, therefore unto the heaven is due the
round hour (...) ^ording too reason, for unto every one body nature gave a
form propercionably unto his work, even as it appears in Beasts and in
planets.

Therefore the proper work of heaven is to^ move it self continually like
to a circle. It was convenient that it should have a figure or form (...)
and (...) for such a moving, and that is round, wherefore this lacks the
(...) which does let the moving.

(...) says, if the world were plain some part of it would be more near
to be the^ other (...) even as that part which is over our ^^ades, whereupon
the (...) that is there, should be more (...) too be then that which is in
the East or in the Weste, then those things which are nearer too us do
seem greater to us, so the Star which is in the midst of heaven shall
seem greater to us then that which is in the East or in the West, which we
see contrary, For the Sun or another Star seems greater in the east or
in the Weste, then in the midst of heaven, the cause of this is, not because
the Sun or the Star is greater or lesser, nor that he is father or nearer,
But for some vapoures that rises up and puts them selves between our
sight and the Sun or the Star, and as these Uapoures are thick bodies they
take away the Beams of the Sun* or Star from our sight, in such sort,
that the thing in his own quantity^ cannot be comprehended.

As it may be likened to a piece of money cast into (...) water, that because
of the glystering of the Beams or strickes it seems to be of greater
quantity then it is.

Even so does the Sun or star, when the Uapoures are put between them and
our sight.

The fourth Chapter, of the nobleness of the Heaven, and of his color.
ARISTOTLE says that the nobleness of the heaven, is understood and
considered in the clearenesse of his shyning, in the roundnesse of his form,
in the unity of his equallitie, in the virtue of his moving, in the heyght of
his situation, which is very far from the center of the earth, in the
deminishing of his quantitye, which does ouerreach the imagination and
measure of reason.

In nature nothing is like too it, neither comparable to it in virtue, The
heaven is none of the elements nor has their qualities, nor is compounded of
them, if it were it should be corruptible, for all thing compounded of the
elements, shall be desolued and corrupted.

The heaven is ingenerable inaugmentable, it cannot receive strange
impressions, it is neither light nor heavy, hot nor cold, dry nor moist,
formal or royal, but virtuous, for his virtue and influence does heat, so
says the Philosopher in the first of the Heaven and the World, and so
improperly it may be said, it is not to be broken nor penetrable, and
likewise improper, thick, or congealed, improperly it has his coulor bright.

And for as much as the color: which seems to us it has, is to be
understood, that our sen^es many times deceives us, and the sight may sooner
deceive us their any other of our senses, for our eyes be of so tender a
composition, that any manner of form, sent of any visible thing, we feel
grief thereof.

So says Alacen in the prospectine; the thirty niene rule.

And Aristotle in the book of Qualitate Visus, whereby I say that nothing
above the Moon can be seen, But the Sun, or the Stars, which Stars
we see by means of the light that they receive of the Sun.

But as touching the color of Heaven, It is to be noted, that it takes
color in one of two sorts, one is of it self. And so is the second
quality, caused of the first, Even as the white, the black, and other
colors, In this sort the Celestial bodies have no colors, But in another
sort it is taken, that is to say, commonly by all that which ye sight does
show, and extends it self to that which is bright and percing, and in that
manner the heaven has his color, that is to say, shining.

The fifth chapter of the ten (...) called the first moveable and of his
moving.
SEeing there has been declared the number of the heavens there shapes and
qualities, I will speak perticularly of the^, and especially of that which
serves for our purpose, of the which I say it is manifest to our sight that
the heavens move, and it is to be understood, that a moving is a passing from
one place to another, so that all things which move passes from one place to
another, or from one limet to another, this moving may be in one of these
three sorts, by means of a circle or straight way or from above downward,
and so contrary. The first of those three, which is the moving in circle
manner, moves not place according to all his quantity, but according to his
parts, as it appears in a whele unless it be al moved from one place to
another yt they make it go round, so they move all his parts, such is the
moving of the heaven, so that, which is now in the east afterward shall be in
the west, and although the heaven moves not place according to all the
proportion which it has, yet it is well moved which in it is moved. And this
has commonly been doubted, if the first moveable of the heavens, were moved
by one only moouer or by many: And if by many how many there are, and in what
sort they move it. Of the which it is to be noted that the heavens in the
first moveable are moved of one mouer, and that they are not moved of many,
for one only is sufficient, and many would be superfluous, so says the
Philosopher or the first of his natural phylosophie, that it is better to put
one beginning then many, and a few rather then an infinite number, therefore it
is better to put one only moouer then many who makes this first moveable:
there are diverse opinions, one says God alone, bringing therefore that which
Aristotle says that the first moouer ought to be of an infinite strengthand
seeing that God is of an infinite strength and has created al things of a
reasonable strength, it seems that God only is he that moves the first
moveable. Others there are that proves that the first moouer is a certain
intellectiue which moves, the which they prove in this manner. If the
first moouer were God it would follow either that ye moving of heaven were done
at one instance, or the doings of God be measured with time.

Therefore it cannot be said that the heaven is moved at one instant, seeing
that all Astronomers holds and the sight shows it, that in four and
twenty houers there is one revolution a^complished. N^^ the second can be.
For the said Philosopher in the fourth of the natural philosophy says, the
everlasting is not in time nor his doings are measured with time, but this is
it which most commonly is under stood, that an angel makes the first
moving, and likewise all the other heavens have intellectiue motion which
moves them in their own moouings and here by it appears how orderly they
move since the time that GOD made them, until the like moving do cease when
his will shall be.

Therefore I say that the first moveable, of the first moving which is of the
tenth heaven according to that as has been spoken of, gives a turn once in
four and twenty hours round about the world, from the east into the west, and
with this his moving he catches and carries with him all the other inferior
heavens and makes them give a turn to the world in the time that he gives
it. Although that their own moouinges be contrary to this, this is showed
because we see that the stars, the sun, the moon* and the other planets
have their first original, and are created in the east. And by little and
little they rise up and assend until they come to the meridian and so with one
accord they descend and come to the west, and always they make this moving
in the same four and twenty hours as the tenth heaven does, so that
continuallye they obey the moouinges of the first moveable.

And it is to be noted, that for as much as it is said of this forceable
moving or catching which the first moveable does, unto the other inferior
heavens, it is to be understood that in the Celestial bodies is no forceable
moving or violence, nor any resistance or contradiction, but all with one
conformity or accord do follows the first moving.

And so when it is said that the first moveable does catch the other
inferior heavens it ought to be understood soundly as if he should say the
inferior or lower heavens are moved of the higher by an accedent, even so as
the mariner moves the ship moving her self, wherein he saileth or as the
water in a vessel, the vessel being moved the water also moves so it is to
be understood, that the inferior heavens do move themselves by the moving
of the first moveable, so by that aforesaid it seems that always there may
be a dout saying.

( A doubt:) how can it be that the tenth heaven moving it self continually
without ceasing from the east to the west, that the other inferior heavens
moving them selves with him do make their own moouinges contrary, so that in
one self time there is made by one self body different moouinges.

A Declaration for the declaration of this, the present example is to be noted,
if in ye wheel of a mil there were set a flee or an Aunt, although that the
wheel does make his moving very quick and hasty yet the Aunt or Flee may
be going at their leisure, and make their moving contrary to that which the
wheel does. As also if the wheel carries them round about and in a short
space gives a turn yet they may make an end of their moving at their
leisure, so that in this sort the moving which the tenth heaven does make
which is in every four and twenty hours, the inferior heavens although they
are moved of him they make their own moouinges contrary, the which every
one of them by himself does make an end in different times.

The sixthe chapter of the nienth heaven, called Christaline or heaven of
water, it is declared how there is a heaven of water, and of what quality it
is of.
THe nienth heaven called the second moveable, which first of all challenges
the moving from ye Weste into the East for his own, because of the ten
moveable heavens. This is the first, and that most by leisure makes his
moving from the West into East, this is called the Christaline Heaven or
Heaven of water, of the which is written in Genesis the first Chapter. Where
GOD said, let the Firmament be made in the midst of the waters, So that the
waters remain divided, some above the Firmament and others beneath, the which
Firmamente is the eight heaven. In such sort that of waters which remain
above the Firmament is this nienth Heaven, Of this it seems there may be a
doubt, saying.

A Doubt, How can there be waters above the Heaven, seeing that naturally
water is heavy, and all bodies which are heavy do naturallye descend,
neither can it be said that GOD has them there, for any miracle, but by a
natural means.

A Declaration, to this Nicholas De Lyra, answers in the gloss upon ye said
article the first of Genesis, where he says that these waters are taken here
in a double sense, for those waters which are above the firmament be of a
celestial nature, that is to say, of the like quality that the heavens are
of, and of their own nature: And those which are under the firmament are of
ellymentall nature. This heaven is called the heaven of waters or christaline
heaven, because it has a pearcing light like to water, and clear shining like
to crystal, of this nienth heaven, or of the tenth we have no sign, nor there
is any in them: nor our sight does pass the eight heaven where the fixed
stars are.

The seventh Chapter of the eight heaven, which is the firmament or starry
heaven, and of the light of the stars, and of their greatness.
THe eight heaven, which is the starrie heaven, is called the firmament by
reason that in it are the fixed stars, in such sort as none by him self
moves but altogether, of these it is to be understood, that although we see
them bright, yet there is none of them that have any light of them selves, but
the Sun gives light unto them all, for he only has light and no other
body. This light God made the first day, as it is written in Genesis the first
chapter. And the text says that God saw the light and it was good. Saint
Austine speaks of the light that it is a corporal substance, sovereign and
simple, multiplied in virtue, and shyning with brightness without resistance it
is communicable and delightful and therefore among all other bodies theris
nothing so profitable, so quiet, so virtuous as the light: The light is
sprinkled abrod from the heaven to the earth it is the beauty of all visible
creatures, and is the cause wherewithal the other bodies or the world be
praised, seeing that I say that the stars have no light of themselves, more
then that which they receive of the sun. So Albertus Magnus writes in the
second of the heaven and the world, The sixth chapter, where he says, all the
stars of heaven are lightened of the su^ne, as also the moon, but there is a
difference in receiving of their light, and so they differ in receiving their
virtue, as they differ in ye noblenes of nature in such sort as, some are most
pure and most noble, and these, receiving their light at one instant it does
penetrate them, from the superficie which is opposite to the sun even to the
other superficie, so that all the stars remain clean and full of light,
others also are penetrated with the sun, although that by their nature they
decline to some color, but howsoever it be, the sun does penetrate them at
one instant, and fills them full of light even as a candle is lighted with
fire, and here it is to be noted that in this eight heaven is the Zodiac
where the twelve signs are, or ye houses of the sun. These signs are
co^pounded every one of a certain number of stars, and besides the signs,
there are other 36. images, which are also compounded of stars, so that there
are in all. 48, and these stars, which do compounde these signs and images
are in number. 1021. of these speaks Alfragano in the third book of the
assembling of the stars, that the least of the fixed Stars to a notable sight
is greater then all the earth. And if all the body of the earth were put into
the place where the fixed Stars are, although it had light by reason of the
great distance, it would be so little that we should not see it, but this
authority is not to be understood of the planets, for all of them be not
greater then the earth, nor it is to be understood of all the fixed stars,
therefore it is to be said of them that are most notable to the sight. For
there are some fixed stars so little, that we see them not, there be others
also that although we see them by reason they are little, they are not
accounted of the Astronomers, but only such as are great and these be not all
of one greatness or quantity, but of diverse quantities, and therefore they be
divided into six differences. So Ptholomy has it in his Almagesto, and the
king Don Alonso in his tables.

The eight Chapter, how it is understood, that the Sun does enter into the
signs, and wherefore the signs have the names of beasts.
IN the Chapter which goes before, was said that in the eight heaven is the
Zodiac where the twelve signs have their place or houses of the Sun, and of
this it seems that two things may be douted. ( The first doubt) To the first,
seeing that these signs or stars are in the eight heaven and the Sun in
fourth, how can the sun enter into the signs, seeing there is so great
distance between the sun and them, ( The second doubt) To the second, if
every one of the signs be compounded of stars wherefore do we say that one
sign is called Aries, which is as much to say a Ram, and another Taurus,
which is as much to say a Bull. And likewise of others: seeing that in the
heaven there is not any beasts. ( The first declaration) To the first,
although it be true yt the signs be in the 8. heaven, and the Sunn in the
fourth, it is to be understood that the moving which the Sun makes in all
the year is, that he moves himself under the stars of the signs, and so
when we say that the Sun is in such a sign, it is understood that then he
moves himself under the stars of that sign, as also any of us may stand
under any sign or under the Sun, And the distance that is from the one to
the other does not let it. (2. Declaration) To the second, it is so, that in
the heaven are no beasts, but these are so named by reason of the effects
which the Sun works, being in every one of ye signs which do follow and
answer by property or likeness to one of these beasts, and by demonstration
of such an effect, it co^pareth it self to the likeness of such a beast, or to
another thing that it is likened unto, as in ye chapter following is declared,
that the Sunn entering into every one of these signs, does cause diverse
effects. Therefore it is to be noted, that of these twelve signs four of
them are moveable, four fixed, four common. The moveable are Aries, Cancer,
Libra and Capricorn, these signs are called moveable, for the sun entering
into every one of the^, it is said, that the disposition of the air does vary
and not continue in one estate, and likewise the Sun entering into Aries, it
moves from winter into summer, and entering into Cancer, it moves from
Summer into Estio, and entering into Libra it moves from Estio to Otonno which
is harvest time. And entering into Capricorn it moves from Otonno or harvest
time into winter. The fixed signs are Gemini, Virgo, Sagitarius and Pisces,
they are called fired, for the Sun entering into any of them, it is said,
that the time and the disposition of the air does continue in his own
estate, They which are common, are Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius, they are
called common signs, for there appertains to them some thing of the moveable
and of the fixed, and so the common in part is moveable, and in part is fixed.

The nienth Chapter what a sign is, and what likeness it has with that
whereunto it is compared, and what day of the year the Sun enters into every
sign.
I Have said, that the signs of the Zodiac have names of beasts, by reason
that ye effects which the Sun does work by entering into every one sign,
they have likeness or property, with that beast or with that thing whereof the
sign bears name; And because I thought good to declare this at large. I will
show what thing a sign is, and how many manner of ways it is taken, and the
likeness that every sign has with that wherewith it is compared, and in what
day of the year according to the common opinion, the Sun enters into-euery
sign, For the first is to be noted, that a sign according to the saying of
Sacro busto, is a piramide of four sides, whose seat is that superficie,
which we call sign, the sharpness thereof is toward the center, the signs
are those stars, yt the Astronomers were accustomed to contemplate on, loking
on their light or brightness, whereby they knew what wether would come, and many
were accustomed to behold them, and thereby they foresaw the qualities of the
summer, winter, and other times of the year. For the principal stars in
their risinges and in their setting, do show the qualities of the times, A
sign is also taken by one part of the Zodiac, the which the sun does
pass, after he has gone thirty degrees from his moving. And because the
sun in one year does pass the zodiac, which has three hundredth and
threescore degrees, therefore the signs or houses of the sun are twelve, so
says Ptholomy in ye second Quadri Partiti, that the signs are twelve,
answering to the twelve parts of the earth, therefore of these signs. The
first is Aries, and the reason why this sign is first named before ye others,
is because that some holds, that in the first degree of this sign, the sun
made his moving the first day yt he began, and that day he was in the
equinoctial: and also for because the sun entering into this sign making
heat, brings forth moisture, by the which it is a lively moving of
generation, This sign is called Aries, by similitude even as a sheep is weak
in one part of the body, and is strong in the other, so entering the sun
into this sign ye. 11. of March, in the first part is a little hot, and in
the last with greater strength his heat is felt.

The 2. sign is called Taurus, to under stand, that as the Bull is a strong
beast, so entering the Sun into this sign the eleventh of April, it heateth
with more strength then before.

The third sign is Gemini of this is understood* that the sun entering into
him ye eleventh of May, with his virtue of heating ingendreth.

The Iour^h sign is Cancer, into the which the sun is entered the eleventh of
June, it is marked like a Crabbe.

The fifth sign is the figure or shape of a Lion, which is a strong beast,
collericke and full of anger, so that the Sun entering into this sign the
fourteenth of July, it brings a strong heat.

The sixth sign is Virgo, by the which is noted, even as the virgin is
barren and does not engender, so the Sun entering into this sign the
fourteenth of August, the earth is barren and brings not forth any thing by
reason of the great heat.

The seventh sign is Libra, marked by a pair of Balance of like equality,
to understand, that the Sun being entered into this sign the thirteenth of
September, the day is equal with the night.

The eight sign is marked with a Scorpion, which is a Beast, that with the
tongue he flattereth, and with the tail he poysoneth, so when the Sun is
entered into this sign the fourteenth of October, the first part thereof is
temperate, but the last is cold.

The nienth sign is Sagitarius which is a beast offenciue, so that the Sun
entering into this sign the thirteenth of November, offends with cold and
snow.

The tenth is Capricorn, wherein is understood that even as the Got from the
lower part goes up to that which is high, so the Sun entering into this
sign the fourteenth of December, from the lowest part of our hemisperio
begins to go to that which is high.

The. 11. sign is Aquarius, marked by a man yt sheddeth water for to show,
that entering the Sun into this sign ye 11. of January, he sends to the
earth water and moisture. The. 12. sign is Pisces, marked by 2. fishes in the
water, which is cold and moist, to show yt entering ye sun into this sign ye.
12. of feburary ye weather is cold and moist. Of the aforesaid it may be
known, the diversity of the effects, that the sun makes in every sign.
But it is to be noted that this does happen to such as do dwell from the
equinoctial toward the north or pole articke, for such as inhabit toward
the pole antartike, the sun being gone forth of the equinoctial, does make
contrary effects to them, so that when we have summer they have winter, in
such sort that the order of the signs in the Zodiac is not conformable or
agreeable to all for if unto us comes forth first Aries before Taurus, to
them comes forth first Taurus before Aries, and in like sort of the other
signs as in the material sphere is plainly showed.

The tenth Chapter, of the seven heavens, of the planets, and their moouings,
and how they have impression, and cause generation and corruption in the
inferior bodies.
SEeing that ye eight heaven has bin treated of, and of the stars and signs
that are in it. It is convenient to speak of the^ seven inferior heavens
which are named by the planets, of the which it is to be understood that of
the seven heavens. The first is Saturn* the second is Jupiter, the third is
Mars, the ^ourth is Sol, the fifth is Venus, the sixth is Mercury, and the
seventh Luna, more near unto us, then any of the rest, these seaue^ planets
are called stars, which are moveable not because they err, but because their
mouings be not uniform nor agreeable, these do move ye elements and do corrupt
the things that are corruptible they bring cloudie weather, and raises up the
waves of the sea, they move tempests, and causes flowers to grow, and the
heavens and planets have natural virtue to cause these effects, the works of
these planets are diverse according to ye variatio^ of the countries and
regions, and thereby their impressions are printed in beasts, birds, and
plants, and in men they incline more to one then to other. But although they
do to incline and move, they do not constrain nor bind by force, But rather
as Ptholomie says, ye wise man is lord over the stars He is wise that
follows not sensuality, but reason, every of these planets have a sphere of
his own, wherein he moves in circle wise, And the superior circle moves
round about so nere to ye inferior, that between the one and the othere is no
space nor any thing empty. so that these heavens do shut one with another, and
they are nere together in such sort, that any thing how little or small soever it
be, cannot put it self between the one and theother, as it appears in the
elements, that between the one and the other their is no place empty: so yt
we see between the water and the earth, or between the air and the water, or
between the fire and the air, remain no place, yt any thing may be put
between: more it is to be noted, that although the heavens are so joined
together, and near one to the other, that this joining together do not let
them of their moving, so that they move very distinctly in differente times
the one from the other, without any let of their moving or standing still one
only point in such sort, that the tenth heaven makes his moving in twenty
and four hours, and the nienth heaven that is near unto him, in forty niene
thousand years, and likewise the eight heaven does make his moving in thirty
and six thousand years, and another in seven thousand, and the seventh
heaven which is next to him makes an end of his moving in thirty years.
These are things which do teach us the greatness and power of the master and
maker of such works, unto whom the said works gives praise, so did the
royal Prophet consider in the eyghteene Psalm where he says, The heavens do
show and manifest the glory of the Lord, and in another place, Lord the
heavens shall confess thy great maruelles, from the beginning thou made the
earth, and the heavens are the works of thy hands. And it is to be noted that
every one of these heavens have two moouinges one is the first moveable, which
is made from the east into the west, turning again into the cast as it is
declared: The other moving which is proper to every one, is made by a circle
oblique, contrary to the first, that is to say, from the west into the east:
Of this is to be noted, that according to the opinion of Frauncis Capuano, it
was necessary that in the heavens were two contrary moouinges, one in the
first moveable, and another in the lower spheres, and this for two reasons,
The first is, because the first moveable does move so swift, and with so
great have, that scarsely his moving can be considered, seeing that in
twenty and four hours he passes all the space that he does occupy,
which causes, that he caryeth with him, all the lower heavens, and the fire,
and the measured region of the air, as it is written, in the first of the
Metheoros, so that if the eight and nienth sphere and the heavens of the
planets did not move unto the opposite part, with a contrary moving, the
said first moving would not only move unto the Celestial Spheres, and to
the fire, but would move all the air, water, and earth round about, with
his daily moving, and there would remain nothing quiet nor firm. The second
reason is because the stars with their moving do cause influence in the
inferior, and so they make impressio^ as they move, but if every one did
move, according to their only moving, that is to say, from the Cast into
the Weste, so that if they moved altogether with one uniformity, they would
bring forth one equal and uniform effect, the which should be an
inconvenience. For that only generation is not sufficient, but it is
convenient, that there be corruption, and so it was convenient, that all the
Spheres, should modue in their daily moving, round about the earth once in
a natural day, because all of them may communicate with us their impressions:
and likewise that they move in the second moving in the Zodiac, coming
together, and dividing them selves one from another to make that the effects
should be different. Aristotle says, in the second of generation, that the
moving of the Stars in the circle, oblique, that is to say, in the Zodiac
is cause of the diversity of effects, And so the Sun in the summer coming
nere unto us, causes generation, and likewise in Otonno, or Harvest time, and
in the winter going ^ro^ us causes corruption.

The eleventh Chapter, of the Region elementall, and how it is divided into
four elements, and why it is not divided into any more or less.
IN the Chapters before written has bin declared the order of the heavens,
their number and mouings, therefore I will now speak of the elements, how
they are ordained and divided, of the which it is to be understood, that the
elements are four and no more, by reason, that first of all they have four
qualities, and it may be said, that they Join in six kind of ways. Let
us see if all six be possible. One joining is hot and cold, another moist and
dry, the third hot and dry, the fourth hot and moist, the fifth moist and
cold, the sixth cold and dry. The two first be not possible, because there
cannot be two contraries in one subject. The four which remain are
possible, in the which the active one with the other joins with ye passive.
These four do constitute the four first essentias which are called elements,
And this is by reason of their first simple bodies, even as it seems in
their quallities. That is to say, in the fire, in the air, in the water, and
in the earth, because we see that the fire is hot and dry, the air hot and
moiste, the water cold and moist, the earth cold and dry, by the which
difference of qualities of the first bodies, they are parted in the same manner.
All these elements do moon, by the higher moving except the earth which is
immovable. So says Albertus the great in the first of his Metheoros, the
fourth Chapter, it is necessary that we say the moving, which we see from
the inferior, that is to say, the moving of the elements proceed of the
superior, even as of his own cause, but it must be understood of the
superior elements the which in their continual moving, they move in circle
manner, only the earth which is most Iowe, remains without moving, not
only circuler neither yet straight.

The twelfth chapter how the elements, do compass about one another, and
wherefore the water does not cover all the earth.
THese four elements, that before are spoken of ought to be understood that
the one does compass about the other in this manner, the earth is in the
midst of al, like to a point or Center of the world, near unto the which
is the water, and upon the water and the earth is the air, and upon the air,
the fire, and the element of the fire is upon the air Albenruys proves it in
the fourth of the heaven and the world in his thirty two commentary: where he
says, we see that all fire moves upward and is elevated upon the air,
therefore as his moving is not infinite it is conue^ient that it come to one
place where it is na^^ral, and there it is conserved, whereupon it is concluded
that the fire is above the air, it is proved by an example in this sort. If
there be any that have not seen the sea but sees how all rivers go to demain
in one pla^^ as their moouinges the not infinite, it is necessary to conclude
and appoint some place, where the waters may join, And this plate is the sea,
so it is convenient to grant that upon the air is a place in the hollow
part of the rou^dnes of the moon, where the (...) is gathered together.
Therefore I say that these Elements either of them do compass in roundnesse
equally from every part of the earth, saving the water in that part of the
earth, which is discovered, for the breathing and life of all living creatures,
of this it is to be noted according to the saying of Albertus the great, that
the water did cover all the earth, and also he says in the second of the
Metheoros the third treaty the second chapter, we see the order of the
elements are in such sort, that always the joining of the one is in the
hollownes of the other, and this is by reason his roundnes does girde him
thereunto, and because this is natural, and sometimes it was so, yt at sometime
the earth was covered with water, and all bodies naturally have one proper
place, whereby it is convenient, that all be filled, for otherwise there would
be some thing superfluous in nature, so it is evident, that the proper place of
the waters is the superficie of the earth, for always they move by that place.

Also when at any time two elements do not agree in any quallitie, commonly it
is called simbol, wherewithal the one does join with the other.

Therefore it is necessary, that there be some mean that they communicate
and ioyn together, and seeing the earth and the air have no simboll, it is
convenient, that they join together by means which is the water that has a
simboll with both, and so it is showed that according to nature all the earth
was covered with water: Of this may be asked what is the cause, why the
roundnes of the elements, failed more in the water then in the others: it is
answered that GOD did make nothing in vain but always woorketh for the best.

Therefore as God by his only grace and will made man, and al other things, I
leave this part of the discovery of the earth, that man and Beasts might be
conserved in their own likeness.

Of this have past many questions, this is certain that GOD of his
omnipotency made it. And so it is written in Genesis the first chapter, that
God said let the waters come together, that are above the heaven, and let the
earth be seen dry.

The thirteenth Chapter, how the earth and the Water, both Elements, make one
round body.
IT is to be noted, that these two Elements, Earth and Water, both together
do make one round body, Of this speaks John de Sacro ^usto in the first
chapter of the Sphere, The earth is round, which is showed by the signs and
the other Stars, which rise not, nor go down equally to all men wheresoever
they be. But first of all they rise to them that be in the east part, rather
then to them that are in the west, and why they appear to one rather then to
the other, ye roundnesse of the earth is the cause thereof, and that to be
true, that the stars are seen to some rather then to others, it appears by
the eclipse, for one self eclipse of ye moon, which we see at the first hour
of the night, they which are in the east parts do see them in the third
hour of the night, whereby it seems, that it was first night, and the sun
was first set to them, before it was set to us, the ^ause is, the roundnes of
the earth, and that the earth is round from the north unto the south, and so
contrariwise it shows it self, for unto those which are toward the north,
appears always some stars, which are near to the pole artick, and ye
other stars which are near to the pole antartik are never seen. But if any
went from the north toward the south or midday he might go so far, that the
stars which he saw first might be laid under the horizon that he should not
see them, and how much more he came toward the south, so much less he
should see the stars of the north, and then he should see the stars of the
south, that first he could not see, as contrariwise, it would happen to such
as went from the south to the north, and the cause of this is the roundnes of
the earth, likewise if the earth were plain from the east to the west, so
son or equally, the stars would rise unto those in the east parts as to
those in the west, whereby it seems false, by the first reason.

Item if the earth were plain from the north to the south, or by the contrary,
the stars that one should see should never be set from him wheresoever he
should go, the which is false, by the second reason, for if in any manner of
wise the earth do seem plain, unto the sight of men, it is for the great
quantity that it contains, in respect of our sight. And if any should say
that the mountains and valleis do let the roundnes of the earth. To this is
understood, that the mountains have not any proportion that should let the
earth to be round And if there be any thing in that sort they be as the nails
of a wheel, that very little or nothing do let his roundnes, but note that in
one of two manner of ways a round thing may be spoken of, the one is by rule,
that is to say, when the lines which are straightly carried from ye center to
the circumference, be equal, in this sort the earth is not perfectly round.
In another sort it is said to be round irreguler, that is, when all parts are
not of equal distance from the midst, so is the roundnes of the earth. And
seeing it has been declared how that the earth is round. I say that the
water is likewise round which is proved by the reasons aforesaid.

Also it is proved, that such as sail by the Sea, for to discover the Land,
they always go up to the top of the Ship, which is the highest part,
and happens to see the Land from thence, and from no other place, And this
is by reason of the roundenesse which the water has.

The fourteenth chapter, How the earth is situated in the midst of (...)
world.
ALFRAGANO says, in the fourth difference, if the earth were not in the
midst of the world it would not be of equal distance from every part of the
heaven. But Euclides brings in the first of the Elements, that it stands
in the midst, and is equal in distance from all parts, and proves so, for
if the earth were not in the midst, it would reach more to the East part,
or too the West. And for a similitude, when the Sun or other Star, were in
that part, it would reach more near to the earth, then it it were in ye
other part, and so they would seem greater: Which is false, for we see that
all people which are vp^ on the face of ye earth the stars seems to them of
one self quantity in what part of the heaven soever they be, be it in the
middle heaven, in the east or in the west. And the cause of this is, by reason
the earth is of equal distance from the Sarres, it follows therefore that it
is in the midst of the Firmament.

Item if the earth by any of his parts, were more near to the heaven in one
place then in another, he that were in that part upon the face of the earth,
which were nearer to the heaven, should not see the half heaven.

This is against Ptholomie, and all the Philosophers, that do say, that
wheresoever a man stands there rises always with him six signs, and other
six sets with him, and the half heaven is seen of him, and the other
half is hid from him, so that equally they are distant from the heaven.

Sacro busto says, that by the self same sign or show is proved, that the
earth is but a point in respect of the Fyrmament, for if the earth were of any
quantity in respect of the heaven, it would not happen that the half heaven
should be seen.

And for the better understanding thereof, Imagine this, if any plain
superficie were put upon the Center of the earth, the which should divide
the earth into two equal parts. And also the firmament it self.

Then the eye of him that were in the Center of the earth, should see the
midst of the Fyrmament, And the self same eye standing upon the face of the
earth, should also see the midst of the firmament, of this is gathered, that
the quantity of the earth is insencible in respect of the firmament.

The fiftenth Chapter, how the earth is quiet and moves not.
THAT the earth is immovable and quiet, to is proved by two reasons, the
first is, that being a hole natural body and altogether heavy, it goes to
the place most low, which is the Center and midst of the Firmament, and
there it remains. So says the Philosopher in the fourth of the natural
Philosophy and in the first and fourth of the Heaven and the world.

The second reason is to consider, how that the earth stands in the
midst, and if it should move and depart from the midst, it would rise
up, the which would happen to it naturally or violentlye, not naturallye,
because his natural moving is to the midst, and so his moving contrary to
the midst is not natural to it, then it should be with violence. But it
cannot be with violence, because there is no body to be found that should do
violence to so great a body, in greatness and weight, where it is to be
concluded, that it is always queit and moves not.

The same proves Albertus the great, in the second of the heaven and the
World, in the third Treaty and the. 8, chapter where he says, ye order of
the stars do learn ye earth to be quiet, and placed in the midst, for as
the moon is ordained to be under the Sun, if the earth were not in the
midst and fixed, it would not happen (...) the part of the circle of the
signs, the Sun and the moon to be opposite to the head and tail of the
Dragon, and likewise the Astrolabios, and other instruments of the Astronomers
should be false, and by them would never be found the courses and
computations of the stars, as by the said iustruments our senses do attain
unto, for always they would happen to be diverse and different, for from the
earth the circles of the heaven should not be equally seen. All the which we
have proved be Geomitrie and Astronomy. It is to be considered that God made
heaven and earth, and all that therein is, he put the earth fixed in the
midst, because the heaven and the stars should compass it about with their
moving, where the divine power does sustain it in the nuddest, eue^ as a
point. Of this is written, The Lord says, I have hanged, the earth in one
knot founded upon his stabillitie.

The sixteenth Chapter of the center of the earth, and how it may be said that
the earth is the center of the world.
THE Center of the earth may be understood in three manner of ways, The
first as touching the greatness of the Center, The second of the weight of the
center. And the third of the mase or assembly of the center, the which
assembly or mase is in the midst of the firmament, This being had, four
things are to be noted. The first is, that in the land is not one self
center of greatness and of weight, for the earth is deformedly weighty, for that
the one part is covered with water, and the other part is discovered. The
second, that the center of the weight of the earth is not in the midst of
the firmament, for if you imagine to divide the earth into 2. equal parts, the^
the part that is covered with water would surmount the other. The third is
that the Center of the greatness of the earth, and the Center of the
firmament, are not one. For that the earth is not equally covered with water.
Of the which there follows, that in the earth we may imagine, three centers
really distinct, The first, is the ce^ter of the greatness of the earth, The
second the center of the weight, The third the midest of the firmament, The
fourth reason that the, center or point of the mase or assembly of the water
and earth is in the midst of the firmament. This is because the like
assembly is a weighty body, and without let, and so the center touching his
wayght is in the midst of the world, for that he is weighty by nature,
whereby it may be said that the earth is in the midst of the firmament, for
that it is a part of the mase, which mase is in the midst of the world.

The end of the first book.
The second Book of the Sea, and of his moouinges, and how the Navigations
was invented.
The first Chapter what thing the Sea is, and wherefore it is called Occean.
THe Sea is the proper place of the waters by reason of the similitude of his
form. There the waters do engender and are sutained. And according as
Albertus the great understands it, the rivers come forth of her and return
to her again. So he says in the third of his Metheoros the twelfth chapter,
we see that all rivers run into the Sea, and from the Sea they return and
come forth, that they may run again, whereby it seuieth, that the Sea is the
end and beginning of the waters. It is called the Occean Sea, for the swift and
continual moving where with it moves: for that, Oikis in Greek is as much
to say hasty or swift. The Greeks and Latinists do name it by this name, and
therefore this name has continued common: or else it is called Occean Casi
Cianeus, because it girdeth or imbraceth the ends of ye earth, and by reason
of ye diversity of the countries, it takes diverse names, as the Indian sea or
Percian sea. etc.

The Sea has no color, being looked upon, when one is near it: for our sight
remains not upon the superficies of ye water, but desendeth down and being
looked upon a far of it has the color of heaven, and being moved of the
winds it has the form of diverse colors. And it is to be noted, that the Sea
for seven days rises increasing, and is that which we call springtides, and
other seven she decreaseth. Of these flowings and ebbinges. Aristotle brings
the causes to he natural, in the second of his Metheoro^: and besides that,
Hipocrates, in his book of air and water says that there is a proper cause
in Astronomy, that is by the natural virtue of the moon, upon the waters, so
likewise we see that al shel fish with the increasing of the moon do
increase, and with ye decreasing do decrease: for as ye moon rises above the
Horizon and with his beams touches the sea, moves a stitring up, whereby it
causes her flowing and ebbing and to cast out into her river or coast all dead
bodies or unclean things that are in her.

The 2. Chapter how the sea apperteineth to the perfection of the world, and
without her the world would perish, and how the water is ingendered in her.
THe sea apperteineth too the making of the world and to her perfection, and
the world, should not be perfect without her: for if there were no beginning of
the waters there should be no simple waters. And if there were no simple
waters there would be no mixed waters, and so there would be nothing of that
which is ingendered of the water, and if there were no water there would be no
bodies, as there are continually, and things which cleeueth together, whereof
it follows, that if the waters had not a beginning the generation would be
destroyed, And so consequently all the world. Also if there were no beginning
of the waters there would not be a joining together of the contraries which are
possible, and so nature would dye in that which were necessary, and the
work would cease in the act. Then it would happen, not having a beginning of
the waters the work of nature would cease, and so the world would perish,
where it concludes, that the sea is necessary for the sustentation of the
world. And Aristotle in the second of his Metheoros, says, that the waters
in the sea do engender in the North, which is as much to say, as the greatest
part of the water of the sea does engender in ye north. This Albertus the
great declares in the second of his Metheoros, chapter six, saying that the
sea runs from ye North into the South, and the cause is that the north is
higher then the south and the reason wherefore it is higher, is, because that
with the cold of the north there is more water engendered, then that which can
contain in the distance and height of the rivers, and in the south the water
consumes and is wasted with the heat of the sun, and for this cause in the
north, one water pusheth out another, to the place which is lower then it
self: And so accidently it moves, from the place of his generation. For as
it is moist, it runs until it come to be detained in some dry place. The
reason why the water is so consumed in the south parts is, because the sun
always moves in his circle, Excentrik so yt his center is not in one place
of the earth, in such sort that if the Diameter of the circle of the Sun were
paste by both centers, that is to say, his own, and that of the earth, the
greater part of the diameter should be toward the one part, and the lesser
toward the other, in respect of the center of the earth: And so it is showed
by reason of Geometry, that the greater length of the diameter is near unto
the twenty degrees of Gemini in this our time, and the lesser length is in the
twenty degrees of Sagitarius which is a sign opposite to Gemini, whereof it
appears that the sun comes much nearer to the earth in the south parts
then in the north parts. And so by reason of his near coming, he heateth in
such sort, that he consumes the water and burns the earth, the which he
does not in the north parts.

The third Chapter, wherefore the water of the Sea is salt, and wherefore it is
most convenient and better for the Navigations.
EXperience shows that the water of the Sea is salt, and so says Albertus
the great, that it is called sea, by reason it is bitter or salt, And the Sea
to be salts it seems to be against his natural kind, wherefore, seeing that
the sea is the begin^ing of the waters, and his own place, and the waters
which engender in her, and those which enter into her forth of the rivers are
fresh, it seems that with more reason the sea should be fresh, and not salt.
Also as it is certain that God made all things to ye best, it seems to be
better, that the sea were fresh then salt. To this answers Albertus the
great in the second of his Metheoros, in the third treaty and fifteenth
Chapter, where he says yt matter that causes ye sea to be salt is. According
to the truth, there are two kinds of vapors, that is to say, hot and moist,
and hot and dry, and in the sea one of these does rise from the superficies,
and the other rises from the bottom, This is by reason of the heat of the
sun, and of the stars, which are an efficient cause of these vapors, and
for the vapor of the water it is very subtle, between these two, and
therefore being risen into the air is consumed of the sun, and the vapor of
the earth remains, or more properly his exhalation dispersed, extended, and
mingled in the water. As it appears by an example in the meat digested, that
the thin substance thereof, is raised up and extended, into the members and
is that which nourishes, and the gross substance remains, and also that
which is undigested: even so does the vapor of the earth remain gross, and
extends into the substance of the water of the sea, and the coldness of the
water compassing it round about, casting into it coldness, and with the coldness
it burns, by reason they be two contraries together, they are made stronger
then before, for the heat of the salt exhalation, being come forth of the
depth of the sea, by virtue of the Sun fortifieth it self, with his
contrary, which is the cold, and so overcomes the like heat which is yt as is
required in the generation of a salt fast, as the Philosopher has it in the
second of his metheoros the first chapter speaking in this matter, of this
there is a similitude, that if a freshwater were passed through ashes it would
make it salt, the like is of the water of the sea, in the time it was made
salt, and because that some say, there is a pure element insubstance, and the
element of the water is in the sea, and that in the midst of the sea, the
water is simple and without taste, wherefore has it not there an objection of
contrariety. This seems to me not to be so, for the heat of the Sun, and
the stars, are sufficient to make exhalations come forth of the bottom of
the sea, which being mingled with the coldness and moisture of the water caused
a salt taste in the highest part of the water: As well and with more reason
they will make it in the midst or in the bottom of the sea, and so I hold
with Aristotle, and with Constantine a great Astronomer, that there is now no
element pure, and for as much as ye water is salt, it is more convenient and
better for ye navigations, the^ the fresh, that is because the salt water is
more heavy and gross then the fresh. And that it is so, Albertus the great
says in this manner, that ye salt water is more heavy and thick then the
fresh, it is gathered by many experiences, of the which one is. If the fresh
water be mingled, with salt and made a strong mixture in such sort that all
the salt be melted in the water, and in to it is cast an egg fresh laid, it
will swim above the water, by reason of the thicknes that the water has
which is done with the mixture of the salt, and if the said egg be put in
fresh water it will sink, it is said that it must be a new laid egg, for
if it be old or cracked, it will sink. And by the same reason is showed, that
the ships do rather sink in fresh water, then in that which is salt for
the fresh rather deuideth it self and rises up rather then that which is salt.

The fourth Chapter of the different moouinges which the Occean sea has.
IT has been declared, in the. 2. chapter of this 2. book, yt a great part
of the water of the sea does engender in the north, and from thence it runs
to the south, and this is one of the moouinges which the water of the sea has:
we do likewise see that the sea when it flows moves toward one part
and when it ebbeth it moves to the contrary, having such order, that where it
began first to flow* there it begins first to ebb, whereby it seems that
the water of the sea has contrary moouings one from another, and besides this
we see that the rivers run to the sea, and also the sea comes up by them,
and this seems meruellous in nature: for the water naturally goes downwarde,
as a body which is heavy, as it is, and if the rivers be higher then the sea,
the sea should not go up into them, and if the Sea be higher then the rivers
they would not run into the sea, whereby with reason it may be doubted,
saying. ( A Doubt,) what is the cause seeing that all the waters of the sea,
being one body have so many different and contrary moouinges, so that some
waters are moving toward one place, and some toward another, whereby it may
be said either that the sea moves it self in these moouinges by chance, and
without any order, or that she is moved by different moouinges or mouers ( A
declaration,) To these doubts Albertus magnus answers, in the second of the
Metheoros the sixth chapter of the third treaty where he says, absoluing all
the difficulties, which are put, touching these moouinges of the sea, we say
with Seneca that there is no other cause of the course of the waters, to one
place or other, but the places which are high or low, (except that only moving,
whereby the sea ebbeth or flows,) for in this it follows the circle of the
moon, as we teach in another place: And that the saying of Seneca is true, it
is proved because the waters of the sea do come flowing to all parts of the
world, that is to say, to the east, and to the west, to the north and to the
south. And* likewise they go ebbing from all the said parts. And therefore
the Sea has no part proper where his flowing and ebbing does begin, so
that by accedent the water moves it self from one place to another, unless
it be down right, for because this moving comes not to it by any accedent
but by proper essence, consequently to his form.

The fyfth Chapter wherefore the Sea never ouerfloweth, nor is augmented nor
made greater.
IT may be asked what is the cause, seeing that in the sea there is so much
water engendered, and continually enters into her so many rivers and
fountains, wherefore she never ouerfloweth nor is augmented. To this is some
cause the which Albertus the great brings in the second of his metheoros
where he says, the sea receives no augmentation nor yet makes it self
greater, for because she is a natural receiver of all the waters, and is their
quiet place. And the place cannot ouerflowe, with the coming in of the thing
which by nature ought to be in this place: for the place ought to be
conformable with that which it shuts into it according to nature, so that
the sea is able to receive into it al ye rivers. And for the entrance of them
neither to ouerflowe nor to augment it self. Likewise it ouerfloweth not by
reason that the Sea is so great that the rivers in the respect of her are
nothing, for there is not any thing in them able to augme^ it* The third reason
is because the heat of the sun and the blowing of the winds do consume so
great part of the water, that although it engender continually in the sea and
continually the rivers enter into her: yet in such order God disposed it that
it: neither decreaseth nor increases. And so it may be said that which is
written in Job, Lord thou did appoint her a precinct, that she should not
break it. And it is to be noted, that in the floode of Noah. The holy
scripture says in Gene^^s the seventh chapter, that the water did ^ise up
fifteen cubits upon ye most high mountain that is under the heaven, so that
all the earth was coueted with water. But although that this increasing of the
waters were so great, the sea did not ouerflowe nor did cover the earth, by
going forth of her limmet and precinct. But the great increase of waters came
for two causes, one was that the windows and clouds of heaven were opened,
and it reigned forty days and forty nights very leisurly. The second was
that the fountaynes and rivers of fresh water did run so much that all the
earth was covered as it is said, so that all living things which were upon the
earth did perish (except Noah and all that were in the arc) But the rain
being ceased, the said text says, that God sent such great winds, that they
consumed the water, and returned the earth to his own perfectnes.

The sixth Chapter of the excellency of the Nau^gatio^, and of the antiquity
thereof.
WIth reason it may be said that the navigations has great excellency seeing
that God was ye first that commanded to make a ship or instrument to go
upon the water: so it is written in Genesis the sixte chapter where is said
that God commanded Noah to make a ship or arc of timber. This Arc had. 300.
cubits in length. and 50. in breadth, and 30. in hight, of these cubits, there
are diverse opinions what length they were of, some say after the manner of
Geometry, others say common, with more reason it seems they were in manner of
Geometry, because they should be greater, for it was convenient that in the
arc there should be (...) for that which should be put there in.

S. Isidore writes of the navigations in the Ethimologias that the Lidians were
those that first found out the making of ships, but these did not attain to
more knowledge then to join one timber with another, and were well calked and
nailed, they sailed in them not departing far from the land, after that
Epaminundas, the Greek made an end to put ships to sail in perfection, and
so in the wars of Peloponeso there was found that notable captain, Bias with
ships, carrackes, and Galleys.

In the third of the kings in the; 10. chapter is read that Solomon king of
Jerusalem sent two ships to Tharsis. and every three year they went and
came from whence they brought gold silver, works of Iuorie, and apes.

Iulio Solino says that all the sea toward the south, which does compass
Africa about behind and from the India to Spain was sailed, and of this he
brings testimony of the king of Inba for the confirmation and argument
thereof he makes mo^tion of Islands, and of a certain people the manne^s and
confines of ye places and the spaces of the^ Plato in ye.32. book, in the
dialogue of Tim^o, says that from an Island called ye colu^nes or pillars of
Hercules, which is at the mouth of a straight there was failing to a firm
land, which contained greater then all Africa and Asia; whereby it appears
that before the time of Plato was sailing from the Island of Cadiz, which is at
the mouth of the strait of Iebralter unto the land of the Indias which we now
have.

Pliny writes, that governing the things of the empire of Tiberius Caesar
there did appear in the coast of the sea of Arabia signs of ships that the
Spaniardes had lost. Cornelius Nepote gives knowledge that in his time one
that was called E^do^ (...) from the latin king sailing by the sea of Arabia,
and likewise says that he saw one Ce^^ Antipatro that called with merchandise
from Spain Ehiopia. In the time of Augustus (...) most pa^^ ye north Occea^
seas were sailed round about. Al (...) unto the cape of the land of the (...).
Reyhold Seleuco and Anthioco say that the rivers of the Caspian sea were
sailed and known with the armies of those of Macedonia: As also they sailed all
the north parts from one place to another. Pliny himself uses the testimony
of Cornelius Nepote who affirms that the king of the Sweuia^s or Esquicaros
gave to Metello Celeri chief consul of France certain Indians ye which
sailing from ye India with merchandise were driven into Almain with tempest of
weather. Likewise it is read in Otho^ that in ye time of ye Iermain emperors
certain ambassadors of ye India were found in ye rivers of Almaine which were
driven thither with great winds, and if was not doubted yt they came from the
regio^ toward the cast, which could not be if it be as some do think yt the
north seas be frosen Pope Pio the 3. says that in the book he wrote of
Geographie and reason does manifest, and show ye the sea in old time was sailed
seeing yt the men of old time did put names unto the rivers of the O^cean sea,
which does compass about the farthest parts of the earth, of ye great number
and multitude of ships yt was molde time some authors have written. Homer.
says yt in the host of ye Greeks which came unto Troy were 1180. ships,
likewise Diodorus says yt Xerxes king of ye Persians brought in his against
Gretia, 700000. men of his own, and 300000. of his friends, and when became
to the Sea called Pontico, he made in the sea a bridge of ships whereby he
past with his people so yt the ships being together, reached from the land of
Asia unto that of Europa, which is at ye least a league of sea.

The 7. chapter how by some signs of the sun and of the moon may be known
when storms will come.
MAny times there happens to be in the Sea tempests of winds and waters which
do cause great storms whereof follows to such as are sailors death or
losses of ships and goods or other great troubles: therefore here I mind to
declare the signs as I find the^ written by ye which the said te^pests or
storms may be known and being foreseen or known they may do les hurt. This
pleased V^rgil greatly, who says, that many hurtful battles of winds do
come upon the ignorant: it is trade of Democrito the Philosopher, that a
brother of his being reaping in time of great heat, who was called Damaso, the
said Philosopher said unto him, yt he should reap no more, but should
gather together that he had reaped, and keep it, for shortly would come a
great tempest of wind, that would carry it away from him, And so a few hours
being past. It followed as ye Philosopher had said, after declaration made of
signs or prognosticatio^ of the tempests or storms, there shall be first
noted, those which are showed in the Sun.

The signs of the Sun.
Pliny in his natural history the eighteenth book Chapter forty five shows
that if the Sun when it rises be clear and not cloudie, foresheweth a fair
day, if it seem yellow, it foresheweth rain with hayle. It when the sun does
rise it seems hollow, it foresheweth rain and wind, if when the sun does
rise there be clouds before it, and show read, and part of the said
clouds are dispersed abroad toward the north and part toward the south it
signifies winds with great rain: Jf when ye Sun rises and sets do
appear any streekes gathered together near it, if foresheweth rain:

If before the Sun rise do appear upon it round clouds it foresheweth great
cold, this is if after Sun rising they go toward the south, but if they
go toward the west it signifies fair weather.

Jf clouds do compass the Sun round about the less light and cleerenes
they give signifies, the greater tempest, and it will be the greater if her
roundnes do seem dubled.

If in the rising of the Sun do appear read, clouds lying over the sun
being brought thither by any manner of wind it signifies that the self same
wind will blow, but if it be a southerly wind it betokens rain.

If when the Sun rises if be compassed about with clouds, from that part
where the roundnes does discover, it is to be looked for that the wind will
come, but if it discover all, it signifies equally fair weather.

If when the Sun rises she extend her beams far of, by the clouds and in
the midst it seems empty, foresheweth rain.

If before the sun come forth she show her becames it foresheweth water
and wind.

If when the sun shall let, her circle be white, it foresheweth some tempest
that night, and if it be very hot, there will be wind.

If when the sun does set, her round body does seem black or thick of the
part which is most discovered, it will blow much wind.

The signs of the Moon.
Seeing there has been declared ye signs of the sun, for to know the
tempests or storms that are to come I will speak of the things which are to
come, that the moon shows.

In A^gypt they keep holy day, the fourth day of the moon the which if she
seem shining with a clean brightness it foresheweth a very fair day, and if
she show read it betokens much wind, if black it signifies rain, if in
the fifth day her horns be not sharp and small, but great and broad, it
foresheweth rain.

If the moon be straight and show her self upward it signifies winds and
chiefelie when this is in the fourth day.

If the moon being four days old, and her roundnes be of an Alborne ^ulle^
it signifies great winds, the author hereof is Var^o.

Pl^nie says that if in the fourth day of the moon she be upright it
betokens tempest in the sea: unless that all round about her she has a
circle very clear.

If at the full moon in the midst of her she be clear if shows a token
of fair weather, or if she be of an alborne color or like to a rose color it
foresheweth winds, if she be black it foresheweth rain.

When at her rising she rise with the upper part of her horn black about,
at the decreasing of ye moon, it will rain, and if likewise her horn be black
beneath round about before the full moon it also foresheweth rain.

If the moon being at the ^ull have a circle round about her of that part
which does show most bright, will the wind come.

If at the first appearing of the moon that is to say when she is new, the
bornes of her do show great it signifies tempest. And it shall be the
greater if before the fourth day the wind do not blows at the west.

If at the sixteenth day of the moon the seem to be of a great color of
flame it foresheweth tempest.

The eight Chapter of the fires and lights, which do appear in ships that
do sail when there is torment or tempest in the Sea.
IT happens to such as do sail when there is storms in the sea when it
seems that they should be lost yt al night they see upon the maste or yard
or in some other part of the ship a certain fire or clearenes, the which
some sailors call, S. Edmund, which ought not to be so taken, seeing that it is
not as they think, therefore I say that these fires or lights are a certain
impressio^ in the air which the Greeks call Pili Deuces, and is so called by
means of the grosenes of ye humor which goes from the earth and fights with
the coldness of the might, and so it gathers it self together and congealeth
in the first region of the air, and when his exhalation finds any body
whereunto to cleave, it kindles and holds it self fast to it until it be
consumed and wasted. This fire burns not.

And Pliny in his second book of the natural history, the thirty seven
chapter, says that when these fires be two they be called Pollux and Castor
and it is a good sign, and when it is but one it is called Hellena, and it is
an evil sign.

These fires are also seen in the land. And they have been seen in the
camps upon the pikes which the soldiers carry, and upon the dead bodies.

And Pliny says also that they have been seen upon the heads of men, and
of beasts, And so did Virgil affirm that it appeared upon the head of lulio
Escanio: In the camps of the wars these fires do appear as well because of
the continual fumes, as also because of the heat of many people: Jn the ships
they engender of ye fume of the said ship and of the heat of the people
gathered together into little rome, and of the Mariners and people in the
ship, which in the storms with the great moving they have, do engender
heat: this is when there is disposition that the rising up of the vapor,
should make impression in the air, as before is said: And Plini^ said that
one only fire is no good sign.

This is because when there are two it seems that in the air is abundance of
gross smoke and signifies that it is sufficient to consume the matter of the
tempest.

Peter de Castroboll, upon the second of the Metheoros says, that whenever
these fires are seen in a tempest, it is a good sign, for it notes fair
weather. Likewise it happens, that there are great storms, and none of these
fires are seen, and in small storms they see sometime one or two, so that
the sayle^s should have no devotion unto these fires to believe that Saint
Edmunde is there, for it is a natural thing.

And therefore every one with his devotion ought to commend himself too GOD,
that he keep them, and bring them forth of that Storm, and put them in
the port of salvation.

The nienth chapter of other certain signs, wherein shall be known when
storms will come in the sea.
IN the seventh chapter of this second book I have declared some signs of the
sun and the moon whereby may be known when storms of wind and rain will
come, as it is declared: and because these storms are things, that unto such
as sail is very conuensent they should know, and prevent: it seemed well to
me to add this present chapter in the which, I will also declare other five
signs or prognostications, which I find written, that ought to be looked on
and known of the sailors, which are these following.

The first is when in the high places or in the woods there is heard a noise
of wind, and abroad it is not heard it signifies storms of wind.

The second when the waves of the scaswel and give great falls or strokes in
the bays of the sea being with great noise or rattling, signifies storms in
the sea: of these 2. Pliny is the author in the eigteenth book of the
natural history.

The third, if the sea being calm does make a nosse within it self
signifies great winds: of this speaks Virgil in the tenth of Ac^eados and
Lucano.

The fourth when the Porpisses of the sea go leaping upon the sea, and show
them selves upon the Waves is a sign of storms, And that the wind will come
from that place that they come, This S. Isidore brings in the twelfth of the
Etimologias.

Of the fifth, Virgil, says, in the Georgians that when the Sea Meowes or
Gulles do leave the sea and go to the dry land it signifies storms in the
Sea.

The end of the second book.
The third book of the VVindes, and their quallities, and names, and how one
should sail with them.
The first chapter what thing the wind is, and what quallitie it is of, and
how it ingendreth.
FOR the declaration of the nature of the wind, for the diversity of the
doubts that are of it, some say it is the air and it moves: others say that
it is water: others that it is a vapor of the earth: and others, that it is
some great celestial body, or other, that with great force and violence does
pushe forward the air.

And this cannot be determined, if his nature be not considered in that which
principally it is. The which I say that the wind is a vapor of the earth that
rises up and stretches even to the highest part of the air and strongly
thrusts forth the air.



This vapor is hot and dry, and by his subtlety does pearce the air: for as
the wind is of a subtle vapor in his kind, and being subtle and light, it
is natural to rise up and so it rises up, and of ye subtilt^e of ye vapor of
ye earth, he is made, and from thence he descends, and in his descending he
shows that the vapor moves it self unto a high place and as he is come to
that place is made wind, and so he descends blowing. And it is to be
understood, that the vapor rises not so high as the superior part of the
air, which is called Estus, but rises up to the cold part, and there as
Algazel says with the cold, he waxes thick and descends of the which it
seems, that the vapor whereof the wind is made, is not congregated with the
inward cold as some say, but with the outward cold of the place, by ye which
as Algazel says, he is let that he come not to the superior part of the
air. Likewise it is proved, that the vapor is raised up with heat, and for
this, if the heat of air round about do help him, it heateth the more: for
the ^^ner heat is helped by ye outward heat, and so if it were not for the cold
of the place, he would neither wax thick nor blow.

The 2. Chapter, how the wind moves not right from above downward: nor
contrariwise, but his moving is in circle of water and earth.
FUrther for the moving of the wind, it is to be noted that it moves not
from above downward, nor from beneath upward but it month in circuler or round
manner, of the water and the earth: so says Albertus the great in the treaty
of winds, chap. 12. all winds commonly move their blast and moving in circle
manner, in such sort, that they move not up unto that which is high nor
descends to that which is low: but moves by the round superficial of the
earth, and water in the air in circuler manner, as appears by the clouds:
that with the winds go up and descend down from the East, into the West: even
like to the moving of the stars. Where it is to be understood, by the
doctrine of the Astronomers, that there are some stars, which move the winds,
as lupiter, that moves northerly winds: and the sun moves Easterly winds:
and Mars moves ye blast of Southerly winds: and the Moon moves, Westerly
winds. This is as it were a beginning, as every manner of cause, by his own
means induces to one effect, and therefore it is convenient that the effect
do immitate the moving of the cause. And seeing that the star^es do move in
circuler manner, it is convenient that the wynd should move like a bow upon
his Horison. In like manner it is said, when the signs do cause winds to
blow, because there are three signs, which have hot and dry qualities,
which are these, Aries, Leo and Sagitarius: and this is called the triplicitie
of the fire. And these are called Easterly signs, because they move the winds
of the East part. There are other three signs, which have cold and dry
qualities. These are Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn: and this is called
triplicity of the earth, these signs are called Meridionales, because they
move the Southerly winds continually. There are other 3. signs, which have
their qualities hot and moist: these are Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius: and this
is called the triplicitie of the air. These are called occide^tall or Westerly
signs, because they move ye winds of the West part. There is another fourth
triplicitie of the other 3. signs, which are Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, And
this is called triplicity of ye water: for because his property is cold and
moist, and these signs do move ye Northerly winds, and that humor which they
have in his property, they cause to abound in the times so attributed in
those bodies, where they are engendered. Of the aforesaid, it is concluded:
that the winds do move themselves in r^u^dnesse of the water and earth like to
the moving of the stars, and not right going upward nor desce^ding. For the
vapor is elevated with the heat, and is expelled with the cold, which
congealeth him, and so it is convenient, that the wind descend not right
down, for the heat that rises up, but that it be by one side in the
circuit of water and earth. And this reason Aristo^le gives.

The 3. Chapter, wherefore the wind is not always alike: but at sometime
blows hard, and at other times calm: and wherefore it moves to his
opposite.
WIth reason might be asked two doubts concerning the wind, which are these: (
the first doubt.) What ye cause is wherefore when the wind begins his blast,
it is not equal, but sometimes hard, and other times more calm. And
sometimes it cease, and other times it turns to blow, so that it blows
not co^tinuallye after one sort. ( the second doubt.) The second is, wherefore
the wind moves to his opposite, for so we call it when from the east he goes
to the west: And from the north to the south, and likewise contrary, of this it
seems that there is no reason, because the Uapour which is the root of the
wind either follows his moving which is to be elevated because he is hot,
and according as it is straight so it ought to go upward, or follow his
matter which is earthly, and at it is straight, ought to desce^d. Likewise what
does make the wind to move more to one side then to the other, rather then to
move it self straight so that the east likewise should move it self toward
the north, or toward the south, as toward the west, and likewise of the
other winds. Item all things which are engendered in one place naturally
move not unto the place opposite: so that if the easterly wind be ingendered
in the east, and the northerly wind in the north, they ought to move to their
own place, and not to the place opposite. By the which it is to be said that
the winds moving of them selves to their opposite is violent, and against
nature, or the matter of the winds is marvelous and unknown to us. ( The
first declaration.) The first is to be understood that as ye matter of the
wind, which is the vapor of the earth, rises up by little and little, makes
a weak and little moving: But as he is increased in great quantity: so with
a great force he descends and makes a strong wind. Also the wind blows
not continually alike because the matter which rises up is not always equal
nor is equally put forward, for the cold is more or less, and the vapor not
equally congealed. And therefore the wind at one time blows hard, and at
another time soft, ( The. 2 declaration.) The 2. is to be understood, that the
wind to move to his opposite is for two causes. The 1. is as Alpetragio says,
the stars do move in circle manner; and so the wind does immitate ye circle
moving, The 2. as Albertus says, that it is more natural, because the vapor
is engendered of heat, and is expelled and thrust out of the cold, and the cold
is behind the heat, and therefore is thrust out to his opposite, so that he
cannot go upright for the cold yt is in the air nor can descend, for the heat
that rises up, nor can return backward for the cold which is behind him: and
therefore it is necessary, that he move in circle manner to his opposite, and as
much as yt which is said that nothing moves forth from the place of his
generation it is to be noted, that which is of the nature of air, moves it
self to the place of air, and the air has place in all parts, and the
vapor has the nature of air as much as apperteineth to his seldom moving so
that he moves not forth of his place.

The 4. chapter, of the whirling of the wind, and how it is caused.
IT has been spoken before yt the moving which ye wind makes is moving
himself to his opposite by ye roundnes of the water and earth, and not going
upright nor descending, as it has been proved, and experience in the
navigations does show it: and seeing that it is so it may be asked what is the
cause that many times the wind makes his moving right from beneath upward.
This we see that the wind raises up from the ground the dust and the straw,
and carries them upright one heigh which is commonly a whirlwind, and this is
as well caused or done in the sea as in the Land. And in the Sea it is made
well near like a right sleeue, and by it the water rises upwarde, as many
times it is seen* Whereby it s^emeth yt ye wind has likewise a straight moving,
yt is to say from beneath upward, as the moving in roundnes before is declared.
To this is to be noted that this moving, which the wind makes is not
natural to it, but accidental and violent: for because it is done by force,
by meeting together in this manner: when one wind comes from one part, and
another from another part contrary, and ye strength of the one, does meet with
yt of the other as every one of the^ has no free running, by the let of the
wind he finds contrary: then he that is strongest thrusts forward the
other, and so they put themselves into roundnes, and make a whirlewinde until
they be divided. This appears by an example in the water when it runs,
that if it find another body that does make any resista^ce, it makes a
whirling, moving it in roundnes: even so the wind as it finds resistance of
another wind or of some mountain, or of any like thing, that does resist his
course, it cannot go forward. Therefore he makes that round whirling. and
this causes in the Sea many times that ships be sunk down under the water,
when they find themselves under such a whirlwinde or spout: for the water which
ye wind raises, does ouerwhelme and drown them. Likewise when there are
moouinges of contrary winds, they cause to rise up storms in the Sea, which
the sailors many times may know before hand considering and beholding the
moving of the clouds if they be contrary and different to the wind that is
beneath. For when it is so, it is a token that contrary winds do run
abroad, of the which continually the superior does overcome: because he is of
more strength and swiftnes then the inferior.

The fifth chapter, of the winds, of the cards of navigations, of their
number, and names.
AND seeing there has been treated of ye winds, what things they are, and how
they are engendered and move, In this I will speak of the winds that are marked
in the cards of navigations, their number, and how they have their names
according to the ^se of the sailors. Of the which it is to be understood yt the
winds of the cards which we call courses, do show forth 32. names of winds,
which are practiced in ye navigations, and no more nor less: and the reason
wherefore this number is given, is because the roundnes of the world, is
imagened to be divided into 32. parts, and in every one of these is assigned
one wind, and is given to him a whole name, or half, or a quarter, according
to the part where it seems to us that he comes; as hereafter shall be
declared. And to understand, this is to be noted, that this roundnes of the
world has 4. principal regions. These 4. parts are named and known by 4.
winds, which are east, west, north, south. The east is also called solan^, it
grows under ye equinoctial line, it is also called lecua^te, because the
sunn^ rises there, and begins to appear in the morning. This wind is
called in the navigations east. The second principal wind rises of the
Occident, under the equinoctial line, it is called poniente, because the sun
sets there, or hides himself in the evening. It is also called, fauonio,
and in the navigations it is called west. The 3. principal wind is called,
Cierco and grows under the pole artick, he is also called, Aquilonall, and
Septemtrionall, Aquilonal because he grows in the part of Aquilon
Semptentrional by the 7. stars of ye Vrsa minor. This wind in the navigations
is called north. The fourth wind is called Meridionall he comes forth under
ye pole antartike, he is called Meridional: for when he is come to the sun,
there he makes unto us the midst of the day. And in the Navigations this
wind is called South. These Winds are marked in this manner.



These four winds have other four Colaterales, and are compounded of the
taking a name of half the name of every one in this manner.

The 1. is marked between ye north and the east, and takes name of both, and
therefore is called northeast.

The second is between the east and the south, and is called southeast.

The third is between the south and the west, and is called southwest.

The fourth is between the west and the north, and is called northwest, and is
marked in this manner.



These 8. winds are called in the navigations, whole winds or principalles,
among the which there is to be marked other 8. which are called half winds
not because they have less force the^ the 1. but because they are described
among those 8. winds afoesaid, the which also do take their names of ye 2.
winds Colaterales and are called in this manner.

The first is described between the north and the northeast, and taking (...)
of both of them is called North Northeast.

The (...) called east, northeast, because he stands between the east and the
northeast.

The third is east southeast, because he is between the east and she southeast.

The (...) is south Southeast, because he (...) between the south and the
southeast.

The fifth is south southwest, because he is between the south and the
southwest.

The sixth is west southwest, because he is between the west and the southwest.

The seventh is west northwest, because it is between the west and the
northwest.

The eight north northwest, because it is between the north and the north west.

And they are ordained in this manner.



Among these xvi. courses of winds and half winds, are marked other sixteen
which are named quarters, and they are put in this manner, every one of the
eight principal winds has two quarters, gathered forth of them, and every
one of them does take the name of ye winds nearest to him, in this manner.

The north has two quarters, which is by the part of the northeast, and is
called North and by east, and that which is by the part of the northwest is
called north and by west.

The northeast has other 2. and yt which stands toward the north, is
called northeast and by north, and that which stands toward the (...) is
called northeast and by east.

The east has other two that which is toward the part of the northeast is
called east and by north, and th^^ which is toward the (...) of the so^th is
called east and by south*

The southeast has two quarters, that which is toward the east part, is
pacled southeast and by east, and that which is toward the south part,
southeast and by south.

The south has two quarters, that which is toward the east, is called south
and by east, and that which is toward the West is called south and by west.

The southwest has other 2. ye which is toward the part of the south is
called southwest and by south, and ye which is toward the west, is called
southwest and by west.

The west has two quarters, that which is toward the southwest is called
west and by south, and that which is toward the part of northwest is called
west and by north.

The northwest has two quarters, that which is toward the part of the west
is called northwest and by west, and that which is toward the part of the
north is called northwest and by north,

They are ordained in the manner following.

The.32. ^indes ^n the com^asse.




The sixth chapter, how the winds of the cards whereby the sailors do sail
do girde or compass about the roundnesse of the world for to sail by them.
SEeing there has been declared, the winds of the cards of navigations, their
names, and differences: I will speak in what manner and order these winds do
compass about the roundnesse of the world, to know how to sail by the^. Of
this is to be noted, that this round body of water and earth, has in
roundnesse three hundredth and threescore degrees. Therefore he that is in any
part or place, and would sail toward the North. All inconvenience being
taken away, shall sail with the wind at South, and with no other. It is to
be understood, sailing before the wind. Although that he not having the wind
at South: But some other wind sailing by the bowling: may go rising up by
other courses, making boords, one board unto one wind, and another board unto
another: until he come to the place where he pretends to go. Likewise, he
that will sail from ye north to the south, must be with a Northerly wind, or
in the manner aforesaid.

The navigations of the east or west, is in this manner: a ship departs from
the Islande of Saint Thomas, or as they call it Saint Thome, which is under the
equinoctial, and would go round about ye world, if in case, yt it might be
sailed: this ship if she should sail toward the east, her way should be in
this manner, from ye said Island or place where she departed, she shall sail with
west, 180. degrees, and if from thence she will return to ye place from whence
she departed, by the same course yt she went, she shall return with east ye same
way: but if she go forward on her way, you shall understand, then all ye
rou^dnes will serve you, ye west wherewith you departed, until you come to ye
point where you came forth, in such sort yt in a place where a man is, a circle
being imagined, which gyrdeth the world, all this circle is sailed with one
wind, but if from the half circle, or before or after he will return by the
way that he went, he shall return with the wind contrary. For it is to be
understood, that from the place that a man departs until the half circle
be ended, he goes departing from the place, from whence he came, and the
other half he returns toward it again, as the figure following shows it.



I say that one departs from A. to go toward C. and goes by B. in A. which
is the place from whence he departs: the wind begins, and being come to
C. which is his opposite, if he return from thence to go to the same B. the
wind which is contrary, will serve him. But if he go sailing from C. to D. and
from D. to A. you shall understand that with the wind he began to sail by,
he shall go all the roundnesse, until he return, where he came forth. The
same account, shall be made, if you begin to sail toward the West, and
that which has been said of the navigations by the equinoctial, the same must
be kept by any manner of circle, whatsoever.

And it is to be noted, that only from the East and West, there are circles
or courses greater and lesser: the greater circle passes by the Center, and
the lesser passes not by the Center. But all circles greater or lesser, have
three hundredth and sixty degrees of length, but in the leagues that every
degree has, there is difference of more and less, even as the circle stands
near to the equinoctial, or to the poles. But the winds which must serve the
turn ought to be of the greater circles and none of them of the lesser
circles. The navigations by the other winds is in this sort. If one sailing
toward the northeast, gave a turn about the world, going always by the
same course, he shall return by ye southwest, from ye place where he departed:
and the same will be done by the contrary. And in the rest let the account be
kept as before has been declared. The same do I say by the navigations
toward the southeast, that he shall return by the northwest. And for an
example of this, let it be asked: if two ships be in one port, and one
departs toward the north and the other toward the south, these ships if
they shall meet, and if they do meet for to go equal way how much shall
every one of them sail? I say that these may meet, and that sailing by these
courses, when every one of them have gone.180. degrees they shall be together.
And in like manner, this acount is to be kept departing by other courses. And
so it is to be understood, that whenever two ships or more do go forth
of one port, and do sail by different courses, when every one of them have
gone 180. degrees, they shall return and join in the place opposite, from
whence they departed: this is because as it is said, yt all the winds of the
navigations be of ye greater circles, for all of them do pass by the center,
and so every one going the half circle which is the said. 180. degrees shall
find him self in the point opposite from whence he came forth.

The seventh chapter, of the order of the Cards of Navigations.
AMong the instruments which are necessary for the navigations, one is the
card: for without it good navigations cannot be made, seeing that in it the
Pilot or sayler does see the place where he is, and the place whether he
pretends to go, and sees ye height of degrees that every place has, so
that he knows if he shall go forth right, or if he shall go rising or
descending: he sees also what wind or winds will serve him in his course,
and where he shall leave one and take another: he also sees the distance of
the way which he shall go, how many leagues it has, and so he ordains in all
things that which is best and convenient for him. But it seems that with
reason there may be had a doubt in the cards wherewith the navigations is made*
And say that they be not certain nor true for this cause following. ( A doubt,)
This being proved that the world is a round body, and not only the heavens,
but also every one of the elements, so that the water whereby we sail is
round, and the wind wherewith it is sailed moves it self in roundnes and
this being so we see that the cards of navigations be not made round but
plain: Therefore from the round to the plain is great difference, as
appears by this present figure,



If two ships should depart from A. unto C. and the one of them went by B.
and the other by D. so great difference will be of the way that the one makes
to the other by how much the distance is from the B. unto the D. and seeing
that the way which by the sea is sailed is from the A. unto C. by D. because
the water is round, and the cards does not show it to be so, but it shows
it in plain manner which is from A. unto C. by B. whereby it seems that the
way which the ship makes, is half more the^ that which the card shows.
Seeing the ship goes it in circle manner, and the card shows it by diameter,
and the diameter has but only the third part and one seventh part of the
circumference. Likewise the aforesaid seems to be so: because the round body
is greater then all other bodies, and as the world is a round body, there is no
other figure so great, that may be compared to it: and so the card which is
made in plain, cannot be equal with the round. Also the courses of the
navigations, as they are put in the cards in every hundredth leagues: they
depart one from the other twenty leagues, in such sort that from the place
where the ship does depart unto the xc. degrees which does amount to 1575.
leagues. An these leagues they depart one ship from another, or one course from
another 315. leagues. And seeing there are 32. courses, the world, that is to
say, ye earth and ye water should have in roundnesse, ten thousand and
fourscore leagues: this is false, because this roundnesse has 360. degrees of
17. leagues, and a half, every degree, which does amount to 6300. leagues and
no more. Of all the aforesaid, it seems that the cards of navigations because
they are made in plain: should be false and imperfect. ( A declaration.) To
this is to be noted* that the cards of navigations are true and altogether
perfect: and the art wherewith they are made and ordained, does contain all
certeintie* And aunswearing to the first is: that the navigations which the ship
does make in roundnesse, and the card does show in plain: is to be
understood, that the same quantity or distaunce of way, that every part has in
roundnesse, the self same is reckoned and given in plain: as well in ye land,
as in ye water, by marking in the leagues and degrees the distance that every
thing has in rou^dnesse, without taking from it any thing. And this may well be
done, for although that one body be round, there may be given to it the self
same proportion and greatness in plain, as Ptholome sets it forth in the
plain sphere. And Jordan in the treaty which he made of the same matter. This
seems to be by an example in an apple, that although it be round, the length
and breadth that his roundnesse has, may be put in plain form: even so in
the cards of navigations, although in their figure or shape they be not round,
yet in the accounting of the way, they give and hold in equality with the
round: And the round body to be greater then another body. It is to be
understood, that those bodies being equal in circumference, for not being
equal, another figure may well be greater then the round. And for as much as I
say, of the courses of the cards. It is likewise to be understood, that these
be ordained in Geometry, and because it is so singular among ye Mathimaticals,
they cannot be false as those Authors which I have spoken of do show. And
if by a point of the card there are found more Leagues in the courses then the
world has: This is not hurtful to the card, for this art and show of the
courses, is not only for this number of six thousand and three hundredth
Leagues which the world has: but for any manner of number, so that although
the world had a hundred thousand leagues, or had a thousand, the self same
would serve those courses in one number as in another: as it appears, that
such as sail one hundredth leagues do go in their way as well as those which
go unto the East India, which sail five thousand. And as Magalanes sailed,
and such as went with him in the year 1521. when the straight was discovered,
which of Magalanes is named, that then sailing from Spain, they gave a turn
about the world: of that as is said, it appears plainly, that the cards of
navigations are so well ordained, that their agreement and perfection is a thing
marvelous: seeing a thing so great as the earth and the Sea is, being marked
in so little room as a Card is, and do so much agree, that it does not
miss one ^otte to sail the whole world thereby.

The eight Chapter, of the account which the pilot ought to have in his way
when he sayleth with a wind different to his course.
SEeing there has been declared ye order which ought to be used, if the
roundnesse of the world were sailed: In this I will speak of shorter voiages
or wa^es, and such as are more commonly sailed by sea from one place to
another. And how ye pilots and sailors should know to keep a good account,
and give reason of their nauigations, whether soever they go: for the which I
say, whenever the pilot will sail, he ought principally to look upon 3.
things.

First of al, the place where he is, and the place whither he minds to go,
and to know the distance, that is from the one place to the other.

The second, in what height of degrees he finds himself, and in what height
the place is which he minds to go unto.

The third is, to know the wind or winds that shall serve him in his
navigations, all the which he may see and know in his card.

And this being known, let him look if he have a wind that is convenient
for his navigations, and having it let him proceed upon his voyage as weather,
and time will permit him. And it is to be noted, yt many times it happens
that for the navigations which should be made, the wind serves not according
to the course, which the ship should go: And therefore it is sailed with
another wind which is different.

Likewise it happens, that as a ship goes sailing, there comes such
weather, that causes her to go forth of her right way: and take her course
by another, by the which how much more she goes, so much the land ye they go
to seek changes it self into different courses of the compass. This is
because the ship goes not her right course to the place, whither she
prete^deth to go: so that the self same place, varieth or changes it self
from one cour^e into another. And likewise sometimes it waxes near, and other
times far of.

And when it is so, that the pilot sayleth with a wind, different to that
which is convenient for his course, and sailing would know in what point or
course, the land whither he minds to go, lies from him: and how many
leagues he has from him to it, in the figures and accounts following, he
shall find it: the which shall profit him to know the certain place where
he is, and thereby he shall know how to choose the true course, (when
weather serves him) for to return to the certain place whither he minds to
go, which is to be understood in this manner. I say that you will sail to a
land, which being seen in your card, and the place marked where you are: You
shall find ye it is from you toward the North or South, or any other course,
and so sailing toward one place, you run toward another: and put the case
that the land whether you pretend to go, be from you toward the North, so
that you should sail with the wind at South, and because this wind blows
not, you sail with another wind: Therefore if the navigations be by the first
course more near to the wind it self, in the first figure you shall find
marked this first course, and near to it the leagues which you shall go for
to get the land, whither you pretend to go toward all the courses of the
compass: as also how many Leagues the land is of from you, and in the manner
that the navigations is declared by this course, so all others are declared.

And when in sailing you have not the proper wind which should serve, mark
by the wind which you have, how many points it is of from the proper wind,
wherewith you should sail, and seek it in one of the figures, that is here
put, which shall be one of the^ marked with the cross, and nere to the figure
where the like wind is, you shall find three accountes, these accountes serve
in this manner.

In the first account, you shall find how many leagues you shall go by the
course where you sail.

In the second account is the course where you have the land whether you
pretend to go, (I will say) that having gone those leagues which there are
declared you shall come unto the land, which you seek after by the course
that is there marked: the which you shall know what course it is, by the
number that he has, seeking the same number in the figure that is next to it.

In the third account, you shall find how many leagues you are distant of the
same land whether you go, so that having gone the leagues of the first
account you shall have the land whether you go at the course which stands in
the second: And you shall be from the same land the leagues that are marked in
the third account.

This being known, three things are to be noted.

The first, because here cannot be put any rule for the number of the leagues
that are from the place where you are unto the place where you pretend to go:
because at one time there will be more distance then at another time.

Therefore this account is taken out for the number of a hundredth leagues, I
will say that the place where you are unto the place whether you will go, is a
hundredth leagues of way. And it is to be noted, that although this account, do
serve for this number of a hundredth leagues, it serves likewise for any other
number of leagues, that the way has, in this manner, if the way be of 200
leagues you shall go it twice as much as the numbers of the first account do
show: And then you shall have the land whether you go in the course which is
marked in the second account, and you shall be from the said land, twice as
many leagues of them which are accounted in the third account: and if the way
be of 300 leagues you must go thrice as much as the numbers of the first
account show so that of every hundredth leagues, which is increased of the way
you shall give as much more number of that which is in first and third account,
and then you shall have the land at the same courses or points, which are
marked in the second account, and if in the way be fifties, or more or less
you shall give a half, a third, a fourth, or a fifth, or according as the
number is.

The second is, that in the figures which are put here, the navigations goes
marked by the winds of the one part of the compass: and by the other part
of the course where you shall find the land.

This is to be noted that the same account is when you shall fail by the part
where the courses go, and so it serves for all parts.

The third is, that toward the wind that these figures do show forth right,
shall be given the name of the proper wind wherewith you should sayle^

When you shall sail by the first course. I.

Leigues of the way. Courses. Leagues of distance. l. 1 l. lx vii. 2 xl lxx.
vi. 3 xx viii l^xx. 4 xx v xx. 5 xx ii. xx. iiii. 6 xx. xx. viii. 7 xx. c. 8
xc. ii c. 9 xx. v. c. x 10 xx. v. c xv. 11 xx. vi c. xx. 12 xl c. xl. 13 l ^
^^^^. v 14 c

When you shall sail by the second course.II

Leagues of the way. Courses. Leagues of distance. xxx. 1 lxxii. l iii. 2 l i.
lxx. 3 xl ii. lxx ii. 4 lx ii. lxx 5 xl. xcv. 6 xxx. c 7 xl. c iii. 8 xl c x v.
9 xl ii. c xxx. 10 lx. c xl iii. 11 lxx. c lxxx. 12 c. cc lxxx ii. 13 cc.

When you shall sail by the third course. III

Leagues of the way. Courses. Leagues of distance. xx v 1 lxxx. xl v 2 lxx. lx
3 lx lxx 4 l viii lxxx i 5 l viii. xc 6 lx. c 7 lx. c x viii 8 lx v c xxx v 9
lxxx. c lx v. 10 c cc x v 11 c xl v ccc lx. 12 cc xc

When you shall sail by the fourth course IIII

Leages of the way. Courses. (...) of distance. xx 1 lxxx v xl 2 lxx v l viii
3 lxx lxx 4 lxx xc. 5 lxx c 6 lxx v c x 7 lxxx c xl 8 c c lxx v 9 c v cc xxx v
10 c lxxx ccc lxxx 11 ccc x

When you shall sail by the fifth course. V

Leagues of the way. Courses. Leagues of distance. xc 1 xc xl 2 lxxx l v 3
lxxx lxx 4 lxxx xc 5 xc. c x 6 c c xxx v 7 c x v c lxxx 8 c xl v cc x 9 cc xx v
ccc lx 10 cccc xx v

When you shall sail by the sixth course VI

Leagues of the way. Courses. Leagues of distance. xx 1 xc. xl 2 xc. l v 3 xc
lxx v 4 c c 5 c x c xx v 6 c xx v c lxx 7 c lx cc l 8 cc xx d x 9 cccc lxxx v

When you shall sail by the seventh Course. VII.

Leagues of the way. Courses. Leagues of distance. xx. 1 xc v. xl i. 2 xc v.
lx. 3 c v. lxxx. 4 c x. c x. 5 c xxx v. c l v. 6 c lx v. cc xl. 7 cc xl. cccc
xc. 8 cccc lxxx.

When you shall sail by the eight Course. VIII.

Leagues of the way. Courses. Leagues of distance. xx. 1 c. xl. 2 c x. lx v. 3
c xx. xc v. 4 c xxx. v. c xl. 5 c lxx v. cc xxx v. 6 cc l viii. cccc lxx. 7
cccc lxxx.

When you shall sail by the nienth Course. IX.

Leagues of the way. Courses. Leagues of distance. xx. 1 c iii. xl v. 2 c x v.
lxxx. 3 c xl. c xx v. 4 c lxx. cc v. 5 cc l. ccccxl v. 6 cccclxx.

When you shall sail by the tenth Course. X.

Leagues of the way. Courses. Leagues of distance. xx. 1 c x. l v. 2 c xxx. c 3
c ix ii. c lxxx. 4 cc xl. cccc xl. 5 cccclxx.

When you shall sail by the eleventh course. XI.

Leagues of ^he way. Courses. Leagues of distance. xxx. 1 c xx. lxx. 2 c l. c
xl. 3 cc x. ccc xxx. 4 ccc cx.

When you shall sail by the twelfth course. XII.

Leagues of ^he way. Courses. Leagues of distance. xxx. 1 c xx. c 2 c lxxx. cc
xc. 3 ccc lxx.

When you shall sail by the thirteenth Course. XIII.

Leagues of the way. Courses. Leagues of distance. l. 1 c xl. c xc. 2 cc ixxx.

When you shall sail by the fourteenth Course. XIIII.

Leagues of the way. Courses. Leagues of distance. c. 1 c xc.



AND for the better declaration of the rules above written, this present figure
is to be noted in the which I say, that you find your self, in the point, A.
And the land whither you will go, you have it, I put the case at the North,
in the point B. and there is from you to it an hundredth leagues, so that your
way should be from A. unto B. that is to say, sailing from the south toward
the North, and because you have not this wind, you sail by the first course,
and the account being put in the first rule, does teach you, that if you go
fifty leagues by this first course: that the Land, which you had first
toward the North, you shall have it at North and by East (you sailing by the
course of North, and bywest) and there shall be from you to it fifty Leagues,
and if you go by the same course sixty seven Leagues, then you shall find it
toward ye North North-East, and then it will be from you to it forty leagues.
And if you sail seventy six leagues, you shall have it toward the
Northeast and by north, and there will be from you to it twenty eight Leagues.
And so in the rest, this rule teaches you how many leagues should be sailed for
to get to the land whether you go to all these courses. The second figure and
rule is, when you shall sail by the second course distant from the proper
wind: in the which you shall find the account that shall be kept in that way.
And the third for the third course, and so for all the rest: and it is to be
noted, that to this wind at North, which was put for an example, shall be given
the proper name of the wind, whereby you should sail, and to the others the
names of the winds, that are next to him.

Also it is to be noted, that always it must be considered what distance is
from the place where your are, unto ye place whither you mind to go, whereby
you may make the account, even as before is declared.

The nienth Chapter, how the pilot shall certainly know sailing by any manner
of course where the Meridian is.
AND seeing that in the rules before written has been declared how the Pilot
shall know whersoeuer he shall sail, and to what point or course of the
compass he has the land whither he goes, and how many Leagues the land is
from him. Here I will speak, that departing from one place for to sail to
another by any manner of course, you shall know how much you depart from
that Meridian wherein you were, and know the Meridian, wherein you find your
self: for this is a thing most necessary in the navigations, the height or
altitude only excepted. And because this rule of the Meridian, may be the
better understood, you shall note this example. I say that eight ships
being in one port, and they go forth sailing, the one from the North to the
South, the second by the first quarter, the third by the second: and so all
the other by different winds, when every one of these ships have gone one
degree, or two, or more, being equal in degrees: they shall be East and Weast all
of them one with the other, although not equal in way, for the one has gone
much more then the other, in such sort, that that which has sailed by the
second course has gone more way, then that which sailed the first, and the
third more then the second, and so of the rest: by how much they go from the
first, so much ye more way is to be gone to raise up, or to descend a degree.
This is caused by reason of the obliquitie of ye courses as more largely
shall be declared in the 14. Chapter of this third book, and this being known
(I say for to know) how far a man is from ye Meridian, from whence he
departed, imagine that his navigations should be by the same Meridian: that is
to say, from the North, to the South, or from the South to the North: and that
he saileth by the first, the second the third, or fourth course, or by any of
the other: according as the course lies whither you mind to sail, to one
place, or to an other. And this is to be understood in the fourteen courses
colaterales, from ye North to ye South, or from the South, to the North,
according as in the first figures which are put here does appear: for because
for ye other 14. courses Colaterals, from the East to the West, in the second
figure or fable they are declared: therefore I say, when you shall sail by any
of the 14. courses heretofore declared, two things must be considered. The
first in what height of degrees you were, when you were in them, and in what
height you do presently find your self in: and look how many degrees of
difference are from the one to ye other. The second is to look by what course
you have come unto ye place where you are, and this being known, look into
the account hereafter written in ye first table, and in it you shall find how
many Leagues you have departed from the Meridian, which you had in place from
whence you departed.

An example. I say, that you departed from the point of these first marked
figures following, and so you were in 20. degrees of height, and after that,
taking your altitude, you found your self in 15. degrees, or in 25. in such
sort, that you found to have raised or destended five degrees, and this was
sailing by the fourth course, whose name you shall know looking on ye fourth
where he is marked in the figures which are here put, and the course being
known and agreeed with y^ which you have sailed, look in ye table which is
next in the 4. course at the five degrees, and you shall find that you have
gone from the Meridian from whence you departed 87. leagues. And for ye better
understanding of this rule, immagine that from this point of the twenty
degrees, where you were, or from any other place from whence you departed, that
when from thence you departed, there departed, likewise another ship from the
same point sailing by the same Meridian, and that when you had gone the five
degrees she likewise had gone other five, in such sort that you have her East
and West with you, and so it is to be understood that these 87. leagues are of
distance from you to this ship, because you are so far distant of that
Meridian, And so knowing the distance which you have from the Meridian, where
you departed, forthwith you shall know the Meridian wherein you are, and in this
sort immagine that any manner of course that you shall sail, by any of these
that are marked here under in the two first figures, you have this ship East
and West with you, and this shall be your guide for to know how far distant
you be from the Meridian where you were, this is by seeing how many leagues you
have raised or descended, and the course whereby you have sailed, and being
sought in the figures and table following, by it you shall know the Meridian
certain wherein you are.

The Navigations by those courses Colaterales from the North to the South.


The Navigations by those courses Colaterales from the South to the North.


A Table of the navigations from the north to the south, or from the south to
the north.
When you shall sail by the first course

Degrees, i. ii. iii. iii. v. vi. vii. viii. ix. x Leagues. 3 7 10 14 17 21 24
28 31 35

When you shall sail by the second course.

Degrees i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi. vii. viii. ix. x. Leagues. 7 15 22 30 37 45
52 60 67 75.

When you shall sail by the third course.

Degrees. i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi. vii. viii. ix. x. Leagues. 11 23 34 46 57 69
80 92 103 115

When you shall sail by the fourth course.

Degrees i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi. vii. viii ix. x Leagues, 17 35 52 70 87 105
122 140 157 175

When you shall sail by the fifth course.

Degrees. i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi. vii. viii. ix. x, Leagues. 26 53 79 106 132
159 185 212 238 265

When you shall sail by the sixth course.

Degrees i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi. vii. viii. ix. x. Leagues. 42 85 127 170 212
255 297 340 382 425

When you shall sail by the seventh course.

Degrees. i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi. vii. viii. ix. x. Leagues. 85 171 256 342
427 513 598 680 769 855

The Navigations by the courses Colaterales from the east to the west.


The Navigations by the courses Colaterales from the west to the east.


A Table of the navigations from the East to the West, or to the contrary
When you shall sail by the first course.

Degrees. i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi. vii. viii. ix. x. Leagues. 85 171 256 342
427 513 598 680 769 855

When you shall sail by the second course.

Degrees. i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi. vii. viii. ix. x. Leagues. 42 85 127 170 212
255 297 340 382 425

When you shall sail by the third course.

Degrees. i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi. vii. viii. ix. x. Leagues. 26 53 79 160 132
159 185 212 238 265

When you shall sail by the fourth course.

Degrees. i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi. vii. viii ix. x. Leagues. 17 35 52 70 87 105
122 140 157 175

When you shall sail by the fifth course.

Degrees. i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi. vii. viii. ix. x. Leagues. 11 23 34 46 57 69
80 92 103 115

When you shall sail by the sixth course.

Degrees. i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi. vii. viii. ix. x. Leagues. 7 15 22 30 37 45
52 60 67 75

When you shall sail by the seventh course.

Degrees. i. ii. iii. iiii. v. vi. vii. viii. ix. x. Leagues. 3 7 10 14 17 21
24 28 31 35

The tenth Chapter, wherein is declared, more of this rule before written.
FOR it is not only necessary to know the navigations which is made from the
north to the south, and so contrary: but also that which is made from the East
to the West, or from the West to the East (that is to say) by these courses
their Colaterales. Therefore I have put the demonstrations and table before
written, of the which is to be noted the same order that is in the Navigations
from the North to the south, or from the south to the north as it has been
declared. (The which is) when you go sailing you shall mark in how many
degrees of height you find your self in, and after that when you turn to
take the said altitude, you shall mark how many degrees you have risen or
descended from the place from whence you departed. And this being known look
upon the figures before written, the course whereby you have sailed, and if it
be the first the second or third, or any of the others, and ye course being
known seek it in ye table, and in ye same course look ye number of yt
degrees which you have gone, and nere to the degrees, you shall find the
leagues which you have sailed. I speak of an example, that taking your altitude
you found your self in 30. degrees, and after that you found your self in
thirty two, or in thirty eight in such sort you rose v p or descended two
degrees, and you sailed by the third course.

Therefore look in the table in ye third course at the second degree, and you
shall find that you have gone fifty two leagues, and in this order you shall
know the rest.

And note that in these tables, there are not put more numbers the^ unto ten
degrees. (The reason is) that whilst these be a sailing by any manner of
course, there will be place to take the altitude, and being taken, to mark the
place, and from thence to begin the account as well rising as descending, and
in this sort you shall go making a point in your card, and know the certain
place where you are.

The eleventh chapter, how the Pilot ought to choose the course which is
convenient according to the place he minds to sail unto.
THE Pilot or any other person that minds to sail, before all things he
ought to consider of the way that he minds to go, and so to choose the
course or courses which are necessary, according to the way which he minds
to make, and for this put before you a certain rule, and this in any manner of
place where a man stands, is a point or beginning where the courses or winds
of the navigations do proceed and come forth. Therefore the Pilot ought to
look in his card the place where he is, and the place whether he minds to
go unto, and this being known, he ought to seek for the course that may go
most right to it from whence he does depart unto the place whether he minds
to go, and if there be a course that will carry him straight from one place to
the other, let him put the foreparte of his ship into it as his compass will
show him, and by that course let him follow his way, as long as weather will
serve him.

And when there is no course that goes the right way, let him seek with the
compass the course that is most agreeable unto him, which is it yt will bring
him least out of his way to the place whether he minds to go, and by the
said course let him follow the degrees or leagues which are of distance,
until he find another that goes more right to the place, and in this let the
Pilot have great care, to see how much way every course serves him, and where
he shall leave that way and take another, and that he keep a good reckoning
and knowledge of the way that he makes as much as is possible, and at all
times when need requires to make a point in his card and move his course,
let him do it keeping always a good reckoning of his way, and this to
continue until he find a course that may carry him directly to the place that
he desires. And the Pilot in the beginning ought not to keep himself toward
the courses that are nearest adjoining to him where he is, but unto those that
are nearest to the place whether he goes. And it would do well to prick his
card often, and provide diligently upon his course: and let the Pilot note,
that for to chose ye course ye right way as he ought to do, he has need to
know precisely the Meridian wherein he is: for not knowing it there may follow
great error, as by this example appears.



If one ship go sailing, the Pilot makes her to be in the point. A. and
would go seeking for B, and in truth his point was the C. it is evident by
reason he is ignorant and without knowledge of the Meridian believing that he
sailed from A. unto B. his navigations was from C. unto D. And therefore it
seems that so much as is erred in the knowledge of the place where the shipp
is, as much more she is distant from the place that she goes to seek: and
this is one of the causes, whereby the Pilots do find themselves in great
error in their nauigatio^, and loose much time, and other inconuententies
happen to them. Therefore let the Pilot take this for a good advise, in long
ways to keep for him self a book of account of his navigations, where he
should be put in remembrance of the wind yt serves him every day, and in what
sort and so how much the singlenes may be, that his ship makes, looking by
his clock how many leagues he may run every hour: and you shall understand,
that the most which she can run is four leagues in an hour, and three
leagues in an hour is a great tun, and in one hour two leagues is
reasonable, and and in an hour to run a league and a half or sometime but a
league. It must be well looked unto, and great advise must be had in this, for
it will profit much to prick the card to know the Meridian, and thereby to
choose the true course as it is said.

The twelfth chapter, how you should prick your card to know the place,
wherein the ship is.
ONE of the things that the Pilot ought to know perfectly, is to prick his
card very precisely, for it is very necessary for good navigations. Therefore
when ye pilot will prick his card for to know the place where he is, he ought
first of al to look in his card, ye place from whence he departed in what
height of degrees it is in, according as he shall find by the graduation
which the rard has, and let him look also in how many degrees of height he
finds himself in according as he took it, and this being known let him
take his two compasses and put the point of one of them in the place from
whence he departed, and the other point of the same compass let him put in
the course or wind which he has had, and take the other compass and put the
one point in the degrees of height which he has found, seeking them in the
graduation of the card, and the other point of this compass in the wind
East, and West that is nearest, and make these compasses to run the one unto
the other not taking away ye two points which come upon the winds, (that is to
say) the one, is it which the ship has gone, and the other the East or West
and coming in this manner where jointly you shall join the two points of
both compasses, the one which was put in the place from whence the ship
departed, and ye other in the height or altitude where in ye found your self.
In this point is the place wherein the ship is, and to know if this point be
certain make the proof in this manner. Look in the point where you find your
self in, and from thence with the compass measure how many leagues are from
it to ye place from whence you departed, and this being known, look into ye
wind that brought you how many leagues is to be reckoned for a degree,
according as you shall find in the fifteeneth chapter of this third book, and
being seen how many degrees you have raised or descended from the place
where you departed, unto ye place where you make your self to be, you shall
reckon the leagues that these degrees do amount unto, and if the leagues of
the degrees be just with the leagues that you find of your way, your
reckoning is good, and if the reckoning be not agreeable the one with the
other, look wherein the error is, for because that these two sums or
reckonings should come just. And if the place where you find your self be
just in altitude with the place from whence you departed, here is no rule that
can instruct you justly that which you have sailed, but by judgment that which
your ship may go, according to ye days and hours that she has sailed, and
according to ye weather she has had, and so the reckoning is made little more
or less. But let the pilot ^^atke that ^^ this account or reckoning of little
more or less, ought to be considered the currents or tides that may be in your
way, for ye many times the wind and tide are one way, and when it is so the
shipp runs more way the^ the Pilot thinks: at other times the winds and
tides are contrary in such sort that as much as the wind carries so much the
curre^t or tide reteineth or keeps back, and for this cause you ought to
consider that if the wind do cast ye ship to one part and the currents to
another, the race of the ship will be in that part where is less strength or
power, and if the wind and the currents be equal the race of her will be of
ye side where the curre^t is. Let the pilot consider the falling down or
holding up that the shipp may make, and so let him make the account that is
convenient. This advise is to be had when he pricketh his card by squarenes or
by fancy, which is by reckoning the singlenes that the ship has made, and
arbitrar or indg how much way it may be that she has gone in every one, and
by what course, of all these the Pilot must keep a good reckoning in his
navigations as much as in him lies.

The 13. chapter, how the Pilot ought to look that his card be just and
certain that there be no error in his navigations.
IN the chapter before has been declared the manner yt the Pilot or sayler
should have in the pricking of his card and know the place where he is, and be
cause my intent is to declare how ye sailers should know to make their
nauigatio^s with out peril or danger, as well of the ignorance of the rules
and instructions of the navigations, as also to know the defectes of the cards
and instruments wherewith they govern themselves by the sea.

I say let the Pilot or any other person yt shall sail, be well advised that
the card which he shall prick, and order his navigations by, be just and true, as
well in the courses as in the setting down of ye coast in such sort yt every
one thing be in his proper place both true and certain as well in the course
as in ye altitude. So that the error or defect of the card be not occasion
that in navigations you err, and you must note yt among the cards of nauigatio^
yt until now have been used in ye way of ye India^s of his majesty, there are
many which have 2 graduatio^s different one from the other, in such sort that
from one graduatio^ to the other is more the^ 3 degrees of difference, these
cards are false and in the nauigations that by the^ are made may follow much
hurt and great inconvenience by reason of the difference, that these 2.
graduatio^s have between them, because their difference does cause that all the
courses yt reach from one graduatio^ to the other are false, being seen from
ye place where they begin unto ye place where they make an end. The reason is,
yt as they begin in one graduatio^, and make an end in another, yt is different
from that: so ye said courses do make the selfsame difference, and so the way
that is sailed by them, shall be erred, and you shall not find the place that you
do seek by it: seeing yt the ports, baies, Islands, and shooldes, and the
other things of the cards, where these said courses do begin, being
looked on where they end, they be forth of their own places and true
altitude, making it equal with the altitude where the navigations began. Also
looking in every course of the card, ye distance of leagues, that are from one
place to another, or from one port to another, I say, from the place where the
course began, unto the place where it ends: and these Leagues being taken
with the compass, and the Leagues being seen which are reckoned for a degree
in every course of the nauigatio^ shall be found, yt ye leagues of the courses
be not agreeable with those leagues, which are of the distance of the way. This
is in the courses that do reach from one graduatio^ to another: the which is
caused by reason of the difference that the two graduations have: so that by
these said cards cannot be made any good nauigatio^, seeing that they in
themselves do vary: likewise because they have 2. equinoctial lines, and
many other errors, all the which I have made declaration of before. The Counsel
royal of the Indians, of his Majesty, whereupon it has been commanded that
the said cards be not used by reason they have two different graduations, and
therefore are false and erroneous as it is said. Therefore I say, that the
Pilot or sayler ought to look well that the card whereby he does sail, be
of one only graduation: I will say if they have two graduations or more: let
them be equal or uniform and not different, the one from the other. And
likewise the other instruments, let them be certain and true, that they cause
no error, whereby may follow hurt and danger, as it is most certain that
with false instruments it may and does oftentimes happen.

The fourteenth Chapter, of the number of the Leagues, which are reckoned for a
degree in every course of the navigations.
FIrst, before I declare the number of ye leagues, that ought to be given to
every degree in every one of ye courses of navigations; it is convenient to
speak here what is the cause wherefore to the roundnes of the world, from the
East to the West, or from the North to the South, was given to every degree,
17. leagues and a half, and no more. And in ye other courses, although they be
equal: with these are reckoned more leagues for a degree then in them. To this
is to be noted, what degree is taken in one of two sorts, is to be understood
a degree of the roundnesse of the world, or a degree of eleuatio^ or height of
the pole. For the first which is a degree of roundnesse, in this all the
degrees of the courses or winds be equal, for all the winds are as the greater
circles in the sphere, and as it has been declared, they have three hundredth
and sixty degrees of longitude, and for that cause is given to every degree of
rou^dnesse seventeen leagues and a half: but in the second manner, which is
the degrees of the elevation of the pole, these are different unto those of the
roundnesse. For if in sailing toward the north going 17. leagues and a half,
the pole is raised a degree, when you sail toward the Northeast, although you
go these 17. and a half, you have not raised ye pole ^ degree: but it is
necessary that you go by this course 24. Leagues and a half, for every degree
of eleuatio^ of the pole, and like in all the rest of the courses, by how
much every one is more straight from the pole unto the Line: so many more
Leagues, or less shall be gone for every degree of elevation of the pole, so
that the rou^dnes wherewith the world is girded, is not to be looked on in all
the courses of the navigations. But do you also look how much should be gone by
every course for to raise up or to put down every degree of ye height of ye
pole, because this altitude of ye pole, is to be reckoned from the half of
the world, which is from the Equinoctial line: for that from thence they begin
to reckon the degrees, as well for the part of the North, as for that of the
South, so that in the cards of navigations, are put the coasts and all the
rest that are marked in it according to the degrees yt every thing is distant
of the said line: in such sort, that sailing by any manner of course, from what
place a man is in, toward the Equinoctial, or from the said Equinoctial or
any other part, by as much as the course is more straight or crooked, by so
much they shall reckon more or less leagues in every degree in this manner.



The Equinoctial line.
I put the case, that two ships be in ye point A. which is a port toward
the North, six degrees distant from the Equinoctial, and both of them do
depart from thence toward the said line, and the one departs with North,
and the other with Northeast toward the Southwest: It is certain, that she
which carries the wind at North, sailing by the same course from the North
toward the South after she has gone a hundredth and five leagues which are
the said six degrees, by that course she shall be in the Equinoctial: And the
other that saileth with Northeast toward the Southwest, by reason that that
wind goes more leaning toward the said line, the way is longer to her. And
so although that in the altitude she goes not down more then six degrees,
but for to come to ye Equinoctial she shall go one hundredth forty seven
leagues, by ye which she has every degree by this course 24. leagues and a
half: so that only from the North, to the South, and from the East to ye West,
and contrariwise every degree has 17. leagues and a half, but in the other
courses every degree has the leagues following.

The second course has a hundredth and eight leagues divided into six degrees,
which comes forth every degree 18. leagues.

The third course has a hundredth and fifteen leagues and a half, so that
every degree has nieneteene leagues and a terce.

The fourth course has a hundredth twenty six leagus, so that every degree
has 21. leagues.

The fifth course has a hundredth forty seven Leagues, so that every degree
has 24. leagues and a half.

The six course has a 189. leagues, so that every degree has 31. leagues and
a half.

The seventh course has two hundredth seventy three leagues, so that every
degree has forty five leagues and a half.

The eight course has five hundredth thirty five leagues, so that every degree
has eighty and niene leagues.


The fifteenth Chapter, of number, and measure, and of how many parts a degree
is compounded.
IT is written in the book of wisdom, that God made all things in number,
weight, and measure, therefore without knowledge of the numbers we can know
nothing, of the time, of the hours, or of the moouinges, or other things, by
the which it seems that without knowledge how to reckon we cannot know any
thing.

There are two sorts of quantities, or numbers: one is continual, another is
divided or discrete: The continual is in 3. sorts, yt is to say, toward the
length only like to a line, and this is called quantity lineall: Another is
continued in length, and breadth, but not deep, and this is called superficial:
The third is continued in length, breadth, and depth, and is called corporal, or
set together. The quantity divided or discrete, is when we say, one, two,
three, etc: whereby it seems by the diversity of the numbers are understood
diverse meanings of writings, and so he that knows them not, ought not to be
called a man. Plato says, for this cause is man so wise a creature, because he
knows the manner how to account: for the which he had written at ye door of
his Academia, yt who could not make a reckoning or account, should not enter
in, to hear him. The measures, and ye reasons for the^ and their properties
have spro^g of Geometry: for Geometry is a science of measure, the which does
contain lines, superficies, and bodies, as appears in any circle three
square, four square, and other figures, of Geometry: many Authors have
written, and principally Euclides, the father of Ypocras. Plurtarch says, that
Archimedes made an artificial thing by Geometry, with the which, Marcellus a
captain of the Romans, having besieged the city of Syracula, in Sicilia
with the said artificial thing Archimedes took out the ships of Marcellus,
that were in the Sea, by raising them up into the air, he put them within the
City: this science is called Geometry, as Saint Isidore says, for the
distribution of lands and fields: Geometry properly is of ye corporal things
for that all corporal things have their proper measure.

And of the spaces or distances that are from one province or city to another,
which are measured by Escadios, miles, Leagues, and Degrees: And this measure
whereby that all may be alike in equality is ordained in this manner.

Four grains of Barley do make one finger.

Four fingers one hand.

Four hands one foot.

Five foot makes one pace.

An hundredth twenty five paces makes one Escadio.

Eight Escadios which are a thousand paces, do make a Mile.

Three Miles do make a league.

Seventeen leagues and a half do make a degree.

Every degree has lx. minutes.

Every minute 60. seconds.

Every second 60. thirdes.

And so unto tenthes.

The reason why this account is divided into this number of 60. more the^ into
any other. Ptholome declares in the first of ye Almagesto, the nienth chapter:
where he says, that yt Astronomers, sought a number, that has many numbers in
proportional parts, which we call parts, Alicotas, and there cannot be given
any other number under sixty, for that this number may be parted into many
divisions and numbers, as in two times thirty, in three times twenty etc.

The end of the third Book.
The fourth book of the height or altitude of the Sun, and how the
navigations ought to be ruled thereby.
The first Chapter, wherein are declared 17. Fundamental principles, which
ought to be known in the Altitude of the Sun.
ONe of the things most subtle and of greatest understanding contained in ye
Art of navigations, is the altitude of the sun: for it shows truly the way,
that he which sayleth, makes, or shall make in such sort, that if he has
made any error in his voyage: by this altitude he knows it: and so by
reason that it is a thing so excellent and subtle, ye ancient writers in old
time did highly esteem of ye practice thereof, chiefly that great Ptholome, and
other singular authors, for the which they used diverse instruments as ye
Astrolabio, and the 3. rules, and others.



This altitude is so effectual for good nauigatio^, that those which do sail
to far countries, cannot make their nauigations: if this should lack. For
among all the rules and aduises that I have declared in this art, and will
declare as well touching the altitude of the North as of others which serve in
the navigations: This altitude (...) the sun has excellency among all others,
because he is as a proof of Arithmeticke, that soeweth the errors which are
in the numbers: so that by the altitude of the sun, being precisely taken,
the Pilot may know the want or lack that has been in his navigations. And
because this altitude of the Sun is a matter delicate and subtle as I have
said. In this fourth book, I will treat thereof as plainly as possible I can,
showing the rules by Text, and giving the^ their declaration and true
understanding, that they ought to have. And likewise giving to every one an
example and demonstration that they may be the better understood, and for this
shall be noted 17. fundame^tal beginnings, which are these following.

Altitude. Degree. Horizon. Zodiake. Equinoctial line. Declination. Circles.
Tropikes. Part of the North. Part of the South. Longitude. Latitude. Parelius.
Meridian. Hemisphera. Zenith. Centrum.
Altitude is the degrees which the su^ne or the ^ole do raise themselves above
the Horizon. Likewise an altitude is understood by those degrees, that any
city, port, Island, etc, are distant from the Equinoctial line. A degree is
one part of three hundredth and sixty: wherein the world is divided, it has
seue^teene Leagues and a half of way, by the longitude which is the length or
breadth of the water and earth.

Horizon is a circle which we do imagine upon the uppermost part of the
earth: in the which our sight is fixed, which is as far as our sight
ca^reach, and by this circle half the heaven is divided which we see, from the
other half which we see not.

Zodiake is a circle really situated in the eight heaven, under the which the
sun moves it self in all the year. This Zodiake deuideth ye Equinoctial
line, into two equal parts: the one from ye Equinoctial line by ye part of ye
north, and the other by the part of the South, by every part of these it has
180. degrees, so that the Zodiake has 360. degrees.

The Equinoctial is a s^rcke or circle imagined by the half of the world
from the East into the West in equal distance from both the poles, so that from
the Equinoctial unto every one of the poles are nientie degrees. It is called
Equinoctial, because the sun passing by it causes Equinoctio, which is as
much to say, the day and the night to be equal.

Declination is the distance which the sun by his own moving makes from the
Equinoctial line, 6. months of the year to the North part, and 6. months
to the South part.

Circles are the way whereby the poles of the Zodiake do move in roundnesse
from the poles of the world. These do take their names of the said poles: and
so they are called circle Articke, and circle Antartike, these circles are
distant of the said poles of the world, 23. degrees, and 33. minutes.

Tropicos or Tropikes are 2. circles where ye sun last of all does come once
in a year. One unto the part of the North, and the other unto the part of
the South. It is called the Tropike of Tropos which is a greek name, and is as
much to say as conversion, for the sun being come to every one of these
Tropickes conuerteth her self and turns back.

The part of the North is taken for half the world, which is from the
Equinoctial line unto the Pole articke.

The part of the South is the other half of the roundnesse of the world,
which is from the Equinoctial line unto the pole antartike.

Longitude or length, is understood by the way from the East into the West, or
from the West into the East, for that this is the length of the world.

Latitude or breadth is the way which is taken from the North to the South,
which is from one pole to ye other, for this is the breadth of the world.

Parelius is a way imagined to go straight by the heaven, or by the Sea, or
by* ye land, from the East into the West, or from the West into the East, with,
outcomming near to the Equinoctial line, or to the poles more in one part
then in another.

The Meridia^ is a line, which is imagined from one pole of the world to the
other, right over our heads, and when the sun comes to this line, it is
the midst of the day unto such as inhabit under it.

Hemisphera is as much to say, the half sphere* and it is to be understood,
that alt the world is one Sphera Esphera, and is taken for a round thing, and
because the world is round, it is called Sphera, and seeing that in what
place soever a man is, he sees the half of Heaven: This half of the Heaven,
which we see, we call Hemisphera.

Zenith is apoynt imagined in ye heaven very precisely put over our head, and
from this point or Zenith to any manner of place of our Horizon are 90. degrees.

Center is a point in the midst of the sphere imagined, and so in the midst
yt from it to the superficie, all the lines that from forth right shall be laid,
shall be equal: and from any part of the superficie to this point is to descend,
and from it to the superficie is to rise up.

The second Chapter, of the excellencies of the sun, and of his moouings.
SAint Ambrose says* in the Exameron, that the sun is the fountain of
light, the fairness of ye day, the orname^t of heaven, the measure of time,
the virtue and strength of all things which are borne, and according as the
Philosopher says, is cause of all generation and corruption. It is of a very
great quantity, so much that Ptholome says in the Almagesto and Alfragano, in
the difference 22. that the sun in an hundredth sixty and six times greater
then the earth, his moving is more swift then any arrow, and we do not see him
move by reason of his great brightness which is of more strength to be
seen, then our sight can see: And to our judgment he goes by leisure. But
the quantity of ye way being known which he goes, his lightness is
innumerable: so yt for the great distance that is from us to him, we cannot
determine his moving. And it is to be noted, that the sun has two moouings
contrary, which are one forcible, and the other proper: the forcible moving is
it that we see that every day he makes a forcible going by the first moveable,
and in every 24. hours, he goes round about the world from the East into the
West. The other moving which is natural, with proper to himself, woorketh
contrary to the first, that is to be understood from the West into ye East, in
his circle Excentrico: the which moving, he makes in three hundredth sixty
and five days and six hours, and less a little quantity: And this moving he
makes in this manner, from the eleventh day of March, that the sun passes
by the line Equinoctial until the eleventh day of June, the sun goes rising
up, by the part of the North, and so putting himself from the said line, the
eleventh day of June, he comes to the tropike of Cancer, and in this rising
up that he makes these three months he departs from the said line twenty
three degrees and thirty three minutes: which is his greatest declination, or
distaunce that he makes from the fayde line; and from the twelfthe of June,
unto the thirteenth of September, the sun descends from the said Tropike
unto the line: and from the fourteenth of September, unto the thirteenth of
December: the sun descends by the part of the South from the line to the
Tropike of Capricorn, from whence he departs other twenty three degrees,
and thirty three minutes, which is likewise his greatest declination of that
part: and from the fourteenth of December, unto the tenth of March, the sun
goes using up from the Tropike of Capricorn unto the line: so that of the
twelf-monthes of the year, six of them, the sun goes from the line to the
part of the North, and the other six to the part of the South. And all the
moouinge which the sun makes, is from one Tropike to another: in the which
are 47. degrees, and 6. minutes. This is the latitude of the Zona, which the
ancient Writers called Torrida, which is as much to say, tosted, because
always the sun makes his moving by her within these Tropikes, without
going worth of them at any time.

And it is to be understood, that the time which the sun goes toward the
part of the North, and the time he goes toward the part of the South, Is
not equal, for the sun goes toward the part of the North, a hundredth
eighty and seven days, and he goes toward the part of the South, a
hundredth sixty and eight: where it appears that the sun goes more time of
the year unto the part of the North, then unto the part of the South. The
cause is, because this circle Excentrico: wherein the sun makes his moving,
is so shut into the Sphera, that of one part he comes more near to the
firmament, then of the other, for the which cause be is described forth of the
Conter of the world.

The part of this circle that comes more near to the firmament, is called
auxe, which is as much to say elevation, and this he does, when he comes to
the tropike of Cancer, and that when he is most distant is called opposite of
auxe, and this is when he comes to the Tropike of Capricorn: so that when
the sun is in Auxe, he is more near to the firmament; and when he is in
his opposite, he is more near to the earth, in such sort that in the Summer
the sun goes far from the earth, and in the Winter, is more near to the
earth. This is to be understood in respect of us in the Winter (...) respect
of such as inhabit toward the parts of the South in Summer. The Cardinal
Peter de Aliaco proves, that aforesaid in the twelfth question, in the first
article of the second notable, where he says that the sun makes his
moving, being come to the end of Gomini, is in the Auxe: of his Excentrieo,
and in the end of Sagitarius is in the opposite.

This seenteth by the demonstration that Ptholome puts in the third
distinction of the Almagesto. And seeing that the Center of the Excentrico of
the sun is distant from the Center of the world, by so much when the sun
in his Auxe is more distaunt from the earth; and when he is in the opposite,
he is more near to it. And so it is proved that the sun is more near to
the earth in our Winter, then in Summer.

The third Chapter, of the year called Solar, and other manner of years, and
how the leap year is reckoned.
THE year Solar is the time, wherein the sun passes ye twelve signs of the
Zodiake, and returns where he began. It is called a year, which is, as if
one should say, a ring, or circle, because the sun has gone his circle, he
returns to the same place where he began.

The Egyptians as S. Isidore says, before they had ye knowledge of learning,
they accustomed to figure the year in a dragon, that bitt the tail, but since
they had learning and account of the year, they began it in September, because
they say that in that moves the world was made. And the Arabians begin in
the same time, the Hebrews begin in the month of March, because it was given
to them by law, we begin it in I^nuarie, because then did our (...) year
begin, which was the birth of the son of justice, Christ our God. And because
the sun does begin to come (...) us, In the scripture I find five sorts of
years. Anno Solet Anno Lun^^ Anno Emergence, Anno Grande, Anno Mundano. The
year ^ol^^ is it the therefore has been declared. The year Lunar is the time
which does contain twelve moons, of twenty niene days and a half, which
amounts to th^^ hundredth fifty four d^^es unto the which is added the
eleven days of the concurrent, because the year Lunar which is of the moon
may come with the Solar which is of the sun. (...) year Emergente is when
there happens, a thing very not^^le, and in the time following is speech
thereof, even as they talked in the time of Caesar* ^od now of the birth of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Anno Grande is as much to far, as a great year, according
as the master of the histories says, that it is a time of six hundred
years. Anno Mundano according to Macrobio, is when the Stars and all the
Planets will come to the point of our degree where they began their first
moving. And this he says shall be in fifteen thousand years, likewise the
other says that it will come in forty and niene thousand years. But any
manner of thing that the philosopher speaks of in this matter, is according
to his own opinion, we ought to hold that the time and the moving of the
things and the end of them is in the hand of him that made them of nothing, and
unto men does not appertain to judge nor determine of the time or ending of
the world. For ye most high providence of ye father eternal did put it in his
own bosom, as our redemer Jesus Christ teaches us, answering to such as
asked him the said question, as it is written in the Acts of the Apostles the
first chapter, Therefore I say that the year called (...) has three hundredth
sixty five ^^^yes and six hours lacking twelve minutes giving to every hour
sixty minutes and because in the year are accounted six whole hours of this
has come although the quantity be little, that it is no more but one fifth
part of an hour ins every one year, in so many number of years they have not
made eleven days of difference in the time, so that these six hours which
are accounted in the year besides these said days from four to four years
does amount to twenty four ^oures which makes and natural day, and so this
fourth year bath three hundredth sixty six days and this is called the leap
year, it is also called Bissiesto by the minutes which are as called Bises the
which minutes the sun tarieth in every one sign most then the thirty days
Bissiesto is ^^oun^^ to say two times six, for because (...) of Bissiesto the
day that is six days before the Kalendes of march is (...) so that in one
only letter of the Calendar there are two days which are the twenty four,
and twenty (...) of February, that is to say the (...) which (...) the said
letter, and more the day which is increased by the Bissiesto or leap year by
the which the leap year in the month of February has twenty nine days and
the other years twenty eight.

Therefore it is to be seen, when the altitude of the sun is taken to know
his declination if it be a leap year, or (...), the second, or the third
after the leap year as is plainly to be found in the seventeen Chapter,
which treats of the declination, and according to the year, so must the
declination of the Sun be sought for.

The fourth Chapter, what thing a shadow is, and how the shadow which the sun
makes ought to be looked on, for to take his altitude.
THe shadows are caused when any dark body is opposite to the light, and so
the shadow has an appearance or show of a body, and it is none The shadow
flies away from such as follow it, and follows such as fly from it. The
shadow by how much the sun is higher, by so much it is lesser, and how much
the lower, the greater: whereby the shadow of a man is greater in the morning
and in the evening, then at the midst of the day, and it is to be noted, yt
the sun goes always is one of these 3 places, which is toward the part of the
north, or in the equinoctial, or toward the part of the south: and in these
three parts to such as inhabit in the world it makes 5 shadows: (That is to
say,) a shadow at the east, a shadow at the west, a shadow at the north, a
shadow at ye south, and a straight shadow. The shadow at the east, is when the
sun does set. The shadow at the west is when the sun rises.

The shadow at north is when the sun comes to the midst of the day, and
he that makes the shadow is more toward the north then the sun. And the
shadow at south is when he that makes the shadow is more toward the south
then the sun there is likewise a straight shadow, when the sun is in our
Zen^^^ Al these shadows, such as dwell within ye tropikes have. Those which
inhabit under the tropikes, have 4 shadows, (that is to say) shadow at east
shadow at west and those of ye tropike of Cancer, have ye shadow at north and
those of the tropike of Capricorn have the shadow at south: and once in the
year a straight shadow, which is when the sun enters into that tropike. Such
as dwell without ye tropikes have three shadows, at east, and at west, and
those of the part of the north, have shadow at north, and those of the part
of the south, have shadow at south, and never any straight shadow. But do you
note, yt although the sun does make in the year five shadows to such as
dwell in the world not only in five parts, but in xiii. differences of parts,
you may be with ye sunn and have xiii. differences of shadows, and no more,
(that is to say) five when the sun goes toward the part of the north, and
three when he is in the line, and five when he is toward ye part of the
south, ye which by xiii. rules with their demonstratio^s shall be noted in this
manner.

When the Sun is toward the north.
The Sun being toward the north, if the shadows be towardees the north,
you are more toward the north then the Sun, and the Sun between you and
the line.



The Sun toward the north, if the shadows be to no part, then are you
toward the north as far from the line as the Sun.



The Sun toward the north, if the shadows be toward the south, you may be
toward the north between the Sun and the line.



The Sun toward the north, and the shadows going toward the south you may
be in the Equinoctial line.



The Sun toward the north, and the shadows going toward the south you may
be toward the part of the south, and the line between you and the Sun.



When the Sun is in the Equinoctial Line.
The Sun in the Equinoctial if the shadows be toward the north, you are
toward the part of the north.



The Sun in the equinoctial, if the shadows be straight you are in the
equinoctial.



The Sun in the Equinoctial, if the shadows be toward the south you are
toward the part of the south.



When the Sun is toward the south.
The Sun toward the south, if the shadows be toward the south you are
toward the south, and the sun is between you and the line.



The sun at the south if the shadows be straight you are toward the south
as far from the line as the sun.



The sun at south if the shadows be toward the north you may be toward the
south beetweene the sun and the line.



The Sun toward the south, and the shadows going toward the north you
may be in the Equinoctial.



The sun toward the south, and the shadows toward the north you may be
toward the north, and the line between you and the sun.



The fifth chapter, wherein is declared what thing the height of the sun is,
and how it ought to be taken to know the place where a man is.
Seeing there has been declared the difference of shadows which the sun
makes, or may make by all the year in any manner of place that a man is, ye
which shadows are necessary to be known. For to know precisely how to take
the altitude of the sun, I will speak, what thing the altitude of the sun
is, and the manner that must be had, for to take it well. For this is to be
noted, that Ptholomie says in the first of Geographia, that wheresoever a
man is, he sees half the heaven and the other half is hid from him, in such
sort that of three hundredth and sixty degrees that the heaven has in roundnes
we always see the hundredth and four score which is the half wherein is
contained our Hemispherio, so that wheresouer a man is, and in any manner of
time, from his head or Cenith, unto the horizon are ninety degrees, and so
from what place that a man is in even unto the sun, when he rises in the
morning, that he do begin to appear in the horizon are ninety degrees, and
how much more the day goes forward, and the sun goes rising, so much more
he comes nearer toward our Cenith. And this rising up that the sun
makes, is called the altitude of the sun, because he goes rising, and going
up upon the horizon, the which altitude he that shall take him at the midst
of the day, let him understand that the degrees that he shall find in his
Astrolabio, less then ninety, those should be from him to the sun, for that
the sun shall be so many distant from his Cenith, which is from the right of
his head. Therefore I say to know the altitude that ye sun has every day
upon the horizon which the pilot or any otherperso^ that would take it, ought,
first of all to look on syue things which are these following.

The first, that it be taken in the midst of the day.

The second, that he see to which part of the line, the sun goes that day.

The third, to what part the shadows go.

The fourth, what declination the sun has.

The fifth, that he know how to apply the rule that is convenient according
to the time and place wherein he finds himself. Unto the first I say, yt the
altitude of the sun ought to be taken at the midst of the day justly, this
is because until the sun comes to the Meridia^ he goes always rising
above the Horizon, and if he be taken before or after he will not be so
justly taken, but although that in this be some difference of time being but a
little thing before or after, it is no great inconvenience, because the most
times it cannot be punctually known when he comes to the Meridian. Although
you look on the clock, the Astrolabio, or any other instrument, but always
do you procure to take him at the hour aforesaid.

To the second, it ought to be seen at what part of the line, the sun
goes, if it be at the north or at the south, considering that the time, which
the sun goes to the part of the north, is from the eleventh of March unto the
thirteenth of September, and from the fourteenth of September unto the tenth of
March he goes to the part of the south.

Unto the third, he that takes the altitude ought to see to what part the
shadows are from him, (that is to say) the shadow of his person, or of the
maste of his ship, or of any other thing yt is put upright. And so by the
shadow he shall know at which part of the line he is, for being known to
which part the sun goes, it may be easily known by the said shadow,
toward what part he is of, as in the fourth chapter has been declared.

To the fourth, the year ought to be looked unto, if it be a leap year, or
the first, the second, or third year after the leap year, and according as
the year is, let him look on the month, and day wherein he is: and what
declination the sun has toward the part where he goes, that is how many
degrees and minutes he is distant from the said line.

To the fifth, yt he apply every rule of ye altitude in his proper time and
place, and this the pilot ought alwais to procure and know the rules of the
altitude, not only the words but the meaning of them for he that only
knows the rule, and does not attain to the reason or foundation thereof, as
it ought to be understood, it procures to him many harms, and he knows
not of what they proceed, and finding him self in the error he puts
fault in the instruments and rules, the fault being in him self, because he
understands them not.

And because these rules of the altitude of the sun may be well understood,
and that their should be no ignorance in any thing, here shall be put every one
with his declaration, figure, and example, in manner following.

The first rule, when the Sun goes toward the part of the north, and the
shadows goes toward the north.
THE Sun toward the part of the North, if the shadows be toward the
North you be toward the north, and the Sun is between you and the line, see
how many degrees you took of altitude and how many does lack of ninety, and
with those which lack, join the declination of that day, and all joined
together you are distant from the line toward the north.

This first rule does show how you shall know the altitude of the sun, when
he goes toward the north, and he that takes the altitude is more toward
the north then ye sun, and so he says.

The Sun toward the part of the North, is as much to say, that when you
do take the altitude of the Sun in any day of the six months, that he
goes from the line unto the part of the north.

If the shadows be toward the North, if in this day that you take the
altitude of the Sun the shadows be from you toward the north.

You are toward the North and the Sun is between you and the line, in such
sort that by the shadows you do know that the Sun is between you and the
line, at such time as when they are in this manner.

Behold how many degrees you take of altitude, these degrees are those that
you take the sun in your Astrolabio, therefore look on these degrees how
many they are.

And how many lacks for nientie, is to be understood upon those that you
found of Astrolabio, look how many they are, which do lack for to come to
nientie, And with those which lack, as if you had taken fifty, there lack
fortye: and if you had taken 65. there lack 25. Therefore with those forty, or
twenty, or more or less, Join the declination of that day, which are those
degrees and minutes which ye sun is distant from the line, as you shall find
in the declination of the said day, And all put together, that is to say, the
declination of ye sun, and the degrees which lack for nienty, and that which
this shall sum or amou^t unto, you are distaunt from the line toward the
North.

An Example.
The sixte day of April, I taking the altitude of the sun, the shadows were
from me toward the North, and I took the sun in sixty degrees of
Astrolabio, there lacked 30. for 90. with these 30. I joined 10. degrees, which
the Sun had this day of declination, which did amounte to forty degrees, so
much was I distant from the line toward the part of ye North. The reason is,
for because in the month of April, the sun goes toward the part of the
North, and as the shadows were from me toward the North, I knew that I was
more toward the North, then the sun, therefore the sun being taken in
sixty degrees, the thirty which lacked for nientie, was I distant of the
sun.

This is because always, when that I shall take the altitude of the sun,
those degrees that I shall find in my Astrolabio, less then nientie, the
self same am I distant from the sun, and the same day, the sun was distant
from the line, ten degrees, which was his declination, so that from me to the
sun, were thirty degrees, and from the sun to the live, ten which make
forty: so much was I distaunt from the said line.



The second rule, that when the sun is toward the North, and the shadows
toward the South, the declination and altitude are more then nientie degrees.
IF the sun be toward the North, and the shadows be toward the south,
join the declination with the altitude, and if they pass nientie degrees,
those which are more, you are distant from the line toward the North, and you
are between the sun and the line.

In the first rule has been declared that when the sun is toward the part
of the North, and he that takes the altitude is more toward the North then
the sun whereby the shadows go from him toward the North. This rule is,
when the sun goes toward the selfsame part of the North, and he which
takes the altitude, ye shadows go from him toward the South in this
manner. The sun toward the North, the time which the sun goes toward
the North, has been declared. Therefore in this time, If the shadows be
toward the south, the south joins the declinatio^ with the altitude, which
is as much to say, look on the degrees and minutes, that this day has of
declination, and join them with the degrees, that you take the sun in your
Astrolabio, and if they do pass of nientie degrees, if altogether the
declination of the sun, and the altitude which you took, were more then
nientie degrees.

Those which were more, you are distant from the line toward the North. It is
to be understood, that if the altitude and declination were nienetie five
degrees, you are distant of the line, five degrees: and if they were an
hundredth, you were distant ten degrees: and so are to be reckoned those
which are more then nientie.

And then are you between the sun and the line. The which you shall know
because the shadows go from you toward the South, and because the altitude
and dedination did pass of nienetie degrees.

An Example.
The twenty day of May, I took the sun in 80. degrees, this day he had of
declinatio^ twenty and one degrees, I joined the declination and the altitude,
and they amounted to an hundredth and one degrees, so that they be eleven
degrees more then nienetie. These eleven was I distaunt from the line toward
the North, between the sun and the line, ye reason is, because this day ye
sun was distaunt of the line, 21. degrees: which was his declination toward
the part of the North: so that I having taken the sun in fourscore degrees,
there was from me to the sun, ten degrees, and as I am between the sun
and the line, I being ten degrees distau^t from the sun toward the line,
there was from me to the line eleven degrees, which lacks for the twenty
one, which is the declination of the sun.



The third rule, when the sun is toward the North, and the shadows
toward the South, and the declination, and altitude, are nienety degrees just.
THE sun toward the North and the shadows toward the South, if joining
the altitude and declination, they be nienety degrees, you are under the
Equinoctial line.

He that takes the altitude in the time that the sun goes toward the
North in one of three parts, he may stand that the shadows may be from him
toward the South, The first is when he is between the sun and the line,
and this has been already declared in the rule, before this. The second is,
the sun being toward the North and he that takes the altitude in the
self same line. The third is, the sun being toward the North, and he
that takes the altitude toward the part of the South, therefore of the
second, which is, the man being in the line, the rule says,

The sun at the North part if the shadows go toward the South, join the
declination with the altitude.

It is to be noted, that always when the sun goes to one part, and the
shadows to an other, the declination is to be joined with the altitude, And
if they be nientie degrees just. Even like if there were seventy degrees of
altitude and 20. of declination, or eighty of altitude and ten of
declination, or any other number, wherein the altitude and declination be
nientie degrees just, when it is so: you are under the Equinoctial live.

An Example.
The 11. day of July I took the sun in my Astrolabio, in 68. degrees, there
was this day of declination, 22. degrees, join the altitude and declination,
and they amounted to nientie degrees, then was I under the Equinoctial line.

The reason is, because the sun was toward the part of the North, and the
shadows going from me toward the South, I was more toward the South, then
the sun, there, fore taking sixty eight degrees of altitude, I was distant
from the sun twenty two degrees, and this day had the sun twenty two
degrees of declination, so that the sun was distant from the line twenty two
degrees, and I distant from the sun toward the line, the said twenty two
degrees, by the which I knew that I was under the said line. For by how much
the su^ne was distant from the line, so much was I distant of the sun from
the said line.



The fourth rule when the sun is toward the North, and the shadows
toward the south, and the altitude and declination do not amounte to
nienetie degrees.
THe sun at North and the shadows at south, if joining the altitude and
declination, they come not to nientie degrees, those that do lack for nientie,
you are distant of the line toward the part of the south, and the line will be
between you and the sun.

It has been declared that when the sun goes toward the part of the
North, if the shadows go from him that takes the altitude toward the
South, he may be in one of these three places, yt is to say, toward the North,
between the sun and the line, and in the said line, and at the part of the
South, the line being between him and the Sun, for in any part of these
that a man is, the su^ne going toward ye North part, always at the midst
of the day, the shadows will go toward the South, of these three, two have
been declared, of the third this rule speaks.

The sun toward the North, if the shadows be toward the South, and joining
the altitude and declination, if they come not to nientie degrees.

If the altitude which you have taken in the Astrolabio, were fifty or sixty
degrees, and the declination fifteen or twenty, so that all being put
together, come not to nienetie.

Those which do lack for nienetie, you are distaunt from the line toward
the South.

So that those Degrees and Minutes few or many, that be less then nienetye,
You are distaunt of the line, toward the part of the South, and then The
line wilbee between you and the Sun.

An Example.
The tenth of August, taking the altitude, the shadow was from me toward
the South: I took the sun in the Astrolabio, in seventy degrees. This day
he had of declination twelve degrees: I joined the altitude and declination,
and they amounted to eighty and two degrees, there lacked eight degrees for
nientie, these eight degrees was I distaunt from the line toward the part of
the South. The reason is, that taking the Sun in seventy degrees, there was
from me to the Sun, twenty degrees, and this day the Sun was distaunt
from the line, twelve degrees: which was his declination toward the part of
the North: so that the eight which lacks for twenty, was I distaunt of the
line toward the part of the South, so that from me to the line was eight
degrees, and from the line to the Sun twelve, these be the twenty which
were from me to the Sun.



The fifth rule, when the sun is in the Equinoctial, and you take his
altitude in less then ninety degrees.
WHen the sun is in the Equinoctial, if you take his altitude in less then
ninety degrees, those which are less then ninety, you are distant from the
line toward that part which the shadows are from you.

There has been declared the rules of the altitude of the sun, when he
goes toward the part of the North: now this rule serves for the days of
the year, that the sun is in the Equinoctial line, and says, when the
sun is in the Equinoctial line.

The sun is in the Equinoctial, the eleventh of March, and thirteenth of
September, so that in any of these days, If you take his altitude in less
then ninety degrees, so that if you take it in 75. which are less by
fifteen then ninety, or in eighty or more or less:

Those which you take less then ninety, These fifteen, or ten, or five, or
as many as are less then nientie, you are distant from the line unto the part
which the shadows doc fall from you.

So that if the shadows go from you toward the North, those degrees which
you find less then ninety, you are distant from the line toward the part
of the North, and if the shadows go from you toward the South, the same
degrees you shall find your self toward the South.

An Example.
The 11. of March I took the sun in eighty degrees, the shadows were from
me toward the North, this day the sun has no degree of declinatio^,
therefore the 10. degrees, which I took less the^ ninety, I was distant from
the sun. The reason is, because ye sun was in the line, the same degrees
that I was distant from the sun, the selfsame am I from the line, and
because the shadows went from me toward the North, was I toward the part of
the North, the which if they had gone from me toward the South, the selfsame
degrees should I have been toward the part of the South.



The sixth rule, when the altitude is taken in nientie degrees, whether in the
sun be a declination o^ no.
When you shall take the altitude of the sun in nienety degrees, the sun
is over your head, look upon the declination of this day, and if there be no
declination, you and the sun be in the line, and if there be any declination,
that which is, you are distant from the line, toward that part which the sun
goes.

This rule declares how the altitude of the sun should be known, when he
that takes him, has him in the Cenith, or point that is right over his head,
the which rule has two parts, that is to say, one, when the sun is in the
Equinoctial line, and the other when it is forth of it, of the first it
speaks.

When you do take the altitude of the sun in nientie degrees. It is to be
understood, that the measurer of the world, shows in your Astrolabio, the
nientie degrees just, when it is so. Know ye that the sun is right over
your head:

In such sort, that your shadow shall not go to any part, therefore the^ Look
on the declination of this day:

Is to be understood the degrees and minutes, which the sun is distant from
the Equinoctial.

And if there be no declination, Which will be the eleventh of March, and the
thirteenth of September, the^ the declination is of few minutes.

You and the sun be in the line, the sun beingin the ^^ne then he has no
degrete nor half a degree of declination, and you are in the line, seeing that
you are under the sun.

And if there be any declination: This is the second part of this rule, wherein
is declared, when the sun, and he that takes the altitude be out of the
Equinectiall, the which will be known in the degrees, that the sun has of
declination, because it says, that which is, is to be understood few degrees,
or many. So much you are distant from the line so that seesyng you are under
the sun, and the sun is distaunt from the line, that the same degrees and
minutes, that the sun has of declination, the same you are distaunt from the
line, toward the part where the sun goes.

If it be that the sun goes to the North part, you are toward the North
part, and if he go toward the South, you are toward the same part of the
South, and because with this that is declared, this rule may be well
understood, there is put in it no more declaration.

The seventh rule, when the sun is toward the part of the South, and the
shadows go likewise toward the South.
THe su^ne toward the part of the south, and the shadows toward the South,
the sun is between you and the line, look how many degrees of altitude, you
took, and how many do lack for nientie, and with those that lack, join the
declinacion of this day, and being altogether the degrees that be, you are
distaunt from the line, toward the South.

This rule is, when the sun is toward the part of the South, and the
shadows go toward the South, is agreeable with the first rule, which was
declared when the su^ne goes toward the part of the North, and because it is
declared according to his proper meaning, and this is agreeable to that, there
shall not be put here any other declaration, but the same that is there
declared, is to be understood in this. Only making difference of the names,
that is to say, from the North to the South, but because this rule is for ye
time when the sun goes toward the South, I will put an example of the part
of the South, in the manner following.

An Example.
The fourth of October, taking the altitude, ye shadows went from me toward
the South, and I took the sun in 85. degrees in my Astrolabio, this day ye
sun had 8. degrees of declinatio^ toward the south, therefore taking the
altitude in 85. degrees, there lacks sieve, for nienetie, these five was I
distaunt from the sun, and with these five, I joined the eight of
declination, they amounted to thirteen degrees, these thirteen degrees was I
distaunt from the line, because from me to the sun was five, and from the
Sun to the line eight, which are thirteen, so that I was distaunt thirteen
degrees from the line toward the part of the South.



The eight rule, when the sun is toward the nouth, and the shadows
toward the ^orth, and the declination and altitude are more then ninety
degrees.
THe Sun toward the south, if the shadows be toward the north, join the
declination with the altitude, and altogether if they pass of nientie degrees,
those which are more, you are distant of the line toward the south, and you
are between the sun and the line.

This rule is declared in the second rule before written when the sun goes
toward the north part, for the same account or reckoning that is made the
sun being toward the north and he that takes the altitude at the same
part of the north, between the sun and the line, the self same is to be
done, the sun being toward the part of the south, and he which takes the
altitude in the same part between the sun and the line.

Therefore ye declaration which is written for the one, by the self same form
serves for the other, and to know that he which takes the altitude is
between the sun and the line, the rule declares in what altitude and
declination, they should pass of nienty degrees, as it is showed in this
example.

An Example.
The xiii. of January I took the sun in seventy eight degrees, this day he
had of declination nienteene degrees, I joined the declination and altitude as
the rule shows and did amount to nientie and seven degrees, these seven,
degrees yt past of nienty, was I distant from the line toward the south. The
reason is, that taking the sun in seventy and eight degreees, I was dista^t
from ye sun xii. degrees, and seeing that ye sun was dista^t from the line
ri^. degrees, and I being between the sun and the line, therefore there are
from me to the sun xii degrees, and from me to the line seven which are
nienteene, so many are the degrees which the sun is distant of the line.



The nienth rule, when the Sun is at the south, and the shadows at north,
and the altitude and declination are nientie degrees just.
THE Sun at south and the shadows at north if joining the altitude and
declination they be nientie degrees, you are in the equinoctial line.

It has been declared that ye sun being at north, he which takes the
altitude, may be in one of 3 parts whereby his shadows, may go toward the
south one of them is toward the part of the north, between the sun and
the l^n^e, another in the said line, the other toward the part of the south*
the line between him and the sun* the same is understood the sun going
toward the part of the south, that he which toketh the altitude in one of
three parts, he may be that the shadows go from him toward the north, the
one being toward the part of the south between the sun and yt line, the
other being in the said line. The third being toward the part of the north
the line between him and the sun.

Seeing of the first it has been written of, and in the rule going before, of
the second, which is the sun being toward the part of the south, and for
him which takes the altitude in the line is put this present rule, the which
because in the third rule when the sun goes toward the part of the north,
it is declared. Only here is to be noted, the example following.

An example.
The second of December I took the sun in sixty seven degrees, this day he
had of declination twenty three degrees, join the declination, and the
altitude they amounted to nientie degrees, and being so I was in the
equinoctial, for because the sun at south, the shadows going from me
toward the north, I was more toward the north then the sun, the sun this
day was distant of the line twenty three degrees which was his declination, so
that taking the altitude in sixty seven degrees, there was from me to the sun
twenty three degrees, in such sort that the same twenty three degrees which
the sun was distant of the line, the same was I distant of the sun toward
the line, so thereby I knew that I was in the said line.



The tenth rule, when the Sun is toward the South, and the shadows
toward the North, if the Altitude and declination being joined, they come
not to nientie degrees.
THe Sun at South, and the shadows at North, if the altitude and declination
do not come to ninety degrees, those which do lack for (...) you are
distant of the line towarde^ the part of the north, and the line should be
between you and the Sun.

The third difference which has been spoken of, wherein he which takes the
altitude, may be the sun being toward the South, and the shadows going
toward the North, is, being toward the part of the North, the line
between him and the Sun, as this rule shows, whose declaration is written
in the fourth rule, when the Sun goes toward the part of the North. And
it is to lie noted, that at all times when ye sun goes toward one part, and
the shadows toward another, the declination is to be joined with the
altitude, and if they pass nientie degrees, those which are more, you are
distant of the line, toward the part which the sun goes and if they be
nientie just, you should be in the line, and if they come not to nientie,
those which are less you are distant at the contrary part where the sun
goes, as in this rule is declared, and therefore in this example following is
to be noted.

An Example.
The thirty of September I took the sun in sixty degrees, and the shadows
were from me toward the north, and the sun this day had six degrees and a
half of declination, I joined the declination and the altitude, and they
amounted to sixty and six degrees and a half, there lacked twenty three
degrees and a half for nientie. These twenty three degrees and a half was I
distant from the line toward the part of the north. The reason is, for that
taking the sun in sixty degrees there was from me to the sun thirty. I
was toward the part of the north, and the sun toward the part of the
south distant from the line, six degrees and a half, so that of the thirty
degrees, which were from me to the sun, taking out the six and a half which
the sun is dista^t from the line, there will be from me to the line twenty
three degrees and a half.



The sixth chapter, wherefore the rules of the height of the sun do show the
degrees that a man is distant of the equinoctial line more then by any other
part.
IN the rules before written has been declared how that every day that you
will take the altitude of the sun, you shall know at what part of the line
you are, and how many degrees distant as well of the one part as of the other.

Of this may be (...) what the cause is, wherefore all the rul^s of the ^^^tude
of the sun, are made and ord^^ned that a man should understand how many
degrees he is distant of the equinoctial line, more then from the pole, or
from the other tropikes or from any other part.

To this is to be answered, that the reason whereby only we would know the
distance, that is from the said line, more then from any other part, is,
because the said equinoctial line, as before has been declared, is put and
^^tuated in the midst of the world, and all the cards of navigations whereby
the pilots and sailers do rule themselves by. In the card of navigations a^
ordained and put the ports, and bays, rivers, capes, Islands, and shooldes,
and all other things, which are marked in the^, according to the degrees that
every thing is distant from the said equinoctial line, as well toward the
part of the north, as of the south: and being known by the pilot or sayler,
with the altitude which he takes, how many degreees he is distant of the
said line, to one part or to another, or if he be in the said line,
likewise he knows if he be equal in altitude with ye place which he goes
to seek according as in his card he has pricked, or if he ought to rise up
or go down, and how many degrees, until he put him self right of the place,
and for this cause the line is more sought for, then any other part.

The seventh chapter, by what reason al rules of the altitude of the sun are
reduced to nienty degrees, more then to any other number.
IT may be asked by what reason all the rules of ye altitude of the sun, as
before has been declared go reduced to this number of nientie degrees, more
then to any other, for that it is so written, that the degrees of altitude are
to be seen, wherein the sun is taken in the Astrolabio, how many do lack,
unto nientie and in other rules is said that the altitude and declination is
to be joined and seen if they amount to nientie degrees, or if they pass
nientie degrees, or if they come not to nienty degrees, in such sort, that all
the rules are made and ordained to this number of nienty, therefore it ought to
be known wherefore more to this number the^ to any other. For the understanding
of this doubt is to be immagined that wheresoever a man stands is the midst
of the world, and he sees half the heaven, in such sort, that as the roundnes
of ye world has three hundredth and sixty degrees, the horizon discovers ye
half which are a hundredth and eyghtie, and they are understood in this manner*
from any manner of part of the horizo^ unto ye Cenith are nienty degrees, and
from my Cenith unto the other part of the horizon other nientie. Which is to be
understood in this manner, immagine that in what place so ever a man is in, he
is right in the midst of this circle, which circle is his horizon.



Therefore I say that I am in the midst of the circle, and from the point A.
which is the horizon unto my head are nientie degrees, and from my Cenith to
the point C. other nientie, which are a hundredth and eyghtie, and from the
point B. unto my head nientie, and from my head unto the point D. other
nientie, and so there is nientie degrees from my head to any part of my
horizon. Therefore declaring the doubt, I say that the reason why the rules of
the altitude of the Sun are reduced to this number of nientie, is because the
Sun cannot rise up above the horizon, more then nientie degrees, which is
until he come right over our heads, and so when we take him in nientie degrees
of Astrolabio, we say that we have the sun right over our heads, and when
we take him in less, that which is less then nientie is the sun distant
from us: so that because the sun cannot rise up, upon the horizon more then
nientie degrees, with the which as I have said, he comes until he be upon
our heads: therefore the rules of his altitude go reduced to this number, and
not to any other.

The eight Chapter, wherein is declared wherefore we say, that the man is
distant of the sun, the degrees that he takes in the Astrolabio less then
nientie.
OF the rules of the altitude of the Sun before written, has been said, and
declared, that at all times when the Altitude is taken, the degrees are to be
looked for which do lack in the Astrolabio of nientie, and that those same,
the man is distante of the Sun. And because it is convenient and expedient
that this rule be well and thoroughly understood and known, I will most
evidently declare it, in this manner following.

It is to be noted, when the Sun does begin to appear by our horizon
which is, when he goes forth in the morning, then he has no Altitude but
from thence he goes rising up, and how much more he ryseth, so much he
goes having more Altitude, upon ye Horizon, in such sort that if one hour
after he is come forth, he has raised him self up five degrees, in two
hours he shall have raised him self up ten or twelve, and in three hours
(...) up vn^^^ the myddist the day, and from of thence he t^^^eth to desc^^^^
by the (...) order that he went risy^g up, until he put or hyde him self
under the horizon. Of that which has been said, two things are to be
noted, the first is, that from the time the Sun (...) forth, until it be the
midst of the day, he goes always rising up, and aug^^nting in his (...),
until he come to (...), Meridian, and alwayee the Meridian is in the midst
of the bow, which the Sun makes, from the time that he comes forth
until he is set* This is because always the man is in the midst of the
roundnes, which roundnes is his horizon.

The second is, that this Bow which the Sun makes upon our horizon, is
not every day equal, but at some times is greater then at other some, even as
the day is great or little, but although that the bow be great or little,
always the Sun goes rising up, until he come to the Meridian, and from
thence he descends. And it is to be noted, that always the Sun comes
forth, and sets in equal distance from us, but at the midst of the day,
he is not always in equal distance of us, but at one time he is near, and at
another time far off, this is from the right of our heads, which is to be
understood in this manner. I put the case that I be distant from the
equinoctial line ten degrees, and the Sun has of declination the same
day the same ten degrees, toward the part that I am, and being so, when
the Sun came forth this day, and began to appear in the horizon, then
he was from me nientie degrees, and from thence he went rising up until the
midst of the day, and being come to my Meridian, he shall be precisely
right over my head.

Insomuch that if a line be imagined* that rightly does descend from the Sun
unto the earth, this line would come upon my head, and this would be so at
all times, when I were as distant of the line, as the declination is, which the
sun has this day, because I am in that way where the Sun that day does
make his moving, by the which that day at the midst of the day, I shall have
it upon my head: but if I be distant of the way of the sunue, although that
when he came forth, he was from me ninety degrees, it is to be understood,
that when it is the midst of the day, I shall not have it right over my head,
but I shall have it as far of, as the distance is from the place, where I am,
to ye place of the way of the su^ne, in such sort that if the distance, which
is of the place or way, where I am, to the place or way where the Sun came
forth, were five degrees, or ten, or more, or less: Those same the Sun
shall be at the midst of the day distant from ye right of my head, so that, if
there were laid two straight lines or strekes, from the East into the West, the
one by the place where the Sun comes forth, and the other by the place
where I am: the degrees of distance yt should be from one line to the other,
the selfsame at the midst of the day, will be of distance of the Sun to my
Cenith. And do you note, that in this distance, which the Sun makes from
me is not to be looked, how much there is from me to the Sun, but do
you look how much the Sun is distant at the midst of the day, from the
right of my head, for so much as this distance is, so much will I say, that I
am distant of the Sun, to one part or other.

The nienth Chapter, wherein is declared, how it is understood, that a man
has the Sun right over his head.
IT has been declared in the Chapter going before, that when a man finds
himself in the course where ye sun makes his way, that that day at the
midst of the day, he shall have him right over his head, of this may be
had a great doubt, (which is this.)

A doubt.
It has been declared in the second Chapter of this fourth Book, according
to the opinion of Ptholome, and Al^rag^no, that the Sun is an hundredth sixty
and six times greater then the earth: and that the Sun is so great, it
appears well, seeing that continually he gives light to all the stars of
the heaven, the heaven being so great, and the stars so many in number, as
the royal prophet says, that God only does reckon and number them. Likewise
the greatness of the Sun does show, in the which, although that there be
always put all the roundnesse of the water and earth between the Sun and
the Heaven in such sort, that continually, he puts himself before,
according to the sight of man, whereby we see not any more then half the
heaven: and although the earth and the water are so great bodies, yet they
occupy not any thing, nor deteyne the light of the Sun, that it do not
pass to give light to all the stars. This is because the earth and water are
so little things in respect of the sun, that well near they may be
compared to a grain of mustard seed, put before a great torche lighted, which
does let nothing of the light thereof, but that it does extend to all parts.
Therefore all the earth being so little in comparison of the Sun, and the
man being well near of no quantity in respect of all the earth, it seems
to be far out of reason, to say that a man should have the Sun right over
his head in any time or place, even as there should be no reason to say,
that a great ship going by the Sea, may be right upon the point of a
little nail, which were in the depth of the water: or that a great cloud
should be right upon a little worm of the earth, even as well it seems, that
there is no reason to say, that the sun is right over the head of a man:
seeing that the sun is always, and shows it self upon the half of all
the earth, by the which reason likewise it seems, that it ought not to be
thought, that the sun in one time is in the Equinoctial, and another time at
the North part, and another at the South part, seeing that these are parts of
the earth, and the sun not only is greater then these parts, but in very
great quantity, greater then all of them, as it is said, and so it is proved
and seems that it is an improper thing, to say that the sun is right upon
our head, or that he is in one part or other of the earth.

A declaration.
For the declaring of this doubt, is to be noted, that although the sun is of
so great a quantity, as before has been declared, this does not let, that a
man may have him right over his head, and in the discourse of the year he be
in one part or other of the earth, the which is understood in this manner, yt
the greatness of the sun is not to be considered how great it is in it
self, but how great it is to us, I will say according to our sight, and
according to the effect which it makes with us. (An example of this is) that
many times it happens to me^ that go sailing, and they see very far of in
the Sea a ship, and although she be very great, and goes very swiftly, it
seems to him that beholds her, that she is little, and that she moves
not: the same does happen to us with a great cloud, which the wind does carry
with great lightness: this is caused for the great distaunce that is from the
one to the other, in such sort, that we judge not as it is, but according as
the sight does represent it to us: even so the sun although he be very great,
and moves with great haste, we judge not of it, but according to our sense,
for because in as much as touches the hastiness of his moving, as ye earth is
well near a point of the circle, which ye sun makes, it is certain, that it
cannot be perceived or known according as his moving is, this is by reason
of the great distance that is betweeene him and us, and so by this great
distance he comes to diminish himself so much in our sight that he may be
right over the head of of one man, and not right over the head of another,
that is one league from him.

This is showed, that in taking the altitude of the sun, one man will take
him very precisely right over his own head, and another although he be
near, will find him sarre of from him, this is because he was more right over
ye head of the one then of the other. Likewise this is showed by the shadows,
the which do show infallibly the moving which the sun makes from one part
to another: in such sort, that in one place one man may have his shadow so
right, that at the midst of the day, the sun does make no shadow to any
part, and to another that is not far from thence, although he be in the same
Meridian, and at the same hour and minute, the shadow will decline to some
part, whereby it manifestly appears* to have the sun right over our head,
and how if moves not only by the midst, but likewise by the sides of ye
earth. And for the better declaration of that aforesaid is to be noted, that
naturally all things which we see, the sight does comprehend it by A piramide,
so says Alacen in the perspectiue in the 17. rule, that the comprehension of
all things visible is by a rooted pyramide. The pyramide is to be imagined in
this manner.



So that although the thing be great, it comes diminishing by the lightning
of the sight, until it remain in the litl^ space or place of the light of our
eye, so that in our eye does contain, a mountain or great hill, how so ever
it be, therefore we may say, that the greatness of the sun, by a piramide
comes deminishing until he be upon our heads, this is when a man is precisely
put under ye center of the sun in this sort, and so it is to be understood,
when we say to have the sun upon our head, or to be distant of us to one
part or other.

The tenth Chapter, to know how the altitude of the Sun ought to be seen if
it be leap year, or what year it is.
IN the sixth Chapter of this fourth book, I said how it is necessary when the
altitude of the sun is taken to know the year, if it be the leap year, or
the first or second, or third after the leap year, because the days of one
year, with those of the other have not the degrees and minutes equal, and the
reason is, because as in the third chapter of this fourth book has been
declared, that the year called Solar, has three hundredth sixty five days, and
six hours, and that those six hours of every one year, from four to four
years, do make a natural day, and that such a year is called a leap year, so
that the first year after the leap year, has three hundredth sixty five
days and six hours. And the second year, three hundredth sixty five days
and twelve hours, the six of the first year, and six his own, and the
third year, three hundredth sixetie five days and eighteen hours, the twelve
of the two years the first and second, and the vi. his own, and the fourth
year three hundredth sixty six days, so that in this fourth year is shut up
the hours of al four years, and the fourth year being past, The first
begineth, and so the other years successively as it is said, and for this cause
they be not equal in degrees and minutes all days one with another:
Therefore it is convenient, as it is before declared, when the altitude of the
sun is to be taken, that it be seen what year it is, and seek what day
and month you are in, and there you shall find the declination, or distance
which the sun has, from the line, as in the tables following is contained,
therefore to know the year that you are in, if it be a leap year, or the
first, second, or third after the leap year, look over the two rules of the
discourses following, for in them plainly is showed, by reckoning the year of
our L^^be, a thousand five hundredth forty five in the first house of the
which is the first year, and so successively in every year one house, and the
house being ended of the last rule, return to the beginning, and so this
account is for ever.

A rule to know the leap year.
1545. 1. 2. 3. B 1. 2. 3. B 1. 2. 3. B 1. 2. 3. B 1. 2. 3. B 1. 2. 3. B 1. 2.
3. B.

When you will know if the year be a leap year, or not without looking in
the book, look in the year of the birth of our Lord, and leave the thousand
five hundredth, the rest divide in the midst, and when every half were of
even number in payers or cupples it is the leap year.

The tables of the distance or declination which the Sun makes from the
equinoctial line every day of the four years, as well toward the part of the
north as toward the south.
The declination of the Sun.
The first year.
January. February. March. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days Degrees. Minutes.
Days Degrees. Minutes. 1 xxi ^i 1 xiii iviii 1 iii xxxix 2 xxi xl^ 2 xii^
xxxviii. 2 ^i xv 3 xxi xxxi 3 xiii xviii. 3 ii iii 4 xxi xx 4 x^ lviii 4 ii
xxviii 5 xxi ix 5 xii xxxvii 5 ii iiii 6 xx lviii 6 xii xvi 6 i xli 7 xx xiv 7
xi lv 7 i xvii 8 xx xxxiii 8 xi xxxiiii 8 0 liii 9 xx xxi 9 xi xii 9 0 xxx 10
xx viii 10 x ^i 10 0 vi 11 x^x lv 11 x xxix 11 0 xviii 12 x^x xli 12 x vii 12 0
xiii 13 x^x xxvii 13 ix x^vii 13 i v 14 x^x xiii 14 ix ^^iii 14 i xxix 15 xviii
lviii 15 ix 15 i lii 16 xviii xlii 16 viii xxxviii 16 ii xvi 17 xviii xxvii 17
viii xv 17 ii xl 18 xviii xi 18 vii (...) 18 iii iii 19 xvii liiii 19 vii xxx
19 iii xxvi 20 xv^i xxxviii 20 vii vii 20 iii xlix 21 xvii ^x^i 21 vi xliiii 21
iiii xii 22 xvii v 22 vi xxi 22 iiii xxxv 23 xvi xlv^i 23 v lviii 23 iiii lviii
24 xvi xxix 24 v xxxv 24 v xxi 25 xvi xi 25 v xi 25 v xliiii 26 xv liii 26 iiii
xlviii 26 vi vi 27 xv xxxv 27 iiii xxiiii 27 vi xxix 28 xv xvi 28 iiii ^ 28 vi
liii 29 xiiii lvi 29 vii xv 30 xiiii xxxv^i 30 vii xxxvii 31 xiiii xvii^ 31 vii
lix

The declination of the Sun.
The first year.
April. May. June. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days
Degrees. Minutes. 1 viii xxi 1 xvii 14 1 23 ^ 2 viii xliii 2 xviii ^ 2 23 13 3
ix v 3 xviii 24 3 23 17 4 ix xxvi 4 xviii 39 4 23 21 5 ix xlviii 5 xviii 54 5
23 24 6 x ix 6 xix 8 6 23 26 7 x xxx 7 x^x 21 7 23 28 8 x lii 8 xix 35 8 23 30
9 xi xii 9 xix 47 9 23 31 10 xi xxxiii 10 xx 0 10 23 32 11 xi liii 11 xx 13 11
23 33 12 xii xiiii 12 xx 24 12 23 33 13 xii xxxiii 13 xx 36 13 23 33 14 xii
liii 14 xx 47 14 23 32 15 xiii xiii 15 xx 59 15 23 31 16 xiii xxxii 16 xxi 10
16 23 29 17 xiii li 17 xxi 20 17 23 27 18 xiiii x 18 xxi 30 18 23 25 19 xiiii
xxix 19 xxi 40 19 23 22 20 xiiii xlvii 20 xxi 49 20 23 18 21 xv vi 21 xxi 57 21
23 15 22 xv xxiiii 22 xxii 6 22 23 11 23 xv xlii 23 xxii 14 23 23 6 24 xv lix
24 xxii (...) 24 23 2 25 xvi xvi 25 xxii 29 25 22 ^7 26 xvi xxxiii 26 xxii 36
26 22 51 27 xvi l 27 xxii 42 27 22 45 28 xvii vii 28 xxii 49 28 22 39 29 xvi^
xxiii 29 xxii 58 29 22 32 30 xvi^ xxxviii 30 xxii 0 30 22 25 31 xxiii 4

The declination of the Sun.
The first year.
Iulie. August. September. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days Degrees. Minutes.
Days Degrees. Minutes 1 xxii xvii 1 xv xxxii 1 iiii xivi 2 xxii i^ 2 xv xiiii
2 iiii xxiii 3 xxii i 3 xiiii ivi 3 iiii 0 4 xxi ii 4 xiiii xxxvii 4 iii xxxvii
5 xxi xliiii 5 xiiii xix 5 iii xiiii 6 xxi xxxiiii 6 xiii 0 6 ii li 7 xxi
xxiiii 7 xiii xli 7 ii xxviii 8 xxi xilii 8 xiii xxi 8 ii iiii 9 xxi iii 9 xiii
ii 9 i xl 10 xx (...) 10 xii xliii 10 i xvii 11 xx xli 11 xii xxii 11 0 liiii
12 xx xxix 12 xii iii 12 0 xxx 13 xx xviii 13 xi xliii 13 0 vi 14 xx vi 14 xi
xxii 14 0 xviii 15 xix li^i 15 xi ^ 15 0 xli 16 xix xl 16 x xl 16 i v 17 xix
xxvii 17 x xix 17 i xxviii 18 xix xiii 18 ix lvii 18 i lii 19 xviii ^ix 19 ix
xxxvi 19 ii xvi 20 xviii xlv 20 ix xv 20 ii xl 21 xxviii xxx 21 viii liii 21
iii iii 22 xviii xv 22 viii xxxii 22 iii xxvi 23 xviii 00 23 viii ix 23 iii l
24 xvii xliiii 24 vii xlvii 24 iiii xiii 25 xv^i xxix 25 vii xxv 25 iiii xxxvi
26 xvii xliii 26 vii iii 26 v 0 27 xvi ^vi 27 vi xli 27 v xxiii 28 xvi xl 28 vi
xvii 28 v xlvii 29 xvi xxiii 29 v lv 29 vi ix 30 xvi vi 30 v xxxii 30 vi xxxiii
31 xv xlix 31 v ix

The declination of the Sun.
The first year.
October. November. December. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days Degrees. Minutes.
Days Degrees. Minutes 1 vi iv^ 1 xvii 29 1 23 7 2 vii xix 2 xvii 45 2 23 11 3
vii xli 3 xviii 2 3 23 16 4 viii iiii 4 xviii 18 4 23 20 5 viii xxvii 5 xviii
33 5 23 23 6 viii xlix 6 xviii 49 6 23 26 7 ix xi 7 xix 5 7 23 28 8 ix xxxiii 8
xix 19 8 23 30 9 ix lv 9 xix 33 9 23 32 10 x xvii 10 xix 47 10 23 33 11 x xxxix
11 xx 1 11 23 33 12 xi ^ 12 xx 14 12 23 33 13 xi xx^ii 13 xx 20 13 23 32 14 xi
xliiii 14 xx 38 14 23 31 15 xii v 15 xx 51 15 23 30 16 xii xxvi 16 xxi 3 16 23
28 17 xii xlvi 17 xxi 14 17 23 26 18 xiii vii 18 xxi 25 18 23 23 19 xiii xxvii
19 xxi 36 19 23 19 20 xiii xlvii 20 xxi 46 20 23 15 21 xiiii vii 21 xxi 5^ 21
23 11 22 xiiii xxvii 22 xxii 4 22 23 6 23 xiiii xivi 23 xxii 13 23 23 1 24 xv v
24 xxii 21 24 22 56 25 xv xxiiii 25 xxii 29 25 22 50 26 xv xliii 26 xx^i 36 26
22 4^ 27 xvi i 27 xxii 44 27 22 35 28 xvi xi^ 28 xxii 51 28 22 28 29 xvi xxxvii
29 xxii 56 29 22 20 30 xvi lv 30 xxiii 1 30 22 12 31 xvii xiii 31 22 3

The declination of the Sun.
The second year.
January. February. March. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days Degrees. Minutes.
Days Degrees. Minutes. 1 xxi liiii 1 xiiii iiii 1 iii xliiii 2 xxi xliiii 2
xiii xliii 2 iii xxi 3 xxi xxxiii 3 xiii xxiii 3 ii lviii 4 xxi xxiiii 4 xiii
iii 4 ii xxxiiii 5 xxi xiii 5 xii xlii 5 ii x 6 xxi i 6 xii xxii 6 i xlvi 7 xx
xlix 7 xii i 7 i xxiii 8 xx xxxvii 8 xi xl 8 0 lix 9 xx xxiiii 9 xi xviii 9 0
xxxv 10 xx xii 10 x lvii 10 0 xii 11 xix lviii 11 x xxxv 11 0 xii 12 xix xliiii
12 x xiii 12 0 xxxvi 13 xix xxxi 13 ix li 13 0 lix 14 xix xvii 14 ix xxix 14 i
xxiii 15 xix ii 15 ix vii 15 i xlvi 16 xviii xlvii 16 viii xiv 16 ii x 17 xviii
xxxi 17 viii xxii 17 ii xxxiiii 18 xxviii xv 18 vii lix 18 ii lvii 19 xvii lix
19 vii xxxvii 19 iii xx 20 xvii xlii 20 vii xiiii 20 iii xliii 21 xvii xxvi 21
vi li 21 iiii vii 22 xvii ix 22 vi xxvii 22 iiii xxx 23 xvi lii 23 vi iiii 23
iiii liii 24 xvi xxxiiii 24 v xli 24 v xv 25 xvi xvi 25 v xviii 25 v xxxviii 26
xv lviii 26 iiii liiii 26 vi i 27 xv xxxvii 27 iiii xxxi 27 vi xxiiii 28 xv xxi
28 iiii viii 28 vi xlvii 29 xv ii 29 vii x 30 xiiii xliii 30 vii xxxii 31 xiiii
xxiii 31 vii liii

The declination of the Sun.
The second year.
April. May. June. Days Degrees. Minutes Days Degrees. Minutes. Daye^
Degrees. Minutes. 1 viii xvi 1 xvii x^x 1 23 8 2 viii xxxviii 2 xviii vi 2 23
12 3 viii lix 3 xviii xx 3 23 16 4 ix xxi 4 xviii xxxv 4 23 20 5 ix xlii 5
xviii l 5 23 23 6 x iiii 6 xix iiii 6 23 26 7 x xxv 7 xix xviii 7 23 28 8 x
xlvi 8 xix xxxi 8 23 29 9 xi vii 9 xix xliiii 9 23 31 10 xi xxvii 10 xix lvii
10 23 32 11 xi xlviii 11 xx x 11 23 33 12 xii x 12 xx xxii 12 23 33 13 xii
xxviii 13 xx xxxiii 13 23 33 14 xii xlviii 14 xx xliiii 14 23 32 15 xiii viii
15 xx lvi 15 23 31 16 xiii xxvii 16 xxi vii 16 23 29 17 xiii xlvi 17 xxi xviii
17 23 27 18 xiiii vi 18 xxi xxviii 18 23 25 19 xiiii xxv 19 xxi 37 19 23 23 20
xiiii xiiii 20 xxi 46 20 23 19 21 xv ^ 21 xxi 55 21 23 16 22 xv xix 22 xxii 4
22 23 12 23 xv xxxvii 23 xxii 12 23 23 7 24 xv lv 24 xxii 20 24 23 3 25 xvi xii
25 xxii 27 25 23 58 26 xvi xxix 26 xxii 34 26 22 53 27 xvi xiv 27 xxii 41 27 22
47 28 xvii iii 28 xxii 48 28 22 40 29 xvii xix 29 xxii 52 29 22 33 30 xvii
xxxiiii 30 xxii 58 30 22 27 31 xxiii 3

The declination of the Sun.
The second year.
Iulie. August. September. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days Degrees. Minutes.
Days Degrees. Minutes. 1 xxii xix 1 xv xxxvi 1 iiii lii 2 xxii xi 2 xv xviii 2
iiii xxix 3 xxii iii 3 xv 0 3 iiii vi 4 xxi liiii 4 xiiii xlii 4 iii xliii 5
xxi xlv 5 xiiii xxiiii 5 iii xix 6 xxi xxxvi 6 xiiii v 6 ii lvi 7 xxi xxvii 7
xiii xiv 7 ii xxxiii 8 xxi xvii 8 xiii xxvi 8 ii x 9 xxi vi 9 xiii vii 9 i xlvi
10 xx lv 10 xii xlvii 10 i xxiii 11 xx xliiii 11 xii xxvii 11 0 lix 12 xx xxxii
12 xii viii 12 0 xxxv 13 xx xx 13 xi xlviii 13 0 xii 14 xx ix 14 xi xxvii 14 0
xii 15 xix lvi 15 xi vi 15 0 xxxv 16 xix xliii 16 x xlv 16 0 lix 17 xix xxx 17
x xxiiii 17 i xxiii 18 xix xvii 18 x iii 18 i xlvi 19 xix iii 19 ix xii 19 ii x
20 xviii xlix 20 ix xx 20 ii xxxiiii 21 xviii xxxiiii 21 viii iix 21 ii lvii 22
xviii xix 22 viii xxxvii 22 iii xx 23 xviii liii 23 viii xv 23 iii xliiii 24
xvii xlviii 24 vii lii 24 iiii viii 25 xvii xxxiii 25 vii xxxi 25 iiii xxxi 26
xvii xvii 26 vii ix 26 iiii liiii 27 xvii i 27 vi xlvi 27 v xvii 28 xvi xliiii
28 vi xxiii 28 v xli 29 xvi ^xviii 29 vi 0 29 vi iiii 30 xvi xi 30 v xxxviii 30
vi xxvii 31 xv liiii 31 v xv

The declination of the Sun.
The second year.
October. November. December. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days Degrees. Minutes.
Days Degrees. Minutes. 1 vi li 1 xvii 25 1 23 5 2 vii xiiii 2 xvii 41 2 23 10
3 vii xxxvi 3 xvii 58 3 23 15 4 vii lviii 4 xviii 14 4 23 19 5 viii xxi 5 xviii
29 5 23 22 6 viii xliiii 6 xviii 46 6 23 25 7 ix vi 7 xix 1 7 23 27 8 ix xxviii
8 xix 15 8 23 29 9 ix l 9 xix 29 9 23 31 10 x xii 10 xix 43 10 23 32 11 x
xxxiiii 11 xix 57 11 23 33 12 x lvi 12 xx 21 12 23 33 13 xi xvii 13 xx 23 13 23
33 14 xi xxxix 14 xx 36 14 23 32 15 xii 0 15 xx 48 15 23 30 16 xii xxi 16 xxi 0
16 23 28 17 xii xli 17 xxi 12 17 23 26 18 xiii ii 18 xxi 23 18 23 23 19 xiii
xxii 19 xxi 33 19 23 20 20 xiii xlii 20 xxi 43 20 23 16 21 xiiii ii 21 xxi 53
21 23 12 22 xiiii xxii 22 xxii 2 22 23 7 23 xiiii xlii 23 xxii 11 23 23 2 24 xv
i 24 xxii 19 24 22 57 25 xv xx 25 xxii 28 25 22 51 26 xv xxxix 26 xxii 35 26 22
44 27 xv lvii 27 xxii 42 27 22 37 28 xvi xv 28 xxii 49 28 22 30 29 xvi xxxiii
29 xxii 55 29 22 22 30 xvi l 30 xxiii 0 30 22 14 31 xvii viii 31 22 5

The declination of the Sun.
The third year.
January. February. March. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days Degrees. Minutes.
Days Degrees. Minutes. 1 xxi lvi 1 xiiii viii 1 iii l 2 xxi xlvi 2 xiii xlviii
2 iii xxvi 3 xxi xxxvi 3 xiii xxviii 3 iii iii 4 xxi xxvi 4 xiii viii 4 ii xl 5
xxi xv 5 xii xlvii 5 ii xvi 6 xxi iiii 6 xii xxvi 6 i ^^i 7 xx lii 7 xii vi 7 i
xxviii 8 xx xxxix 8 xi xlv 8 i v 9 xx xxvii 9 xi xxiii 9 0 xli 10 xx xv 10 xi
ii 10 0 xvii 11 xx ii 11 x xl 11 0 vi 12 xix xlviii 12 x xviii 12 0 xxx 13 xix
xxxiiii 13 ix ivi 13 0 liiii 14 xix xx 14 ix xxxiiii 14 i xvii 15 xix v 15 ix
xii 15 i xli 16 xviii l 16 viii l 16 ii iiii 17 xviii xxxv 17 viii xxvii 17 ii
xxviii 18 xviii xix 18 viii iiii 18 ii lii 19 xviii iii 19 vii 42 19 iii xiiii
20 xvii xlvi 20 vii xix 20 iii xxxviii 21 xvii xxx 21 vi lvi 21 iiii i 22 xvii
xiii 22 vi xxxiii 22 iiii xxiiii 23 xvi lvi 23 vi x 23 iiii xlvii 24 xvi
xxxviii 24 v xlvii 24 v ix 25 xvi xx 25 v xxiii 25 v xxxiii 26 xvi ii 26 v 0 26
v lvi 27 xv xliiii 27 iiii xxxvi 27 vi xviii 28 xv xxv 28 iiii xiii 28 vi xli
29 xv vi 29 vii iiii 30 xiiii xlvii 30 vii xxvi 31 xiiii xxviii 31 vii xlviii

The declination of the Sun.
The third year.
April. May. June. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days
Degrees. Minutes. 1 viii ix 1 xvii 46 1 23 7 2 viii xxxi 2 xviii 2 2 23 11 3
viii liii 3 xviii 17 3 23 15 4 ix xvi 4 xviii 31 4 23 19 5 ix xxxvii 5 xviii 46
5 23 22 6 ix lviii 6 xix l 6 23 25 7 x xx 7 xix 14 7 23 27 8 x xii 8 xix 28 8
23 29 9 xi ii 9 xix 41 9 23 31 10 xi xxii 10 xix 54 10 23 32 11 xi xliii 11 xx
7 11 23 33 12 xii iiii 12 xx 19 12 23 33 13 xii xxiii 13 xx 30 13 23 33 14 xii
xliii 14 xx 42 14 23 32 15 xiii iii 15 xx 53 15 23 31 16 xiii xxii 16 xxi 4 16
23 30 17 xiii xlii 17 xxi 15 17 23 28 18 xiiii i 18 xxi 25 18 23 26 19 xiiii xx
19 xxi 35 19 23 23 20 xiiii xxxviii 20 xxi 44 20 23 20 21 xiiii lvii 21 xxi 53
21 23 17 22 xv xv 22 xxii 2 ^^ 23 13 23 xv xxxiii 23 xxii 10 23 23 9 24 xv l 24
xxii 18 24 23 4 25 xvi viii 25 xxii 25 25 22 59 26 xvi xxv 26 xxii 32 26 22 54
27 xvi xli 27 xxii 39 27 22 48 28 xvi lviii 28 xxii 46 28 22 42 29 xvii xv 29
xxii 52 29 22 35 30 xvii xxx 30 xxii 57 30 22 28 31 xxiii 2

The declination of the Sun.
The third year.
Iulie. August. September. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days Degrees. Minutes.
Days Degrees. Minutes. 1 xxii xxi 1 xv xl 1 iiii lvii 2 xxii xiii 2 xv xxiii 2
iiii xxxiiii 3 xxii v 3 xv iiii 3 iiii xii 4 xxi ivi 4 xiiii xlvi 4 iii xlix 5
xxi xlviii 5 xiiii xxviii 5 iii xxv 6 xxi xxxix 6 xiiii ix 6 iii ii 7 xxi xxix
7 xiii l 7 ii 39 8 xxi xix 8 xiii xxxi 8 ii xvi 9 xxi ix 9 xiii xii 9 i lii 10
xx lviii 10 xii lii 10 i xxviii 11 xx xlvi 11 xii xxxii 11 i v 12 xx xxxv 12
xii 13 12 0 xli 13 xx xxiii 13 xi lii 13 0 xviii 14 xx ix 14 xi 32 14 0 vi 15
xix lix 15 xi xi 15 0 30 16 xix xlvi 16 x l 16 0 liii 17 xix xxxiii 17 x xxix
17 i xvii 18 xix xx 18 x viii 18 i xl 19 xix vii 19 ix xlvii 19 ii iiil 20
xviii lii 20 ix xxv 20 ii xxviii 21 xviii xxxviii 21 ix iiii 21 ii lii 22 xviii
xxiii 22 viii 42 22 iii xv 23 xviii viii 23 viii xx 23 iii xxxix 24 xvii lii 24
vii lviii 24 iiii ii 25 xvii xxxvii 25 vii xxxvi 25 iiii xxv 26 xvii xxi 26 vii
xiiii 26 iiii xlix 27 xvii v 27 vi lii 27 v xi 28 xvi xlviii 28 vi xxix 28 v
xxxv 29 xvi xxxii 29 vi vi 29 v lviii 30 xvi xv 30 v xliii 30 vi ^1 31 xv lviii
31 v xxi

The declination of the Sun.
The third year.
October. November. December. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days Degrees. Minutes.
Days Degrees. Minutes 1 vi xlv 1 xvii 21 1 23 4 2 vii viii 2 xvii 37 2 23 9 3
vii xxxi 3 xvii 54 3 23 13 4 vii liii 4 xviii 10 4 23 17 5 viii xvi 5 xviii 26
5 23 22 6 viii xxxix 6 xviii 42 6 23 25 7 ix i 7 xviii 57 7 23 27 8 ix xxiii 8
xix 12 8 23 29 9 ix xlv 9 xix 26 9 23 31 10 x vii 10 xix 40 10 23 32 11 x xxix
11 xix 54 11 23 33 12 x li 12 xx 7 12 23 33 13 xi xii 13 xx 20 13 23 33 14 xi
xxxiiii 14 xx 33 14 23 32 15 xi lv 15 xx 45 15 23 31 16 xii xvi 16 xx 57 16 23
29 17 xii xxxvi 17 xxi 9 17 23 27 18 xii lvii 18 xxi 20 18 23 24 19 xiii xvii
19 xxi 31 19 23 21 20 xiii xxxvii 20 xxi 41 20 23 17 21 xiii lvii 21 xxi 50 21
23 13 22 xiiii xvii 22 xxii 0 22 23 8 23 xiiii xxxvii 23 xxii 9 23 23 3 24
xiiii lvi 24 xxii 17 24 22 58 25 xv xv 25 xxii 26 25 22 52 26 xv xxxiiii 26
xxii 33 26 22 46 27 xv lii 27 xxii 40 27 22 39 28 xvi xi 28 xxii 47 28 22 32 29
xvi xxix 29 xxii 53 29 22 24 30 xvi xlvi 30 xxii 59 30 22 16 31 xvii iiii 31 22
7

The declination of the Sun.
The leap year.
January. February. March. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days Degrees. Minutes.
Days Degrees. Minutes 1 xxi lviii 1 xiiii xiii 1 iii xxxii 2 xxi xlix 2 liii
liii 2 iii ix 3 xxi xxxix 3 xiii xxxiii 3 ii xlvi 4 xxi xxix 4 xiii xiii 4 ii
xxii 5 xxi xvii 5 xii liii 5 i lviii 6 xxi vii 6 xii 32 6 i xxxiiii 7 xx lv 7
xii xi 7 i x 8 xx xliii 8 xi l 8 0 xlvii 9 xx xxx 9 xi xxix 9 0 xxiii 10 xx
xviii 10 xi vii 10 0 i 11 xx v 11 x xlv 11 0 xxiiii 12 xix li 12 x xxiii 12 0
xlviii 13 xix xxxviii 13 x i 13 i xi 14 xix xxiiii 14 ix xxxix 14 i xxxv 15 xix
ix 15 ix xvii 15 i lix 16 xviii liiii 16 viii lv 16 ii xxii 17 xviii xxxix 17
viii xxxiii 17 ii xlvi 18 xviii xxiii 18 viii x 18 iii ix 19 xviii vii 19 vii
xlvii 19 iii xxxii 20 xvii l 20 vii xxv 20 iii lv 21 xvii xxxiiii 21 vii ii 21
iiii xviii 22 xvii xviii 22 vi xxxix 22 iiii xlii 23 xvii i 23 vi xv 23 v iiii
24 xvi xlix 24 v lii 24 v xxvii 25 xvi xxv 25 v 29 25 v l 26 xvi vii 26 v v 26
vi xiii 27 xv xlix 27 iiii xliii 27 vi xxxvi 28 xv xxx 28 iiii xix 28 vi iviii
29 xv i 29 iii lvi 29 vii xxi 30 xiiii lii 30 vii xliii 31 xiiii xxxiii 31 viii
v

The declination of the Sun.
The leap year.
April. May. June. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days
Degrees. Minutes. 1 viii xxvii 1 xvii 58 1 23 10 2 viii xlix 2 xviii 13 2 23 14
3 ix x 3 xviii 28 3 23 18 4 ix xxxii 4 xviii 43 4 23 22 5 ix liii 5 xviii 58 5
23 25 6 x xv 6 xix 11 6 23 27 7 x xxxvii 7 xix 25 7 23 29 8 x lviii 8 xix 38 8
23 31 9 xi xviii 9 xix 51 9 23 32 10 xi xxxix 10 xx 4 10 23 33 11 xii 0 11 xx
16 11 23 33 12 xii xx 12 xx 28 12 23 33 13 xii xxxix 13 xx 39 13 23 33 14 xii
lix 14 xx 50 14 23 32 15 xiii xix 15 xxi 2 15 23 30 16 xiii xxxviii 16 xxi 13
16 23 28 17 xiii lvii 17 xxi 22 17 23 26 18 xiiii xvi 18 xxi 33 18 23 24 19
xiiii xxxv 19 xxi 42 19 23 21 20 xiiii liii 20 xxi 51 20 23 17 21 xv xii 21
xxii 0 21 23 14 22 xv xxx 22 xxii 8 2^ 23 10 23 xv xlvii 23 xxii 16 23 23 6 24
xvi iiii 2 xxii 24 24 23 0 25 xvi xxi 25 xxii 31 25 22 35 26 xvi xxxviii 26
xxii 37 26 22 49 27 xvi iv 27 xxii 44 27 22 43 28 xvii xii 28 xxii 50 28 22 37
29 xvii xxvii 29 xxii 56 29 22 30 30 xvii xliii 30 xxiii 1 30 22 23 31 xxiii 6

The declination of the Sun.
The leap year.
Iulie. August. September. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days Degrees. Minutes.
Days Degrees. Minutes. 1 xxii xv 1 xv 27 1 iiii xl 2 xxii vil 2 xv ix 2 iiii
xvii 3 xxi lviii 3 xiiii l 3 iii liiii 4 xxi l 4 xiiii xxxii 4 iii xxxi 5 xxi
xii 5 xiiii xiii 5 iii vii 6 xxi xxxi 6 xiii lv 6 ii xlv 7 xxi xxi 7 xiii xxxv
7 ii xxi 8 xxi xi 8 xiii xbi 8 i lviii 9 xxi 0 9 xii lvi 9 i xxxiiii 10 xx xlix
10 xii xxxvil 10 i x 11 xx xxxviii 11 xii xvii 11 0 xlvii 12 xx xxvi 12 xi lvii
12 0 xxiii 13 xx xiiii 13 xi xxxvii 13 0 0 14 xxi il 14 xi xvi 14 0 xxiiii 15
xix xlix 15 x lv 15 0 xlviii 16 xix xxxvi 16 x xxxiiii 16 i xi 17 xix xxiii 17
x xiii 17 i xxxv 18 xix x 18 ix li 18 i lviii 19 xviii xvi 19 ix xxx 19 ii xxii
20 xviii xli 20 ix ix 20 ii xlvi 21 xviii xxvli 21 viii xlviii 21 iii ix 22
xviii xi 22 viii xxv 22 iii xxxiii 23 xvii ivi 23 viii iii 23 iii lvi 24 xvii
xl 24 vii xli 24 iiii xix 25 xvii xxv 25 vii xix 25 iiii xliii 26 xvii ix 26 vi
lvii 26 v vi 27 xvi lii 27 vi xxxiiii 27 v xxix 28 xvi xxxv 28 vi xi 28 v liii
29 xvi xix 29 v xlix 29 vi xvi 30 xvi ii 30 v xxvi 30 vi 39 31 xv xliiii 31 v
iii

The declination of the Sun.
The leap year.
October. November. December. Days Degrees. Minutes. Days Degrees. Minutes.
Days Degrees. Minutes. 1 vii ii 1 xvii 33 1 23 8 2 vii xxv 2 xvii 50 2 23 12 3
vii xlviiii 3 xviii 7 3 23 17 4 viii x 4 xviii 22 4 23 21 5 viii xxxiii 5 xviii
38 5 23 24 6 viii lv 6 xviii 53 6 23 26 7 ix xxii 7 xix 8 7 23 28 8 ix xxxix 8
xix 23 8 23 30 9 x i 9 xix 37 9 23 32 10 x xxiiii 10 xix 50 10 23 33 11 x xlvi
11 xx 4 11 23 33 12 xi vii 12 xx 17 12 23 33 13 xi xxix 13 xx 30 13 23 32 14 xi
l 14 xx 42 14 23 31 15 xii xi 15 xx 54 15 23 29 16 xii xxxi 16 xxi 6 16 23 27
17 xii lii 17 xxi 17 17 23 25 18 xiii xii 18 xxi 28 18 23 22 19 xiii xxxii 19
xxi 38 19 23 18 20 xiii liii 20 xxi 48 20 23 14 21 xiiii xiii 21 xxi 57 21 23
10 22 xiiii xxxii 22 xxii 7 22 23 5 23 xiiii lii 23 xxii 15 23 22 59 24 xv xi
24 xxii 23 24 22 54 25 xv xxx 25 xxii 31 25 22 48 26 xv xlviii 26 xxii 38 26 22
41 27 xvi vi 27 xxii 46 27 22 33 28 xvi xxiiii 28 xxii 52 28 22 26 29 xvi xlii
29 xxii 58 29 22 18 30 xvii 0 30 xxiii 3 30 22 9 31 xvii xvii 31 22 0

The Callender.
January. February. March. 1 a New years day. 1 d 1 d 2 b 2 e Pruficatio^
of Ma. 2 e 3 c 3 f 3 f 4 d 4 g 4 g 5 e 5 A Shroue Sunday. 5 A 6 f Twelfe day. 6
b 6 b 7 g 7 c 7 c 8 a 8 d 8 ^ 9 b 9 e 9 e 10 c 10 f 10 f 11 d 11 g 11 g 12 e 12
A 12 A S. Gregory. 13 f 13 b 13 b S. Leonard. 14 g 14 c 14 c 15 a 15 ^ 15 d 16
b 16 e 16 e 17 c 17 f 17 f S. Gabriel archan. 18 d 18 g 18 g 19 e 19 a 19 A 20
f S. Fabian and Seba. 20 b 20 b 21 g 21 c 21 c 22 A S. Uince^t martyr. 22 d 22
d 23 b 23 e 23 e 24 c 24 f S. Matthias apost. 24 f 25 d Conuer. of S. Paul. 25
g 25 g Anuntia. of Marie. 26 e 26 A 26 A Easter day. 27 f 27 b 27 b 28 g 28 c
28 c 29 A 29 d 30 b 30 e 31 c 31

The Callender.
April. May. June. 1 g 1 b S. Phil. and Jacob. 1 e 2 A 2 c 2 3 b 3 d Innuenci.
of ye cross. 3 g 4 c 4 e Ascension day. 4 A 5 d 5 f 5 b 6 e 6 g 6 c 7 f 7 A 7
d 8 g 8 b 8 e 9 A 9 c 9 f 10 b 10 d 10 g 11 c 11 e 11 A Barnabe apostle. 12 d
12 f 12 b 13 e 13 g 13 c 14 f 14 A Whitsunday. 14 d. 15 g 15 b S. Isidore
archbish. of Seuill. 15 e 16 A 16 c 16 f 17 b 17 d 17 g 18 c 18 e 18 A 19 d 19
f 19 b 20 e 20 g 20 c 21 f 21 A 21 d 22 g 22 b 22 e 23 A S. George matyre. 23 c
23 f 24 b 24 d 24 g S. John Baptist. 25 c S. Mark Euang. 25 e 25 A 26 d 26 f
26 b 27 e 27 g 27 c 28 f 28 A 28 d 29 g 29 b 29 e 30 A 30 c 30 f S. Peter and
Paul. 31 d

The Calender.
Iulie. August. September. 1 g 1 c 1 f 2 A 2 d 2 g 3 b 3 e 3 A 4 c 4 f 4 b 5 d
5 g 5 c 6 e 6 A Transfigu. of our Lord 6 d 7 f 7 b 7 e 8 g 8 c 8 f The
nativity of our 9 A 9 d 9 g Lady. 10 b 10 e Saint Laurence. 10 A 11 c 11 f 11
b 12 d 12 g S. Clare virgin. 12 c 13 e 13 A 13 d 14 f 14 b 14 e 15 g 15 c
Assumption of Ma 15 f 16 A 16 d 16 g 17 b 17 e 17 A 18 c 18 f 18 b 19 d 19 g 19
c 20 e 20 A 20 d 21 f 21 b 21 e 22 g Marie Magdalen. 22 c 22 f S. Matthewe apo.
23 A 23 d 23 g 24 b 24 e S. Bartholomewe apostle. 24 A 25 c Saint James. 25 f
25 b 26 d Saint Anne. 26 c 26 e 27 e Saint Christopher. 27 A 27 d 28 f 28 b S.
Austin. 28 e 29 g 29 c The cutting off of saint John Baptist 29 f S. Michael
archan 30 A 30 d 30 g S. Jerome. 31 b 31 e head.

The Callender.
October. November. December. 1 A 1 d All Saints day. 1 f 2 b 2 e The
remembrance 2 g 3 c 3 f of them that are. 3 A 4 d 4 g dead. 4 b Saint Barbara.
5 e 5 A 5 c 6 f 6 b 6 d S. Nicholas bisho. 7 g 7 c 7 e 8 A 8 d 8 f Conception
of Ma. 9 b 9 e 9 g 10 c 10 f 10 A 11 d 11 g Saint Martin. 11 b 12 e 12 A 12 c
13 f 13 b 13 d S. Luce virgin. 14 g 14 c 14 e 15 A 15 d 15 f 16 b 16 e 16 g 17
c 17 f 17 A 18 d S. Luke evangelist. 18 g 18 b 19 e 19 A 19 c 20 f 20 b 20 d 21
g The xi. M. virgins. 21 c 21 e S. Thomas apost. 22 A 22 d 22 f 23 b 23 e Saint
Clement. 23 g 24 c 24 f 24 A 25 d 25 g Saint Katheren. 25 b 26 e 26 A 26 c
Christmas day. 27 f 27 b 27 d S. Steven martyr. 28 g S. Simon and Jude. 28 c
28 e S. John evangelist. 29 A 29 d 29 f Holy Innocents. 30 b 30 e S. Andrew
apostle. 30 g 31 c 31 A

A Rule to know the Dominicall letter every year.
FOr to know in what day of the week is every feast of the year. It is
necessary you know what letter it is that serves for sunday. This is to be
known by the rules of the letters under written, in the which, the first
letter which is D. serves for the Dominicall letter, this year of 1545 and so
successively in every year one letter serves, and the two rules being ended,
return again to the beginning, and this is for ever. And it is to be noted
that in the leap years are two Dominicall letters. The letter above being
uppermost serves from the first day of Januarie, unto ye xxv of February, and
the other unto the end of the year. 1545. D C B. A F E D. C A G F. E C B A. G
B D G E D C B G F E. D B A G. F F A C E

The eleventh Chapter, wherein is declared howeby the Calender before written,
a man may know the month, and the day wherein he is.
THe Philosopher says, that the art does emitate nature as much as he may,
Likewise the said art many times helps the defects of nature, this is
proved, wherein we see that a man which by nature does want his sight, the art
does help and remedy his want, that is, by looking on a pair of spectacles,
whereby in such sort, the sight is gathered together, and is cause that he
sees, the which he does not without the^ for that it is scattered abroad. The
self same which is said of the sight, may be said of the memory, that many
times it lacks in me^, but it is certain that in some it comes by nature,
but in others by their own vncarefulnes that they forget themselves so much,
that in things which stands them much upon, they take no heed. And
concerning this I do remember as we came sailing in a ship, nienteene men,
which were seven passengers, and twelve mariners, and having bin many days at
the sea, because the weather was contrary, there happened a cause whereby it
was convenient that the purser should write it down in his book for to give
reason thereof when time should serve, and he with the other that were there,
knew not what day of the month it was, nor there was any yt had it in his
remembrance, nor knew what day was the first day of the month, until I told
him, nor any book in the ship to look in whereby it might be known. And this
being brought for my purpose, I say that here before has been declared. that
one of the things which ought to be seen and known, for to take the altitude
of the sun, is the declination or distance which it has that day from the
equinoctial line, for not knowing the declination how much it is, the said
altitude can not be known, whereby it is necessary that ye Pilote or any other
person which shall take the said altitude should know in what month he is in,
and how many days of the month it is, without having any error or want
therein. And because of that as I have spoken of before, which happened, it may
happen the like in others, or likewise if he that takes the altitude be
alone, or with little company, and do not remember the reckoning aforesaid,
for this it seems to me to be a convenient thing to help the memory by
putting here the calender before written, whereby may be kept a certain
remembrance and a reckoning of the month and day wherein he is, by looking
what day every month begins, without any need to ask it of any. And
because such as do go by some ways which has not much used it, are
accustomed to set marks to know it the better. So in this Calender, for the
better knowledge thereof, I have put marks which are ye saints days. Therefore
I say to know what day in the week is every holy day of them aforesaid. The
letters must be seen which stands before those days of every month, and
see what letter of these serves in this year for sunday, and is called the the
Dominicall letter, which shall be known by the rule before written, and being
known, to stay in it which is sunday, and in another which is next mu^day, and
in the other tewsday. And so all the seven days of the week named by the seven
letters ABCDEFG. And by reckoning in this manner, see what day is the letter
that is next to the holy day, and in that year that is the proper day of such
a feast, the leap years as before has been declared, have two dominicall
letters, the one serves unto ye xxv day of February, and the other unto the
end of the year.

The end of the fourth book.
The fifth book of the Altitude of the Poles.
The first Chapter, what thing a pole is, and how between the two poles the
roundnesse of the world is divided.
THis name pole sometimes is taken for all ye heaven, and at other times for ye
ends of the heavens, and so the poles are understood here, by the two ends of
one Ex, which is imagined, whereupon ye heavens do move. These poles are not
seen but are imagined, and they are imagined to be in ye first moveable. In
this manner, the roundnesse of the world is called Sphera, as before has been
declared: in ye midst of ye which, according to the definition of Theodosio,
is a point which is called Center, this point is taken in two sorts, one
according to the truth, and of this speaks Euclides in the beginning of the
Book entitled De Elementis, It is a point which has no part, in another
sort, this point is taken respectively, and so the earth to (...) of the
heaven is a (...) which is (...) the (...) of the world, so says the
Philosopher (...) fourth of the natural philosophy ^^ing that by the midst
of this (...) the (...) parts whereof do (...) or teach^^^ (...) this (...)
which some do call Diameter, is called the Ex of the Sphe^a, and the ends of
this line are called poles. There is a difference between the Ex, and the
Diameter, although yt many times the one is taken for the other because a
Diameter properly is called any manner of line, which deuideth any body into
2, equal parts, but the Ex is called a line, set in both p^^les, in the which
is imagined that some body turntth it self in circle manner, of the which does
follow, that in the heaven is no more then one Ex: and there are an infinite
number of Dia^^ers imagined. Therefore I say that those ends of the Ex are
called poles, the one is called Articke, and the other Antarticke, and in the
midst of these two poles all the roundnesse of ye world is divided into five
parts, and the Astronomers and Philosophers do call them Zonas, and they are
divided in this manner. The first zone is from the pole articke, unto the
circle articke, and this has in latitude twenty three degrees, and thirty
three minutes. The second from the circle articke to the Tropike of Cancer,
has in latitude forty two degrees, and fifty four minutes. The third from
the Tropike of Cancer, to the tropike of Capricorn, has in latitude forty
seven degrees and six minutes. The fourth from the tropike of Capricorn, to
ye circle Antarticke, has in latitude forty and two degrees, and fifty four
minutes. The fifth from the circle Antarticke to the pole Antarticke, has in
latitude, twenty three degrees, and thirty three minutes: so that from one
pole to the other, are a hundredth and fourscore degrees.

These Zonas the first is called Septentrionall, the second solstitiall, the
third Equinoctial, the fourth ^emall, the fifth Australl. And it is to be
noted, that these two poles* the one is superior, and the other is inferior.
And according to Albertus the great in the second book of the heaven, and the
world, the first treaty, ye six chapter, they are to be considered in this
manner, in as much as touches the moving of the circle of the fired stars.

The pole Antarticke is the superior, and the pole Articke is the inferior,
and according to the circle of the Planets, the pole Articke is the Superior,
and the Antarticke the inferior, and it is to be understood that such as dwell
in the Equinoctial line, only the place of the one pole they see, and so we
do only see in the heaven, the place where we imagine the one pole to be:
and this is called Articks, likewise Septeritrional, or Boreal: It is called
Articke, because it is near to the image called Arture. It is called
Septentrionall, by the seven stars of the Vrsa minor, which does move round
about the said pole. It is called Boreall by the wind Boreas, which we call
North. The other pole is called Antartico, which is against, as though it were
put contrary or opposite to the Articke, and Australl, because from that part
comes the wind called Austro: it is also called Meridionall, because it is
toward the part of the midst of the day, it is to be understood, that it
stands toward the part of the midst of the day to such as do dwell
toward the North, out of the tropicke of Cancer, because in all times of the
year at the midst of the day, we have the Sun toward that part*

The second chapter, how the altitude of o^ the pole Articke is to be taken,
and of the effect wherefore he is taken.
THe P^^ot or an^ other person that will take the Altitude of the pole articke,
which commonly we call the Altitude of the North, let him take his Ballestila
or quadra^t, or the instrument that he has most used, let him take the
altitude of the said star, as precisely as he can, and for the better
taking thereof, let him put himself near to the maste of the (...), ^^there
shall (...) feel lead^^ all the moving a^ the (...). And it in to (...), that
the altitude of is ^ole to token, to know ye distance of the degrees, that are
(...) hori^d unto the p^le, (...) there degrees being known, is known how
many degrees are from him which takes the altitude unto the Equinoctial line,
and it is known in this manner. The pole articke, or the antarticke either of
them, is distant from the Equinoctial line, ninety degrees, therefore let him
look that takes the altitude how many degrees he has raised the pole upon
the Horizon, and he shall understand, that the selfsame degrees are from the
place where he is unto ye Equinoctial line, so that if he be under the
Equinoctial, he shall not take altitude of any of the poles, because he shall
have them in the Horizon. But being come forth of the Equinoctial, how much
he is distant from her, so much he shall have the one pole raised up, and the
other put down, so that how many degrees he is distant from the line, in so
many he shall take the altitude of that pole, toward ^he part where he is.
For so many, he has raised upon him his Herizon, In such sort, that if he
took the altitude of the pole in ten degrees, the said ten degrees he is
distant of the Equinoctial, and if in twenty, twenty, and so the rest. In
such sort, that whenever the altitude of the pole is taken, looking by her
the degrees that are raised upon the Horizon, the self same he which takes
the altitude is distant from the Equinoctial line.

The third Chapter, how the reckoning which is taken of the height of the
pole articke or North is, to be understood.
IT has been declared in ye chapter before this, that how many degrees are
taken of the altitude of the pole, so many is he which takes her distant of
the Equinoctial line, because for this effect to know the distance of the
said line, the said altitude is taken, therefore in this present, I will
speak how this altitude which is taken of the pole is to be understood. Of
the which it is to be understood, that when a man is in the Equinoctial line,
he has both poles in the Horizon, as before has been declared, and by how
much he is going from the said line, and coming toward the pole articke
or North pole, which is this that we speak of, by so much the said pole
goes rising upon his Horizon, so that if the man be distant of the line
twenty degrees, the same twenty he has the pole, above his Horizon. Of this
is to be noted, that the degrees which are taken of the altitude of the pole,
are not to be understood of those which are from him, that takes the
altitude unto to the pole it self: But it is to be understood, that those have
gone raising up the said pole above his Horizon. For because like as in the
altitude of the sun, is not noted how much the sun is raised above him that
takes his altitude, but it is to be seen, how much he is raised above the
Horizon, which is seen by these degrees, which are taken in the Astrolabio,
so that in the altitude of the North, it is not to be looked, how much the
pole is risen upon him, which takes his altitude, but yt which he is risen
above his Horizon, in such sort, that to know the height of the pole, there
is no account or reckoning, to be taken between him that takes it and the
pole, but the reckoning is between the pole and the Horizon. For if the man
should keep reckoning with the pole, it would be said in this manner, from
the Equinoctial line, to the pole, are nienty degrees, therefore if he which
takes the altitude is twenty degrees, distant from the Equinoctial line: then
it should be threescore and ten degrees from the pole, and would say,
seeing I am in seventy degrees of altitude, I am so many from the pole.

This ought not to be understood so, for it would be a very great error,
so much that being in twenty degrees of altitude, he that should so make
his reckoning, should make that he were in seventy. But let the reckoning be
kept, as aforesaid, which is, that how many degrees I do take of altitude
with my Ballestisa, or other instrument: these have I raised the pole, not
above me, but above my Horizon, and the self same degrees am I distant of the
Equinoctial line.

The fourth Chapter, of the North star, and of the guardes of his moving.
THE North star being very well seen and known of all the sailors, is the
first of ye 7. stars, which yt Vrsa minor does set in order, and commonly he
is called Bozina. These 7. stars do seem clear and bright, and three of
the^ are like to a half circle, and the other 4. like to a quadrangle in this
manner. The seven stars do always move round about the pole, describing
their circl^s from the East into the West, and always in one self distance
one with the other, and in every four and twenty hours they give a turn
about the pole. But as the North star is more near the pole, then any of the
others, his turn is lesser and done with more ^eysute, then any of the other
stars: because how much more every star goes farther of from the pole,
so much the greater circumserence he makes, and so much the hastier he
moves. Therefore I say, that by this statre of the North is known, how much
the altitude is, which the pole has upon the Horizon: In such sort, that
although the pole is seen, yet by this star is known the place where the
pole is, the which is known by an other star of the same seven, the most
shyning. Of the two called guardes, which are in the month of the Bozina,
which star is called the formest guarde, and also he is called the horologial
star, because he goes always like to a whele of a clock, giving to
understand in all times of the year, what hour of ye night it is, by that
reckoning, that is called the midst of April, midnight in the head. And note
ye, that between the north star, and the guardes, is always the pole, in
such sort, that when the guardes are above the pole, the north star is
under, and so contrary, seeing by ye course or place where the guards are, is
known to what part of the pole, and in what distance of him, the said star
is.

The fifth Chapter, how that according to the course wherein the guardes are,
is known how many degrees the north star is under or above the pole.
IT has been declared in the chapter going before, that the north star
moves him self round about the pole, and that likewise the two stars
called the guards, do make their moving round about the said star, and of
the pole. By the which it is necessary to know, in what course the guards are
in, with the said star, because with this, will be known by the rules here
under written, in what course the said star is in with the pole, as also
how many degrees he is under or above him: for the which knowledge, the rules
following are so be looked on, in the which is to be noted that besides the
rules of the principal winds, you shall find rules for the half^ parts,
because the said altitude more easily at any hour of the night may be taken.

The which rules go set with their figures in such sort, that in every course
that the guards are in, may be known likewise in what course the said north
star is in, it is ordained in the manner following.

The guardes in the east, themost fore guarde is with the north star, east
and west, and the said star a degree and a half under the pole.



The guardes in the east northeast, the north star is three degrees under the
pole.



The guardes in the northeast, the one guarde is with the other east and west,
and the north star is three degrees and a half under the pole.



The guardes in the north northeast, the north star is three degrees and a
half under the pole.



The guardes in the north, the foremost guarde is with the north star north
and south, and the said star (...) three degrees under the pole.



The guardes in the north north^est, the north star is two degrees (...) ^^r
the pole.



The guardes in the northwest, the one guarde is with the other north and
south, the said star is half a degree under the pole.



The guardes in the west northwest, the north star is one degree above the
pole.



The guardes in the west, and foremost guarde is with the north star east and
west, and the said star is a degree and a half above the pole.



The guardes in the West Southwest, the North star is three degrees above the
pole.



The guardes in the Southwest, the one guarde is by the other East and West,
and the North star is three degrees and a half above the pole.



The guards in the South Southwest, the North star is three degrees above the
pole.



The guardes in the South, the North star is with ye foremost guard, North
and South, and the said star is three degrees above the pole.



The guards in the South, Southeast, the North star is two degrees above the
pole.



The guards in the Southeast, the one guarde is by the other North, and South,
and the North star is half a degree above the pole.



The guardes in the East Southeast, the north star is half a degree under
the pole.



The sixth Chapter, how the rules of the altitude of the North star ought to
be applied, and how they ought to be put to, or taken away, according to the
place where the guardes are.
THerefore when you take the altitude of the pole, look in what place the
guardes are, and by them you shall understand if the north star be under or
above the pole, as it is said. And mark, if the star be under, you shall
join with the altitude that you take, those degrees that are under and
altogether so much is your altitude: and if the star be above the pole, you
shall take away from the altitude that you took, ye degrees that the star is
above, and that which remains, is the altitude wherein you are.

Example.
I say the guardes being in the northeast, you took xl. degrees of altitude;
join with these xl. three degrees and a half, that the star is under the
pole* which does amount to forty three degrees and a half, this is your
altitude* and if the guardes be in the southwest, take a way of the forty
degrees, three and a half that ye star is over the pole, there does rest
thirty six and a half and this is the altitude wherein you (...) to that when
the star is under the poles you shall join with the altitude those degrees
that he is under, and when he is above, you shall take away ye degrees yt he is
above, and so you shall make your account just, and you shall know the place
where you are.

The seventh Chapter, wherein be declared certain doubts that in this moving of
the north star may be had.
IN the third chapter of this fifth book has bin said, that the stars which
are nere to ye pole, do move the^ selves more slowly then they that are far
off, and it seems yt of this may be a doubt, because yt every thing which
moves their parts in rule, do move so equally, that one moves not more siow,
nor the other more hasty. And as all the heaven does move equally, as ye sight
both manifest it, and so is the beginning of Astronomy, that the moving of
every day is in rule, whereby it ought to be said, that the parts of heaven do
move equally, and not the one part more slowly then ye other Likewise this is
proved because that one self intelligence, moves all the circle and all his
parts seeing that the parts nerest to the pole, are less then those which are
far off, therefore the said intelligence has a greater proportion upon the^,
and of the great proportion comes greater swiftnes, whereby may be said,
that the parts which are most nere to the pole, do move more speedely or with
m^^ have then the others.

Item, in the fifth chapter of the first book has been declared how the
heaven is round, and seeing that it is so, it may be said, that in ye heaven is
no part from above the pole, nor part under the pole, because that all round
bodies, naturally have no part high nor low: for if one part were more high
or low then the other, then the body should not be round, whereby it seems,
that it cannot be said, that the star of the North, nor the guardes are in
no time under nor above the pole.

The third doubt is, that likewise we say, that the North star does give an
equal turn round about the pole, and seeing it is so, that it is equal:
wherefore at sometimes is he distaunt of the pole under or above half a
degree, and at other times three degrees and a half.

To that which is said in the first doubt, all the Philosophers and
Astronomers are against, for that al of them hold that the pole moves not,
but is fixed, and upon him all the parts of heaven do move in circle manner
and in such sort, yt that which is near, moves slowly, and that which is
far of, moves with more haste, whereby that which moves it self by the
Equinoctial, because that there it is farthest of, there the moving is more
hasty, then in any other part, and this shows it self by experience. We see
in the moving of a wheel, that the Ex stands still, and always remains
in one place, and all the parts of the wheel do compass it about, of the
which, those parts that are near to the Ex, go more slowly, and those that
are farther of they move with more hasty moving, so the uppermost part of the
wheel his moving is more hasty then any of the other parts: as Aristotle
shows it in the Mechanica.

To that which is said, that the heaven moves it self equally, it is to be
understood in equallitie of time, but not in equality of place, in such sort,
that in equal time they make their parts in equal moving, because these
parts cannot of continuance (...) by themselves. A continuance is that whose
moving is one, and is to be understood wholly together: so that it cannot be,
that at one time one part is moved, and at another time another, but at the
moving of one part, all the other parts, and all together are moved: so that
when the Heaven moves, because his moving is a pure moving, of his place to
his moving all the parts do move place.

Item although that one self intelligence do move the parts of the poles and
likewise the others, which are more distant, because all be continual, they
are moved together. And it is so, because these parts are not put asunder,
nor divided ye one from the other. And if they were it is certain that the
lesser parts should move more hastily then the greater parts, the which is
not because the said intelligence does move them together, and the moouer has
his proportion to all, and not to part.

And this is manifest, because in the continual moveable, there are parts of
an infinite smalnesse, for that to any part that is marked may be given a
lesser.

To the second doubt which is in the round body, that there is no part high
nor low: truth it is, that naturally there is not, respectively there is. And
to say that the North star is sometime above the pole, and at other times
under, it is to be understood, not naturally, but to our respect, and so he
that were in such a place, that had y^ pole for Cenith: the North star should
not be from him more high nor more low, at one time then at another. But to
him whose Cenith is not under the pole in the moving which the star makes at
some time, he wilbee under the pole, and at other t^^es above and to know how
the North star is under or above the pole, do you imagine the f^^ure of a
^an in the pole articke, which having his face toward the midst of the day,
and being so put, the left arm shall be toward the East, and the right
toward the West, therefore when the North star does go from the left to
the right, which is from the East toward the West by the head which makes
the half of his circle, we say that he is above the pole, because then the
pole is between the star and the Horizon, so there are more degrees, from
the Horizon to the star, then to the pole: and when he goes from the right
arm to the left, which is from the West to the East, in the other half turn
that he makes by the foot, we say, that he is under the pole, because then
the star wilbee between the pole and the Horizon, and then there are more
degrees from the Horizon to the pole, then to the star, as appears by this
figure.

The Horizon,



And so it is to be understood, that the North star to be under or above
the pole.

To the third is to be noted, that the north star does go round about the
pole, but although the turn, which he gives, be in equal roundnes, he goes
distant from the pole, more in one place then in another, this is to be
understood not as much as touches ye roundnes, but as much as touches the
straightness of the pole, in this manner.

When the star is in any of the arms of the east or of the west, then he is
neither more high nor more low then the pole but in one equallitie with him.

And for as much as touches his turn, he goes from the said arms, by the
part of the head, or by the part of the foot, so much he goes aside of, from
the straightness of ye pole. In such sort, that when he is in ye head, is,
when he is farthest of the pole, by ye uppermost part: and when he is in the
foot, is, when he is farthest of by the lower part, the which is not to be
understood, that the circumference is greater in the head or the foot, then in
the other parts.

But unto our respect is that which he goes distant above or under ye pole as
here it is showed.



The eight Chapter, how the altitude of the North, is to be taken, although
the guards be not seen.
IT happens many times to such as be sailors, when they go near the
Equinoctial by reason the pole is near to their Horizon, they see not wholly
the turn which the guards do make, round about the pole, so that when the
guards do descend from the West; and go toward the East, in all those
courses of the west Southwest, South West South Southwest, South, South
Southeast, Southeast, East Southeast, they cannot take the altitude, because he
is not seen when ye guardes do come to every one of these said courses. And
for this in this chapter shall be declared, how it shall be known, when the
guardes do come to every one of these courses aforesaid, and taking the
altitude how much it is that justly shall be taken away from the altitude,
according to the place where the star is, is to be understood, yt which is
above the pole: for the which it is to be noted, yt besides the two stars
which we call guards, which before have been spoken of, there are other three
stars, which go well near in the same distance, that the guardes go in,
that go round about the North star: and although the guardes be not seen,
yet by these three stars, or by any of them, the altitude of the pole is to
be known, as well as by the guardes, which is to be known in this manner.
These three stars which before are spoken of, are called the third, the sixth,
and the nienth, and although they have other names, these names we name them
by, because it makes for our purpose, and the reason is, because ye star,
which we call Tercera, or third star, goes three hours, which is one
course or wind before the foremost guard: and the Sesta or six, two courses
or winds which are six hours: and the Nouena or nienth, three courses or
winds which are nine hours. And to know these stars, do you note that ye
third star has near to him other two stars, and all three do make well
near one triangle, in this manner.



This star whenever that the foremost guard is in the head, then is she in
the Northeast, and if the guard be in the West, then is she in ye Northwest,
and if the guarde be the South, then is she in the Southwest, and so it is to
be understood of the other courses, that always he goes one wind behind
the guarde.

The sixth is one star alone, the which goes well near as distant of the
North star as the guards.



This star goes two winds behind the guarde, so that if the guarde be in
the head, she is in the East, and if the guarde be in the West, she is in the
North, and so it is to be understood in the other courses.

The nienth is one star alone which is nearer to the North star, then the
guards, this star goes three winds behind the guarde, so that if the guard
be in the West, she is in the Northeast, and so contrary.



And these three stars being known, although the guardes be not seen, by
these or by any of the^ is to be known, in what course the guardes are in
reckoning the courses in the manner, as it has been declared: the which rule
I have had experience of, and have found it certain.

The nienth Chapter, how the altitude of the North, is to be taken, although
the Horizon be not seen.
IT happens many times to such as sail, that they cannot take ye altitude
of the North, because they cannot see the Horizon. This is because either the
earth does cover it, or some cloud or vapor which rises of the water, or it
makes so much darkness, that it cannot be discerned, or for some other
cause. And how to know ye Horizon is a thing so necessary, that lacking it the
altitude of the North cannot any manner of way be taken with the Ballestilla
of this cause the sailors receive very great hurt, for that many times it
happens to them, to pass many days without taking the altitude and most of
all in the winter.

Therefore to take away this hurt and inconvenience, I will declare in this
present Chapter, in what manner the said altitude may be taken although the
Horizon be not seen, the which is this. The pilot or other person, that
should take this altitude, let him take a staff or rod of the greathes of a
finger little more or less, and so high, that being put upright in the
ground, it come justly to his sight, and being made of this greatness, no
more nor lose: let him make at the top of it a Cross, and when he will take
the altitude, let him join his feet together, and lay down the rod
straight and equal from the point of his feet, as far as the rod will
reach, and let him make two points, the one where he has his feet, and the
other as far as the rod does reach, and in that point where the rod does
reach, there do you take him up, and let some body hold him upright, and the
Ballestilla being taken his feet being put in the point that he first had
them put, let him take his altitude, making the Horizon in the highest part of
the rod or staff where he marked the Cross. And ye shall understand that
this is his Horizon, wheresoever he finds himself. And it is to be noted,
that if the night were as dark, that ye highest part of the rod cannot be
seen. That which I have said is his Horizon, then put upon the top of the
rod, a sign or show of fire, by the sight of the which he may hit to put
his Ballestilla right with the said rod, and so he shall take his altitude
precisely doing in the rest, to take away or put to the degrees, according to
the place wherein the guardes are, as before has been declared.

The tenth chapter, of a clock by the north star whereby may be known what
hour of the night it is, in any ^ anner of time and place that a man is in.
IN the third Chapter of this fifth book, I said, yt the foremost guard is
called horologial, because he goes always round about the North star, like
to the wheel of a clock giving knowledge what hour of the night it is. And
because this knowledge brings much profit, and it is convenient that every
one should know it, therefore in this present Chapter, I will speak how it
should be known in any manner of place, whersoeuer a man is, and in any time
of the year, what hour of the night it is, and for to know it, is to be
noted that which follows.

First of all, look upon the North star and imagine upon him a Cross in
this manner.



Of this cross the uppermost part, we call head, and the lower most part foot,
and the other two the right arm, and the left, in this manner.



This being had, is to be understood, that between these four courses or
strekes, we put other four which do divide or part these in the midst
which we call lines, in this manner.



So that there is a line between the right arm and the head, and a line
between the head and the left arm, and a line between the left arm and the
foot, and a line between the foot and the right arm: this imagination
being made, it is to be understood, that ye greater star of ye two guardes,
which is the foremost, which before has been named the star of ye clock,
this star in twenty four hours does pass these eight parts, tarrying
three hours from the one to the other. So that it at xii. of the clock in the
night, he be in the head at three, he shall be in the line between the head
and the left arm, and at six in the said arm, and in that sort, the rest is
to be reckoned.

Of this does remain, that being known in what part this star should be
when it is midnight, forthwith will be seen, yt if he be there it is mydnight,
and if he be not come thither it is not, and if he be past, it is more then
mydnight. For this, it is necessary to know two things: the one is, to know
in every month of the year, in what part the guarde star ought to be in,
to know when it is mydnight: and the other, how it is to be known, what
hour it is, more or less the^ mydnight. Of the first this is to be noted, yt
the account or reckoning, that is to be used in this, is, that at the midst
of the month of April, when it is mydnight, then the said guarde star will
be in the head, with the North star, and from thence forward every fifteen
days, the middle of the night, is one hour forward: for in every day he
goes forward four points or minutes, and giving to every hour threescore
points, so that it comes to pass in every fifteen days one hour
forward. But in this I say that I have made experience sometimes with clockes
of precise hours, and setting them punctually, at the point that the Sun
sets, and I find that unto the twenty day of April, the guarde and the
star, do come precisely at mydnight in opposite, but because the difference
is little: I do follow the order of the figure following. To the second is
to be noted, as before has been declared, that in every three hours the
star called the guarde, does pass from one course to another, by the which
there is to be divided with the imaginatiue, that space in three parts, and
every part of space will be one hour. In such sort, that the place of the
guarde star being known where he should be at mydnight, is to be
known, if he be there, or if he be one hour, two, or three, behind or
before, and so it will be known what hour it is: and to know in what part the
guarde is in at midnight, every half month of the year, it must be seen in
this figure of following.



The eleventh Chapter, how the altitude of the pole, antarticke is to be taken.
SEeing there has been declared the altitude of ye pole articke, or North
with his demonstratio^s, it is convenient to speak of the altitude of the pole
antarticke, how he should be known, because the sailors or any other person
finding himself toward the South part* they may know how to take him, and
to govern themselves thereby. Of (...) is to be known, that the tokens or
knowledge, that we have of ye pole antarticke, are four stars, put Cross
wise in this manner.



These stars be not of any of ye signs of the Zodiac, nor of the other
thirty six images of the heaven, therefore they are called Cruzero, and these
four stars we name, head, foot, and arms, and to know which star is the
head, and which are those of the other parts, is to be understood, that the
star of the foot is greater then any of the others, and by this, the other
are known.

Therefore it is to be noted, that when these four stars are a cross, the
head being right with the foot, that then ye greater star which is the
foot, is more near the Horizon, and then he is distant of the pole antarticke
thirty degrees above the said pole, and the altitude of this star is taken,
and of no other: And he is to be taken when he is in right of the head, for
there is his own place. Therefore when you will know the altitude of the
said pole, do you stay until the star of the foot, be in his place,
because with the moving of the heaven, he moves with the others, and being
in his place, then take his altitude, even as you take that of the North, and
look that the altitude which you take of him, either they must be thirty
degrees or more or less, if they be thirty ^ust, you are in the Equinoctial:
If they be more then thirty, those which are more, you are distant of the
line toward the part of the South, and if they be less then thirty, that
which is less you are distant of the line toward the part of the North.

An Example.
I say that the said star being in his place, I took his altitude in
forty degrees, then I say that I am in ten degrees, distant of the line
toward the part of the south, the reason is, because this said star has
thirty degrees of declination or distance of the pole, therefore if I had taken
him in the said thirty degrees, then should I have had the pole in the
Horizon, and having the pole in the Horizon, I am in the Equinoctial, and so
the degrees, which are more then thirty, in the which I took the altitude
those am I distant of the line toward the part of the South: for thirty
from the star to the pole, and ten from the pole to the Horizon, are forty,
in so many took I the altitude, so that these ten degrees, is the pole
raised above my horizon, so that by how much, I shall be distant of the line,
so much the pole shall rise up above my horizon, and in so many more degrees,
I shall take ye altitude of the said star and the thirty being taken out,
which the star is above the pole, those which are more, I am distant of the
line toward the said pole, and so many shall the said pole be raised above
my horizon, and if I should take the altitude in twenty, I am distant of the
line ten degrees toward the part of ye North, and if I should take him in
ten, I am distant twenty, and if I should take him in five, I am distant
twenty five, and if I had the said star in the horizon, I am distant
thirty degrees of the said line, toward the part of the North, so that when I
shall take him in thirty degrees, I am in the Equinoctial, and when in less,
toward the part of the North, and when in more, toward the part of the South.

The end of the fifth book.
The sixth book, of the Compasses to sail by.
The first Chapter, of the Compasses to sail by, and of the defectes which
they may have, and how they may be amended.
THe instrument that most precisely and with greatest perfection, the pylot
ought always to have, is the Compass to sail withal, for that no instrument
so much as this does show the way, that he should make. And likewise
because the other instruments, without this are to little effect, and this
without the others do profit much: and so the compass among other instruments
of ye nauigatio^, may be compared to the sight of a man, among the other
senses. And seeing that this instrument is so delicate and subtle, it
happens that for small occasion he comes to have defect in such sort, that
he cannot serve. Therefore in this Chapter, I will speak of the defectes that a
compass may have, and how the pylot having necessity, may amend it. For the
which is to be noted, yt for one of these six causes, the Compass cannot
judge the North.

The first is, by the styles not being well touched with the Lodestone, that
he lacks the virtue. And this ceasing which is the cause, the effect
ceasseth, which is to show the North.

The second, because the capital is wrested, and not upright, that he does
not suffer the rose to go right in his step.

The third, because the step is broad, so that the rose cannot move with
quickenesse.

The fourth, because the rose lies down, and hangs more to one side then to
another.

The fifth, because the chest of the rose is open, in such sort that the air
enters into it.

The sixth, if the sphere or the hinges, whe^eby the said box or chest is
sustained, are not so light that the chest and the rose may go equal.

To the first, the pilot ought to carry in his chest a Lodestone, and that he
have experience that it be good, and with the face thereof to rubbbe or touch
ye points of the compass subtlely until there cleave to it, a little of the
said stone, and see that it be with the face of the said stone, the which he
ought to have marked, to which part it is, for if it be with another part it
makes not the true effect.

To the second, which is the capital to be laid down, for to know when it is
so, take a compass and put the one point in ye head of the capital, and the
other in one of the circles of ye rose, and thereby you shall know to which part
he is wrested, and how much it is needful to dress him, and it is to be
understood, that if the capital be not very upright, the rose will put him
clean out of his place, although he be very well touched.

To the third, if the step be broad or flat, he ought to be finely filed,
so that it be seen, yt the rose run not hasty nor to slowly, and if by ^yling
of him, it be seen that the rose does run over much, touch him subtly with
some yro^ in the point, yt he may be somewhat broad, so that the rose may run
ordinately.

To the fourth, if the rose go somewhat laid down, and do not go very
equal, you may put to him some wax, or pitche* or a thing that may cleave
fast to him in the under part, until that he go upright, without leaning to
one part more then to the other.

To the fifth, he ought to look that the box or chest where the rose goes be
so near, that there go not in any air as well by the part of the glass, as
by the part which is shut, and if it be open in any part, with the said
wax or pitch, it ought to be shut.

To the sixth, I say that he ought so look to the Sphera or hinges, wherein
the said chest or box goes put, upon the which it is sustained or held up
that it be so good and light that the said box or chest go always equal,
in such sort, that although the ship do hilde or do lie down to one side
or to the other, the said box and rose be always right, for if the yrons,
wherein they move, be hurt they cause that when the ship does hilde to one
side or other, the box and the rose cannot judge the North in his proper place.

So that it is convenient that the said Compass or needle be precisely made
without having defecte or lack, or if there be any inconvenience, although it
be very little, it causes much error.

The second Chapter, how the winds of the Compass ought to be understood,
and how the sun passes every day by them.
IT is necessary, that the pilot understand two things in his compass, the
one is, how the East and West, which are marked in the Compass ought to be
understood.

The second, how that in every four and twenty hours, the Sun does pass
all the courses of the Compass.

To the first is to be noted, that this name East and West is taken two ways,
(that is to say) natural and respective: the East and West is natural, and is
understood by the Equinoctial line, and not by any other part, because it is
ye midst between the two extreme parts, (that is to say) the two poles, as
his definition declares.

The respective is by any other manner of part where a man is, now near the
line, now far off, so that if a man be five degrees from the line, or ten,
or more or less, all that he is in the same degrees, he shall be toward the
east and respective toward the west, in such sort, that all that he is from
the place, where the Sun rises to the Meridian where the man is, he shall be
toward the east, and that which he is from the man unto the place where the
sun sets, he shall be toward the west, and this likewise, is to be
understood being in the equinoctial, as also forth of the equinoctial.

An example.
Of this may be asked, if the city Seuill be toward the east or west, that
is, toward Leuante or Poniente, it is answered, that it is not in the east
and west natural, and as much as touches the respective, it is toward the
east, and it is toward the west, I will say, that likewise it is toward the
Leuante, and it is toward the Poniente, in this manner. Of that which it is
most occidental is toward Leuante, and of that which is most oriental, is
toward the Poniente, so that if Seuill be in thirty seven degrees of the
equinoctial, toward the part of the north, all that it is in the right course
of the thirty seven degrees it is with Seuill east and west, in such sort
that all that it is from the Meridian of Seuill unto the part of Poniente,
Seuill has toward the Leuante, and that which is from Seuill toward the
part of the Leuante, Seuill has it toward Poniente. We have an author of
this, who is Saint Luke in the first chapter, where he says, that the three
kings came from the oriental parts to Jerusalem, it is to be understood,
that as Jerusalem was more occidentall, then from whence they came, so they
came from the orient, to occident, which is from the east to the west.

Therefore I say to our purpose it is not to be understood that the course
which is marked in the compass, is the east and west, respective, or
accidental, but the natural which is by that straight course which the Sun
does describe in that moving which he makes the eleue^th of march, and
thirteenth of September, for that is east and west, that is marked in the
compass, (that is to say) by the equinoctial, so that from the east unto the
north are nientie degrees, and seven courses, besides the east and the north,
and the like unto the south, And if the east of the compass were respective
the nientie degrees, nor the seven winds or courses, should not be reckoned
the which would be a very great error.

To the second, I say that how much a man is farthest of the equinoctial,
so much the days will be greater to him when the Sun goes of this part
where he is, and by reason that the days are greater to him, the rising of the
Sun may be different to him, in this manner, those which inhabit under
the equinoctial, or in any other part, when the Sun does describe the said
line, always he comes forth to them in the east, and sets to them in
the west, and they have twelve hours of day, and twelve of night, so that in
the four and twenty hours wherein the Sun makes his daily woouing he
passes all the eight winds or principal courses of the navigations, In such
sort, that from three to three hours, he goes from one wind to another,
and so he rises and comes forth to us at si^e of the clock, at the east,
and at niene at the southeast, and at twelve at the south, and at three at the
southwest, and at six at the west, and there he sets. So that in xii.
hours he goes four courses, but out of the equinoctial, how much ye day is
greater so many more courses the sun goes in the day, and less in the
night, so that if the day be of fifteen hours, the sun goes in the day five
courses and by night three: and if the day be of eighteen hours the sun
goes in the day six courses and by night two: and if the day be of one and
twenty hours, the sun goes in the day seven courses, and by night one: and
if the day be of four and twenty hours the sun goes twenty four hours
in the day, which are eight courses, and that day there is no night: as it
happens to those which inhabit in the circles, when the sun comes to
the tropikes. And that which is understood of the days when they go
increasing, and the nights deminishing, the same is to be understood by the
courses which the sun goes by night when the day goes deminishing, and the
night increasing: as shall be declared in the sixth chapter of the eight book,
so that the quantity of hours being known which the day has, ye pilot may
know to what course of the compass the sun rises and sets from him
every day, this reckoning will serve for many things of the navigations.

The third chapter, wherein is declared, the opinion that is had in the
northeasting, and northwesting of the compasses.
THere is an opinion among such as sail that the compasses do north stear,
and northwestear, and it is said that in the Meridian of the Ila^des of the
Acores, that there the Compass does show the pole in his place. And from
thence passing toward the west, it does Northwestear, this is that he shows
not the pole in the place where he was first, but that he goes aside
toward the Northwest. And if they come from the said Meridian, toward the
East, that the Compass does Northeastear, that is, to make the said
difference toward the part of the Northeast, so that they say, that only
in that Meridian the Compass does show the pole, and not in any other place:
but to one part or other: and how much more they depart from him, so much
the Compasses have more the said defect, but those which understand this,
give no cause nor any reason, nor how much this difference is, which the
Compass makes, nor how far it goes, so that they know not what to say
more, but marking their Compasses, it seems that which is said to be so.

Hereupon I have procured to seek some Author or reason, or some thing wherein
this should have a foundation, and I say that of this variacion which is spoken
of the compass. I find not any thing written, nor reason, nor experience,
that is certain: therefore here I will speak my opinion, touching this,
persuading my self to that which is most natural and true of the navigations.

Therefore coming to the cause, I say putting an example, if I make two
compasses of one self style, and of one temperance, and touched with one self
stone, and two ships go sailing with them, departing from the said Meridian
one toward the east, and the other toward the west, that these compasses
shall make, different effects in such sort, that in the one, the stone and the
style, should have virtue to cause northeasting, and in the other to cause
northwesting which are contrary effects, it seems not to me, that there is
any foundation, or reason to have the like. But let us see if this be in any
thing of the navigations, let us seek it in three parts, which is in the
pole or the compass, or in the way where sailing now is used.

To the first, to say that the pole does make any variation or distaunce from
his place or point, this ought not to be thought, because it should be to
put out of order all the order of the Sphera, in such sort yt all ye ^ixed
circles; should be moveable* besides this, if ye pole should move with him that
saileth toward ye east, it would move it self in the same tune with him
which saileth toward the west. This is impossible how much more, that the
pole cannot move to one part or to another because it is a point immagined
always fixed in one place.

To the second, I say that it ought not to be thought or understood, that the
compass by himself makes the said difference, for it is certain, that the
said natural virtue or property which the stone and steel have in the place
where the compass was made, the self same they have in the said Meridian,
and in the new Spain, and in Calicut, and in all parts. And there is no
reason to say, that this property is of such quality, that in the said
Meridian it has one virtue, and in all others, which are well near infinite,
it has it in every one, different, for if it were so, it would be to give a
great inconvenience, the which is that (...) no part forth of the said
Meridian, there could be made a true compass, seeing that in no part the
compass does show the pole but there, and to say so it were a very great
error, because an instrument, so important to the navigations, should not be
said, that in no part it could be made certain, for if it were so, it were
to give to the navigations an instrument with a known error.

To the third, that is by the way where you sail, this is known, that in any
manner of place where a man is, there he has his Meridian, the which goes
precisely to remain at the point, which is the pole, without making any
distaunt or difference in any thing.

And if it should be said, that by reason of the way which the Ship
sayleth, the compass makes the said difference as well toward the one
part, as to the other, this would be to make many Meridians different, the
one from the other, and so they should go to remain at different poles in
such sort that how many differences the compass went making, by reason of the
way: so many different Meridians, the way should have: and too every
Meridian of necessity, there should a pole (...) given, where he should
make an end, for otherwise it would be an infinite process, so that there
should be given an infinite number of poles. And to think this should be a
very great error* so that it appears well, that neither by the part of
the pole, neither of the compass, nor of the way where you sail, the said
compass do make any variation or difference from his proper place, but
making more inquiry of this variation, which of the compass is spoken: I say
that commonly is understood that the compass does show the pole, but of this
there is no writing which does say so: that which I find written of the
Lodestone, and of iron is, that Pliny in his thirty six book of the
natural history says, and also Saint Isidore in the sixteenth of the
Etimologi^s, that the Lodestone by one hidden virtue or property, that it has
does specify that it draws to it iron of this Auicen speaks in the Book
of Viribus Cordis, the tenth Chapter, he asks what the cause is, wherefore
the Lodestone does draw unto it iron, to the which he aunsweareth, that there
is no other thing can be said, but because it has a natural virtue to draw
it to him, and he says that some understood that he draws it to him by
reason of heat or coldness, or because of similitude, that both of them have
in nature, or for other reasons, all the which he says is false, for that
he draws it not, but only with his property, and declaring what thing
property is, he says, property is found in nature in the co^pounded bodies,
proceeding in them, a most high and full influence, so that we see the load
stone does draw to him the iron: likewise we see that the iron being rubbed
with the said stone, I say in one only part of it the virtue renia^^^th with
the iron to show always one point, which is answerable to the place where we
do show in the horizon the wind at north: so that ^eeing the pole is
imagined in the heaven, and is not seen, and the compass does show him in
the horizon without any rising, one only degree above the horizon: it is clear
that neither the compass does show the pole nor by the said compass the pole
can be seen when it is equal with him, nor when it is at one part nor at
another, even as I should not know, when I am right with yt which I see not,
nor when to one part nor to another. This being understood, I mind to declare
here whereupon they ground them selves, which are of opinion that the compass
has a Northeasting and a Northwesting, and the manner whereby they say, that
they know it, which is this. The pilots which do ma^^e their compasses do
behold the North star to mark them by her, but because this star does
always move, as before it has been declared, therefore they tarry until
the guardes be in the Northeast, or in the Southeast, for then they think,
that the said star is in opposite of the pole, under or above him, and then
they imagine a streke which descends from the said star unto the Horizon,
and they imagine another streke which goes from the point of the flower of the
compass, unto that point of the Horizo^, so that in these two strekes, which
they put in that point, they look if that point be straight under ye North
star, and so they speak what their opinion is without having in this any
other account or reason.

To this is to be noted two things. The first that the guardes being in any of
these said courses are not in opposite of the North star, and the pole
rather is a point different, for because to stand in opposite, ye guards ought
to be in the Northeast, and by North, or in the Southwest and by South.

The second, that this making just of the compass is always done by night,
because by day there is no star seen. And from the star unto the Horizon
the distance is very great, by which the true point that is corespondent to the
said star, cannot be known in the Horizon: But that at one time is ^^dged
one, and at another time another. Likewise for the great distance, that is
from the said compass unto the point which is imagined in the horizo^: And as
that point is imagined, and invisible, always the sight goes wavering without
establishing it self, which has happened sometimes to me, making experience
in this. And therefore I say, that according to the perspectiue rule, the
precise point of the Horizon cannot be taken with the only sight which is
imagined under the said star, nor it can make justly equal, the point of the
flower of the compass, by reason there is no certain point, and the distance
very great, which is to that as is imagined. For the sight fails when the
object is very dista^t. Whereby I conclude, that it cannot be precisely known
in the compass, by the manner as it is said, if he make the said distance of
the pole, nor how much it is, nor I by this way could ever attain to it.

The fourth Chapter, of the inconveniences, which may follow by the
Northeasting, and Norwesting of the Compasses.
AMong other inconveniences, that will follow in the navigations, if the
Compasses should make the said variation or difference, I find four very
principals, which are these following.

The first if it be true, that the compasses have a Northeasting, and a
Norwesting, likewise it may be said, that they have a southeasting and
southwesting, and the reason is this, it is certain that the variation or
difference which the compass does make to the part of the north, the same
ought to be made, toward the part of the south, I will say that how much
the north point of the compass departs from his own point, so much the
south point of the said compass goes distant to the other part, and so the
north point of the compass does northeast a quarter or more, and the south
point does southwest the like, for the north point cannot go aside, but the
south point does the like. And so when you shall sail toward the part of
the south, seeing that there the north star is not seen to mark by her, either
it must be said, that of that part the compass does not make variation, or if
it do, that in the south, it is to be known: and so when you shall sail to
the river of plate, otherwise called Rio de Plata, or to the straight of
Magalanes, or by the south sea, or to the cape of Buena Esperanca which is in
english, good hope, and from thence to Calicut or the Maluco, then will be
said, that the south point of the compass does southeast or southwest, and to
say so should be a great error.

The second if the north point of the compass do make the said distance of
his proper place and point, it is certain that the self same difference and
distance all the other winds of the navigations should make from their proper
places, because how much any wind does depart from his proper place, the
self same all the others should do by the agreeable order, and equal
distance, that they have in the compass, the one with the other, and so none
would answer to the certain point, that is showed in the Horizon, so that
likewise, there would move from their place, the east, and the west, and all
the other winds, this would be a great inconvenience, for the compasses,
would never agree with the cards, this is because always the winds of the
cards are fixed in one point, without moving from thence, therefore if the
winds of the compass do make many differences, it is certain, that they
cannot be agreeable, and not agreeing: The place which you go to seek cannot
in any manner of wise, be precisely hitte, but with great compass, this will
cause it by reason the card says one thing and the compass another, and so
there cannot be had a certain accounte, in the degrees and leagues which are
sailed, rather all the accountes or reckoninges of the leagues which is given
for a degree in every course, should be false seeing the pilot does not sail
by the course, which he thinks he does, and so the reckoning which is made
by such a course, should not be certain, and if he would give allowaunce it
would be nothing worth, for he knows not of what part nor how much, and
so it would be to add one error to another.

The third, if the variation or difference which is spoken of the compass,
were certain it would follow, that the compasses which were very distant of
the said Meridian at the east or at the west, they should have great
difference, if it be true, that how much more they are distant, so much more
they have the said defect, and so all the earth, that should be discovered,
with these compasses, and should be set down in the card, should not be
in his true point, the reason is, because the principal winds of the card
(that is to say) the north and the south, the east and the west, are marked in
four fixed points equally distant, which are the two poles and the
equinoctial line: and according to these all the other winds of the card are
marked and parted, for if there were put into the cards any other thing it
would be to make an error at the beginning, which is not convenient in a
thing so certain, as the navigations is, so that all these winds are always
steadfast and fixed, in their own points, without making variation or any
difference, so that all which is placed with the compass by reason of his
difference, will not be aunswearable with the certain point; according to the
winds which are in the card.

The fourth, if the variation of the Compass be true, immediately would follow
great difference between the course and the altitude, because if I, by my way
or course do seek a land, which I know is in thirty degrees, or more or
l^sse, and I sail by one point the which I have chosen agreeable to the
Altitude. It is certain, that by reason of the variation of the said
Compass. I shall not go by this course to that Land which I go to seek,
but rather when I have gone, the said way, I shall find my self forth of
that place, whether I go very different, of the which, the error of the
Compass was cause thereof.

And so in long ways will always happen great hurtes and inconveniences.
Therefore I say, seeing that the said opinion has no more reason nor
foundation, then that which is before said, that such as do follow it, let
them look to the hurtes and dangers which may follow them.

The fifth Chapter, of the allowance, which the Compasses have, and how it
ought not to be given them.
SOme which make compasses have a custom, that at such time as they do set
the styles in the rose of the winds, they do not precisely put the flower of
the rose upon the points of the styles, which are touched with the Lodestone,
but they put them aside of the flower half a point for^ the Northeast, and
this they say they do to give allowance to that which the Compasses do
Northeast, so that the Compass does remain, made in such manner that the
styles, and the slower are not uniform in showing the North point, because the
flower does show him to one part, and the styles do show him to another:
this is a known error, and it ought not to be done in no manner of wise, for
the reasons following.

The first, if it be true, that the Compasses do northeast and northwest: it
is also said that they do as well northeast as northwest, so that the
difference which is given to the one part, the selfsame is given to the other,
and if it be so, by what reason should be given to it the allowance, always
to the one part, and not to the other, therefore it is certain, that it to
the navigations that is made toward the West, the allowance does profit that
which is made toward the East, it would hurt, seeing they are different the
one with the other, so that what it does benefit the one, it will hurt the
other. Likewise, with the self same co^passes, which they go one any voyage,
with the selfsame they return, without taking away, or putting to any thing
in them, thereby it is clear, that the said error is to be perceived,
seeing that the allowance cannot serve to both parts.

The second, if it be true that in the Meridian of the Acores the Compass
does not make any difference from the pole, I say that this cannot be known,
by the said compasses. (The reason is) because the virtue of the Compass is
in the styles, and not in the flower, and the pilot looks not unto the
styles, but to the flower, because he cannot see the styles, and the flower
shows one, and the styles another, whereby as he rules himself by the
flower he cannot know the truth.

Likewise what reason is there, that there is given there to the Compass, as
much allowance, as in other parts which are far of. Of this does follow, yt
for the allowance or difference put in ye said compass cannot be known, when
the pilot is in the said Meridian. Therefore it is so as it has been said,
when the styles do show, the flower does not show. And so ye said Meridian
cannot be known, if it be not in seeing the said Islands, by reason of the
difference that is between the styles and the flower.

The third I say, that there is no reason, wherefore so much allowance should be
given to the Compass in the sailing of a hundredth leagues, as in the sailing
of two thousand by the which reasons, it is not convenient, that to any
compass the said allowance or difference be given between the flower and the
styles, but yt they be made even very precisely, so that they may be uniform
in their showing.

The sixth Chapter, of an instrument, with the which the Compasses may be
marked, and known if they be certain and true.
IT has been said, that by the point of the Horizon, which is corespondent
to the North star the compasses cannot be marked, because it is an uncertain
point, so that because the compass is an instrument so little and so subtle, it
is necessary to bring him in order with another instrument, such a one as the
sight and the reason may rectify.

Therefore when the pylot will mark his compass, and know if he be true or
not, let him make ye instrument following: with ye which I have many times
marked compasses, and have found it certain, set down your compass upright,
and put upon him a little thin table and plain, a little longer the^ the
compass, and narrower the^ the rose, so that the North and the South be seen
of the rose: And in this table make a circle with the compass, well near of ye
greatness of the rose, and make in the said circle a streke very equal and
straight, that may go from the North to the South of the rose, so that the
rose standing still, the streke of the circle of the table, be such, yt he come
precisely with ye North and south of the rose, this being done, put in the
point with the compass made in the midst of the circle of the table, a
little small maste upright, and that he be so great that the shadow which he
makes go forth of the circle, and being put so, then set your compass in
the sun before ye midst of the day, and there make equal the streke of the
circle with the rose, as before is declared, and the compass standing quiet
and the table fixed above, do you stay until the shadow which the little
maste does make, do come shortning until he come to the said circle, and when
he is come, make a point there. And after that stay until the said shadow do
turn to go forth of the circle, and when he comes to it, make there
another point, this being done, take your compass, and part justly that which
is from one point to the other.

And to this point of the partition, the Meridian of that place is
corespondent, it is to be seen if the streke which was made in the circle of
ye North and South, of the compass do come by the said point of the
partition, then the compass is good, and if not, there it is to be seen, to
which part he makes difference, and how much it is.

The end of the sixth book.
The seventh book of the Moon, and how her ebbings and flowinges do serve in
the Navigations.
The first Chapter, what thing the moon is, and wherefore her light is not
equal, but always increases or diminishes.
THE Moon is one of the seven Planettes, constituted in the first Heaven more
near unto us then any of the others, of this some had opinion, that she had
light of her self, and when she was in one sign with the Sun, by means of
the great light of the Sun, she gave no light, and how much the more she
went from the Sun, so much her light began to appear, and the nearer she
was, the less it did appear. This is not so, because the Moon has no
cleerenesse nor brightness of her own, as in the first book the seventh
Chapter, has been declared, the which is seen by experience, because the
Moon does suffer Eclipses, when she is deprived of the light of the Sun, as
there is a let, that she cannot receive it, she remains dark. This light
is let by means of the Earth, as the Philosophers and Astronomers do show,
because in the moving which the Su^ne and the Moon make, as they come into
the point, that the earth is directly between the Sun and the Moon, the
light of the Sun gives in the earth, and so the Moon remains in her own
likeness, which is dark, so that of her self, she has no light nor
cleerenes, but the sun which is over her, does light her, although not every
day alike toward us, because as the Moon is a body dark, when she is right
under the sun, she is lightened of the uppermost part, and remains dark
toward the earth, and therefore in her conjunction with the sun, we see her
not. And it is to be noted, yt in the conjunction of ye moon, she and the Sun
rise not in one self place, but they rise at one self time, and so by means
of the light of the sun, ye moon does not appear, because coming forth at
one self time and in one place the sun would be eclipsed, and so the
eclipse of the sun happens in the conjunction of the moon, when she is in
the head or tail of the Dragon. And as by her moving, she goes away from
the sun, she begins to appear unto us, and appears in the manner of a
thin horn, and the farther she goes from the sun, the more she shines to
us. And at the eight day she shines parted in the midst, and at the
fifteenth day she is full, for then she is farthest of the sun, the which is
proved because it happens, when the sun does set to us in the west, she
begins to come forth in the east, and then all the brightness, which the
moon receives of the sun descends toward us, and after she begins to
go nearer to the Sun, by the same manner that she went departing, and when
the light goes upward the shadow descends, and so she turns decreasing,
in the like sort as she went increasing. And it is to be noted, that the moon
does pass the circle of ye zodiac, in tweentie seven days and eight hours,
and although that in this time, she makes an end of her circle, there is given
to every moon twenty niene days and a half. The reason is, because in those
said twenty seven days and eight hours, she does not overtake the sun, and
therefore passes forward other two days, and four hours, a little thing
more or less, and so twenty nine days decying past, and twelve hours, and a
few minutes, in some more, and in others less, the conjunction of the Moon
and the Sun is made. This is according to the half moving of the Moon,
wherewith is made equal, the moving of all the days, because according to the
true moving which she makes, at sometime it is said to be slow, and at other
times swift, the which moving is also made equal by the middle moving, this
is largely declared by the king Don Alonso in his tables.

The second Chapter, of the Golden number, and how it is to be reckoned from
one to nienteene, and wherefore no more nor less.
IT is a necessary thing to take out the reckoning of the Moon by the Golden
number, for that the Golden number is a thing whereby many reckonings are made,
and therefore it is called the number of Gold, whereof I mind to declare in
this Chapter, that of the Golden number which makes to our purpose, where I
say that this reckoning of the Golden number is, from one to nieneteene, so
that the Golden number is accomplished in the time of nieneteene years, and
the nineteen years being past, returns again to one and so for ever. The
reason why it has this number, and no more nor less is because the nineteen
years being past, the Moon turns to one only day, of the year, of the
Sun, and in this time she finisheth and ends all those diversities of
conjunctions and fullness, and other aspectes, which she has with the Sun
in one only day, degree, and minute, in this manner following.

I put the case that the Moon made conjunction the first day to January of
this year. The year followyng she will not make the same conjunction in the
same point, but before or after, and so we will speak the like of the
fullness, and other aspectes. And as these be not in an infinite number, it is
certain that they are comprehended under some number, or space of time.

These are those said nieneteene years, in the which are to be noted, as it
is said, all the diversities of aspectes, as well of conjunctions, and
fullness, as of any other cause, which the moon makes with the Sun, in such
sort, that the nieneteene years being ended. The Moon does not turn to
make a new coniunctio^ or opposition in any degree or point of the Zodiac,
that in the said time, she has not already done, and by this reason this
reckoning of the golden number is ended and finished in the time of nieneteene
years, and not in more nor less.

A Rule to know the Golden number of every year.
TO know every year how many are of the Golden number, look on the numbers
following and counting in the first house, the year of our Lord 1545. which
are seven of the Golden number, and one house is to be reckoned every year,
and the last house being ended, return to the first and so for ever.

1545. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15.

16. 17. 18. 19. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.

When you will know in any year that you are in, how many are of the Golden
number, without looking on the book, see in what year you run, and leaving
out the thousand five hundredth, of the rest take out the nieneteenes, and that
which remains, so much is of the Golden number that year, and if the number
of the years come just in nieneteenes, that year is nieneteene of the Golden
number.

The third Chapter, wherein is declared the day and hour, wherein the Moon
makes conjunction in every Month of the year for ever.
THere has been declared in the Chapter before, how it should be known every
year how many are of ye golden number, according as the account in it is
declared, and because it is necessary for the navigations to know in every
month the day and hour of the conjunction, therefore in this Chapter, shall be
declared, how a man may know every day what day and hour the conjunction of
the Moon was, or shall be. And for this are to be noted, two things, the first,
yt this account goes taken out by the Golden number, and by him you must rule
your self, even according as the number is, which that year, wherein you are,
do run of the Golden number. In that said year, look the Month where you
are, or the Month that you would know, and in him you shall find the day,
and hour that the Moon was or shall be in conjunction. The second is, that in
this account a day is understood from this day the midst of the day, until
to morrow, the midst of the day, so that if we say, this day is the
fifteenth day of the Month it is understood, from this day the midst of the
day, until to morrow the midst of the day, and from the midst of the day
to morrow, does sixeteene begin, because this is the manner, that the
Astronomers do reckon the days, so that those hours which are over and
above, the days are from the half day forward.

If they be one of the Golden number. If they be two of the Golden number. If
they be three of the Golden number. Months Days Hours Months Days
Hours Months Days Hours January. 19 16 January. 8 20 January. 27 14
February. 18 6 February. 7 13 February. 25 9 march. 19 7 march. 8 4
march. 27 1 April. 18 1 April. 6 16 April. 25 4 may. 17 9 may. 6 2 may. 25
0 June. 15 15 June. 4 9 June. 23 8 July. 14 23 July. 3 15 July. 22 16 August.
13 8 August. 1 7 August. 21 0 September. 11 21 September. 29 19 September. 19 8
October. 11 12 October. 29 9 October. 18 19 November 10 6 November. 28 1
November. 17 7 December. 10 1 December. 27 20 December. 16 22

If they be four of the Golden number. If they be six of the Golden number.
If they be eight of the Golden number. Months Days Hours months Days
Hours months Days Hours January. 15 0 January. 23 20 January. 2 3
February 14 19 February. 22 9 February. 31 22 March. 16 3 march. 22 22
march. 31 22 April. 14 19 April. 21 8 April. 29 17 May. 14 9 may. 21 4 may.
29 3 June. 12 11 June. 19 19 June. 27 14 July. 12 7 July. 19 9 July. 27 3
August. 10 16 August. 18 0 August. 25 29 September. 9 1 September. 16 13
September. 24 12 October. 8 10 October. 16 2 October. 23 6 November. 6 20
November. 14 14 November. 22 23 December. 6 7 December. 14 1 December. 22 15

If they be five of the Golden number. If they be seven of the Golden number.
If they be niene of the Golden number. Months Days Hours Months Days
Hours Months Days Hours January. 4 20 January. 12 11 January. 21 4
February. 3 11 February. 10 21 February. 19 15 March. 5 3 March 12 8
March. 21 0 April. 3 20 April. 10 19 April. 19 8 May. 3 13 May. 10 7 May.
18 16 June. 2 2 June. 8 20 June. 17 0 July. 1 4 July. 8 10 Iulie. 16 9 August.
29 16 August. 7 2 August. 14 21 September. 28 2 September. 5 17 September. 13
12 October. 27 12 October. 5 10 October. 13 November. 25 22 November. 4 1
November. 12 1 December. 25 8 December. 3 15 December. 11 19

If they be ten of the Golden number. If they be twelve of the Golden
number. If they be fourteen of the Golden number. months Days Hours
months Days Hours Months Days Hours January. 10 12 January. 17 9
January. 25 7 February. 9 3 February. 18 15 February 23 23 march. 9 16
march. 17 21 March. 24 15 April. 8 ^ April. 16 11 April. 23 7 may. 7 9
may. 15 23 May. 22 22 June. 5 16 June. 14 8 June. 21 13 July. 4 23 July. 13 16
July. 21 1 August. 3 7 August. 12 00 August. 19 13 September. 1 18 September.
10 8 September. 18 1 October. 31 8 October. 9 17 October. 17 11 November. 29 19
November. 8 5 November. 15 22 December. 29 14 December. 7 18 December. 15 8

If they be eleven of the Golden number. If they be thirteen of the Golden
number. If they be fifteen of the Golden number. Months Days Hours
Months Days Hours Months Days Hours January. 28 8 January. 6 10
January. 13 18 February. 27 1 February. 5 3 February. 12 6 March 28 15
March. 6 21 March. 13 19 April. 27 1 April. 5 15 April. 12 9 May. 26 9
May. 5 6 May. 12 0 June. 24 16 June. 3 19 June. 10 20 July. 23 23 Iulie. 3 6
July. 10 5 August. 22 7 August. 1 15 August. 8 20 September. 20 17 September.
29 10 September. 7 10 October. 20 5 October. 28 19 October. 7 0 November. 18 21
November. 27 6 November. 5 13 December. 18 14 December. 26 18 December. 5 0

If they be sixteen of the Golden number. If they be eighteen of the Golden
number. months Days Hours months Days Hours January. 3 10 January. 12
2 February. 2 20 February. 10 14 march. 3 6 march. 11 0 April. 1 17
April. 0 7 may. 1 4 may. 8 8 June. 29 15 June. 6 23 July. 28 21 July. 6 8
August. 27 13 August. 5 19 September. 26 6 September. 3 8 October. 25 22
October. 3 1 November. 23 13 November. 1 19 December. 24 1 December. 1 14

If they be seventeen of the Golden number. If they be nineteen of the
Golden number. Months Days Hours Months Days Hours January. 22 12
January. 30 5 February. 20 22 February. 28 14 March 22 7 March. 30 1
April. 20 16 April. 28 9 May. 20 1 May. 27 16 June. 18 11 June. 25 13 July.
17 23 Iulie. 25 6 August. 16 14 August. 23 16 September. 15 7 September. 22 4
October. 15 1 October. 21 20 November. 13 19 November. 20 14 December. 13 11
December. 20 19

It is to be noted, that for the conjunctions of the moon before written,
shall be taken out, the opposition or the fullness of the moon that is, by
reckoning fourteen days, and sixeteene hours, after the conjunction, a
little thing more or less.

The fourth Chapter, of a short account or reckoning to know without the
book briefly the days which the moon has in any mooneth of the year.
OF the accounte of ye Moon which before has been declared, you may at all
times when you will, know how many days old ye moon is, and what day and
hour the conjunction was, but because without the book it cannot be known. I
thought good to put here a short account; that by memory it may be known,
how many days old the Moon is, at all times when you will know it: the
which is to be reckoned i^ this manner.

In what day soever you are in, look how many be of concurrent in that year
which you run, according as you shall find in the account before (...) and
join with them the number of the Months which are past from March unto that
month, and likewise join the days of the month which you have unto the day
wherein you are: these three numbers together if they pass of thirty, those
which are more, the Moon is old, and if they be thirty just, the Moon is
in couiunction, and if they come not to thirty, those which are, so many days
old the Moon is.

An Example.
In the year of 1545. we have seue^teene of concurrent, therefore the twenty
of August, I will know how many days old the Moon is: I say that of
co^current is seventeen, join six of ye months which are from March to
August, it amounts to twenty three, and twenty of the Month are forty
three, take away thirty, there remains thirteen, so many days the Moon is
old, the twenty day of August. And by this manner you shall take out the days
yt the Moon is old, every time that you will.

1545 17 ^8 9 20 1 12 23 4 15 26 7 18 29 11 22 314 25 6

In the year of 1545. we have seventeen of concurrent, the next year
following, we have tweentie eight, and so reckoning in every year one house of
these and it serves for ever.
OF this account of the concurrent, know ye, that it increases every year
eleven, and it cannot pass above thirty, and if they do pass thirty, you
must leave the thirty, and take that which remains. And so know this
reckoning of the concurrent quickly by the head, do you in this manner set
down in the root of the thumb, ten, and in the joint of the midst twenty,
and the uppermost thirty, and this being done put the Golden number in the
three joints, reckoning one in the root of the thumb, and in the middle
joint, two, and above three, and turning again beneath four, and in the
midst five, and so discoursing until you come to the Golden number of that
year, and if it stay in the root of the thumb you shall join that which
it is of Golden number, with the ten that was put there, and joining one
number with as many more: you shall have of concurrent as much as both numbers
does amount too, and if the Golden number d^e rest in the middle joint you
shall join with the Golden number, the twenty that was put there, and all
being joined together, it will be so many of concurre^t, and if the Golden
number, do rest in the uppermost part of the thumb, join with the Golden
number, the thirty which was put there, having always remembrance, when all
the number does pass thirty, you shall leave the thirty, and that which
remains, is the concurrent.

The fifth Chapter, how by the days of the Moon, and the course where the
Sun will be, shall be known at what hour the tide will come every day.
ALL persons which do do sail, it is necessary that they know how the
tides do fall every day, and at what hour it is full Sea, or low water, for
this is convenient, as well for to enter in by any bard haven, as for other
things, which may serve in the navigations.

Therefore in this Chapter, I will declare, how the reckoning of the said
tides ought to be kept, and at what hour they come, for to profit thereby, of
the which is to be understood, that the Moon goes the thirty two winds of
the nauigatio^ in 24. hours, in the which she makes her daily moving, with
more yt she has gone of her own moving, and in this time she brings two
tides, that is to say, two floods and two ebbes, so yt the sea flows six
hours, and ebbeth other six, which are twelve, and the like is done in other
twelve, but it is to be noted, yt these flowinges and ebbinges are not equal,
nor alike in all times and places, as much as touches the time they be not
equal, because seven days the waters go rising, and we call them spring
rides, and other seven they go decreasing or ^ayling, and we call them nepe
tides: so that from the first day of the Moon unto the eight day, which is the
quarter, the waters go decreasing, and from the quarter unto ye fifteenth
which is ye full Moon, they go increasing, and from the full Moon to the
third quarter, they go decreasing, and from that to the conjunction they go
increasing: and declaring this more at large, I say that the first day of the
Moon, is the head of the water, and the second day, the increasing is as
great, and the third day well near the like, and the fourth day it
decreaseth, and so it goes every day decreasing, until the Moon be eight
days old, and then it is altogether nepe tides: and the nienth is the like,
and the tenth well near alike. The eleventh it begins to increase
something, and so it goes increasing every day unto the fifteenth which is
full Moon, which does turn to be the head of the water. And the sixeteenth
it increases the like, and the seventeen well near the like. The eighteenth
it decreaseth, and so it goes decreasing every day unto the two and twenty,
which is altogether nepe tides, and the three and twenty it is the point of
the water, and goes increasing every day unto the thirtye day which is the
conjunction. And the first day it turns to be the head of the water, and so
successuiely, it goes increasing and decreasing as it has becue^ ^eclare^.
Likewise it is to be understood, that these increasinges, are not at all tunes
equal or alike, but in some (...) they are greater and in other (...) as by
experience we see.

Likewise it is to be noted that these increasinges and decreasinge^ in all
plates are not alike, for th^rauses that I will speak of.

And for to know the how, when the tides do come, it is to be understood,
that always the Moon being in the Northeast it is full Sea, and in the
Southeast low water, and in the Southwest full Sea, and in the Northwest low
water.

And to know when the Moon is in every one of these courses, it must be
taken out by the course where the Sun is in this manner.

The first day, of the Moon, the Sun being in the Northeast and by East,
the Moon is in the Northeast, and that hour full Sea.

The second day, of the Moon, the Sun being in the Northeast is full Sea.

The third day, when the Sun is in the East and by north it will be full Sea.

The fourth day, the Sun in the East full Sea.

The fifth day, the Sun in the East, and by South, the Moon in the Northeast.

The sixte day, the Sun in the Southeast, the Moon in the Northeast.

The seventh day, the Sun in the Southeast, and by east, the Moon in the
Northeast.

The eight day, the Sun in the Southeast, the Moon in the Northeast.

The nienth day, the Sun in the Southeast and by south, the Moon in the
Northeast.

The tenth day, the Sun in the South Southeast, the Moon in the Northeast.

The eleventh day, the Sun in the South, and by east, the Moon in the
Northeast.

The twelfth day, the sun in the South, the Moon in the Northeast.

The thirteenth day, the sun in the South, and by west, the Moon in the
Northwest.

The foureteenth day, the sun in the South, Southwest, the Moon in the
Northeast.

The fifteenth day, this day we recko^ two quarters together, by reason that
the points are thirty two, and the days thirty, we give in the midst one
quarter, and in the end another, so that at the fifteenth day the Sun being
in the Southwest, the Moon wilbee in the Northeast, and this hour it will be
full Sea.

The sixeteenth day, the sun being in the Southwest and by west, the Moon
will be, in the Southwest, and that hour will be full Sea.

The seventeenth day, the sun in the West, Southwest, the Moon in the
southwest is full Sea.

The eighteenth day, the sun in the West, and by south, the Moon in the
southwest full Sea.

The nineteenth day, the sun in the West, the Moon in the South West, full
Sea.

The twentieth day, the sun in the West, and by north, the Moon in the
Southwest.

The twenty one day, the sun in the West, Northwest, the Moon in the
Southwest.

The twenty two day, the sun in the Northwest, and by west the moon in the
Southwest.

The twenty three day, the sun in the Northwest, the moon in the southwest.

The twenty sour day, the sun in the Northwest, and by north, the moon in
the Southwest.

The twenty five day, the sun in the nor northwest, the moon in the
southwest.

The twenty six day, the sun in the North and by west, the moon in the
Southwest.

The twenty seven day, the sun in the North, the moon in the southwest.

The twenty eight day, the sun in the North, and by east, the moon in the
southwest.

The twenty niene day, the sun at North Northeast, the moon at southwest,
and at that hour full Sea.

The thirty day, which is the co^iunctio^ is to be reckoned two points, which
are the Northeast and by north, and the Northeast.

The sixte Chapter, wherein is declared more at large, the aforesaid Chapter,
with a demonstration.
OF the account which before has been declared, you shall take out every day
at what hour the tide comes, the sun being in the point or course as
before is mentioned. But for ye better understanding thereof, it is to be noted,
that always at 12. of the clock in the day you have the sun at south, if
you be more toward the North the^ the sun, so that at six of the clock in
the morning you had it at East, and at nine at Southeast, and at three after
the midst of the day, you shall have it at southwest, and at six, at West,
and at nine, at Northwest, and at twelve of the night, at North.

And at three after midnight at northeast, and if the sun be more toward
the North, then at the midst of the day, you shall have him at North, and at
twelve of the night at South. And by these courses you shall take out the rest,
according to the place and time, wherein you shall find your self. Likewise it
is to be noted, as before has been declared.

The Moon being in the Northeast or Southwest, it is full Sea, and in the
Southeast and Northwest, it is low water. And to know when he is in these
courses, the course must be sought where the Sun should stand according as
the days of the moon are,

And of this is understood that although here goes written, the courses where
the Sun ought to be, because the Moon should be in the Northeast, and that
hour full Sea. Likewise it is to be understood, that the Sun being in the
contrary course of that, the Moon (...) in the Southwest, and it will be
likewise full Sea, and the (...) will be at the low water. And in this sort the
account serves, as well (...) the first tide, as for the second, the which may
be, taken out by the figure (...) lowing.



Of this figure is to be noted, that being known how many days the moon
is old, and seeking it in this account, and the Sun being come to that
course, where the like number is, or to his contrary, that hour will be full
Sea, keeping reckoning that at twelve of the clock of the day the Sun is at
South, and at twelve of the night at North: And that in three quarters of an
hour the Sun passes from one point to another.

The seventh Chapter, how by the hour wherein the conjunction was, the tide
may be known, and the allowance that ought to be given to the rivers.
IT has been declared, how it shall be known, at what hour the tides come
every day, by counting the number of days of the moon, and by that means
looking in the course where ye sun should be, as in the Chapters before
written has been declared. And besides this, it seemed good to me, to put
here a rule, and account, because not only by the days of the moon, and
courses of the sun, but by the hours, the hour being known wherein the
conjunction was, shall be known every day, at what hour of the day or the
night, the tide will come: and for this you must know the account following.

Look in what day and what hour the moon was in conjunction, and being
known, you shall find that every day the tide does come four quintos or
four five parts of an hour forward, so that if the tide come this day at
one of the clock, to morrow he will come at one and four five parts of an
hour, and the next day at two, and three five parts, and so the rest of the
days as by this account appears.

Days. Hours. Fifthes. 1 4 2 1 3 3 2 2 4 3 1 5 4 6 4 4 7 5 3 8 6 2 6 7 1 10 8
12 8 4 12 9 3 13 10 2 14 11 1 15 12 2^ 16 12 4 17 13 3 18 14 2 19 15 1 20 16 21
16 4 22 17 3 23 18 2 24 19 1 25 20 26 20 4 27 21 3 28 22 2 29 23 1 30 24

IT is to be noted that the hours here (...), being joined with the hours of
the moon which she has in the conjunction, besides those days that be more
then four and twenty, there shall be taken out once twelve, or twice if it he
needful, and t^ose which remain shall be the hour in the which the tide
(...) come. Item it is to be noted that the accountes which before has been
declared, whereby may be known, at what hour the tide will come, is as much
as to the natural course of the moon, more it is so that accidentally, it is
not in all parts, or in all coasts that the tides are equal, although they
be in one Meridia^, they come not so at one time, by reason of the great
currents, or the straightes of the Sea, great gulfes, or entrance of Land
into the Sea, or winds, or for other cause, by the which always the practice
of the Land ought to be looked unto.

Likewise, it is to be understood, that there ought to be given allowance to
the rivers, because they make not the tides according to the bar, and there
should be given them allowance, a quarter later because in the coasts, the
tides begins to ebb more speedily, and in the rivers it cannot be done, by
reason of the holding back or stay of ye waters that comes from above, and
the like is to be given at the flowing, this is common, but the allowance is
not always equal to all rivers, because some do flow and ebb more then
other some.

This is by reason that some rivers have more current then other some, and
likewise when the flowing is helped with wind, therefore the disposition of
the place is to be looked on.

The end of the seventh Book.
The eight book of the days of the year.
The first Chapter, what thing a day is, and how it is reckoned, and in how
many parts it is divided.
THis name day, is taken in 2. sorts, that is to say, a natural day, and an
artificial day. The natural day is a time of four and twentye hours, and is
called a natural day, because he is equal in all parts of the earth,
habitable, the which day diverse nations do reckon by different ways. The
Athenienses, and Egyptians do reckon it from the setting of the sun, until
the next day, at ye same hour. The Greeks, Persians, and Babilonians from the
time that it rises. The Romans do reckon it from mydnight. The Astronomers
do reckon it from the midst of one day to the midst of the next day: the
reason wherefore the Astronomers do reckon them so, is that which Ptholome
writes in the second and third of the Almagesto, and Alstragano in the
eleventh difference where they say, that the cause wherefore the Astronomers
do begin the natural day, the sun being in the Meridian, and not when he
rises, nor when he sets, is because the days in the rising of the sun,
and setting of him, are different according as every habitation is near, or
distant of the Equinoctial line, and the Meridians in all the habitations are
uniform, because all them do pass by the poles: so that the day is greater
or lesser in one habitation then the another, because as it is not equal,
which the Sun does light in the Horizontes, Obliques, so it is not equal in
all parts, when he rises, and when he sets.

In such sort, that how much the variation of the Horizon is, so much is the
variation of the days in length or shortness, and if this should he made
even for all Horizontes, it were convenient, to have for every one a Table of
equallitie of the days, where should be well near an infinite number, so
that the Astronomers to fly so great adiuersitie, began the day, in the
midst of the day, because one is sufficient for all parts, and seeing that we
have spoken of the natural day, let us speak also of the artificial day.

The artificial day is the time which the sun does show light unto us, going
above our Hemispherio, and is called the artificial day, because he is
different in diverse parts, and because ye Artificers do make their woorks in
him, the which is divided into four parts accoring to 4 differences, which the
Sun makes. In ye first he shines, in the second he heateth, in the third he
burns, in the fourth he warns, the night consequently has four parts.
The first is the first sleep, the second is mydnight, when all things hold
their peace, because it is no apt time to work any thing, the third when
the Cock croweth, ye fourth when the day does begin to appear. There is
another time called Cropusculo, and is, when it is neither day nor night: so
between day and night, as between night and day.

This Cropusculo is that bright time, which we have in the Morning, before
the Sun rises, as likewise that which we have in the Evening, after that
the Sun is set: until the darkness of the night do come.

This Cropusculo is greater or lesser, according as the day is great or
little, and so in the Summer we have a greater Cropusculo then in the Winter,
and in that part it should be greater, where the days are greater, and so
we see, that in Flaunders in the Summer, at te^ of the clock in ye night,
although it be two hours after Sun let, there is so much light, that any
letter may be read.

The second Chapter, how in the artificial day the Sun rises and sets,
differently to such as inhabit in the world.
IT has been declared, what thing a day is, and how the natural day, and
artificial day, are understood. In this I will speak how the sun coming
forth in the Horizon, and rising up by our Hemispherio, comes to the
Meridian, and from thence desce^ding, and comes to the orrident, where he
sets to us, and as this is done indifferently to such as inhabit in the
world, of the which it is to be understood, that the going forth which the
sun makes, every day by our horizon, is not equal one day with another, and
that this is true, experience does show it. And to be likewise so, the
quantity or greatness is not equal one day with another, but of this is to be
noted, that in ye degrees or distance of the equinoctial, wherein the sun
comes forth every day, in the same he sets, likewise it is to be noted,
that although the day be great or little, always a man being in one place, the
sun comes every day at the midst of the day, into one self Meridian,
without any manner of variation.

Likewise it is to be understood, that because the sun comes not forth
equally at one time to all such as inhabit in the world, nor all of them do
see him at one time, so the midst of the day is not made at one time to all.
In such sort, that how much the more any place is more easterly, then other,
by so much, such is inhabit there, do see the sun rather, and does begin to
appear rather to the^ then to such as are more westerly. And in this manner
successively, even as ye sun goes rising above the Horizon of some, so he
goes showing and appearing indifferent parts to others: so that when to us it
is the midst of the day, such as are more westerly, to some it will be xi. a
clock, to other x, and to others it. And so how much more distant he is of us
toward the west, so much the later the sun comes forth to them, and so
by the said reason, he comes later to their Meridian, I say more late to
our respect, and such which are from us more easterly, because the sun came
forth to them first, then to us, they had the day first. And in this manner,
is to be understood that at the xxiiii. hours, that the sun goes about the
world, when to some it is day, to othersome it is night, and when to some it is
ye morning, to others it is the Evening, and when he rises to some, he sets
to othersome, and when to some it is midday, to others it is midnight. This is
because as the sun moves himself round about the world, and always goes
lightning the half of the roundnes, does cause the said differences. And it is
to be noted, yt in the moving which the sun makes, he moves every house
by the roundnesse of water and earth, 262 leagues, because the vi. thousand
three hundred leagues being parted, which ye roundnesse has in the xxiiii.
hours of the natural day, it comes to every hour 262 leagues. And so by
this reckoning, looking what hour it is of the day in the place where a man
as, he shall know what hour it is in any other part, knowing the distance of
the leagues which are to that said place.

The third Chapter, how that under the Equinoctial, the days and nights are
always equal.
IT was an opinion of some ancient writers, that under the Equinoctial, and
likewise all the Torrida Zona was inhabitable, the which they believed,
because yt there the sun does send his perpendiculer beams, there should be
such excessive heat, that it was not habitable: of this opinion was Virgil,
and Ovid, and other singular men. Others there were, which healde that some
part was habitable, following Ptholome, which in the book that was compared
to the art of the Sphera, says, it is not convenient, yt we should think the
Torrida Zona to be altogether inhabitable. Other there were, which heald that
there it was not only temperate, and without too much beat, but also most
temperate. And this is affirmed by S. Isidore, in the first of the Etimologias,
where he says that the earthly Paradise is in the East part under the
Equinoctial, a most temperate place, and Ptholome likewise says in the third
of the Quadri partiti, that all the temperate complections do proceed of the
Equinoctial. The experience does now show us, that not only under the
Equinoctial, but all the Tortida which is from one Tropike to the other, is
habitable, rich, and plentiful, because well near all the year, the days
and nights are almost equal: so that the freshness of the night, does temper
the heat of the day, and so continually the earth has season to bring forth
and increase her fruits.

But it is to be noted, that touching the equality of the days and the
nights, there may be had a doubt, and say that the sun in no time does make
equality of the day with the night, but always the artificial day is
greater then the night by these reasons following.

It is certain yt a shining body being greater, lights the darkness more
the^ half, and as the sun is greater then all the earth, so that as it has
been said, that it is the opinion of Alfragano in the difference twenty two,
that ye Sun is 166. times greater then the earth, so that the Sun does
light the earth more then the half.

The lesser part remaining dark, in such sort, that the Sun is seen in a
greater part of the earth, then in that part where he is hid, and as the
presence of the Sun is cause of the day, and his absence causes the night,
it follows, that the sun never makes equality of the day, and of the
night. Likewise the aforesaid is proved, wherein a case is given, that the half
of the Equinoctial, is above the Horizon, and the other half beneath, for the
greatenesse of the Sun is the greater part where he lights, then in that
which he hides himself: it seems evident, that the part is greater that
the sun lights, then that which he leaves dark. By the which reason is
proved that the Sun makes not equality of the day with the night.

A declaration.
Contrary to that which is said are many reasons, I will speak of three in
short time. The first is, that our sight does manifest, how all days are not
equal, but some days greater, and some lesser, by the which whersoeuer is
given greater and lesser, is like wise necessary that there be given an
equality, so that as there is a day greater then the night, and a night
greater then the day, of necessity must be given day and night equal, because
it cannot pass from one extremity to another, but by the mean: To the
second, the Philosopher says in the sirt of the natural philosophy, that
the sun being come to the Equinoctial, the moving which he makes above
the earth, is equal with that which he makes under. And in like sort, the
time of the day is equal with the time of the night.

The third, aunswearing to the reasons aforesaid, I say that it is true, that
the Sunite lights more then half the eart, as the perspectiue reason shows
it, but it is to be denied, that the day in the Equinoctial is greater then
the night, not because when soever any part of the light of the Sun is seen,
the day begins, but it begins when the Ce^^er of the sun comes
forth, and not the parts circumferentials. And so likewise when he sets,
the night begins. The reason is because the Planets, and the stars do
occupy a great quantity, and their place, and moving is not to be taken, by
any manner of part, but it ought to be taken by the Center, and so it is said
that the Sun is in the Equinoctial, when his Center is there.

The fourth Chapter, how the days and the nights go always increasing or
diminishing unto such as inhabit forth of the Equinoctial.
IN the first Chapter of ye fourth book has been declared, that from the
Eqniuoctiall, to the pole articke is called ye North part, and from the
Equinoctial to the pole antarticke, is called the South part. Therefore it is
to be understood, that such as inhabit from the Equinoctial, toward the
North part, or the pole articke, as the sun comes to the tropike of
Capricorn, the thirteenth of Dece^ber, and so begins to return to the
line, how much he comes from the said tropike, so much the days go
increasing, and to such as inhabit toward the South part, they go
decreasing. And the sun being come to Aries the eleventh of Match, he
describes the Equinoctial line, and makes in all parts the days and
nights equal, and being past the first point of Aries, the days begin to
wax greater then the nights and to those of the other part, the days lesser,
and the nights greater, and the sun being come to Cancer the eleue^th of June,
the day is greater, and the night lesser, and to the other part the contrary:
for then the sun is more near to some and more distant to other some, and
from thence ye sun turns to desce^d, and as he goes away from that part,
the days go decreasing, and ye nights increasing, and being come to Libra, ye
13. of September, he returns to describe the Equinoctial, and the days and
the nights are to al equal, and from thence he goes descending to Capricorn,
and the nights begin to be greater then the days, and toward ye South part,
the days greater, and the nights lesser, and as he comes to the said
tropike, it makes a greater night, and a lesser day, and to those of the other
part, the day greater, and the night lesser, for there the Sun goes more
distant from some, and comes nearer to other some.

Whereby it is to be noted, that if there be taken two days of the year,
equally distant of ye Equinoctial line, of contrary parts, that how great
the artificial day is of the one, so great the artificial night is of ye
other. Likewise it is to be understood, that how much in every habitation,
the pole is more raised above the Horizon, so much the days and the nights
are greater, so that those whose Cenith is in the circle articke. To whom the
pole rises above the Horizo^, sixty six degrees and a half, when the sun
comes to the first point of Ca^cer, the eleventh of June is to them one day
24. hours, and the night very short, because in one moment the sun touches
that day his Horizon and immediately comes forth, and that touching they have
for night. And ye thirteenth of December, when the sun comes to the first
degree of Capricorn, then he is to then a night of 24. hours, and a little
moment for the day, for in one instant, the sun touches his horizo^, and
forthwith he hides himself, and that touching they have for a day, by the
contrary, such as inhabit under the circle antartike, have the like. And those
whose Cenith is between the circle and the pole of the world, whiles the
Sun goes toward the North part, it wilbee to him one day, that which his
Horizon does discover of the Equinoctial, continually without night, and if
that were of the quantity of one sign that day would be of one Month. And
if of two sign, it would be of two Months, and so the rest: and he that
were under any of the poles, all the year would be to him one day and one
night: In such sort, that if he were under the pole articke, the six months
which the Sun goes to the part of the North, would be to him one day
without any night, and the other six which he goes toward the part of the
South, would be one night, without day, and so contrary it would be, if he
were under the pole antarticke, so that half the year, it would be to him
one day, and the other half, one night. The cause is, by reason the roundnesse
of the world, how much it goes toward the poles, so much it goes to be
lesser, and so the Horizon of such as are nearest to the poles, do discover
more part of the turn which the Sun gives in the heaven, when he goes
from that part: In such sort, that the earth, nor the water, does not occupy
the sight of the Sun, all the time that he goes, rising up, and turns
descending, until he comes where his Horizon does not discover any thing of
the circle or turn, that the Sun makes to the world, and so how much more,
the part is which is seen of this turn, so much the day will be greater.

The fifth Chapter, how the increasing and diminishing of the day is not in all
parts alike.
MAny things are put in the common opinion of the people that reason, and
truth does show it to be in another manner. And among others, one is that many
do think yt the increasing, and decreasing of ye days through all ye year
are made equal, I will say yt the time, which those days goes increasing,
so much increases one day as another, and so when they decrease even by the
like sort.

And according to the quantity of hours which the day increases, from the
lesser day to the greater, those being parted by ye time of the 6. months,
which the day does increase, they consider how much it is that it increases
every day, giving equal number or quantity of time to one day, and so much to
another. And likewise when the day goes decreasing how much it is that it
decreaseth: in such sort, that the lesser day, having nine hours, and the
greater 15. these 6. hours which he increases, divided into 6. Months, the
days should increase one hour every Month. And so by the contrary in the
other 6. Months, it would decrease an hour every Month: (This is not so)
for in truth only in the Month of March, the days do increase as much as
they did increase in the 2. Months of Januarie and February, and by the
contrary, they do decrease so much in the only Month of September, as they
do decrease in July and August: also in the Kalenders, in the head of all the
Months is written, that the days have in every Month, so many hours, and
the night so many. Of this is to be understood, that neither the days are
equal in all the Month, nor the number of the hours are one in all places.
For in the city of Ceuill, the days are of one quantity, and in Toledo, of
another, and in Burgus another, and so proceeding to the place where the day
is of 24. hours: so that the days of every Month be not equal in hours,
nor ye days be not equal in all parts, the cause is, as the sun makes
difference from one Month to another in coming near, or going from the
Equinoctial line, so the days go increasing or diminishing this coming
near, or going away of the sun, he does it not always alike, but he does it
in this manner.

From the 12. of March, that he goes forth of the Equinoctial, he
begins to rise up, by the part of the north, from thence until the 12. of
April, he has gone from the said line, 12. degrees, and from the 12. of
April, to the 12. of May, he has gone distant other 8. degrees, and from the
12. of May, to ye 11. of June, which he comes to the Tropike, he goes
distant other three degrees and a half, which are in all 23. degrees and a
half, which the sun has of declination or distance, from the said line,
in such sort, that the first Month he goes distant, the half of the said
declination, and the second Month the third part, and the third, the sixth
part, and so in the increasing of the days. The 11. of March, the days and
nights are equal, and from thence to the 11. of April, the day increases
half of all the time that he will increase, and from the 12. of April, to
the 12. of May, he increases the third part, and from the 12 of May to the
11. of June, he increases the sixth part, whereby that in the straight course,
where the greatest day has 15: hours, the 12. of March, it has 12. and the
12. of April, 13. and a half, and the 12. of May 14. and a half, and to the
11. of June 15. And by this reason in ye straight course, where the greatest
day has 16. hours, and in him where he has 14. or more, or less: the 12.
of May, or in any other day, except in the Equinoctials, the days will not be
equal, but one will be greater then another, in such sort, that the day has
more increased to them which have 16. hours then to them which have
fourteen, so that such as have sixeteene, the twelfth of May, the day has
increased two hours, and to such as have fourteen, it has not increased
more then one, And as the day went increasing at the rising up of the sun, so
he returns diminishing or decreasing, when he descends. And so the
reckoning ought to be kept in all parts, according to the quantity of the
time and hours, which the greatest day has.

And it is to be noted, that how much the day increases of twelve hours
upward: so much he decreaseth of twelve hours downward, therefore to know
the quantity of hours, and points, that the greatest day of the year has in
every degree of distance of the Equinoctial line: In the table hereafter
written, shall be declared, the which is likewise to be understood for the part
of the South, as for the part of the North.

And it is to be known what day it is called in this reckoning from ye time
that half the body of the sun rises, until the other half be set, and all
the other is night, also the hours or parts of the day are not understood by
ye twelfth part of the day, or of the night, but by these vulgar things of the
clock, for by another name they are called Equinoctials: for in every one of
them rises fifteen degrees of ye Equinoctial, and other fifteen sets.
And likewise it is to be understood, yt in this account threescore points or
minutes do make an hour, and thirty, half an hour. And so of the rest.

A Table of the hours, and minutes which the greatest day of the year has,
to such as inhabit in any manner of distance of the Equinoctial.
Degrees. Hour. Minut. Degrees. Hour. Minut. Degrees Hours Minutes. 1 12 1 23 13 27 45
15 27 2 12 3 24 13 30 46 15 33 3 12 5 25 13 34 47 15 40 4 12 8 26 13 39 48 15
50 5 12 12 27 13 43 49 16 2 6 12 17 28 13 48 50 16 11 7 12 21 29 13 52 51 16 22
8 12 25 30 13 57 52 16 34 9 12 29 31 14 2 53 16 45 10 12 34 32 14 7 54 17 0 11
12 40 33 14 12 55 17 15 12 12 45 34 14 17 56 17 30 13 12 49 35 14 22 57 17 45
14 12 54 36 14 27 58 18 0 15 12 57 37 14 32 59 18 20 16 13 0 38 14 38 60 18 40
17 13 4 39 14 45 61 19 0 18 13 7 40 14 52 62 19 30 19 13 11 41 14 59 63 20 0 20
13 15 42 15 6 64 21 0 21 13 19 43 15 12 65 22 0 22 13 23 44 15 19 66 23 0 66m
24 0

The sixth Chapter, of the hours, points or minutes, that every day of the
year has in the altitude of forty degrees.
IN the table before written, has been declared the number of the hours and
minutes, or points that the greatest day of the year has in any manner of
distance, of the Equinoctial line, and because it is likewise profitable, to
know the hours and points, that successively, every day in the year, has in
every part. But for to make this apparent, to al persons, it were needful to
have many tables. Therefore this is only taken out for the altitude of forty
degrees, where the greatest day has fourteen hours and, and fifty two
minutes, which are well near fifteen hours. For in this altitude, is the
midst of Spain, so that with little difference or more or less, it may
serve in all Spain.

In the other parts may be taken out the reckoning, according to the
greatness of the greatest day, agreeable to the Table before written.

January. February. March. Days Hours Points Days Hours Points Days
Hours Points 1 9 22 1 10 22 1 11 34 2 9 23 2 10 24 2 11 36 3 9 24 3 10 26 3 11
39 4 9 25 4 10 29 4 11 43 5 9 26 5 10 3 5 11 44 6 9 28 6 10 34 6 11 47 7 9 30 7
10 37 7 11 50 8 9 32 8 10 40 8 11 53 9 9 34 9 10 42 9 11 56 10 9 36 10 10 44 10
11 59 11 9 38 11 10 46 11 12 2 12 9 40 12 10 48 12 12 4 13 9 42 13 10 50 13 12
8 14 9 44 14 10 53 14 12 11 15 9 46 15 10 56 15 12 14 16 9 48 16 10 59 16 12 16
17 9 50 17 11 4 17 12 18 18 9 52 18 11 7 18 12 21 19 9 54 19 11 10 19 12 24 20
9 57 20 11 12 20 12 26 21 9 0 21 11 15 21 12 29 22 10 2 22 11 18 22 12 32 23 10
4 23 11 20 23 12 35 24 10 6 24 11 23 24 12 37 25 10 8 25 11 26 25 12 39 26 10
10 26 11 28 26 12 41 27 10 12 27 11 30 27 12 43 28 10 15 28 11 32 28 12 45 29
10 46 29 12 48 30 10 18 30 12 50 31 10 20 31 12 53

April. May. June. Days Hours Points Days Hours Points Days Hours Points
1 12 56 1 14 4 1 14 47 2 12 59 2 14 6 2 14 47 3 13 2 3 14 8 3 14 48 4 13 4 4 14
10 4 14 48 5 13 6 5 14 12 5 14 49 6 13 9 6 14 14 6 14 49 7 13 12 7 14 16 7 14
49 8 13 14 8 14 18 8 14 50 9 13 16 9 14 20 9 14 50 10 13 18 10 14 22 10 14 51
11 13 20 11 14 24 11 14 52 12 13 22 12 24 26 12 14 52 13 13 24 13 14 27 13 14
52 14 13 26 14 14 28 14 14 51 15 13 28 15 14 29 15 14 50 16 13 31 16 14 30 16
14 50 17 13 34 17 14 32 17 14 49 18 13 36 18 14 33 18 14 49 19 13 39 19 14 34
19 14 48 20 13 42 20 14 36 20 14 48 21 13 44 21 14 38 21 14 47 22 13 46 22 14
39 22 14 47 23 13 48 23 14 40 23 14 46 24 13 50 24 14 41 24 14 46 25 13 52 25
14 42 25 14 45 26 13 54 26 14 43 26 14 45 27 13 56 27 14 44 27 14 44 28 13 58
28 14 45 28 14 43 29 14 29 14 45 29 14 42 30 14 2 30 14 46 30 14 41 31 14 46

Iulie. August. September. Days Hours Points Days Hours Points Days Hours
Points 1 14 40 1 13 50 1 12 38 2 14 39 2 13 48 2 12 33 3 14 38 3 13 46 3 12 29
4 14 37 4 13 44 4 12 26 5 14 36 5 13 42 5 12 23 6 14 35 6 13 39 6 12 19 7 14 34
7 13 36 7 12 17 8 14 33 8 13 34 8 12 15 9 14 31 9 13 32 9 12 11 10 14 30 10 13
30 10 12 7 11 14 28 11 13 28 11 12 4 12 14 26 12 23 26 12 12 2 13 14 25 13 13
24 13 12 0 14 14 24 14 13 22 14 11 59 15 14 22 15 13 20 15 11 57 16 14 20 16 13
18 16 11 55 17 14 18 17 13 16 17 11 52 18 14 16 18 13 14 18 11 49 19 14 14 19
13 12 19 11 46 20 14 12 20 13 9 20 11 44 21 14 10 21 13 6 21 11 41 22 14 8 22
13 4 22 11 38 23 14 6 23 13 1 23 11 36 24 14 4 24 12 59 24 11 33 25 14 2 25 12
56 25 11 30 26 14 1 26 12 53 26 11 28 27 14 0 27 12 50 27 11 25 28 13 59 28 12
48 28 11 22 29 13 58 29 12 46 29 11 20 30 13 56 30 12 43 30 11 17 31 13 54 31
12 40

October. November. December. Days Hours Points Days Hours Points Days
Hours Points 1 11 15 1 10 1 9 15 2 11 12 2 9 58 2 9 15 3 11 9 3 9 56 3 9 14 4
11 6 4 9 54 4 9 14 5 11 4 5 9 52 5 9 13 6 11 1 6 9 50 6 9 12 7 10 58 7 9 34 7 9
11 8 10 56 8 9 46 8 9 11 9 10 53 9 9 44 9 9 10 10 10 50 10 9 4^ 10 9 9 11 10 48
11 9 40 11 9 9 12 10 46 12 9 38 12 9 8 13 10 44 13 9 36 13 9 8 14 10 42 14 9 34
14 9 8 15 10 39 15 9 33 15 9 9 16 10 36 16 9 32 16 9 9 17 10 34 17 9 30 17 9 10
18 10 31 18 9 28 18 9 10 19 10 29 19 9 26 19 9 11 20 10 26 20 9 24 20 9 12 21
10 23 21 9 23 21 9 13 22 10 20 22 9 22 22 9 13 23 10 18 23 9 21 23 9 14 24 10
16 24 9 20 24 9 14 25 10 14 25 9 19 25 9 15 26 10 12 26 9 18 26 9 16 27 10 10
27 9 17 27 9 17 28 10 8 28 9 17 28 9 18 29 10 6 29 9 16 29 9 19 30 10 4 30 9 16
30 9 20 31 10 2 31 9 21

The seventh Chapter, of the hour, and point which the sun rises, and
sets in every one day of the year.
ANd seeing there has bin declared in the Chapter going before, the hours,
and minutes which every day has, it is convenient to speak in this at what
hour and minute the sun rises and sets, in every day of the year: for
the which first of all, it is to be noted, that for to take out the hour when
the sun shall rise, is to be reckoned from xii. of ye clock in the night. And
the hour when it shall set, is to be reckoned from xii. of the clock in the
day. Therefore look over the hours and points which the sun has, and
divide them in the midst, and that which one half does amount to, take it out
of twelve, and that which remains shall be the hour, wherein the sun rises,
and the same half shall be the hour wherein the sun sets, so that for
when he rises take out of xii. half of the number which the day has: And to
yt which remains, is ye point, where the sun rises and sets him self
after the midst of the day, at the point which is half of the number that
the day has.

An example.
The first day of Januarie, he has niene hours, and xxii. points, half this
is iiii. hours, and forty one points, therefore these four hours, and
forty one points, taken out of xii. hours, remains vii. hours and
nienteene points, and so the first day of Januarie, the sun comes forth at
vii. of the clock, and nienteene points after midnight, and sets at four
of the clock, and forty one points, after the midst of the day, which was
half the number that the day has.

The eight Chapter, how the sun gives his light at equal time of the year
to such as inhabit in the world.
IN the rules and accou^ts before declared, there might be a doubt saying,
seeing that in some parts of the world, The days be great, and in other parts
little, let us see if in any one part of the world the sun shines in all the
year more time then in other. To this is to be noted, that although it be
true, yt in some part of ye world, and times of the year, ye days and nights
be greater then in other some, it is to be taken, that the sun by his own
moving, that he makes in the year, at equal time of the year is seen and
gives light in all parts, so that as long time of the year he is seen in
the part where the days be little, as in the part where they be great, the
which is known in this manner, consider that which every part has in it, of
the day, and that which it has of the night in this manner, such as inhabit
under the equinoctial, as they have continually, the days equal with the
nights, every one of the^ xii. hours, it is certain that half the time of
the year they have day, and they see the sun, and he shows light to them, and
the other half they have night, that they see him not, and such as dwell in
forty and two degrees which have the greatest day of xv hours, they have
also day of niene hours, and so as the day goes increasing from xii. to xv.
hours, so they come decreasing unto niene, in such sort that the said time,
which they have of day, the same they have of night, so consequently those
which inhabit in sixty degrees which have the greatest day of xx. hours,
they have likewise day of four hours, and as the sun goes lighting of
them, and the days increasing unto twenty hours, likewise they go
decreasing until the day be no more but iiii. hours, and the night goes
increasing and diminishing the like. And of those which inhabit in sixty six
degrees and a half, have ye greatest day of twenty four hours, likewise they
have night of ye said xxiiii. hours, and such as have day of one month
without night, have likewise a month of night without day, and such as should
have six months of day without night, should have other six months of
night without day, and so the time being considered which every part has of
day, and being seen, that as much justly it has of night: So shall be found
that not only in the torrida zona, by the which the sun continually moves,
but likewise in the other parts very distant and far off, and also under the
poles them selves, so long time of the year it is that the sun is seen, as
the time that he is not seen, in such sort, that the sun gives his light in
equal time in all parts, and not in one more then in another. So the
omanipotent God, maker of the heavens, of the earth, and of all that is in
them, did dispose and ordeine, whose name be blessed, in the worlden worlds.
Amen.

The end of this book of Navigations.
God save the Queen.
Imprinted in London at the three Cranes in the vinetree, by Thomas Dawson, and
are there to be sold. 1581.


