Misericors, IKPOKOSOS, OR, Medeleyes Offices, Containing an iniunction to all
duties of Mercy belonging to the whole Man.

Miser esto in cord mecum. ROMANS 12.16. Rejoice with them that rejoice, weep
with them that weep, and be of like affection one toward another.

Consider these matters, consult, and give sentence.

Printed at London by I. B. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD Lord Wotton, Baron of Marleigh, L. Lieuetenant
of the County of Kent, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel,
my singular good Lord; and to his most worthy associate my very good Lady and
Mistress: health, wealth, and everlasting happiness.
RIght Honorable, there was a custom among the Jews, that such dettors whose
debts amounted their abilities to satisfy, were to be sold themselves, their
wives and children to become slaves to content their Creditors. So calling to
mind how far I stand engaged to your Honor, not only for your great and
daily bounty, whereof I have continually tasted from time to time; but also in
that you have willingly furthered me by your other many and sundry favors,
when occasion required: the consideration of which forces me to confess that
I also should incur the penalty above said; having no other means to
cancel the obligation, wherein I rest bound to your Lordship; and now in your
Honors absence, (aye me) I find no other like minded toward me. Wherefore as
one Sophocles, a poor scholar of Socrates did; so I having nothing else, do
dedicate not only my self, but whatsoever is of mine, wholly to your Lordships
service: continually praying, that the Lord would multiply his many and sundry
blessings and graces upon you, and yours in this life; and that he would
hereafter crown you with glory, and eternal happiness for ever, with his
Saints and Angels.

Your Lordships most continually bounden, T. M.

To the Christian READER.
I Am not Ignorant (gentle reader) according to the saying of the Poet,
Scribimus indoct^ doctique poemata passim, That godly and learned treatises of
all sorts abound; and this consideration might well have stayed my pen from
paper. Know therefore that not vain glory, but a sensible fellow feeling of
the wrongs and iniurses offered to my brethren (by reason of a certain imbred
self-love reigning for the most part in the heart of the oppressor) has
stirred up in me a settled resolution, to cast in my widows mite
(notwithstanding the many rich gifts, and worthy works of the more learned)
into the Lords treasury Wherein my only scope and drift is to show forth my
forward and willing disposition in laboring to repair the ruins and decaies
of love and piety, which this age has almost thrown flat on the ground: if
Narcissus like^^ dote not to much upon mine own shadow. Many thinks it
sufficient, if they can talk and dispute of faith, if they be able to reason
and discourse in eloquent words of religion: when they have small regard to
turn their talking into walking, their words into works, and their
profession into practice.

For whereas we should manifest our faith and love of God, in our love,
charity, and kindness toward our neighbor, many notwithstanding are now
become so degenerate, and such Non proficients in the School of true Christian
integrity, that in their actions they are malicious, envying, cruel,
deceitful, contentious, malecontent, scandalous, haters of God, injurious,
without natural affection, and merciless. But we have not so learned Christ,
neither can it be (what show soever they make) that the love of God should rest
in that heart, where fraudulent, hateful, malicious, and envying Foxes have
made their dens. For if a man say he loves God, and hates his brother, he
is a liar: for how can he that loves not his brother whom he has seen,
love God whom he has not seen? as says the Apostle John. And he that would
know how to love his neighbor aright, must first entertain the love of God in
his heart; and the love of God is retained by practicing the love of our
neighbor. For even as the heat of the natural body warmeth the clothes that
are put upon it, which clothes afterward nourish and conserve the natural
heat: so the fire of the love of God, which springs of faith, kindles the
heart with the love of thy neighbor, and the love of our neighbor cherishes
the love of God in our hearts. Wherefore if these endeauours of mine shall effect
any good, it is the thing that I desire; and let God have the praise: if not,
yet I have discharged my conscience. Therefore I humbly beseech thee into whose
hands these writings shall come, thoroughly to read them at thy leisure, and to
mark them well; begin not only, but make an end: for happily the best wine is
reserved till the last. And the God of patience and consolation, make us
followers of God as dear children, and grant that we be like minded one
toward another, after the example of Christ Jesus.

Thine in Christ, Thomas Medeley.

MISERICORS, Or Motives to mercy.
The Preface.
AS the young man in the Gospel, that was desirous to obtain everlasting life,
yet being enjoined by our blessed Saniour, to sell what he had and give to the
poor, departed sorrowful that Heaven should be held at so high a rate. Mat.
19.21. So (beloved) are there many in these our days, that very willingly
would be registered among the number of the saithfull, righteous, and merciful
men, whose charitable deuotio^s can abide no beggars. For who amongst us is
there almost, that does any good, or what man is he amongst a thousand, who
having a fellow feeling of the miseries of his brethren, remembers the
afflictions of Joseph. Yet our Savior Christ exhorts all those that will be
his Disciples to the practice of mercy, after the example of our heavenly
Father. Luke 6.36.
Ye shall therefore be merciful, as your Father which is in Heaven, is
merciful

There are two principal points to be considered in this text: First, a
precept, Ye shall therefore be merciful, Secondly, the president; As your
heavenly Father is merciful, of these in order.

Merciful men may be taken two ways, Passiuely, and Actiuely: Passiuely, for
such as God has received to mercy, Tim. 1.13.
as he did the Apostle Paul; because he sinned ignorantly, through unbelief:
and in this respect, Romans 9.23.
they are termed Vessels of mercy, prepared to glory; of this number are only
those which repent and amend. Pro. 28.13
As Solomon says, He that hides his sins shall not prosper, but he that
confesses, and forsakes them, shall have mercy.

But in this place it is meant Actiuely namely, for such as show mercy unto
others: Now that we may the better know our duties in this point, let us more
especially consider what the works of mercy are. Thomas Aquinas very learnedly
sets them forth, to be in number, 13.6. belonging to the soul, and 7. to
the body, comprehended in two verses.

Consule, Castiga, Solare, Remitte for Ora;

Vifito, Poto, Cibo, Redimo, Tego, Coligo, Condo.

Instruct the Ignorant, Correct the sinful, Comfort the sorrowful, Forgive
the offenders, Bear with the weak, and Pray for all men. These are works of
mercy to the soul, Visit the sick, Give drink to the thirsty, bread to the
hungry, help the opressed, cloth the naked, Lodge the harbourles, and bury
the dead: These to the body, of them particularly, more at large.

Consule.
The first work of mercy to the soul, is to instruct the Ignorant, this duty
is both Ecclesiastical, and Domisticall; Ecclesiastical discipline, chiefly
concerns those whom God has placed over us in the Church, as Bishops,
Ministers, etc. Domestical discipline belongs to Fathers, and Masters of
families. That part of instruction which appertains to the Ministers and
Pastors of the Church, is twofold, Catechumenicall, and Prophetical.

Catechumonicall document, Heb. 6.1.
Is the Doctrines of the beginning of Christ, whereby Gods children are led
forwards to wards perfection, which we usually call catechizing. Prophetical
instruction, is the exposition of the holy Scriptures, with Doctrines, and
applications drawn from thence, for our further growth in Christ Jesus,
Domestical or Paternall discipline is commanded of God. De. 11.19.
You shall teach them your children, speaeking of them, when thou sit in
thy house, and when thou walk in the way, and when thou lie down, and
when thou risest up. Saint Paul likewise wills the Ephesians to bring up
their children instructed in the fear of the Lord; Ephesians. 6.4.
this duty is to be performed three manner of ways, by example, by precepts of
discipline, and by correction.

By example, our Lord and Saulour Jesus Christ taught us when he said, Mat.
7.5.
First cast out the beam, that is in thine own eye, and then shall thou see
more clearly, the more that is in thy brothers eye: And the Apostle Paul
wills the Colossians To walk wisely, Col. 4.5.
toward them, that are without. For youth is generally more corrupted by the
ill exampels of Parents, Masters, Magistrates, or Ministers, then for the most
part any good example, exhortation, or Instruction from others, can well amend
them, they being naturally proane to follow the worst presidents: and herein
may they justly be termed Rehoboams scholars; who whereas he might have
learned much wisdom out of his Father Salomons sentences, and actions, yet
could he gather nothing worthy of imitation from them, 2 Chr. 10.12.
but Where as his Father taxed his subjects over grievously, he would therein
go beyond him.

So are there many Rehoboams amongst us, in these our days, who can find
nothing worthy their imitation out of the good examples, virtuous precepts, and
divine exhortations of their Parents, Masters and Magistrates, or Ministers,
but if they have any vice, blemish, imperfection, or corruption therein they
will be sure to follow, and exceed their President. For such is the corruption
of the time^ and age wherein we live, that in any good thing we come short of
our president, but in evil things we exceed our pattern; yet ought we not
so to do, but rather in all examples, to behave our selves according to the
counsel of the Apostle Paul. Tit. 2.8.
That he which withstandeth, may be ashamed, having nothing concerning us, to
speak evil of.

Secondly, youth are also to be instructed in precepts of discipline, which
Salamon avouches, saying, Pro. 22.6.
Teach a child in the trade of his way, and when he is old, he shall not
depart from it: In their prime and tender age, they ought (as Samuels) to be
dedicated to the Lord, to sound forth the most glorious name of the most high,
and then as the Poet says: Quo semel est imbuta recens, seruabit odorem, testa
diu, they being at the first well instructed, will continue the better.

But herein many are greatly to be reproved, that whereas they ought especially
to have a care, that their Children should (as soon as they can speak with
the least use of understanding) be seasoned with the liquor of grace, and good
nurture. They with the Scribes and Pharisees teach traditions, Mark 7.13
which they themselves have ordained, and make the Word of God of none
authority. They will teach them to lie, to swear, to speak filthy speeches,
and to sing songs of ribaldry, but the duties of obedience, the practice of
piety, the Catechumenicall Documents of faith, and fundamental points of
salvation, they account not worthy the learning, as unfit for their tender
years and capacity; yet this affection was not in Abraham, of whom the Lord
says, I know that he will command his sons, Genesis 18.19
and his household after him, to do righteousness and judgment, and to keep
the way of the Lord, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham all that he has
spoken unto him. Joshua was also resolved, Ios. 24.1^.
that whatsoever others did, yet he, and his household would serve the Lord.
And surely in this case, it behooves great men especially to be good men, as
being unprinted statutes, and speaking laws unto the rest. Let us therefore be
merciful, as our heavenly Father is merciful. And thus much touching the
first duty of mercy to the soul.

Castiga.
THE second work of mercy to the soul, consists in correcting the sinful:
This duty is Ecclesiastical, Domestical, and Judicial. Ecclesiastical
correction is, when the Bishops and Ministres of the Church, according to their
several functions, rebuke, or correct vice in any of the flock of Christ
committed to their charge. For says Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
the whole Scripture is given by inspiration from God, and is profitable to
teach, to convince, to instruct, and correct in rightcousnesse, that the man of
God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works. So likewise Saul
deserved commendations, 1 Samuel 15.24
because he humbled himself at the rebuke of the Prophet Samuel. David
suffered gently reproof of the Prophet Nathan; 2 Samuel 12.7.
neither did Ahab disdain to hear his faults told him from the mouth of
Eliah. 1 Kings 21.20.
And thus we see how patiently in times past, even the greatest would hear of
their faults; albeit in these days such wickedness now reigns, that scarce
the meanest will put up check, or control, being like them of whom the
Prophet Hosea speaks; Hose. 4.4.
that they reprove the Priests, telling them that they have nothing to do with
them, they shall not answer for their faults, they know what they have to do
as well as any he, whosoever shall reprove them. These, or the like words,
will every rude ruffin return to us, whenever he shall be taxed for any
misdemeanor: Yet says Almighty God, Leuit. 19.17.
Thoushalt not hate thy brother in thy heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke
thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin. As if he should have said; He
that suffers his friend to go on in his wickedness, unreproved, shows
therein rather hatred, then any true love unto him. Very well therefore says
Seneca; Qui non vetat peccare, cum possit, Iubet. He that suffers sin
uncontrolled, does as it were command it.

But rightly to reprehend, is one of the greatest difficulties incident to
humane discretion.

And yet it is easier known then done, partly by reason of the way wardnesse of
the delinquents disposition, that may not suffer reproof, partly by reason of
the diverse affections of the reprouers themselves, whom either ignorance
disables, favor withdrawes, fear deterres, or fury transports beyond the
bounds of reason.

First, such (I say) is the waywardnes of man's crooked nature, that (for the
most part) they may not hear of their offenses, according to the example of
Herod, who heard John Baptist willingly, Mar. 6.20.
and did many things after him, but when he told him that it was not lawful
for him to take Herodias h^ brother Philips wife, he laid hold on him, and
cast him in prison.

Jeroboam also stretched out his hand from the Altar, 1 Kin. 13.4 and 22.27.
saying, lay hold on him, so soon as he was reproved; and Michaiah must be
fed with bread and water of affliction till Ahab return in peace.

We can enery one of us cry out against the sins of the time and age wherein
we live, saying; Hos 4.1.
There is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land. But what man
is he among a thousand, that in the true humiliation of his own soul, will
stand out with David, and say; Behold, I have sinned, yea, I have done
wickedly, 2 Samuel 14.17.
(...) these sheep what have they done? For albeit in general we all confess
our selves to be sinners, yet so great is the self-love that every man by
nature carries in his own bosom, that when it comes to the particulars, he
coueteth to lay the burden upon another man's shoulders, and not to say with
Judah, that he, or she, Genesis 38.16.
is more righteous then I.

A first part of Ecclesiastical Corrigidors there are, whom ignorance
disables, these poast upon Gods message, before they have learned their errand,
being more greedy of the gain, then gainefull in the grace of their calling,
having not as yet received any warning from the mouth of the Lord to give to
his people; and therefore no way fit to execute the charge whereinto they have
thrust themselves.

There are a second sort, whom either favor withdrawes, or fear deterres from
reproving sin. 1 John 1.15.
Such, who loving the world, love net the Father; that is to say, when Michael
your Minister, or Peter Please-man his Curate, will not tell Ahab of his
cruelty, Nabal of his churlishness, Iezebel of her painting, Gehazi of
bribery, etc: lest they thereat offended, should withdraw their affection from
him, and pleasure another. And thus whilst he prefers gold before God,
honor before honesty, and money more then the good of any: he is ready even
with the false Prophets, 1 Kin. 22.15.
to bid Ahab go up and prosper. In stead of correcting vices, he is ready to
flatter and sooth men up in their conceited virtues, covering a rusty blade
with a velvet scabbard, and crying peace, peace, when war is approaching;
whereas Almighty God commands, Esai. 58.1.
Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, tell ludah his
sins, and Israel their transgressions.

Shall God bid cry aloud, and shall we be silent?

A third sort of corrigidors there are, whom sury transports beyond the bounds
of reason those men can wink (...) all things, till they themselves be first
offended, and then passing the bounds of charity, they lay all things open,
yea, peradventure more then all, stuffing their Pulpits with inuectiues, and
declamations, so far are they transported with the fury of their affections.
And yet for all this, sin must be checked, error must be restrained, and
vices must be spoken against, lest under pretense of supposed defects, in our
selves, or respects to others they gather head, and like the unruly Sea, break
down the banks, and ouerwhelme the Land with Atheism, and superstitious
impiety. Thus much touching Ecclesiastical correction.

Domestical correction is twofold, reproof, and punishment; this duty is to
be performed by Parents, toward their children, and by Masters toward their
servants Solomon is very copious in this matter, Pro 23.13.
Withhold not correction from thy child, thoushalt smite him with the rod; and
shall deliver his soul from hell. Correct thy son, and he will give thee
rest, Pro. 29.17
and he will give pleasures to thy soul. Again, Pro. 13.24
He that spares the rod, hates his son: but he that loves him, corrects
him betimes. All which testimonies tendes to this, that if we desire our own
peace, and not to be molested, nor vexed, but much comforted by them, if we
would testify our faithful love to them, if we would purge their hearts from
folly and sin, and preserve their souls from everlasting perdition, then let
us be careful to give them due correction, which is Gods blessed ordinance,
to reform and save their souls.

Let all cockering Parents harken what the Lord says to the Prophet Samuel
touching Eli for not correcting his children: 1 Samuel 3.12, 13.
In that day will I raise up against Ely all things that. I have spoken
concerning his house, when I begin, I will also make an end: and I have told
him that I will judge his house for ever, for the iniquity which he knows,
because his sons ran on in a slander, and he stayed them not. So that you
may see, how that the irrespectiue conniuency of Parents upon their Childrens
faults, brings often times Gods judgments upon the whole family, and not
without great cause.

Nam tenera est dum virga, recensque flectitur, huc, illuc vt vis; at post vbi
creuit, non, rob usta arbos: while the twig is tender and green, it is bent
hither and thither as you will; but after it is grown, you cannot, it will be
a strong tree. And as Gods judgment fell upon Ely and his Family for this
sin: 1 Samuel 4.17, 18.
for Hophni and Phinehas died in the battle, and Ely at the news thereof fell
from his seat backward, and brake his neck: so in these days many adjudged to
execution for murder, Felony, or the like, have cried out upon their tender
hearted Parents for bearing with them too much in their childhood.

But whilst I insist upon this point, I beseech you mistake me not; for my
meaning is, that we should have an eye to the counsel of our Savior in this
Text: so to show mercy to others as we would expect the mercy of God toward
our selves.

Si quoties peccant homines, sua fulmina mittat

Jupiter: exiguo tempore inermis erit.

For if that Jove should strike

So often as Men offend, The Poets say his Thunderbolts Would soon be at an end.

Thus much touching domestical correction.

Judicial correction is to be performed by Magistrates toward the Subjects:
therefore thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying, Execute true judgment,
Zach. 7.9.10.
and show mercy and compassion every man to his brother; and oppress not the
widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor, and let none of you
imagine evil against his brother in his heart. Saint Paul also says; Romans 13.4
The Magistrate also bears not the Sword in vain: for he is the Minister of
God, to take vengeance on him that does evil. That Magistrate therefore that
will be said rightly to bear the sword, must vnsheath it so against sin, and
sinners, that piety and good men may flourish the better, and and prosper. And
herein the pious care of good Iehoshaphat, is to be highly extolled: 2 Chro.
19.5.6.
For he set Judges in the Land of Judah throughout all the strong Cities
thereof, City by Ci^ty: And said unto them, take heed what ye do, for you
execute not the judgment of man, but of the Lord, and he will be with you in
the cause, and judgment.

Magistrates in these times, are culpable in two points: first, that they do
not consider they execute the Lords judgments, or if they did, how then could
your cursed swearer, your prophaner of Gods Sabbaths, and beastly drunkards go
so unpunished, as for the most part they do; yet herein they show themselus
like the Scribes and Pharisees, Mark. 7.13
Who preferred their own traditions, before Gods laws.

Secondly, your inferior Magistrates are greatly to be blamed, in that they
being either too mild, or else too too negligent, in punishing small offenses
and petty fellonies, in their several jurisdictions, do often cause the
offender to a greater Judgment: so that whereas in pardoning small faults,
they would be esteemed most merciful, it often times falls out far
otherwise. You are therefore so to temper you judgments, that in them you may
remember mercy. To that end says the Prophet David, Psa. 88.10.
Mercy and truth shall mcete together, righteousness and peace, shall kiss
one another. And as it was in Queen Elizabeth's Poesy.

Sit piger adpaenas princeps, adpraemia velox.

Cuique dolet: quoties cogitur esse ferox.

I see and hold my peace,
A Princely Poesy right;
For every fault should not provoke,
A Prince or man of might.
Then happy we that have,
A King so well inclined;
That when as Justice draws his sword,
Has mercy in his mind.
Solare.
THe third work of mercy appertaining to the soul, consists in comforting
the sorrowful. This duty is Ecclesiastical, and General; Ecclesiastical
consolation, chiefly consists in pronouncing the glad tidings of the Gospel,
to those whose consciences by the law, are thoroughly wounded, for their sins.

And surely they that thus sow in tears, Psa 126.5
shall reap in joy. For godly forrow causes repentance, 2 Cor. 7.10
not to be repented of And as this duty is to be enjoined to all Ministers at
all times, so more especially, are they to labor to bring al those, on whom
God has laid his heavy rod of sickness.

First, to a true sight and feeling of their sins, which is by the rule of Gods
law; Secondly, to a fear of Gods anger for, them that they may lament them,
and earnestly repenting, call to God for mercy: Thirdly, let us bring them to
the true Samaritan, our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, Who when the Priest and
Leuite left us wounded; Luke 10.33 24.
that is to say, the Ceremonial and Judicial Law passed by us; He bound up
our wounds, and paid for our curing, that we might be recovered to everlasting
happiness. Fourthly, we are so to arm them against the concupisence of the
flesh, 1 Ioh. 2.16
the lust of the eyes, and pride of life, with the comfort of the Spirit, the
society of Angels, and crowns of eternal glory; that they thus prepared to
pass the waves of their trouble some sickness, might safely ariue at the port
of their eternal blessedness.

General consolation is to be performed amongst all Christians mutually one
toward another, which thing Saint Paul teaches, saying: 1 These. 5 14.
Comfort the feeble minded. In the performance of this duty, let us especially
have an eye to the cause of the party grieved; for none can truly comfort an
other, who has not a fellow feeling, of the misery, of his brother. Saint
Paul therefore wills us, To. 12.16.
to Rejoice with them that rejoice, and to weep with them that weep, and to
be of like affection one toward another. All sorrow is for the most part
drawn from one of these four heads: Grief of conscience, Fear of death,
Loss of friends, And loss of wealth.

Grief of conscience arises from the knowledge of some heinous sin
committed, for which the offender fears Gods anger and judgment, toward him.

And surely until (like wandering sheep, that have gone astray) we acknowledge
our selves, as lost and wounded, through our daily tra^sgressions, we have no
hope in the true Lamb of God, to be purged from them; I say, he that
sometimes lamenteth not the absence of Gods graces from him, shall never find
assured peace to his conscience, by the presence of Gods holy Spirit. And this
does our blessed Savior himself testify, whereas he says: Mat 11.28
Come unto me, all ye that are weary, and heavy laden, and I will ease you: As
if he should say, all you that seek ease in me, must first be weary with the
burden of your sins, as desirous to leave them; then you must also come
laden with tears of hearty contrition, before you can find rest unto your
souls, whereupon follows that comfort of Almighty God, denounced by the
Prophet Ezekiell; Exc. 18.21.
At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins, from the bottom
of his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance.

But many Libertines abuse this place of Scripture, thinking that they may
repent, when they list; albeit the Lord says, At what time soever, Exec. 18.21.
yet have thou no warrant from thence, to think that thou shall have free
power to repent whenever thou will. Poenitentia sera rarovera. Late
Repentance, is seldom true repentance; we read of one that repented at the
last hour, because no man should despair, and but of one, lest any man should
presume: we see many thousands of those who have deferred their repentance,
have been taken away in their sins, and died impenitent. Luke 18.13
Put not off therefore from day to day, but turue to the Lord your God, because
he is merciful, and gracious, and such a one, as is sorry for your affictions.
Say not with your selves as Came and Judas, that your sins cannot be
pardoned. For says S. Austine Mentiris Caine, mayor est dei Miserecordia, quam
omnis humana miseria. Thou speak est false Caine, men cannot be so sinful, as
God is merciful, if with penitent hearts they could call upon him. A proof of
this may be seen in the poor Publican, Who stands a far off, and would
not come near, nor yet lift up his eyes to heaven, Eccles. 9
but smote his breast saying: God be merciful to me a sinner. He would not
come near unto God, therefore God in mercy comes near unto him: for the
text says, He went away rather Justified. Oh happy therefore, and thrice
blessed are they, who groaning under the burden of their sins, seek quietues
of mind in Christ alone. Thus much touching grief of Conscience.

The next special duty of consolation is to be performed toward those, who
stand in fear of death, wherein you are to require the aid of your Minister,
and with him, to join in prayer to our heavenly Father, for the sick Patient,
that if it so stand with his great goodness, he may restored to his former
health; if not, yet to forgive him his sins, and so to arm him with
patience, that he may the better be prepared to enter into glory: And of this,
sufficient has been spoken, in the place of Ecclesiastical consolation.

In the third place, we are to speak of the comforting of those, who suffer
immoderate grief for the death of their friends, as wives do for the deaths
of their husbands, children for their Parents, and one friend for the loss of
another.

To whom I say, that although it be commendable, to power forth tears over
the dead, for so did Jacob for Joseph, supposing him to be dead. Ge. 37.35.
Surely, I will go down into the grave, to my Son mourning. And likewise
great was the lamentation, that David made when news was brought him, of the
death of Absolon. Oh Absolon my Son, 2 Samuel 18.35.
my Son Absolon, would God I haddied for thee: Oh Absolon my Son, my Son
Nay, Christ himself (says Saint Jerome) went not to his Sepulcher without
weeping eyes, yet says the Apostle Paul, 1 These. 4.13.
I would not have you ignorant, concerning them which are asleep, that ye
sorrow not, even as others that have no hope. And therefore says Saint
Barnard, Non culpamus affectum, sed excessum. We blame not the affection, but
the want of moderation. He that said, Eccle. 38.17.
my Son power forth thy tears, over the dead; said also, comfort thy self.
Amongst other mean comforts (says Tertulllian) Resurrectio mortuorum, fiducia
Christianorum; Christians, who believe a Resurrection to a better life, should
raise up themselves by faith from such too doleful passions; for as in all
other things, so in this, a moderation should be had. Have thou lost a good
Father, Friend, Husband, Wife, or Child, say with the holy man Job, Job. 1.21.
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the
Lord. They are not clean taken from us, but gone a little before on the way,
wherein we must al follow; we shall all one day meet again by the grace of
God; at what time there will be no mean joy, when friends shall for ever live,
rejoice, and sing, an Halleluiah, to our heavenly King. And surely says the
prophet Esaias, Esa. 57, 1.
They are taken away from the evil to come. And our Savior Christ Jesus a
little before his passion, seeing his Disciples sorrowful for his departure,
which was so shortly to ensue; said unto them, Ioh. 14.29.
If you loved me, you would rejoice because I said I go to my Father. So if
we loved our friends, we cannot but rejoice, because they are gone to Christ
Jesus, their Redeemer. For they are taken from misery to happiness, from
vanity, to glory, and from fading pleasures, to everlasting joys.

Let us therefore rather praise God for their so happy deliverance, then any
way seem discontented thereat. Thus much touching the death of our Friends. In
the last place we are to comfort such as have sustained loss of worldly
wealth; which hapeneth either by casualty of fire, inundations of water,
shipwreck, Pirates, or thieves: To al which kind of worldly losses, these five
principles following, are to be propounded.

First consider what our blessed Savior taught us, when he willed us to pray,
That Gods will might be done in us: what reason then has any man, to withstand
the performance of that, for which he daily prays. And our Savior praying,
a little before his passion, said, Mat. 26.39
Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. Oh excellent Pattern for
obedient children, patiently to content themselves with what cross soever it
shall please our heavenly Father to lay upon them.

Secondly, Psalm. 24.1.
consider the Earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the round world, and
they that dwell therein. If then all the riches of this world, belong to the
Lord, who in mercy has but lent them us and made us to be Stewards over them.
Luke 16.1.
As by the Parable of the unjust Steward, may appear: Saint Paul also
avouches it, when he says, We brought nothing into this World, 1 Timothy 6.7.
and it is certe^^, we can carry nothing out: Why then should men be too much
dejected, seeing the Lord has but taken his own, we count him a very
unthankful debtor, that is not as willing to pay, as to borrow. Man is the
debtor, God is the lender, let us not herein deal with our heavenly Father,
more unjustly then we would have our Brother deal with us. Let us say with the
holy man Job, Job. 1.21.
The Lord, gives, the Lord takes away; blessed be the name of the Lord. When
I had them, I was not the better, I trusted not to them, they therefore being
gone, do nothing dismay me.

Thirdly, consider the Lord has done this for the trial of our Faith,
Patience, and perseverance, as he dealt with his servant Job who said, Job.
13.15.
Though he slay me, yet I will trust in his mercy,

For when the Lord shall perceive that our confidence is not built upon fading
joys and transitory pleasures, but firmly cast upon him, he then will draw
near unto us, and unto all that truly fear him, and trust in his mercy, as he
did to his servant Job, To whom God gave twice so much riches, as he had taken
from him.

Fourthly, call to mind the providence of God, toward all Creatures.

Behold (says our Savior) the fowls of heaven, Mat. 6.26.
for they sow not, neither reap, nor carry into barnes, yet your heavenly
Father feeds them are you not much better then they? The Philosopher Bias
cast his goods into the Sea, and being demanded why, he answered, Omnia mea
mecum porto, My goods and I, are never parted. It were to be wished in like
manner, that Christians would cast away the leaven of too too worldly
carfulness, into the sea of eternal forgetfulness to that end especially,
that Christ, and they might never be parted.

The fifth and last principle, and not the least, which we are to perform to
our poor brethren in this behalf, is, to yield them our charitable relief;
for says Saint John, Who soever has the worlds goods, 1 Ioh. 3.17.
and sees his brother have need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him: or how can he be said to love God whom he
sees not, when he loves not his brother whom he daily sees? Let us therefore
be merciful, as our heavenly father is merciful. Thus far of the third work
of mercy to the soul expressed in comforting the sorrowful mentioned in this
word Solare.

Remitte.
THe fourth work of mercy toward the soul, consists in pardoning and
forgiving, offenders. This duty, and the rest that follow, are all general;
every man must forgive all men, as our Savior Christ Jesus plainly showed
when he taught his Disciples to pray, Luke 11.4.
Forgive us our sins, for even we forgive every man that is indebted to us,
as if he should say, expect no forgiveness at the hand of Almighty God,
unless ye likewise freely from the bottom of your hearts forgive one another:
yet now a days, among your swaggering and roaring gallants, there is but a
word and a wound, and among your civil and lawless Lawyers, but a word and a
writ, Ephesians. 4.32.
Nevertheless S. Paul wills us to be Courteous one toward an other, and
tender hearted, freely forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake,
freely forgave us. Wherein the Apostle meets with an objection that might be
made I am as gentle, quiet, affable courteous, and patient, as any man can be,
so long as you do not wrong me, iniure, disgrace me, or take away my good
name; but indeed if you abuse me, or cross me of my will in any thing. Oh
then you must pardon me, I am somewhat passionate, I may not endure, or put up
such abuses, at any hand: No, may you not endure them? What then may you
endure? Surely no more then a bear, a dog, a horse, or a hog may. But it is
the property of all those that will be the Disciples of our Lord and Savior
Christ Jesus, to forgive, and forget with meekness, all injuries and wrongs;
they will not only be kind to the kind, and show courtesy for courtesy, for
this the veriest reprobate, and deepest dissembler in the world may do, but
they will overcome evil with goodness, they will show mercy to the merciless,
by putting up many wrongs and offenses. And as they look for pardon from God,
for far greater offenses; so will they not stick easily to give pardon for
these lesser offenses. An excellent example may be seen herein in Joseph,
whose brethren after the decease of Jacob their father, fearing his
displeasure, and submitting them selves to him, he said, Genesis 50.19.
Fear not, for I also am under God. As if he should say, If I should be so
hasty in revenging my self upon the wrongs, which you have offered me, may
not God pay the same fourefold into mine own bosom? Plainly teaching every
true Christian, so to behave himself toward offenders here in this life; as
they would have God to reward them hereafter.

If then you would have forgiveness at the hand of Almighty God, freely from
your hearts, forgive you your brethren, remembering that you your selves are
likewise under the same condemnation.

Now to forgive, it is not enough to moderate the tongue, which is loves broker
and interpreter, in not judging evil of our neighbor; but also the simpathy
and affection, of the heart is required (which is the treasure of love) in
forgiving, to which Christ himself annexeth a most comfortable promise; and it
shall be for given you, because we approve and show our selves thereby, to be
the true children of God. Great is the equity of this precept, that we should
forgive one another because we are brethren; But unspeakable is the mercy of
God in promising us forgiveness. In forgiving our brother, we do no more then
equity it self requires. Tu quidem eum habes inimicum, quiteeum creatus est
(says S. Augustine). Deus vero eum quem creauit; thou have him to thine
enemy, which was created with thee, but God has him to his enemy, whom he
created: thou forgiuest, when thou thy self need forgiveness; for who is
he, that sins not; but God who wants nothing, and cannot sin, forgiueth
thee.

And that every good Christian should do this, it is not only meet, but for
many reasons necessary.

The first is the commandment of God, which should be the rule and direction,
for every Christian man's life. Mat. 5.45.
But I say unto you, love your enemies, says Christ.

If thy friend should have a servant that should greatly abuse and offend thee,
and thou in thine anger should rise up to strike him, yet remembering that he
is the servant of thy dear friend thou would bridle thy wrath, and forbear
for thy friends sake, to strike him, least thou should offend, or loose thy
good friend.

This mildness and modesty God requires at thine hands, that for his sake,
thou should forgive and spare thine enemy, his servant, his creature, least
thou loose his favor, and friendship.

Sometimes we see a brother to spare a brother; lest they should displease their
earthly father, Esau a reprobate and malicious man who bare a deadly hatred to
his brother Jacob could say, Genesis 27.
The days of mourning for my father will come shortly, then will I stay my
brother Jacob. He would not lay hands upon his brother, while his father lest
he should grieve and offend him; and should not we much more refrain from
hurting and seeking revenge upon our enemy, for the love and reverence we owe
to our heavenly father, to whom we are so many ways indebted, especially
Christ saying unto us, So shall my heavenly father do unto you, Mat. 18.
that is, deliver you to the laylors, until you pay all that is due? Except
ye forgive from your hearts, each one to his brother their trespasses. Ad tam
magnum tonitru, quinon expergiscitur, non dormit, sed mortuus est; He that is
not awaked at this so great thunder, is not a sleep, but is a dead man, says
S. Augustine.

If this can little move thy flinty heart, yet let these examples of heathen
men prevail something with thee, of whom to be excelled and to come be-bind
them in the practice of virtues, is not only a shame unto Christians, but shall
also condemn them at the day of Judgment.

Phillip king of Macedon, being counseled to punish one Archadius, which
continually railed upon him when he met; him, spoke kindly unto him, and sent
gifts unto him, and afterward willed his friends to enquire what he said of
him among the Greeks: And when they answered, he was become a great prayser
of the King; I am then (said he) a better Physician then any of you are.

Hippocinus a noble man, conceiving deep displeasure against Alcibiades, by
reason of some injury done unto his son. The next day early in the morning,
Alcibiades came unto his house, and being no sooner within his door, cast off
his garment and offered his naked body, willing him to whip him at his
pleasure, as he had worthily deserved; At the sight whereof Hippocinus by and
by forgot the injury, pardoned Alcibiades, and gave him his daughter in
marriage. If now these Ethnicks either through the moderation of their minds,
or humane wisdom could willingly offer reconciliation, consesse the injury
done, and forgive received wrongs; shall not they rise up in Judgment, and
condemn us, which are so deadly in our malice, so obdurate in revenge, so
refractary, and stubborn in forgiving wrongs, that many think it impossible
to frame their stony hearts to be reconciled to their enemies.

First the duty we owe to our Christian brother (if we be Christians indeed)
should work this effect in us, that by our lenty and patience, we may reform
and amend our neighbor.

Hereof the Apostle, Romans 12. Pro. 15.
Overcome euillwith goodness, And Solomon A soft unswer puts away wrath, but
grievous words stir up anger. For even as fire (the fuel being taken away)
goes out; so wrath and displeasure is mitigated by mildness; and as smoke so
annoyeth the sight, that a man cannot see what lies, before him; so envy and
malice casts such a cloud before reason; that one cannot easily judge, or
censure, rightly of the actions of his brethren, nor wherein we our selves are
delinquent.

Secondly, because we are bound by charity, not to hurt our neighbor, for by
revenge and retorting evil for evil, we do not only prove our selves to be
evil, but also minister occasion of further fury, and perturbation to our
brother: What is this else, but Oleum Camino addere? according to the proverb,
to cast oylein to the fire.

Demosthenes being provoked by many taunts and reproaches of an enemy,
answered; I will not contend with thee in this kind of combat. In quo qui
vincitur ipso victore melior est, in which he that is vanqished, is the better
man.

Thirdly, we should forgive and patientiy suffer wrong, for the edification of
our neighbor, that we may give him an example of godliness.

For as every example of virtue, so especially of forgiving injuries, does
edify our neighbor, and enforce him to admire and love us, yea, though he be
most vile, and wicked.

If the commandment of God as obedient children, cannot pierce our Adamantine
hearts; neither the love, we owe unto our brethren, as fellow members of one
body; yet let the vtility and profit, which comes to our selves thereby, as
mere natural men, prevail somewhat with us, in this precept of forgiving.

First, least thou hurt thy self, because thou can not wreake thy revenge
upon thine enemy, but thou must do thy self a sarre greater hurt. For if a
man, for the disliking that he has of a garment, which he wears, that he
might cut and tear it, should thrust the knife into his own bowels, were he
not worthy to be condemned of extreme madness? So thou canstnot stirike thy
neighbor, but thou must give thy self a more greenous wound; thou offendest
God, piercest thine own soul, through thine impatiency, and pleafest thine
adversary. Know thou not what the Apostle says, Whosoever hates his
Brother, John 3.
is a manslayer, and ye know, that no manslayer has eternal life abiding in
him.

Passus es Malum? says S. Augustine, have thou suffered wrong? Ignosce, ne duo
mali sitis. Forgive, that ye be not both wicked, If thou hate thy brother,
thou hurtest thine own soul; If thou forgiuest him, thou do good to thy
self, and thine enemy remains in his own sin. What greater madness can
there be, then to persecute thine ene- with deadly hatred, seeing it cannot be
without offering great injury to thine own soul?

Is there any man so sottish, that if in eating, he biteth his tongue with his
teeth he will therefore pull out his teeth? Or if in cleaving a block, he
hurts his foot, will he to be revenged, cut off his arm? would thou not
judge such a one, to be out of his wits? Know then, that thy neighbor is
nearer unto thee, then thy teeth in thy head, or thine arm on thy body. Is it
then the part of a wise man, to take revenge on his neighbor for a little
injury and reproach done unto him, and so cut off and destroy the fellow member
of the same body?

Surely, if there were no other reason, but this, to move us to condonation,
and love of our enemies, lest we most of all hurt our selves, seeing nature
her self has ingrafted in every man's heart, to wish well unto himself, this
should be a sufficient motive unto us, to draw love and kindness toward our
enemies. Patience knows how to convert injuries and reproaches into gould,
silver, and pertious stones, even as the Salamander is nourished in the fire of
tribulation, and as the fea fish is sed with salt and bitter waters.

Socrates, when going in the street, one malepertly kicked him with his heel,
and many maruelling that he so patiently put it up, what should I do, (quoth
he to them that persuaded him to take the law upon him,) Si quis asinus me
calce percussit, diceretus mihi voca eum in jus? If any Ass should strike me
with his heel, would you wish me to go to law with him?

Secondly, we should love and forgive an enemy, for the great profit, and good
an enemy causes unto us, And by experience we see, the very brute, and savage
beasts, to be loving to their benefactours. If then reason it self enforces
from us love to a benefactour, by the same law of reason we are bound to love
our enemies, which often times are more beneficial and profitable to us then a
friend. Our friends many times do wink at our infirmities, sooth us up in our
follies, suffer us to run on in our wickedness; but our enemy, which is sharp
sighted to pry into our life, makes us to walk warily and to be circumspect
in our sayings and doings, that we give him no occasion to backbite, and
discredit us.

It was a wise saying of Socrates, that every man needs a true friend, or a
watchful enemy. For a friend (if he be indeed a true friend) will ever tell
us the truth and counsel us for our good.

But because often times we will not hearken unto a friend, God sends us
enemies to counsel and reform us in that, which our friends either will not,
or dare not. And therefore one calls an enemy, Optimum vita nostrae
Padagogum, the best Schoolmaster of our life: Et medicum gratuitum ae
salutarem; and a healthful Physician, which gives his physic freely, which
if he do but touch our ulcers, and offenses, causes us to amend them.

Philip king of Macedon, was wont to say, that he was much behoulding unto
them of Athens, for that they spoke evil of him; because (says he) I am made
the better man whiles I endeavor et verbis, et factis, ^es mendaciss
conuincere, both by words, and deeds, to prove them liars. Even as those that
suspect a disease, are carefully careful, that they hurt not their crazed
bodies by evil diet; so enemies, are an occasion unto us, of circumspection in
our lives and conuersations. Romans 8.28
For we know (says the Apostle) that all things work together for the best,
unto them that love God: So that a good man receives not a wound by the dart
of his enemy, but an wholesome plaster, to cure the ruptures of his soul, and
to the furtherance of a godly life.

Thirdly, we should be prone and ready to for give, because we can not
possibly have peace with God, as long as we be at jar with our Neighbors;
and therefore the necessity of it, should move us to forgive and love our
enemy. If ye bite and denoure one another, Gal. 5.15.
take heed ye be not consumed one of another, says the Apostle.

We see in an army, that the enemy has never so great advantage, as when the
Captain and Soldiers are at discord and strife among themselves; but the
whole life of a Christian, what is it but a warfare upon earth? And if then we
retain peace with God, and our Neighbors, we need not fear our enemies. But
therefore we are vanquished of them, because we have little care of this peace
amongst our selves. This inestimable treasure Christ left with his true
members, Ioh. 14.27.
My peace I give unto you, my peace I leave with you, not as the world gives,
give I unto you.

This peace of the world, is the consent of wicked men amongst themselves,
against God, and good men, rather to be called a conspiration, then a
pacification; as Herod against Pilate, Pilate against Herod yet both agreed to
put Christ to death. All the Sons of Jacob conspiring against Joseph, were
friends in wickedness, and held such firm concord together, that for many
years, though they dissented among themselves, (as it comes often to pass)
yet they never bewrayed to their Father, the selling of their Innocent Brother.
But this is not the peace of Christ, which so makes both one, that we cannot
have peace with God, unless we hold peace with our brethren; neither can be
at peace with our brethren, except we be at peace with God first.

We are all conioyued in God, the beginning and author of all things, we all
received our beginning of him, and therefore we are brethren and neighbors.
And for this cause (as says Saint Augustine) He created man but one and
single, De ciuit. Dei.
that by this means, he might commend unto us the unity of society, and bond
of concord. If men not only be knit together among themselves, by the
similitude of nature, but also by the affection of cognation; so that no man
may fall away from the love of God, but he loses the love of his Neighbor
also, or can put off the love of his Neighbor, but with all he loses the
love of God, and so it follows, that if we be not at peace among our selves,
we have no peace with God: and if we have no peace with God, we can neither
pray, nor per form any duty of godliness: therefore says our Savior, Mat. 5.23.
If thou bring thy gift to the Altar and there reme^brest that thy brother has
ought against thee, leave there thine offering before the Altar, and go thy
way: First be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. And
again, when he taught them to pray, he added, Mat. 6.14.
For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also
forgive you; But if ye do not forgive men their trespasses, no more will your
Father forgive you your trespasses.

God will not accept any service at our hands, except we be first reconciled to
our brethren, because there is no peace between us and him, as long as there
is no Christian amity between us and our Neighbors.

With what face can we say the Lords Prayer; with what conscience can we
crave forgiveness of our heavenly Father, of our ten Thousand Talents, Mat. 18.
of our infinite sins against his divine Majesty, when we will not forgive
our Brother an hundred pence: That is, a trespass of no moment, in comparison
of our grievous sins daily against God. Is not this the Condition which we
make with God, As we forgive them which trespass against us. O fool says
Saint Augusttine, thou prayest against thy self, is it not as if thou had
said. Lord forgive me not, seal fast my sins, forgive me, as I forgive
others: but thou know, that I will not forgive them that trespass against
me, therefore, O Lord, forgive me not? And thus through thy hard heartednes,
thou praiest not for thy self, but bring a curse upon thy self.

Fourthly, another motive which should move us to forgive, is because our
enemy is worthy rather of commiseration, then retaliation and revenge.

But to meet now with the usual objection of carnal men; How can I (they
will say) refrain from seeking revenge against him, who with his virulent
tongue, has impaired my good name, who wrongfullie calls me into the Law,
which ledeth me with many contumelies, and never cease to reproach me?

I am not so estranged from the common sense of men, but I think this to be a
grievous disease among many. Let us learn now how to cure this festered wound;
weigh first the loss on either side, whether I pray thee does thine enemy hurt
most himself or thee? He loses Gods favor and friendship, in using thee so
injuriously; in reproaching thee, he reproacheth God himself, and in sinning
he betrayeth his soul unto eternal torments, and loses (without repentance)
those eternal joys, Which the eye has not seen, 1 Cor. 2, 9.
the ear has not heard; neither has entered into the heart of man, which God
has prepared for them that love him. He has obscured thy good name, but he
has betrayed his own soul; he has but rent thy garment, but he has
wounded his own heart; he has taken scarce a hair from thee, but he has
bereft himself of an eye: This being so, if there be in thee the bowels of
charity, should thou not rather take pity upon thine enemy, which has so
harmed himself, then greatly to be moved, in that he has done thee a
little injury? This the Holy Prophet signifies when be says, Ps. 113 11.
They came about me like bees, but they were quenched even as a fire among
thorns. The Be stingeth thy finger, but pulls out his own bowels,
Animasque in vulnere ponunt; They kill themselves with their stinging, and thou
enioyest the honey: If therefore thou would enjoy the honey of heavenly glory,
it is needful that thou suffer persecution of these waspish enemies, where as
the reuengerneuer wants a re-action on himself, whilst he seeks vengeance
on man, finds vengeance of God, whilst he shoots the sting of revenge, he
emptieth himself of the bowels of mercy, Col. 3.1^.
kindness humility, etc.

Phocion and Aristides two Noble men of Athens, the one being condemned to
exile, the other to death unworthily: Aristides going in to exile, prayed that
all things might succeed so happy and prosperous with the Athenians, that they
might never hereafter have need to remember Aristides.

Phocion being about to drink the poisoned Potion, Plutarch.
wherewith he should die, charged his son that he should never revenge his
unjust death upon the Athenians.

Thrasibulus that Noble Citizen of Athens, Val max.
who expelled the thirty Spartan Tyrants, and by this means, restored the
former freedom to his Country, he caused the law of perpetual oblivion of
former injuries to be enacted, which they called (Legem obliuionis) the law of
forgetfulness.

Let Christians then be ashamed, not to aspire unto that perfection herein,
which many wise Heathens have attained unto. How far this brotherly
forgiveness is to be extended, our Savior himself shows in the parable of
the Unmerciful Servant, Mat. 18.35
which owed ten thousand Talents, concluding in these words: So likewise shall
my heavenly Father do unto you, except you forgive from your hearts, each one
to his brother their trespasses.

In these words, first we are taught to whom this precept of forgiving of
injuries pertains. None are exempted which profess to be Christ's Disciples:
for he says; Except ye forgive each one, that is, of what degree, state or
condition soever he be of, rich or poor, Noble or Ignoble; King, or beggar; we
are all sinners, and do pray daily: Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our
debtors. Let the proud observe this, which being puffed up with the confidence
of their birth or dignities, think that they may lawfully despise, wrong, and
tread under foot, the simple obscure, and poor man.

Secondly, he shows whom he should forgive, His brother: He might have
said, his follow servant: but he would have us to lift up our eyes higher, and
to consider, that all men are not only of the same condition as servants; but
also of the same nature and dignities as the Sons of God; who was so far
from contemning the base and obscure, that he would have his only begotten
Son to be contemptible and poor, that he might make us rich.

Thirdly, he teaches what we should forgive, Their trespasses. He speaks
indefinitely, that he might comprehend all things wherewith our neighbor
has offended us: for how great soever is the injury done unto us, it may in no
sort be compared unto that wherein we have offended God.

Fourthly, he expresses the measure and manner of forgiving, saying; From
your hearts: that is, not in naked words, with an hypocritical and dissembling
heart, but truly and seriously, that not so much as a sparkle of envy, hatred,
or rank or remain behind in our hearts: which particle, reproves their
contumacy, Which say, they will forgive, but withal protest, they cannot
forget the injury, neither can they endure the sight of such as have offended
them.

These forgive not from their hearts, but in words only; nay, not so much as
in words, seeing they foster in their hearts the memory thereof, and do not
conceal it.

We should in forgiving of injuries, imitate the example of our heavenly
Father, who so forgiueth our iniquities, that he remembers them no more: for
if our sins were still in remembrance with God, how could the hope of our
salvation be firm and certain unto us? And therefore the Princely Prophet
prays, That God would not remember the sins of his youth. Psalm. 25.7.
And that which necessity constrains us to crave at the hands of God, is it
not meet that we should show the same to our brethren? We would not that God
should remember our sins, and shall we keep in memory old grudges and
offenses of our brethren and neighbors? Surely such make themselves unworthy
of the mercies of God; Being destitute of faith, working by love. Gal. 5.6.


Most memorable, and never to be forgotten, was the dealing of the holy
Patriarch Abraham, with his nephew Lot, when Satan assaied to kindle
contention between them, by reason of their quarrelling servants; Abraham
being every way the better man, being his Uncle, and his elder, Who already
had seen the day of Christ; John 8.56.
had also learned the lesson of humility of Christ; he stood not upon his
Summu^ Ius, his right and reputation, but came first to Lot, and was the
profferer of peace, saying; Genesis 13.8.
I pray thee let there be no strife between me and thee, and between my
heardmen and thine, and why? for we are brethren: He sought peace Concedendo
de suo Iure, By yielding of his right. Now there are Christians to be found
(says Musculus) which will not yield one foot of their right for brotherly
unities sake: this proffer of Abraham is counted but folly now yea of those
which yet would be esteemed his children.

Lastly, this benefit also we make through patience toward an enemy, (which is
not the least) that being accustomed to deal justly and friendly with an
enemy, we shall the better frame our selves to live sociably and kindly with
our familiar friends, and to do nothing fraudulently, and deceitfully in
friendship. Let us therefore I beseech you, cast out of our minds the
remembrance of iniuties, which is the very wood and fuel to nourish revenge,
and which exasperateth our hearts against our brethren. Col. 3.12.
Let us, as the Elect of God, put upon us tender mercy, kindness, long
suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, as Christ for
gave you, even so do ye. Let this sweet promise of our Savior: And ye shall
be forgiven; quench in us all rancor and malice, and ouersway in our thoughts
all reasons of flesh and blood, which seek to move us to revenge: consider
that in no other Petition in the Lords Prayer we so pray, as to indent with
God, but in this only: Forgive us, as we forgive others. In which covenant
with God, if we be found liars, we pray in vain, our prayers are against our
selves; seeing our sins are not forgiven, because we are not truly inserted
in the body of Jesus Christ, unless we forgive one anther; except we manifest
our faith, in love toward our neighbor: Forgive (says Saint Augustine) lest
whiles thou deny mercy to thy brother, thou shut the mercy of thy Heavenly
Father from thy self. Iam. 2.13.
For there shall be judgment merciless, to him that shows no mercy.

But if all this cannot suppress the rage of thy wreakefull humor, but thou
must needs seek revenge: I will permit thee to be carried with the current of
thy passions, upon condition that thou will be angry with him that indeed
has done thee that injury: And who is he? verily (as Basil says) even he
which rules in thine enemies heart, the Devil I mean, which inflameth him
with the firebrands of wrath and armeth him with his spirit against thee; it is
he that uses thine enemies hand as a Sword, to strike thee, and his tongue as
an arrow to shoot at thee. If an horseman should strike thee with his spear,
would thou be angry with his horse? So, if thou be hurt by thine enemy,
seek e^euenge against the Devil, which is his rider; he is the author of the
wrong the wretched man is but the devils instrument, wherewith he strikes
thee: why then do thou boil in hatred against the man, letting the Devil
alone, who indeed is the Author of the wrong? what is this else, but to
imitate the dog, which snarleth and biteth at the staff or stone wherewith he
is struken, and leaves the man which cast them. Let us therefore leave off to
pursue our brother with hatred and revenge, and bend our force against the
Devil, the true Author of all evil, and hold perpetual war with him.

If this reason do little move thee, lift up thine eyes unto God, who
permits this injury to be done to thee for the good of thy soul. So when
David fled from the wrath of Absolon, and was thus despightfully cursed, and
railed on by wicked Shimei; and when one of his men of war asked leave of the
King, To take the head from this raylers shoulders; this holy man was so far
from revenge, that he answered: 2 Samuel 16.16.
Let him alone, for the Lord has bidden him to curse David, who dare then say,
wherefore have thou done so? And afterward, Suffer him, for the Lord has
bidden him to curse: It may be the Lord will look upon mine affliction and
do me good for his curse this day. Here ye see this good King ascribed this
reproach, not so much unto his enemy that did it, as unto God that permitted
it: which holy Job also perceived, imputing the loss of his goods not unto
Satan, which was but the instrument thereof, but unto God, saying; Job 1.21.
The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away.

But thou will say again; Seneca) is dearer to every good man then any riches.

I answer, Solution.
thou art deceived man, thou art deceived; not he that receives the injury,
but he that does the imury, loses his honor: For even as the man that is
bountiful, and charitable to his neighbor does not so much increase his
neighbors praise, as his own. So he that does injury unto another man, not so
much diminishes his credit, whom he reproacheth, as he impayreth his own
honor, in showing himself a malicious railer, or backbiter.

Cyprian affirmed that man to be like unto Christ the son of God, which
patiently suffers injury; and him to be like Judas the traitor, that does
the injury. See, see, how far different the judgment of this holy man is,
from the common opinion of the world now a days. Seeing therefore, as good
Children, it is our especial glory, to resemble our father, let us also in
pardoning injuries be merciful, as our heaue^y father is merciful. Thus much
touching the fourth work of mercy concerning the soul, mertioned in this word
Remitte.

Fer.
THe fifth work of mercy to the soul, is ^et forth in bearing with the weak,
This duty S. Paul enioyneth, saying; Galat. 6.2.
Bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ. And Solomon
says, Eccle. 7.23 24.
Give not thine heart to all the words men speak, lest thou hear thy servant
cursing thee, for often times thy heart knows, that thou likewise thy self
have cursed others. Antigonus hearing certain soldiers railing upon him hard
by his tent, who thought that he was not so near, discovered himself unto
them, saying, Can ye not go further to speak ill of me? So far was he, from
revenging their open reuilings, that he only desired them, to rail out of his
hearing. That we may therefore the better perform this duty, let us construe
all things in the best part, let us take things in the best sense, and meaning.
Let us, I say, so judge of others, as we would wish; they should judge of us.
Let us not be so suspicious, and misdeeming, as (for the most part) many men
be. For this ill construction, and wrong interpretation, of things, by haling
and wresting them, to the worst sense and meaning, is the way to fill our
hearts full of bitterness, and to make us ready, upon every light occasion, to
fall to brangling, brawling, and contention with our brethren. When one shall
have these doubts perhaps he thinks thus of me, it may be he had this
meaning, or did it to this intent, or the like, these or the like conceits,
will very maruelously infect the heart with the leaven of maliciousness. And
therefore S. Paul reckons it as a chief note of an ill man, and a sure brand
of a wicked person, To take all things in the worst part. Romans 1.29.
But a courteous and meek man will be sure, if a thing may be expounded one
way, better then another, to take it in the best sense, and to make the best of
it.

Our Lord and master Jesus Christ was so far from taking his bitter passion,
in the worst sense and meaning, that in the midst thereof, he prayed saying;
Father forgive them, they know not what they do. Luke 23.34


But forasmuch as our Savior Christ condemns rash judgment in the next
verse, saying, Judge not, and ye shall not be judged, condemn not, and ye
shall not be condemned: I purpose a little to touch this point, and so much the
rather, because rash censurers oppose themselves by all means against this
duty. This rash judgment is that which is gathered of some light conjecture or
signs. This judgment the Scripture calls judgment according to the outward
appearance, forbiden by our Savior. Whereas he says, John. 7.24.
Judge not according to the appara^c^, but judge righteous judgment.

There be six marks, whereby this Judgment according to the outward
appearance may be discerned.

First he which looks only on the outward fact, without considering the
circumstances thereof, which may alter the manner of the fact.

^^ Without weighing the in tention of the dooer, which may be honest though
he err in the fact 3. Without weighing the end, for which it was done, which
in an evil actio^, if it be good, may, at least wise extenuate the fault,
without po^dering the cause, and the original of the act, as that it was done
the^ row evil company, or by some strong temptation or violence. 5. Without
consideration had of the time, place, or person, all which may either excuse,
or much lessen an actio^, that seems evil. Lastly he judges according to the
appearance which what he disliketh in one, John 7.23.
he approves in an other, As the Pharisees which allowed of circumcision to be
done on the Sabb^t^ day but were angry with Christ, for making a man every
whitwhole on the Saboth day. The Lord commanded. Leuit. 13.^.
concerning the trial of the Leprosy, that the Leaper should be shut up seven
days. Much less would he have us, which have no authority, to judge of
Leapers, that is of the sins of others, hastily and rashly to step forth and
censure the secret infirmities of others, which can not be so easily discerned
as the Leprosy of the body.

This kind of judgment is oposite to Christian charity, which if we be Gods
children, should shine forth amongst us, it springs from a two fould
pestilent root.

First because a man himself is wicked, he judges others to be like
himself; neither can any judge better of another, then he does of himself.
Qualis quisque tales et ^liot iudis at. As the man is, so he judges of others.
The coueteous man, that i^ aconstomed in buying and selling to deceive,
suspecteth all others in the same. The Adulter^^ and carnal liver, easily
misdeemeth others. So impure Nero, was persuaded, Ne^^^em (...) pudicum, (says
Suttoni^^) that no man lived honestly, Mala men's, mal^s anim^^. An evil
conscience has ever an evil surmising mind.

Secondly rash judgment proceeds of hat^ed and evil will; for of him whom a
man hates, or enuieth, upon the least signs, he is ready to judge evil and
condemn him. Every one is easily persuaded in the thing that he desueth. Such
was Simon the Pharisees judgment upon Christ, Luke 7.39.
for that he suffered himself to be touched of the sinful woman.

This rash judgment is caused of the long experience of the manners of men,
that when they have oftentimes s^^^^ men fall into many sins, they are in
duced thereby, upon very light occasions or surmises, to condemn their
brethren.

But it should not so be, if we be truly granted into Jesus Christ: charity
will measure all our thoughts and actions. Love (says the Apostle) thinks
not evil; 1 Cor. 13 5
unto the pure are all things pure, Tit. 1.15.
but unto them that are defilled, and unbelieving, i^ nothing pure, but even
their minds and consciences are defiled. And is even as the swine which are
ever rooting in dyre, and dung; so an evil and filthy mind is always plodding
upon filthy things; and he that is affected with wicked desires, loves to be
rubbing the same upon another either that he might iustif^^ his own faults, by
the comparison of other men's, or at the lestwise, by reason of the multitude of
offenders make his own (through society) seem light. Even as they that can
find little to do at home, are often walking and gadding abroad; so when men
are negligent in examining their own lives, they are curious in scanning and
judging, the doings of others men. Non iudicat personalitor, qui diligit
aqualiter (says S. Augustine) in his thirtieth sermon upon John. For we judge
according to the person, and not according to the matter, because we are
accepters of persons, and love not the person of him, whom weiudge.

But shall I set thee down a rule, whereby to examine thy judgment, whether
it proceed from reason, or from some corrupt passion? Before thou condemnest
thy brother, Imagine the fact which thou dislikest, to be done by some other,
whom thou love, or transfer it upon thy self, suppose thou thy self had
done it. And if the fact does yet displease thee, then it is reason, and not
thy passion that judges But if now thou can ^igest, and brook it without
any distaste well enough, or with Menius in the P^^t say, Egomet mihi igu^sco, I
pardon my self, and count it no f^ult in thy self, surely thy judgment is
corrupt, some depraved affection has deceived thee: It is a law among the good
Merchants, to be coparme^ as well in their loss, as in their gain; so should
it be in the society of the faithful. For even as charity makes an others
good her own, and so gains much so mercy makes also another evil her
own, by a fellow feeling of others miseries, according to this of the Apostle
Rejoice with them that rejoice, Romans 12.16.
weep, with them that weep, and be of like affection one toward another.

But on this iron and flinty age of the world; where are now become the bowels
of mercy and loving kindness? This simpathy of affection one toward another,
which was amongst the Christians of ancient time which were of one heart and
one soul. Acts. 4.
in what angle of the world (almost) shall we find them. Shall we lock them,
as one once sought for a good man, in the temples among the tombs of the dead?
For surely such is in these days the deprivation of manners, from that which
was in our forefathers days, that we may truly say as the wise man did once,
Quos fugiam scio, quos sequar non video, whom to beware of I know, but whom I
should follow I see not. Nothing in Christian society is worse, or more
troublesome then such kind of uncharitable censurers of their neighbors; who
as it were, violently divulge and lay open men's secrets, pull from them the
best ornament of their good name, and cast out of their unclean mouths all the
filth and corruptions of their brethren, that is, their faults and infirmities.
That therefore we may the better beware how we commit this odious sin, I will
here set down some remedy against this perverse and dangerous disease of rash
judgment.

First, if our neighbor have done or said any thing we should not rashly judge
or condemn it, interpret, calumniate, or touch his credit, for we know not
whether the report be true; sometimes this, or that may be fastened on a good
man. It was a goulden counsel of the wise man. Eclesicus 19.10.11.15.
If thou have heard a word against thy neighbor. Let it die with thee, and be
sure it will not burst thee. A fool traueleth with a word as a woman with
child. Tell thy friend his fault, for often times a slander is raised, and
give no credit to every word.

Secondly though a thing be done or spoken (as we think) amiss, yet we are
ignorant of the causes and occasions, why then do we exaggerate and judge of
things unknown. Good works are manifest, and th^se that are otherwise cannot
be hid; that is, a man may many times do that which is good and right, but
thou know not by and by his intent; yet afterward thou may find that he
did well.

Thirdly, consider, that if thou had bin in the place of thy neighbor at
that time, thou would (perhaps) have done, as he did. Digito courpesce
labellum, Put thy finger to thy mouth; 1 Cor. 4.5.
lest thou be injurious to thy self, Judge nothing, says the Apostle before
the time, And S. James wills us, ^ames. 4.
not to speak evil art of another. And again, the Apostle Paul gives this
counsel Let us not Judge one another any more, Romans 14.13.
but use our Judgment rather in this, that no man put a stumbling block
before his brother. Pasquils and Libels are not to be cast forth, as the
heathenish manner of some is; for who appointed thee, a judge of thy brother.

Fourthly, if thou find a defect in thy brother, suppose that under that
defect many virtues may be hid, many good parts, as that of Cicero, in the
Senate of Rome answering one Memmius, who declaymed against Marcus Cato,
because he made merry all night long: why (said Cicero) did thou not add
also, Quodtota die aleas ludit, that he played at dice alday. Cato having spent
the whole day in serious business of the common wealth, refreshed himself the
more liberally at night.

Fifthly, to consider that he which now has grievously fallen to day, by Gods
grace may be converted to morrow; for God is able to make him stand. If thou will needs judge, Nosce teipsum. Begin first with thy self, and perchance
thou shall find thy self worse then him, whom thou condemnest. Iustus prius
est accusator sui. Rom 2.
Take good heed, lest in the same thing thou iudgest another, thou condemnest
not thy self. Take heed I say that thou be not stained with the same crime,
and so give sentence against thy self. 2 Samuel 12.
The man that has done this, shall surely die says David. But what said the
Prophet? Thou art the man.

To conclude, if thou can not excuse the action of thy neighbor, yet excuse
his intention, impute it to his ignorance, or that he was overcome with some
grievous temptation, wherewith if another had been assaulted, he might
likewise have yielded. This the Apostle teaches. Gal. 6.1.
If a man be fallen by occasion into any fault ye which are spiritual, restore
such a one in the spirit of meekness; considering thy self lest thou also be
tempted. Surely if a man would look into himself, he should find that he
has enough to do at home in the house of his own conscience, so that he
would find no time to enquire into other men's souls. But this age yields
great store of Physicians, every one will be launcing the carbuncles of others
infirmities, but they never have care to cure their own Ulcers. Every one would
be an eye in the body of the Church, none a hand. Such without authority,
usurp the office of the eye, but to be a hand in doing good few are willing.
They are ready to carpe at other men's labors, when they put their hand to
nothing that good is. But let us first judge our selves, and so we shall more
charitably look into the faults of others. Let us I say be merciful as our
heavenly father is merciful. Thus much touching rash judgment, and the fifth
work of mercy to the Ioule described by this word Fer.

ORA.
THe sixth and last work of mercy toward the soul consists in praying for
all men, A duty so necessary, as without it, we have no means to express our
wants to our heavenly father. S. Austen calls prayer Interprei defiderij, a
key to valocke the secrets of our heavenly desires; the necessity whereof our
blessed Savior sets forth, when he taught his disciples to pray, and also the
benifit, when he said, Ask and ye shall have, Mat. 7.7.
seek and ye shall find; knock and it shall be opened unto you. And he
yields a reason in the next verse, saying, For whosoever, asks receives he
that seeks, finds, and to him that knocks, it shall be opened. From hence
may you plainly perceive, that often times our wants and miseries proceed from
our coldneise and neglect of prayer. And surely most men are greatly to be
blamed for neglecting so religious and heavenly a duty. This was not the use of
the holy Prophets and Patriarks. Dan. 6.10.
Daniell, notwithstanding the Kings decree to the contrary, usually prayed
three times a day. And we ought especially in these days to call to mind the
admirable devotion of the Son of God (devotion waxing key-cold amongst men).
Let us therefore remember our selves, and think a little more of calling upon
God, by religious and devout prayer, remembering who it was, that spent whole
nights in prayer, when he was laboring for the sins of the world, and the
salvation of our souls. If the eyes of God do at all times, and in all places
behold us, then most especially, when we present our selves before him in
prayer; when both attention of mind, and humiliation of body co^curre, actions
most befitting humble suitors: we often repeat that of the Prophet, Psalm. 95.6.
O come, let us worship, and fall down, before the Lord our Maker; but we do
it not, by humbling our bodies, to sue pardon for our souls. To approach and
enter into the place of prayer, a^ if we came to sit in commission with God, or
would countenance him in his own house, is as an vnreuerent a custom as heart
can wish. To dehort men now a days from long prayer, we are eased of that
labor, seeing many care not how little they pray. Nay which is more, when some
altogether neglect this holy duty unto God, wherein Christians assemble
themselves by public prayer; as if by preaching, they would have evermore God
do service unto them, but they by prayer would never do service unto God. And
yet for all this, not only to speak of prayer, but of feruency in prayer, may
further our Christian desires in Gods service, seeing our zeal is often so
cold as we may seem rather to speak, then pray, seeing the very of house pray
or, is almost made nothing less; whereas our repayring thither, puts us in
mind of a duty to be performed. He therefore that prayer not in the Church,
does as he that eats not at abanquet, that learnes not at the school, that
fights not at the battle, that walks not when he is in his journey. Mat 26.31
Let us observe Christ's praying in the garden, when his soul began to be
sorrowful, the better to move us to a dueconsideration of prayer.

In this had prayer, we may consider these circumstances; first, that it was
solitary, for that he now left his disciples, as he had usually done before,
when he went out alone to pray, and this commends unto us solitary praying.
Secondly he prayed with humiliation of body. Luke 22.41 Mat. 26.39
S. Luke says. He kneeled, and prayed; S. Matthew and S. Mark, that he fell
prostrate upon the earth. Mark 14.55.
The Evangelists may soon be reconciled; for it may seem he first kneeled,
and afterward for faintness he was forced to fall prostrate; and this commends
to us humiliation in prayer. John. 11.41.
When he raised Lazarus, and restored the dumb man to the use of speaking,
Mark 7.38.
we find he lifted up his eyes to heaven; which was sometimes his gesture in
prayer: when Moses prayed, Exodus 17.12.
he lifted up his hands until the going down of the Sun: which houlding up
of his hands David calls his evening sacrifice. Psa. 141.4. Acts 7.60.
When Steven prayed, hekneeled down, according to Christ's example here in the
second place mentioned.

The third circumstance in this our Saviors praying is, that it was just and
right; for he subjected his will, to the will of his father, saying, Si iuvis.
If thou will, which teaches us to commend our selves, and all our petitions to
the will of God.

The fourth, that it was with sorrow; for he was in an agony, and this puts
us in mind of that of the Apostle; Romans 8.26
The spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not what to pray as we
(...), but the spirit works (...) for us, with sighs which cannot be
expressed.

The fifth that it was with perseverance; for he came three times unto his
Disciples, three times, and in three places was he tempted, and three times
did he here pray, and willed his Disciples, Mat 26.41.
To watch and pray that they enter not into temptation.

Oh what devotion was here, his last supper being ended, he goes forth,
accompanied with his Disciples, and speaks unto them (as a loving father upon
his deathbed, when he has not much to say) gives his Children precepts at
parting, which they should remember when he is gone from them, of which
precepts, this was not the lest, Watch and pray: Mat. 26.41
that you enter not into temptation.

And surely; we have no sweeter incense, then our devotion offered up by
prayer, we have no better Orators to pleadeour cause, no surer Ambassadors,
to conclude our peace, then our humble supplications to Almighty God, who
heals our sicknesses, and forgiueth our sins, who sits ever in
commission, to hear our suits, and looks, that we should send up prayers,
and petitions to him, that he may also send down his mercies, and graces to
us.

By which means, we enter into a spiritual traffic with God himself, we
give a cup of could water, and he returns a fountain of the waters of life to
us.

We give him, with the poor widdowe two mites, Ioh. 4.14.
and he gives us again the whole treasure of the temple. The mercy of God
(says one) is like a vessel full to the very brim; if once his children, by
the hand of faithful prayer, begin to take of it, it does ouerflowe unto
them.

It is not with God, as with men, amongst whom, those who are petitioners, are
wont to be troublesome unto him; but with God, the more we offer up our prayers
unto him, the more we are accepted of him. For with him the gates of mercy are
wide open to all poor sinners, that will make their prayers unto him.

Come and welcome. 1 Samuel 2.
Hannah being barren, by prayer obtained a son; Elias, 1 King. 18.
rain Elisha a son, 1 King. 4
for the Shunamite, which being dead, was also by his prayer restored to life.
Acts 9.20.
Peter by prayer raised Dorcas and Paul Eutichus, from death to life.

It is recorded in the life of Martin Luther, that a certain young man, having
by an indenture of covenants written, and sealed with his own blood, given his
soul in reuersion to the devil, that the fiend was forced, at the instant
prayer of the said Martin Luther, to give to the young man his deed again.

Russinus and Socrates also write, that Theodosius the Christian Emperor, in a
great battle against Eugenius, when he saw the huge multitude, that was
coming against him, and so in the sight of man, there was an apparent our
throw at hand; he gets him up into place eminent, in the sight of all the army,
falls down prostrate upon the earth, be seecheth God, if ever he would look
upon a sinful creature, to help him, in this time of greatest need; suddenly
there arose a mighty, wind, which blow the darts of the enemies back upon
themselves, in such wonderful manner, as Eugenius with all his host was
clean discomfited.

Wherefore being compassed by such a cloud of witnesses, let us sometimes with
Abraham, Genesis 22.
leave our terrene affairs, as he left his servants beneath, when he want into
the mount to sacrifice to God: so in sickness principally, and in times of
distress, then should we fly unto our surest stay of repose; then should we
ascend into the contemplation of heavenly things, and have recourse to Gods
mercy, as to a City of refuge, Psalm 50.15
Therefore (as Austin counsels: Demus operam, vt moriamur in precatione Call
upon me, in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall praise
me. In the time of trouble; there is a refuge for extremity. And I will hear
thee; there is a reward of mercy; and thou shall praise me; there is a reflexe
of a thankful duty. Christ wills all, Mat. 11.28
that are weary, and heavy Laden, to come unto him, and they shall not loose
their labor, for he will refresh them. In time of need no surer sanctuary,
then by humble prayer, to repair to God, Psalm. 123.2
Wherefore as the eyes of servants, look unto the hand of their master, and as
the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her misereis; so let our eyes wait upon
the Lord, our God, until he have mercy upon us.

But as prayer and thanksgiving is our Christian sacrifice, so must it agree
with that of the Israelites, in six points.

1. As theirs was seasoned with salt, so ours must be with the truth of a good
conscience.

2. As theirs was brought to the priest, so ours must be presented to God.

3. As theirs was slain; so when we pray, we must kill all our lewd, and
malicious affections.

4. As theirs was washed with water, ours must be with tears of repentance.

5. As theirs was without blemish; so ours must be without hypocrisy.

Lastly, as theirs was kindled with fire, so ours must be with zeal.

And in this duty, we must imitate the blessed, Protomartyr S. Steven, who
prayed for his enemies, saying, Lord lay not this sin to their charge: we must
pray for all men. Acts 7.
Thus much concerning the six duties of mercy belonging to the soul; Wherein
let us be merciful, as our heavenly father is merciful.

MISERICORS OR Motives to Mercy.

The second part.

Comprehending all duties of mercy belonging to the Body.

AT LONDON Imprinted by JOHN BEALE 1619.

The Argument.
Having (dearly beloved brethren) finished the former treatise touching all
the duties of mercy belonging to the soul. I now purpose by Gods blessed
assistance, particularly to handle the works of mercy due to the body, as they
follow in this verse.

Visito, Poto, Cibo, Redimo, Tego, Colligo, Condo.

To visit the sick, give drink to the thirsty, bread to the hungry, to help
the oppressed, to cloth the naked, to lodge the harbourlesse to bury the dead.

Visito
THe first duty of mercy to the body, consists, in visiting, comforting and
relieuing all those, on whom God has laid his heavy rod of sickness. Already,
sufficient has been delivered in the third work of mercy to the soul,
touching spiritual consolation to the sick and diseased. It is the counsel
of the Apostle to the Hebrews That we should remember those that are afflicted,
Heb. 13.3
as if we were also afflicted. As if he should say, Be ye the members of one
body. And members be all pertakers of the same pain and grief: if any one,
yea but the meanest, sufferany thing the rest are also pertakers thereof. For
whosoever trippeth at the toe, his purpose is, to bring the head to the ground.
If therefore we have the love, that ought to be in the hearts of Christians, we
cannot choose, but in some part, as having a fellow feeling of the miseries of
our brethren, be ready to help them, and relieve them, and to do works of
mercy toward them. And herein Jobs friends may be commended vntovs. Job. 2.11.
It is said that having heard of the misery, wherein Job was sudde^ly cast, they
came to him, not as the common custom is, to bid him be of good cheer, and
we hope, you shall do well, fear not, we will help you the best we can
etc. but they came to lament with him, they wept with him, they rent their
clothes, and sat down with him mourning; they hearing their friends woe, would
let him know, they were touched with it, and therefore they show it by weeping,
wayling, and lamenting in the dust, making his cause theirs, so near as might
be. And surely he that is thoroughly and sensibly affected with other men's
miseries, will be very ready and willing to relieve them, and to do works of
mercy to them. But for want of this partaking of other men's griefs, it comes
to pass, that men be so hardly drawn and haled to any work of mercy; that it
must be pulled from them by maine strength, yea by many forcible arguments,
reasons; and inducements must they be constrained to it, before they will
yield there unto and when all is done, they bestow a thing of no value,
nothing to the purpose yea, they that are bountiful enough, in matters of lust
and vanity, in plays, vain shows, gaming, wantonness, and the like, are so
sparing in works of merey, that one can hardly wring a penny from them, by all
the persuasions he can make. But why should they be so slow, and unwilling?
Surely, because they neither have, nor will have any sense of other men's
griefs, but put away al consideration and regard of these things, and give
themselves wholly to pleasure. In those matters, which will cost them many
tears much lamentation, and great grief of heart, and bring them no good
hereafter, but much sorrow, they care not how far they run, and what charges,
and expenses they be at; but for visiting the sick, duties of compassion, and
works of mercy, such as will further their souls, and do good to the church
and Saints of God, they come off so slowly and heavily, as though all were
lost, that were that way bestowed. And thus it falls out, because their
hearts are merciless, and void of compassion.

Whereas affliction should makes v^ more mexciful, pitiful, and compassionate
toward others, as having our selves endured the like crosses, and miseries,
and our hearts, which are hard in themselves, should be softened and made the
more tender, and in fellow feeling of their griefs, more ready and willing to
yield unto them any comfort, and refreshing.

Thus those who have been sick, are apt to pity those most, whom they see
payned with the like diseases; Those who have bin imprisoned, do more readily
compassionate and accordingly help, and relieve those, who are restrained.
Those which have been pinched with penury, and pain with hunger, do above
others pity them, who being poor, want food to feed them, and clothes to
cover them.

Now therefore to conclud this point, in as much as in this life, there is
nothing certain; it being often incident for men to flourish in a moment, and
on a sudden to be plunged into the pit of miserable poverty, or a affliction.
Neither is there any man, that would refuse comfort, when occasion and
necessity does require it: why then should we withold that from our
brethren, which we should expect at their hands toward our sclues, if need
were. Let us therefore be merifull toward others, as we would expect the mercy
of God toward our selves; And thus much touching the first work of mercy to
the body.

Poto Cibo
THe Second and third work of mercy to the body, consists in giving bread and
drink and other food, to such as want it. These two, are as twins, which may
not be parted; touching which duty S. Romans 12.20.
Paul says, If thine enemy hunger, feed him, If he thirst, give him drink.
If thine enemy, much more thy friend, yet such is the hard hartednesse of the
age and time wherein we live, that charity is not extended to a friend, nay
scarce to a brother; how then shall an enemy expect any favor. Nevertheless
the spirit of God reaches us, by the mouth of Salo mon. To cast our bread upon
the waters, Eccle. 11.1 2.3.4.
for after many days we shall find it. Give a portion to 7, and also to 8.
for thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth. As if he should say,
be liberal to the poor, for though it seem to be as a thing ventred on the
sea, yet it shall bring thee profit. If the clouds be full, they will pour
forth rain upon the earth. As the clouds so the rich that haueal, oundance,
should distribute liberally: If the tree fall toward the South, or toward the
North in the place that it falls, there it shall be. Be beneficial there fore
whilst you live, for after life, there is no power.

He that observes the wind shall not sow, and he that regards the clouds,
shall not reap. So he that fears inconveniences, when necessity requires,
shall never do his duty.

And thus you see Solomon in this Metaphorical speech stirs up the people
of God, to the workeof mercy and liberality toward such as are with misery and
want afflicted. What we should give, he shows, when he says (Cast thy
bread) by which word bread, he signifies all kind of food, and meat for the
preservation of the life of man, or necessary to the relief, and suslentation
of our needy, and distressed brethren.

We are bound therefore to give whatsoever is requi sit, to supply the want of
such as are in need and necessity.

There is also an Emphasis to be observed in this word (Cast:) the latin word
Mitte, signifies to send any thing, as if the alms; we give to the poor,
were sent by them into heaven. So it is reported of Laurence the Martyr, who
having distrito the poor, the treasures which Sextus left him, a^swe red
Decius the Emperor, in this manner. The treasure of the Church, which thou
requirest, In celestes The sauros manus pau peru^ deportauerunt, the hands of
the poor have carried them into the heavenly treasury. If we will then lay up
our corn our garment, and our money in a safe place, where the the eues cannot
steal the^, the mothes cate, nor the rust consume them, letys send them to
heaven by the hands of the poor, where weshall be fure to have the^ safe kept
and that which we cannot carry with us, if we give to the poor, we have sent
it before us. Let us then by the hands of the poor tra^sport some partof our
goods into heaven, and commit it to the safe keeping of Jesus Christ, who at
the day of judgment will restore it, to our everlasting comfort.

Secondly, he shows what we must give, when he says (Thy bread) of our
own not of that, which by right appertains to others which we have gotten
bydeceit, and vniustmeanes, and therefore he says again, Pro. 3.9.
Honor God of thine own riches, that is of that, which i^ justly and honestly
gotten. S. Ambrose speaking of A. hab, How he lay upon his hod, and would eat
no bread, 3 King 21.4.
says Thoserich Cormorants, may be said rather to eat the bread of others,
then their own, which live by catching, and oppression, and mayntaine their
expense, by rapine: and this Chrysostom notes (in his thirteenth Homily upon
the first to the Corinths and the thirteenth) to be more shameful, then for
the poor to beg; for the poor crave of the better sort, and such as willingly
give, that is of rich men, but the rich take it from men, against their wills,
and that from the ragged and base poor they themselves wearing clothes of
silk. And the Lord says, Esa. 61.8.
that he hates robbery as burnt offering and also the wise man, Eclesiasti
34.21.
he that offers asacrifice of the good of the poor, is as he that
sacrifices the son before the fathers cies. What is this else, but as if a
man should steal a sheep, or a hog, and think to make satisfaction to his
conscience, in giving the feet to the poor for Gods sake. And therefore says
he again. Ecclesiast. 34.18.
He that offers an offering of unrighteous goods, offers a mocking
sacrifice.

Let us herein lay before us the example of famous Zacheus, Luke 19.89
whose praise is in the Gospel, and may be almost a miracle for the
singularity of the fact. Behold (says he) the half of my goods, I gine to
the poor, and if I have taken from any man, by forged cauill^tion, I restors
him four fould. He lost not his reward, for our Sa^^^^ said unto him, This
day is salvation come unto this house, for as much as he is also become the
son of Abraham.

In the eight verse, so many word, so many semences, and so manydo^uments of
mercy. He says half of my goods, which may reprove our an^^ice, who either
give nothing to the poor, or so little, that it cannot relieve their want.
When yet the Apostle says, He thun sows sparingly, 1 Cor. 9.
shall reap also sparingly, and he that sows Liberally, shall reap also
liberally.

Secondly, he says ( of my goods, a check to our pride and delicacy, which
will give to the poor the refuse only, and corrupt things, reserving all
dainties (even till we surfeit) for our own bellies.

Thirdly, He adds (my goods) to show, that whosoever gives any thing
unjustly gotten, does but mock in his sacrifice, as I said before.

In that he says (I give) speaking in the present tense he condemns them
which will do no good themselves all their life time; but commit all things, to
the fidelity of their executors, to be done after death.

Lastly he promises restitution, of whatsoever he had gotten unjustly, and
that in the largest manner, Four fould, without which, neither repentance,
prayer, almesdeedes, or any other work of piety, is acceptable unto God; For
without ^estitution says S. Augustine repentance is never truly done, but
counterfeited, but where it is truly done, the sin shall never be pardoned,
til the spoil be rostored if it may possibly be done.

Thirdly, he shows to whom we should give, when he adds (upon the waters) by
which metaphor, he understands not the elementary and material waters, but
afflictions, anguishes, sorrows, adversities and miseries, as Save me O God,
Psalm. 69.1.88.7.
for the waters are entered even upon my soul; by which he understands his
calamities, and adversities, which by their succeeding courses like the waves
of the sea, seemed to ouerwhelme and drown him. S. Jerome thus expounds it.
(Cast thy bread upon the waters) that is Iuxta aquas by the waters, to signify
that as seed sown upon fertile valeyes, and places well watered, yeeldes the
more plentiful increase; so says he, he that liberally distributeth his
alms to such as suffer misery, and want, shall receive a blessed reward, and
an happy harvest of the Lord; he sows not a grain of seed, but bread it
self, expecting the multiplication thereof with increase, and at the day of
judgment, he shall receive much more then he gave.

It is recorded that the Emperor Titus so loved liberality, that remembering
one evening with himself, that he had given nothing that day, said; O my
friends, we have lost this day.

So let us suppose that we have lost that day, and that hour, wherein some or
other be not benesitted by us. Neither may I pass ever in silence, the
careful regard taken in this regard, by the Right Reverend Father in God, and
blessed Martyr of Christ, Master John Hooper, sometimes Bishop of Gloucester,
and of Worcester; who as Master John Fox records, never dined before he had
seen such poor as usually reforted unto him, (amounting many times to the
number of eighty persons and upwards) first catechized in the Principles of
Religion, and afterward sufficiently comforted with bodily sustenance. O
blessed Bishop that so bountifully fed both the souls and bodies of the poor
flock of Christ committed to his charge: Oh that this example might never be
forgotten amongst us. And Saint James says; Iam. 2.16.
Albeit you say unto the poor, depart in peace; war me your selves, fill your
bellies, and the like: If notwithstanding ye give them not those things that
are needful to the body, what helps it?

Surely of all that we possess, we shall faue nothing, but what we have given
to the poor, whereof God appoints himself a rewarder, as done unto
himself; Yea, Mat 10.42
unto a cup of cold water, whereby (says our Savior) We shall make our
selves friends, Luke 16.9.
which shall receive us into everlasting Tabernacles.

Thou fear to loose thy money by giving it, and yet the bestowing of it in
alms is the means to keep it; thou fear to loose thy money by giving it,
and fear thou not to loose thy self by keeping it? For our goods
auariciously reserved, are not only spoiled, but do also spoil and corrupt
our spirits: Remember the wicked rich man, who despised poor Lazarus, craving
a ^orsell of bread; does now beg of him a drop of water to allay his heat.
Lastly, call to mind that God will judge the wicked at the latter day, by
their works of mercy. Let us therefore be merciful, as our Heavenly Father
is merciful. This shall suffice to have spoken of the second and third works
of mercy to the body.

Redimo.
THE fourth work of mercy to the Body, consists in helping, relieuing,
delivering, and comforting those that are oppressed; touching which duty, the
Apostle to the Hebrews says; Heb. 13.3.
Remember them that are in bonds, as though ye were bound with them. As if he
should say; Make their case your own, deal with them as you would be dealt
withal your selves, if the like misery should befall unto you Solomon also
says, Pro. 24.11.12.
Deliver them that are drawn to death, and wile thou not preserve them that
are led to beeslaine? If thou say; Beheld, I know it not, he that pondereth
the hearts, does not he understand it? and he that keeps thy soul, knows
he it not? will he not also recompense every man according to his works?

He shows, that if we see those that be vnrightcously drawn to death, or
oppiossed, we must not stand by, and say; Alasso, who ever sam such a World as
this is? who ever saw such wrongful appression used, as in these times? But
we must put to our helping hand, and labor to our power to rescue them, and
to deliver them: For, says he, Wilt not thou preserve them? As if he had said;
Art thou so mercisesse, that thou will not help the oppressed? But then he
meets with our excuses, which we are ready to make in such cases: Alas, I
knew not that he had such need of my help, or if I should meddle, I should
bring an old house upon mine own head, and trouble my self, when I needed
not: yet he cuts off all, when he says; Does not God see thee, and know thy
heart? As if he should say; Well these excuses may dazell mine eyes, and make
a fair show with them, that can see nothing but shows; but God looks not so
much to the tongue, and what one can say for himself; he ponders the heart,
and that not lightly; he knows and considers every particular thing and
circunestance: and therefore it is no shifting, nor doubling, when he comes to
take trial of us. For he knows that all those excuses come from self-love,
and the love of lucre, and commodity; that one might spare cost, and live at
case, and rather see another oppressed with wrong, then hazard himself any way
to help him.

Last of all he says; You that be so loath to suffer a little trouble, and to
be at a little charges to help another man in misery; know you not that God
recompenceth men according to their works? That he causes them to reap like
for like; may not you come to the like misery your self? and then because you
had no heart, nor will to help another, you shall see others fit as quietly by
you, and not venture to minister any succor unto you.

Now men are come to such self-love, and senslesnes of other men's wrongs, as
if they were things done in a far Country, and in another age, as if it
nothing appertained to them, they have nothing to do with them. The better
fort only will have a little idle pity, and mercy in the mouth; saying:
Alas, I am sorry, and it is a pity, that honest men should be thus wronged,
injured, and disgraced; yet they will never put to an hand to help, they will
not stir a finger, to do any good to their relief: neither will they take
any pains, or be at any charges, to ease and deliver the oppressed: for most
men bear this mind, that they could take more pains, and spend more money to
compass their own pleasures, to satissie their lusts, and carnal appetites;
yea, to pull one of their own beasts out of the ditch, then to deliver a poor
wronged Christian out of the paws of the persecutor. But Jonathan was not of
this mind, 1 Samuel 20.38.
he ventured his own life to save David's, and delivered him out of the hand
of Sa^l his Father, though it seemed David only stood between him and the
Crown.

Obadiah likewise being Ahabs Steward, 1 Kin. 18.4
when his Master raised an hot persecution, and would have slain all the
Prophets of God; and he in likelihood should have escaped: but hardly, if his
Master had perceived that he had borne any favor and affection toward them;
and the famine was so great, that scarce bread and water could be got for
money. So that it was not only dangerous, but exceeding chargeable to feed an
hundred Prophets now, whom the King sought with all diligence to bring to
destruction: yet (notwithstanding all these impediments) Obdiah stood
faithfully for God and his Prophets, and kept them with bread and water
sufficiently, both in the heat of persecution, and in the midst of famine.

But on the contrary, most hellish and cursed of all are those, that be so
far from helping and succouring Gods afflicted Saints, as that they rejoice
at their troubles, recounting it one to another as very joyful tidings, and
matter of meriment, when they hear that such a man is in prison, such a
Minister suspended, deprived, or the like; yea, peradventure they will not
stick to put an hand to it, and to their power, to help it forwards. These be
cruel wretches indeed, inspired with the malice of the Devil, and (unless
they repent) shall be most miserable hereafter, being plagued with the
vengeance of God, as a just recompense for their cruelty: whereas in this case,
they ought rather so to show mercy unto others, as they would expect the mercy
of God toward themselves. Let us therefore be merciful, as our Heavenly
Father is merciful.

Thus much touching the fourth work of mercy toward the body.

Tego.
THE fifth work of mercy to the body, consists in showing mercy to the poor
and needy, according to our ability, and their necessity: This duty our Savior
Christ commands, saying; Luke 12.33
Sell that you have, and make you bag^ that wax not old. Where Christ
exhorting us to be merciful, meets with a common objection: Indeed I would
willingly bestow something upon the poor members of Christ Jesus; but less, I
have nothing. Have you nothing to sell; never a strike of ^orn, never a parcel
of Land, no Merchandise, no house old stuff, that you could spare for Christ?
If you have, sell it, and give to Christ, and to his Members; imitating therein
a wicked man, who to compass his pleasures, and to satissie his own carnal
appetite, will come by money, what shift soever he make: Do you as much for
Christ and his Members, as a wicked man will do for the fulfilling of his
vain desires. Oh, but if I should sell, and give, so I might be beggered. Nay,
Christ wills no man to beggar himself: But make you bags. This is such a
treasure, as no other is like it; for no other will multiply and increase,
lying by us, but is of that nature, that either of it self i^ will corrupt,
the canker and rust will set upon it, and bring it to ^^ught; or else a thief
may meet with it, so that one is in continual danger to be poor. But this
is such a kind of treasure, as in it self is eternal, and growing, and is so
surely kept, that no man can deprive us of it, either by force or craft. And
then another benefit there is; Luke 12.34
Where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also. This is of so good
effect, that if one lay up treasure in Heaven, his heart will follow it.

What is the reason then that many men can come so hardly to speak of Heaven,
and heavenly things? that one may as easily make a great millstone ascend up to
the Sky, as draw their thoughts to heauen-ward; the reason is plain, their
treasure is not there. This knew Solomon, when he said; Pro. 11.17
He that is merciful to the poor, rewards his own soul. As if he had
said; every man will yield it is a good thing to be beneficial to himself,
and to do good to his own soul: but it is most certain, that nothing in the
World, no purchase, no bargain, shall bring so much profit to the soul, as a
merciful heart, and liberal hand to the poor members of Christ Jesus. Acts
9.39.
This caused Dorcas to be so full of good works and alms, whose continual
custom was to buy cloth, cut it forth, and prepare garments for the naked.

Master Fox records, in the story of the Right worthy Lady, the Lady Anne
Bullen, Mother to the late Queen of famous memory, Queen Elizabeth; that she
usually sent her messengers into the Towns next adjoining to her abode, to
understand both the number, and state of their poor; and where greatest want
was, she contributed her alms to the relief of their necessities; yea, and
that continually, so great was her compassion toward the afflictions of Gods
people. Let us then by these examples, Remember them that are in bonds, Heb.
13.3.
as though we also were bound with them; and them that are afflicted, as if we
also were afflicted. Neither let the rich man think (whom wealth and nobility
makes haughty and proud) that therefore he was formed of gold, silver, or
some purer substance, then the beggar, who has nothing to stand upon, but
beggary, patchery, and penury: for of the same mass, of the same vile, and
abject piece of earth, both rich and poor were taken. Let them again
remember, that they are mortal, corruptible, frail, and subject to as many
chances and changes as any other, though never so poor and contemptible in the
world. Job having found this by experience, Would not see any perish for want
of clothing, Job 31.19, 20.
nor any poor without conering; yea many blessed him, that were warmed with
the fleece of his sheep. And he found the truth of that blessing pronounced
by the Prophet David, saying; Blessed is the man that considers the poor and
needy, Psalm. 41.1
the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble. Why then despisest thou
thine own flesh? why art thou an enemy to thy self? This consideration should
breed in us such a fellow-feeling of the good, or evil; joy, or sorrow;
weal, or woe of the members of the same body; that we should Rejoice with
them that rejoice, Romans 12.16
and weep with them that weep. Again, 1 Cor. 12.25.
That the members should have the same care one of another: Otherwise, if we
have lost this feeling, and affection of members, it argues plainly, that we
be no true members of the mystical body, that we are not ingrafted into the
body of Jesus Christ. And therefore Saint John assures us; 1 Ioh. 3.17
That whosoever has this Worlds goods, and sees his brother has need, and
shuts up his compassion from him, that the love of God cannot dwell in him.

If then the love of God be in thy heart, it is known by the love that thou
show to thy neighbor: and if thou love thy neighbor, thou will not show
thy self hard-hearted, and straight laced unto him in his miseries. Even as
the heart that is placed in the midst of the body, inclines most to the left
side, though indeed it inspireth life to the whole body: so though a Christian
ought to manifest his love to every man, and our charity is to be diffused
unto all men; yet should he be most prone to the afflicted part, and to
bestow his charitable benevolence, where there is most need of succor.

Charity and love to our neighbor in humane society, is like the blood in the
natural body, which amine streth and conserueth life: for as the blood in
every necessity of the body runs to the indigent parts, to succor where is
most need; so is true charity over ready to minister succor, and to convert
it self thither where is most need and necessity.

Lucullus having sumptuously entertained (for some time) certain Gr^^cians; and
when they said^ unto him, they marvelled that for their sakes he would bestow
such liberal expense, and magnificent cost; be answered: Much my friends was
for your sakes, but the greatest part was for Lucullus sake: So the good
Christian who shows himself merciful to the poor and needy, does surely
much for their sakes, because he loves them as his neighbors and fellow
members: but much also for his own sake, because he is delighted in doing
good, and joyfully does the work of mercy.

The Holy Ghost compares our deeds of charity to seed sown; Gal. 6.7.
They that sow plentifully, shall reap also plentifully. Now we know that
after sowing, in time comes the Harvest; and when the harvest comes, there is
many for one: the Husbandmans labor is recompensed; keep your seed by you, it
will corrupt, cast it forth, it shall bring in crease.

What more praiseworthy in a Christian, then where God has blessed industry
gathered, and frugalitie saved; thereby charitable almesdeeds, and works of
mercy, to pity the distressed estates of others, especially considering, that
if we sow but a cup of cold water in conscience, and in love, it is sown upon
Christ Jesus; Mat. 25.35
he is the ground: For I was hungry, and ye gave me meat; I thirsted, and ye
gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye lodged me, etc.

Therefore unless ye think that Christ will be a barren ground, it is most
certain, that he which scatters seed here, shall reap a large increase: that
which is cast abroad in mercy, shall return again in goodness; the more good
a man does, the more good he shall receive: for God will restore it.

But oh what vain of eloquence, or style of persuasion, may now serve in this
congealed age of charity, to mollify the steely hearts, and thaw the frozen
affections of worldlings, and make them relent at the miseries of the poor
members of Christ? Let us never forget that the sentence which the supreme
Judge Jesus Christ shall pronounce at the dreadful day of judgment, shall be
grounded upon the works of mercy, how we have discharged our stewardship in
the succor and relief, or in the neglect and contempt of his poor members,
which he reputeth as done unto himself.

And contrariwise, he shall send the merciless, and such as have heene
negligent in the works of charity, into eternal fire. Of earefull sentence,
to be tormented with the Devil and his Angels: Oh that this sentence were
continually sounding in our ears.

But you are to note, that these works of the faithful, are not here set
down as the causes, whereby men merit salvation; but because these works of
charity, are the infallible fruits of our faith, to show the same to be lively,
and working through love; Gal. 5.6.
and so consequently, the marks and signs of our election, and that way
wherein God would have us to walk toward the possession of his heavenly
Kingdom.

Many men, pretend many excuses, that they may not give, some for fear of
diminutio^ of their goods, that if they extend liberally to the poor, they
themselves shall want; others, cut of their bounty to the poor under pretense
of providing for their children, that they may leave them the richer but what
is this else, but to distrust God, then not to be lieue his word, then not to
trust him upon his promise? Has not truth it self said, which cannot lie?
Pro. 28.27.
He that giuth to the poor, shall not want. Luke 6.38
Likewise does not our Saniour Christ say, Give, and it shall be given you, a
good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over, shall men give
into your bosom. And does not God assure thee, that this honoring of God with
thy substance, Pro. 3.9.
shall be so far from diminishing thy wealth. That it shall fill thy barnes with
abundance. And does not the Apostle confirm this, 2 Cor. 9.10
That God will multiply your seed; and increase the fruit of your
benenolence. If thou would provide for thy children, what better course
can thou take, then that which S. Ciprian gives. If thou have many children,
be the more careful by distributing to the poor, to leave them Gods blessing;
commit to his custody, the goods thou would lay up for thy children, make
God their tutor, and protector, and so shall thou be sure to have them safe
kept. Otherwise thy niggardliness, and sparing fro^the poor, to make them
rich, what is it else, but a subversion of thy self thy house, and thy
children?

We are all not Lords, but Gods stewrds; of the goods committed to our charge,
and the poor be but Gods receivers, which come to receive Gods blessings at
our hands, to deny then to pay unto thee poor, (which bear Gods Image) that
which we owe unto God, what is this, but an heinous theft, and an intolerable
sacrilege? Christ says (says S. Augustine) give unto me of that which I
have given thee, I ask but mine own, give, and restore, thou have found me
liberal, make me thy debtor, thou give unto me temporal things, I render
unto thee eternal. Surely, there is nothing more dishonors God, then
disobedience and distrust in his providence, and promises; for it deroguteth
from his goodness, as if he would suffer us to want, if we obey his will. Even
as mothers, which have many small children, have over bread by them, that they
may give unto their children, when they crave; so our God abounds with all
treasures of goodness, and is ready to impart unto those that serve him, and
crave at his hands. As did the Leaper, Mat. 8.
Master if thou will thou can make me clean. Then would the Lord presently
answer, I will, be thou clean: thou shall have sufficient, thou have obeyed my
will, in giving relief unto the poor I will not fail thee, Luke 16.9.
nor for sake thee. Make you friends (says Christ) of the unrighteous Mammon,
that when you shall want they may receive you into everlasting habitations.

Damasoene tells a tale of the rich man's three friends, his goods, his
kinsfolks, and his works of charity.

His goods when he dies, can afford him but a shrowding sheet, and a few
mourners, and so forsake him; his kinsfolk follow him to the grave, and there
leave him; but his almesdeedes, and virtues never forsake him. This, this, I
say is the friend we should most regard, and as for the dross of the world,
and all other friends we must leave them, and they will forsake us. And surely
there is nothing more effectual, to the good of a family, then when the Master
of it opens his hands abundantly, with all plenty of good works of mercy. I
will therefore conclude this fift-branch, with this saying.

Who helps the poor, and pittieth the oppressed,
He lives to God, and doubtless dies blessed.
Let us therefore be merciful as our heavenly father, is merciful. And thus
much touching the fifth work of mercy to the body.

Colligo.
THe sixth work of mercy to the body, consists in lodging the harbourlesse
and in the entertaining of strangers. And this the Apostle commends unto us,
saying, Receive ye one another, Romans 15.7
as Christ also received us to the glory of the father. But so great was the
love of Christ that he sticked not to offer up his body, and blood as a lively
sacrifice to God the father for our atonement and reconciliation. How great
then should ou^ Christian love be one toward another to further the good one
of another and to relieve the wants and necessities one of another. The Apostle
to the Hebrews calls to us with a remembrance, Heb. 13.2.
saying; Be not forgetful to entertain strangers, for thereby some have
entertained Angels into their house unawares. Wherein he eanswereth an
objection made by many, saying, I could be willing to entertain any honest
man, but I did not remember that any stranger past by my door at any time
unregarded. Did you not? And why I pray you, would you be so forgetful? can
you tell to whom you denied entertainment, and upon what occasion they
travailed this way. Genesis 19.1.2.
For had not Let entertained the two Angels, when he saw them, he might
(peraduonture) have had his destruction amongst them of Sedom and Gomorrah. 1
Kings 17 10.22.
Had not the widow of Sarcphath enter tained Elias, neither could she have
continued her meal in her barrel, nor her oil in her cruse, neither had her
son dying bin restored to life. Joshua 2.1.
And Rahab had not saved her self and her household neither could she have
obtained this privilege, that afterward Christ Jesus according to the flesh,
should have come of her stock and posterity, if she had not entertained, and
defended with the hazard of her own life those spies, which Joshua sent.

It is recorded that the Lucans had a law; which condemned that man to be
sined, which suffered a stranger to pass vnlodged, after the sun was down.
And surely, were the like law in England, practiced upon our Inhoulders, and
victualling houses, our poor trauailers should be better respected.

For albeit the law tolerate those houses, rather for the relief of strangers,
then for the maintenance of drunkards, and other shifting mates. Let a
trauailer never thelesse, be his occasion never so urgent) resort to any of
them, who either is not able, or willing, so to lavish his expenses, according
to their greedy demands, (albeit otherwise they will content them to the
uttermost farthing) yet will they turn him away, bid him be gone, and tell him
their Rooms are provided for others. And truly these abuses I have had
experience of, and therefore may well sing with Dido.

Non Ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco.

The knowledge of this evil, moves me to pity those that are thus
afflicted.

Your Sergeants and Baileues in the second place are to be found fault withal,
and that for two causes; first for their iugling and double dealing with men.
If they be well contented, they can play see me, and see me not; yea albeit
they go daily by the party, and the creditor be at great cost and charges with
them, for attaching of their debtors. But if the debtor give not to them such
reward as they expect, then let him look to himself, he shall be catched,
dragd, and haled to prison, he shall be pincht and flieced to the bare bones,
yea they will hardly leave, till they have plucked from him all that hoe is able
to make I might t^^e bad executors, for their bad and unconscionable dealing
toward orphans, and fatherless children: many being so barely flieced by
those, into whose tuition and protection they have been committed, that they
can scarce recover from them ten for a hundred, toward their relief and
sustenance. So hard hearted are many in these our days, and of so woluish a
nature, that in stead of education, and protection, they will give them their
baine and destruction, injuriously wresting from the^ almost al, that is
committed to their bands. But let them beware, and take heed least the Lord,
who hears the cry of the poor, and appressed, reward them not accordingly.

I could also blame hardhearted Chirurgions and Physicians in Hospitals, who
having often times poor patients under their cure, continue them in torture,
and pain, suffering them grievously to languish in their maladies, because
they cannot extort from them such sums of money, as they would. But God, who
also delivers all his Lazars out of their hands, will one day call these to
account, and pay them their hire in hell, unless by repentance they prevent
Gods judgment speedily.

What should I say to gardians and ouer-seers to the gifts of the dead, who
often times convert and turn those things to their own gain, and prosit,
which the deceased, by will bequeathed, toward the relief of the poor, the
nake, the halt and the blind? I say, if there be any such, let them be
circumspect, and wary yea let their repentance be quick, and speedy, least God
in his judgment overtake them.

I could also touch watermen, the behavior of who^ for the most part is so
rude, irreuerent, and currish that they will scarce spare, or for bear any
state, age, person, or sex.

But I will conclude with the laylour, whose oppressing and extorting cruelty
toward the poor prisoner is unsupportable. For whosoever falls into his
hands though he enter with a full purse, yet shall he be sure to have it empty
before his departure; being during, his abode in prison, entertaiend with
hunger, cold iron, and fees enough, for his relief, and comfort. These
merciless misers, show to none any further co^miseration, then they themselves
may have a large consideration. But let them hearken to Christ, saying, Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. For if every man be bound to give to
the relief of the needy, what shall we think of those men, who not only never
practice this lesson of giving, but also by alsubtile means, cunning shifts,
fraudulent dealing, poll, and pill, oppress, wring, cosen and deceive the
poor, and catch that little they have, from them? who feed them selves with
others wants, cloth themselue, by others nakedues, pamper up themselves by
others penury. Iam. 5.4
Surely this cries into the ears of the Lord of hoasts, who being a righteous
Judge, and the God to whom vengeance only belongs, will reward them
accordingly. Si sterilitas in Ignom mittitur, rapa^ita quid meretur? Fulgentius.
If barren nesseshould be cast into the fire, what does catching and rapine
deserve? James 2.3
If the Apostle James says, There shall be judgment without mercy, to him
that shows no mercy; what judgment (think you) belongs to him, which does
also show cruelty to the poor? Quid recipiat qui aliena tulit, si semper
ardebit, qui sua non dedit what shall he receive that takes away other men's
goods, if he shall ever burn in hell fire, Rabunus
that has not given of his own? I was an hungered says Christ, and thou
gave me no meat, nay the little meat I had, thou tookest from me, I was
naked, and thou gave me no clothes, nay the poor clothes I had, thou
tookest from me Is there an Item aledicti, for them which do not feed the
hungry, and shall they go free, which take away the bread of the hungry. Is
the punishment so great for them that lodge not the strangers, and is there
nothing for them, that wrong the fatherless, and strangers? If those who
clothed not the naked, find it so hard a doom, what may they fear, that
take away the clothing of the naked. S. Chrysostom (in his thirty and fourth
Homily to the people of Antioch) says, that whatsoever is a boue our necessary
maintenance, is not ours, but the goods of the poor, and to retain this from
them, cries into the ears of the Lord for vengeance. And surely, there will
come a day, when men would wish they had been more merciful. For with what
measure you meat, Luke 6.38.
with the same shall men meat to you again.

Innumerable are the examples, of like measure of Gods justice toward the
unmerciful, worthy the observation, to teach us the necessity of mercy toward
our neighbors, if we would avoid the same measure of Gods revenging hand for
our cruelty showed to others.

It is recorded by Nicephorus, in his Ecclesiastical history, Lib 1. Cap. 29.
that the dancing daughter or Herodias, who required of wicked Her^^ the head
of inndent John Baptist, and had it, that afterward going on soote over a hard
frozen river, the ice breaking, she sunk down even unto the neck, which,
(through the violence of a great piece of ice coming down the river) was cut
off from therest other body, and so she tasted of the like death, she procured
to another.

King David at his death, 1 King 2.5
gave charge to Solomon his son, Thou know what Ioab did; he stird the
blood of battle in the time of peace, and put the blood of war upon his
girdle, that was about his loins, and in his shoes; that were on his feet:
let not his gray head go down to the grave in peace. Wherefore he was afterward
slain, taking hold on the horns of the altar, and so the Lord did bring his
blood upon his own head.

Aelianus reports of one Cratenas who vilanously slew Archilaus tirant of
macedonia (of whom he was entirely beloved) that he might make a compendious
way unto the kingdom, but he tasted of the same sauce. For he had scarce
enjoyed the kingdom three days, before he was also slain, fulfilling the
verse of Dramatus.

Qui struit Insidias alijs, sihi damna dat ipsi. (wrought. He that has snares
for others Himself the ^n is likewise caught.

This shall suffice to show how God in his deep and unsearchable providence
punishes (yea in this life) cruel and unmerciful persons, with the same
measure that they meat unto others Messem (says S. 'Bernard) habebis, semente
dignam; thy harvest shall be according to thy sowing: Immisericordiam
seminasti, habe quodamasti; have thou sowed unmercifulness? receive what thou
love, Fugisti misericordiam? te fugit misericordia: Did thou fly mercy?
mercy will fly from thee. Detestatus es pauperem? detestabitur te qui propter
nos, factus est pauper: Do thou hate the poor? He will also hate thee, who
for our sakes became poor. Where is become the large liberallitie of old
benefactours, toward the poor members of Jesus Christ? Is not all (with many)
scant sufficient to maintain our excesses? The pride of the world in attire,
and the maintenance thereof, in lauishing the the needless superfluity of
diet, has eaten up hospitality and mercy toward many hungry souls, and it
causes that we have little to leave at our departure, for the good of others.
Never more at table, never less at door; never more sumtuous in clothing our
selves, never less respect of others: Nature is content with few things, all
will not serve out excess. Let us therefore be so sparing in superfluous
expenses, that we may be the more liberal toward merciful, and charitable
uses; yea, let us be kind and merciful on toward another as we hope for
mercy ^at the hands of our heavenly father. Let us therefore be merciful as
etc. Thus much touching the sixth work of mercy to the body.

Condo.
THE last work of mercy toward the body, consists in burying the dead;
touching which duty the Wise man says: My son, pour forth thy tears over the
dead, Ecclesiasticus 38.16.
then cover his body, according to his appointment, and neglect not his
burial. The same commandment gives Tobit to his Son; Tobit 14.10.
My Son when I die, bury me honestly. Whence we may gather, that sunerall
rites, decent interring of corpse, exequies, and seemly mournings, (which
Saint Austen calls, Officium postremi muneris, our last duties of love) are
not unfitting ye practice of those amongst whom all things should be done in
order. The Israelites in burying so honorably their Parents and Governors,
did show themselves to be people of good and orderly dispositions. Abraham the
Father of the faithful, Genesis 23.4.
bought a possession of burial of the Hittites, who by the sight and light of
nature, had their Sepulchers: And therefore answered Abraham; Thou art a Prince
of God amongst us, in the chiefest of our Sepulchers bury thy dead, none of us
shall forbid thee his Sepulcher; but thou may bury thy dead therein. Genesis
25.
So when Abraham yielded the spirit, and died in a good age, and was gathered
to his people; his Sons Isaac and Ismael buried him in the care of
Machepelah, in the field of Hephron, where Abraham was buried with Sarah his
wife.

The like we see done to Isaac, when he gave up the ghost being old and full
of days; his two Sons, Esau and Jacob buried him. Now as Jacob did to his
Father, so his children do to him, according as he had commanded them: For
they carried him into the Land of Canaan, and buried him in the cave of the
field of Machpelah, which Abraham had bought. The like may be said of Moses:
Deuteronomy. 34.56.
for albeit the people buried him not, neither knew of his Sepulcher, lest they
should abuse it to Idolatry: yet rather then he should want burial, he was
buried of God.

The men of Iabesh Gilead, 2 Samuel 2.5, 6.
are praised of God, and rewarded of David, because they buried King Saul and
his Son, and adventured their lives to do unto him their last duty.

The same might be said of the rest of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Judges,
Kings, Governors, and Priests: Yea, the new Sepulcher, Luke 23.53
the clean linen clothes the sweet ointments, and the assembly of men of
reputation, showed how our Savior was respectively regarded, and entembed with
s^le^^nity.

These examples teach, that it is a Christian and commendable duty of the
living, to be performed to the dead; of Children to be performed to their
Parents, of the people of God one toward another, to commit the body of the
deceased to the grave, to put dust to dust, and so to cover earth with earth.

And certainly those bedies which have been the Temples of the Holy Ghost,
and shall be at the day of doom changed into a condition of glory; should
have that decency performed, as is agreeable both to comely practice, and
Christian s^omlinesse: wherefore, as they are very highly to be exalted, whose
honorable care to the dead is such, as to erect them Tombs, and to repair
and beautify their decayed Monuments: so on the other side, they are greatly
to be reproved, and found fault withal, that carelessly attend to the funerals
of their brethren departed.

But what shall I say to such as deface the Monuments of the dead? Surely such
deserve to have their names to be blotted out of good men's remembrance, for
such their cruel, inhumane, and barbarous dealing: whereas they ought rather
to beautify the blessed memories, and repair the decayed tombs of their
Ancestors, and Forefathers.

Let us I say, in this last point of love also, so show mercy unto others, as
we would likewise expect in the same case to be performed toward our selves,
especially it being a matter of so great weight and moment.

For first amongst all creatures, Man is most loathsome and ugly, when his life
is departed: as in his birth and bringing forth into the World, of all
Creatures he is most frail and feeble, without strength to stand, without
help to defend himself; so being dead, he is become noysom, ghastly and
deformed: he that a little before gloried of his beauty, comeliness, feature,
and proportion, is now become the mirror and spectacle of a deformed,
misshapen, and noysom carcass: such a confusion and wrack has sin wrought
and brought into our nature. This is noted in Lazarus, Ioh. 11.39
who having lien buried but four days, his body stunke. Secondly, burial is
promised as a blessing from God, and the want of it threatened for a plague and
judgment. God offers it as a mercy to Abraham, Genesis 15.15
that he should be buried in a ripe age: and to Josiah, that he should be put
in his grave in peace, 1 King. 22.19, 20.
and his eyes should not behold the evil that should be brought upon that
place.

Contrariwise, the want hereof is threatened as a curse to Ier^b^^^^ and Ahab,
Kings of Israel, that they and their posterity should be devoured with dogs.

And because Iehoiakim fell from God, it was foretold unto him by the Prophet;
That he should not be buried honorably, but he should be buried as an Ass
is buried, even drawn, and cast forth without the gates of Jerusalem. Psalm.
79.2, 3.
The dead bedies of thy Servants have they given to be meat to the Fowls of
the Heaven, and the flesh of thy Saints unto the heasts of the Earth; their
blood have they shed like waters round about Jerusalem, and there was (...) to
bury them.

I answer, Resol.
all temporal chastisements are common to the godly, and ungodly, as famine,
plague, pestilence, sword, nakedness, and such like punishments, which God
shoots as his arrows against the sons of men. The favor of God bringing
salvation, stands not in these outward things: for as it cannot profit a
wicked and wretched man to be solemnly interred, and costly buried, dying out
of the favor of God, (As is noted in the Parable of the rich glutton) so it
shall not hurt a righteous man, Luke 10 22, 23.
to want a sumptuous solemnizing of his funeral.

Yet let us make a difference between the body of man and beast: for as man
differs from the beast in his life; Genesis 2.7.
Made after the image of God, fashioned to look upward, created with a
reasonable soul, and sundry other prerogatives; so he should in his death and
burial. The bodies of beasts are drawn forth being dead, to lie in the open
air, to be devoured one of another, and it skilleth not: but it is unseemly,
and unlawful, against order and honesty, that the dead bodies of men should be
cast out unburied into ditches, and dunghils, or such foul and filthy places.
And therefore Iehuspeaking of Iezabel, cast down out of her window, and having
her blood sprinkled upon the wall, said; Visit now yonder cursed woman, 2
King. 9.34.
and bury her. Seeing then that the dead carcass of man is so unsavory and
loathsome by reason of sin, and seeing burial is a blessing where it is
bestowed, and a curse where it is denied; we conclude, that it is a courteous
and commendable duty, testifying our love and reverence to the dead, so soon
as life is departed, and death has arrested them, to commit the body to the
grave.

And thus have I (albeit in a weak measure) particularly set down what I
could, touching each duty of mercy, both to soul and body, desiring, and
humbly beseeching all those, into whose hands this Treatise shall happen, so to
show mercy unto others, as they would have mercy as the hands, of God toward
themselves. Les us therefore he merciful as our Heavenly Father is merciful.

Thus much touching the precept.

The President.
In these words. As your father which is in heaven is merciful.
FIrst, whereas Christ teaches us to call God father, we are emboldned to
make our suits unto him, least we might say as Abraham what be we, Genesis 18.27.
which are but dust and ashes, to talk unto God.

Secondly, when we confide him as a father, in the very beginning of our
prayer, we acknowledge his bounty and grace. For first this name of father, is
a name to move us to come unto him.

The wandering son said Ibo adpatrem. I will go unto my father. Luke 15.18
Secondly it is a name of privilege. Rom 8.18.
He has given us says the Apostle his spirit, whereby we cry Abba father.
And thirdly it is a name of providence, your heavenly father cares for you. 1.
Pet. 5.7.
But how come we to call God by a name of love, of privilege, and of
prou^dence; Surely, he that wills us to call God father, has made him our
father. He has given us power, Ioh. 1.12.
to become the sons of God. In the old law, God is called by the name of
Lord, Ego Dominus, I the Lord; there his people are called servants; now from
the name of the Lord, he is called father; his people from feruants, are become
sons, and all by the means of Christ Jesus. Ascend ad patrem meum, and
patrem vestrum: I go to my father, and your father, my God and your God.

Now calling God father, as it is a name of dignity, (for it is thought to go
well with the children of a rich and loving father) so is it a name of duty.
And as he has the properties of a rich and loving father, to love, to care
for, and to pity, so should we have also the quallities, and properties of
good children, to honor him to serve him, and to obey him; lest it be said,
as it was once of some, Nutriui filios; Esaias 1.2.
I have nourished children, and they have rebelled aganist me.

Secondly as Christ called God here by the name and title of a father; so in
like manner has he to the comfort of us his chosen children and servants,
entitled himself by the name of our father: After this manner pray; Our
Father which art in heaven. etc. And first, this may teach us, with boldness
to call, and cry unto God, being our so merciful, so loving, and so careful a
father, in all our necessities and afflictions Call upon me, (says almighty
God.) Psalm. 50.15
in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall praise me.

Secondly, this teaches us, when we pray, to pray all in one. Let not the
rich, and mighty therefore despise the poor, and needy; it is the will of our
blessed Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, to have us altogether, to call to God
our father; why then should any one contemn or disdain others.

Thirdly, this may admonish us to love one another, and to have a
participation, or fellow feeling of the wants, and miseries of our brethren,
according to the counsel of the Apostle, Romans 12.16
Rejoice with them that rejoice, weep with them that weep, and be of like
affection one toward an other. John 13.34.35.
A new commandment I gine you, that ye love one another. By this shall all men
know, that you are my Disciples if ye love one another. This so commendable a
virtue nature her selse has taught the wise men, (even among the heathen)
which were wont to say. Nihiltam esse secundum Naturam, quam iuuare consortem
nature, nothing is more agreeable to nature, then to help them, that partake
with us in the same nature; especially, seeing the creator of nature, has
endued us with the same condition of nature, that no man should suffice to
himself, without the aid of another; and therefore he would have all things
to stand. Mutuis auxili^s, by mutual succors, that the very reason of
necessity might inuit us to mutual love.

As your father which is in heaven is merciful.

We show God to be a heavenly father, in that we mention him to be in heaven.
We confess what a manner of Father we mean, that is to say ^eauenly. Lest
therefore we should be esteemed as degenerate children, let us also be
heavenly. In heaven. What more powerful, then to have a father In heaven, And
therefore howsoever we are distressed on earth, the comfort is, we have a
father in heaven. In heaven: Then is our inheritance in heaven also. In heaven:
And therefore praying. Psalm. 121.1
We list up our eyes unto the hills, from whence comes our help. In heaven:
Not as placing his divine power only there, which fills heaven and earth;
but we say In heaven; because there chiefly his glory does appear, there he
blesses his Saints and Angels. Well then (says S. Ansten) we have a father in
heaven; let us not cleave to things here on earth. Inuenimus Patrem, Inuenimus
patriam, we have found our father, we have found our country. Hence we
learn first of all, to acknowledge his goodness. Secondly, to have recourse
to him in the time of neeth; and thirdly, to be m^ ^^tifull unto others by his
example, who has been so loving and so merciful to us.

Is merciful.
As we wish that God should be merciful unto us, our Savior would have us to
show ^^^cy unto our neighbor. And inde^de herein consists the tripartite
justice, with con^ei^^th the whole duty o^^ Christion, which wills us Rodd^^
vnicuique quod suum est, to give ouery one his due, to God our selves, and our
neighbor.

Mercy he wills for two respects, first because we have always in our eyes
those that have need of mercy; and as we are men, so Nihil humani, anobis
alienum putemus; Let us think no human accident strange unto us. For if it
be true that Herodotus says, Nihil aliud esse hominem, quam miseriam and
calemitatem, Man is nothing else but misery and calamity. Surely then there is
no man, good or evil, but needs mercy, and that for this cause, for that he
is nothing but misery: And according to the proverb Miseria res est digna
misericordia, Misery is a thing worthy of mercy; because Misericordia non
causam, sed fortunam spectat; mercy looks, not into the cause, but to the
present state, and necessity. And therefore Augustine thus defines mercy.
Misericordia est alienamiseria in nostro cord compassio; mercy is a fellow
feeling in our hearts of another misery. Mercy, (says Gregory) has the
denomination, and etymology a misero cord from a miserable, or woeful heart;
because as often as we behold a man in misery, the mind through
commiseration, being touched with grief at his miseries, does as it were (cor
miserum facere) vex and torment the heart, with a sympathy and fellow feeling
of his misery. And he that has compassion of a wretched though wicked man,
non mores eius, sed hominem miseretur, does not pity the manners, (which are
evil) but the man, who by being sinful, is also miserable. We commend them
that love men, (says Aristotle) If it be but as they are men; and therefore
being on a time reproved, for that he gave an alms to a wicked man, answered,
Misertus sum hominem, non Iniquitatem. I had compassion on the man, and not on
his manners. Homo qui Calamitoso est misericors, meminit suit he that has
pity upon a man in misery, remembers himself, Cuiuis potest accidere, quod
cuiquam accidit. That which chances unto one man, may happen also to another.
So that nothing should more incline our hearts unto mercy, then the
consideration of our own misery. And he that is merciful, deserves mercy
again, when he falls into misery. Habet in aduersis auxilia, qui in socundis
commodat; He finds succor in adversity, which shows the same in
prosperity, (says Publius).

The second respect, why God wills mercy, is because to him it is more
agreeable, and more acceptable; for by it, we are most like him, and by
likeness we best please him. Psalm. 145.9
His mercy is above all his works. Well wills he therefore that man being the
best of his creatures, should be like him, in the best of his actions, as
plainly appears by this text: Ye shall therefore be merciful, as your
father which is in heaven is merciful.

He bids us not to imitate his power, which Lucifer proudly aspiring to was
dejected into hell, nor his wisdom which Adam vainly affecting, was elected
out of Paradise; but his mercy, which we humbly practicing, shall be erected
and lifted up to heaven.

Now that we may be merciful, let us first learn who are miserable. Not
every one that is sick, or hungry, or naked, or in prison; is simply or only
the object of mercy: but many that are also strong in body, fat with cheer,
brave with clothes, rich in Lands, and free from bonds: those are sick in
soul, empty in spirit, bare in mind, poor in virtue, slaves to sin. For as
there is a corporal necessity, so there is a spiritual misery; and in both
there is a work of mercy; in the one, the rich seeing the want of the poor,
may pity him; in the other, not knowing his own, may be pitied of him; in
that the distressed has nothing but what he receives; in this he has
somewhat of his own to bestow; there a Potentate may show his bounty, here a
beggar may give Caesar an alms: so then there is mercy to the body, mercy to
the soul, and he that does either, shall have mercy both for body and soul:
that consists in those seven works aforenamed, visiting the sick, giving
drink to the thirsty, bread to the hungry, redeeming the captive, clothing
the naked, lodging the stranger, and burying the dead. But this has as many
forms of pity, as there be acts of charity; and all, or more then Saint
Paul ascribes to it, is true of this: 1 Cor. 13.4.
It gives, it forgiues, it enjoys not, it boasts not, disdaines not, seeks
not her own, is not angry, thinks no evil, rejoices not iniquity, suffers
all things belecues all things, hopes all things, indures all things. And to
conclude, it does all things that may be done, though for a sinner, for a
stranger, for an enemy; as our dear Lord, by conuersing with the converting
of sinners; in the precedent verse teaches us To be good with the evil, Luke
6.35.
and kind to the unkind: not as proud Pharifies, contemning, or condemning
those that err in life or belief; but sometimes instructing, otherwhiles
admonishing, upon occasion tollerating, if need be, reproving, and when it is
requifite, comforting. Thus to be a Prote^, i^ no hypocrisy, but perfect
piety. And though perhaps there be not always effecting means, yet God
never reiects a charitable meaning; it is the mind, not the gift; the will, not
the work, the affection, not the action, that God esteems: and therefore
Saint Paul commends the Corinthians, For that they had begun not only to
do, but also to will: 2 Cor. 10.
for there may be a doing of good, and no good will; there may be giving
without charity, and courtesy without mercy. In some, either fashion, not
compassion, or humor, not virtue, or hypocrisy, not Christianity, produces
strained, fained, maimed acts of mercy.

Such a giver does but cast off his superfluity superfluously; hut the truly
compassionate (like the widow) puts into Gods treasury of his substance
really; the one gives externally, the other gives internally. As Saint Gregory
says, he gives Extra semetipsum; Somewhat without himself; this, de
semetipso, a piece of himself. And albeit this kind of mercy be most usual,
when it meets with vnderserued misery, yet must there be a pity, even of a
just calamity, both in private men, that in others, see daily Gods righteous
judgments, and in Magistrates, that usually punish malefactors: unless the
fault be out of measure, some heinous offense, either against God, or his
anointed, wherein to be merciful were to be miserable, and to be
compassionate, very unjust.

Let us not therefore grieve, yea let us rather rejoice with a great and
unspeakable joy, when traitors, murderers, or the like are worthily brought
to confusion. Psalm. 85.10
Seeing mercy and truth they then do meet, righteousness and peaoe therein
kiss one another.

But in regard of our own private wrongs, we are taught to love our enemies,
To bless them that curse us, Mat. 5.44, 45.
and to do good to them, that hate us, and to pray for them, which hurt us,
and persecute us, that we may be the children of our Father which is in
Heaven; for he makes the sun to arise on the evil, and on the good, and
sends rain on the just, and on the unjust.

Let us not so feast the body only that the soul should fast; as many do,
who are merciful but in part; Yea, in regard of the soul, they are altogether
merciless. For what good do these men toward the redemption of a soul from
the bondage of sin and Satan, more then they do to a dog, a horse, or a
hog; yet as the miseries of the soul are more dangerous, so should they more
carefully be regarded and pitied. Let us not ( whilst we carefully feed the
soul, suffer the body to pine in want and penury; as also some do who being
ouer-clogged with the terrestrial affairs of this life, may not part with a
penny what need socuer should be. Howbeit, as man consists of soul and
body, and is subject to miseries in them both; so must we be charitable to
him, in relieuing of both.

If you ask (says Lactantius) why God created the world? It was because man
should be created. If you demand why man was created? It was, because he
should worship his creator; If you ask why he should worship his creator? It
was, for no other cause, but that he might be rewarded by him. These are the
bowels of Gods mercy, who had no other cause of his mercy, but his mercy; no
other end, but his own glory, and our good; wherein there is no end of his
goodness, no number of his mercies, no measure of his wisdom, no depth of his
bounty; whose great love to mankind was apparent in this, when he purchased our
redemption, with the effusion of the most precious blood of his dear and only
begotten Son.

And therefore (says Tertullian) si tanta in terris moraretur fides, quanta
merces expectatur in Coelis: were there so great faith on earth, as there is
reward to be expected in heaven, how great should our love be one toward
another, to tender the good one of another, and to relieve the wants, and
necessities one of another.

And surely man has but two pleas before the throne of Gods judgment seat,
the one of Innocence, the other of mercy; the former never any (that Immaculate
Lamb, excepted) could plead; and what interest shall man challenge in the plea
of mercy, who has denied the same to his brother. For says Christ our
Savior, Mat. 18.33.
ought not thou also to have had pity on thy fellow, even as I had pity on
thee? Let us then, Col. 3.1, 2.
so many as be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits on the right hand of God the father. Set I say your affections
on things which are above, and not on things which are on earth.

Worldly minded men fitly resemble the earth in these five points; first the
nature of the earth is cold and dry, so are all worldly affections to devotion
and charity. Secondly the earth stands still, and has the circumfere^ce
carried round about it; so are Gods benefits about earthly men, and they are
not at all moved. Thirdly, the earth does oft^ntimes keep down many hot
exhalations, which naturally would ascend; so do worldly affections, many
charitable motions. Fourthly, the earth is heavy, and heavy things go
downward; so worldly men set all their affections only upon the terrestrial
things of this life; according to the saying of the Apostle; Phil. 3.18, 19^
They are enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose end is damnation, whose God is
their belly, whose glory is to their shame, who mind earthly things. Lastly
yet the earth is fruitful after tilling and manuring; so to conclude, till the
heart of man be fully manured with the graces of Gods holy Spirit, it can bring
forth no good fruit of devotion and charity. Let our compassion therefore so
largely extend it self toward the consolation of others, as in like manner we
would expect from the hands of the Almighty toward our selves, ending with
this of our Savior. Let us be merciful, as our heavenly Father is merciful.

Now the God of grace and mercy, so guide you in the ways of holiness and
good works, that both in life and death you may glorify God your creator, to
whom with the Son and holy Spirit, be given and ascribed, from the bottom of
our hearts, all power, praise, might majesty and dominion, both now and for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

