A NEW INSTVCTION OF PLOWING AND SETTING OF CORN, HANDLED IN MANNER OF A
DIALOGVE between a Ploughman and a Scholar.

Wherein is proved plainly that Plowing and Setting, is much more profitable
and less chargeable, than Plowing and Sowing.

By EDWARD MAXEY. Gent.

He that withdraws the Corn, the people will curse him: but blessing shall
be upon the head of him that sells Corn.

Prou. 11.26. men ploughing with horses and setting a field

Imprinted at London by Felix Kyngston, dwelling in Pater noster Row, over
against the sign of the Checker. 1601.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL SIR RICHARD MARTEN KNIGHT, MASTER OF HER MAJESTY'S
MYNT, ALDERMAN, and twice Lord Mayor of the City of London.
IT is well known (right Worshipful) how great a benefactor and furtherer you
have been to many good works and profitable to the Commonwealth: for by your
employments, the inhabitants of sundry parts of England and Wales, have gained
for many years, many thousand pounds yearly. How much then those poor are
bound to praise God for you, and such as further the like good works, all wise
men acquainted with your great charge and travel can testify, which I thought
worthy to be published, and left in memory for other ages yet to come, to your
great commendation and encouragement of others, to follow your good example.
And now (right Worshipful) calling to mind my former time spent in
Husbandry; the most sweet and comfortable kind of life to all virtuous minds
(that Adams posterity can enjoy) if it were not for the wickedness of servants,
who discourage many industrious minds; and seeing an unskillful Pamphlet
(called God speed the Plough) to be so long unanswered, set forth by some
Nouice in Husbandry, as should appear as well by his writing, as that he
says in the same, it is none of his profession; which has and may do much
hurt by dissuading men from so profitable an employment as the setting of
Corn; which when I considered, and remembering that I had spent the most part
of thirty years in Husbandry: I adventured to publish this little Treatise,
for the instruction of those that will be persuaded to practice this kind of
excellent and profitable work: which with my self I desire to be protected by
your accustomed loving favor toward me.

Yours to be commanded, EDW. MAXEY.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
WHereas there are two books written concerning the setting of Corn: the
first commending it, the second disgracing it; both of them discoursing so
Schollerlike, that the plain Country Husband man, cannot judge which of them
has most skill for instruction in this kind of Husbandry; and perceiving
that the second treatise (called God speed the Plough) has dissuaded great
numbers from the practice of setting of Corn: I was advised and resolved to
adventure the public censuring of this Instruction. Wherein I desire to prove
how much more casie and profitable, Plowing and Setting will be in all places,
and that with less charge, then either Plowing and Sowing, or digging and
Setting, desiring to be freed from all suspicion, to contend for art or
learning with any of the former writers. And like a plain Ploughman to show my
opinion, what I think of the former contention, between the Plowe and the
spade: in a word, I judge both these profitable instruments may right well be
used in their proper places, that the Plowe may keep his place in the fields,
A little good counsel would have saved all your labor in writing, and mine in
answering: but I: hope it will do good.
to the great increase of Corn, and the Spade in the Gardens for roots,
herbs, and flowers, necessary for household provision. And I could have
wished you the Gentleman and author of the book (called God speed the Plowe)
had taken better counsel of some skillful Husbandman, before you had published
a book, wherein you endeavor to correct and teach an Art, which you
acknowledge is none of your profession, and to have considered how easelie for
the most part our English Nation are dissuaded from good causes, neither for
the glory of God, or the honor and profit of their Prince and Country: for
though it be true, that very few innouations in the Church, or novelties in a
state, are not always and generally good, and profitable for all places, and
for all people: yet these profitable inventions, specially in Husbandry,
should rather be commended then disgraced, until a manifest error in them be
discovered, and that by experience and proof. Again, you ought rather to have
remembered and well considered the lamentable case of the poor that lived in
distress in the late years of dearth, who notwithstanding the charitable
orders taken by her Majesty, her honorable Counsel and other officers of the
kingdom, to the glory of God, and their high commendation: yet was it well
seen with the eyes of the truly charitable, that except the King of heaven
and earth had relieved the poor people of this Land, with Corn out of his
storehouses in other Countries; the poor and the rich also had been in hazard
to have perished by famine, that might have fallen upon this sinful people, or
by some woeful calamities, inseparable companions of penury and want. And let
every indifferent man consider what huge quantities of Corn may yearly be
saved, that now is cast away by Plowing and Sowing: yet give me leave plainly
to give you a project what this would come unto. Some writers of our time
account but nine thousand six hundred and two and fifty Parishes, or
thereabouts, in England, and suppose six hundred and two and fifty of them to
be in Cities and Towns using no Tyllage: and so account but nine thousand
Country Parishes, and because the author of the book (called God speed the
Plough) writes, that if a Parish have three thousand Acres of erable land,
which is about thirty or forty Ploughlands in a Parish, therefore mistrusting
his judgment, we will admit but ten Plowelands, one Parish with another; so
nine thousand Parishes has four score and ten thousand Plowlands, and that if
in every Ploweland there may easily be saved yearly ten or twelve quarters of
Seed Corn, that now is cast away, which shall be directly proved, it will
amount to some nine or ten hundred thousand quarters of Grain that might every
year be saved in her Majesty's dominions: I dare affirm so much (be it more
or less) as would fetch hither the Indies Treasure out of Spain and other
Countries far distant; to the great honor and riches of our Prince and
Country, and especially the maintenance of our English Navy, with plentiful
provision also of victuals for Soldiers both by Sea and Land, to their
exceeding comfort, and the terror of all foreign enemies.

And to conclude, I wish that they whose hearts the Lord has endewed with true
wisdom, and charity, to remember and consider well of this danger, from
which the Lord has so lately delivered us: and let us all serve that God in
the moderate use of his creatures, and not consume in riotous gluttony and
drunkenness, such great quantities of his blessings, to the hurt of our bodies
and souls, the poor being ready to famish before our eyes. So I commend thee
good Christian Reader, to Gods protection, and this work to the blessing of
the Almighty.

The particular proofs of this good Husbandry, shall be seen in a dialogue,
between a Ploughman and a Scholar, for the better instruction of plain
Country people.

E. M.

A NEW INSTRVCTION OF PLOWING AND SETTING OF CORN, HANDLED IN manner of a
Dialogue between a Ploughman and a Scholar.
Ploughman. SEeing I am appointed to defend the profitable art of setting of
Corn, though in respect of learning very unfit, yet because I have professed
and practiced Husbandry for the most part of thirty years, and that you, the
author of the book (called God speed the Plough) say that husbandry is no
part of your profession, I may hope to maintain against you by way of argument
in plain Husbandry, that Plowing and Setting is much better and more
profitable, than either Plowing and Sowing, or Digging and Setting.


Scholar. I marvel that my book does so much offend you, I thought to have
pleased you and all Ploughmen, for so commending the old fashion of Plowing
and Sowing.


Ploughman. Surely sir you have no otherwise offended me, than all other men
that desire the good of their Country, and be sorry to see the simple abused
and discouraged by your means, and how you please an other sort of wilful
men, that will neither know what may be profitable for themselves, nor have any
such hearty love to their Country and poor neighbors, as they ought to
have. As for your book, howsoever you meant, it serves to so little good
purpose (in my conceit) that it was the chief cause that moved me to take
this work in hand, to correct (if it were possible) the evil humors and
preiudicate opinions against Corne-Setting, that it has planted in men's heads
and hearts.


Scholar. I am sorry that my book should breed any evil humors in men's
heads or hearts, and I pray you what faults do you find in my book?


Ploughman. Sir there be faults too many, which being the fruits of your idle
hours (as you say) be not much to be marueiled at, for seldom does idleness
bring forth any profit in husbandry. And it is not my purpose to expostulate
with you upon all particular faults; they are too many to trouble the reader
with: but you shall hear mine opinion, like a man of my plain profession, and
I will tell you my mind what I do think in this argument, as well as I can.
To pass over other matters, I will begin to defend our old fashion of
Ploughes, against your strange Plough, that you say might be so made and
handled, that it may go deeper by a foot more than ordinary, proportioning
the strength of the Teeme and Plough together. Note that the question between
the old fashion Ploughes and this strange Plough, is but to prove the Plough
apt to set Corn.
Sir, if you can devise a Plough that will go deeper in all grounds (for you
make no difference) a foot more than ordinary, it were good you brought it
forth; for surely it is likely to prove an implement of great force to our
English Husbandry: for with it you must be compelled to plowe land twenty
inches deep or thereabouts, and yet I must confess to my remembrance, I never
saw any Plough, though drawn with ten oxen, to go above eight or ten inches
ordinarily, and that with much a do; and I pray you, how many Oxen or Horse
will your Plough require to be drawn with? for in some places if you make it
go, we plain country men will suspect you will Conjure: and in many places
the quality of the mould will not permit our ten inches, much less your two
and twenty. Again, what use I pray you shall the Commonwealth have of such
an implement, where either it cannot go unless the diu^ell draw it, or may not
go for the evil mould it will turn up? and so your Plough in that place does
more harm, than your book can do good any where else.


Scholar. Not so sir, I will have my Teeme and my Plough so made, that it
shall go well of that depth in such grounds, as I will choose to set my Corn
in.


Ploughman. It may be possible (if it please God to work such wonders by your
invention) but we the poorer sort of Husbandmen, cannot make Ploughs, and
provide Teemes of that value and quality; neither have we such change of Land,
as to make choice of apt grounds to bear the weight of such Plowes and Teemes;
but I doubt not by Gods help, to plowe and dress ten Acres of Land, as well
as you shall do with your strange Plough, or any man shall do with a spade,
except he dig it two spit deep, and so bury the first spit with the second,
which will be both extreme chargeable and impossible in most grounds; and yet
where he may dig but one spit, there will remain needs unburied specially
the Cooch, which I never saw destroyed, but with a summer fallow, or burning
the land, as the Devonshire men do: the which killing of weeds, howsoever it
can be done, is the chief cause, that upon extreme barren Land, those
country people have good Corn, which otherwise The destroying of weeds, a
chief point in Husbandry.
should have little or none: and I desire all good Husbands to consider how
necessary it is for them to destroy the weeds, before they sow or set their
Corn, that (if possibly they can) they suffer not the weeds to suck out the
sap of their grounds in the spring time, and all summer, before they commit
their seed to the ground, indangering it with such enemies, which they may do
(in my opinion) by one or two plowings more in their summer fallow above
ordinary, if the weedie condition of the Land, or the season of the year do
require it.


Scholar. Well sir, admit you do plowe your Land as well as the Spade can do
it, as deep as your Plough will go, yet as I say, you cannot plowe it deep
enough, nor lay it level and plain for the setters to work upon.


Ploughman. The Corn sowed above furrow, often lies not one inch deep.
To this I answer, first that I will plow it deep enough, for what should set
my Corn to grow as well, and much better (being set in due proportion and
order) when it has as much hollow and loose ground under him, to spread root
and lie pleasantly in, as your book or the former appoynts, or as our sown
Corn ever had, since sowing was first used, and that is but three or four
inches deep: and as far as I know, our english Corn rooteth not past two or
three inches directly downwards. So then, if it root downwards, and spring
upwards but five or six inches at the most; marvel why you should think I
should not plowe it deep enough, when your self faith you will plowe it yet
deeper by a foot more if need be, and I pray you so do, but take heed you
meet not with those furious beasts you speak of in your book, This Plough
will serve to make ditches, but for the danger of those beasts.
that will devour the Corn when it lies so deep and light, for if they
catch you and your Plough (in most grounds of England) they would surely
devour your Plough, and put your person in great hazard, without speedy
help: and therefore we will not plow so deep, it is good sleeping in a whole
skin. But if you had been contented with half a foot more then ordinary,
there had been some possibility in some places, yet with much ado: therefore I
pray you give some men leave, that have or may have good Teemes and Ploughs,
though not made after your fashion, to go but two or three inches more than
ordinary, and then they may plow some ten or twelve inches with much ado where
the land will permit, so if our Corn have five or six inches to spring
upward, (even from the lower most part of his root) and as much downward, it
shall be sufficient to content us with the increase of eight or six quarters
upon an Acre: Note well.
do you plowe it deeper for thirty or twenty quarters upon an Acre (God send
it you that venture so deep for it.) And as for laying our ground level and
plain, we will not follow your counsel in your book, nor fear your wooden
dagger, your huswife-like instructions are to rake away the grass that the
light Harrow leaves, till it be as level as a Garden, and then to set it; as
though any good husband would have his Land so out of tilth, and ouergrowne
with weeds, that at sowing or setting time, the Land should need the raking
of the grass, after a good summer fallowe. It is time for such a Ploughman to
throw his Plough in the hedge, and take the Spade in hand, and become one of
your threescore laborers: and then in the fame place you tell us of laying it
as level as a Garden. And I pray you sir, then what shall become of the Corn
of the best and most grounds of England, specially for Wheat and Rye? Winter
Corn cannot lie too hie in most grounds.
For if you level it so like a Garden, without all question, it will be
drowned for the most part, and come to little or no good at all, for all men I
think that ever saw Husbandry, or understood natural reason, know that such
Land; nay, most Land must be laid high and round with furrows, according to
the quality of the soil, or else the seed will be drowned. And to break the
clods, we may use the Rowler, as we do for our Barlie if need be, and so much
shall serve for instruction, or rather persuasion of such as you have inueigled
with so many idle doubts, in a matter that may be perceived by those that are
not wilfully blind, or not skillful at all in Husbandry.


Scholar. Not so sir, these are not altogether so idle as you make them, but I
pray you how will you make this barren Land rich enough, to have such increase
as will answer the charge of setting?


Ploughman. Indeed that is not altogether so idle as the other, but yet very
easy to be answered, and very likely to be compassed, even in the barrenest
Countries and places far removed from all means to enrich their Land. Here
then I would advise all good Husbandmen that intend setting, to lay all their
soil and foul doung that they used to scatter over thirtyAcres or there
abouts, (being their ordinary season) I say, lay it upon ten Acres. And by
reason they leave twenty Acres to rest, they shall keep more store of Sheep
either of their own, or take to fold of other men's, and so keep them better,
and by that means their fold will be much bigger, and their Land will be
folded much better: and if there be any Marle of Chalk, or of other sort of
good molde near to be had by any means, they shall now have leisure to fetch
it, by reason they have so little tillage to do: or else do this, follow the
example of a Gentleman that made a great quantity of soil, by the fodering of
all his Cattle upon a piece of exceeding rank ground about an Acre, which
being very good and restie Land near his house, he plowed up in the end of
April, when his Cattle went to grass, and with two or three plowings so
mixed the restie rank ground with the doung and so fodder of his cattle, that
he had ten load for one of very good soil, (to the fatting of other grounds)
then otherwise he should have had; and also there is much dounge to be made
with Fern in places where it is near: many good Husbands do provide great
store in summer, that in winter will serve for cattle to sit dry upon, and
make great store of soil, with little cost, having now so much leisure in this
small Tillage. By these and diverse other good means very common and easy,
when men have little plowing, they may so enrich their land, that they shall
not need to doubt of a better increase (by Gods help) sufficient to pay the
charge of setting liberally, with threefold increase at Harvest.


Scholar. Then you may fall into another inconvenience, that I warned you of
in my book, that is, to make your land too rank, and then your Corn will
ledge, and every stalk will be slender and long, every ear will be heavier
and longer than ordinary, and so the Corn will fall down and ledge, and
cometo little good.


Ploughman. This inconvenience will easily be helped. We had first need to
help our barren land, and make it hearty, and then for falling and ledging I
will set it thin enough, as the quality of the ground requires: for it is the
thick sowing of rank land upon evil tillage that causes Corn to ledge.
Note.
If the land be rich and the year wet, the Corn rank, and the weeds many;
then (as you say) it is like to ledge: few poor men in England complain their
land is too rich, or desire their Corn more thin, for then their purses would
be more empty. I could easily teach them such tricks as well as you with all
Reason and experience teaches and proves, that the straw will be bigger and
much stronger.
your cunning: and as for the length and slendernes of the straw, I doubt not
but it will be fit to bear the heavy ears, which God send me, and take you
the light if you like them better.


Scholar. Your reasons may prove good for sowing, but for setting, you will be
set a ground presently. For where will you get people enough to set a Season fit
for a Teeme to be kept on? All the laborers in the Country will scant serve
you, and five or six such as you would be.


Ploughman. Sir, I wonder what you mean to talk still so idly, as though it
were fit for me or any man, to set our whole seasons, when we have laid all
our soil, and bestowed all our labor, tillage, and cost, upon the third part
only, to the intent to make that so hearty and rich, that by all reason,
common experience, and Gods blessing, it may yield as much and more increase
than the whole would have done. Neither am I tied by any necessity (that I
know of) to set all my third part, vnsesse I may do it conveniently in all
respects: Note well.
for when I have thus plowed my land and made it ready to set, I may sow
thereof what I will if I lack setters, and it is likely to bear three times
as much, being thus well handled; as other poor barren land so misused for
lack of such good Husbandry. But now for setting of ten Acres of Wheat or
Rye, or other grain, being the third part of most men's Season, why should I
not find people enough to set them, seeing you confess that threescore
laborers, and twenty women and children, will dig and set thirty Acres in
seven weeks? Why good sir, if I be at the charge, and can dress my land with
my Plough my self, what have I to do with your threescore laborers that
should have been employed in your digging: I will spare them all for you,
seeing you will needs have so many Acres dug, for you might as well have
understood Master Plat, the author of the first book, that he meant not to
have the whole number of every man's season to be dug, when he proposed that
three Acres might bear as much as thirty: And although I am of your opinion,
this will seldom prove true in action, yet cannot you nor the best Scholar in
England disprove the principles that he grounds his proportion upon, for he
adds diverse approved examples in practice to prove his arguments. And for your
twenty women and children, poor people, I am sorry; for the most of them may
still want work, and live a staruing kind of miserable life, for by your
persuasions they should earne just nothing; and so none of the poor by this
means set to work in your Husbandry. Well, yet I will propose less work by
the third part in my Husbandry, and so will have but the third part of your
women and children; Note.
which being but seven, will set my ten Acres in seven weeks, whilst your
threescore diggers and twenty women and children be digging and setting your
thirty Acres in the same time by your own account: and by Gods help, if this
third part of the land be employed, we shall have work sufficient for all our
poor people, and poor people enough for all our work. I will therefore spare
you four or five of those seven poor people for a supply to your company,
least any should happen to fail in some hot skirmish, and then I shall only
be troubled with some two or three of your poor people, or some lame Soldier;
Provision for lame and maimed Soldiers
he will serve my turn though he want a leg or an arm: and so let us reckon
the charge of three poor women and children, which will be hired for eighteen
pence a day at most, which is but nine shillings Charges of setting.
a week, and for seven weeks is three pounds three shillings for the wages of
those poor people, unto whom I will join our two plow-folkes; for away go
our Teemes to rest and gather flesh against winter, our Wives will spare one of
their maids, and many of us have two or three children, and our selves for
ouer-seers of the work, all these are above nine persons for your seven, and
all their charges is but three pounds three shillings more than ordinary; Ten
Acres as soon plowed and set with seven people, as thirty dug and set with
sour score.
and so you see that two or three poor people at most with our own family,
shall be as well able to set our ten Acres in seven weeks, as your fourscore
men, women and children shall dig and set thirty Acres in the very same
time. But if you think that Wheat or Rye will be set in the beginning of
March in rich land, as you say in your book (and truly I am of your opinion)
and the rather, because you affirm that the best croppe of Corn that ever you
saw, was a summer croppe of Wheat upon a rich ground: now it will be a great
commodity if we may stay to set our richest land until after Christide: for
by some means or other, we may by that time make some of our land better than
other, and the nature of some land of it self is much better than other; then
will we set our poorest land first, and begin about the middle of September, or
near thereupon, every Country and place, as the condition of the land
requires, and so continue setting in the fairest weather, until the middle of
December or there abouts; so then we shall have some thirteen weeks at least
before Christide, and some seven weeks after, before March. It is most
certain that this late setting or sowing being in very good ground, is the
best to avoid the Mildew and the smut.
Thus a poor Farmer may well set ten Acres in twenty weeks with his own
family, having wife and children as most have, and do it all by leisure.


Scholar. I must needs confess, that your experience Your mislike or
writing, will not hinder, if it prove profitable.
has taught you to say more in this matter than I conceived of it before. But
yet seeing you look for no more increase than six or eight quarters upon an
Acre, it is not the admirable art the first book speaks of (which made me
mislike and write as I did) for many men in diverse places have had the like
increase; neither do I yet perceive how the charges of setting will be
answered, nor any matter worthy so great account as you make of it.


Ploughman. What you see I know not, or what the cause should be I cannot tell,
that so many men should be so blind or so unwilling to see how to do
themselves and their neighbors so much good: but I fear me it is the just
punishment of God upon us the sinful people of this good Land, that we having
so great plenty of all good things, do consume with gluttony and with
drunkenness so great blessings of God already bestowed upon us: A caveat for
gluttons and drunkards.
and if we should by this means or any other, expect a greater abundance than
yet we have received, it is to be feared that the Lord that sees how wickedlie
we would consume it, will not permit such an unthankful people to receive so
exceeding great a benefit, but even by our own frowardnes will quite overthrow
it. Take heed of murmuring and unthankfulness, joined with frowardnes.
But yet let us see if we can possibly be brought to discern any thing
worthy account in this novelty, as you term it: And for example, say that
thirty Acres by Rod, will require three bushels of seed Winchester measure
to every Acre, In some part of Essex their land requires less seed, well
observed by some good Husbands.
(for so you say it will) and so in most land it does, which is eleven quarters
and two bushels of seed to thirty Acres: What is the usual increase upon an
Acre in the common fields barren land?


Scholar. The increase of an Acre of such barren land, commonly is not above
two quarters one year with another, and one Acre with another, and when they
so do, there need be no dearth in England; for where one has above, three
has not so much: and therefore you will hardly approve that your setting will
be to any great purpose in those common fields, barren Land.


Ploughman. The best setting of Corn is in the common fields, barren land,
when by these instructions it is so amended.
Very well sir, I am glad you have declared your conceit in this point, and
even for those barren Countries and barren common fields, do I auowe this
Husbandry to be most profitable, and for their sakes only and altogether do
I take all this pains, and use so many persuasions against so many fond
objections, as you and most men use against this good Husbandry of Corn
setting, and not for those that are occupiers of rich land, either by nature or
so made by soil. Their increase is plentiful already, and therefore I think
it no great work of charity to bestow much labor upon such rich men, as
commonly with good Husbandry use such rich land: but I speak and write for
poor men, and desire to make their poor land and them the richer by this good
Husbandry, which I will maintain upon equal terms or by practice, with any
Husbandman in England, of what country or shire so ever he be or dwell in.
Note well.
And now to our purpose again, and I pray you mark well what I say, you
confess (as the truth is) that an Acre by the Rod will bear but two
quarters commonly one year with another, which is but threescore quarters for
thirty Acres, and that such an Acre will require three bushels to sow it,
which is for thirty Acres eleven quarters and two bushels of seed, as
aforesaid; so then take your eleven quarters two bushels of seed sowed at
seed time, out of threescore quarters reaped at harvest, there will remain
forty eight quarters and six bushels increase by this computation: then come
to our ten Acres of like measure, which will be set with five bushels, what may
we look for every year upon an Acre set with half a bushel? by Gods
blessing we are as likely to have six or seven quarters upon an Acre that is
well dunged, tilled, the seed choiselie picked, and the land orderly set, as
other have had upon an Acre sown, which is upon ten Acres threescore and ten
quarters: And what is then our increase of these ten Acres, if you take five
bushels of seed set at seed time, out of threescore and ten quarters reaped
at harvest, there will remain some threescore and nine quarters and three
bushels increase; so it is manifest, that our increase by setting of ten Acres
with five bushels, is more then by sowing of thirty Acres with eleven quarters
and two bushels, by some twenty quarters and five bushels.


Scholar. Say that all this do follow, as you would have it, and truly I
cannot deny but it may; yet the charge of setting and the trouble will be so
great, that it will not be worth the practice.


Ploughman. Well, it is manifestly proved, that two or three poor people with
the ordinary family of all men that sow thirty Acres to a season, may set
ten Acres, and that the wages of those poor people for setting time, was but
three pounds three shillings at six pence a day: and for that charge, you do
save twenty Acres of land at five shillings an Acre, five pounds; and the
Plowing of that land three plowings to every Acre before you sow it, which is
threescore plowings at two shillings every time, is six pounds: then you
save some twenty quarters and five bushels of Corn as aforesaid, worth in
most years twenty shillings a quarter, comes to twenty pounds twelve
shillings six pence. So by this reckening, which in truth and substance cannot
be denied, you will save some one and thirty pounds twelve shillings six
pence. And although I do prise the twenty Acres so spared as aforesaid, at
five shillings an Acre (as it were to be let out for rent) yet I rather think
that any good Husband that so spares twenty Acres to rest from his principal
seasons or Wheat, Rye, or Barlie, will sow (after the old fashion if it
please him) some six, eight, or ten Acres with Pease, Beans, Bucke, otherwise
called french Wheat, or with Oats upon one earth or Plowing, whereby he may
have great store of straw for his Cattle, meat for his wives Hens, and
prouender for his Horse, over and besides so much increase and profit of those
six, eight or ten Acres, as shall defraie all the extraordinary charge of
setting with advantage. And because I have heard this kind of complaint often;
and many men doubt their neighbors and their own servants will not meddle with
such a pidling troublesome work, whose frowardnes no doubt will do much hurt:
I wish any such that dwell amongst such neighbors, or have such servants (as
indeed I think many have) to sell some three or four quarters of their seed
corn, that before was spared, and allow double their wages to strangers, and
I will assure them workmen plenty to do so easy and clean a work. And yet
then the charge will be but six pound six shillings: which taken out of the
former profits, there will remain some twenty five pound six shillings six
pence, which will help a poor Farmer toward the payment of his rent.


Scholar. This objection is none of your own Master Scholar, you had help
of a Lawyer.
Your comparison between ten acres passing well husbanded and made rich, and
then set, and thirty acres of barren land sowed, no doubt will be a matter of
great difference, and therefore I wish to be followed of all men. But what say
you to good land, either by nature or help of soil, that will usually bear
five or six quarters upon an acre? and if your setting will amount to no more
increase, then after a man has laid all his cost upon so small quantity of
land, and made it so good, he will sow it, and save the charge of setting.


Ploughman. If this book do but persuade our countrymen, that occupy much
barren land, to sow but the third part or half their land, which they were
wont to work out of heart, with their poor cattle and themselves, I shall
not only think my labor happily bestowed in writing, but all the poor
people may thank God as much for the printing of it, as for any book set
forth in our time, (for a matter of this quality) and which is of no small
importance for the commonwealth of this land. But yet I must not yield that
plowing and sowing will be of like profit for the commonwealth, as plowing and
setting, seeing the same will be done yet with much less charge, comparing
ten acres of the best land set, with other ten as good sowed, which I will
prove by example and tried experience: and first it is well known by often
trial, that less then half a bushel of very choice seed wheat, will set as
much land as three bushels will sow. So that whereas ten or twelve great Acres
of land will require some three or four quarters to sow them; the same land
may be set with six or seven bushels at the most, for there will be faued some
three quarters of the best seed Corn every year, which is now worth forty
shillings a quarter, and comes to six pounds, and exceeds the
extraordinary charge of setting aforesaid by much, Five or six thousand
quarters of Grain saved every year by Corn setting, all objections answered.
and will amount to the saving of some three hundred thousand quarters of the
best Wheat and Rye growing in this Land: and much more in Barlie, Pease, and
Beans, and so of all sorts of grain: I think it would save above five or
six hundred thousand quarters every year in her Majesty's Dominions. And yet
give me leave to tell you Gentleman, that I dare confidently auow (seeing both
reason does teach and experience does prove) that an Acre orderly set, will
yield more increase by some three quarters, than an Acre sown: which increase
at Harvest being added to the other three quarters saved at seed time, comes
to some six quarters of Corn at forty shillings a quarter, twelve pound, as
it is now worth, in many Countries, which will defray the charges of setting
double, though your Plowmen follow their Teemes and give us no help. And yet
this I must confess, that in time of great plenty, when Corn is at a low
price, and where chargeable servants or laborers dwell, Chargeable servants
and ill workmen, a great hinderance to all good Husbandire.
that will not serve or work under five pound and a fustian doublet; or in
such places where their land and themselves are so rich: with such times,
places and persons, this poor book, or rather book for the poor, has yet
little to say, until such time as they be brought to consider; that after great
plenty may follow as great scarsitie, the wealthiest Corne-master and stoutest
labourer or servant, may in time become like one of their poorest neighbors.
Great men in this and all ages have been subject to their fall. Lasie usury, a
capital enemy to all industrious husbandry, jews only did use it in
England, about the reign of King Richard the first, anno 1189. Job. 1.1. 1.
Pet. 4.7.
Job was accounted as rich in his time, as the greatest Corne-master or the
wealthiest Usurer that lives in our time: yet the Lord made an example of his
servant Job to all posterity, albeit he was an upright and just man, one that
feared God and eschued evil. If vengeance begin at the house of God, where
shall the wicked and ungodly appear. I write not this against good minded men,
whom it has pleased God to bless with plenty of Corn, and yet love their
brethren and poor neighbors: some such good men no doubt have been and yet
are in England, who may be accounted patterns for others to follow, or
patrons, that is, fathers to their Country, by storing up Corn in the time of
plenty, with purpose to bring it forth in scarcity, to sell it at a lower
rate for the good of the poor. Such good men no doubt are to be praised with
gracious Joseph, The murmuring of the people provoke Gods wrath.
who by laying up of Corn in the time of plenty, preserved not only the whole
kingdom of Egypt, but also the whole Church of God, then visible on earth,
for which cause his industry is recorded and commended for the instruction of
all posterity. And by the way, I wish all murmuring people to consider what it
is to grudge and repine against Gods works, and to be more advised how they
speak against good Magistrates and such good men, as carefully respect the
public weal of the Land. Exodus 16.2. Numb. 11.13.
Furthermore, that it may yet appear more manifestly, that plowing and setting
of Corn is every way much more profitable and less chargeable than plowing
and sowing, and that every Farmer may easily set the third part of his land
with his own family, and two or three of the poorest people only at setting
time (whereby he may yet have more leisure to practice and perform every
complement that shall be likely to further his increase) let him Till but the
third part of his land, as of thirty Acres ten, and so whereas he was wont to
give his thirty Acres upon a summer fallow, some four or five plowings (as
some grounds will require) and as most good Husbands do: for thereby they do
kill the weeds, which of all things I would all men should most specially
regard: So then thirty Acres having at least four plowings, amounts to an
hundred and twenty days work at the least; and ten Acres having five
plowings every Acre, which is but fifty days work at the most: so here is
threescore and ten days work spared in your winter season for Wheat or Rye,
and as much for Barlie, which being in all one hundred and twenty days work
or there about, is very near the third part of the whole year spared for your
Plowes and Teemes, The third part of the year spared from plowing, by setting
of corn, therefore forget not therein to forue God.
which I wish should be otherwise employed to some good work, as no doubt but
every good Husband will find work enough for them to do. But yet let them
bestow some part of this time so well gained, a little to serve God in prayer
morning and evening, either in their private families, or with a diligent
Minister (they that dwell near the Church) one half hour in a morning or
evening, or both: if they have any thing to do at Church with God, or with
their neighbors, it will be a good meeting place if it be done to good
purposes. It is a small portion of so many days spared, and no doubt but God
will the rather bless the increase of such as will serve him, according as he
has promised; and as the Scripture says, Paul planteth, Apollo waters, but
it is the Lord, no doubt, that gives the increase, as well in temporal as in
spiritual blessings. Beware of Atheism.
Thus we all must believe, and so I hope we do, unless there be any of so
desperate and cursed opinion, that thinks there is no God to bless and help
their increase, which God forbid that her Majesty's dominions should bear any
such detestable and cursed imps and lims of Satan to rest on this earth, that
should so much as give any cause of suspicion of any such abomination: so as
many as do so well begin the day with the service of God, may cheerefullie
expect from the Almighty a blessing upon their labors: who promises to
bless the work of our hands if we fear him. And to proceed in this argument
yet a little further in our Husbandry, which no doubt may be yet exceeding lie
furthered diverse ways in this time so well gained: as first to make great
choice of our Seed corn: for as Master Plat well says, every corn that is
within the ear is not apt to grow, for God has created some of them for the
food of living creatures, and some for seed. The choice of the seed, the
killing of the weed, and resting of the land, and time so well gained, to do
all this and serve God too, is like to bring a good increase.
There be in every ear certain abortiue or bastardly corns small and
whinderlings, which will hardly grow, and are unprofitable for any good
increase: but there are other corns which are bigger and fairer then the rest,
which (no doubt) God by nature has ordained for good and great increase: and
therefore seeing you have so much leisure, you may spend more time in picking
your Seed, corn after corn, if you think good. The best way to make choice
of your seed.
But indeed the best way and most speedy is to put the corn into a tub of
water, and so the most heavy corn will soonest sink to the bottom, and the
lightest (with other seeds which were wont to be sown) you may take
presently away: for else in a small time the lighter will also sink, by taking
water to make it heavy also. But you must do this but a little before you
intend to sow it, and in doing whereof you may help your Seed corn very
much, as it were with a dunging, as I my self have done my Seed barlie. When
the year has proved dry at Barlie seed time, I have caused certain wotting
fattes or tubs, used for Malting, to be filled with water, and caused Cow dung
and Pigeon dung to be put into the same water, stirring it together, and it
has stood a day or two, but the longer the better, with often stirring it.
Then have I let or powered out the same water from the dung, and put it into
other clean vessels: and then I put in my Seed all day and all night, and the
next day took it out and laid it upon a floor to dry it fit to handle, and
cast abroad by sowing. And truly that Barlie has shot an ear as soon as
other that was sown some fourteen days before it. Whereof (in my opinion)
one great commodity does follow, in that the corn (specially Barlie) at
that time of the year comes away so speedily, that it out grows all the
weeds, who are the chief and deadly enemies to all corn. Thus the corn may
flourish and be master of the field, like a brave Captain: for so no doubt he
gets better root to begin the world with, and more heart to continue and
bring forth increase more abundantly, when it has at first gotten the start
and upper hand of his mortal enemies. One hundred and twenty days yet spared
for good Husbands, to enrich their land and themselves.
This picking and watring work is fittest to be performed by the good wife, and
her maids, and children at home, and our hundred and twenty days that we
spared from plowing, as aforesaid, yet gives more time to the good man and his
Ploughmen with their Teemes to fetch Marle of Chalk, or of any other kind of
soil, fit for the condition of their land, if it be possible to be had, as no
doubt it is in most places, though in some they may happen to go far for it:
but in six or seven weeks (part of the foresaid time) a Teeme will carry
much, though it be far to fetch. Further also those that have sower barren
cold grounds, may in this time all by leisure, follow the example of the
Cornish and Devonshire men, that beat and burn their land, which no doubt is
an excellent piece of good Husbandry, and now used by good Husbands in many
places of England and Wales. A commendation of Cornwall and Devonshire.
And whereof Cornwall and Deuon has so tasted the benefit, that whereas of
late time Cornwall was wont to have most of their bread-corne by sea from
other countries, now by this means they have great plenty to spare, and send
over much by sea into other countries. There will be many other profitable
works found out by many good Husbands to keep their people and Teemes at
work, The Plow and the Spade very good fri^eds, and allow each others work
for setting, as the place requires.
if it please them, and such as have a better mind to use the Spade to set
their Corn: and so by experience shall find much better increase, which I
will not deny, but it may be so; nor discommend the industrious invention and
practice of the Spade, and specially for setting of poor people to work,
which indeed is a matter of great regard, which by no means I would hinder:
for as in this action by setting of Corn, the chief and principal respect is
the saving of such a goodly deal of Seed Corn yeerelie so fondly cast
away, as before is showed; so specially by setting of Corn the poorest and
most miserable people, that can otherwise earne little or nothing, shall now be
set to work, because they are best cheap to be hired, and are as well able to
perform this work as the lusty laborers, that sometime in some countries no
reasonable wages will intertaine them: Middlesex, Kent, and places near the
mighty city of London.
these are fit for rich men, and to be employed in rich land, where the owners
may have rich crops to pay such great wages to such proud laborers and
servants, that will serve and work where they list, and have what wages they
list, and then do what they list, make what laws and statutes her Majesty,
her Council and the Parliament can devise: I mean such servants as intend not
to serve their masters faithfully for their masters profit, but for their
own, amongst whom there are many thieves, which some Gentlemen, Farmers and
other, with their wives and children have dearly paid for, to their great and
importable loss and hindrance. This proud kind of slouens and sluts, which
some masters have and do keep from the halter, have no need to be pitied, but
rather to be punished. A reward for faithful and good servants.
And such masters whom it pleases God to bless with a good servant, let him be
accounted as a precious jewel, and used with due respect, pay him his wages
truly, and leave him not a poor man: It is the Lord the great Master his
commandment by the wise Solomon, as you may read in his Proverbs. As
touching the Instruments to be employed about setting of Corn, although I
might leave every man to his own invention, or refer them to Master Plats
book, whose instructions in many things I do commend: yet because it may be
that all men have not that book, and desire some instruction, therefore I will
recite an example of his, which he best commends, which is a board of three
foot in length, or thereabouts, and twelve or ten inches in breadth, having
diverse holes bored therein, according to such distance as every particular man
does best fancy, through each of which holes a wooden dipper or pin to be
thrust into the ground, being of the bigness of ones finger, and of three or
four inches in length, having a shoulder or crosse-pin to keep one self same
certainty in the depth of each hole. Now my invention is to have two boords of
some two foot broad every where, and in the middle a staff or handle set
fast to remove them: or if any do like better to have them one foot broad,
and two or three foot long, and in every of those boords one or two staves or
handles, of some two foot high set fast to remove them, and also to leave
upon for their worships ease: but for this matter of making of holes, I must
say with you master Scholar, I profess to press this argument no further,
being no part of my profession, but leave it to them that shall use and
practice this invention. Only this I do advise that every man do well
consider the quality of his own ground, if it be exceeding rank, four or
five inches distance; but most commonly three or four inches is likely to be
most fit, and two or three inches deep, as the ground is heavy or light. And
peradventure the clods may sometime hinder: for which purpose this boorde and
this handle or two be very fit to thrust down the clods. These boords are to
be directed by a line, to keep a straight course in setting, having always a
Rake with thick teeth and a broad head, which at one pull will sufficiently
fill all the holes. And for example, to such as are very simple, it is thought
good to set down the order of making of the holes in every board, as the same
holes shall be of distance more or less: as if your board be ten inches
broad and three foot long, and your holes five inches distance, there must be
two rows of holes and feuen holes in a row, and at every end and fide there
must be two inches and more left, and for every scantling or distance, whether
it be three, four, or five inches, leave always the outside and the ends
half the distance or less in every board, and so it will make a true
continuance of one scantling throughout all the work. But if this labor by
writing and printing be lost in the behalf of plowing and setting, and that
men should continue so wilfully blind to despise Gods blessings upon
themselves, their poor neighbors, and the whole Commonwealth: yet it is to
be wished that where men are so obstinately addicted to old custom, they
would yet follow the old proverb, which says, A little land well tild, a
little house well filled, and a little wife well wild, no doubt but his little
land would be as profitable for his purse, as his little good wife comfortable
to his mind.


Thus I draw to an end, desiring the reader to take some view of such great
benefits as this action of plowing and setting may (by Gods mercy) bring to
this our Country. And I leave the success to Gods good blessing. And first
(here I say) the plowing takes away the laborious and chargeable work of the
Spade, which made setting of corn seem unprofitable, and impossible to have
laborers and people sufficient to dress and set fifty Acres, of three
thousand in a Parish, as the adverse book supposes. This now by plowing and
setting is proved that every third Acre may be set in all places throughout
her Majesty's Dominions. Secondly, it proves plowing and setting to be less
chargeable then plowing and sowing: Provision for lame soldiers and poor
children. This benefit is not lightly to be respected.
Thirdly, we have proved that this may be done by the ordinary family of
most men, with some help of two or three of his poorest neighbors, old men
and women, poor children, lame and distressed soldiers, that now can have no
work for their living. Fourthly, I say this, these poor people (that indeed
ought to be kept from a staruing kind of life in so plentiful a Country as
England is, by the wealthy inhabitants of every Parish, to whom now they are
both chargeable and grievous) by this good means they may be kept from hunger,
cold, nakedness, and idleness, breeding monstrous vices against God, her
Majesty, and this present happy State; deserving whipping and hanging, to the
spoil of their bodies, and peril of their souls. Fifthly, it saves great
abundance of the best corn, growing within her Majesty's Dominions, which now
is yearly cast away and lost by sowing, or rather burying it too deep under
furrow, or lying too shallow above furrow, for Crows and Mice and other
vermin to devour from the poor people. Sixthly, it spares two parts of the
land, that is, of thirty Acres twenty may be spared to lie and rest to gather
heart for a while, and after when it is plowed again it will bring forth
increase of corn abundantly, as all m^e know. Seventhly, it will increase
great store of pasture in the common fields, to the relief of all cattle, and
whereby Two hundred pasture sheep well fed, will dung a fould better then
three hundred poor sheep hungerly kept
there may be kept both greater number and better sheep both for growth, wool
and soundnes, that by these means, being plentifully fed, will enlarge the
poor man's fould, and also they will dung his land much better, to the like
increase of corn in greater abundance. Eighthly, it will save great quantities
of Hey and Corn for horsemeate, which now is spent upon poor working cattle
tired to death, with great store of work upon much tillage of barren land: so
that when by this means great quantities of grass and hey is saved from
working cattle, then greater store maybe reserved to the fatting of cattle;
so that Gentlemen, Farmers, and other householders may feed many of their own
Oxen, Cowes and Sheep fat, and need not go so often to the Butchers, and then
their Kine will give much more milk to make Butter and Cheese, when they are
much better fed with grass and hey plentifully: and of these it will come to
pass that their bacon Hogs shall be fed fat with their whey of their Kine,
and with the corn that the working cattle were wont to eat up, and then
shall those householders have less need of the Markets for their household
provision, which will be a means to bring down the price of all flesh (fit to
be eaten) and of white meat, that the poor Artificers and laborers may eat
their victuals better cheap. Ninthly, it will be a notable means to overthrow
the wicked depopulation of the Lords people, her Majesty's loving subjects,
who have bin most lamentably driven out of their habitations, and diverse towns
and villages, overthrown by enclosures, which yet continue, and rather will
increase, notwithstanding the great care and order taken by her Majesty, and
the great officers of her Kingdoms in the high Court of Parliament, as
appears by an act made of purpose against Setting of Corn good for Seafaring
men, let them praise God also.
the same. Tenthly, it will breed and save such plenty of corn in England, by
Gods help, that we may spare great quantities to be transported without any
prejudice, but rather great good to all our English nation of all sorts, as
well poor as rich, to the great increase of the treasury of this Realm, the
maintenance of our English Navy, Shipping and Mariners, with provision of
victuals for her Majesty's soldiers and Armies, by Sea and by Land, to the
fear and terror of all foreign enemies.

These and many other excellent benefits (no doubt) would follow this good
kind of Husbandry, which deserves a more learned handling then I can say, or
do profess to be in me. If any man do think this work to be needless, for
that there is already sufficiently written in former books: I answer, that
to my knowledge there is none that has hitherto written of the plowing and
setting of Corn; neither do I perceive the people so instructed, but rather
most ignorant, and great numbers do utterly protest against the practice, as
an idle novelty, being lately discouraged by this Pamphlet, called God speed
the Plough. Now the Almighty bless all good husbands in Husbandry, and
grant a blessing to this mine endeavor, to his glory, the honor of our
Prince, the comfort of the poor, and the general good of all the Land.

A COMPARISON BETWEEN PLOWING AND SOWING OF THREE ACRES of land, after the old
fashion, and plowing and setting of one Acre after the manner declared in this
Book.
And first for the Charge.
A Computation for poor Farmers that pay great rents.
THE rent of three Acres in most places is worth some five shillings an Acre.
The land, according to the use of the common fields, does lie summer fallow the
first year, and bears Corn the other, and so the Farmer pays two years
rent before he has his crop, which rent comes to thirty shillings.

The plowing of these, if it be well done, and as most grounds require, every
Acre four times, which is twelve plowings, at two shillings every time comes
to four and twenty shillings.

The dunging of these three Acres with some twelve or fourteen load upon
every Acre, and is for three Acres some forty load, at six pence a load,
spread upon the land, amounts to twenty shillings.

The seed that will sow it is usually two bushels and a half of Wheat or Rye
for every Acre, which is seven bushels and a half, at four shillings the
bushel, comes to thirty shillings.

The weeding, reaping, and other charges in two years, though uncertain, yet
for example ten shillings. Thus two years rent and charges comes to five
pound fourteen shillings.

The usual increase in the common fields barren land, having so little help
with dung, is but two quarters upon an Acre: but allow twenty bushels to stop
a wranglers mouth, which is for three Acres seven quarters and a half, rated
at four shillings a bushel, thirty two shillings the quarter, comes to
twelve pounds. Out of which if you take the charge aforesaid, there remains
to the Farmer for his stock, six pound six shillings. And so for every one of
those Acres, allowing so good increase and so great a price, the profit is two
and forty shillings.

Then let us see what profit one Acre, being well plowed, well dunged, and
orderly set, will yield, and so for the charge of one Acre. The rent of one
Acre, at the price aforesaid, which was five shillings an Acre, for two years
ten shillings. The plowing five times for this one Acre, if need be, ten
shillings. The dunging with forty load upon this Acre at six pence a load,
twenty shillings. The seed to set this one Acre, half a bushel, two
shillings. The setting of this Acre, one man at eight pence a day, and some
four poor people at four pence a day, will set this Acre in some six days,
and all their wages is twelve shillings. The weeding, reaping, and other
charges, three shillings four pence. The sum of the charges comes to seven
and fifty shillings four pence.

This Acre so well tilled, with three times as much dung as any one of the
other, with excellent seed and orderly set, although we cannot promise thirty
or twenty quarters, yet we may have seven or eight quarters upon an Acre,
which is usual upon very good land, which being rated at four shillings, as
the other, comes to twelve pound sixteen shillings. Out of which also if you
take the charge, which is fifty seven shillings four pence, there will
remain nine pound eighteen shillings eight pence. And so this one Acre
exceeds the other three in profits, with half the stock, the sum of three
pound twelve shillings eight pence. But suppose the foresaid wrangler will not
allow eight quarters upon an Acre, yet set down some five quarters, which
comes to five pound two shillings eight pence, the charges deducted, yet does
it exceed any one of the other by some three pound and eight pence.

Some part of this great profits I would have bestowed upon the poor to weed
this one Acre, in March or April, or sometime before the Corn be too high, to
pull up the weeds by the roots, and then you shall see the Corn flourish:
keep down the weeds, and have no more need of weeding in this season.

Work and provision for old poor weak men, their wives and children.
Now a word or two to encourage a poor man that has a wife and three or four
children, that often wants work in some countries, yea though he be weak,
sickly or lame, yet he may set Corn with his family, and have sufficient to
serve his house: therefore let them fall to work cheerfully this next season,
and praise the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever.

FINIS.

