EDWARDVS III. D.G. ANGLIAE ET FRANCIAE REX DOMINVS HIBERNIAE

EDWARD the III King of England and France Lord of Ireland. He reigned 50
years, 5 mo: He died at the manor of Shene in Surrey 1377 and lies buried at
Westminster



The Victorious REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE THIRD. Written in seven Books.

By his Majesty's Command.

Tu mihi, tu Pallas, Caesariana veni. Matt.

LONDON: Printed for T. Walkley, and B. Fisher, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Talbot, without Aldersgate. 1635.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY MONARCH, CHARLES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF
GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, AND IRELAND, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, etc.
SIR,
I Should have humbly craved your Majesty's pardon for my omission of the
latter part of King Edward's Reign, but that the sense of mine own defects
have put me in mind of a more necessary suit, to beg forgiveness for that
part of it whichis here written. For I am not so presumptuously vain, when I
consider either the Dignity of your Office, or the Virtues of your Person, as
to imagine that any writing from my unworthy self can be either too short, er
enough elegant to be presented to your sacred hand. For should your Majesty
vouchsafe to read it, as the precious hours of so great a Monarch (which maae
Horace affect shortness to Augustus Caesar) would tell me the Poem were too
too long; so the judicious Censure of so wise a Prince would make me tremble
at the defects of it. Those defects (whatsoever they be) can be imputed only
to insufficiency; for neither was there Argument wanting, nor yet endeavor,
since I had the Actions of a great King to require my skill, and the Command of
a greater King to obliege my care. Those great Actions of Edward the Third are
the Argument of this Poem; which is there ended, where his fortune began to
decline, where the French by revolts and private practices regained that, which
had been won from them by eminent and famous victories: which times may
afford fitter observations for an acute Historian in Prose, than strains of
height for an Heroike Poem. Your gracious Pardon only can rectify what may
be amiss in my unworthy and imperfect labor. In hope of which I humbly cast
both it and my self at your Majesty's feet, beseeching Almighty God to bless
you with a long and happy Reign on earth, and after to crown you with
incorruptible glory. So prays

Your Majesty's Most humble Subject and Servant, THO. MAY,

I have perused this Book, and conceive it very worthy to be published.

IO. COKE, Knight, Principal Secretary of State.
Whitehall, 17. of November, 1634.
THE REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE THIRD.
The first Book.
Argument I.
Edward the third is crowned; a bootlesse war
Against Scotland made: ambitious Mortimer
At Notingham surprised in all his glory.
Carnarvan Edward's lamentable story.
THe third and greatest Edward's reign we sing,
The high achievements of that martial King,
Whose long succesfull prowess did advance
So many trophies in triumphed France,
And first her golden Lillies bare; who ore
Pyrenes Mountains to that Western shore,
Where Tagus tumbles through his yellow sand
Into the Ocean, stretched his conquering hand.
The second Edward (while disloyal hate
Un justly strove to cure the wounds of state,
And sadly punish, to this Nations stain,
The grievances of his misgovern'd reign)
Was now deposed from the Regal throne;
To which the Son is chosen, and upon
His Fathers ruins is compelled to rise;
As if by that the envious Destinies
Meant to allay this Edward's glorious reign,
As loath to suffer England to obtain
So great a blessing at the lawful time,
Or such a Prince without a public crime:
For which the Land must after suffer, by
A rent so made in his Posterity.
Young Edward's age may plead his innocence,
And free his fame from this unkind offense:
He did receive not seize the royal crown,
Which other men's disloyalty had thrown
Too soon on him: nor could an actor be
In his divested father's injury.
But to employ the new-establish'd state
In foreign action, and to vindicate
The Kingdoms honor against that enemy
A war on Scotland they at first decree:
Fresh were the causes of it; a deep and sad
Remained those wounds that warlike Bruce had made,
And that great loss which England had sustained
While her unhappy second Edward reigned.
This expedition that did bootlesse prove
To Englands ends, served only to remove
The young Kings person, and his court so far,
(Whilst every thought was busi'd in the war)
That murdrous Treason, who still shuns the light,
From Hels black shades might take his dismal flight,
And work, without the search of curious eye,
Deposed Edward's woeful tragedy.
But while this execrable murder here
Was wrought upon his person, fruitless were
Th'attempts against Scotland, that the young King made*
The same proud traitor Mortimer betrayed
His Countries honor there; and let the foes,
Whom that great English army did enclose
b At Stanhop Park, retire in safety thence.
By him the Kingdomelost a wars expense;
And that brave Prince, for triumphs borne, to whom
Fate owed so many victories to come,
Of his first actions honor was deprived.
But this, perchance, the pitying fates contrived
To Appease, oh murdered Edward! thy sad ghost;
That Englands state by his corruption crossed
Might feel thy traitor to be hers, and know
Who killed his King, would prove his Countries foe.
This to thy just revenge must make the way.
Forgive the powers above, though they delay
A while, that certain punishment they owe
To guilt; let Fortune have a time to show
Her power in raising, and how long she can
In spite of Justice guard a wicked man,
Till she have made him high enough to be
A fit and hated sacrifice for thee.
Ambitious Mortimer, who reigned alone
In Isabels misled affection;
And with the beauties of that Queen (as Dower
To them) enjoyed almost a Regal power,
Had like an high-swolne and impetuous tide
Borne all before him, raised to such a pride
As did his own approaching ruin show,
And draw it on: Plethorike bodies so,
From whence diseases of themselves do breed,
The seeds of death in that strong fullness feed.
The greatest Nobles now begin to fear,
And therefore hate the power of Mortimer.
They that had joined with his attempts before,
And helped to work them out, do now abhor
To see the fruit on him alone to fall.
And though at first they do not look at all
Upon his wicked deeds, but high estate,
And not his vices but great power do hate:
At last, through that, his vices they survey.
For Justice Envy must prepare the way.
But nothing thence fears his aspiring mind;
For Fortune, like her self, dooes ever blind
Her favovrites; who nere decline at all
Their envied height until they ruined fall.
Nor ought does he in their repining see
But his own greatness and selicity,
Swelled with that flattring distance; proud to move
Their fear, and would not change it for their love,
Till those distastefull courses, that did seem
To prop his state, wrought on to ruin him.
Fair Notingham, the theater, where all
His pomp is showed, must show his sudden fall.
No scene of Fortune in so short a space
Presented ever a more changed face;
Nor more amazed spectatours hearts, then here
Did this quick-turning fate of Mortimer,
So far beyond what any could surmise
They scarce dare trust the witness of their eyes.
Such hidden paths do God's high judgments tread,
That ere the pride of wicked men can dread
Their near approach, they feel the fatal blow.
His ruin is contrived; young Edward now,
Whose manly thoughts are riper then his years,
Had with a number of his stoutest Peers,
And saithfull servants, cast a ventrous way
In spite of all his guards, to seize the prey.
Night is the appointed time for their design;
And now the golden Phoebus 'gan decline
Unto the West, that young courageous Lord
The noble Mountague (whose prosperous sword
In foreign parts hereafter shall deserve
So well, and early here begins to serve
His Prince at home) a chief assistant now
To young King Edward in the overthrow
Of Mortimer, was in his house alone
Retired; his youthful thoughts still fixed upon
Th'atchievement; tedious seemed the hours of light
To him, and slow the approach of duskie night.
His trusty arms with various carving wrought,
And glittering sword two nimble Pages brought;
Which whilst with care they buckle on, at door
A knock is heard. Sir Thomas de la Moore,
A Knight well known to noble Mountague,
And welcome still, that long had been a true
And faithful servant to that woeful Prince
Carnarvan Edward, and had ever since
His Lords accursed murder, mourning spent
His days, and prayers to God's high throne had sent,
Imploring justice for so black a crime.
His presence is admitted, though the time
And action greatest secrecy require.
To whom, while gazing he did seem t'admire
Those arms, thus spoke the gallant Montague;
Ah think not, De la Moore, that vengeance due
To wicked men can be for ever stayed;
Or that bright Justice should be still afraid
To draw her sword* three Summers now have past,
Thrice has the painted pride of Flora graced
Earths joyful bosom; thrice has winters rain
Bereaved her of that verdant dress again,
Since we (oh shame) have not disdained to bear
The yoke of that proud traitor Mortimer,
And England suffered his usurped reign.
To guard his pride, and fill his pompous train,
Where ninescore Knights attend his gaudy state,
The Royal patrimony's spent of late.
That wealth, that noble Edward should possess,
His mother holds, whose unjust Dower no less
Contains (should all the Crown revenues be
But rightly valued) then two parts of three.
And what she holds, false Mortimer enjoyes;
Who linked too near in love with her, destroys
Not only her revenues, but her fame,
And brands the kingdom with another shame.
One Port, one undistinguished house with her
Her saucy Minion keeps; one Caterer
With aequall price and privilege dooes buy
Provision for that ill-joyn'd family.
So is their state in all as man and wife
To open view; and for their secret life,
How free the bed has been, ere long (they say)
Her teeming womb will to the world betray.
Nor is this all the sieknesse of the time,
Great Edward's honor is eclipsed by him;
Who long has ruled the Land, whilst we afraid
Of that usurped power, perforce obeyed.
And fatal 'twas to contradict at all.
What else so lately caused the pitied fall
Of noble Edmund Earl of Kent, who died
A sacrifice to Mortimer's stern pride,
And Isabellaes lawless power? nor could
(Though Edward's Uncle) his high birth and blood
Protect his life. This hapless Prince, abused
By their delusions, his best means had used
To help (not knowing he before was slain)
Deposed Edward to the crown again.
Ah De la Moore, the wondering people saw
That Prince condemned by their tyrannicke law,
Five hours together on a scaffold stand.
Nor all that while found they so base a hand
That would be hired, until the Sun was set,
To shed the blood of a Plantagenet.
What need I speak those treasons, which of late
He wrought for Scotland against the English state?
What bribes he thence received, to betray
His Countries honor? which he now shall pay.
How two years since he drew the Parliament
Held at Northampton then, to give consent
That peace with Scotland should be ratified
So prejudicial to the English side.
In which those famous Rolls, that did contain
Their homage to this Scepter, were again
Given up; and all those jewels of renown
And price, that did belong to Scotlands crown,
And thence by former English Kings were taken,
Were at this peace delivered back again.
Which by a marriage was confirmed; and Ioane
King Edward's sister was bestowed upon
Young David Bruce, their King. Fates can defer
No longer now the account of Mortimer.
Nor dooes our brave young Edward fear to call
The traitor to a trial; nor shall all
His train defend him; nor the strength of that
Fair Castle there, in which with wanton state
His beauteous Queen and he their revels keep;
And there by night securely guarded sleep.
Nor can their pride allow (they filling all)
The King a room within his Castle wall:
A meaner lodging in the town, alas,
Must serve the King: but ere this night do pass,
The Castle shall be his again; and there
Shall rising Phoebus see proud Mortimer
A prisoner, where now he reigns; whilst all
The Land shall wonder at his sudden fall;
Or else the blood that feeds this life, shall flow
Upon you stained earth: but ere I show
To thee the way that Edward has designed,
Do thou relate what yet remains behind
Of Mortimer's foul crimes, which thou so well
Have learned, which I in part have heard thee tell,
And at each accent passionately sigh,
The late King Edward's ruthful tragedy.
Though sad the story be, 'twill take up time
Until that hour that must revenge the crime
Do call us hence. Lord Montague had done,
When thus (deep sighing) De la Moore begun.
`Since you command, my Lord, I will recite,
(Though still I tremble to remember it)
That ruth that never found a parallel,
That story, that no eloqvence can tell
In accents sad enough, no moorning line
Express, although the saddest Muse of nine
Melpomene should search through all her store,
And tune her tragic lessons ore and ore,
When all those balefull mischiefs she has sought
That barbarous Thrace, that Thebes and Argos wrought,
A sadder story she did nere relate
Then was Carnarvan Edward's tragic fate.
While this deposed unhappy Prince remained
In Killingworth fair Castle entertained
In gentle manner by his kinsman there,
The noble Henry, Earl of Lancaster,
In part he seemed to enjoy content.
(If after loss of Regal government
Content can come) the courteous Earl still shows
Himself compassionate of Edward's woes,
And in the noblest manner lessons them;
That he almost could have forgot t'esteeme
Those vain past glories, if the tyrant Love
Had not in prison found him out, to move
His more disquiet: th'absence of the Queen,
From whose desired embraces he had been
So long divorced, dooes now afflict his mind,
That she should prove so cruelly unkind
To his dejected state, as to deny
Her presence now, which in prosperity,
While crown and scepter he possessed, above
The joys of scepter or of crown did love.
Who would believe fond love could give a wound
So deep, as might amongst all those woes be found?
He that had lost the glories of a crown,
And fell from that transcendent honor down
To fortunes lowest wretched'st step, can he
Be sensible of loves calamity?
Amongst all his sad distempers, must that be
Praedominant, and greatest malady?
Such is the power, or the unhappy fate
Of love, as deepest felt in wretched state,
So can it cross the best prosperity,
And sour all other joys, though nere so high.
The happiest Monarch, that may seem possessed
Of all earths joys, with wealth, fame, honor blessed,
Yet if he want the object that he loves,
No banquets please, no air of Music moves
Delight; he sits uneasy on his throne,
And seems, in amidst of his rich court, alone.
How short are sweets of love enjoyed? how vain,
Compared to a star-crost lovers pain?
But such in all we are; nor can we so
Esteem our good, as we can feel our woe.
The best degree of health cannot content
Frail man so much, as sickness can torment.
How often have they that did associate
This woeful Prince in his dejected state,
Heard him those amorous passions to disclose,
Though armed with patience against all other woes?
How often in lamentable notes would he,
Like mourning Orpheus for Eurydice,
Complain, and move the hearers with his mones,
As Orpheus did the trees and senseless stones?
But all in vain, like him; no more was she
To be recalled, then was Eurydice.
Often would he vow how constant he had been
To his beloved, but now too cruel Queen;
That never flame had scorched him, but from her.
These passions moved the Noble Lancaster,
Whose true and gentle soul abhorred to see
A love so fervent, and so just, to be
Repaid with scornful spite; and to the Queen
He signifies what he had heard and seen.
But what effects in her stern breast it wrought,
What mischiefs on poor Edwards head it brought
Let them imagine, who did ever know
What misled women's wild desires will do,
When they extremely do or lust or loath,
Cruel alike, alike unjust in both,
And from their worst desires most hardly changed.
Her heart from Edward was too far estranged
To yield to pity; for the love she owed
To him, had she on Mortimer bestowed.
And now that wrong that was begun, must be
Made perfect by a greater injury.
Remorse can little in such cases move,
And pity seldom can engender love.
Now does the fair, but cruel, Queen begin
To think what courses may secure her sin.
And fearing, whilst her husband was alive,
The power of holy Church would make her give
What nuptial rites were due, to him, since she
Did wed his person, not his dignity,
And must be still wife to his meanest state:
That people would his woes commiserate,
And her brave son the King, with all the laws
Of God and man, would favor such a cause.
While all these doubts within her breast arise,
She calls (oh partial* counsel) to advise
With her, that wicked Bishop Hereford
The greatest foe to her unhappy Lord,
With him proud Mortimer, to whom she gave
That beavties use, that Edward ought to have.
Oh what events could be expected there,
When svch the Queen, and such her counsel were?
And first to bring their policies to end.
(As for the young King a safety) they pretend
The noble Earl of Lancaster to be
A man unfit for such a charge; that he
Allowed him greater freedom then would stand
Well with the peace and quiet of the land;
That daily tumults might arise, whilst he
Remained within so loose a custody.
Then by their power the Earl of Lancaster
Is straight discharged of his prisoner,
And to succeed him in that wretched care
The Lord Matrevers, and Lord Berkley are*
Appointed by the Queens command; and they
To Berkley Castle carry him away
From Killingworth; but noble Berkley shows
Himself compassionate of Edwards woes,
And uses him in more respective wise
Then was allowed by his stern enemies.
Lord Berkley therefore is discharged from
His Gaolers office too; and in his room,
To serve the utmost of their dire intent
Hell finds them out a cursed instrument,
Sir Thomas Gurney, a fit man to be
Joined with Matrevers in that treachery,
As great a stain to Knighthood, as the base
Matrevers was to honorable race.
These men for flattery and hire could show
More cruelty then hate it self would do,
And so afflict his heart, as Hereford
And Mortimer* (perchance) would have abhorred,
If they themselves had seen these monsters foul
Demeanor to him: they torment his soul
With all opprobrious words, all spites that can
Be thought, or thrown upon a wretched man,
In hope to end his life; no rest, no food,
When Edward wished to have it, was allowed,
To make him feel his wretched fall, how low
The man that tumbles from a throne, may go,
To let him know how great a change the state
Of mortal man may suffer, and what fate,
When she would seek extremities, can do.
Instead of Kingly cates they naught allow
But what they know is most distastefull meat;
Instead of rich perfumes and odours fet
From farthest lands to feast a Prince his sent:
These cruel feinds (oh cursed punishment)
Dead carrions round about his lodging strew,
To kill his spirits and stifle nature so.
Instead of Musickes gentle air, t'invite
Soft sleep, and charm his senses with delight:
A spiteful Drum was beat, to reave his rest,
And banish sleep from that afflicted breast.
All which by strength of nature he sustaines,
Preserved (alas) to feel more horrid pains.
Why, miscreants, do you torment him so,
Yet not your own, but others mischiefs do?
You in this action are not principal.
While Edward reigned, he wronged not you at all.
His threats, like Hereford, you did not fear,
Nor court his beavtious Queen like Mortimer.
How base it is for men of name to be
The instruments of others villainy!
Then least some plot for his deliverie
His friends might lay, these Gaolers cunningly
By night would often carry him abroad,
And often change the place of his abode:
First to Corfe Castle, and to Bristow thence*
Where, when the villains had intelligence
Some Burgers pitying his aggrievances
Would rescue, and transport him ore the Seas:
They durst no longer in that place detain
Their woeful prisoner: but back again
To Berkley Castle in the dead of night
Removed him thence: pale Cynthia lent her light
As if to give some comfort to his way.
Along the Meades, and marish grounds, that lay
By Severnes side, they came: where (oh sad crime
Of fate) another means to torture him
The monsters found; for fear some troop might pa^^
By chance that knew this woeful Prince his face,
And rescue him, his board and hair they meant
To shave away; and for that dire intent
By Severnes side enforced him to alight,
And on the ground to sit: cold was the night;
March then began, and frosts, like pearls, around
Lay glistering on the surface of the ground.
No other water, while they shave their Lord,
Have they, but what the river can afford;
Who seems from their unhallowed hands to flee,
As loath his pure and crystal stream should be
Abused so; that sacred head whereon
The holy oil was powered forth. Upon
Whose temples once the royal Diadem
Of England stood, is there profaned by them.
That face, where Majesty so lately sat,
Whose frown the greatest nobles trembled at,
With impious hands do they disfigure now,
The whilst the waters cold torments him too.
But he with patience armed, or so great
A spirit, as scorned such Villains to entreat,
Vtters no more but thus; yet while you shave,
In spite of you I Will some warm water have:
With that the tears flowed down his cheeks amain
Some servants, that stood by, could not refrain
From melting grief; but Gurney and the rest
With bitter taunts do more and more molest
His soul, and all his suffering tears deride.
With reeds and sedge, that grew on Severne side,
In scorn their Prince his sacred head they crown;
And whilst with laughter lowly bowing down
They strive to make sad Edward feel what he
Was once, forget what they themselves should be.
Poor Bischapp then, as Gurney's servant, went
Among the train (who now apaenitent
With daily tears and sighs from Gods high throne
Dooes beg forgiveness for what then was done,
And fasting lets his beard and hair to grow
Unshorn, ere since his Lord was ^aved so.
This Bischapp saw, my Lord, and told it me
As an eyewitness: will posterity
Believe this story, that a King (although
Deposed) from villains hands could suffer so?
A King, I say, whose wife did then retain
The power of Regent, and whose Son did reign?
But then to heaven let us turn our eyes,
And think, as God is purposed to chastise,
So instruments will work; and Furyes will
Be found to execute the worst of ill.
So much was Edward wronged, that now too late
It grew, to pity his afflicted state;
For to secure his foes, his death was sought.
To Berkley Castle he again was brought,
Unhappy Berkley damned by Fates to be
The balefull stage, where such a tragedy
Was acted, as no ages that succeed
But shall accurse, no human hearts but bleed
To hear it told: to make his misery
Complete, the manner of his death must be
Far worse then death: for, to conceal their own
Abhorred guilt, and keep the deed unknown,
A hellish way the catiffes found at length
To work the murder, mastring him by strength
A horn they thrust into his fundament,
And through that pipe into his entrails sent
A burning spit: oh what pathetique tongue
Can tell the pain? his pious soul, whom long
Affictions here had mortified, and taught
On heaven alone to fix his zealous thought,
From forth the hands of that accursed crew
Up to the glorious quire of Angels flew.
No outward signs of murder did appear,
And of their skill so confident they were,
That to the peoples open view, a day
The royal coarse in Gloucester Abbey lay.
But guilt of conscience, and a sad dismay
Upon th'offenders seized, nor durst they stay
In England long. Matrevers since has spent
His days (they say) a weeping paenitent
In Germany. False Gurney as he crossed
The Seas of late, was taken there and lost
His head, as we have had intelligence,
Too small a vengeance for his foul offense.
The next revenge (oh murdered Lord) for thee
I hope the fall of Mortimer will be.
And now so far had their discourses gone,
That day was vanished, and the hour drew on,
Which for the Kings design was set; from whom
A trusted squire to Montague was come
Armed, as he was, the youthful Lord arose,
And forth with courage flew; the like did those
That were alike engaged: a gallant band
About the person of their Prince they stand.
Amongst whom brave Edward in rich armor dight
His early manhood shows: with such a bright
Heroike visage dooes the blew-ey'd maid
Appear, in all her warlike tire arrey'd.
For yet no golden down had cloth d his chin,
Nor twice nine painted Summers had he seen.
And yet those young, those maid-like frowns, as there
They showed, the Genius of great France might fear:
Much more in them the sure and present fall
Of guilty Mortimer was read by all.
Far from-that Castle, on the side of Trent
A Caves dark mouth was found, of deep descent;
Upon the brinke of which there grew a round
So close a thicket, as quite hid the ground
From sight; the Cave could be descried by none,
And had remain*d for many years unknown;
Whose hollow womb did far from thence extend,
And underground an uncouth passage lend
Into the Castle. This dark vault was made
To serve the Fort, when Danes did first invade
This fertile Island; now not thought upon,
For the remembrance, as the use, was gone
Of such a place, until of late it chanced
Sir Robert Holland to that charge advanced
Surveying all his Castles nookes, had tried
That horrid way, and closely certify'd
The King the truth of all: with store of light
The noble troop arrived there by night;
There void of fear into the dark descent
With his brave train Heroicke Edward went,
And through the ragged entrails of the Cave
And balefull paths did fierce Rhamnusia wave
Here flaming brand, to guide their passage right,
And vanquish all the terrors of the night.
No damps, no noisome stinkes their sense invade;
Rhamnusia's power expelled them all, and made
Her Champions pass with fresh and spritely cheer,
Those moldy vaults, and air unstirred, where
So many years no humane foot had trod,
Nor living thing but toades and batts abode.
Yet full of hazard did the attempt appear,
So great a train had pompous Mortimer.
But they secure of any danger nigh
Within the Castle some in jollity
Consumed that hour of night, and some in sleep,
(For The Earl himself the Castle keys did keep.)
In such a fearelesse, but a fatal plight
The wodden horse surprised old Troy by night.
Into her chamber the fair Queen was gone,
Where with her Minion Mortimer alone
She sat: but not his dearest company,
Nor loves sweet thoughts, which wont to give so high
A relish to them, now could bring delight.
They both were sad on that portentuous night.
(The fates it seemed into their souls had sent
A secret notice of their dire intent)
Which she could not conceal, nor Mortimer,
Although he often strove by courting her,
To hide the inward sadness of his br^^st.
Carnarvan Edward's Manes had possessed
The room; and many strange ostents declared
The Approaching ruin: in the Castle-yard
The dogs were heard unusually to howl:
About their windows the ill-boding Owl,
Night-iars, and shreiches with wide-stretched throats
From Yews and Holleys sent their baiefull notes.
And which encreast their sad and ominous fears)
The beauteous Queen relates, while standing tears
Began to dazzle her bright starry eyes,
That ghastly dream, that did last night surprise
Her frighted fancy; Mortioner, quoth she,
Me thought the sky was wondrous clear, when we
Together walked in yonder court alone;
The gentle air seemed undisturbed: anon
Rose sudden storms, a dark and pitchie cloud
Obscured heaven's face, and thunder roared aloud:
The trembling earth about us moved round,
At last it opened, and from underground
Rose Edward's pale and dismal ghost, his hand
Armed with a flaming sword, a threatening band
Of furies did upon the ghost attend:
He cried revenge; with that they all began bend
Their force 'gainstus, and thee, me thought, they flew:
At which I frighted waked, and hardly knew
(So great the terror was) whether we were
Alive or not: Ambitious Mortimer
Scorning to show from any dream a fear,
Strove to divert so sad a theme, and cheer
The Queen with amorous discourse again.
While thus he flatters his own fate in vain:
A boistrous noise about the doors they hear;
The maids without, that waited, shreik'd for fear,
Clashing of steel, and groans of dying men
Approach d their cares: for in the Lobby then
Stout Turrington and Nevil both were slain,
That durst by force resist the armed train:
And in the chamber, ere the Queen and he
Had time to doubt what this strange storm should be,
Sent from the King the armed troops appear,
By whose command they seize on Mortimer;
And in an instant hurry him away:
(For at the Chamber-doore did Edward stay)
The woeful Queen at first amazed stands;
But quickly recollected wrings her hands,
Strikes her fair breast, and after them she hyes
To the next Lobby, weeps, and kneeling cries,
Dear Son (for well she knew her Son was there)
Oh pity, pity gentle Mortimer.
Let no accusers raise thine anger so;
Nor wicked counsel make thee prove a foe
To him that well deserves: oh pull not down
So true, so strong a pillar of thy crown.
But when she sees him gone, and no reply
Vouchsafed to her (for Edwards modesty,
Because his justice her fond suite denyde,
For fear his tongue should be enforced to chide
A mothers crime or folly, words forbeares)
A grief too great to be expressed by tears
Confounds her sense; as in an ecstasy
She falls to ground, and helpless seems to lie,
Until the maids and Ladies of her train
Had to her chamber borne her back again.
The Castle wholly to the King's command
Is now reduced, and to his royal hand
The keys delivered up: nor dooes he fear
The great and pompous train of Mortimer;
They soon submitted when their Lord was taine.
And here seems Edward to begin his reign;
Henceforth his regal power, his treasury
Shall be his own; those rays of Majesty
A subjects greatness shall eclipse no more;
Nor shall the Land a blazing-star adore
Instead of true-borne Phoebus: and thus far
The tragaedy of this great Mortimer
Fair Nottingham began, and opened the way:
What now remains another place must play:
The scoene from thence to London is removed;
Where more foul treasons are against him proved,
More debts then one condemned head could be,
Or single life enough to satisfy;
Had not the opprobrious manner of his fate,
And that proud height, that pinnacle of state,
From whence the peoples late astonished eyes
Had seen him star-like shoot (as from the skies
Ambitious Phaeton was dinged down
By Jove's revengefull thunder) fully shown
With what proportion powerful Justice can
Redeem her self against the greatest man:
And that there is no such envied height at all,
But she can make it pitied by a fall.
And now the common Gallows is the place,
Where this great Lord with shame must end his race
On earth: and twice did rising Phoebus there
Behold the body of dead Mortimer
To all a scorned spectacle remain.
But yet thus much thy memory shall gain
Of great and tragic fame, that all shall say
A stranger game did Fortune never play.
And whensoere that fickle goddess glories
In her proud sportive trophies; when the stories
Of her most envied favovrites are told,
Who next to Kings and Emperors did hold
The Helm, and keep the nearest rooms in state:
When Plavtianus greatness we relate
With his so sudden ruin: when we tell
How once great Romes adored Sejanus fell:
Or how Ruffinus torn and mangled died
In all the height of his ambitious pride:
Among those names shall thou in times to come
Great Mortimer, fill up a tragic room,
And in thy story, like to them, shall be
A Document to all posterity.
Annotations upon the first Book.
a About the fifth year of King Edward the second his reign, that renowned
King of Scotland Robert le Bruce having now over-mastred the opposite faction
in his own Nation, and driven out all the English Garrisons left there in
possession by Edward the first, had wholly recovered his Kingdom of Scotland;
and not so contented, had much endammaged, by often inrodes, the Realm of
England. To take revenge of him, Edward the second with a wonderful great and
rich English army, containing about 80000. invadeth Scotland in his own
person, at a place called Bannocks bourne it came to a battle; where the
English are discomfited with as great an ouer-throw as ever they received in
any field: six of their greatest Noblemen slain, about 700. Knights and
gentlemen of account, besides many noble prisoners taken: about the number of
common soldiers slain, the Authors of that time (whether misinformed or
partial) most wretchedly disagree, some accounting 10000. some 50000. but how
great so ever the number were, no revenge was taken during the whole reign of
Edward the second; but the kingdom of England in many ensuing actions suffered
much from the hands of Robert le Bruce: the fortune of war running all on that
side while he lived.

b While deposed Edward was miserably murdered in Berkley Castle, the young
King was upon the borders of Scotland with a puissant army: and having
environed the Scots (who had entered England with invasive arms) in the woods
of Wiredale and Stanhop park, and stopped up all passages, made sure account
of victory: but by the treason of the Lord Mortimer (for which he was
afterward among other things accused and condemned) after they had lodged
there fifteen days, and began to feel much want, they were suffered to
escape: and the young King lost his first enterprise, besides the expense of
much treasure, and a wonderful danger of his own person: for Sir James
Douglas, a valiant servant of King Robert le Bruce, with 200. light horses
assailed the Kings own pavilion, where the King was so near death, that a
Chaplain of his, who stoutly behaved himself, was slain in his Masters
defense; and Sir James retired from thence with safety.

c All the Authors of that time do generally agree concerning the greatness
of Roger Mortimer, his power in state, his pompous attendance, and haughty
carriage of all business; as likewise the greatness of the Queens Dower, and
her familiarity with that Lord: which offending (as needs it must) the rest of
the Nobility, I thought it not so fit to be barely related in the Authors
person, as by the way of speech to proceed angerly from the mouth of that brave
Lord Mountague, who was, by the consent of those writers, a special assistant
to King Edward in the surprising of Mortimer: and such particulars as concern
the lamentable murder of that deposed King, to proceed from his servant Sir
Thomas de la Moore, who accordingly wrote the story of it.

THE REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE THIRD.
The second Book.
Argument II.
King Edward's homage to the King of France.
He claims that Crown: his friends and puissance.
Sicilia's King fore-tels the misery
Of France. King Edwards Navall victory.
NOt yet had Edward in his active mind
The claim and conquest of great France designed,
Nor looked abroad: domesticke business
Employed his early manhood; the redress
Of those distempers which had grown at home,
Too great for any youth to overcome
But such a youth as his, had yet detained
His spirit there; when Fate, that had ordained
Through fire and sword the miseries of France,
Finds out a means to wake the puissance
Of this victorious Prince, and make him know
That fatal title that had slept till now.
Philip of France but newly crowned, and not
Content in rest to hold what he had got
Upon a doubted title, nor abate
The least and strictest circumstance of state,
Which might belong to that high crown he wore,
In punctual manner summons Edward ore,
For Guyennes Dukedom, which he held, to do
His personal homage; nor did Edward, though
Filled with disdain and manly rage, refuse
To come: fair Amiens is the place they choose;
In whose Cathedral Church King Philip sat.
Oh who can tell what pomp and wondrous state
Was showed at this so great solemnity:
How many noble Peers and Princes, high
In blood and fame, did there attendance give;
And in their best attires and lustres strive
To grace the crown of France and Philips state.
Under a wealthy Canopy he sat,
His roabe of color like the violet
With golden flower de luces all beset
With crowned head and sceptered hand, to take
That low obeisance The English King should make:
The Kings of Boheme and Navarre were by
Placed as spectators of his dignity.
Unhappy Philip, boast not this vain state,
Which bleeding France shall buy at dearest rate.
Why do thou fondly show to Edwards eyes
That wealth, that must hereafter be his prize?
And by those gorgeous splendours, teach so great
A spirit as his, what value he should set
Upon thy Kingdoms conquest? those thy Peers,
That proudly face him now, ere many years
Do turn again, shall in their ruin be
Sad monuments of Edward's victory.
And mourning see, though now he seem to low,
His real honor in thine overthrow.
Bohemia's King (oh ominous) whose eye
This shadow sees of Philip's dignity,
In Philip's fall a tragic part must play,
And as a trophee to remain for aye,
To Edward's conquering hands must dying yield
His glittering plume in Cressyes fatal field.
The English King to Philip's royal seat
Makes fair approach, attended with a great
And gallant train of Peers, whose bright array
The wealth and pomp of England did display.
A gown of crimson Velvet Edward wore
With golden Leopards all embroidered ore.
His well-becomming sword was guirded on,
And spurs of gold about his anckles shone;
Upon his head stood Englands diadem:
And such did his Heroicke presence seem,
As in the French men's hearts, although that there
He came with peace, did strike a silent fear.
So much unlike his Princely looks did show
To that low action that he came to do.
Thus coming before Philip's chair he stands;
Melun the Chamberlain of France commands
To doffe his royal Crown, his Spurs and Sword,
And bids him kneel to Philip, as the Lord
Supreme of all those Aquitanian lands;
Then twixt King Philip's puts King Edward's hands,
Declaring the Oath; then Edward gives a kiss
To Philip sitting, as the manner is.
The King of France rejoicing in this vain
Shadow of Majesty, to entertain
His royal Leigeman makes a sumptuous feast.
Put deep in Edwards young, and fiery breast
Remains the thought of this indignity;
Which, though a while it smoother'd seem to lie,
Breaks out in such a flame, as long in vain
The neighbor Princes strive to quench again,
Until Revenge had given to France as sad
And great a wound as ere that Kingdom had.
But to attempt the conquest of so great,
So populous a land as France, and set
The title that he had on foot, required
Strong preparations: the young King retired
To England, in his eager thoughts revolues
This weighty cause; and though the great resolves
Of his undaunted spirit ore-master all
The difficulties, that were like to fall:
Yet fitting time must be allowed, to make
Confaederacies of import, and take
Fair opportunities. The fates afford
Occasions straight to flesh his conquering sword
In Scotland wounds; whose miseries must be
The prologue to great France her tragaedy.
Ballioll unhappy to his nation,
Was now returned to challenge Scotlands crown,
(While young King David did abide in France)
Which soon he gained by Edward's puissance.
Whose prosperous valor, first at Berwicke town,
Then in that famed defeat at a Halidowne,
In which so many valiant Scots were slain,
Appeared; and seemed to quit that blow again,
Which, whilst his father second Edward reigned,
England from Bruce his warlike hand sustained.
Enough had these victorious wars declared
Great Edward's prowess, and enough prepared
His martial thoughts for France; when Fates conspire
To bring fresh fuel to this raging fire.
For discontented from his native home
To England b Robert of Artois was come,
His Countries firebrand, one that well had learned
King Edward's mind, and well his spirit discerned*
So do the peoples shouts encourage more
A fierce Olimpicke Steed, that strove before
To force the lists, and break th opposing bars:
As this young fiery King too prone to wars
Before, is now by his incitements moved.
So against his Rome bold Curio's language proved,
When with the Tribunes banished, he was come
To armed Caesar at Ariminum.
Curio by death prevented could not see
What he had wrought, his Countries misery;
Whose slaughtered carcass strewn the field, a prey
To Lybian birds, before that tragic day
His Caesar conquered on Pharsaliaes plains.
How like a fate for thee, Artois, remains?
Thou shall not see thy Countries greatest woe,
Nor Edward's bays in Philip's overthrow.
Thy death shall first in Britains wars be wrought
Before that Crescyes mortal field be fought:
And ere that Poictiers wondrous battle fame
Black Edwards sword, be nothing but a name
As much by France accursed in times to come,
As Curio his by his afflicted Rome.
This stirring Frenchman Edward joys to see,
And honors him with Richmonds signiory.
Then ore the Seas to Antwerpe, to provide
Confederacies to support his side,
He sails in person with his Queen and Son;
Where what Queen Philips father had begun
(The noble William Heinaults Earl, to draw
Those German Dukes to his great son in law)
King Edward's royal presence in their land
Soon brings to pass: the Dukes of Gelderland
And Brabant join with him: and to his side
The potent Flemmings too (though strongly tied
By oath and obligation to the Crown
Of France) by c James of Artevile are won*
Nor were their oaths and obligations broke;
For noble Edward, to preserve them, took
Upon himself the style and arms of France,
And on his royal Standard did advance
The Flower deleces: thence he past the Rhine,
And there with speed did to his party join
The potent Prelate, that did then the land
Of Agrippina's Colony command
There did Bavarian Lewis the Emperor
Bestow on Edward, more to same his power,
An office high, creating him ore all
The Roman Empire Vicar general.
Though soon unconstant Lewis did revoke
That grant; and to his own dishonor took
The side of France; that men might after know
By Edward's conquest, Philip's overthrow,
That Lewis the Roman Emperor could be
Nor useful friend, nor hurtful enemy.
No less doos Philip labor to advance
His strength by leagues; and to his wealthy France
The power of many foreign Princes draw:
With him the two great Dukes of Austria,
And the old warlike King of Boheme join,
With Cassimere th* Elector Palatine:
And in this heat on either side too soon
By little sparkles is the fire begun.
Pope Benedict, now summers gaudy pride
Had his belov d Avignion beavtify d,
With all the Court resided there to whom
Those Lords that saught the peace of Christendom
(Which as they justly fear d, would by the war
Of these two Monarchs be engaged too far)
Resorted thither daily to complain.
The Pope himself was grieved that he in vain
Had by his Legates often strived of late
To reconcile the Kings: that fresh debate
Was nourished daily, and that either Land
Had felt already wars ungentle hand:
That Philip's royal Navy, which had been
Prepared for pious wars in Palaestine
To free the afflicted Christians of the East,
Was now so ill diverted, to infest
The shores of England: sometimes would he chide
King Edwards heat, and too ambitious pride
That durst make such a claim, or hope at all
That he could conquer with a strength so small
So great a land, so rich a crown, from one
That had already firm possession:
Sometimes again would he expostulate
Against Philip's punctual and vainglorious state,
That Edward's strictest homage would require,
And tease a spirit active as the fire.
One Prince in virtue, as in honor, high
Robert the learned King of Sicily
Was then in person at Avignion.
Whose skill, discerning every motion
Aspect, and powerful influence of the stars,
Foresaw th event of these so tragic wars,
And wail'd the woes that France would suffer thence.
Of that the Pope desired intelligence.
About his chair the revered College sat;
By whom the King was placed in fitting state.
When thus the Pope bespake him; Royal Son,
Since well we know your good intention,
And can no less commend your pious will
To end these wars, then we admire that skill,
By which your noble souls delighted eye
Takes wise survey of all the starry sky;
And in that glorious book the future fates
Of men can read, and change of greatest states:
And shall we think the stars would ever show
What shall betide mortality, if now
They would be silent in so great a war,
(If this great war proceed) that doos so far
Engage the shaken state of Christendom,
And look so full of tragic threats? on whom,
If they neglect a state so eminent
As France or England, can they be intent?
Unto our cares declare, renowned d King,
What strange effects these stars are like to bring*
For we allow that Christian use may be
Made of praedictions by Astrology.
Let dim-ey'd heathens count it double woe
When future fates they are enforced to know,
Who think the stars no higher power obey,
And judgments unavoidable, which they
Denounce against mortal men; which when they hear,
Their hopes are fled, and they can only fear.
But we, that worship his eternal name,
That rules the stars, that heaven and earth did frame,
Have learned, that though their usual virtue guide
The state of earth, and show what shall betide
(Beyond control of Nature) certain still:
It is not certain against his sacred will.
If not against him, then why should we despair?
It is not certain against a Christians prayer.
That sacred charm has power to thwart the law
Which constant Nature strives to keep, to draw
The moving stars ont of their wonted way,
And in the height of his carriere to stay
The glorious Sun himself; which once was done,
When noble Ioshuah fought in Gibeon:
As afterward he was enforced to take
A backward course for Hezekiah's sake.
In vain a cause of this great wonder wrought
Chaldaeaes wise Astrologers had sought
To find by Art; for all Arts useless proved
Until the great Assyrian Monarch moved
His servants sent to Hezekiah's land.
The powerful working of so great a hand
None but inspired Prophets could descry,
No Oracle but Iuda's Deiry.
We therefore may believe no stars portent
Is sure against a Christian paenitent.
Nay more, if paenitence have often controlled
Those doomes, which sacred Prophets have foretold,
And could reverse the Lord's severe decree
Denounced by Jonas against great Ninivee:
It well may thwart what ere the heavens portend.
But happy are those threats, when they amend
The sinful world (made useful so) to be
A wholesome cure, and not a malady.
Be therefore pleased, learned Prince to show
To us what Kingdoms are most threatened now.
King Robert sighed, since, holy Sir (quoth he)
You have been pleased to grace Astrology,
And tell her Christian uses, I shall now
My good entents with greater freedom show.
But when I speak of this ensuing war,
Expect no actions in particular:
Too dim an eye have we Astrologers
Too general to search out those; the stars
Distinctly cannot future things decree,
Or men's frail skill exactly cannot see.
Inspired Prophets only that can find,
Allowed to speak their great Creators mind.
Whose eye of Providence counts nothing small,
As to his power is nothing great at all.
But thus we find; if this sad war proceed,
So much, so long unhappy France shall bleed,
The enfeebled Kingdom shall expire, or near
To utter ruin grow; full fourscore year
This black and balefull influence shall last.
Recount, oh France, thy former woes, what wast
The conquering Romans made, what blood so ere
The Frankes drew from thee, to inhabit here,
Or when fierce Rollo with his Danish flood
Broke in upon thee: to this sea of blood
It Is small; and weighed with conquering Englands wars,
Shall be accounted slight and gentle scars.
Deep, as thy wounds, shall thy dishonor be.
Alas, how great a map of misery,
How long a tragic field of war shall thou
Rich France become? the pride of Europe now,
But then the pity of all neighbor Lands?
Oh do not scorn at English Edward's hands
On hardest terms a peace to entertain;
Nor let King Philip strive against fate in vain.
No force can there prevail, nor overthrow
The Martial fame that Destinies do owe
To Edward's high nativity, for whom
A glorious thread is spun, such as their loome
Was proud to see, when those old Worthies came
Into the world, that with so loud a fame
Have filled the ears of all posterity.
Such shall this active Edward prove; as high
And wondered at, shall be his deeds of war,
Although his stage cannot extend so far,
Nor his small Kingdoms forces overrun
Far distant Lands, as did the Macedon,
Or Romes proud Sons: his deeds within the bounds
Of France (excepting Scotlands fatal wounds)
As mighty trophies, and as great shall gain
As such a circuit ever did contain.
And for the several actions of his wars
(Though I but dimly see particulars)
Within this spacious Continent, where once
Great Caesar governed those stout legions,
Whose strength could after overcome the power
Of Rome it self, and make him Emperor,
Let disadvantages of battles be
Well weighed, the past and present quality
Of such a foe; the stars to him do give
As true a fame as Caesar did atchieve.
But such calamities this heart will bleed
To see; and therefore, holy Sir, with speed
(If a prevention can at all be had)
Let your high power be interposed: sad
Are all that hear the King's praediction,
And think which way they may the strife atone:
But while they think, thus on the Ocean
A mighty blow this fatal war began.
Slight skirmishes had wounded either side,
And banished Peace: nor must the cause be tried
By any judge but Wars uncertain chance.
Edward already wore the arms of France,
And in his honor stood engaged to gain
The Crown he claimed, as Philip to maintain
That great possession: in their own estates
Both strong; both powerful in confoederates,
And both alike incensed. But ere rich France
In her own bosom try the puissance
Of warlike Edward, she must weeping hear
Her losses by him, and be taught to fear:
Or Fortune else was purposed to declare
How hot, how aequall a desire of war
Both Nations had, that in the middle way
Would meet the trial, and disdained to stay
Till either other should at home invade;
But with their armed Navall forces, made
Blew Neptunes face the first discolored stage
Of war, and Scene of their incensed rage.
The Fleet of France, so great it was esteemed
Invindible by Englands force, and seemed
To bear command ore all those narrow Seas,
Proud of spoils and wealthy pillages
Which from sacked Hampton they had brought away,
Between the Ports of Sluice and Blankebergh lay
In three fair bodies, led by three, that then
In navall fights were held the bravest men
France had, and did in all Sea-arts excel,
The stout Bahuchet with brave Kiriell,
And Barbenoire the Genois Admiral.
So showed their Navy, when conjoined all,
Men would have thought some forest moved from far,
When Winters rage the Pines proud tops did bare,
Or that the famed Aegaean Cyclades
Torn from their roots, had floated on the Seas.
Upon that coast this hapless Navy lay
To intercept King Edward in his way
To Sluice; who now from England had put forth.
His Fleet, though less in number, yet in worth,
Fortune and courage greater then the foes,
Came sailing on. When golden Phoebus rose
Behind the French, and shooting forth his light
Displayed the English Navy to their sight.
The royal Banners to their scouts appear,
And notice give that Englands King is there.
At which the French are swelled with excess
Of joy, though false, with golden promises
Flattring themselves. (How blind are humane eyes!
How hidden are the path of Destinies!)
Never did wretches not ordained to see
The setting Sun, with vainer jollity
Welcome their ruin, and each other cheer.
They thank the fates, that had presented there
The King of Englands person, and so great
A price that day had on their valor set.
That this great storm, that proudly threatened France,
Was now committed wholly to the chance
Of their Sea Fight: that only they should have
The actions honor, not alone to save
Their land in war; but keep it from a war,
And cut off danger ere it came so far.
Great Edward slowly brings his Navy on,
Waiting advantage wisely, till the Sun
Declining Westward at his back might be,
And dazzle thence the face of the enemy.
Although his Soldiers hardly brook'd delay;
So much they longed for trial of the day:
And in their courages were raised high,
To think they had so brave a witness by
As was their King, and such a King as he,
Who would as well their great example be
As witness of their deeds. This time of stay
He spent, to set his Fleet in fair array.
The middle body he himself maintained,
In which the great and tallest ships were manned,
Which choicest Archers held: twixt every two
Of whom, one ship with men of arms did go.
On either wing loose ships of archers lay,
On all occasions against the foe to play.
The wings themselves with gallant Lords were filled:
The Earls of Darby, Pembrooke, Gloucester held
The right, where Huntington commanded all,
Of Englands Southern fleet Lord Admiral.
Lord Morley Admiral of all the North
The left wing had, with many Lords of worth:
Northamptons Earl, Lord Percy, Delaware,
And Robert of Artois, who th'honours bore
Of Richmonds Earldom then, with many more
Of honored name and noble service too.
Heroicke Edward, when both Navies near
Had made approach, 'gan thus in short to cheer
His forward Soldiers; It were needless now
Brave Englishmen, and valiant Lords, to show
How much depends on this great Navall fight;
That all the trial of our royal right
To France, and your rich hopes are lost: undone
Are all designs, unless this day be won.
This is the gate of our great enterprise:
This is that entrance where the danger lies;
Which if we master now, the future war
Will prove more easy, as more fruitful far:
And not a war, but a reward will be,
And recompense of this days victory.
Here let your valor sway wars future chance,
And, though not conquer, yet disharten France.
The Sun and wind are both auspicious
To us, the channel advantageous.
With these let us in our own cause appear.
See what spectatours fortune gives us here.
Oh let our friends the Flemmings from the Bays
Of Sluice and Blankebergh now behold and praise
Your deeds, and viewing th English puissance,
Think themselves happy in forsaking France
To side with us: but I in vain prolong
The battles trial, and your valors wrong
To keep such eager spirits from action.
On then brave Soldiers: Scarce had Edward done,
When the bold English archers with a flight
Of winged shafts begin the mortal fight.
The Crossebowes answer from the Frenchmens side;
And through the air dooes Death in triumph ride
Twixt both the fleets, while storms of arrows fly,
And with a fatal darkness cloud the sky.
All noise of tacklings, and shrill trumpets sound
Is by the lovder shouts of soldiers drowned,
That wound the air; whose strong concussions make
The hollow parts of Sluice and Blankebergh shake,
And strike with terror Englands Eastern shore.
Nere did blew Neptune on those seas before
Behold so great, so tragical a fight.
Oh fates, why was not all great Edward's right
To France, in this one Navall fury tried?
But if the mourning land must bleed beside
In horrid wounds, if Crescyes mortal day,
And Poictiers field could not be wiped away
From th'adamantine book of Destiny*
But uncontrolled must there remain, oh why
Was not this Sea Fight spared? why in vain
Did so much slaughter the sad Ocean stain?
The worlds imperial wreath was won and lost
With far less blood then this days trial cost
At Leucas battle, whence Antonius, head
Of half the world, with Cleopatra fled.
Less slaughter there covld that high quarrel try
Then here could purchase Edward's victory.
Nor yet, alas, can this so cruel fight
Determine all, or stablish Edward's right.
By so much blood that Kingdom is not won,
Nor this great war concluded, but begun.
Nor now did bows alone maintain the war,
Or barbed shafts bestowing wounds from far.
More close together their stern fury meets,
And with each other grapple both the Fleets,
With iron hooks and chains to draw more nigh
Unto themselves their own sad destiny.
The sword acts freely there; and hand to hand,
Whilst firmly linked both the Navies stand,
And without distance cover th Ocean ore.
Short pikes and bills encountering make a sore
And mortal fight; no hopes of flight at all.
Upon the decks the slaughtered bodies fall
In heaps together; some ore board are thrown,
And twixt the grapling ships fall dying down,
As if they strove again to separate
What was conjoined by so bad a fate.
Nor did the blood that streamed down apace,
No more then only stain blew Neptune's face:
But on the top that aerie liquour swam,
And by it self a crimson sea became,
And often to dying men proved mortal too,
Anticipating what the sea would do,
When some, that down the ships alive are cast,
Are choked in blood, ere they the water taste.
A gallant English ship, the Christopher,
That had been taken by the French that year,
Now in the front was placed, bravely manned,
As if to let the English understand,
And grieve for what they had so lately lost.
But dear the French must pay for such a boast.
The sight of her dooes not dismay, but whet
The English courages, who strive to get
That ship again: her they in fight avail
With greatest fury, and at last prevail.
They board the Christopher; the French are killed,
And she again with English soldiers filled.
Who now more fiercely fights, as if to be
Revenged for her late captivity.
Another warlike English ship, that bore
The name of Edward, and the year before
Had from Southampton (like the Christopher)
Been taken by the French, was fighting there.
Against her the Christopher with fury came.
Two sister-ships of aequall strength, of frame
Alike they showed; no vantage was in ought,
Unless that here the French, there The English fought:
They join, and grapple with each other close;
The sword acts all; for useless are their bows,
And no room left at all for arrows flight.
'Twixt no two vessels was so stern a fight;
Nor English ships so fiercely French invade
As was the fight, which these, both English, made.
So hostile souls, when they imprisoned are
In kindred bodies, make the sharpest war.
With greatest spleen the Theban brothers fought,
No Argive soldier against a Theban brought
Such perfect hate, as twixt the fruit of one
Divided womb was in that combat shown.
Long was the fight 'twixt these two vessels tied
Ere doubting fate the conquest could decide
At last the English prowess dooes appear;
The Edward's boorded by the Christopher,
(The French within her all captived or slain)
And to their Nation both restor d again.
The English Soldiers less in number are,
But free, and wider on the Ocean far
Have room to stretch their wings, and keep them even:
Into the havens straits the French are driven,
And so unhappily encumbered there
They cannot help themselves; the Mariner
Wants Sea-roome to employ his skill aright,
The Soldier freedom to maintain his fight.
No part of all the fleet of France was free
From this encumbrance and perplexity
But that which Barbenoire of Genoa
Commanded; he that danger well foresaw,
And from the haven, when the fight began,
To gain the freedom of the Ocean,
Brought out his ships the rest a hapless prey
Unto their foes, together crowded lay;
That now it seemed the Sun, the wind, and tide
Did all assist victorious Edward*s side.
Yet stroveth'unhappy French to sell as dear
Their lives as that strait place would suffer there:
With flaming brand the fierce Enyo flew
Ore both their heads, and great the slaughter grew.
Oh what unw^aried Muse has time to show
How many souls fled to the shades below?
Or each Plebeian tragedy to tell?
Scarce can we thine renowned Kiriell,
Who in the heat of all were gladly slain
Ashamed to see thy native France again.
With thee the flower of all thy Captains fall
To wait upon their dying Admiral.
Mean while the valiant English Lords divide
Their dreadful forces, and on every side
Assail the wretched Frenchmen; here come on
The Earls of Derby, Pembrooke, Huntington:
There Morley, Percy, Deleware invade,
And stern D'artois distaines his vengefull blade
In wounds of bleeding France: amongst whom as high
In prowess as imperial Majesty
Like Mars himself, Heroicke Edward goes;
Whose armed presence quels the fainting foes.
He worst of danger dared; while by the side
Of such a Prince his valiant servants died,
Stout Poinings, Butler, noble Latimer
Before his eyes were slain: but wondrous dear
The Unhappy French did for their slaughter pay*
For every English ghost that mortal day,
Ten ghosts of France fled to the shades below.
Nor in the heat of fight could The English know
How great a wrack their conquering swords had made*
The James of Deep, a mighty ship, that had
Endured so long the shocke of hottest fight,
And never seemed to faint at all, when night
Began now approach, was by the English taken:
In which Death's treasure only did remain.
Four hundred slaughtred carcasses in her
They found, and by that tragic token there
Perceived how deep a wound their arms had given.
Now all the other ships, that had been driven
Into the havens straits, were sunk, or there
Surprised by the English Conqueror.
When Barbenoire, who not enclosed at all
Had Sea-roome left, perceived how great a fall
His side sustein'd, in sorrow and dismay
Bewailing France, and cursing that sad day
He tacked about, to be in safety gone;
But by the warlike Earl of Huntington
The Southern Admiral, so sore was chased
And hard-beset, he was enforced at last
By secret flight almost alone to go
A sad reporter of so great a blow.
Black night now challenged her alternate reign,
S^^^ soon enough to hide that tragic stain
Which on the blushing face of Neptune lay:
Not soon enough to part the mortal fray.
Wars raging fire was spent, the fuel gone,
And all that Mars could do, already done.
Nor would great Edward then approach the shore*
But make the Oceans bosom, which before
Had been the stage of his victorious fight,
To be his lodging field; whilst all the night
Drums beat, and Trumpets to the havens nigh
Proclaim his great and noble victory.
But when the rosy morning began appear,
With joy to welcome his arrival there
The town of Sluice prepares, while all along
The haven people numberless do throng
To view the face of that Heroicke King,
And all the shores with acclamations ring.
At last great Edward lands, and waited on
By all the noblest Burgers of the town,
And English Lords, in triumph takes his way
To Gaunt, where his belov d Queen Philip lay.
With such expressions of true state and love
Did white-arm'd Juno meet triumphant Jove
When from the Giants wars he came, as she
Her Lord returned from this great victory.
With her at Gaunt remained the greatest States
Of Netherland, and best confoederates
King Edward had for his great war in hand.
The Dukes of Brabant, and of Gelderland,
With Heinaults Earl his coming did attend,
And James of Artevile his constant friend,
Whose power had drawn those people to his side*
There all their leagves are firmly ratified;
While happy Gaunt is proud to entertain
So brave a Monarch with his noble train:
But much more proud that she had been the place
Of birth to one fair branch of Edward's race
Young princely John, who thence shall take his name,
And lend the town, in liev, eternal fame.
Annotations upon the second Book.
a This great battle of Halydon hill, a place near Berwick, was tought in the
sixth year of the reign of King Edward the third of England, and the second of
King David of Scotland; who being then a child remained in France, and
Archimbald Douglas Earl of Argus governed the realm of Scotland for him: the
English army was led by King Edward himself in person: that of Scotland by the
forenamed Earl of Angus Regent of the Kingdom: in this battle the Scots
received a great overthrow, although the writers of those times do much
disagree about the number of those that perished in the vanquished army: the
Scottish Histories allowing fourteen thousand, the English naming above
thirty thousand, but howsoever it were, by this victory Berwicke was gained to
the Crown of England.

b This Robert of Artois was a Prince of the blood of France, descended from
Robert Son to Lewis the eight; there had been a suit betwixt the said Robert
and Maud his Aunt, Countess of Burgundy, about the Earldom of Artois. Robert
presuming upon his own power, and the service he had done King Philip in
advancing him to the Crown (for Robert of Artois was at the first a great
maintainer of Philips title against Edward of England) forges a deed, thereby
to overthrow his Aunts right; which being afterward discovered, made her right
the more, and moved the French King to give judgment on her side, so that the
County of Artois was by Parliament confirmed upon Maud; which so offended
Robert, as in his rage he openly said he would unmake the King by the same
power that he had made him. This rash threatening so incensed the King, that he
presently laid to apprehend him; but failing therein, he proclaimed him
Traitor, confiscated his estate, forbidding all his Subjects to receive or
aid him. Robert of Arto is being thus distressed comes over into England, is
joyfully entertained by King Edward, made of his Council, and invested in the
Earldom of Richmond, where he becomes a great incendiary between the two
Kings; discovering to King Edward the secrets of France, and disapproving now
of King Philips title; upon which a Declaration is published and sent to the
Pope, and all the neighbor Princes, showing the usurpation of Philip de Valois
upon the Crown of France.

c There was among the Flemmings one Jacques de Artevile a Citizen of Gavnt, of
great estimation among the people: he was their Leader and Tribune as it were
in all their tumults: him King Edward gets by great rewards to take his part,
and thereby had them all ready to assail the French King upon any occasion.
This Jacques, though a man of mean condition, was an useful friend to England;
whose death happening about seven years after (for in a tumult his brains
were beaten out) was much lamented by King Edward.

d This Robert King of Cicily, as Collenutius and other Neopolitan writers
testify, was a learned Prince, and much renowned for his skill in Astrology:
he was about this time (says our Froissard) at Avignion with Pope Benedict,
where he declared to the Pope by his skill what great wars and bloodshed was
like to be, and lamented the miseries of France. That report of Froissard gave
ground to this discouse in the Poem.

e This Navall fight, which is here at large described in the Poem, was out of
doubt the greatest that ever had been upon these narrow Seas: the numbers were
many, the fight was cruel, and the slaughter exceeding great. The French Navy
by consent of most writers, consisted of 400 sail; the English consisted,
according to some authors of 200 sail. according to others of 200. to others
of 300. although Froissard report that the Frenchmen were four to one English,
which may be thought too much odds to be believed, for the French in those
days had good Seamen: but the slaughter was exceeding great, and the victory
as complete on the English side as could be imagined: for very few of the
French ships escaped home, but were either sunk or taken; and 30000* of their
men flaine: of the English those writers, that report most, have mentioned but
4000.

THE REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE THIRD.
The third Book.
Argument III.
Atruce' twixt France and Englands Kings is made*
The Garter f^unded; Edward dooes invade
King Philip's lands; the warre's to trial brought,
And that renowned field of Crescy fought.
A Wound so mortal had enfeebled France
By Sea received, she could no more advance
Her colors there: no more had she or vein
To bleed, or spirits left to strive again.
What now remains of this lovd-threatning war
The Continent alone must feel: as far
As Tourney, filled with high and wealthy hopes
Victorious Edward leads his cheerful troops
Augmented lately with new-mustred bands
Of his confederates in the Netherlands.
That town is first enobled by his stay,
Judged worthy to be made the maiden prey,
A royal army would vouchsafe to take.
Nor is King Philip in her rescue slack;
But for the late dishonorable blow
Filled with revenge and fury, thither now
Is marching with a numerous host, and brings
Besides his Frenchmen, the two warlike Kings,
Navarre and Boheme: nor will Edward rise
From Tourneys siedge; although too small a prize
One Cities conquest now appears to be
For Edward's sword; but Fortune lets him see
That she, to crown his glorious hopes, so nigh
Had brought a war of greater dignity.
And now the two incensed Kings are met,
And their great cause on one days trial set
(As all believe) all expectations near
Are drawn, nor have they time to hope or fear.
The armies both stand ranged in fair array,
And fierce Bellona proud of such a day
(As if it lay not in the power of chance
That storm to scatter) shakes her dreadful lance:
For like two high-swoll'n seas on either side,
Whose meeting rage no Isthmos did divide,
But winds, that from contrary quarters blow,
Together drive, the two Battaliaes show.
But that Eternal God, who from on high
Surveys all hoasts, disposes victory
(Called thence the Lord of hoasts) and sets the times
Of war or peace, as sinful Nations crimes
Provoke his justice, did not think it good
That cloud should yet dissolve in showers of blood.
But pleased to respite for a time the woes
Of wretched France; and for his purpose chose
An instrument, whose weakness might make known
The power, that reconciled them, was his own.
A veiled Nun alone could enterpose,
And stay the fury of these armed foes,
Jane de Valois a Princely Lady, near
To one in blood, as by alliance dear
To the other; Mother to great Edward's Queen,
And Philip's sister; who of late had been
Since Heinaults death, at Fontenelles vowed
A holy Nun* She wakened with the loud
Alarmes of this so great so feared a blow,
Her quiet cloister had forsaken now.
Amidst their armed troops her way she took,
And through the rudest breasts a reverence struck.
Well did the fame of her chaste life before
Become the sacred habit that she wore.
Pure innocence her snow-white veil professed,
Her black a sorrow silently expressed.
Grave was her comely face; Devotion
On beavties ruins with more beavty shone.
In all her gestures dwelt humility,
But tempered with commanding Majesty.
As thus she passes to persuade the Kings,
Fair Peace descends, and with her silver wings
Cutting the air, above the Princess still
Hangs gently hovering; whose calm breath does fill
The changed Camps; the Soldiers 'gan to feel
A mildness seize their breasts; all thoughts of steel
Of blood and slaughter seemed to withdraw.
This gentle Nymph when fierce Bellona saw
As she from heaven descended down, and knew
Her hopes were now put off, away she flew,
And left the field; but with an angry look
Turned back, and proudly her plumed helmet shook.
Go sluggish Nymph, quoth she, enjoy thy day;
Fates may defer, but cannot wipe away
This Kingdoms wounds; but it is not their decree
The fields of Tourney should renowned be
To future times for such a glorious day.
In Crescy fields brave Edward shall display
His conquering colors; there the French shall fall,
And that poor Village, now scarce named at all,
Shall for the death of many thousands be
A place of fame to all posterity.
There I shall reign; till then dull fields adieu,
And like a Dragon through the air she flew.
And now so well the Princess did persuade
Both Kings; so powerful, he that sent her, made
Her pious Eloquence that all their hate
Seemed banished; Philip of Valois forgate
His thirst of vengeance for the fatal blow
France took in that great Navall overthrow:
Edward relented too, content to cease
His royal claim a while; a sudden peace
Is for three years concluded to remain.
The dreadful colors folded up again,
The threatening swords are sheathed, not stained yet
In blood at all; and all those Princes met
To make the trial of so great a day
Depart again. King Edward takes his way
By Flanders home; and with his dearest Queen
That royal pledge, that for two years had been
Left there by him, (the honor of their clime)
And there had brought within that happy time
His royal family a fair increase
(Two Princely Sons) to England crossed the Seas.
But soon Wars flame, that had a while in vain
Been by the Truce deprest, broke out again,
And higher blazed; but by degrees it came:
Nor did the royal quarrel, and great claim
That Edward laid to France, begin the jarre;
But to draw on this great and fatal War
Collateral causes are found out by fates.
And first in aid of their confoederates
About the questioned right of Britains Lands
Th'engaged Princes by their servants hands,
And meaner strengths begin to blow the flame.
To England Montford's widowed Duchess came,
And here from Edward noble succors gained
Against Charles of Bloys, whom Philip's power sustained:
The Earls of Suffolk, Pembrooke, Salisbury,
And Stafford, flowers of English chevalry,
Bourchier and Spencer Lords, and many more
Of honored name, with her to Britain go.
With them went Robert of Artois, who first
In Edward kindled that ambitious thirst,
And fired his active spirit to advance
His own high honor by the woes of France.
At Vannes siedge (so fate ordained) he took
His mortal wound; but ere the soul forsook
Her earthly relics, thence to Englands ground
Transported back, a quiet grave he found.
Her Soldier England willingly entombed:
His native France, that by his means was doomed
So many following mischiefs to endure,
Bestowed his death, but not his sepulture.
Vannes, and other little towns are won
And lost: but no important action
This war produces (where the threats are high)
Save that the two great foes are drawn so nigh,
(Though timely truces do again prevent
The fatal blow:) great Edward not content
To send in Montford's aid those forces ore,
Arrives himself upon the Britain shore.
To whom Prince John the Duke of Normandy
With forty thousand men approached nigh
In Bloys his right: the armies both prepare
To give the blow. Near was the stroke of war,
And Britain Vannes had almost beheld
What was decreed to Crescyes fatal field;
The royal powers of England and of France
In Britains cause to try their puissance
Before their own great quarrel they maintain.
But Britains Duchy must not hope to gain
So great an honor here: clear grows the day,
Without a shower this cloud is blown away,
The war is done; two Cardinals atone
(As erst a Ladies gentle breath had done)
The royal Armies, and so well persuade,
Truce is again 'twixt France and England made.
Stern Mars a while from deeds of blood restrained
Strove still to whet his rage, and entertained
That breathing space in pastimes to prepare
His cruel forces for the ensuing war.
For like a Camp shows Edwards marshall Court,
To which the Knights of greatest fame resort
From every land, their prowess there to try,
And gain renown by active Chevalry.
His great round Table for those warrelike feasts,
And invitation of such noble guests
At Windsor Castle does King Edward found,
Where he himself was borne, a place renowned
For Britain Arthur's name, who with his bold
Round-table Knights resided there of old.
Of whose majesticke state and honor there
Some monuments did in that age appear,
Though too much darkened by injurious time,
And more by those vain fables made of him,
Which casts such mists ore his bright deeds of glory
That he remains a name without a story.
Nor does fair Windsor seem alone to be
The Throne of Mars, and Scene of Chevalry,
But Loves delicious Bower, more graced then e're
The Idalian wood, or gentle Paphos were.
Here are the Cupids, here the Graces seen;
Hither does Philip, Edward's noble Queen
In state repair with all her beauteous train,
Which then three hundred did no less contain
Of all the greatest, and most Courtly Dames
That this blessed land could boast: they, like the flames
Of heaven, those Orbs of pure aetheriall sire
With noble thoughts the Knights strong breasts inspire.
For Courage often from Beauties influence
Receives his motion. Iusts and Turneaments
With all the other feats of active War
Are daily showed on this fair Theater.
Such Martial labors once the Trojan Band
Did exercise in old Acestes land
Trained by that pious Prince, who first brought ore
The Phrygian relics to Laviniums shore.
But one unhappy Cross is sent to be
A sad allay to this high jollity,
And make great Edward mourn in midst of all
His feasts and triumphs, the untimely fall
Of that renowned Earl of Salisbury
His deare-lov'd William Mountague, who by
A bruise in Tilting took his fatal wound.
Who (though a Subject still) was lately crowned
The Monarch of an I Will, and first began
To wear that Royal title, King of Man.
That Island, on the western Sea, between
Scotland and Ireland lying, that had been
Subject so many years to Scotlands Crown,
Had by the valor of that Earl been won
From them of late, whilst great King Edward (come
From Britains Truce with his strong army home)
Was wasting Scotland; who bestowed that I Will
On The Earl, together with a Royal style.
But (oh) how short a time did envious Fate
Allot to noble William's Kingly state.
Who, like a sacrifice, did only seem
So near his death, to wear a Diadem.
Soon ore all parts of Europe had the fame
Of Edward's table, and the Knights that came
Thither to show their manly prowess, spread,
And in his jealous foe King Philip bred
High emulation; who discernes the end
To which these haughty preparations tend.
That Edward's aim is only to advance
His strengths and friendships *against the Realm of France.
He thinks it now concerns him to prepare
Himself as well against th approaching War;
And in a cause and danger great as that
Dooes not at all disdain to imitate
His subtle foe: but such a table he
Sets up, to draw from Austria, Italy,
And southern Lands the Knights of best renown
To grace his Court, and guard his threatened Crown,
Prevented thus, a new society
King Edward founds, not only made to be
For military deeds a present tie,
But lasting honor to posterity,
The noble order of Saint George his Knights.
Nor for invention of those sacred rites
To former times is he indebt at all,
As for the tables first original
He was to Britain Arthur's old renown.
So many standing monuments were known
Of his round tables in the Kingdom yet.
Besides, the warlike Mortimer had set
Another table up at Killing worth
The age before; whose fame had sounded forth,
And many foreign Knights had drawn from far.
But in this act not Mortimer shall share,
Nor any ancient Hero; this renown
Without a rival, is third Edward's own.
No Killing worth shall sound with Windsors name,
Nor British Arthur darken Edward's fame.
Saint George the Martyr is esteemed to be
A Patron fit for this society.
Among the Martyrs noble army, none
Had suffered more, nor more on earth forgone
For our dear Lord, when Dioclesian reigned,
And every land with Christians slaughters stained.
Not all his wealth, nor stately signiories,
Nor prime of youth did this young Martyr prize;
(For thrice seven Summers only had he told,)
Yet in that early age so wondrous bold,
And in Wars feats so skillful was he grown,
That many famous battles he had won
Against Caesar's stubbornst foes, before that he
By patience conquered Caesar's cruelty.
Him since for tutelary Saint of Wars
The Christians honored, as the Heathen Mars.
Him they invoked in field, before they fought;
His noble aid the encouraged Christians thought
Against the faithless Saracens they had;
That beauteous George in silver armor clad
And crimson Cross appear d, conducting them
Unto the conquest of Jerusalem.
That Saint and Soldier, in this Martial age,
Edward entitles to the Patronage
Of that most noble Order he erects.
Whose armed figure's worn about their necks;
The Garter buckled on their leg, to be
A mark of prowess and of unity.
Which shall increase, and in all ages be
Delivered greater to Posterity.
While other lands in aemulation vain
Shall strive so bright a luster to attain.
But Englands Garter shall obscure the rest,
Saint Michael's Knights in fhelly collars dressed,
Rhodes silver Crosses, and Burgundia's fleece,
Though worn by gteater Worthies then from Greece
Did first in Argo cross the Seas, and bore
That golden purchase from the Colchian shore.
Peace could no longer hold; Wars raging fire
Suppressed a while, breaks forth, and blazes higher
Then e're it did; the battle must be tried,
For which both Kings so long on either fide
Had made their strengths: all Truces now are broke.
And nothing can prevent the fatal stroke.
The noblest army that e're crossed the Seas
From England yet, was now in readiness;
Which Martial Edward soon transported over,
And safe arrived on the Norman shore.
Nor are King Philip's preparations slack,
Whose side so many mighty Princes take;
While in suspense all Christian Nations are
To see the issue of so great a War.
Forth through the midst of quaking Normandy
Like Lightnings fatal stroke, did Edward fly
With his courageous troops, where-ere he went,
Diffusing fear and pale astonishment.
Swords freely raging, and remorselesse fire*
Were instruments of his reuengefull ire.
Unhappy a Caranton must be by fates
First offered to his fury: on her gates
The heads of Edward's slaughtered friends remain,
The heads of Percy, Bacon, Clifton slain
Not long before by Philip's rage: for whom
The town (alas) must bide a woeful doom.
For their dear fakes great Edward vows to have
No mercy there: no age, no sex can save
From deaths sad stroke; all slaughtered that are found:
The town it self is levelled to the ground,
And in confused heaps of cinders lies
To them a tomb and mourning sacrifice.
From thence the dreadful army marches on;
Saint Lo, so rich in merchandise, is won,
And pillaged by the Soldiers; stately Caen
Although a while it durst resist, is taken.
And now so great a terror through the land
Is spread of him, that to his conquering hand
Themselves Falaise, Lyseaux, and Honfleur yield;
And uncontrolled his march had Edward held
Beyond the bounds of Normandy at last:
Fair Eureux stream and Seine it self he past,
Now time it seemed to stop his furious course;
Yet durst the French oppose no armed force
But break the bridges down where he should pass.
Which soon they find too poor a bar (alas)
Against Edward's spirit; whose resolved way
No high-swoll'n stream, no flood had power to stay,
No more then Caesar's, after he had gone
Past the forbidden stream of Rubicon.
One part of Some, near Abbevile, was known
That might be foorded, when the tide was gone.
To which six thousand Soldiers Philip sent
By Godmar led with politic intent
To stop great Edward there, but with as bad
A Destiny, as with presage as sad
As those unhappy Persians sent to stay
At Granicus great Alexander's way.
No disadvantage could his passage bar
To whom the honor of that future war
Was meant by Fate. Upon the rivers bank
Stood Godmer's Soldiers in well-ordered rank.
Through them (as through the channel) must the worth
Of The English Soldiers carve their passage forth.
Edward, that knew their resolutions well,
And could by former hard adventures tell
That his bold men for him would rush to fight
Through ways, which some would fear to take in flight,
And pass that stream by his command alone;
Yet would not now command, but lead them on,
And in the action their example be.
He cries, Who loves me now will follow me,
And springing forth into the trembling stream
Is followed with such spirit and zeal by them,
That all the French amazed at a sight
So wondrous strange, almost forget to fight,
And with dismay are vanquished, to see
The undaunted courage of an enemy.
With small ado, while faintly they oppose,
The English gain the bank, and rout their foes.
Of whom are many flaine: the rest for fear
Disordered fly; but their retreat is near.
To Abbevile, where then King Philip lay
With all his great and glorious army, they
Chased by the English swords affrighted came;
And by their fellows (who esteemed the shame
As great as was the loss) received are
As bad presages of the future war.
King Philip followed by the bravest host
That e're before the Realm of France could boast,
In confidence of Conquest to succeed,
And to revenge the late disgrace, with speed
(Although advised at Abbevile to stay
And rest his Army) marches thence away.
Thou sweetest Muse of all the Aonian Spring,
Faire-hair'd Calliope, that best can sing
Of Kings high deeds, and God-like Heroes fames,
Declare King Philip's power, recite the names
Of all (beside the native Chevalry
Of France, and flower of her Nobility)
The foreign lands that shared in that great day,
And royal Princes that did there display
Their dreadful colors in the aid of France,
And forward thence to Crescy field advance.
Within the Van (with Charles of Alanson)
The royal Banner of Bohemia shone,
With which did Lodowike her old Martial King
His furious horse, and well-try'd lances bring.
His glittering Plume, that many an honored field
Had known, and many a dreadful fight beheld,
Waved there unhappily, ordained to be
A lasting fame to Edwards victory.
Along with him marched Charles his Princely Son,
For whom the Fates a fairer thread had spunne,
Saved, to preserve the name, and ancient stem,
And after weareth' Imperial Diadem.
Thither from far Majorca's Monarch brings
His light-armed Soldiers, from whose fatal slings
As from strong Bows, death's carried; nor of yore
Were Cretan shafts or Parthian feared more.
With fifteen thousand mortal Crosse-bowes there
The stout Grimaldi and Antonio were
Two noble Chiefes from stately Genoa,
Whose Gallyes had in many a Navall fray
Against prond Venice wrastled long, to gain
The rule of all the Mid-land Ocean*
Stout John of Heinault to King Philip's side
His forces brings, although so near allied
To Englands King (as Uncle to the Queen)
And had by Edward highly honored been.
He now had changed his faith, and for the gold
Of France, his mercenary valor sold.
There march those warlike Flemmings, that attend
Their Earl of Flanders Lewis, a constant friend
To France; but no strong number could he get,
Nor ore his subjects was his power so great.
They honored Edward's worth, and to his side
Had been, without their Earls consent, allied.
There Charles of Blois leads on his martial train
In glittering armor: Burbon, and Lorraine.
To whom, whilst all the army marched away,
But new arrived there, in rich array
Brings Savoyes Duke a thousand men of arms.
Whom from the lofty Alps the lovd alarmes
Of this great war had drawn with dismal fate,
Too soon (alas) arrived, though seeming late.
How many men dooes Fortune bring from far
Their parts to suffer in this tragic war?
How many Lands their several shares of woe
Must contribute to Philip's overthrow?
Perchance cause Edward will his force advance
No farther then the continent of France,
She feared his fame would be no farther known,
But circumscribed where the deed was done:
Nor therefore suffers France to bleed alone.
The sad Bohemian wives that live upon
Great Albis banks, and drink fair Moldaes stream,
Must make this battle their lamented theme.
Those that beyond the clouded Alps do dwell,
And Netherlanders shall be forced to tell
Great Edward's honor, while their own dear wounds
They count, received on Crescyes fatal grounds.
While thus the French march on in rich array,
In Crescy park encamped Edward lay:
His firm Battalia on well chosen ground
Was closed behind, and barricado'd round
With strongest fences made by plashing trees,
And placing there the weighty'st carriages.
Thither were all the Leaders horses brought
To cut off hope of flight, and leave no thought
In English breasts but Death or Victory.
Their resolutions that before were high,
By this strict means were more ascertained there.
Their minds were cheerful, fresh their bodies were,
And fit to encounter their approaching foes.
In three Battalia's does the King dispose
His strength, which all in ready order stand,
And to each others rescue near at hand.
The first in rank that early blooming flower
Of fame, Prince Edward leads, a Warrior
Before a man; no Down had clothed his chinne,
Nor seventeene Springs had this young Soldier seen.
Within his battle famous Leaders are,
Brave Warwick, Stafford, Harcourt, Delaware,
There Beauchampe, Bourchier, Clifford, Chandois weild
Their active arms, whom many an honored field
Had famed before. The second Squadron by
Northamptons Earl was led: there Willoughby,
There Arundell, Lord Rosse and Basset stand,
Men that could well obey, and well command.
Within the third King Edward means to fight.
The great French Army now approached their sight,
And to each Camp did threatening Mars display
What the succeeding horrors of the day
Were like to be. The bloody stroke is nigh,
Nor in the power of Fortune does it lie
Their warrelike fury longer to restrain;
Nor now can silver-winged Peace again
(As erst at Tourney and Malstroict she did)
The Enraged troops without death's stroke divide.
But fierce Enyo (chased from thence away)
Without controllment claims this fatal day.
Dark grew the troubled air, as if it strove
Within the soldiers furious breasts to move
A sad presage of what would then ensue.
Nor longer could the golden Phoebus show
His cheerful face. The lightnings flashy light
And loudest claps of thunder' began affright
The darkened welkin; which in tears apace
Dissolved, to fall upon the tragic place.
Another darkness more portentous rose
Ore both the amazed camps. Whole sholes of Crows
And croaking Ravens, that obscure the sky,
From all the neighboring fields to b Crescy fly
(As thick as Cranes in winter, that forsake
To drink warm Nile, the frozen Strymons lake)
And muster there themselves, in hope to prey
Upon the slaughter of so great a day.
From these ostents are deep impressions wrought.
The soldiers fancies, as each breast is fraught
With passions various, variously surmise.
Presaging murmurs through all parts arise.
In some the thirst of fight encreast; in some
Appeared the palenesse of a death to come.
Yet none so much on their own danger thought
As they divined, after this field was fought,
About their Kings and Nations changed fate;
Nor had they time to fear their private state.
'Twixt both the Marshals, one on either side,
Through every battle did great Edward ride.
Whose royal presence with fresh vigor filled
The soldiers cheerful bosoms, and exiled
Even from the coldest hearts all thoughts of fear.
No long persuasive Oratory there
Did that short time afford, or Edward need;
Few exhortations served, that did proceed
From such a Prince. He briefly bids them crown
That day, their Nations honor and their own;
And sets before the common soldiers eyes
How great, how glorious was their valors prize*
How many Princes wealthy spoils would be
The recompense of that days victory.
But when approaching Philip had beheld
His English foes embattell'd in the field,
And that the war admitted no delay,
He vainly joy'd to see the wished for day,
That might redeem the honor France had lost,
And straight drew on his rich and numerous host,
In which so many several Nations fought
By their own Sovereigns there in person brought.
And now those foreign Princes every where
With fitting language briefly 'gan to cheer
Their armed Subjects; that in this days fight
As well their Countries honor, as the right
Of Philip lay; that all great France would fame
And thank their conquering hands; how great a shame
It were for them to shrink in such a war,
To which for honor they had come so far;
And left their dearest pledges, whom if they
Again would see, it in their valors lay.
But most does Philip his French troops excite,
As most of all engaged in the fight
By natures laws, and all the love they bear
To their dear native soil, whose freedom there
Or shameful conquest into question came;
That 'twas a stain already to the name
Of France, a petty King that claim durst make,
Or their great kingdoms conquest undertake.
Which they must wipe off by their valors now,
And for his pride chastise the ambitious so;
That easy 'twas to do, since Edward's power
So few in number, not one hand against four
Of fighting men, was able there to show:
And to revenge their fellow soldiers now,
Who near to Sluice, on Neptune's watery Maine
Had been before by English Edward slain
With such like speeches all their hearts are fired,
And now a signal every where desired.
Which given, on both sides a loud shout arose,
And Death began to deal his fatal blows.
Far off at first his winged message flies,
While the strong-armed English Archer plyes
His bloody task; while Genoan Crossebowes back
Return their fury, and the air grows black
With shafts, as erst with winged foul it did.
The English Vangard, which Prince Edward led,
(...) in the figure of an hearse came on.
Against which the furious Charles of Alanson
K^^g Philip's brother, with Bohemia's King
The strength of all the Chevalry did bring.
But ^re the horse came on in full carriere,
The Genoan Crossebowes, that stood foremost, were
To power their storms of fury on the foe.
But there began the fatal overthrow
Of that huge Army. For the late great fall
Ofraine (although it did no hurt at all
To the English bow-strings) spoiled the Genoans quite,
And made their Crossebowes useless in the fight.
Who wearied with their mornings march so far,
And grieved with dis-respect, had taken no care
How to preserve their strings. Which seeing, on,
On Chevaliers, cries hot Count Alanson,
And over yon lazy Genoans bellies make
Your way to victory; let soldiers take
The Van from useless beasts. With that they ride
Upon them furiously; by their own side
The wretched Genoans are trod down and slain.
But nothing by that act the horsemen gain;
For over their bodies some are tumbled down,
The rest that stand, in that confusion
Are galled with arrows, that uncessant fly
From the English fresh* and gallant Archery,
Which did almost the whole Battalia rout.
The whiles the dying Genoans round about
Might see, before their latest gasp of breath,
Their own revenge wrought in the Horsemens death;
And for the wrong, which their own side did do,
And quickly righted by the valiant foe.
But loath far off to endure the Archers force
Count Alanson with his approaching horse
Within Prince Edward's battle strives to bring
The fight; and thither the old Bohemian King
With his brave troop does even-ranked ride,
Whose reins are all fast to each other tied,
As if they meant to mow the enemy
By squadrons down* So chained Bullets fly
And sweep a field, as those Bohemian horse
Close-link'd together came. And now their force
Within the Archers foremost rank had got
There the encounter grows more closely hot;
There battell-axes, swords, and lances stand;
There foot to foot, and furious hand to hand
The men at Arms maintain a constant war.
And now Prince Edward's battle too too far
Began to be oppressed; to succor whom
The second battle of the English come.
In which with other Lords Northampton stood;
And all too little in this scene of blood
That succor seems to be. Up to the hill
On which King Edward with his battle, still
Untouched, kept stand, the Lords have sent to crave
Aid for the Prince in this sad storm; but have
This answer (past their expectation) made:
While he is alive send not to me for aid;
It Is he must wear this honor; nor will I
Be Edward's rival in the victory;
Or fear so much his danger, to step in,
And seize those Bays, which he alone will win.
From this Heroike answer of a King
In every bosom did fresh vigor spring.
That answer might have wrought despairing fear;
But that young Edward and the Nobles there
The worth and wisdom of the King did know,
And he their spirits whom he sent it to.
Now does the day grow blacker then before;
The Swords, that glister'd late, in purple gore
Now all distained, their former brightness lose;
Whilst high the tragic heap of slaughter rose.
Swords meeting swords, and breaking lances sound,
Clattering of armed breasts, that fall to ground,
And dying soldiers groans are only heard.
Horror in all her saddest shapes appeared.
But long the fury of a storm so strong
Could not endure, nor Fortune waver long
In such a trial; but at last must show
Which way her favors were decreed to go.
The English Swords with slaughter reeking all
At last had carved in the Frenchmens fall
Their way to victory; who now apace
Are beaten down, and strew the purple place;
Where, like their own pale-fading Lillies, lie
The flower of all the French Nobility.
What Muse can in this field of death declare
Each private wound? each fate particular?
Or pay the several obsequies to all?
Amongst common soldiers slaughtered Princes fall;
'Twixt whom Death takes away the distance now,
While in one stream their bloods commixed flow.
There Alanson, striving to cure in vain
The wound of France, is beaten down and slain.
There dies Majorca's King, who from his home
So far had sailed to find a foreign tomb,
And dearly that alliance, (which he thought
So safe to him) in this fierce battle bought.
Lewis Earl of Flanders, that to Philip's state
Had been so constant a confaederate,
Whom no conditions to King Edward's side
Could ever draw, on Edward*s weapons died,
Sealing in blood his truth to France, to lie
A wailed part of her calamity.
There Savoy's Duke the noble Amy lay
Weltring in gore, arrived but yesterday
At Philip's hapless Camp, as short an aid
As Rhaesus proved to falling Troy, betrayed
The first sad night, and by Tidydes hand
Slain, e're his Steeds had grazed on Trojan land,
Or drunk at all of Xanthus silver stream.
But most the warrelike Monarch of Boheme
Old Lewis was famed. Who on that honored ground
Chained to the foremost of his troops was found,
And charging at the head of all was slain.
His cold dead hand did yet that Sword retain
Which living erst it did so bravely weild.
His hopeful son young Charles had left the field
When he perceived that Fortune quite was gone
To Edward's side. His Father blood alone
Was too too great a sacrifice to be
Bestow*d on France; whose dying valiancy
Made all men more desire his Son to live,
And that the branch of such a tree might thrive.
There was the Noble Bourbon, there Lorraine,
Aumall, Nevers, and valiant Harcourt slain.
In vain had Philip now (whose Princely soul
In all those deaths did bleed) strive to control
By highest valor, what the Fates would do.
Wounds not in mind alone, but body too
(Unhorsed twice) did th'active King receive,
As much ashamed no blood at all to leave
In such a field, although enforced to part
Himself from thence; at last his struggling heart
Is to necessity content to yield,
And flies with speed from that unhappy field.
With whom the Frenchmen all the fight forsake,
And over the Country flight disordred take.
By this had Night her sable mantle spread
Upon the earth, by whose protection fled
The vanquished French with more security.
A most complete and glorious victory
The English had obtained; yet would not now
Dis-ranke themselves to chase the flying foe.
But in that field, which they alone possessed,
Resolve to give their wearied bodies rest,
Till mornings light display those wealthy spoils,
That must reward the conquering soldiers toils.
Now great King Edward from the Windmill hill
Came down, where his untouched Battalia still
Had stood, till all the fight below was done,
And in his arms embraced his armed Son.
Who now with blood and sweat was all distained;
Then gratulates his early honor gained
In such a field of danger, joy'd to see
His blooming years thus fleshed in victory.
Well did that day presage the future glory
And martial fame of this great Prince, whose story
With admiration aftertimes shall hear.
Like miracles his conquests shall appear
In France achieved; nor shall that kingdom bound
His Swords great deeds; whose fame shall farther sound,
And royal trophies of black Edward's praise
Beyond the Pyrenaean mountains raise.
Next morn, mists, fatal to the French, arose;
To Crescy field, where their encamped foes
Stood now refreshed, were many troops of France
Discerning not the former battles chance
Like sacrifices come, and fell there more
Then had been flaine in all the fight before.
Victorious Edward for so great a day
To God's high Throne on bended knees did pay
His true and humble thanks, and briefly then
Commend the worthy service of his men.
Who now the spoils of that rich Army share,
As just reward of their victorious war.
Annotations upon the third Book.
a King Edward taking Caranton protested openly that he sacrificed it to the
memory of these Gentlemen, who had the year before been uniustly massacred by
King Philip, and their heads now were standing upon the gates of that unhappy
town. For King Philip of France the year before perceiving that a terrible
tempest of war was likely to fall upon him out of England, waxed cruel in
his jealousy, and put sundry principal men of Normandy, Picardy, and Guyenne
to death, for no other crime, but that they were English in affection: Among
whom are reckoned Sir Oliver de Cli^^on, Baco, Persie, and Geoffrey of
Malestroict, Knights of the best note. Sir Godfrey of Harecourt, brother to the
Earl of Harecourt, a man once in high favor with King Philip, being upon this
occasion also summoned to Paris, fled to King Edward into England, and became
another Robert of Artois; for his valor and counsels at this present invasion
of France did much advantage King Edward's achievements; though two years
after he forsook the English, and returned again to the obedience of Philip
his natural Lord.

b This great battle of Crescy, where King Edward obtained so full, and
wonderful a victory, is at large recited in the Poem, and therefore little
shall need here to be spoken of it, but only of the numbers which fought or
dyed on both sides. The English Army by general consent of almost all Authors
consisted of 30000. The French, according to those that speak least, together
with their auxiliaries, were about 60000. But many Authors of good credit
report their number twice as many, others agree upon an hundred thousand. Upon
that Saturday, being the 26 of August, 1346, when this great battle was
fought, the slaughter was great on the French side, for none were taken to
mercy upon that day, for the Conquerors thought it not safe for themselves to
take any Prisoners. But the next morning presented new work; for a great mist
arose, that men could hardly see the distance of an acre of ground from them;
when as many troops of Frenchmen from Roan, Beavicois, and other Cities coming
to join themselves with King Philip, (and not hearing of his discomfiture)
together with great multitudes of such as had lost their way in the last
flight, lighted unhappily upon the victorious English, and were severely put to
the Sword. Among those that came with fresh forces to aid the King were the
Archbishop of Roan, and the Grand Prior of France; who were both slain after a
great and sore battle with the English; for they brought a good strength with
them. The Earls of Northampton, Suffolk and Norfolk had execution of the
French, which fled from this last overthrow, for the space of nine English
miles from the ground where they encountered. And it is the general consent of
Authors, that more of the French were slain upon this second day, then were
the day before, when the great battle was fought; some Prisoners were then
taken, though none of great name, for they were spent in the day before. When
the account was taken, it was found that there dyed in all of the French side
eleven great Princes, of Earls, Barons, and gentry of high account about
fifteen hundred, of common soldiers above thirty thousand. And to make the
victory the more wonderful, there was not one man of honor or note slain
upon the English side, of common soldiers so few, that we find no mention of
the number.

THE REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE THIRD.
The fourth Book.
Argument IIII.
Calleis by Edward is besieged, and won.
Great deeds in several parts of France are done
By Edward's soldiers, whilst in England here
The King of Scotland's taken prisoner.
FIve mornes had cleared the Earth with Phoebus light,
And from the Pole removed the dampes of night
Since England's conquering King from Crescy gone
Without control of foes, had marched on
Through Picardy; and now before the Town
Of Calleis sat with his strong Army down,
Resoly'd in spite of all relief or fence
Till he had gained it, not to rise from thence.
Impregnable was Calleis; to be won
Not by assault, but length of siedge alone,
Where meagre famine Natures greatest foe,
And heavens feared plague must all th'atchivement do*
For which great Edward had on every side
His Camp entrenched, and strongly fortified
With timber-workes, investing it by land
The circuit round; the Sea at his command
Was wholly then; where his strong Navy lay,
And brought his Camp provisions every way.
But while the siedge is yet but new begun,
Fortune presents a brave occasion
To make King Edward*s noble nature known,
That all the Country may as much renown
His minds brave sweetness as his Martial fame,
And learn to love as well as fear his name.
De Vein the Marshall, and Lord Dandregan,
That then commanded Calleis, while they can,
Resolve to the utmost to preserve so dear
A pledge, and naught but only famine fear.
They therefore straight enforce out of the Town
The folk, that now for war are useless grown
Full fifteen hundred heads (to spare their store)
The lame, the sick, the aged, and the poor.
At mercy of the foe these wretches go,
If to such wretches Edward were a foe.
But he remembers he is a King, and they
Too weak (alas) to be the Lion's prey.
Instead of foes, his bounty makes them guests,
And French, by French forsaken, Edward feasts.
With store of victuals, and with money too
He sends them thence; who every step they go
Send back a prayer for his prosperity.
And in their hearts acknowledge silently
That he is the lawful Sovereign of the land.
For when two titles thus in question stand,
Whose (do the people think) should be the right
But his, whom first just heaven assists in fight?
And makes ('against odds) a conqueror of his foes?
And who besides by his compassion shows
Himself his Countries father, as Kings are?
Those barricado'd strongest works of war,
Which must, in spite of Philip's forces, stand
Till Calleis keys be given to Edward's hand,
Can these weak people find a passage through,
Which th'armed strength of France could never do*
Nor loses Edward time in staying there;
For every day to his rejoicing ear
Some prosperous news from foreign parts is brought
Of what abroad his conquering men have wrought.
How every action's crowned with high success,
And all their conflicts add some happiness
To his triumphant side; as if that then
Kind Fortune strove the name of Englishmen
Even to the highest point of fame to bring;
Or that the Genius of so great a King
Through all the lower parts diffused were
To guide their deeds alike. For wheresoever
They fight, the Garland's won, and every war
A Crescy proves, where Edward's soldiers are.
From Guyenne first he hears the prosperous fights
Of noble a Darby; who with Gascoyne Knights,
And other Lords from Bordeaux took his way,
And over the river of Garonne, 'twixt Blay
And that great City, marched through Philip's lands.
Fair Mirabell is yielded to his hands.
Aunay and her strong Castle, with Benon,
And Maraunt in Poictou by force are won;
Tailebourgh, and Bourgh Saint Maximent they win
Both by assault, and Montrevill Bonin.
Nor with so small a power of Soldiers fears
The warrelike Darby to assault Poictiers,
So large in circuit that he could not lay
Round siege about it; but one only way
Surpised it by assault; and many more
Achievements high did his small army do.
There many noble Prisoners did he take,
And marched without control, to Bordeaux back.
There breaks his Army up with thanks, and home
His soldiers filled with wealth and honor come.
As much true honor won the English name
In Britains wars, as radiant was their fame.
Where Charles of Bloys the great Competitour
By valiant Dagworth and his English power
Was overthrown and taken Prisoner.
The odds so wondrous in their numbers were,
One Writer then amazed, in his thought
Among the deeds of the ancient Worthies sought
A parallel for Dagworth's victory,
Entituling him another Machabee.
But that which most secured great Edward's state,
(Left English swords should prove less fortunate
In England, then in foreign parts they were)
That Conquest was, and royal Prisoner,
Which his brave men had in his absence gained.
Queen Philip sent the news, and there complained
Of Copland's stout demeanor, who to her
Denied to yield the King his Prisoner.
For which to Calleis Copland sent for, had
So good excuses to great Edward made,
That for the service, from his royal hand
He gained a ^^^h reward. The King commands
Him to relate the battle, and display
Each circumstance of that victorious day.
Full well (quoth noble Edward) do I know
That most to God's Almighty hand I owe
For preservation of my kingdom there.
What strength had you alas? what forces were
In readiness? what Army could you bring
Against th'invasion of a warrelike King?
Whilst here our self with our chief Army lay
At Calleis siedge, the second was away
As far as Guyenne, and the third then fought
In Britains wars? what were the hands that wrought
This great achievement? but King David brake
The truce he made with us, that he might take
With Philip's fortune, Philip's falling side.
For heaven does justly wars successes guide.
Do thou relate the fight. The King had done,
When humbly bowing Copland thus begun:
Since you are pleas*d, dread Sovereign, to command,
(For whose victorious brow the sacred hand
Of heaven is weaving Garlands every where)
From me the meanest of your servants, hear
This battles great success, and what for you
The same high hand has wrought in England now.
To Durham walls (while far his terror spread
Among the people) had King David led
His royal army; where those warrelike Peers
Of Scotland marched, that had for many years
Late past, so well the English borders known;
That there so many strange exploits had done,
And wealthy pillage gained: when to withstand
That threatening force, and guard their native land
With noble spirits the English Lords prepare,
And draw their forces to this sudden war;
Lord Percy, Nevill, Mowbray, D' Eincourt there,
Humfrevile, Mawley, Musgrave, Scroope appear,
And many more of worthy note, to whom
The men at arms, and nerved Archers come.
Nor in so great a danger was it thought
Enough, if only usual soldiers fought,
To save their Countries universal harm
The Churchmen fight, the reverend Prelates arm;
The two Archbishops and grave Durham there
Their Crosier-staves' midst streaming Ensigns bear.
No cause (they thought) could make them to refuse
So dear a war, no calling could excuse.
Over all the field do armed Priests appear,
And shaven Monks unused helmets wear*
Such was that law the ancient Romans made,
When e're the furious Gauls did them invade.
No Priesthood from wars service then excused.
But that which into the English breasts infused
The noblest fire; was that your virtuous Queen
Great Sir, among us was in person seen.
Nor could the Princely burden of her womb
(Great as she was with child) detain her from
That gracious visit. As along she rode
On every rank and squadron she bestowed
Words that inspired new life; such seemed she,
Such did her looks and cheerful Majesty
Appear to each adoring soldier
As Poets fancied in the Trojan war
Majesticke Juno, when in all her state
She would descend from heaven to animate
The warrelike Greeks, or Pallas come to lead
Her wise Ulysses, or stout Diomed.
At Nevils Crofle, a place not famed at all
Till this great conflict, and King David's fall,
The eager Armies meet to try their cause.
Our English Lords in four Battalia's
Bring on their forces; but so furious grows
In little time the fight; so near the blows,
That soon no order we perceive at all.
For like one body, closely move they all.
And thought the archers had at first begun
The fight with wondrous happiness, and done
So much as caused the future victory,
Yet now their arrows scarce have room to fly*
While swords and bills do all; while hand to hand
The armies wrestling with each other stand.
Small ground (and that alternately) they gave,
As by a rivers side tall reeds do wave:
Or when a field of lofty standing corn
Two several ways by different gales is borne.
That if a man had from some hill survei'd
The fight, and seen what equal motion swayed
Both armies there: he would have been so far
From judging which should conquer in that war,
As to have feared almost that all would dye,
And leave no conquest, but one tragaedy.
No stratagem, no foul default was showed,
Nor could your servants tell to what they owed
(Unless to justice of their cause it were)
That days hard conquest; which 'gan then appear
When those chief flowers of Scotlands noble blood
Strewn dead those places, where before they stood.
There Murrey's Earl, the noble Randolph, son
To that renowned Randolph that had done
His native land such wondrous service, falls
Encircled not with vulgar funerals
Alone, but men of Scotlands greatest power,
Her Marshall, Chamberlain, and Chancellor.
With many more of note and dignity.
The King himself, who with resolve as high
As any soldier had maintained the fight,
Near still, where greatest danger did invite
His forward sword; and might for valiancy
Deserve a conquest, not captivity,
That through the thigh had with a lance bin struck
(Besides two shafts that in his body stuck)
And lost much royal blood, when he beheld
His Army now discomfited in field,
Not yet dismayed, fought on; when 'twas my chance
Your Graces meanest soldier, to advance
The next to him; I humbly bade him there
To yield himself King Edward's prisoner;
And gently came to take his hand; but he
That sought for death before captivity,
And therefore strove our anger to provoke,
My face so fiercely with his Gauntlet struck,
That two teeths lost can witness yet the blow.
Then with his sword (though hurt and wearied now)
He flies among us, while disdain and ire
Into his weary nerves new strength inspire,
That scarce could we his most unwilling foes
Preserve that life which he desired to lose.
At last he fell; by which our royal prey
We seized, and bore him by maine strength away.
That fate the greatest Nobles of his land
The Earls of Fife, Menteith, and Southerland
With warrelike Douglas are enforced to take;
While all the rest, that could escape the wrack
Of that sad day, forsake the tragic fight,
And into Scotland take disordred flight.
King Edward pleased with this relation,
And what John Coplond in that fight had done,
Conferres on him, beside revenues great,
The martial honor of Knight Banneret,
And sends him back for England, with command
To yield his prisoner to Queen Philip's hand.
Despair had entered the besieged Town
Of Calleis now; pale famine, which alone
Subdues the strongest forts, had taken hold
Upon the wretched Citizens, and gold
Which reigns in humane breasts at other times,
Esteemed a price even for the greatest crimes,
Is proved no just rate at all to bear,
Food only is of price, and valued there.
All former hopes of their relief were crossed:
In vain had Philip with a numerous host
From Amiens marched; Edward's siedge to raise,
And challenged him in vain; for all the ways
Of their approaching both by sea and land
Were by the English kept, each passage manned.
And now (though late) the governors were bent
To yield to terms, and to King Edward sent.
Who, scorns t'accept of any terms but these,
That six the wealthiest of their Burgesses
With halters on their necks, resolved to dye,
Should to his pleasure yield them presently;
And that their deaths his wrath should expiate;
That all conditions else should come too late,
And he no mercy on the Town would take.
These sad conditions are returned back;
And through all hearts had struck a chilling fear
In every visage did pale Death appear.
For though destruction challenged but a few,
It threatened every head; until they knew
What heads would suffer. They despaired to find
Among the noblest rank so brave a mind
That would on that condition choose to dye,
As once for Rome devoted Decij.
In this amaze the weeping people throng
Into the public Marketplace. Among
Their cries confused, and different face of woes,
Eustace a rich and noble Burgess rose,
Who, when the people 'gan a silence make,
Thus with a voice and look undanted spoke:
Since, Countrymen, you know King Edward's doom
Let me be bold to claim my proper room.
The wealthiest men must suffer; nor will I
Strive now to hide that wealth and dignity,
That made me honored in our peaceful time,
Nor e're be guilty of so foul a crime,
As not to come a willing sacrifice
For all. I thank the English King in this;
That, though a general pardon he deny,
He is so just in his severity,
To make those men, that most indebted were
Unto their Country, pay the most for her.
Besides, he gives us privilege in the case;
The low, the impotent, and poor (alas)
Look on the general slaughter of the Town,
And, mixed with public ruin, fear their own,
Since Edward makes their lives too cheap a price
To be for all th'appeasing sacrifice.
They only fear, but no election, know,
And must endure what fortune we bestow:
But to the nobler rank of Burgesses
Though death be nearer, yet our fears are less.
Election's left to us, and power to make
That vantage thence, which others cannot take.
For we gain honor if we freely dye,
And not abandon this brave liberty:
If we refuse, their deaths will be the same
With ours; and yet no choice to purchase same
Is given to them. We ought our lives to give
In gratitude for this prerogative.
Why should so many thousand people dye
When six the foes demand will satisfy?
Had he been pleased to accept of one,
I then had spared this Oration;
Because my self had had the power to be
What now I cannot without company.
But howsoever, Eustace will be one
That freely comes to this oblation.
A general applausive shout was heard,
And many passions amongst the rout appeared.
Moved with his love and noble piety
The Commons weep, the Burgers instantly
Present themselves, and make it now a strife
Who first shall offer his devoted life.
Daire first steps in to Eustace side; to whom
Two Wyssons, brethren, James and Peter come;
Forth in a moment the whole number stands
Six of the wealthiest Burgesses; whose hands
The weeping people kiss, and to the sky
Extol their pious magnanimity.
The keys of Calleis are by Eustace borne:
And on they march undaunted; halters worn
About their necks, instead of cheines are been,
Yet honored more then chains of gold had been.
Whom to the gates the people all attend,
And thousand prayers for their safety send.
Their prayers are heard, and God preserves their lives;
At Calleis Edward's virtuous Queen arrives,
Queen Philip great with child, who pleased to make
Their lives the boon she craved. For her dear sake
(Though Edward srown'd at first, and bade them dye)
He smoothes his brow, and to her clemency
And pleasure only he commits the men;
She freely pardons and rewards them then.
An action fit for that brave Queen to do,
And fitter far for Edward to allow
Then do himself; whom sternnesse then became
No less then pity did the royal Dame.
Thus with his family could he divide
His own renown, and give (as erst he did
The fame of Crescy's conquest to his Son)
To her the thanks of this compassion.
In Calleis Castle proud to entertain
So great a Monarch with his warrelike train
The Conqueror feasts his virtuous Queen; where she
To give the Castle greater dignity,
Or take more firm possession then before,
A Princely daughter to great Edward bore.
Whence some presaged that that conquered place
Should long remain to Edward's royal race.
Soon over that channel into England flies
The fame of Edward's glorious victories,
Of Crescy battle, of fair Calleis won,
And all the other high achievements done.
Where France in several parts had felt the force
Of English arms. Such is the glad discourse
In every part of Edward's kingdom now.
Some speak of France, some Scotland's overthrow:
One tells what Dagworth had in Britain done;
Or what in Gascoyne noble Darby won,
Themselves enriched, secured on every side.
Often had the Moon renewed her waned pride
Since daily news had been of some success,
Of some rich triumph, or new happiness;
Since they so often had to their Temples gone,
And often paid thanks to God's caelestiall Throne.
Often friendly feastings did express their joys.
The Country Damsels danced, and sporting Boys
Abroad in fields, by chosen companies
Would act before their pleased parents eyes
The late-fought battles, and the story show
Of Edward's conquest, Philip's everthrow.
Such were the triumphs, such the sports of Rome
When news was from victorious Scipio come
Of Zama's prosperous battle, and the fall
Of their long terror, Libyan Hanniball.
Fair Summers pride began to fade away,
And night encroach upon the hours of day,
When Fortune does (as if in spite of time
She meant to make in England's joyful clime
Another Summer) to the people bring
The long wished presence of their conquering King*
Oh how from Dover-landing all the way
Along to London, as his progress lay,
Was strewn with branches! how the air was rent
With acclamations which the people sent;
When with himself in highest Majesty,
The Queen, and that young flower of Chevalry
Prince Edward rode, with all the valiant train
Of Lords and Knights returned from France again,
With noble Prisoners, with, warre's wealthy prize,
And captive Ensigns of their enemies.
Now happy London is the Theater
Of triumph grown; the soldiers every where
Taste the sweet fruits of their successful toils,
And fill their native Country with the spoils
That ransacked France has lost. On beds from thence
Of richest work lie London Citizens.
While every house a clothing new puts on;
In all their largest rooms are hangings shown,
Of fairest tapistry, which heretofore
Fair Caranton, or Caen, or Calleis wore.
At feasting tables they carouse in wine
In ancient plate, on which engraven shine
Arms of some Norman Lord, or Gascoyne Peer;
And their lost jewels English Ladies wear
To please new Lovers; whilst each Lad can deck
With Peales of France his mistress beauteous neck.
While other neighboring Countries curse the chance
Of their successelesse wars: while wretched France
Beholds her losses with a mourning eye,
And Scotland wailes her Kings captivity:
England alone is filled with joy, that sees
The gain of war, and not the miseries.
And thus is all the winters season spent
In revels, feasts, and jolly merriment.
But oh, how soon fades earthly bliss away!
And clouds of grief o'recast the fairest day!
How soon that land, that seemed in surest state
Of happiness, grows sad and desolate.
Such must the mourning change of England be,
Although no sword of foreign enemy,
Nor stroke of war shall shake her quiet state:
Though Edward's sword continue fortunate,
And on his standard victory attend:
Yet other arrows the great God can send
To wound a kingdom. That Almighty hand,
That wounded Israel once, his chosen land
With David's choice for David's high offense,
Not with man's sword, but his own pestilence,
Strikes England so; yet this they comfort call,
Into the hands of man they shall not fall.
b Sad grows the time, nor with her wonted cheer,
Or usual dressing does the Spring appear;
No cleansing gale of Zephyre moves the air,
While rising fogs obscure the welk in fair.
Without his showers contagious Auster blows,
And painted Summer no kind fruit bestows.
Nor does the Sun, as if inflamed with ire,
Send out that wholesome and prolifique fire
He used to do: but beams of mortal heat;
And from the bosom of the twins, as great
Combustion kindles here, as if he then
Upon the Nemean Lion's back had been.
Within the farthest Eastern Lands, from whence
Day breaks, breaks forth the fatal pestilence,
As if with rising Titan it begun,
And followed thence the motion of the Sun.
To Europe then does th* hot contagion fly,
Raging through every part of Italy;
And France, that bled so late, is forced to see
Beside wars stroke, a new mortality.
But most of all over England's mourning face
The sad infection spreads; and Death apace
In his pale Chariot rides through all the land.
No age nor sex escape his vengefull hand.
Young men in prime of all their strength are struck,
And yield. The sucking Infant, what he took
From Nature, soon is summoned to repay:
From those soft limbs untimely fleets away
The new-come Soul, before it can be grown
Acquainted with the tender mansion.
The aged man, not because aged, goes,
But only 'cause he had a life to lose.
The mourning grave becomes a marriage bed
To beauteous maids; praeposterously dead
One father wailes his son: another all
His household carries in one funeral,
And for so many deaths one mourning serves,
If one be left to mourn. No care preserves
Nor antidote can save from this disease:
Their greatest hope is but to dye in peace;
For often the fiery sickness did invade
Reasons cool seat; and there prevailing made
A strange distraction, worse then loss of breath;
For which their friends wished (as a cure) their death.
The face often burned; no moisture had the eye,
Nor could by tears express their misery.
Some, while their dearest friends they do entombe,
Before that pious office done, become
Themselves a funeral. Death makes him to be
An hearse, that came a mourning obsequy.
Nor does this venomous contagion
Work the destruction of mankind alone,
The sheep and cattle perish; as if grown
On earth quite useless, since the men are gone.
Wast lie the Lawnes, the fields of tillage now
Are desolate, while the forsaken plow
Nor men nor cattle scarce can exercise.
The Ox in midst of all his labor dies,
And leaves behind his mourning fellow, now
Dismissed from toil, and service of the plow.
Who takes no comfort now in shady woods,
In flowery meadows, or clear Crystal floods
That destiny (alas) for him remains
Although at rest. The warrelike horse disdaines
The pleasant streams, and sick forgets quite
His food, or the honor of a race or fight.
Even Toads and Vipers dye, acquainted grown
With venom far more mortal then their own
Twice through the Horrizon had Hyperion run
Since first the fatal Pestilence begun,
Before the Almighty did his sword restrain,
And with his favor visit earth again.
He now is pleased to cast a gracious eye
On this distempered world; her misery
He cures; and makes her former beauty come;
With kindly fruits he fills earth's fertile womb.
And makes sweet blasts to move the wholesome air.
The people find at last their humble prayer
Is heard; and now the tears are wiped away,
Due praise and thanks before his Altar pay.
Annotations upon the fourth Book.
a Those that would see at large the actions of the Earl of Darby in Guyenne,
Aquitaine, and Normandy, let them read Froissard, where they shall see them
fully (though not elegantly related. This Earl of Darby a man of great worth,
and near in blood to King Edward, was afterward by him created Duke of
Lancaster (the first Duke that ever was in England) and left behind him no
other issue, but one daughter; who being his sole heir was married to John of
Gaunt the Kings son, and brought to him a large dowry, together with the
title of Duke of Lancaster.

b This wonderful mortality which it pleased God in his wrath to send upon the
wretched earth, happened in the 22. year of King Edward, immediately after the
taking of Calleis; a greater pestilence we can scarce read of in any
particular land or kingdom, much less so great, and with all so general as
this was For not only England, but France, Italy, and most of the Eastern and
Southern kingdoms were visited at that time, and felt the rod most heavy and
sad on them. The forerunner of this great sickness was immoderate rain, for
our Chronicles agree in general, that from Midsummer to Christmas it rained
every day or night. The year following it is noted that there dyed in London
between January and the end of July seven and fifty thousand persons. Other
Cities and Towns suffered the like according to their proportions; insomuch
that some writers of those times were of opinion that half the inhabitants of
the Land dyed: for we must not believe Walsingham, who says there was not
above a tenth part of mankind left alive. As great a death of Cattle happened
both that, and the year following. Thie was the greatest, but not the only
plague which happened during the reign of this King Edward For twelve years
after England was visited with another, which our Chronicles called the second
great Plague. In that many of the Nobility dyed, and among the rest that noble
Henry Duke of Lancaster, a chief actor in all the wars and victories of
Edward, and a maine Pillar of the state at that time.

THE REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE THIRD.
The fifth Book.
Argument V.
Prince Edward levyes forces to maintain
Against the French, his right in Aquitaine;
The King wastes Scotland; Poictiers field is fought,
From whence King John of France is prisoner brought.
PHilip of France had left the earth, and John
The eldest Son, as in his father's Throne,
So in his sad misfortunes does succeed.
Who, what the Fates in vengeance had decreed
Against his Realm, by rashness hastens on.
And (against all right) on Charles his eldest son
Conferres the style of Duke of Aquitaine.
Great Edward bound in honor to maintain
His own inheritance, creates his Son
Young Edward Prince of that Dominion*
Exhorts him bravely to defend his right,
And against the French for his just Title fight.
For which Prince Edward arms, and with a train
Of valiant Lords prepares for Aquitaine.
Never did Fortune with more favor smile
On any arms; nor from this martial I Will
Did ever army cross the Seas before
That more triumphant did return, or wore
A richer Garland from Bellona's tree.
There to maintain young Edward's signiory
Brave Warwick arms; who near the Prince his side,
When Crescy field his maiden prowess tried,
Before had fought; and Suffolk, whose renown
In many an hard adventure France had known.
His noble service Oxford tenders there;
And that redoubted Lord, that must appear
In Poicteirs battle honors brightest star
Lord Audley; Chandois in all feats of war
And policies to none inferior,
And then young Edward's chiefest Counselor.
With these brave William Earl of Sarum, clad
In shining arms appears; now not so sad
Since sage resolves had weaned fond desire,
And in his breast extinguished Cupid s fire;
A fire once sweet (alas) whilst laws did seem
T'allow his love, and power to favor him.
The sowrest Virtues did excuse his flame,
When he the beauties of that Princely Dame
Enjoyed, as then he well might seem to be
The envy of a Prince: much more is he
(Since reason did that passion quite convince)
Now truly grown the envy of a Prince.
Prince Edward sighed, and wished himself as free,
(When he beheld the cheer of ^alisbury)
From that fair flame. One object kindled both,
But Edward's was not of so long a growth
As Salisburies; nor had been aided so
By powerful Time, the passion to forgo.
Forbear a while to sound the Martial noise
Calliope, and tune thy gentler voice
Soft Erato; declare what Princely love
Did then the Heroike breast of Edward move.
Not many years had past, since by the laws
Of holy Church, that long-depending cause
Betwixt Lord Holland, and Earl Mountague,
(Who both with power and eager claymes did sue
For Kent's fair Countess) was on Holland's side
Decreed, and by Pope Clement ratified.
By which decree blessed Holland, freed from strife,
Possession took of his admired wife.
And his bright Jewel now in public wore;
Which from the Court had been concealed before,
While that great suit depended, and unknown
It was, what husband should the Lady own.
Her tempting beauties (now th'ecclipse and pride
Of Englands Court) had love-sicke Edward spied.
The flames unseene his youthful bosom burned;
His active thoughts, so cheerful once, are turned
To pensive musings: company he flies,
And, for his wonted Princely exercise,
And high discourse with martial Lords, he loves
Retreats, sad music, and the silent groves.
Why did you gaze unhappy eyes (quoth he)
Too late on her? it is too soon for me
Because too late. The Laws are false, that say
No time can barrea Prince. Debarred for aye
Am I. In what possession can they give,
Unless in Love, a fit prerogative
For Princes to receive? where did she lie
While free she was, concealed from Edward's eye?
Was not her birth of height enough? and she
A branch of England's royal family?
Her name Plantagenet, Earl Edmund's heir?
Did she not bring, together with that fair
And heavenly form, a dower that might affright
Those Lords from courting of her, and invite
A Prince his highest flames? why is not she
Restored again to her great family
From which the ambitious love of Holland durst
To draw her maiden innocence at first?
Or else some foreign Monarch would from far
Have come, perchance, to fetch a prize so rare.
A thousand Princely suitors for the fame
Of Spartan Helen's virgin beauties came
By deeds of arms their persons to endeare,
And by a war revenged the rape of her.
As many ventrous youths, for such a Bride
As was the fair Hippodamea, died.
At cheaper rate why did our climate set
Thy maiden blossom, fair Plantagenet?
Would thou had been the prize of Chevalry,
For which great Princes might have come to try
Their manly prowess; Edward might have worn
Thee then perchance: or thou (at worst) been borne
From hence away to be a foreign Queen,
Nor had I here thy killing beauty seen.
Thus, as within a laurel Bower he sat,
Did Edward's love-sicke thoughts expostulate.
The twy-light then began; nor had night spread
Her sable mantle yet, though day were fled:
When lo before him (one on either hand)
Two Nymphs of more than humane visage stand.
The one was plain, her looks composed and grave;
Yet seemed a cheerful Majesty to have.
A mantle rough over her tall shoulders hung;
Her undeck'd hair behind she earelesse flung.
Her name was Arete: on the other side
Stood Hedone her foe; her beauties pride
In all alluring amorous forms displayed*
Transparant silks her snow-white limbs arrayed,
And Tyrian scarfes with gold embroidered over.
The precious spoils of every Eastern shore
Adorned her ivory neck and tresses fair.
From whence diffused odours filled the air.
She thus assailes the Prince: Enjoy the time
Sweet Prince, that Fortunes height, and Natures prime
Both meet to bless thee with; and ravished see
What pleasures wait on youth and Royalty.
Thou have the top of others wish, and may^st
Pluck those sweet fruits, which neither age can taste,
Nor low estate procure. Both fade away;
Not only men, but Princes turn to clay.
Then take in time what never will come again.
What is not used, was bestowed in vain.
Which prudent Nature never did intend
In any gift she gave. Why should thou spend
In toils and hazards these thy happy days
To gain that nothing, that vain shadow, Praise?
Of which, as life no real use can make,
So the absent ghost, or senseless grave can take
No joy at all. What e're the vulgar deem,
Believe me, wisest men did never esteem
That bubble Honor. When King Pyrrhus once
Resolved to invade so many nations,
A vain renown by restless toils to win,
And make the ending of one war begin
Another still; wise Cyneas asked his Lord
What comfort all those labors should afford
His life at last. When all is overcome,
We Will live (quoth Pyrrhus) merrily at home.
So may you now (quoth he.) Why seek you by
Those toils, what now you have in certainty?
Nor could vain Pyrrhus answer him, or name
A real end of his ambitious aim.
Then use thy time. But if thou only strive
For so much fame as may more license give,
And more sweet relish to thy pleasures, know
Thou have already, what thy age could do,
Attained unto; thy worth enough is known,
And Crescy field with Bays enough did crown
Thy youthful brows. Now reap the happy fruit.
With confidence pursue thy amorous suit.
Regard not laws, nor popular air at all;
I Will work thine ends, and Kents fair Countess shall
Her bed and beauties yield to thy delight,
And meet thy wish. 'Twas I that did invite
The Spartan Dame to Paris arms, and led
The Queen of Love to young Anchises bed.
Can she refuse? can wedlock's aerie tie
Or that supposed virtue, Chastity,
(Poor names, which men, against natures free intent,
To rob themselves of pleasure did invent)
Resist those real arguments, that be
Opposers here, and proudly plead for thee?
Alas, what tempted Lady can deny
Such love, fame, feature, youth and dignity?
Then weigh not rumor; sit not pining down;
But freely take, what power can make thine own.
With that she ceased; when thus fair Arete:
Heroike Prince, built up by Fate to be
Bright Honor's great example, England's fame,
And to succeeding times a glorious name,
Oh do not stain thy high beginnings now,
Nor from that Noble path, which hitherto
Thy farre-admired youth has trod, to serve
Inglorious lusts and pleasures, do not swerve.
Those fruits seem sweet to such alone, as live
(Discerning not man's true prerogative)
Beasts lives; whose souls are drowned in the flesh,
Not capable of perfect happiness,
Nor suffering those celestial seeds to grow,
Or spring in them, which God at first did sow;
When purer Souls are not so much in thrall
To flesh; but that their high original
They well discern, and often abstracted fly
In contemplation of eternity.
Which spurs them on to spend the uncertain times
They have, in glorious deeds, unstained with crimes:
And such, I know, is Edward's noble aim;
Thou aemulat'st the ancient Sons of fame;
Thy worth securely may such stories love;
Thee great examples shame not, but approve.
Thou know that Honor has a cheerful face*
And solid joy within; that Nere's base
Voluptuous feasts and lusts were not so sweet
As Cato's manly temperance: nor yet
So truly safe Sardanapalus ease
As were the labors of great Hereules.
Though Vertnes ways seem rough at first to be,
The habit makes them sweet; nor teaches she
Her noble scholars only to endure
Cold, hunger, thirst, or labor: but secure
To overcome them, and to make all these
Their trophies rather than their grievances,
And not to fear what Death it self can do,
Which Pleasures strength could never reach unto.
Oh give not way to this thy wanton flame,
Nor tempt the honor of that Princely Dame;
Love may hereafter bless thee there, and may
Assist thy wishes in a lawful way.
Great Chiefes, among their other marks of fame,
Have gained by noble Continence a name.
Think on that Roman Worthy, whose high story
Thou read'st so often and aemulat'st his glory,
That Scipio, who first against Carthage fought.
And his great name from conquerr'd Affricke brought;
In heat of youth, as thou art now, was he
When Spaines new Carthage, then a Colony
Of Affricans, by warrelike force he won.
Great was the pillage of that wealthy Town;
But amongst their store of captives, one there was
A noble Virgin, that did far surpass
The rest; her wondrous beauty did amaze
The Conquerors; no Roman eyes durst gaze
On that bright form, but straight became her thrall
(Though Captive she.) The youthful General
Began himself to feel Loves powerful flame.
But that a noble virtue overcame,
And quenched again. With gentle words he cheered
The maid, and all her love and fortunes heard;
Then to that Prince, to whom she was affy'd,
Delivered freely his unstained Bride.
The land admired him; and that act there won
As much as his successful sword had done.
Of such a temper art thou made (I know)
Brave Prince; as much to thee as Scipio
Of deathlesse fame is meant by Destiny.
As much thy hand shall act in France, as he
In Spain or Affricke, and a greater King
Then Syphax was, shall thou to England bring.
Forsake not therefore Virtues ways, who will
Thy best desires, thy highest aims fulfill,
To her Heroike Edward's heart inclined;
And now resolved to cure his love-sicke mind
He musters all the thoughts of war and fame.
The Nymphs were vanished; when brave Chandois came
Into his presence; he relates the news
Of France; and great King Edward's purpose shows.
Well does the War his father had designed
For him to manage, suit black Edward's mind.
Those gallant Lords, that had resolved to fight
Against the injurious French for Edward's right,
Are all prepared, and from the English shore
With Fates auspitious soon transported over.
Whilst France from them must England's prowess feel,
The King against Scotland draws his vengefull steel
Enraged for Berwicks sack. A furious rode
(Although their King a prisoner yet abode
In Edward's hands) some Scots had lately made.
Whom gold from France had tempted to invade
The North of England: Berwicke Town they took,
The pillage gained; dismantled, and forsook
The town again. Great Edward not content
To gain his own, unless the foes repent,
And dearly rue their rash presumption too,
Wi^h dreadful force and fury marches through
The bowels of their land: for want of foes
The empty towns and walls he overthrowes.
Nor are religious Monasteries free
Or priviledg'd from his hostility.
And though to conquest of the land inclined,
(For all his right the Ballioll had resigned
To him at Roxburgh) so he marched on,
That men might deem by his invas^on
He did not mean his conquest to enjoy,
Or came not to possess, but to destroy.
At last to Berwicke, when his vengefull ire
Again was vanished, back does he retire
To build her ruined walls more fair and strong,
And brings with him the Ballioll along,
I est left behind he might again recall
His resignation: but no aid at all
To Edward's purpose could his title bring,
Whom Scotland never would acknowledge King.
The peoples hearts did with King David live.
Those hearts to Edward, Ballioll could not give.
Nights silent charms all eyes in slumber closed;
When lo, while Edward in his tent reposed,
He dreamt before him armed Scotland stood;
Her martial visage pale with loss of blood,
Which through her loosened helmet did appear;
The furious Lion her broad shield did bear.
And thus with sober Majesty she spoke
At last: why furious Edward do thou make
These sad invasions? and so vainly strive
To ravish hence what war shall never give,
My Crown and Scepter, not ordained to be
The swords reward or spoil of victory?
This truth thy Grandsire might at length have found,
Who did so often my bleeding bosom wound
(Although not unrevenged.) In threescore years
That last have passed, what alternate tears
For noble sons with me has England shed!
What crimson streams have we two sisters bled!
What mutual wounds have thy stern Grandsiers blade,
My warrelike Bruce, and thou, great Edward, made!
Yet all in vain. No conquest can unite
Whom our great God is purposed to invite
A sweeter way to bonds of unity.
This knot a Monarch's happy birth must tie:
Although before those Halcyon days (alas.)
Shall many years and strange adventures pass.
Thy seed commixt with ours shall then enjoy
What battles cannot purchase, but destroy.
Blew Neptunes arms, that compass both these lands,
And now are cruel lists, to join our hands
As combatants, and make the I Will a stage
Of our divided Nations war and rage,
Shall then embrace us as a marriage ring.
My royal James shall to this Island bring
By birth, as well as by his reign a peace.
All rapine, theft, and barbarous feuds shall cease,
Which now our borders do so much infest.
And after him, more to confirm those blessed
And Halcion days, shall Charles from heaven be sent,
Whose pious, just, and temp rate government
Shall teach the world that peaceful Virtues bring
As true and lasting honor to a King
As by victorious wars can be obtained,
Or by the blood of slaughtered Nations gained.
That they more sweetly set a Monarch forth:
As Aristides and good Cato's worth
Deserve more solid and enduring praise
Then Marius triumphs or great Pompey's Bays.
My ransomed King home to his Kingdom send,
And these so bloody jarres (and bootlesse) end.
Strive not against Fate. With that she vanished.
While Edward waked, lay musing on his bed,
A messenger arrived at the tent,
That from his sister, Scotland's Queen, was sent,
Who su'd for her beloved Lord's release.
Great Edward began relent, and terms of peace
Resolved to embrace, fates only did ordain
That David there a prisoner should remain
Till he in woes a partner find, and see
A greater King in that captivity,
That, weighing well the loss of potent France,
He may the more excuse wars fatal chance.
Past Touraine now the Prince of Wales was come,
And through Poictou to Bordeaux marching home,
After so many great achievements done,
So many Towns and stately Cities won,
His men enriched, the French endammag'd more
Then all th'incursions that had been before
Could make them feel; when the open hand of war
(Though uncontrolled it let him pass so far)
Beside Poictiers presents it self, to stay
This youthful Lion and redeem the prey.
Or else kind Fortune thought the prey to be
Too mean for her black Edward's dignity;
Nor had the forts, the Cities he had won,
As strong Narbon, and stately Carcason
With all the pillage gained (in her esteem)
Or fame or danger great enough for him:
Unless this wondrous battle had been fought,
From which a captive Monarch should be brought
With fame as great to him, as e're before
One field could give to any Conqueror.
Few were Prince Edward's troops; King John of France
Armed with his kingdoms choycest puissance,
And all the flower of French Nobility,
With a resolve unfortunate, though high,
Pursued the Prince; to make him that sad day
A dear account for all his voyage pay.
His passages they cut off every way,
In hope to seize what they esteemed their prey,
But proved too strong for their weak arms to hold.
So when Getulian hunters too too bold
A furious Lion round about beset,
And will not let him escape; they vainly whet
The beast's high courage; whose collected ire
(To them as deadly as enclosed fire)
Breaks forth at last; his danger anger moves,
And fatal only to the hunters proves.
Not far from Poictiers town brave Edward was,
And there encamped, nor further could he pass,
Nor longer shun the battles fatal stroke.
Him there King John's huge army overtooke.
His wisely seated camp on every side
Was both by pains and Nature fortified.
Thick Vines and bushes round had fenced the place
Hard for the French Cavallery to pass.
With poor eight thousand there entrenched he lies
Against six times as many enemies;
And disadvantag'd so, a courage showed
As great as was the fortune that ensued.
Men knew not which to wonder at, that he
With such a strength durst hope for victory,
Or that he gained it; that he stood the blow,
Or that he gave so great an overthrow.
The Cardinal of Perigortin vain
Had strived long by treaties to detain
King John's resolved fury from the fight,
(As much bewailing Edward's woeful plight.)
In vain had Edward offered to restore
All towns and forts that he had gained before,
And satisfy for all the damage done.
But Fate (to work his fall) had blinded John,
No other terms will be accepted now
But that Prince Edward with a hundred more
His chiefest Knights, and noblest in the field
Should to his hands themselves as prisoners yield.
These base conditions Edward scorns to take,
And to the King returns defiance back.
His valiant troops agree, resolved to dye,
Or spite of a odds to gain a victory.
Whom thus their most undaunted Prince bespake:
Brave Countrymen, if I have skill to take
Presage of future fortune: when I see
Your looks your not despairing industry,
Which, all the time that our vain treaties were,
About your camp could work with such a cheer,
Me thinks I swell with hopes; nor could be sad
If twice as many that proud army had.
But that I know their numbers fright not you,
I could, brave soldiers, by example show
How useless thronging numbers prove in war.
Then why should John presume on that so far
To make such proud conditions, as that we
For fear of him should choose captivity?
And yield our selves as prisoners to the foe,
Before the chance of war have made us so?
By which our honor we had quite forgone,
Honor our Countries Jewel, not our own,
By her entrusted to us, which when I
Forget to keep, let me unvalu'd dye.
How great a price is on this battle set!
If we subdue, no army ever yet
In all the books of fame was honored more:
A richer Bays no Nation ever wore:
But if we dye, those conquering soldiers,
Whom bleeding France has often selt, and fears,
Survive in England our revenge to take.
But God, that gives all victories, can make
Our own swords do it. There is no soldier here
But does already some French trophee wear.
Here fight those arms, who from the Norman wars,
From Britains conquest brought victorious scarres,
Those noble names, whom Crescy field renowned,
And Sluice before with Navall Garlands crowned.
Then by such armed friends environed, why
Should I at all despair of victory?
The Prince had done; the undanted soldiers show
By cheerful signs, they dare abide the foe.
Too confident of victory King John
In three large battles draws his army on,
On fire to charge, nor could his heat forbear;
When he, that led the first Battalia there,
His brother Orleance with sage advice
Thus spoke: oh Sir, forbear your enemies
A while: defer the days uncertain chance,
And let this conquest cost no blood of France.
We need not fight at all; the famished foe
Our strengths environ round, he cannot go
To forage now, nor fetch provision in.
To feel that want already they begin,
It will become their wish on swords to dye,
And mix their ruin with our tragaedy.
But why should we (against a Christian host)
Refuse that conquest, that no blood will cost?
And rather hasten in their tragic fall
To bear a part? without a wound at all
The captive Prince shall be at your command.
Then why should you with danger thrust your hand
To quench that flame, that would it self expire,
And battle more than victory desire?
Sound was the Dukes advice; brave Edward's day
In amidst of Fates had vanished away,
Nor so had headless France been over-runne
Had that been followed; but unhappy John*
Whom Fate had blinded, thus in wrath replies:
Does that poor handful of the enemies
Affright your courage brother? can you weigh
Against such a prize the danger? to what day
Should France her fortune ever trust, if here
She should misdoubt her swords? and feeding fear
By such fly courses seek to steal renown,
Not take it boldly, as our Nation
Have ever used? if famine, not the sword
Should here to us a victory afford,
The boasting English, who so often of late
Against us have proved in battle fortunate
Even in our kingdoms bosom, would not know
Whither the French could win by sword or no.
With that the signal's given. In full carriere
They charge that little English band; who there
With well collected spirits stand, to abide
Their fiercest onset: and on every side
Return sharp death, and furious force for force.
Their mortal arrows gall the approaching horse.
Nor is the chevalry of France o'rethrowne
By the English archers only: but their own
Rash fury helps to draw their ruin on,
And on themselves does execution.
In vines, shrubs, bushes, that environed round
Prince Edward's armies well-elected ground,
The entangled horse with miserable fate
Their riders and themselves praecipitate,
And to their foes become an easy spoil;
(As beasts of greatest courage in a toil
Ensnared, almost without resistance dye)
While against the rest that stand, the archers ply
Their fatal task: the wounded horses fall
Foul on their fellows every where; through all
The troop reigns nothing but confusion.
Those chevalliers, that came so bravely on,
And seemed themselves enough the day to gain,
In this disorder tumbled down are flame;
Nor can so few of English hands suffice
To execute their routed enemies.
Now wondrous sad the spectacle was grown;
In all her foulest shapes was horror shown.
The mangled limbs of riders, that of late
Were proudly mounted, by praeposterous fate
Beneath the horses bloodyed hoofes are trod.
With heaps confused the mourning fields are strow'd;
The dikes are filled with slaughter, while the blood
Of men and horses make one purple flood,
As if in nature they had been the same,
And from the wounds of slaughtered Centaures came.
Now to the French infantery at last
(Which far behind the horse King John had placed,
And vainly thought that in the action
He should not need their hands; the horse alone
Would gain the day) the furious war was brought.
But they, alas, amazed before they fought
To see the horsemens wondrous overthrow,
And now assaulted by the conquering foe
Gave ground apace: The first hot charge that brave
And valiant Lord renowned Audley gave;
Who to perform a noble vow, in deeds
Almost the prowess of a man exceeds;
And like the stroke of Jove's resistlesse thunder
Shoots forth, and breaks the strongest ranks in sunder.
Here in the thickest throng of enemies
Like Thracian Mars himself, black Edward plyes
Deaths fatal task: here noble Warwick gives
A furious onset: there brave Suffolk strives
T'outgoe the foremost; aemulations fire
Is kindled now, and blazes high; desire
Of honor drownes all other passions there,
Not in the Chiefes alone; each soldier
In that small army feels bright honors flame,
And labors to maintain his proper fame.
Never was a battle through all parts so fought,
Nor such high wonders by an handful wrought.
White Victory, that scared above beheld
How every English hand throughout the field
Was stained with blood; amazed to see the day,
And that so few should carry her away.
The fields no more their verdure can retain,
Enforced now to take a purple stain,
And be obscured with slaughter, while the wounds
Of France manure her own unhappy grounds,
Where mixed with Plebeian funerals
Her greatest Princes dye: There Burbon falls,
And Marshall Clermont welters in his gore:
There noble Charney's beaten down, that bore
The standard royal that sad day; here dies
Athens great Duke, there valiant Eustace lies,
Who, as a badge of highest honor, wore
A Chaplet of bright pearls, that had before
(When by King Edward in a skirmish, near
To Calleis, he was taken prisoner)
As testimony of his prowess showed
Been by that royal enemy bestowed.
But amongst so many noble funerals
Of France, one star of English prowess falls
From his bright sphaere, with sorrow to allay
The high success of that victorious day;
Renowned Audley, that so long had fought
In front of all the English power, and wrought
High feats at Arms, by many wounds bereft
Of spirits, sinks down at last; but is not left
To The Enemy; four valiant Squires engage
Themselves for him against the fiercest rage
Of foes, and bear their wounded Lord away.
Whom gently down in freshest air they lay
Past hope of life, alas, but gentle Death
So long gave respite to his latest breath
Till he his Countries full renown might see,
And Edward graced with perfect victory.
Great are the French Battalia's, and in room
Of those that fall, so often fresh soldiers come,
So often the bloody fight's renewed, that now
The English weary with subduing grow,
And 'ginne to faint, oppressed with odds so great.
When lo, to make the victory complete,
Six hundred bowmen (whom to that intent
Before the battle the brave Prince had sent
Abroad well mounted now come wheeling over
The field, and charge the French behind so sore,
As with confusion did distract them quite;
And now an execution, not a fight
Ensues; all rowted that great army flies
A prey to their pursuing enemies.
With his disheartened battles Orleance
Forsakes the field; with him the heir of France,
Young Charles of Normandy, and thousands more
Not overthrown but frighted by the foe.
Nor are the English, though enough to gain
The day, enough in number to maintain
So great a chase; and not so well suffice
To follow, as subdue their enemies.
Nor yet (which more declared the conquest sent
From heaven alone, to strike astonishment
In overweening mortals, and to show
Without that aid how little Man can do)
Are all the English conquerors in field
Enough to take so many French as yield,
Nor to receive the Prisoners that come.
Though some in field are ransomed and sent home;
Yet more from thence are captive borne away
Than are the hands that won so great a day.
Yet did the King, almost forsaken quite
By all his men, maintain a noble fight,
As if ashamed to outlive the sad
Discomfiture, which his own rashness made.
Nor did his faultring hands even then forget
To play a soldiers part, appearing yet
Worthy the fear of his assaling foe,
While death attended every furious blow.
Too late that prowess comes; and he in vain
By personal valor hopes to cure again
That malady which ill conduct begat.
No soldiers valiant deed can expiate
A Generall's folly; nor one private hand
Redeem the errors of a King's command.
Thither to crown their actions high success
The ambitious valors of the English press
With greedy hope to seize the royal prey,
The greatest prize of that victorious day.
But too too great it seemed for one alone,
By many hands the King is seized upon.
Nor had it cost less than a civil war
To judge whose right so great a prisoner
Should prove in field, and that rich claim decide*
On English swords had many English died,
And in that storm the captive King of France
Himself had perished, had not timely chance
Presented rescue; noble Warwick came,
And from that rabble in Prince Edward's name
Demanded him; whose presence seemed to bring
Not thraldom then but safety to the King.
There was Prince Philip taken, his youngest son,
Who, when his brothers all were fled and gone,
Still by his fathers side the fight maintained,
And in that field the name of Hardy gained.
And now the swords sad work was ended quite,
When, that the wearied soldiers, who from fight
Or from the chase returned back, might spy
Their place of rendevous, displayed on high
Upon an hill Prince Edward's banner stood.
To which the soldiers smeared with dust and blood
Laden with spoils and wealthy prisoners come.
Some leading three in bands, some four, to some
Did five belong; that whosoever had been
A stranger to the battle, and there seen
Them altogether, had supposed then
The Camp to be of French, not Englishmen*
Annotations upon the fifth Book.
a Concerning the slaughter of this miraculous battle of Poictiers, and the
numbers of which both Armies consisted, we find thus, (for though Historians
differ, it is not much.) The Prince his Army contained not in all above eight
thousand; of whom the greatest part were Archers; the French King (according to
most Wr^^rs) had threescore thousand; and no writer at all speaks the number
much less. The slaughter on their side was exceeding great; for besides fifty
Lords (of whom the chief were Peter of Burbon Duke of Athens, high Constable
of France, John Clermont Marshall; George of Charney, Lord great Chamberlain,
etc.) there fell about seventeene hundred Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen
bearing coats of Arms; and of common soldiers there dyed about six thousand
in the field, besides those that fell in the chase, or were beaten down under
the walls of Poictiers. The list of Prisoners comprehended these great names,
John King of France, Philip his Son, afterward Duke of Burgoigne, the
Archbishop of Sens, James of Burbon Earl of Ponthieu, John of Artois, Earl of
Eu; Charles his brother, Earl of Longuevile; Charles Earl of Vendosme; the
Earls of Tankervile, Salbruch, Nassaw, Dampmartine, La-Roch, with many other
great Lords, and about two thousand Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen bearing
armouries. Many Prisoners had been ransomed in the field, and some let go,
for fear of the danger that might have ensued by retaining a greater number of
Prisoners than themselves were.

THE REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE THIRD.
The sixth Book.
Argument VI.
With fire and sword King Edward uncontrolled
Wastes wretched France: Prince Edward's love is told*
King John of France is ransomed home again.
The Prince is sent to govern Aquitaine.
THe chase together with the day was done,
And all returned: in his pavilion
Brave Edward feasts the Royal prisoner.
At which as noble did the Prince appear
As erst in battle, and by sweetness won
As great a conquest as his sword had done.
No fair respect, or honor, that might cheer
That Kings afflicted breast, was wanting there,
No reverence nor humble courtesy,
That might preserve his state and dignity
But Edward showed at full; and at the feast
In person waited on his captive guest.
But what content, what object fit could Fate
Present to comfort such a changed state,
Or cheer the Kings perplexed soul at all?
New is the wound; nor do his thoughts recall
A long-past glory, where the hand of time
(Best cure of grief) might ease the smart; but him,
Whose state the morning Sun had seen so high,
This night beholds in sad captivity.
His restless passions rolling to and fro
No calm admit; when thus his noble foe
Prince Edward spoke; Great King for such you are
In my thoughts still, what-e're the chance of war
Have lately wrought against you here) forgive
Your humble kinsman's service, if I strive
To ease your sorrow, and presume to do
What is too much for me, to counsel you;
Do not deject your Princely thoughts, or think
The Martial fame that you have gained, can sink
In one successelesse field; or too much fear
Your Nations honor should be tainted here.
Men's strengths and honors we most truly try
Where fields are fought with most equality.
But God was pleased to make this days success
The more miraculous, that we the less
Might challenge to our selves, and humbly know
That in so great and strange an overthrow
Some secret judgment of our God was wrought:
And that the sword of heaven, not England, fought.
All foreign Nations will expound it so,
That are by noble stories taught to know
What your French arms in Eastern lands have done,
What trophies you have raised, what Garlands won
Against the faithless Saracens, whose wounds
So often have flowed on Iuda's holy grounds,
And stained with purple Siria's swarthy face.
And can the fortune of one field disgrace
A Nation of so great Nobility?
And for your self, great King, all history
That shall hereafter to the world make known
The Event of Poictiers battle, shall renown
Your personal prowess; which appeared so high
As justly seemed to challenge victory,
Had not God's secret providence opposed:
But though his will, great Sir, have thus disposed,
Your state remains, your person and your fame
Shall in my humble thoughts be still the same.
And till my father see your face, to show
How he respects your worth and state; to you
As to himself, were he in person here,
In all a observance Edward shall appear.
The noble King a while amazed to see
Victorious youth so full of Courtesy,
At last replies: Brave Coozen, you have shown
Your self a man built up for true renown;
And, as in action of the wars, to be
This ages Phoenix in humanity.
Why do you wrong me thus, as to enthrall
Me doubly? not insulting over my fall
You rob me Coozen, of that sole renown
Which I, though vanquished, might have made mine own
To bear adversity. I might have showed,
Had you been proud, a passive fortitude;
And let the world, though I were fallen, see
What spirit I had in scorning misery.
But you have robbed me of that honor now,
And I am bound in honor to allow
That noble theft, content (since such are you)
To be your captive and your debtor too.
And since my Stars ordained a King of France
Armed with such odd, so great a puissance,
Must in a fatal field be lost, to raise
So great a trophee to another praise:
I am best pleased it should advance thy story,
And John's dishonor be Prince Edward's glory.
What love the virtues of a noble foe
May win, did that great Persian Monarch show,
Who prayed, if he must from his kingdom fall,
That Alexander might succeed in all.
The Prince all signs of humble love expressed;
And when the banquet ended, to his rest
Conducts the King, if any rest at all
His thoughts could take after so great a fall.
Next morn had cheerd the earth with Phoebus light.
And from the Pole removed the damps of night
When with his host victorious Edward goes
Marching along without control of foes.
Near to the walls of Poictiers town he past.
Who shut their gates, and all their guards had placed
For fear of him. But no such thought had he.
Enough of miracle it seemed to be
If with so many prisoners, and so great
A spoil, that small enriched host could get
Safe to their journey's end. Through all Poictou,
And through the County of Xantoigne they go,
The French admiring, but resisting not,
Till to the river side at Blays they got.
Which with their wealth and prisoners all they past,
And at fair Bordeaux safe arrived at last:
Sad fame before had into England brought
The Prince his danger. What amazed thought
Could hope (alas) for conquest there? or who
Durst think that valor disadvantag'd so
Could work it self a passage? fear possessed
All English hearts; and great King Edward's breast
Revenge had entered in as horrid height
As France could fear, or that great cause invite.
How many Cities had he doomed to sack?
And men to death? but Fame could not be slack.
Fate would not suffer England long to err;
Nor such a days triumphant joy defer.
But on a sudden, as the golden Sun,
When darkest thunder-clouds are newly gone,
Shoots forth again in all his glorious light,
That men amazed scarce dare trust their sight,
They hear of Poictiers battle, of the high
And strange success. But incredulity
A while the freedom of that joy controlls,
For fear of too much surfeiting their souls
With such a change. So slowly they receive
The unlooked for news, and by degrees believe,
That even their eyes are satisfied as soon
As are their ears almost; nor had the Moon
Thrice filled her orb before (to second fame)
With that great King victorious Edward came.
Oh how to Plimmouth, where the Paince arrived
From every part the people flocked, and strived
Betimes to kiss that Martial hand, and see
So great a prize of one days vi^^ory
Now safe at home! as much was all the way
From thence to London, as their progress lay,
With shows adorned, and thronging people filled*
Where (equal to his prowess) they beheld
The Prince his goodness; how he humbly rode
Below the King; no pride his gesture showed:
But such respect as if he did not bring
In triumph thither, but attend a King.
Where, noble Edward, shall we find for thee
A parallel in true humanity?
What ancient Prince or modern ever showed
So sweet a temper joined with fortitude?
What Conqueror did ever use success
More modestly, or stain his fortune less?
Imperial Rome in her most virtuous age,
(When wisest writers durst by strong presage
Affirm the worlds sole Empire due to be
Not to her strength, but her morality)
Knew no such virtue to great Princes falls.
How far unlike it her proud Generals
In that inhumane pomp of Triumphs dealt,
Jugurtha, Syphax, and great Perseus felt.
And yet what Roman Army e're could boast
A nobler conquest than thy English host
At Poictiers battle won? without Romes vice
Her greatest virtues thou did aequalize
In that great act: and shew'dst, as then was tried,
The Roman prowess, not the Roman pride.
With joy as great, but more magnificence
Did London welcome her triumphant Prince,
Where great King Edward with all courtesy
Receives King John of France; as if that he
Did aemulate the virtue of his son;
Or rather would approve what he had done;
And, by that noble moderation show
Himself the stock from whence Prince Edward grew.
Within his sumptuous hall at Westminster
He entertaines and feasts them all* and there
The pensive King with gentle speeches cheeres.
To all the other princely prisoners
The like respect the Lords of England give;
And at the board in full-crown'd goblets strive
To banish from their breasts all thoughts of care.
Over which old Heroes fortunes, and the rare
Events of ancient battles they relate.
So over the Wine in massy Phthian plate
Talked great Achilles in his tent at night;
When he the Grecian Princes did invite.
But he whose noble actions were become
The argument of every tongue, on whom
The greedy eyes of all were fixed there,
Prince Edward seems himself of heavy cheer,
A greater captive in his own sad thought,
Than those that he from Poictiers battle brought.
Nor could great Mars with all his honors heal
The wound that love had made. Deep sighs would steal
Sometimes from him, although with care represt,
And speak the inward passions of his breast.
Among the sparkling beauties, that resort
More to enlighten this triumphant Court,
His Love-ficke eyes do often wander round
To find (although he fear to find his wound)
Kents beauteous Countess. But no where at all
Does she appear, nor was the festival
Graced with her presence. Soon had she been spied
If there; nor could so bright a star be hid.
But missing her, his other passions rise.
A thousand doubts and jealous fears surprise
His loving breast at once. Alas what crime
Of Fate should he suspect? at such a time
Of Courtly state and high magnificence,
What cruel cause should keep the Lady thence?
Feign would he know, yet blushes to enquire;
And, though he burn, still strives to hide the fire.
As many men whose sudden ruine's nigh,
Have been in height of all their jollity:
And some have been observed in pensive mood
Just then, when Fate contrives their greatest good
Even so it fares with Princely Edward here;
Who fears the worst, and cannot think how near
The Accomplishment of his desires should be.
Till to remove the sad uncertainty,
Some Lords discoursing, do by chance relate
How noble Holland was deceased of late.
A sudden change in Edward's looks appears;
Again the passions alter; doubts or fears
(Since now to every eye the cause is plain
That did the Countess from this feast detain)
No longer hold possession in his breast;
Love freely enters to displace the rest.
The Prince resolves his pleasing fuit to move,
And, spite of all opposers, gain his love.
In Savoy Palace, when the feast is ended,
King John of France is lodged, and thence attended
In fitting state to Windsor Castle, there
TO enjoy what sports the season of tho year
Would yield; what games the Country could present
To give a King's perplexed thoughts content.
And David, King of Scotland, that ten year
Had been detaid'd in England prisoner,
Is ransomed home, since England seems to be
Secured from France by John's captivity.
Unhappy France, whilst England nothing knows
But joys and triumphs, now overwhelmed with woes
Sits like a mourning widow, wailes her fate;
And she that was the pride of Europe late,
Is fallen from all her glories, and become
The pity of astonished Christendom;
Her bosom filled with sad confusion;
And rebel members, while the head is gone,
Do from their safe and wholesome order fall.
The Royal City Paris most of all
Is out of joint, that should the rest redeem.
Sick even to death does this great kingdom seem.
Nor can the Cure be sudden; for the Sun
Five times through his celestial signs must run,
Before King John of France be ransomed home.
Yet healthier far for France in time to come
Shall this Confusion and long sickness prove.
(By such unlook'd-for ways the Powers above
Do work in their disposing Providence)
Wise Charles the Dauphine by experience
Of those disordred and rough times, shall gain
So true a wisdom, as his prosperous reign
Shall cure again the wounds of bleeding France;
His quiet gown her state shall re-advance,
Recovering all by policy alone,
Which English swords in those famed battles won,
But Love with Honor strives to bear a part;
And cure what he had wounded, Edward's heart.
Within the house, since her dear husbands Fate
Had Kent's fair Countess been immured of late,
Her mourning times not fully yet expired.
To comfort her, as thus she sat retired,
The other Ladies daily do resort.
There they discourse the triumphs of the Court;
Of every Princely prisoner they tell,
And on Prince Edward's worth and praises dwell.
Nor can the mourning Countess choose, how-e're
Her times may seem, but with true pleasure hear
His noble story told: from her fair breast
Sometimes a sigh would steal, not like the rest,
Nor ought of kin to those sad sighs at all
She used to fetch for Holland's funeral,
A Blush would seize her then, as if she knew
That stranger-sigh encroach'd on Holland's due.
But yet she knew not truly whence it came,
Nor did the spark so soon begin to flame,
And teach her bosom that the tyrant Love
As many tears, and sighs as deep can move
As death by dearest funerals can do.
Loves winged god into her chamber, though
Hung with so sad a darkness, and unfit
For such a guest, had taken his secret flight,
As once into the dark Elysian grove
Among the silent ghosts, as if he strove
To show no place so melancholy were
But that his godhead could or change or cheer.
Love-care in time his place 'bove sorrow takes,
And by degrees another watching makes
Her pale, and reaves the quiet of her breast.
And whensoe're she takes her flumbering rest,
No dreams of death are sent: Before her eyes
Moves Edward's image in triumphant wise,
Like Liber clad in golden arms, when from
The spiced Inde he came with conquest home,
And yoked Tigers his proud chariot drew
She dreamt (and could not choose but wish it true,
Nor did the event prove less) that Love appeared
In such a shape as she had often heard
The Boy described, and thus gently spoke
To her at last: Now is the time to take
What was ordained thee, fair Plantagenet,
Fate pitied thee, and would no longer let
That Royal blood and heavenly beauty lie
Ecclipsed in a private family.
Let all thy thoughts of sorrow now expire
For Holland's death, and cherish Edward's sire
As did thy fathers, so thy seed shall reign;
And thou descended from the Crown, again
Art bound to propagate the royal stem,
And bear an Heir to England's Diadem.
But when the Countess from this flattering sleep
(For such it seemed) was waked, sighing deep
Shee' began accuse Days too ambitious thought,
That had by night so vain a vision brought;
Resolved to check that thought for evermore,
And rather court the sorrow, which before
Her breast had lodged. She studies to recall
Her mourning, and on Holland's funeral
Again to fix, thinking that grief more free
From torture, than an hopeless love can be.
Why was I cursed (quoth she) by envious Fate?
Did not the mournings of a widowed state
Seem sad enough to punish me, unless
A passion more than frantic should possess
My breast, and wound it deeper than it was?
Why should I hope for Edward's love (alas?)
Or fondly think the heir of England's Crown,
And such a Prince as he, high in renown
As in his Royal birth, and now become
The only Theme of praise in Christendom,
On whom the greatest Monarchs would bestow
Their fairest daughters, should descend so low
As give that precious love to me, and grace
The beauties of a widows waning face?
Too much ambition had it been for me
To hope, nay think of such a dignity
In my fresh Virgin flower, and blooming prime:
Much more (alas) in this autumnall time,
When like a sullied Lilly, or a Rose
Too fully blown, my fading beauty shows.
That for a Prince his love is too much wasted,
Whose sweets two subjects have already tasted.
Yet Edward's looks, and frequent visits here
Seem to betoken Love, if with uncleare
And partial eyes my state I did not see,
And so suppose his noble Courtesy
To be Love-passion. But (alas) we all
Are our own flatterers; and I mis-call
That Love, which is a kinsmans kind regard.
Oh would that name of nearenesse could be spared!
In that again, as in his high estate,
Am I debarred from such a blessed Fate,
And by that nearenesse farther from his love*
But Dispensations of the Church remove
Those obstacles, and nearer kindred tie.
Oh wherefore wander my wild thoughts so high!
Sink down for aye, false hope; disturb no more
The quiet grief that I enjoyed before.
Thus would she strive those fancies to remove;
But his kind visits still renewed her love;
And as her flame encreas'st, his noble heart
Was more and more pierst with Loves golden dart,
Until at last Prince Edward, to prevent
All others, plainly told his kind intent;
And both their wishes in so full a joy
Are met, too high for fortune to destroy,
Though she a while defer their Nuptial rites,
And growing war break off Loves sweet delights.
For while the French delay by treaties vain
The ransom of their King; sad France again
Is forced to feel revengefull Edward's hands;
Who with a great and powerful army lands
At Calleis, marching through the heart of France.
In three Battalia's his whole puissance
Is drawn along; himself conducting one:
Another led by his renowned son:
The third by Henry, Duke of Lancaster.
Against whom while no resisting foes appear,
They wast and spoil the Country: without fight
The greatest Cities to his force submit;
Burgundia's Duke at Edward's conquering hands
With money buys the safety of his lands.
Aras is taken, with many towns beside.
Within fair Paris strongly fortified
With all his forces Charles the Dauphin lay;
Whom Edward dares to trial of the day.
But wary Charles instructed by the sad
Success his father ^^d his Grandsire had,
Within the walls ^^ntaines his army now;
Nor to the hazard of one fatal blow
Against the English dares he trust his strength.
Whence Edward, after his vain stay, at length
Draws back his forces, when no hope he sees
At all of fighting with his enemies.
Much less he hoped to force a Town so strong.
Wasting the wretched Countries all along
As far as Chartres uncontrolled he goes;
But there, although no mortal strength oppose,
God's mighty b hand does The English host dismay.
Black on a sudden grows the troubled day.
Heavens cheerful face wrapped in a pitchy cloud
No beam sheds forth, while cracks of thunder loud
Rend all the air, and in the frighted eyes
Of every soldier horrid lightning flies
In more than usual manner; and anon
Like murdring stones thrown from a Castle down
Upon th'assailants fatal hailestones fall
Of such amazing greatness over all
The English army, that nor man nor horse
Is able to endure their fatal force*
But both together are beat down and slain,
While thousands dying strew the purple plain.
The wretched Soldiers feel, but cannot see
The wondrous cause of this great tragedy*
Some with amaze and fear are almost killed,
Some only overthrown: but all hearts filled
Withsad destruction, think the day of doom,
And dissolution of the world is come.
Or else surpised with more particular fears,
They deem (alas) some winged Messengers
Of God above against their camp are sent
TO inflict on them immediate punishment.
As once an Angel sent from God did smite
The host of proud Senacherib by night.
Great Edward sadly trembles, every where
Enforced his dying soldiers groans to hear.
But when the horror of the storm was gone,
The darkness vanished, and bright daylight shone
On them again, and had discovered all,
His heart relents, and in the pitied fall
Of his poor men he thinks he truly sees
God's wrath for all those Christian tragedies
Which his victorious sword in France had wrought,
And all the woes he had on Scotland brought.
Never before did Edward's pensive breast
Truly revolve how tragike is the best
Success that war against Christian lands affords,
What impious wounds, his sadly conquering swords
Had made in Europe; all the battles won
(Since first that fatal title he begun
To set on foot) are running in his thought;
Now Crescy, Poictiers, Halidowne are brought
Into his fad remembrance; and almost
He wishes all his triumphs had been lost
Rather than with such horrid slaughter won.
For which in paenitent Devotion
His knees in Chartres Temple Edward bows,
Forgiveness begs for what is past, and vows
Thenceforth the fury of his sword shall cease,
And he with wretched France conclude a peace
On easier terms then erst he stood upon,
Home to his land restoring ransomed John.
Few months had past, before this good intent
Of pious Edward found accomplishment*
At Brettigny so well on either side
The Agents dealt, that peace was ratified
On steady Articles; and John, whom here
Five painted Springs had seen a prisoner,
Is to his native land returned back*
With kind embraces the two Monarchs take
Their leave at Calleis. With a Royal heart
So full of love did John from Edward part*
So well his usage pleased him, that he
Entends again in noble courtesy
To visit England, and for fav^rs done
To thank great Edward and his Princely son.
The bloody storms of war away are blown,
And white-wing'd peace from heaven descended down
To cheer fair France her late afflicted state;
Whilst England's quiet Court does celebrate
At once two Princely Nuptials with as high
A state as may befit their dignity.
The Paphian Queen in all her smiles appears.
His purple robe the pleased Hymen wears,
When brave Prince Edward (now all lets removed)
Weds that fair Countess he so long had loved:
And John of Gaunt enjoyes the wealthy heir
Of Noble Henry, Duke of Lancaster.
The State at home well settled, to employ
Prince Edward's worth and raise his dignity,
He with his Princess, and a noble train
Is sent away to govern Aquitaine.
Annotations upon the sixth Book.
a Concerning the lowly demeanor of Edward the black Prince toward King John
of France, after he had taken him Prisoner in the battle of Poictiers, and
the Courteous reception, which King Edward gave him here in England, there were
no Authors, either then or since, but did freely acknowledge* insomuch, as many
years after, Guicciardine an Italian Writer, and therefore indifferent to both
Nations, speaking of the wars of Christendom in his time, when Francis the
first King of France had been taken prisoner at the battle of Pavie by the
soldiers of Charles the fifth Emperor, and King of Spain, and had long been
kept in hard durance in the Castle of Madrid, brings in King Francis
complaining of his unworthy usage, where comparing the misfortunes of King
John with his own, and the wonderful difference of both their entertainments,
he much extols the Courtesy of the English Nation, and condemns the
Spaniards insolence. And so much did that Courtesy work upon the noble
disposition of King John, that (as many of that time thought) it occasioned his
voluntary coming into England to visit King Edward not many years after his
releasement. Though other occasions there might be of that journey, as the
selling of his affairs before his intended voyage to the holy Wars; and yet
those perchance might well have been performed by Ambassadors. But howsoever
it were, in the year 1364, and of King Edward's Reign, the 38, this King John
came into England, and besides him two other Kings, the Kings of Scotland and
of Cyprus; where the magnificence of the English Court was well expressed in
feasting sumptuously three Kings at once. The King of Scotland, and the King of
Cyprus, after they had dispatched their business, returned home to their own
kingdoms: but King John of France fell sick, and dyed at London the year
following. His death was much lamented by King Edward, who solemnly attended
his corpse to Dover; from whence it was conveyed to Saint Denis, and entombed
with his Ancestors.

b This miraculous storm of hail stones, which near to Chartres fell upon
King Edward's Army, was esteemed, by many of those times, an immediate
Messenger of Gods wrath for all the Christian blood which King Edward for many
years had shed both in France and Scotland. So great was the hail, and so
violent the fall of it, that it felled horses to the ground, and slew above two
thousand of the English Soldiers. King Edward himself was much astonished,
and thought it no less than an immediate judgment of God; upon which in
penitence he performed many devotions, and on reasonable terms concluded a
peace with France; so that King John was ransomed, and returned home to his
own kingdom, after he had remained a prisoner five years in England.

THE REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE THIRD.
The seventh Book.
Argument VII.
Prince Edward marches into Spain to fight
Against Henry, in deposed Pedro's right.
At Naveret he beats the strength of Spain,
And sets Don Pedro in his Throne again.
PRince Edward's honor was not mounted yet
Up to her Zenith; Fate is in his debt
Another Garland, and from Aquitaine
She calls him forth again; that conquered Spain
May feel his noble prowess, and advance
His fame as high as erst triumphed France.
The tyrant Pedro of Castile was by
His land deposed for brutish cruelty,
Whose Crown his Bastard-brother Henry gained.
At Bordeaux then the Prince of Wales remained,
Whose fame was spread through every land, and he
Esteemed the noblest flower of Chevalry
That Europe boasted. To his Martial Court
Deposed Pedro humbly does resort,
And weeping craves Prince Edward's aid, to gain
His right. That Pedro may his suit obtain
Beside that bloods alliance that he brings,
The bad example of deposing Kings,
Persuades the Prince; and to that brave intent
His Father, great King Edward, gives consent.
At hand great troops of expert soldiers are,
Cashiered of late from service of the war;
Who now employment want, since troubles cease
By France and Englands late concluded peace.
Of those the Prince an a^my soon may take
For that great war, which he entends to make;
And happily may free his Country too
From spoil and rapine which they daily do.
As much does Henry of Castile provide
To guard his late-gain'd Throne; and to his side
Has gotten many expert troops of France.
Bertram's their leader, to whose puissance
In future times, fair France so much shall owe.
The war to Spain must be removed now.
Yet there the French against English fight; wars rage
The same: and nothing altered but the stage.
The fortune too shall be the same; and they
In Spain must grace victorious Edward's day.
The French must there before the English fall,
Nor shall the Climate change their fate at all.
To Bertram's Standard cashiered soldiers flock
From farthest Provence, Dauphine, Languedocke.
And other people arm; not they alone
That till the neighboring fields, and dwell upon
Seines nearest banks: but those that see his head;
And from those mountains where the Marve is bred;
Who gliding through the meadows of Champaigne
In various windings falls into the Seine.
And they that live by Isdrus stream; who gets
Growth from so many rising rivolets,
Till he himself be swallowed by the Rhone;
Who by so many large increases grown
Rowles on his furious billows, and in three
Fair channels falls into the mid-land Sea
From that fair Southern shore, that bounds the extent
Of France her rich and spacious continent.
To Edward's Standard with courageous hopes,
Beside* those active well-provided troops
That unto him from England crossed over,
Arriving on the Aquitanian shore,
And with loud clangor filling the air of France,
The greatest part of Edward's puissance;
a From France her Northern coast do soldiers come,
And cashierd troops from farthest South; and from
The banks of Seure; those that near the bounds
Of Aquitaine are bred, whose fertile grounds
Are far together watered by Dordonne;
And those that see the mouth of famed Garoone;
With soldiers dwelling on the farthest land
Of France; where those renowned mountains stand,
(The bounds of Spain) which, if we trust to fame,
Did from the fair Pyrene take their name.
All France in aid of these two Spanish Kings
Is filled with streaming Ensigns now, and rings
Of wars alarmes; yet never more free from fears;
Shrill Trumpets sound th'unfrighted plow man hears,
And loves the noise; amongst drums the shepherd swains
Feed their fair flocks securely on the plains,
And midd^st those seeming terrors joyful are
To hear the sound of a departing war.
So looked the ancient Gauls then when stern Fate
Was bent to wound great Romes divided state.
And mighty Caesar drew from thence at once
His there dispersed, and wint'ring Legions.
When dreadful Classicks in all parts were heard,
And threatening Eagles every where appeared,
Yet they rejoiced, and saw in that stout host,
How great a danger left their quiet coast.
But while the cheerful Soldiers all prepare,
And Edward's thoughts are fixed on the war,
His beauteous wife is sad; those starry eyes
Often dimmed with sorrows clouds; nor can she prize
So much one conquests fame, or aerie praise,
As she his danger and his absence weighes;
And thinks how long a time (though he be graced
With victory) her fears and doubts must last.
Besides (alas) her tender breast abhorred
That savage Tyrant, in whose right her Lord
Himself adventures against the strength of Spain,
And thus to him deep-sighing she began:
Though I should rather to my self deny
The happiness of Edward's company
Than love it with so great presumption,
As, for mine own delights, to hinder one
Of his resolves: yet pardon, dearest Lord,
If to mine own desires I do afford
One place in love: why should thou march so far
To find out danger? seek a causeless war
When none provokes thy sword, compelling those,
That are not in their thoughts, to be thy foes?
England is safe; firm peace with France is made:
Nor does this Henry of Castile invade
Thy lands. But oh dear Edward when I see
For whom thou make all Spain thine enemy,
That men! oh no, that monster, in whose right
Thou go, I tremble that my Lord should fight
For such a tyrant, mankind's enemy,
Who has outdone in brutish cruelty
What ere's of Rome's most hated Caesar's told,
Or those Sicilian tyrants famed of old.
No Christian, Pagan, or Mahumetan
Can be compared with this Castilian.
Not Spain's great forces only are thy foes,
Not Henry; but the murdered ghosts of those,
Who now for vengeance against Don Pedro cry,
Will plead to heaven against thy victory.
There is no human heart that can forbear
To melt, when they his cruel story hear.
I tremble to recite it; in his reign
How forty Lords of greatest mark in Spain
He butchered cruelly without a cause:
How, scorning both divine and humane laws,
Being admitted into Toro Town,
Upon condition he should murder none,
He broke his faith, and in his mothers fight
(As blood and torture were his chief delight)
Commanded four the greatest Lords to dye*
The Queen, abhorring her sons cruelty,
Forsook his Court, and to her father went.
How four and twenty Burgers innocent
Within Toledo, before the tyrants face
Were executed in the Market place:
Or with how many studied tortures there
He racked a Jew that was his Treasurer,
With all his friends and kindred, to confess
Their Treasury, and flew them never the less.
Nor safe could his own blood and kindred be
Of either sex, from that dire cruelty.
He killed three brothers of his own: his wife,
Queen Blanch, he poisoned; and bereaved of life
In cruel wise his Aunt Queen Leonore,
Commanding then two noble Ladies more,
That were his kindred both, and did remain
As prisoners in his keeping, to be slain.
But would you see, besides his bloody vice,
Perfidiousnesse, and sordid Avarice?
A King of Moors exiled from his land,
Old Aben Alamar, at Pedro's hand
To find some succor came; just so as he
Now comes, my Edward, suppliant to thee*
But he that never knew what pity was,
In stead of that, when he perceived (alas)
The Old King was rich in jewels, caused for gain
Himself and all his servants to be slain.
And as to blood, to all impiety
Is this Don Pedro given; nor is he free
From lust; besides Padilla, who had been
His strumpet long, and for whose sake the Queen
At last was murdered; when he could not get
To satisfy a sudden lustful heat,
Fair Donna Jane of Castro to his bed,
A false divorce he caused to be read
Betwixt Queen Blanch and him: and so to Jane
Was married, whom he soon forsook again.
For all his divellish acts, at last (though late)
The holy Church did excommunicate
This impious Prince. Will thou, dear Edward, be
A friend to whom the Church is enemy?
Oh pardon me, if now I fear thy Fate,
Though still in war victorious yet. With that
Down her fair cheeks the tears distilled apace.
The noble Edward with a kind embrace
Cheeres his bright Princess; and in words declares
How just a cause excites him to the wars,
Besides the honor he from thence may gain;
That Pedro is the true-borne Lord of Spain,
And crowned Monarch; that no vice (what-e're)
Can wash away that sacred Character.
That Subjects may not put their Sovereign down,
Nor give Don Henry title to their Crown:
But ought to leave that power to God alone,
Who can revenge at full what he has done*
Or else so cleanse him from the greatest crimes*
That Pedro's penitence in aftertimes
May all his former impious reign redeem
(Like King Manasses in Jerusalem)
That it concerned a true-borne Prince his right
To take that part; lest other Nations might
Hereafter from a president so bad
Usurp more freedom than they justly had.
Then taking leave of his dear wife, he went
To that, which after proved by accident
A fatal war to England. Where, though he
Obtained a great and glorious victory,
And present honor through all Europe gate:
Yet most unhappy to his future state
The voyage was; his treasures wast which cost
Sad tumults, and his French Dominions lost;
Besides his loss of health. All which was sent
Perchance to Edward as a punishment
For ayding such a monster, though true heir.
Nor long held Pedro his recovered chair.
(Soon after The English went from thence again,
Deposed, and by victorious Henry slain.)
Thus all their punishments did undergo,
Castile, Don Pedro, and Prince Edward too:
The Tyrant Pedro for his impious reign:
Edward for lifting up the fiend again:
And all Castile by England's conquering sword
Scourged for deposing of their lawful Lord.
With noble Edward to this Spanish war
Young John of Gaunt the Duke of Lancaster,
His brother marches; to whose future state
Castile shall prove a name more fortunate;
Who by the marriage of Don Pedro's heir
The Royal title of that land shall wear
With large revenues thence. The Duke commands
One of the three Battalia's; with him stands
Brave Sir John Chandois, who in war before
Had ever been Prince Edward's Counselor,
Now set to guide the youth of Princely John.
With him young Beauchamp, noble Warwick's son,
And stout Lord Dalbert with a gallant train
Of Gentlemen, and Knights of Aquitaine.
The Prince of Wales himself commands the maine
And middle Battle. Pedro King of Spain
For whom the war is made, by Edward's side
There marches on; and English Chieftaines tried
In many a Battle, then esteemed to be
The very flowers of Europes Chevalry.
With many Lords of high account and name,
That from Poictou, from Maine, and Guyenne came.
A Monarch leads the third Battalia on,
James of Mallorques, King; that in renown
Like the ancient Caesar's might black Edward stand,
And Kings not scorn to serve in his command.
There The Earl of Arminacke leads on his power,
And English Knolls, that expert warrior;
Thither the Lords of Dalbreth, Piergort,
And many noble Knights and Squires resort.
With all his army thirty thousand strong
The Prince sets forth from France, to pass along
The famous streights of Roncevall, and through
The kingdom of Navarre gets leave to go;
By which, with faithful guides, they pass as far
Before they meet the approach of any war
As fair Victoria on the bounds of Spain.
There some forerunners of King Henry's train
Descried, gave notice that the blow was near.
But thrice as many as Prince Edward's, were
The troops that Henry of Castile had brought.
Besides the natives of the Land, that fought
To guard their new-elected King, and free
Themselves from Pedro's future tyranny,
Th'expertest soldiers of the Realm of France
Come to increase King Henry's puissance:
And Saracens, from our invasions free,
Bear here a part in Christian enmity,
And against Don Pedro guard his brothers throne.
In three great bodies comes that army on.
The first and noblest, where the Frenchmen stand,
Is under Bertram of Cle^quy's command:
The greatest body in the amidst, the King
Himself draws up: the last his brothers bring;
And now beside the town of Naveret
In fair array are both the battles set.
Renowned Edward to his men declares
Th'undoubted justice of their present wars;
And that no odds of numbers he can fear
When he beholds those men, those Leaders there.
Who, but against odds, did never battle try:
Yet never fought without a victory.
As those that Sluices navall fight had seen:
That had in Crescy field, and Poictiers been;
And bids them now maintain that old renown
They in so many honored fields had won.
As much does Bertram his French troops excite;
And briefly tells them they not only fight
King Henry's Crown and honor to maintain,
And win fame there: but to redeem again
That dearest honor against the English host
Which France of late had to that Nation lost.
But when King Henry, whose great cause was tried
In that days hazard, saw the English side
Were marching on against him in array,
And that the war admitted no delay:
He thus bespeaks his soldiers: If a cause
Of such great weight, as to this battle draws
Your farre-engaged hands, could need at all
The inciting language of a General:
The wrongs of Spain, and brutish cruelty
Our foe has used, afford a scope to me
Too large, too sad to play the Orator.
But, well I know, your Countries love has power
Enough to raise your highest courages,
And bring you forward, were our army less
Than theirs in number (as the odds is ours.)
Unless this battle make us Conquerors,
There can no people be so low as we;
No land so wretched as Castile will be.
It Is not our wealth alone, or laws we lose;
Nor to be quite o're-runne by foreign foes:
(Though every Nation have esteemed those
The worst) but Spain must suffer greater woes.
Against her so fierce no foreign sword can be
As her restored tyrants cruelty:
His, who was once deposed, when to a mind
Before so bloody, stern revenge is joined.
If Spain before could not endure his yoke;
How will she bear it now? if by wars stroke
Our conquering hands make not the action good:
Better the tyrant undisturbed had stood:
What made old Marius, when returned home,
With so much slaughter fill the streets of Rome,
Marius, whose hand was once her best defense,
But that himself had been exiled from thence?
The prisons stinch, the shackles that he bore,
The bread he begged on wasted Affrick's shore,
Which he himself before had overcome,
Made his return so sad to wretched Rome.
And can we here fear less than Marius brought
On Rome? or than the Butcher Sylla wrought,
When not in wars, but executions
So many thousands were destroyed at once,
If in this battle Pedro should overcome?
(But God avert from Spain so sad a doom.)
What sights would all her mourning Cities see
But racks, and gibbets, blood, and cruelty?
The land no place in such a peace could yield
More safe from slaughter than this fighting field;
And tortured wretches that were left in Spain,
Would call us happy, who in war were slain.
But such a plague to earth I cannot fear
When I behold your manly faces here
Brave friends and soldiers. To your valors now
Let our dear land a greater safety owe
Than e're she did to one successful fight.
Nor let the fame of English Edward fright
Your thoughts at all. Fortune has done for him
Enough already; and it well may seem
Since blinded he maintains so cursed a cause,
That she her favor from that Prince withdrawes.
The King had done; when all the Spanish troops
Inflamed with love of fight, and filled with hopes,
A strong desire to hear the signal show.
All wish to dye, should, what they fear, be true.
From every part confused showts are sent;
And both the hoasts with passions different
Together join; th'auxiliary troops
Of France are filled with revengefull hopes
To make the English in that bloody day
For all their conquests, and proud trophies pay.
The English bold by former battles won,
And to maintain their fame, come fiercely on.
As strong resolves the eager Spaniards bring,
Here to establish their new-crowned King:
And by one prosperous fight for ever free
Their wretched land from Pedro's tyranny.
Great is the fury; high the cause is tried:
Deep the engagements lie on either side;
Both armies mighty; in their numbers one:
In prowess the other; nor had Spain e're known
(Although of mighty wars so often the stage,
Though there the old Punicke and the Roman rage
So long were seen, while fortune doubted yet
Which land to make the worlds Imperial seat)
Two nobler Hoasts than in that trial fought.
And yet this storm so black, so tragic, brought
This one sad comfort, that it could not last;
But all the war, when this great field was past;
The wretched people hoped would quite expire.
Spain could not bleed so long, nor feed the fire
So often with fuel, to protract her fate
As rich (but hapless) France had done of late.
Against the foremost English battle there,
Which John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster
Brought up, does Bertram of Clesquy advance
With all th'auxiliary troops of France.
There hot and furious the encounter grows.
No where does Death more freely deal his blows:
No part of all the field more stained with blood.
As there the war began, it longest stood,
And various Fortune longest doubted where
To give her favors. Youthful Lancaster
Came bravely on in that days fight to win
His maiden fame; and Bertram, that had been
Not many years before in Britains war
By famous Chandois taken prisoner,
The Banner of his ancient foe had seen*
Against which he pressed with eager hopes, to win
From him the honor he had lost again,
While slaughtered bodies strew the purple plain.
With Fate far different did Don Tello draw
Against Prince Edward's maine Battalia
His forces up, though strong that body were,
And well disposed for charging did appear,
With Spears in front so strongly fortified,
Yet there (alas) King Henry's hapless side
'Gan first to fail; nor could Don Tello long
Endure the fierce encounter of so strong
And expert soldiers as the Prince had brought;
Who in so many prosperous fields had fought,
And in all feats of war so well were tried.
Their fatal task the strong-nerv'd Archers plied
So fast, that soon the rank of Spears was broke,
And routed so, that they the field forsook;
The rest left naked, when the Spears were gone,
Are by the Gascoigne Horsemen trampled on.
And now the wars whole fury 'gan to draw
Upon King Henry's great Battalia;
And was from thence with equal fury met.
So much the Spaniards on that day had set
Their Countries future fortunes and their own.
In that Battalia from their slings were thrown
Such mortal stones, as seemed awhile to be
Aequivalent to The English Archery;
But could not prove at last so strong an aid.
There stuck the war, there Edward's fortune stayed.
There various feats of hardy arms were wrought;
So many thousand hands to fight were brought.
Nor did the Common soldiers only there
The toils of war, and brunt of dangers bear:
But highest Chiefetaines played the soldiers parts,
And through the battle with courageous hearts
Their passage made; there stern Don Pedro fought,
And to the ground that day had many brought.
Pleased now he seemed he might with honor do
What by his nature he was prompted to
(Shed human blood*) Most eager was his spite,
His visage black. He that had seen him fight
And kill so fast, would have supposed that from
The Infernal caves the Prince of night had come
To work on earth the ruin of mankind.
But not content with vulgar deaths, his mind
(Had Fortune suffered) chiefly aimed to meet
His brother Henry there. No blood so sweet
As his, could be to Pedro's cruel thought.
So, when of old the Argive Princes fought
Against fatal Thebes in Polynices right,
The banished Prince could with no other fight
Nor Tragedy be pleased; but through the press
Still sought his brother, proud Eteocles;
Until at last, in spite of Piety,
They meet in field; and Fate so cruelly
Balanced their impious strengths, that both were slain,
Yet both did guilty Conquerours remain.
Nor did King Henry in his thoughts decline
The sad encounter. Had the Power Divine
But let them meet, the like (perchance) had been;
And Spain as much as fatal Thebes had seen.
There through the midst the terror of his foes,
Like Mars himself, renowned Edward goes.
White Victory still over his standard slew,
As if no other name but his she knew;
And he in war did guide the wheel of Fate.
The glittering swords, that shone so bright of late,
Are quickly all distained with purple gore;
And all the field with slaughter covered over.
Mischief and fury reigned: Deaths groaning sound
The Trumpets noise, and showts of soldiers drowned.
But long the heartlesse Spanish troops, how-e're
Great were their numbers, and their quarrel dear,
Could not the prowess of the English bide.
Which when (alas) unhappy Henry spied,
And that their ranks they 'gan forsake apace,
With restless industry from place to place
He rides, to breath into his fainting men
Fresh vigor, and restore the fight again.
He cries aloud, oh friends, oh soldiers, why
Do you forsake so near a victory?
One stroke will finish what is done almost.
There is no safety when this field is lost.
For swords why seek you gibbets, and above
A noble death an ignominious love?
With such sad speeches did the eager King
Renew the fury of the fight, and bring
His fainting soldiers on: that bloody grew
The day again, till the English spirits anew
Collected, charged their rallied foes so sore,
That soon the Spaniards routed, as before,
Into disordered flight began to fall;
Although no office of a General
Did Henry leave undone. Thrice did he stay
His vanquished men from flight, and thrice that day
Restore the desperate field; but all in vain:
Nor did the Fates in justice then ordain
That he should be the Conqueror; one fight
Must needs be lost to prove Don Pedro's right,
And raise Prince Edward's fame. Then must he gain
That Crown, when England has abandoned Spain.
b And now the day beyond all hope is lost
On Henry's side; and that great numerous host
Fly in amazement, and themselves expose
Without resistance to the conquering foes;
While many thousands, as they thronging fly
From English weapons, in the river dye
That flows by Naveret; whose stream affords
As many deaths almost as Edward's swords.
Sad Henry, though his heart disdaines to fly,
Yet since reserved for Royal dignity
By kinder Fates hereafter, yields to flight,
And though sore wounded in the fatal fight,
Upon his Iennet mounted leaves the field.
By this the French Battalia's, that bad held
The longest out, and first encountered, where
Stout Bertram fought against John of Lancaster,
Are quite consumed, and weltring in their blood,
Cover the place where late they fighting stood,
Their Chiefes enforced to yield, and Bertram there
Again by the English taken prisoner.
Stern Mars his task had to the utmost done;
Nor e're had Spain beheld a Garland won
With more renown, or conquest more complete
Than in this famous field of Naveret
Black Edward purchased; nor could ought allay
The lasting fame of that victorious day,
Save that the Prince his noble valor lost
On such a cause: that so much blood it cost
To raise a wicked Tyrant, and again
Advance Don Pedro to the Throne of Spain.
Annotations upon the seventh Book.
a Prince Edward, by the common consent of all, brought into Spain an Army
consisting of thirty thousand English, Gascoignes, and other strangers, being
for the number of themesteemed as expert soldiers as any in the world. The
cast companies of English, which had served in so many famous exploits under
himself and King Edward his father, upon this occasion came in to serve him.
King Henry of Castile had a great Army, for besides the French, which served
him under the conduct of Bertram of Clesquy, and were in number about four
thousaad men at Arms, besides many other loose troops; he had of Spaeniards,
Saracens, and others, above fourscore thousand. When it came to Battle,
Prince Edward obtained a complete victory: the slanghter, considering so great
a victory, was not much; for the Spaniards were too soon routed, and did not
in their own dear quarrel behave themselves so stoutly as their French
auxiliaries did. But there were slain of them, besides five hundred Gentlemen
of quality, above seven thousand of the common soldiers. Of the English side
were slain (of men of quality) but four Knights, two Gascoignes, one Almaine,
and the fourth an English-max; and of common soldiers about sixteen hundred,
as some write; though Froissard says, not above forty: but the other number is
more credible, considering how fiercely the battle was fought, as all agree.
There were taken Prisoners to the number of two thousand, and among them the
Earl of Dene, Sir Bertram of Clesquy, the Marshall Dandrehen, and many other
men of name.

b After this great victory Prince Edward at Burges seated the tyrant Pedro in
his Throne again; and for so great a merit the promised recompenee is required
by the Prince, which Don Pedro could not, or cared not to provide, but starving
him with delays, enforced him in the end to return to Bordeaux, without money
to pay his Army, and which was worse, without health; which he never after
recovered. Some Hystorians report that he was poisoned in Spain: others say
it was a Dropsy, of which the Prince never could be after cured. Such was the
success of this unfortunate action undertaken to right an ungrateful Tyran^,
who afterward notwithstanding was again dispossessed, taken and put to death
by his brother Henry. But the affairs of England did wonderfully suffer from
that time. The Prince to pay his soldiers (who were not able to stay Don
Pedro's leisure) coined his Plate, and when all would not serve, he fell upon a
worse misfortune (to cure a present want, with a greater and more durable
loss) seeking to lay upon his subjects in Gascoigne a new taxation, which bred
a most dangerous revolt, namely the imposition of Fevage, or Chimney money,
which so discontented the people, that they exclaim against the government of
the English, and appeal to the King and Court of France for redress. The King
of Fran^e at the instance of diverse great Lords, (although by the Articles of
accord at Brettigny he were bound to quit all homage for the ^utchy of
Aquitaine, which he might claim of the English) entertaines their complaint,
and sends to the Prince of Wales at ^urdeaux, summoning him to answer before
him and his Court at Paris concerning these matters. The Lords of Arminiague,
D'Albret, Peregot, Cominges, and many others made their protestations against
the King of England, for the Crown of France, alleging that they were by
nature to obey that, and not a strange Sovereign: that it was absolutely
against the fundamental law of the kingdom to dissever them from the Crown:
that the Contract was made in prison, and therefore by the right of Nations not
to obliege: therefore they utterly disclaimed the government of England. By
their example the Cities of the County of Ponthieu, which was King Edward his
undoubted inheritance, revolted all to the French King. King Edward complained
of this breach of Accord to the Pope and other Christian Princes, but treaties
availed little the English side, when the French hearts were weary of their
yoke, and resolved to return to their old obedience. From this time, being
the 42 year of King Edward's reign, the tide of Fortune was turned from the
English to the French side; Edward the Renowned Prince of Wales was sick of a
lingering malady, and not able to endure the travel of War; and old King
Edward was misled in England by evil servants, which caused disquiet in
Parliaments, and many distempers in the State at home. All these occasions were
politikely looked into by Charles (surnamed the Wise) King of France, who
though, forewarned by his father and Grandfathers misfortunes, he never would
venture any pitched battles against the English (for there were diverse Armies
sent over from hence after that time, but returned fruitless, as the
Chronicles will inform you) yet he omitted no opportunities of recovering his
kingdom by secret solicitations, large promises, and other wary practices; by
which as also some fortunate skirmishes of Bertram his best servant he
recovered all before the death of King Edward, except the Town of Calleis
only. Those eminent victories and great actions, by which the English had
gained so much of France, have been the subject of this Historical Poem: the
particular revolts, fly practices, and petty actions, by which insensibly it
was lost again, you may read distinctly in the Chronicles at large.

FINIS.

