Godly meditacions very necessary to be said of all Christen men.

Watch and pray lest ye fall into temptation.

Before thou prayest forgive, if thou haste any thing against any man, and
remember that thou comeste not to God with a double heart but lift up thy
hands without wrath or doubting.
O Almighty and most mercyful father, I thy poor creature and work of thy
hands, do knowledge and confess unto thee my manifold sins and wyckednes,
which I from my youth up unto this time have grievously committed against thee
in thought, word, and deed, and am now heartily sorry for the same, desiring
the for the death and bloudsheding of Jesus Christ to have mercy upon me and
forgive me al those mine offenses according to thy great mercy and promise,
which thou have made to me and al men, in Christ Jesus our Lord.

O lord I knowledge and confess unto thee, that in my flesh dweleth no good
thing, and that of my self I am not able to do that thou requirest of me to be
doe^. Therefore O lord I call unto the for grace always to preuente my will to
al goodness, assistance of the spirit in the same strength and hablenes to
perform it: O lord make me poor in spirit, vile and low in mine own sight,
that I lift not up my heart above my brethren, but that I may esteem my
self to be as a servant to al men for to do the^ good: O lord give me grace,
that whenever I be overtaken with any kind of sin and wickedness, either in
thought word or deed: or that I feel mine own infirmity or weakness, I may
immediatlye with hartye repentance return to the again. Oh lord take from
me all pride and vain glory all hautenes of mind and presumpcyon all self
love, and self trust, that I stand not to high in mine own conceypt: but
that I may be willing to learn of every man, rather the^ to teach. O lord take
fro me that wicked spirit of suspicio^ and enui: al rash indgme^tes evil
ielousye and vain surmisings, murmuring and grudging, whispering, or
backbyti^g, of any man.

O lord take from me al wrath: malice, and hastynesse, al respect of persons in
the faith, and all lying, evil words, contencion, all flatteryng,
dissimulacion, supersticion, Idolatry, and ypocrisie, al lightenesse and idle
words and all unstableness of heart.

O lrod keep me from al erroneous doctrine, and false interpretacions of
scripture. O lord take fro me al unbelief, blindness of mind, hardness of
heart, contempt of thy word and commandment:

Oh cleanse my heart from all filthiness, both of the flesh and the spirit,
from all unclean thoughts, and unlawful desires, evil concupiscence and
lust of the body O good lord. Take fro me also covetousness, all deceit and
gile in my vocation, all idelnes and slouthe, and give me not over unto an
unshamefast and obstinate mind: Oh lord make me worthy to suffer
imprisonment, loss of goods, wife, children yea, and mine own life for thy
word and names sake, and to rejoice in it, and glorify the for it. O lord make
me able and contented to bear al occasions with patience, when they be offered
or given me, and not to recompense evil for evil, neither to swel nor to
murmr, nor to be solemn, nor angry. O good lord make me very loath and slow
to give occasions of evil to any man, and if I chance to give any, make me
willing to knowledge and confess my faults, and to amend it: good lord grant
me grace that I may be willing and free to give, loath to take and receive,
because it is more blessed to give then to receive.

Oh lord grant that I never enui any good ma^s love, or women's, because they
either do love god and his people, more then I or else that they be beloved of
any more then I.

O lord make me to rejoice in other men's gifts and not to envy them, because
they be better then mine, but rather to give thanks to god with my heart
desirynge that they may be increased in them and in me.

Oh lord take fro me a careful heart in all worldly things. And grant that
neither poverty oppress me neither richesse lift me up, but ye in prosperytie
I may give thee thanks and in adversity to be pacient.

O lord make me merry in thee without lyghtnes sad without mistrust, sober
without dulnes, true without desperacio^, trusting in thee without
presumptyon.

Oh lord give me humility and a lowli mind, simplicity, mekenes, gentilnes,
goodness, faythefulnes, and truth.

O give me also tender mercy, louyngkindenes longsuffering and patience to
bear all things well that thou shall suffer to be laid upon me.

Oh lord increase my faith in the and in my redemer.

Oh lord increase and make perfect my hope in thy promise, as concerning my
salvation.

Oh lord increase my love in the and in my iustifyer. O lord increase in me a
true and unfeigned love to the, and to all virtue and godliness, and to all the
elect and chosen people, wheresoever they be dispersed in all ye world

Oh lord increase in me strength and victory, against all temptacions, and
assaults of the flesh, the world and the devil, that I be not carried away with
the error of the wicked.

Oh lord, give me grace to keep a good conscience, give me a pure heart, a-
pure mind, and a right spirit renew within me.

Oh lord give me true repentance, and thy holy spirit, and the true
understanding of the holy word, and that my whole felicity may be in the
same word, in hearing, in readinge, in talking in watchinge, prainge, and
fasting, in mortifying, and subduing mine own will and members.

Oh lord give me the true judgment of spirits, that I be neither deceived by
love nor by hate.

Oh gracious lord give me a steadfast and perfect remembrance of thy holy word,
that I may exercise my self in it day and night.

O lord have mercy on my wife and children which thou have given me, and
increase thy fear in our hearts, that we may truly love the, and one of us
an other in thee: so that we may be pure in soul and body, and to bring up
our children in virtue and informacion of the lord. O merciful god give me
soberness, pacyence, and chastity. Oh lord plant and sow in my heart all
virtues that be necessary and required in a christian man, namely wisdom,
discretyon temperaunce, strength, and boldness and give me grace so to use them
and all other gifts, which I have received at thy merciful hand, as may be
most to thy glory and profit, and to my consolacion and comfort and to the
praise of my brethren. For I do not require these peticyons. Oh lord of thee,
trusting in mine own rightousnes, no but only in thy great mercies: Oh lord
hear me. Oh forgive me lord: Oh lord consider me tarry not over long, but for
thine own sake do it Oh my god for the city and people which is called after
thy name.

Give al praise to god who alone is worthy-
Remember that ye pray for the king and the queen's majesty's grace the counsel,
and all that be in authority, or office, the congregation of God dispersed
througheoute all the woorlde,

R.L.

MOst blessed lord Jesus grant me thy grace, yt it may be always with me and
work with me: and persevere with me unto ye end, and that I may ever desire and
will that is most pleasant, and most acceptable to the, thy will be my will,
and my will always to follow thy will, and best agree therewith, be there always in
me one will, and one desire with thee, and that I have no power to will, or not
to will, but as thou will, or wilt not: and grant me that I may die to all
things yt be in thy world and for the: to love to be dispysed, and to be as a
man unknown in this world grant me also above all that can be desired, that I
may rest me in thee, and fulli in thee to pacify my heart for thou lord art
the very true peace of heart, and the perfect rest both of body and soul: and
without the al things be grievous and vnquyete: Wherefore in that peace that is
in the one high, one blessed, and one endless goodness shall I always rest
me. So be it: good lord let it be so.

O Lord God for thy great mercy sake, grant me all these my peticions, and
grant me that I may ask them in such sort as thou requirest, to the honor,
glory, and praise of thy holy name, to the profit of thy word and people and to
my co^solacio^ and comfort through Jesus Christ, to who^ be al honor and glory
world without end. Amen.

O Lord thou great and terrible God, thou yt kepest covenant and mercy with
the^ that love the, and do thy commandments, let thine ears mark, and let
thine eyes be opened that thou may hear the prayers of thy servant which I
make before thee at this time, and have mercy upon me thy poor creature and
work of thy hands, for I have sinned and done wickedly, and have offended thy
majesty greuouslye, in that I have gone back and departed from al thy precepts
and iugmentes and have not followed thy servants the prophets that spoke unto
me in in thy name, but have from day to day provoked thy just wrath and
indignacyon against me.

O Lord I knowledge and confess my manifold sins and wickedness ye which I
have vnryghteously committed against the in thought word and deed, fro my
youth up, until this day, for the which I am hertely sorry, and do
unfeignedly repent, purposyng ever more through the assistaunce of thy grace,
to walk in a new life.

O lord remember not the number of my mise-dedes, but according unto thy
great mercyes, think upon me O lord for thy goodness.

O Lord for Christ's sake call to remembrance thy louingkindnesse and thy
tender merci ye which has been ever of old.

O lord hide not thou thy face fro me, nor cast not of thy servant in thy
displeasure, for I confess my sins unto the, and hyde not mine
unrighteous.

O lord for thy mercies sake, deliver me from al my sins and make me not a
scorn unto the folyshe.

O Lord turn not thou thy mercy fro me, but let thy louyngkyndnes and truth
always preserve me. O lord help me for thy name sake, and deliver me in
thy strength. O lord for Christ's sake hear my prayer, and consider the
words of my mouth, for my misdedes prevail against me. O be thou merciful
unto my sins.

O lord let the sorrowful syghyng of thy prisoner come before thee, and
according to the power of thine arm preserve those that be appointed to dye.

O Lord comfort the soul of thy servant, for unto thee do I lift up my
soul.

O lord teach me to number my days: that I may apply my heart unto
wysoome.

O lord satisfy me with thy merci, and that soon, so shall I rejoice and be
glad all the days of my life.

O lord look not extremli what is done amiss in me, for I have sinned against
heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son yet Lord
of thy great goodness power doowne some of thy cro^mes that fall from thy
childrenes table, and make me as one of the least of them.

O lord reward me not according to my deseruynge, for then I must needs
perish, for unto me pertains nothing but open shame, confusyon, and
da^pnacion: but with thee there is mercy forgeuenes and salvation.

O lord therefore do I come unto thee, not hoping in mine own righteousness
but trusting only in thy great mercies and promises, made unto me in Christ
Jesus my Lord, for whose sake I beeseche thee to cleanse me from all my sins,
and do away al mine iniquities.

O lord for thy tender mercy sake lay not my sins to my charge, but give
me grace to amend my life, and walk in a pure conversation, to decline from
sin, and incline to virtue yt I may thereby walk in a perfect heart, a
clean conscience, and single eye before the, this day and evermore. ^ight


O Lord remember not mine offenses nor the offenses of my forefathers neither
take thou vengaunce of my sins, spare me good Lord, spare me, whom thou have
redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with me for ever,
spare me good lord, spare me.

O lord put me not from thy presence, but inclyne thine ear unto my calling. O
lord strengthen thy servant, and healpe the son of thy ha^dmayde^,

O lord replenishe my heart with grace wisdom and understanding.

O Lord embrace my soul with thy promises, and let thy mercies cover mine
infyrmities.

O Lord for Christ's death and blood sheading, consider mine infirmityes
which are many, and help and bear mine imperfectyon, and deliver me from al
kinds of euylles, that I do not obey unto them: as from adulterye,
fornicacyon, uncleanness, wanto^nes, ydolatrie, good Lord deliver me. From
witchecraft, lying, hatred, variaunce, zeal, wrath, strife, sedicion good
lord deliver me. From sects, envying, whispering, backbytyng, bryngyng up of
evil things, good lord deliver me. From murder, dronkennes, glouttony, and
from that spirit of evil ielousy, good lord deliver me. From enuyinge of
other which love thee and thy people more then I, or be beeloued of the or of
thy people more then I, and from swellyng at other me^nes gifts, good lord
deliver me. From surmising, murmuring, lowering, grudgyng, muttri^g, when words
be not spoked to my mi^d, good Lord for thy great mercies sake deliver me, that
I do at no time envy any good manne or womans love, but labor to increase it,
that their prosperity in word, and praise of other may be my co^solacio^
and reioising.

O lord grant me that I may be low in mine own sight, to put down my self
to bear occasyons, to wrestle with flesh and blood, and get the victori.

O lord grant me this gift, that I may be swift to hear, slow to speak and
slow to wrath, that my heart do not go after no wicked and evil
imaginacions. O lord give me grace to walk so, that I give none evil
occasions, to avoid all suspicious things, whereby evil occasions may grow.

O lord assist me with thy spirit, that I may labor to mai^tayne peace to
increase love and to further virtue.

O merciful father, grant that I may prosper in all virtue, in long
suffering, gentilnes, goodness, faithefulnes, meekness, temperaunce, strength,
and patience, with all such like virtues as ar commanded me to walk in thy
holy law. O lord give me joy in thy holy ghost, that I may rejoice in thy
holy scriptures, yt al my whole pleasure, joy, felycitye, and consolacyon,
may be in thy holy word night and day, in reading, musyng, and talking of the
same to thy glory, and my edifying. O lord assist thy servant against this
world, with ye vain pomp, pleasure and beutie thereof, that it may be unto me
as vile dust, slime filthiness, and ashes, that I may have this world as
though I had it not, and that it may serve me, and I not it, that I may take
my part thereof with thankesgeuyng unto my necessity, that I do not use thy
creatures voluptuousli, but that I may at all times live ryghteously, soberly
and godly in this life.

O lord give me grace, to walk with a good conscience both before thee and
toward al men, in bying and sellyng and in all other my doings to cast away
all lying, craft and disceit, that I be not a reader of thy holy word and a
talker only, but that it may appear also in my life and conuersacyon.

O lord grant unto thy servant the strength of thy holy spirit to subdue this
my body of synue, with the hole lusts there of, that it may be made
obedyente, both in will, mind, and members to do thy will, that it may be
weak, vile, simple, and of no reputacion in his own sight, by the way of
fasteng, prayer, and obedience with a sure faith in thy promyses made in thy
son Christ Jesus my Lord, that I may be lowlye hearted, humble minded,
gentyl spyryted, and to all virtues obedyente.

O lord give me grace to bridle my mouth from al vain and light
communicatio^, and give me an understanding heart with a discrete mouth, that
neither filthiness nor folysh talking, nor iesti^g which are not comelye,
proceed out of my mouth but rather giving of thanks. O lord my savior,
increase my faith to the and in thy christ, and strong faith to believe thy
promises. O lord my redeemer, increase my love to do thy will, and to thy
righteous people.

O lord my iustifyer increase in me a sure hope of my salvation, without doubt
or waueri^g in adversity, and without pride or presumpcio^, in prosperity, so
that in adversity I may be pacient, and give the thanks in prosperity, and
serve thee with reverence and godly fear all the days of my life.

O lord increase in me all other virtues consonaunt and agreeable to a godly
life, for I com unto thee O Lord, as unto the well and everlasting fountain of
all health and salvation.

O heavenly father let me and all other where soever they be dispersed
througheoute the whole world, live in thy sight, which seek thy holy word to
ye intent to forsake sin and all worldly living, and to lead a godly
conversation innocently before the.

O lord defend thy servant from all error, and false opinions, that I be
not deceived and carried away in error of the wicked, but that I may grow in
grace and knoweledge of our lord and savior Jesus Christ.

O lord give me a pure judgment and a reuerente in thy holy word, that I may
thereby avoid all vain affeccions and rash judgments.

O lord give me wisdom, knowledge and understanding to perceive those false
lyinge, flattering spirits, which do deceive the hearts of inno centes,
and begyle unstable souls.

O lord make me to be content with this woman which thou have given me to be
my wife, Let wom^^ sai ((...) man^ both the p^cyo^
and let her love always satisfy me. O lord give her an heart of
understanding, and set thy fear always before her eyes, that she may be
obedient in word, deed and thought to al yt is thy will O lord give us ye power
of thy holy spirit, to rule, govern, and bring up these our children, and
family in all godly fear and knoweledge of thy holy word, and that we may
be their shewtoken, in all godliness and virtue to the praise of thy holy name.

O lord save my soul whether it be through prosperytye or aduersytye, loss or
gain, syckenesse or health, life or death.

O lord, aid, strength, succoure and defend thy servant in all aduersytye,
tribulacion, and te^ptacion, and suffer not thy servant to be tempted above
his strength.

O lord increase my joy that I may rejoice in persecucyon and embrace it to my
consolacion and coumeforte, and think my seelfe happy and blessed, when I am
counted worthy to suffer reebuke for thy name sake. O lord take fro my heart
the care of all worldelye things only set before my eyes ye joy of thy holy
cross, that I may joy therein, and despise ye shame for the great reward that
is laid up in heaven for christ's sake, for all those that with patience suffer
in adversity, and continue in well doing unto ye end.

O lord lay not presumption to thy servants charge, nor look not upon my
vileness, for I am but duste earth and ashes, yet Lord I have taken upon me,
and am bold to com unto the through the merytes of Christ's death and blood
sheddyng, to lay my prayers before thee, requyrynge mercy, pardon, and
forgeuenes of al my sins, and also the assistaunce of thy grace to do thy
will all the days of my life, and to obtain all these my peticio^s through
Jesus Christ thy dear son and my only Sauyoure, to whom be al honor and
glory now and ever Amen.

By me John Ledley.

A godly prayer for all Christen men.
O Almyghtye and euerlyuyng God of all things, before whose eyes al things
lies naked and bare, have a respect unto me (O thou God of my life and show
me the light of thy mercyes. Let my prayers asce^d up before thy presence and
be accepted in thy sight for Jesus Christ's sake. Give me seed unto my heart
(Oh lord and buyld my understanding that I may dwell in the fear of thy hand
all the days of my life, that I may know the, thou only true god, and Jesus
Christ, who^ thou have sent For I com unto the (Oh Lord) thou lover of souls,
not hoapyng in mine own righ teousnesse, but trustinge only upon the
multitude of thy great mercies which thou haste laid forth before the eyes of
al people, offering salvation to the whole world, and have promised, that
whosoever he be of the whole generation of man, that will obey to thy grace,
repent, and turn unfeignedly from their sins that they should have fre
remissyon and forgeuenes through Jesus christ our lord which is our only
advocate and mediator, in whom our saluatyon lies, of whom thou have said:
This is my dear son, in whom I am well pleased and well pacyfyed. For this
thy sons sake, by whom I am bold to come unto thee, which appears now in
thy sight, making contynuall intercessyon for us, have mercy upon me (O thou
mighty god) and forgive me all my sins which I have un ryghteouslye
committed against thee in thought word, or deed. Oh let me feel thy mercies
toward me, for I do confess my sins unto the (Oh lord and hide not mine
unrighteousness I do acknowledge mine offenses, and accuse my self before the
Lord of all my misdedes help me O god my savior for the glory of thy name. O
deliver and forgive me my sins for ye glory of thy names sake. Remember not
the offenses of my youth, O lord but think upon thy great mercyes and
covenant, made unto me in Christ Jesus. O most merciful father, consider mine
infirmities, which are many and great, and bear mine imperfection for thy
son my savior Jesus Christ's sake which had good experience of infyrmityes,
that he might be merciful to all them that are tempted. O Lord consider how the
enemy has gotten an open way into my flesh wherein I confess that there
dwells nothing but sin, wretchedness and misery.

Therefore I come unto the O Lord my God, desyryng thee for Christ's sake to
renew in me a right spirit, that I may receive strength and hablenes to do
thy will, and to stand against all the crafty assaults of ye devil, that
they may have no place in me, but that the old manne, which I bear about
in my body may be crucified, and daily dye in me, that ye lusts of sin may
utterly be destroyed, yt I may evermore be renewed in ye spirit of my mind, yt
the life of christ may always appear in me. Good lord deliver me from all
kinds of evil, as fornication, covetousness, maliciousnes envy, murder, debate
deceyte: good lord deliver me from whisperyng, backbytynge, hatynge of thee
and from evil yelousye, from doing of wrong, pride, boasti^g, from bringyng
up of evil things: good lord deliver me from adultri, vain glory, ipocrisie,
wantonness, ydolatrye, witchecraft, hatred, variaunce, zeal, wrath, strife,
sedicion, sects, envying dronkennes, gluttony, and such like.

Good lord for thy great mercyes sake deliver me and grant me grace (O Lord)
to have thee always before mine eyes, that I may also have a respect unto
thy judgments, that whatsoever I think, say, or do, may be agreeable to thy
holy word, that I be not mindeed as the ungodly or wicked men are. Let me
have no pleasure in such things as please them: make me low in mine own
syghte (O Lord) that the foot of pride overtake me not. Let not the hand of
the ungodly cast me down, but bow my heart always unto thee, that I may
serve thee without fear all the days of my life in such holiness and
righteousness, as is acceptable before thee. Remove from me vanytyes and lies,
take fro me the lusts of the body. Let not the desires of uncleanness take
hold upon me, and give me not over unto an unshamefast and obstinate mind:
but hold me always under thy nourture and correction. Of thy fatherlye mercy
leave me not to my self, but stand thou always by me, for I am to weak of
mine own power to do any thing yt is good, but my righteousness and
strength lies only in thee. Therefore (Oh Lord) I come unto thee, requyring
mercy in thy syghte, and the assistau^ce of thy grace, that I may be
strengthened with might in ye inward man, and be armed with thy holy armoure,
which is the breast plate of rightousnes, the shyld of faith the hope of
salvation for an helmet, and the sword of the spyryte which is thy holy
word, that I may stand perfect in all that is thy will, and be found
worthy (through christ) to receive a croune of life, which thou have promised
to al them that love thee in pureness of mind. O Lord, plant in me true
obedience to thy holy law that the cares of this world choke not thy word in
me. Keep me also from the deceitfulnes of riches, and al uncleanly desires,
that all virtues may be planted in me. Good Lord give me grace to walk
before thee all the days of this my pilgremag with a good conscience and pure
mind that when thou shall appear to reward every manne according to his
deeds, I may rejoice and not be made ashamed of thee at thy coming. Increase
my faith O lord my savior in the, and in thy Christ. Increase my love O my
redemer to thee, and to thy righteous people, Increase a sure hope in me of my
salvation, O my iustifyer. Increase strength in me to ouercom sin, and to
stand against all evil temptacyons, that theye have no place in me. Increase
in me perfect understanding and pure judgment in thy word, that I be, not
deceived and carried away in the error of ye wicked. But grant (O Lord) that
I may grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and savior Jesus
Christ. Let thy kingdom come unto me, which is righteousness, peace, and joy
in thy holy ghost, longesufferyng, ge^tilnes, goodness faythfulnes,
meekness, te^peraunce, strength and pacyence, with all such like virtues as
are prescribed unto me in thy holy word, that in prosperous things I may give
thee thanks, and in adversity be pacient, that I be not lyfted up with the
one nor oppressed with ye other. O let all worldely things be vile unto me for
thee. Let me not be merye with the joy that is without thee, and let me
desire nothing besyd the. Make me to lift my heart oftentimes to the. And if I
chance to fall or slip, make me to thynk on the and be sorry with a stedefaste
purpose of amendment, O Lord I give over my self into thy holy hands,
desyryng the for Christ's sake, yt I may remain under thy mighty protection,
and strong defense of thy power, and that thy holy aungel may always pytche
his tent round about me, and keep me in all my ways. Good Lord give me
the joyfulness of heart and peace of conscience, contynual gladness and
co^solacyo^ in thy word and promises yt I may evermore be thakfull unto thee,
and praise thy name, O lord think upon all thy people, which are strawed here
and there from the farthest parts of ye earth which be entered into covenant
with the and ar minded to walk after thy will, grant (Oh lord that we may grow
together in love through the knoweledge of thy holy word, to keep the unity
of the spririte, through the bond of peace, to the utter confounding of
error, and all false opinions and to keep us clean from ypocrysye and
superstycion, and to make us strong in pesecution. We beseech the to hear us
good Lord.

Give praise to God.
I. H.

O Lord most mighty and fearful god, to all them that hate thee, and that
follow their own ways, and seek not to do thy will, we thy simple
creatures, which labor to do thy will, O merciful god, do see by thy
righteouse judgment of thy word, thy fearse wrath and terrible indignacion
against this realine of England, O lord, for despisyng of thy preachers and
messengers, and for treading under foot thy most holy word, and now we see thy
wrath is kindled. O lord, who shall be hable to quench it, and we for our
parts, O lord, do confess that we be worthi of al ye plagues yt thou have
devised against us, o most mighty god, yet nevertheless, we beseech the most
merciful father vnworthi to be called thy children, look not upon our deserts,
or worthynes, but upon thy favorable mercy, which thou had in the old
time upon the children of Israel, if they repented unto the, o lord thou
did preserve the^ and kept them from captivity of all other nacyons, and
did ever prouyd them a faithful gouerner or ruler. And furthemore most
merciful father although they were destroyed for their wickedness, and left
but a small people, yet nevertheless, when they turned unfeignedly to the,
thou O lord ever gave them the victory over all their enemies, so that they
might dwell as breethren togeether, peaceably in their- own land, which thou
gaueste them. Thou art the same lord, and thy mercy endures for ever, and now
O lord we that seek to do thy will, being but a small people, do beseech thee of
thy great mercy, for Jesus Christ's sake our only peace maker to turn
away thy great wrath; and terrible indignation, which we have deserved in this
realm of England, and show thy compassion upon us good Lord, as thou
dyddeste upon the children of Israel in the old time, though not for our
sakes O Lord which have deserved thy wrath, but for thy most mighty and
glorious names sake, O lord: for if thou shouldeste destroy us, and bring us
to desolacyon, as we have deserved, the^ should thy most mighty name, and
thy holy word be evil spoken of through us in all ye world Wherefore we
beseech the most merciful father, to nurture and correct us, not as we have
deserved, but with thy favorable mercy, not in thy furye, but with thy
fatherly pytye and deliver us not over into the hands of our enemies, neither
take not thy holy word from us, O Lord, and here we confess unto the, O
lord all our wickedness, the which are more in number then the hears of our
head and they press us so down, O Lord, that our hearts almost fails
us, and we dare skarsely presume unto the.

Yet nevertheless, through CHRIST which is our ryghteousnes, and has pacyfyed
thy wrath we are bold to come unto thee, O lord being sorye for our faults,
even from our very hearts, desyri^g thee for his death and passions sake,
which is our only mediatoure and redemer: to forgive us all our sins: that
ever we have committed either in thought, word or deed, and now, O lord, we
give over our selves into thy holy hands, and with all our hearts do desire
to do whatsoever thou would have us to do, beseching the, O lord to assyst
us with ye grace of thy holy spirit, that we hence forth may live according
to thy most godly and blessed will, and that we may labor and study to serve
the in newnes of life, and that we may willingly take up ye cross and follow
thy steps, O lord Christ all the days of our life. And furthermore, O Lord,
we beseech thee to give us grace to be thankful in our conversation, and
living, for all the great benefits yt we have received at thy hand, so that
we may enjoy them to thy glory, and our comfort. First, we thank thee, O
Lord of thy great mercy and recreacion. Secondli, we thank thee, O lord, that
when we were fallen into destruction, through our consenting to the subtlety
of the enemy, thou of thy great mercy dyddeste by Jesus Christ raise us up
again. And we thank thee, O Lord, that it has pleased thee to suffer thy
holy word the food of our souls, to have free passage among us, and haste
given us a will to seek it, and a defyre to believe it. Furthermore we thank
the, O Lord for Mary our Queen, which thou have given us to be our ruler and
governor under thee, whom thou haste delivered us by thy wisdom through thy
great power and mighty arm, from the hands of all her enemies, we beseech
thee, O Lord, to give her wisdom from thy holy heavens, and from the throne of
thy majesty, yt she may rule all yt thou have made her governor of, according
to thy most holy and blessed will, o lord and that she may labor and desire
to follow al things that are written in thy holy law, all the days of her
life, and that she may through thee, O Lord, be stablished in her kingdom,
and ouercom all her enemies and ours, as these most godly and verteous women.
Debora and Judith did, who by their godly conuersacyon with prayer and
obedience through thee O Lord overcame the enemies of the children of Israel
in the old time.

And that thou would vouchesafe, O Lord, to give grace and wysdom to al
them that thou have appointed to have rule over us, that they may obey to thy
will O lord, and exercise them selves in thy laws both day and night, with
fervent prayer obedyentely, and that they may desire too execute their office,
according to thy will, O lord and that we as loving subjects may (not for
fear of punyshemente, but for conscience sake) obeie to our Queen and
governor in all things that is agreeable to thy will O Lord, and to all them
that are in auctoritye over us, and we beeseche thee, O Lord for Christ's
sake, that every one of us, both high and low in his degree, may walk in
our conuersacyon, here in England, as may be to thy glory, O Lord, and to
the comfort and edyfying of all other nations that whereas they backebyte us
as evil dooers, theye may see our good works and praise GOD in the day of
vysytacyon.

O Lord give peace in our time. Amen.

Have mercy on the congregation dispersed over all the yearthe.

Give God the praise.
A prayer necessary to be said at all times.
O Bountiful Jesus, O sweet Savior O Christ the son of God, have pity upon
me mercifully hear me and despise not my prayers. Thou have created me of
nothing, thou have redeemed me from the bondage of sin, death, and hell
neither with gold nor silver, but with thy moosle precious body once offered
upon the cross, and thine own blood shede once for all for my ransom,
therefore cast me not away, whom thou by thy great wisdom have made,
despise me not who^ thou haste redeemed with such a precious treasure. Nor let
my wyckednes destroy that, which thy goodness has builded. Now whiles I
live, O Jesus have mercy on me, for if I dye out of thy favor, it will be to
late afterward to call for thy mercy, whiles I have time to repent, look
upon me with thy merciful eyes, as thou did vouchesafe to look upon
Peter thine Apostle, that I may bewail my sinful life and obtain thy
favor, and dye therein. I reknowledge the if thou should deal with me
according to very justice, I have deserved everlasting deeathe.

Therefore I appeal to thy high throne of mercy, trusting to obtain Gods
favor, not for my merytes, but for thy merits, o Jesus, who have given thy
self an acceptable sacrifyce to thy father, to pease his wrath, and to bring
all sinners truly repenting and amendynge their evil life into his favor
again. Accept me O Lord among the number of the^ that shall be saved, forgive
my sins, give me grace to lead a godly and innocent life, grant me thy
heavenly wisdom, enspyre my heart with faith, hope, and charity give me
grace to be humble in prosperytye, pacyent in aduersytye, obediente to my
rulers, faithefull unto them that trust me dealing truly with all men, to live
chastelye in wedlock, to abhor adultry, fornicacion, and al uncleanness, to do
good after my power unto all men, to hurt no man that thy name may be
gloryfyed in me, during this present life, and that I afterward may obtain
everlasting life through thy mercy and the merytes of thy passion. Amen.

Another godly prayer.
O Heavenly father, God almighty, I pray and beseech thy mercy, beninglye to
behold me thy unworthy servant, that I may by gift of thy holy spyrite,
fervently desire thy kingdom, that I may know thy will, and work thereafter.
Give me (O Lord) wisdom: Make me constant, pacient, and strong in thee. Keep
me lord, from the sleyghtie invasion of the old wily serpent. Defend me from
the counsayles and cursings of evil tongues: Let thy mighti arm be my
shild against all ye malignitie of this wicked world. Remember not (O Lord)
mine offenses: instruct, and prepare me to repent, to be sorye for my sins.
Make me to love justice and hate wrong, to do good, and absteyne from all
euels: that I may be worthy, to be called thy child. To thee be honor and
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Another prayer.
THe lord our god be with us, as he has benne with our fathers, and forsake
us not neither wtdraw his hand from us. But be gracyous unto us, and think
upon his covenant that he has made with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob his
faithful servants: and give us all such an heart that we may love and
serve him, yea: and perform his will with an hole heart and of a willing
mind. He open our hearts, (Further and further) in his laws and in his
commandments, send us his peace, hear our prayers, be at one with us, and
never forsake us in the time of trouble. But to bow our hearts unto him, that
we may walk in all his ways here on earth and to keep his commandments,
ordinances, and laws, which he commanded our fathers, and that our hearts
may be perfect to walk with God all ye days of our lives, this grant for
thy dear sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord and only sauyoure. Amen.

FINIS.

