THE ENGLISH CATECHISM EXPLAINED OR, A COMENTARIE ON THE SHORT CATECHISM set
forth in the Book of Common Prayer.

WHEREIN DIVERSE NECESSARY Questions touching the Christian Faith are inserted,
modern Controversies handled, doubts resolved; and many Cases of Conscience
cleared.

Profitable for Ministers in their Churches, for Schoolmasters in their
Schools, and for Householders in their Families.

By JOHN MAYER, Bachelour of Divinity.

The second Edition reviewed.

LONDON, Printed by Augustine Mathewes for John Marriot, and are to be sold at
his Shop in Saint Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1622.

TO MY REVEREND BRETHREN, THE PASTOVRS OF Parochial Congregations in the
Church of England.
Reverend Brethren, ever since my first entering into a Pastoral charge, I have
applied mine endeauours, by Catechizing to instruct the ignorant. And because I
would not be irregular, my Theme has always been the short Catechism, set
forth in the Book of Common Prayer, a Catechism indeed, solely appointed to
be first taught; but to the great detriment of our Church either wholly
neglected, any other being preferred, or barely taught without any further
explanation, or else for outward formality only in Lent set upon the Table, as
a dish appropriated to that Fast. My study has been first to mend this fault
for my own particular, and therefore I have diverse years labored constantly
throughout the year, by this kind of teaching to form in my hearers some
distinct knowledge of our Christian Principles: and having at length come to my
intended period, I digested the pith of all my Collections and Meditations into
this Book, herein imitating Vrsinus upon Melanctons short Catechism, so
useful to young Students in Theology, and to other studious persons. The
labor thus ended, being conscious to my self of mine own weakness, I suppressed
it three or four years, till that being animated by some of you (my Brethren)
who had either seen or heard hereof, I have adventured to bring it into
public view. The work I confess is ordinary and worthles; but for form it
is alone, and so may crave entertainment. Here are collected into one all
fundamental points, of the true Christian Religion, sparsedlie handled in
diverse learned Books, and applied to the short English Catechism. It is a
Catechism and a Comentarie, the one for Children, short, and fitted to their
capacity, the other for men, leading to a larger map of Christian Principles,
and fitted for the edification of all. To have written a large new Catechism
without an old text, had bin superfluous amongst so many already abroad, but to
write for the illustrating of the Text, to which we English must all hold us,
is very necessary. In publishing this, I take not upon me to prescribe a form
unto any, my self being the least amongst thousands, but I whet on all, what I
can, to an uniform proceeding by our common grounds. We have all one God, one
Christ, one Baptism, one Gospel, and one form of Articles of Religion, to
which we subscribe; why then should we not all consent in one Catechism? Our
Mother the Church of England, has first commanded this one Catechism, upon
which is my Commentary. If therefore my inward wishes may break forth into
open request, I would crave that it might please the right Reverend Fathers of
our Church, more strictly to press the teaching of our common Catechism in
their several Jurisdictions: and you my Brethren, who do already teach it in
your several Parishes, to labor in it with all diligence, and to bring it in,
and commend it to the private exercise of your people in their families,
amongst whom it has hitherto been much neglected. And I beseech you all
favorably to accept this my present act, and where I have faulted, correct me;
where I have failed, supply me; where I have done rightly, join with me. If
this may be any thing, though but goats hair, toward the Lords Sanctuary, I
shall be glad, and give God the glory. Our great Shepherd, the Lord Jesus, who
has laid down his life for his sheep, make this and all the endeauours of
his Servants, fruitful pastures for the comfort of his flock, and for the
praise of his holy and glorious name. Amen.

Your fellow-Seruant in the work of the Ministry. JOHN MAYER.

A TABLE OF THE QVESTIONS AND Answers added unto those of the Catechism,
handled in this Commentary.
Question. WHom do the Articles of your faith concern? Answ. The first part
of them concerns God: the second, the Church of God. 21 Quest. In the first
part concerning God, what learn you to believe? Answ. First, I learn to
believe in God the Father; secondly, in God the Son; thirdly, in God the holy
Ghost. 21 Quest. How know thou that there is a God? Answ. Many ways: but
chiefly, by mine own conscience, accusing me for secret sins, which cannot be
but unto an infinite wisdom, that knows the most secret thoughts of the
heart, such as is neither man, devil, nor Angel, but God alone. 22 Quest. How
many Gods be there? Answ. But one only true God, the rest are Idols set up by
man. Quest. What is God? Answ. He is a spiritual Essence, most simple,
infinitely present, holy, wise, just, merciful, and mighty; the creator,
preserver, and only governor of the whole world. 23 Quest. Into how many
Persons is the Godhead distinguished? Answ. Into three, the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost. 24 Quest. If in the Godhead there be three persons, and every one
be God, how say you then, that there is but one God? Answ. Although there be
three persons, yet is there but one only God in substance, one infinite power,
and one eternity. 25 Quest. What learn you to believe concerning God the
father, and in which words? Answ. I learn to believe that God is my Father,
able to do all things: the creator of the whole world, and the Lord and
governor of the same in these words, I believe in God the Father almighty,
maker of heaven and earth. 26 Quest. In which words learn you to believe in
God the Son? Answ. In these; And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord,
etc. From thence he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead. 32 Quest.
What learn you to believe here concerning God the Son? Answ. Two things:
First, his humiliation; secondly, his exaltation. Quest. What is the Son of
God, who is also called Jesus Christ? Answ. He is perfect God by nature, and
one substance with the Father, and perfect man, made so of his own good will,
that he might become our Redeemer, and thus is he subject to the Father. 33
Quest. How can this be that God should be made man? Answ. Not by turning the
Godhead into the nature of man, but by taking man's nature unto the Godhead,
that so one person might be both God and man. 33 Quest. What need was there
that the Son of God should thus abase himself to become man? Answ. Great
need on our behalf, who could not be delivered by Angels, or by earthly
treasures, but only by his precious blood. 35 Quest. Does sin deserve so
ill, that we could not by other satisfactorie means be delivered heerefrom,
but by the death of the Son of God? Answ. Yes, it deserves the infinite curse
of the Law, that is, all judgments in this world, and everlasting damnation in
the world to come. 35 Quest. If he must needs be made fit to bear the curse,
why did he not to this and take unto him some other nature more excellent?
Answ. Man only had sinned, it was most agreeable to the Justice of God; to
receive the payment of the debt of sin, in the same nature of sin, which
committed it. 36 Quest. How came it to be thus with us men, were we created
sinners? Answ. No, God at the first made man righteous, but by yielding to the
devils temptation, he made himself a sinner. 37 Quest. Wherein did man yield
to the temptation of the Devil. Answ. In eating of the forbidden fruit, and
not contenting himself with all other fruits, of which the Lord had allowed
him to eat. 37 Quest. Was God so angry, that he would curse man for eating an
apple, or fig, or such like? Answ That was not the matter of Gods anger, but
his unthankfulness, pride, disobedience, and crediting rather the Devil, then
God. 37 Quest. But though one man did thus, yet all did not, are we all then
sinners, and under the curse? Answ. We were all in his loins, and so
whatsoeu^r he did, and what estate he fell into, it is common to us all. 38
Quest. It seems then, that we are sinners so soon as we are borne, before
that we have actually done either good or evil. Answ. Yes verily, the child
that is but newborn, yea, but conceived, and living in his mothers womb, is
a sinner, and needs Gods grace. 39 Quest. I perceive then that we are all in
a miserable estate by nature: but you tell me of Jesus Christ, that he was
humbled for us, wherein stands this his humiliation, and in which words is it
set forth? Answ. It is set forth in these words: And in Jesus Christ his only
Son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin
Marie, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified; dead and buried: and of
this his humiliation there be three degrees. 39 Quest. Which is the first
degree, and in which words? Answ. First, his Incarnation, set forth in these
words: which was conceived by the holy Ghost borne of the Virgin Mary. 40
Quest. Which is the second degree, and in which words? Answ. He suffered the
death of the Cross, for my sins, set forth in these words; He suffered under
Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried. 48 Quest. Which is the third
degree of his humiliation, and in which words? Answ. He descended into hell,
that I might be delivered from hell, and everlasting death, in these words: He
descended into Hell. 58 Quest. Is this all the humiliation of the son of God
for our redemption, did he no way else abase himself for us? Answ. Yes, he
became obedient to the law also, that by his obedience and righteousness, we
might stand perfectly righteous in the sight of God. 64 Quest. In which words
is his exaltation set down, and how many be the degrees hereof? Answ. In these
words; the third day he arose again from the dead, and ascended up into
heaven, there he sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty: from
thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead; and of this be four
degrees also. 67 Quest. Which is the first, and in which words? Answ. First, he
arose again from death to life. 68 Quest. Which is the second? Answ. And he
ascended up into heaven, in these words: the third day he arose, etc. 68 Quest.
Which is the third, and in which words? Answ. Thirdly, he has all honor,
power, and authority in heaven, and in earth, together with God the Father, in
these words: He sits on the right hand, etc. 79 Quest. Which is the fourth
degree, and in which words? Answ. Fourthly, he shall come from heaven, at the
end of the world, to judge all that shall then be found living, and all that
have died since the world began in these words; From thence he shall come, etc.
84 Quest. What learn we to believe concerning God the holy Ghost, and in which
words? Answ. That he is God equal with the Father, and the Son, and the
sanctifier of all the elect people of God, in these words; I believe in the
holy Ghost. 91 Quest. Which is the second part of your articles of faith,
concerning the Church of God? Answ. I believe the holy Catholic Church, the
Communion of Saints, etc. 98 Quest. What learn you to believe here concerning
Gods Church? Answ. Four things. 98 Quest. Which is the first? Answ. First, I
learn to believe that God has a Church, consisting of a certain number of
true belieuers, of whom some be in heaven, and some be upon earth, and that I
my self am a member of the same. 98 Quest. Which is the second? Answ. I learn
to believe, that Gods Church is holy, that is sanctified and washed by water,
and the holy Ghost, and such as daily grows in holiness, until at the last
it comes to be presented before God, without spot or wrinkle of sin. 118
Quest. Which is the third? Answ. I learn to believe, that Gods Church is
Catholic, consisting of persons of all sorts, scattered all over the world,
and of all times and ages. 127 Quest. How may a man certainly know where this
Church of God is? Answ. By these two special marks, holiness taught and
professed, and antiquity when they go together. 138 Quest. Is not the Church
of Rome then the ^^ue Church of God, seeing it exceeds in holiness, and is
most ancient. Answ. No: It was a true Church indeed in the Apostles times, and
many years after, but now it is neither holy, for great uncleanness is there
maintained: nor ancient; for the ancient, for the ancient Religion is defaced
with gross errors and superstitions. 138 Quest. Where then may we find the
true Church? Answ. In England, and in all other places where these corruptions
are done away, and Religion is restored to the first purity. 138 Quest. How
can this be, seeing the Religion here professed is but as it were of
yesterday, and never heard of before Luther and Calvin. Answ. This is a mere
slander, for there was never any age since the Apostles, wherein there have not
been some standing to the maintenance hereof, against Romish corruptions. 138
Quest. How happened it then, that the church of Rome still ever prevailed, and
was generally accounted for Christ's true Church, and those oppugners were
never of any esteem? Answ. By the greatness and tyranny of the Roman
Bishops, whose chief care has bin most ever since Constantines time, to
magnify their own Church, and themselves, and to suppress their adversaries.
138 Quest. But is it possible, that the Roman Church having been once a true
Church, should fall, seeing God has promised his spirit unto his Church, to be
always present, leading it into all truth? Answ. The Lord tieth not his spirit
to any place, for then the famous Churches in Asia, should still have been
true Churches, but the spirit is always present to the faithful in all places
of the world. 139 Quest. Which is the fourth thing that you learn to believe
concerning the Church? Answ. That there be certain special benefits belonging
to the Church, and to every true member thereof, viz. The Communion of Saints,
the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting. 139 Quest. What mean you by the Communion of Saints? Answ. That
holy and sweet fellowship, which all the members of Christ's Church have one
with another, as they all make but one body in Christ, so communicating all
good things unto one another, whether spiritual or temporal, as their mutual
necessities do require. 139 Quest. What mean you by the forgiveness of
sins? Ans. That wonderful grace of God in Jesus Christ, whereby he passes
over our transgressions as if they had never bin committed, and releaseth the
punishment due for them. 148 Quest. What mean you by the resurrection of the
body? Answ. That though the body after death lie rotting in the grave, yet at
the last day it shall be raised by Gods power, and being joined to the soul,
shall stand before Gods judgment seat, to give account of all that it has
done, whether good or evil, and be rewarded accordingly. 155 Quest. What manner
of bodies shall we have in the resurrection? Answ. The very same which now we
have, only whereas they be now natural, they shall rise again spiritual, not
subject to death any more, nor sustained by natural means, of meats and
drinks, and sleep, and the like. 159 Quest. Amongst those that dye, some are
crooked through age, some tender infants, some blind, and some lame, shall
their bodies at the resurrection then be the same? Answ. No, for all these are
weaknesses, which shall be done away to the faithful, and strength, perfection,
and comeliness shall be to every one of them. 159 Quest. What mean you by the
life everlasting? Answ. All that euer-induring happiness, and all those joys
which the Lord imparteth to all his elect in the world to come, which are so
great, as that the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, neither can the heart
conceive thoroughly. 163
Concerning the Law.
Quest. Thou said, that thou were bound to keep the Commandments of
Almighty God, which be they? Answ. God spoke these words, and said, I am etc.
171 Quest. How many things do thou learn out of these Commandments? Answ.
Two things, my duty toward God, and my duty toward my Neighbor. 172 Quest.
How are the Commandments divided? Answ. Into two Tables. 189 Quest. In which
Table do you learn your duty toward God? Answ. In the first, containing
the four former Commandments. 191 Quest. How many be the parts of every of
these Commandments? Answ. Two, the Commandment it self, and the reason of
it. 191 Quest. In which words is the first Commandment contained, and which
is the reason? Answ. The Commandment is, Thou shall have none other Gods but
me: the reason in these words, I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out
of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. 196 Quest. What are we
here commanded? Answ. To have the Lord for our God, that is, to love him above
all, to fear him above all, to put our whole trust in him, and to make our
prayers to him alone. 196 Quest. What is here forbidden? Answ. First,
Atheism, which is the acknowledgement of no God: Secondly* ^gnorance, which is
a neglect of the knowledge of God and of his word: Thirdly, prophanenes, which
is a regardlesnes of God and of his special service: Fourthly, inward
idolatry, which is the giving of Gods worship unto creatures, by praying unto
them, trusting in them, or by setting the heart upon them. 201 Quest. Whence is
the reason of this command taken? Answ. Both from the equity of it, because
he is the Lord our God and none other, and from the benefits bestowed upon
us, in bringing us out of the bondage and thraldom of the Devil. 209 Quest.
In which words is the second Commandment, and in which is the reason? Answ.
The Commandment is, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor
the likeness, etc. The reason, for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God,
visiting the sins. 212 Quest. What is here forbidden? Answ. All outward
Idolatry, which is first by making the image of God, or of any creature to be
worshipped: Secondly, by falling down before any image: Thirdly, by serving
God according to our own fantasies. 212 Quest. What are we here commanded?
Answ. To perform all outward duties of Gods service, according to his will
revealed in his word, for the substance thereof. 223 Quest. Whence is the
reason of this Commandment taken? Answ. Partly from the punishment to be
inflicted upon such as break it, unto the third and fourth generation, and
partly from the benefits to be bestowed upon such as keep it unto the
thousand generation. 227 Quest. Which is the third Commandment, and which the
reason? Answ. The commandment is, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy
God in vain, the reason, for he will not hold him guiltless, etc, 229 Quest.
What is here forbidden unto us? Answ. All abusing of the Name of God, which is
first by blaspheming, or giving occasion to others to blaspheme: Secondly, by
swearing falsely, deceitfully, rashly, commonly, or by creatures: Thirdly, by
cursing and banning: Fourthly, by vowing things impossible or unlawful, or by
neglecting of our lawful vows: Fifthly, by lightly using the holy name of God
or his word: Sixthly, by vain protestations and asseuerations. 230 Quest. What
are we here commanded? Answ. To glorify the name of God, in all that we do,
think, speak and desire, and to labor that others may be won by our
means to do the same. 240 Quest Whence is the reason of this Commandment
taken? Answ. From the fearful estate of such as any way abuse the name of
God, the Lord holds them as guilty of dishonor done unto his name. 244
Quest. If there be such danger in swearing, may a man lawfully swear in any
case whatsoever? Answ. Without doubt a man may sometimes lawfully swear,
either for the confirming of a truth which cannot otherwise be known, and yet
necessary, or for the strengthening of honest Leagues made betwixt men; or
lastly, a man being called thereunto before a lawful Magistrate. 246 Quest.
What else is required, that our swearing may be lawful? Answ. These four
things. First, we must swear only to such a truth as we know to be so.
Secondly, according to known intent of him unto whom, or before whom we
swear. Thirdly, this being a part of Gods worship, we must do it with great
reverence. 248 Quest. What if a man shall swear to perform an unlawful
thing, is he not bound notwithstanding to perform his oath? Answ. In no wise,
for so he should add unto his sin of swearing unlawfully, a further sin of
doing unlawfully. 249 Quest. Which is the fourth commandment? Answ. Remember
that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, etc. 250 Quest. What is the duty here
commanded? Ans. To keep holy the Sabbath, and to be mindful of it. 250
Quest. How may this be done? Answ. By assembling together to pray unto God, and
to praise him, to hear his holy Word, and receive the blessed Sacraments. 250
Quest. Is this all that is required to the right keeping of the Sabbath day?
Answ. No, but we must prepare our selves by prayer, and emptying our hearts of
sin, and meditate upon Gods works, and the word which we have heard, suffering
it so to work in us, as that we may be furthered in all holiness of life. 250
Quest. Js there no duty to be done toward our neighbor for the hallowing of
this day? Answ. Yes, it is a special time of exercising mercy, by helping
against sudden dangers, by collecting and distributing to the poor, by
visiting the sick, and reconciling dissentions amongst neighbors. 254 Quest.
Is there any set day under the new Testament thus to be kept holy? Answ. Yes,
the day which is commonly called Sunday, but in the Scripture the Lords day, or
the first day in the week, is thus to be kept without alteration to the end of
the world. 260 Quest. When does the Lords day begin and end? Answ. It begins
in the morning at the dawning of the day, and ends next morning likewise. 272
Quest Are we bound to do the holy duties of Gods worship all this time without
ceasing. Answ. No, for we may refresh our selves with eating and drinking,
singing and music, and with any honest delight whatsoever, whereby the mind
is cheared up, and joy and gladness befitting the Lords holy day expressed.
276 Quest. Is this all that we are bound unto, to keep the Sabbaths our
selves, in ceasing from labor, and doing the duties thereof? Answ. No, but who
so has Son or Daughter, Man servant or Maid-seruant, Cattle or stranger
within his Gates, is alike bound to provide as much as in him lies, that they
all observe this day in their kind both man and beast. 278 Quest. Does the Lord
only take care for the right spending of this day, and leave us to our selves
upon the six days? Answ. No doubtless, but it is his will and commandment
also that we should upon the six days abstain from idleness, and
diligently labor in the works of our callings. 279 Quest. Is it not lawful
then to forbear working, to attend upon God and his worship, upon the six
days? Answ. Yes, it is not only lawful but necessary for every one, to do
the duties of Gods worship every day of the week in private and in public,
when just occasion is offered. 282 Quest. How can this stand with the command
of working vpan the six days? Answ. Yes, very well, because that howsoever
God is to be served upon the six days, yet they are for the most part to be
spent in the works of our callings. 286 Quest. What more special rules are we
to follow in our weekly devotion? Answ. First, we must pray every day morning
and evening: Secondly, before and after the use of Gods creatures. Thirdly, the
more our necessities urge us, pray the oftener, and more instantly. Fourthly,
let no day pass without some reading, and divine meditation. Fifthly, neglect
not the public preaching in the week days, where opportunity is offered to
come unto it. 286 Quest. What is to be thought of whole days set apart to
public duties in the week, as Saints days and days of thanksgiving? Answ.
All this may lawfully be done, and is commendable by Gods word, and therefore we
are reverently to conform our selves to the ordinance of authority herein.
287 Quest. What is the sin by this Commandment forbidden? Answ. All profaning
of the Sabbath day, which is, first, by doing worldly works that are not of
present necessity, by iourneying about worldly affairs, idle resting, or
absenting our selves from the public duties of Gods worship: secondly, by
forgetfulness of the Sabbath upon the six days, by which we often bring upon
our selves a necessity of profaning the same: thirdly, when being parents or
governors, we leave our children, pupils, or servants to their own liberty
upon this day. 291 Quest. What be the reasons of this Commandment? Answ. They
are partly infolded in the Commandment, and partly expressed in these words;
For in six days the Lord made heaven, and earth etc. 295 Quest. What are the
reasons infolded in this Commandment? Answ. Three: First, because the law of
the Sabbath is ancient, and was in force in Paradise, before man's fall.
Secondly, because it is most equal, the Lord allowing us six days for our
worldly affairs, and requiring but one of seven for the work of his worship:
thirdly, because the seventh is the Lords peculiar day, so that without
sacrilege we cannot any way profane it. 296 Quest. What are the reasons
expressed? Answ. Two, first, from the Lords own example, who rested upon the
seventh day from all his works of creation: secondly, from his blessing
inseparably linked to the hallowing of this day, so that he which keeps it
holy, shall find it to his comfort, unto him a blessed day. 298 Quest. Which is
the first Commandment of the second Table, or the fifth of the Law? Answ.
Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which
the Lord thy God gives thee. 299 Quest. In which Commandments do you learn
your duty toward your neighbor? Answ. In the six latter commandments which
be of the second Table. 299 Quest. Which is the first of these Commandments?
Answ. Honor thy father and mother. etc. 301 Quest. What are we here
commanded? Answ. To honor, that is, to love, reverence, cherish, and obey our
natural parents, the parents of our country, and our Fathers in Christ.
Secondly, to carry our selves lowly, and reverently toward our masters, being
ruled by them in the Lord, and toward the ancient, and all our betters:
Thirdly, if we be superiors, to walk worthy the honor due unto us from our
inferiors, and to use all gentleness toward them. 303 Quest. What is here
forbidden? Answ. All irreuerence toward those that be in place and authority
above us, and churlish behavior in such toward those that be of a low degree.
317 Quest. Whence is the reason of this Commandment taken? Answ. From the
promise of long life, if God please not to prevent us with the blessing of
eternal life. 325 Quest. Which is the sixth Commandment, or the second of the
second Table? Answ. Thou shall do no murder. 328 Quest. What is here
forbidden? Answ. All murdering of our selves, or others and all approbation
hereof in others, either by command, counsel, consent, or concealment.
Secondly, all injurious actions tending to the prejudice of our neighbors
life: thirdly, all railing and reuiling speeches: fourthly, all murdrous
desires and affections of the heart, as of anger, malice, hatred, and envy:
fifthly, all cruelty toward the creature, which shows a murdrous mind in us.
328 Quest. What are we here commanded? Answ. Out of the love which we bear to
our neighbor, as much as in us lies, to preserve his life and health, and
specially the life of his soul, by good counsel, exhortation, and
admonitions. 343 Quest. Which is the seventh Commandment? Answ. Thou shall not
commit adultery. 347 Quest. What is here forbidden? Answ. First, all outward
unclean actions of adultery, fornications, etc. Secondly, all filthy and
unclean speeches, singing of wanton loue-songs, and reading of Books and
Ballads of this sort. Thirdly, all incontinent thoughts and lusts of the heart.
Fourthly, whatsoever is usually an occasion of uncleanness, as being present
at filthy stage plays, putting on apparel of another sex, mixed laciuious
dancing, surfeiting, drunkenness, idleness, etc. 347 Quest. What are we here
commanded? Answ. To live in temperance, chastity, and soberness, and so to
keep my body holy and pure, as a temple of the holy Ghost. 357 Quest. Which is
the eight Commandment? Answ. Thou shall not steal. 361 Quest. What is here
forbidden? Answ. All stealing, which is first by violence, or secret taking
away that which is our neighbors. Secondly, by oppression and tyranny of the
rich toward the poor. Thirdly, by deceit in buying and selling. Fourthly, by
using any unlawful trade, or way of gain or gaming, fortune-telling, or
selling drink unto drunkenness. Fifthly, by prodigality, for thus do men rob
their children and posterity. 361 Quest. What more is here forbidden? Answ.
All covetousness, and unmercifulness, the robbing of God in things dedicate,
tithes and offerings. 370 Quest. What are we here commanded? Answ. To do to all
men as I would they should do unto me, and by diligent paines-taking, to get
mine own living, in that estate of life, to which it shall please God to call
me. 379 Quest. Which is the ninth Commandment? Answ. Thou shall not bear
false witness against thy neighbor? 383 Quest. What is here forbidden? Answ.
All false witnes-bearing; first, by falsely accusing, and witnessing against
our neighbor before a Judge. Secondly, by slandering and backbiting, and by
readiness to hearken to such false reports. Thirdly, by flattering, or
soothing any for advantage against the truth. Fourthly, by lying, or telling an
untruth against our consciences. 383 Quest. What are we here commanded? Answ.
As much as in us lies, to preserve the good name of our neighbor, and our
own good name, stopping our ears against false reports, and suppressing them,
and always whatsoever comes of it speaking the truth. 393 Quest. Which is the
tenth Commandment? Answ. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, etc. 396
Quest. What is here forbidden? Answ. All first motions of the mind unto sin,
though no consent be yielded unto them. 396 Quest. What are we commanded here?
Answ. To keep our very hearts and minds free from evil thoughts against any
of the commandments of God. 399 Quest. Is any man able to keep all these
Commandments? Answ. No man upon earth has, or ever can be able to keep them
perfectly, Adam only excepted in the state of innocence, and Christ who was
both God and man. 401 What is the breach of the law, and the punishment of it?
Answ. It is sin, which if it be but once committed only, and that but in
thought, it makes a man subject to Gods eternal curse, which is everlasting
death in hell fire, the torments whereof are unspeakable without end or ease.
404 Quest. Is it not injustice to appoint so great a punishment for every
sin, yea even for the least? Answ. It is very just and meet for the Lord to
adiudge the least sin to hell fire, because his mark, which is perfect
holiness, set upon man in his creation, is hereby removed, and a mark with
the Devils brand is made upon the soul of the sinner, for which it is just
that the Devil, and not God should now have such a soul. 405 Quest. If no man
can perfectly keep the Law, wherefore serves it? Answ. First, to humble us in
regard of our miserable estate hereby discovered; secondly, to be a rule of
good life unto us. 406 Quest. How may we be saved from our sins? Answ. Only
by the blood of Jesus Christ laid hold upon by a true and lively faith. 407
Quest. How is faith first begun and wrought in the heart? Answ. Ordinarily by
the preaching of the Gospel, the holy spirit inwardly opening the heart to
believe those things that are outwardly preached to the ear. 410 Quest. How
does faith exercise it self, and get more strength? Answ. By prayer, the
exercises of Gods holy word, and by receiving the Sacraments.
Concerning Prayer.
Quest. What is Prayer? Answ. It is a lifting up of the heart unto God, only in
the name of Jesus Christ according to his will, in full assurance to be heard
and accepted at his gracious hands 412 Quest. What need is there that the
faithful should pray, seeing they are in Gods favor, he knows their wants,
and has pardoned all their sins? Answ. By how much the more we are in Gods
favor, by so much the more needful is it that we should cheerfully pray,
both to pay the duty that we owe unto God, to obtain the blessing promised,
and to renew our assurance of the pardon of sin daily renewed through our
great weakness. 416 Quest. What times are specially to be spent in Prayer?
Answ. It is necessary, that every Christian make his prayers unto God every
morning and evening, sitting down and rising up from meal, and at other
times, as the spirit moves, or occasions and other necessities require to
have the heart lifted up in prayer. 418 Quest. How, and according to what
Prayer ought we to pray? Answ. The patrerne and form for our direction is the
Lords Payer. Our Father, etc. 422 Quest. How many be the parts of this Prayer?
Answ. The Preface, Our Father: The Petitions, Hallowed be thy name: and the
conclusion, For thine is the, etc. 429 Quest. In the Preface why call you God
Father? Answ. Because he is ready as a loving Father to hear me calling upon
his name, whence I learn with boldness and confidence to come unto him with
prayer. 429 Quest. Why do you say Our Father, and not my Father? Answ. Because
I ought to pray for all other the Children of God as well as for my self. 432
Quest. Why add you in the Preface, which art in heaven? Answ. Not for that I
believe God to be in heaven only, for he is every where: but because to be in
Heaven, is an Argument of great glory: whence I learn with reverence to pray
unto him, being my Father most glorious. 434 Quest. How many be the Petitions
of this Prayer? Answ. Six, whereof the three former concern Gods glory the
three latter concern our selves. 435 Quest. Which be those three concerning
Gods glory? Ans. First, Hallowed be thy name. Secondly, Thy Kingdom come.
Thirdly, Thy will be done on earth, as it is in Heaven. 437 Quest. In the first
of these, what desire you? Answ. That the name of God may be glorified in the
use of his Titles, Word, and all his Works. 437 Quest. In the second Petition
what desire you? Answ. That the number of true belieuers may be daily
increased, that Gods Kingdom of grace being enlarged, his Kingdom of glory
may be hastened. 443 Quest. In the third Petition what pray you for? Answ. That
I and all the people of God upon earth may as readily obey Gods will, as the
Angels and Saints in Heaven. 452 Quest. Which be the three Petitions concerning
our selves? Answ. The first, Give us this day, etc. 2. Forgive us our
trespasses. 3. Lead us not into temptation, etc. 459 Quest. What pray you for
in the first of these Petitions? Answ. For all things necessary for this
present life, and therefore we ask but for bread, and but for this day. 460
Quest. What pray you for in the second of these Petitions? Answ. That God would
freely forgive us all our sins, as we do from our hearts forgive the
offenses of men against us. 471 Quest. What pray you for in the third of these
Petitions? Answ. That the Lord would not suffer us to be carried aaway by the
temptations of the world, flesh or Devil, to the committing of sin, but that
he would deliver us from the evil of all temptation, both sin and damnation.
480 Quest. Wherefore serves the conclusion, For thine is, etc. Ans. It is
added as a reason of all the Petitions, to strengthen our faith, that God being
both able and willing, does certainly yield to our requests made unto him,
therefore we add a note of confidence and say, Amen. 487 Quest. What is the
other exercise of the faithful? Answ. The right receiving of the Sacraments.
518
Of the Sacraments.
Quest. The benefits being showed, which we are to crave at Gods hands by
prayer, what further means have we for the better assuring to our souls the
promises of all spiritual blessings in Christ. Answ. The Sacraments of the new
Testament, which are the pledges of the Covenant between God and his people.
492 Quest. Wherein stands true repentance? Answ. In three things. First, in
knowledge and acknowledgement of our sins past. Secondly, in godly sorrow and
grief of heart for them. Thirdly, in a godly purpose to forsake all sin, and
to lead a new life for all time to come. 505 Quest. What is faith? Answ. It is
a certain persuasion of the heart, wrought by the Spirit of God, grounded upon
his promises; that al my sins are forgiven me in Christ Jesus. 508 Quest.
What is required in such as come to the Lords Supper? Answ. To be rightly
disposed before, and at the receiving hereof. 532 Quest. What ought a man to
do before his coming? Answ. To examine himself for his faith in Christ. 532
Quest. How may a man know whether he has true faith, or no? Answ. By two
special fruits thereof, repentance for all his sins, and love toward his
neighbor. 534 Quest. Wherein stands true repentance? Answ. In affection, when
it is the same toward our neighbor, that it is toward our selves, void of
malice, hatred, and envy, and desirous of his good as of our own: and in
action, when we are ready to do good unto others, as unto our selves, and to
keep away hurt, as from our selves. 537 Quest. What shall he do that finds
not these things in himself after due examination? Answ. He may not keep
away from the Lords Supper, for this were a provoking of God to wrath, neither
can he come unto it without offending in a higher degree. 539 Quest. What may
a man do then in this case? Answ. He must humbly sue unto God for the pardon
of his sins, to ftrike his hard heart, that he may melt into tears for them,
and constantly cleave to his commandment, and if there be any dissension, he
must go and be reconciled to his brother. 540 Quest. What ought a man to do
at the Lords Supper? Answ. He ought thankfully to remember the inward graces of
God toward him, by seeing the outward signs. 541 Quest. What are these
graces? Answ. First, the Lords giving of his son Jesus Christ to death for
us, set forth by the Ministers taking of the bread and wine, breaking and
pouring out, and offering them to us all. Secondly, our near union unto
Christ, and how we have all our spiritual food from him, set forth by our
taking, eating, and inward digesting the Bread and Wine that become nourishment
unto us. Thirdly, the near union that God has made by Christ betwixt all the
faithful, set forth by the same bread, being made of many grains of corn, and
by the same wine made of many grapes. 541 Quest. What is to be done after the
receiving? Answ. We must meditate of the covenant of new obedience, renewed by
this Sacrament, that we may more carefully perform it, and fly sin and vice
all the days of our life. 543
Appendix.
Quest. What is the Word of God? Answ. Whatsoever is contained in the Books of
the old and new Testament, and not any other Books, or writings whatsoever.
545 Quest. How many, and which are these Books? Answ. The Books of the old
Testament are seven and twenty; Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers,
Deuteronomie, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, the first and second of Samuel, the first
and second Kings, the first and second of the Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah,
Ester, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Isaiah, Jeremiah,
Ezechiel, Daniel, and the Book of the twelve small Prophets. The Books of the
new Testament are 26. Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, the Acts of the Apostles,
the Epistle to the Romans, first and second to the Corinthians, Galathianss
Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, and two to the Thessalonians, and two to
Timothy, to Titus, the Hebrews, the Epistle of James, and two of Peter, first,
second, and third of John, of Jude, and the Revelation of John. 545 Quest. Are
not the Apocrypha Books part of the word of God? Answ. They are not, neither
have been ever so accounted in the Church of God, but are annexed, as being
full of good instructions and histories, declaring Gods wonderful Providence
over his people Israel. 546 Quest. What proof is there, that the other are
Gods Word? Answ. It is proved by their antiquity, some of them being before all
other books, sundry times oppugned and sought to be burnt up by persecutors,
and yet wonderfully preserved, and by miracles from Heaven confirmed, which
shows that they came from heaven, and are not of man's invention. 547 Quest.
Having this word written, is it not sufficient for our salvation, without any
help by preacking. Answ. It is not sufficient, but it must also be set forth
by preaching, that the hard places may be rightly understood, we may be kept
from errors, and have our dull hearts stirred up to embrace it. 551 Quest. What
is the Preaching of the word of God? Answ. It is properly the expounding of
some part thereof, teaching hence, the duties to be followed, and the sins to
be avoided, and exhorting to do accordingly. 553 Quest. Who may preach the Word
of God? Answ. Only such as are outwardly sent of God, ordinarily, and when
extraordinary necessity does require, all such as are inwardly stirred up, and
enabled by Gods Spirit. 555 Quest. What is required to the right hearing of the
Word? Answ. To prepare a man's self by prayer and holy meditations, and by
emptying the heart of corrupt affections, to attend diligently and reverently
at the preaching of the Word, and laying it up in the heart, to do accordingly
all the days of his life. 557
Gentle Reader, I have here noted unto thee the most remarkable faults; some
small literal faults if thou meet withal, I pray thee to amend.

ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 36. for Chastenings, read Christenings. page 7. l. 1. for labor,
read Lauer. page 12. l. 18. for contention, read contempt, page 58. l. 15. for
was wont, read was not wont. page 356. l 30. read yet this did cost John
Baptists head. page 356. l. 34. read by the house falling down upon them.

If other faults have past, they are but small,
And as the Printer hopes, but litterall.
Yet pardon, though in words he did offend,
For, most of us, I fear, have deeds to mend.
TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader, having been much desired and importuned to print these
Questions, and Answers alone by themselves, in regard this great Book is too
large to be learned by heart; I have condescended to their Requests, and
printed them, for the futher help and benefit of Ministers in their Churches,
of Schoolmasters in their Schools, and Householders in their Families, and it
is called, The English Teacher, or, The A. B. C. enlarged; and are to be sold
by JOHN MARRIOTT, at his Shop in Saint Dunstons Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1622.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal English blazon or coat of arms

A COMMENTARY, OR, LARGER EXPLANATION OF THE SHORT Catechism, set-forth in
the Book of Common PRAYER.


N or M.

This Primer Question may be called the way to the Church door: it leads to
the mention of Baptism, which is the gate of Christianity. It is prefixed
before our Catechism, as an Introduction, or familiar entrance, framed by
question and answer, for the instruction of the simpler: and therefore is not
idle and unfitting, as some would have it, but very agreeable to the matter
intended. Inasmuch, as a Christian man's name does not only distinguish him
from other men of different names; but also serves for a remembrance, whereby
the grace of God should be stirred up in him. Thus the people had names of
old: Adam, signifying red earth; Euah, a mother: Abram, an high father: Isaac,
laughing: Jacob, supplanting: and the Lord himself has a name prescribed,
Jesus, a Savior, etc. Neither were these names given by chance, but Almighty
God himself being the first guide hereunto, and many times appoynting the
name, then holy men followed; and generally, all the world in former ages, gave
names of special signification. Pharaohs daughter called the Hebrew child
drawn out of the river, Moses, Drawne-out. Joseph was proclaimed by Pharaoh the
King, Abres, Father; when, as a Father he provided for the Country, etc. A
more especial daily monitory may this be to us, for that our name does
remember unto us our Christian Profession, that we may walk worthy of the
same. And this may serve for some direction unto us, in the naming of our
children, that we prefer not heathen names where other are usual and
convenient.

Quest. Whether may a man change his name or not?

Change of names.
Answ. He may: First, by Gods special command: as Abram was changed into
Abraham; Sarai, into Sarah; Iaacob, into Israel; Peter, into Cephas, Ioh. 1 43.
etc. Secondly, if he be converted from a false, to the true religion: thus
Saul his name was turned into Paul: for in this case infidels and heathen men
have thought unfit to retain the old name: When Nebuchadnezzar consecrated
Daniel unto Bell their God, he changed his name into Belshazzar, Bells
Treasurer: Ananias, into Shedrach, which is, The King of the Planets has
inspired him; Azaria^, into Meshaecke, Venus; and Misael into Abcan^ge, the
servant of the fire. And the same is the practice of the Turks at this day, if
any man turn Mohammedan, he receives a new name, as that famous Prince George
Castriot of Epirus, had his name changed into Scanderbeg. Thirdly, a man may
change his name for the glory of God, and his own safety, without hurt to any
man. Thus Bucer, in the time of. King Edward the sixth, called himself by the
name of Aretius Felinus; Cyril: Jerus: says, That they changed their names, as
occasion was offered. And the Civil Law does allow it.
Beza wrote two Homilies under the name of Nathaniel Nestkins: that their own
names might not hinder the Papists from the reading thereof: Yet this approues
not the changing of names, the more securely to commit any villainy, as was done
by the late Traitors of November the fifth.

Quest. Who gave you this name?

Answ. My Godfathers, and Godmothers, in my Baptism, wherein I was made a
member of Christ, a child of God, and Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Explan. In this answer I observe three things. First, the time of the name
giving. viz. In Baptism. For this is both answerable to the practice of the
Church of God in all ages, since there was a Sacrament of Baptism, or any
other in the room thereof, and stands with very good reason. As for the
custom of the Church; Abraham, at the first institution of the Circumcision,
is said, to have circumcised his son the eight day, and to have called his
name Isaac, Genesis 21*
and this custom held as long as circumcision, as may be seen in John
Baptist: When they came to circumcise the babe, Luc. 1.59.
and called him Zacharias. And in the Lord Jesus; When the eight days were
accomplished, that they should circumcise the child, Luc. 2.21.
his name was called Jesus. Object. Gershom the son of Moses, Exodus 2.22. 4.25.
was named before his circumcision, for he was afterward circumcised, when the
Lord met Moses in the Inn, and would have slain him: Rachel, Iaacobs wife,
Genesis 35.18.
immediately after her travel, named her child Benoni, and during the time of
the Israelites being in the wilderness, for forty years, Jos. 5.2.
they were without circumcision, but it is not likely they were without names.
Sol. This last was an extraordinary time, necessity made them dispense with
law; for that act of Rachels, it only shows her desire, for the child was
afterward called Benjamin, viz. at the circumcision. Lastly, for the first, no
marvel though the custom of the Church were broken, seeing that Gods
ordinance was also neglected, for fear of impatient Zipporah. Secondly, what
fitter time can be to impose names, then when we begin to be? we are first
borne, and then have the common name of man, then we are borne again, and have
the special names of Christians. The second thing in the answer; the persons
that give the name, Godfathers and Godmothers. True it is, that Parents were
always wont to propound the name. Joseph directed by the Angel told what the
name of Jesus should be: Zachary, of his son John: and ordinarily, Abraham,
Moses, Joseph in Egypt (also Hannah named Samuel; and Rachel, Joseph. But the
Godfathers, following the direction of the parents, have used a long time to
propound the name in public: when John was to be circumcised, it is said,
They call d his name, etc. But his parents had the greatest stroke in
determining the name. Objections against Godfathers answered
One, writing against our custom herein, alleges the Council of Nice, Can.
30. Let no faithful man name his children by heathen names; and that of
Baronius. My Parents called me Tarr^chus, and out of Dionysius, that the Priest
was wont to ask the name at the Church door, and hence endeavors to prove,
that Parents, and not Godfathers, are to name their children, neither at the
time of baptism, but before, for which he further adds, that they, which
were Adulti, were wont to come before their baptism, and put their old names
in the Register. Unto which I answer. First, that of the Council of Nice, is
a mere forgery, there being but twenty Canons in all, or two and twenty at the
most. Secondly, admit it to be true, and that which follows; it is no more
then we confess, that Parents have, or ought to have, the chiefest stroke in
the names of their own children. Lastly, for the Adulti holding their own
names, it might be through conniuency, in some particular Church, at some time
only. For it is most evident, that Godfathers were used amongst Christians,
even in the Primitive Church. Higinus, Bishop of Rome, and Martyr, speaks of
them in his fifth Decretall, who was but 140. years after Christ's incarnation,
and the best reformed Churches do allow of them. One, a learned Doctor of
Germany, defends this use upon these reasons. Zanch. in Ephesians* p. 580.

Reasons why Godfathers are used.


1. It is not against the Scriptures. 2. It is most ancient. 3. It proceeds
from love, of the parents procuring them, of them undertaking. 4. It is to the
benefit of the Infant, if the Parents dye. 5. It is an help unto the Parents,
to which may be added, that it is a mean to increase mutual love amongst
neighbors, when they shall perform this duty one for another.

3.
The third thing in the answer is, the addition: Wherein I was made a member of
Christ, etc. Which is not so to be understood, as though the outward washing of
water, did make the baptized partaker of these so excellent benefits: for it is
true of the Sacraments of the new Testament, which was said of them of the old:
It is impossible, Heb. 10.4.
that the blood of bulls and Goats should take away sin. And in another
place; Circumcision avails nothing, but a new creature. Gal. 15.
That the same may be said of Baptism, see in the Pharisees coming to John
his Baptism: O generation of Vipers (says he, Luke 3.7.
who has forewarned you to fly from the wrath to come? Where he shows,
baptism to be a means of escaping Gods wrath, after an implicit manner; but
withal, requires virtue, which being away, baptism avails not. And our Lord
having commended baptism to all, excepteth yet, saying; He that belieueth not
shall be damned. The case herein is diverse, Mark. 16.16.
First, in those that are of ripe years and understanding: there is required
of them a due disposition of repentance, and faith, actually performed by, and
in themselves. But in Infants it is enough that they pertain to the Covenant,
being born^ in the bosom of the Church, and presented to the participation of
gracious adoption by virtue of the Faith of their Parents.

The right understanding then of this is, that in our baptism, we are
sacramentally, or instrumentally, made the children of God; and really, and
truly, when we are together baptized with the Holy Ghost; if thou believe, and
be baptized, thou art made Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven, and this is
ascribed unto baptism. Joh. 3.5.
Except a man be borne of water and the spirit, etc: as converting, begetting
unto Christ, and building men up in grace, is ascribed unto the Officers of
Gods Church. Wherefore let no man mistake this matter, thinking himself safe,
when he is baptized, for he may, nay, infinite numbers do, notwithstanding
perish. Baptism confers not Grace, Ex opere operato, as the Church of Rome
teaches; but ever, in men of years as they were found in grace, they were
thought fit to be baptized. Read of the Eunuch, of Cornelius and his company,
of the conuerts amongst the Jews at Peter's preaching. Act. 8 etc. 10 chap. 2.
Now then consider, whether this be thy case or no? Art thou endued with grace?
Art thou baptized with the Holy Ghost? Art thou baptized into Christ? Beleeuest
thou with all thy heart? repentest thou with a true and due compunction? If it
be thus, thou have put on Christ, thou art buried with him by baptism, Romans
6.2.
into his death, that like as Christ was raised from the dead, so also thou
should walk in newnes of life. O well is thee, thou art a member of Christ,
and inheritour of Heaven: If otherwise, thou have been admitted to the water
in vain, thou art still in thy sins. But thou will say, wherefore serves the
remembrance of our baptism then? I answer, to confirm that grace, which is
begun in a man's heart, if he believes he shall be hereby more confirmed, if he
be a true Christian, he shall be hereby registered in the Catalogue of true
Christians, and all the fiends of hell shall not be able to blot him out
again. If it be further demanded, how can it be said of all baptized, that
they are members of Christ, seeing there are many Hypocrites, who bear only
the badge of Christ, but fight under the banner of Satan. I answer, that our
Church does not usurp the gift of prophecy, to take upon her to discern which
of her children belong to Gods unsearchable Election, but in the judgment of
charity embraces them all, as Gods inheritanc^; and hereby teaches every of
us so to believe of our selves by Faith, and of others by charity. St. Paul in
his salutations styleth the whole visible Churches, to whom he writes by the
title of Saints, and yet it is likely that by his extraordinary discerning
spirit, he could have differenced the goats of his flock from the sheep. How
much more ought we, with our blessed Mother the Church of England, at all
chastenings, presume that sacramental grace, does like a soul enquicken the
body of the outward element, and receive these for our true fellow members of
Christ, who have been made partakers of the same labor of regeneration?

Quest. What did thy Godfathers and Godmothers then for thee?

Answ. They did promise and vow three things in my name, first, that I should
forsake the devil, and all his works, the pompes and vanities of this wicked
world, with all the sinful lusts of the flesh. Secondly, that I should believe
all the articles of the Christian Faith. Thirdly, that I should keep Gods holy
will and commandment, and walk in the same all the days of my life.

Explan. In this answer observe four points, which are further to be opened.
First, wherefore this promise is made of forsaking the devil, etc. For the
resolution of which, Man's fourfold estate. 1 of Inocency. Gen 1 27. Eccles.
7.1.
it is to be understood, that our natural estate is carnal, and sensual, yea
a very subjection unto Satan. True it is, that man by his first creation was
holy and righteous, witness the Spirit himself; saying thus. God made man in
his own Image, in the Jmage of God created he him. And God made man righteous,
and this estate of holiness was accompanied with exquisite, and almost Divine
knowledge: for proof whereof, the creatures were brought unto him to be named,
and as he named them, so they were called: now his names did so fit the
creatures, expressing partly their several natures, that if a most cunning
Philosopher had studied all his life, he could not have done the like. Besides
this, he being cast into a deep sleep, when the woman was taken out of his
side, did rightly divine how near she was unto him, saying: This is flesh of
my flesh, and bone of my bone etc. Again, Genesis 2.23.
unto his knowledge was added a sound estate of body, (from all diseases,) as
death it self came in by sin: Rom 5.18.
he could labor without wearines: for the sweat of the brow comes in after
the transgressio^. He could abstain without prejudice to his health, he could
have multiplied years without gray hairs, for he was immortal. All creatures
did reverence him, the earth was all serviceable unto him without barrenness,
briars and thorns, none of all the serpents and wild beasts, were noisome
unto him. The woman was without sorrow in travailing, without pains in
bringing up her children, and without subjection to the man. Both man and woman
were comely without blemish, warm without clothes, naked without shame. I
dare not say, that they should have propagated without copulation, with Gregory
Nyss: De Opis^^. lois cap. 17. 2 Of corruption. Romans 3.23.
Now man is fallen from this estate, sin proceeding from one Adam has
ouerspread all men. All have sinned and are deprived of the glory of God. There
is in us all, so soon as we are, a want of all grace and goodness, a pronenesse
unto evil, and untowardness to do that, which is pleasing to the Lord, as both
St. Paul sets forth in himself, saying; Romans 7.15. Jam. 1.14.
The things which I would I do not, which I hate that do I. And St. James,
Let no man say that he is tempted of God. Lust, when it has conceived brings
forth sin, etc. And hence it comes to pass, that we are the devils
subjects. For he that commits sin is the servant of sin. Ioh. 8.34. Heb.
2.15.
He is in bondage unto the devil all his life long, The promise then which is
made in our Baptism, is that we shall come out of this estate of nature
corrupt, into the estate of grace, which is, when we follow not the swinge of
our own dispositions, neither suffer the God of this world to rule in us, but
the law and word of God: For herein stands man's restoration and bringing
into a third estate, which is the estate of grace, 3. Of grace.
if the heart be purified by faith; if he faithfully believe all the Articles
of the Christian faith, and be sanctified to obedience of life, if he always
walk in the ways of Gods commandments; faith giving him interest in this
estate, and obedience certifying; that he is truly interessed herein,
according to that of the Apostle: Show me thy faith by thy works. Jam. 2.18.
Ephesians. 2.2. Romans 6. Ioh. 8.34. 1 John 3. Heb. 2 15. Luc. 1.7.4. Heb. 11.6. 2.
Cor. 8.
And as our condition under sin is most terrible; so is this under grace most
comfortable. Then we were dead in sins and trespasses: now we are dead unto
sin, and alive unto God in righteousness: then we were servants, yea
bondslaues; now we are set at liberty, yea made sons of God: then we were
every day in fear; now we serve the Lord all our life time without fear: then
our best works did displease God; now, though we fail in many things, we
are accepted according to that we have, Ephesians. 2.
and not according to that we have not: then we were without God in the world
to protect us; now we are made near, Romans 6.23.
yea of the household of God: to conclude, we were at the day of payment to
receive for our wages, death, now we shall not taste of that death, but have
the gift of our God, which is eternal life. And here is the last end; the
fourth estate of man endued with grace, which shall be without end, 4. Of glory.
the first fruits of this are had here, half the harvest follows at every
man's particular death, the soul being placed in Paradise, and all is perfected
at the day of Judgment, when both soul and body enjoy the kingdom of God the
Father.

Secondly, we are further to consider, whether we be able and have of our
selves power to forsake the devil, etc. and if not, whence we are to seek
for this. Ephesians. 2.2. Of free will.
The words indeed seem to intimate such ability, but they have no such
meaning: for we are dead in sins and trespasses; that is, have as little
ability to do any act of grace, as a dead man has to move himself, or to do
any thing, that belongs unto the living. We are not sufficient of our selves
to think a good thought, as of our selves: It is not in him that wills, 2.
Cor 3.5. Romans 9.16.
or in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. Where note, that as
nothing in the work of our conversion and turning from sin is ascribed unto
us, so all is ascribed unto God. Wherefore Jeremy says, turn us O Lord,
Lament. 5.21.
and so shall we be turned, and the Apostle, It is God that works both the
will and the deed: and it is rightly decreed in an ancient council against the
heresy of Pelagius. Whosoever shall say, Conc: Milinit: Can. 4.
that by the grace of the Lord, we are herein helped against sin, because
that by this is opened unto us, what we ought to do, and what to shun, and
that it does not effect this in us, that we choose, and are able to do what we
are commanded, let him be an anathema: and not long after in another council:
Whosoever shall say, Conc: Araus: can. 3.
that at man's calling upon God, his grace is bestowed, and that grace it self
does not work this in us, that we call upon him, he speaks against that of
the Prophet Esaias, I was found of them that sought me not, and was manifested
to those that asked not after me: Nay, the fathers in this Council go
further, Can. 4.
and deny any disposition in man's will toward God, as touching his
conversion, Can. 4.
according to that of Solomon: The will is prepared of the Lord. Compare this
with that, which is taught by the Papists at this day, and judge whether they
be not justly charged with Pelagianisme.

Romans 10.14
We are therefore to seek for this at the hands of God, we must read, hear,
and learn, that we may be able to see. First, we must learn the grownds of
the Christian religion, the Lords prayer, Creed, and ten Commandments, and
then diligently hear Sermons; for how shall we call upon him, of whom we
have not heard, and how shall we hear without a Preacher? Hearing the word
preached then is Gods principal ordinance to begin in us the grace of desiring
to forsake sin, which where it is he will second with more grace, of utterly
shaking off the dominion of sin, according to his promise of giving grace for
grace.

Ioh. 1.16.
Thirdly, we are to consider, what is the office which the Godfathers and
Godmothers do bind themselves unto in the behalf of themselves. Now as has
been already said, neither men nor Angels can effect this work of grace, it is
a work proper to God alone. We are not therefore to suppose that their
promise tends to the full performance of this, by themselves, as undertakers,
or infusers of grace, but to do what weak help and means may be able to do,
both by their care of instruction, if parents be negligent or departed, and
also by prayer unto God for them. Godfathers were of old taken for sureties, as
when one is admitted to be apprentice to any trade he must have sureties for
his trusty and faithful service: so was it thought fit, when men turned from
heathenisme, and were by baptism admitted into the order of Christians, that
such as were counted faithful, should be sureties for their constant and
honest proceeding according to the same order, and this was done when men were
of age and able to answer for themselves, and has ever since held to be
auailable to the same purpose, and much more necessary for infants, when
growing up, they shall be pricked forward unto holiness by them. O how greatly
then are they to be blamed, that turn this custom into an idle ceremony, by
putting all care off: thus frustrating the intent of the Church, and deluding
the congregation of Gods people.

Fourthly let us take a brief view, what be those abominations which a
Christian at his first oath of allegiance to God, is to abjure solemnly. They
are the Devil and his works, the pompes and vanities of this wicked world.

Such an express form of abrenunciation of the Devil and the pompes of the
world is very ancient, and may well be thought to have bin derived from the
Primitive Church; whereof we find express mention in Tertullian, and others.
Very well therefore has it been continued in the Church of God, and retained
in this our Mother Church of England. True it is, that though such disauowing
were not expressed at Baptism, yet it must needs be included implicitly in
the very stipulation of that covenant, whereby we make our selves members of
Christ: But it is a more lively and firm monitory unto us, to hold us in due
allegiance to our Lord and Savior, when we record, that we have at the first
entering our names into his Band, and marching under his Banner, proclaimed an
express defiance and abiuration of all his enemies. Whilst this Memento
sounds in our ears, how shall we dare to fly over like traitors to that
enemy: nay, so much as to be seen to maintain correspondence, or entertain
intelligence with those that are professed rebels against our Lord? I have
solemnly before God and the congregation forsaken the Devil and his works, to
cleave unto my Lord Christ, and to set my self about his holy work. Shall I
then put my hand, or heart to the works of Satan, of Darkness, of Death?
Sure if I do the Devils work, he will pay me my wages, the woeful wages of
sin; what that is; if mine own conscience did not sufficiently vpbraid me,
the holy servant of Christ St. Paul does further tell me, The wages of sin is
Death. I have professedly renounced the vanities and pompes of this wicked
world. Shall I then turn servant to so empty and deceiving a Master, as is
this wicked world? Sure if I do, the reward of my sin will be in the end
nothing but Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. Christ my Redeemer bought me
out of this wicked world: shall I sell my self again to that tyrant, and that
for nothing? Such profitable Meditations are suggested, by this courageous
defiance made in the first entrance into our Christian warfare.

But to return to the subject matter whereupon this disclayming and forsaking
is to be employed, it is a troop of encompassing and besieging enemies all too
near us, partly round about us, and partly within us. The Devil, an invisible
foe, most powerful by his own subtilty and malice, he sets upon us by
suggestions to draw us to his works. Verily none of them can be good, for he
can do nothing but sin, and would make us like himself. He employeth these
works and workmen when he breaths into our souls the hellish passions of
presumption, desperation, pride, malice, murder of souls and bodies:
contention of Religion, Atheism, Heresy, etc. For the influence of spiritual
wickednesses, he uses among all other instruments the strongest against our
own souls, our own natural purblind reason, to wound our Faith: he hence
whetteth and kindles his fiery darts. The world a more visible foe, most
insnaring by entisements and blandishments, that dazleth our eyes with the
luster of glittering pompes, and fading vanities. Our putting on gorgeous
apparel makes us easily forget our putting on Christ, and our loging to be
clothed with immortallity: sumptuous buildings make us too soon forget the
house Not made with hands which we have in the heavens. 2, Cor. 5.2.
Feathers, fans, foretops, paintings, etc. Do so sophisticate our bodies, and
entoxicate our souls, as if we preferred these ensigns of vanity, and
disguises of mortal bodies, before the hoped beauty and splendour of glorified
bodies.

Ob.
It seems then that all outward pomp and secular glory is renounced in our
Christendom. What then shall become of Kings Courts, Royal shows, triumphs,
etc. Must these be ranged amongst the forbidden vanities?

Sol.
Verily no. As there are in all well-gouernd Christian commonwealths,
distinctions of habits, ornaments, and buildings, to put a difference between
several degrees of subjects, so much more is it fit that there should be a
maiestique splendour whereby the Prince and his Court may be conspicuous above
others. In domibus Regum sunt, qui mollibus indumentis vestiuntur. It is the
brainsick humor of some Anabaptists to lay all the world level. Nor is it
marvel that they, who defy all Kings, as limbs of the wicked world, and
scourges of the disciples, should deny all roabes of ornament, exceeding the
skirts of a weauers or millers iacket. Our vow in Baptism renownceth not civil
pompes befitting particular callings or occasions, but the excess of them,
they being too much possessed by them, transported with them, or addicted to
them. If they thus entice us to forget God, and become a snare to us, make us
to cling and cleave to earthly things, then by our abuse they degenerate into
the vanities of this wicked world. Alas this they do too often. God be
merciful in this to the best of us.

The world, the flesh, and the Devil.
The third foe is most sensible and inseparable, because nearest us, most
powerful in persuading and conquering us, because it deals with us, not as a
stranger, but a dear part of our selves. Our flesh is the wife of our soul,
no marvel then if this be easily drawn by that, as Adam by Ruc, Sampson by
Dalila, Ahab by Iesabell. Hardly and rarely can we with Job check this wife
when she gives us desperate counsel to curse God and die. This weaker part
of us is the stronger by entisements, so that we often again embrace it and
beg^t complete sin upon it, though we have in our baptism pronounced a
final divorce against it. The sinful lusts of the flesh, though they fight
against the soul, yet stick as near our souls as the very natural flesh.
Look to thy self therefore thou baptized Christian, put on thy spiritual
armor of proof, o thou champion of God, prosecute thy defiance against the
Devil, the world, and the flesh, for that they are all Gods enemies, and all
enemies to thine own soul. First, that they be Gods enemies, is plain; the
Devil aduanceth himself as a God in this world, 2. Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.2.
for which he is called the God of this world, 2 Cor. 4 4. Ephesians. 2.2.
and a Prince that rules in the air. Now he that shall take upon himself to
be a King, is the true Kings most deadly and greatest enemy: so is the devil.
The world considered, 1. Joh. 2 15.
not naturally, as it signifies the frame of heaven and earth, or things
necessary for the the maintenance of this corporal life: but morally as
signifying unlawful or immoderate pleasures, or cares abstracting or entising
from God; in this respect the world is such an enemy unto God, as that the
friends of the world are pronounced Gods enemies, and he that serves the world
cannot but hate God. Gal 5.17.
Lastly, the flesh is said to fight against the Spirit of God. Moreover, they
be also thine enemies: The devil as a Lion, 1 Pet. 5.7.
goes about seeking whom he may devour: We must prepare every day to fight
against him: Ephesians. 6.12.
for we are not to fight only against flesh and blood; but against
principalities and spiritual powers in heavenly places: Math. 13 22.
the world as briers and thorns does choke the seed of Gods word in our
hearts, and make us unprofitable hearers: 1. Tim. 6.9.
it is as a pit of water closely made to drown thy soul in perdition: Romans 7.
and the flesh so strongly assaulteth thee that it carries thee captive to the
Law of sin, and never cease until that it has brought thee to be a most
miserable creature.

Quest. Do you think, that you are bound to do, as they did promise for you?

Answ. Yes verily, and by Gods help, so J will. And I heartily thank our
heavenly father, that has called me to this state of salvation through Jesus
Christ our Savior, and I pray God to give me his grace, that I may continue
in the same unto my lives end.

Explan. This Answer is a manifold cord binding the baptized unto these three
duties. First, an acknowledgement of obligation to perform in our own persons
whatsoever our Sureties have undertaken in our name. The insoluble strength of
this bond is evident out of reason and common practice. The rule of Law is,
Quod quis per alium facit, per se facere videtur. What a man does by another,
he is in law taken to do it by himself. If I depute a man to seal a bond
for me, his act binds me as sure, as if I had performed it immediately by my
self. An oath taken by a Proctor in animam Domini, lies upon the soul of him
that authorized the taker.

Ob. But an infant cannot make any deputation, nor can at all bind himself,
being not of judgment and discretion so to do, and therefore it seems we
are free, from whatsoever was undertaken by others for us at our Baptism.

Sol Whosoever has capacity of being baptized, must needs have withal a joint
ability to undergo the covenants of Baptism, the duty does inseparably
accompany the benefit. The stipulation of others for an Infant, where it is to
his benefit, binds not only in the gifts, but in the annexed duties. If a
child have an hand to take a beneficial Lease, he must also find an hand to
pay the rent and perform covenants. Nor does the Obligation of obedience bind
the baptized, merely by virtue of the promise made by the Godfathers: though
there were no such promise made by others for the child, nor expressly by the
party baptized (in case he should then be of age) yet this holds ex natura
rei, as an inseparable condition accompanying the Sacrament of baptism:
inasmuch as all baptizing is into the similitude of Christ's death, Romans 5.
and implies on our part, the covenant of obedience, mortification, and dying
unto sin. Whosoever therefore, whether man or child has ability to be
baptized, must needs withal be of capacity to undergo the covenants of
Baptism. Does Baptism confer upon thee the privilege of adoption to be
the child of God? Semblably, it lays upon thee the yoke of obedience, to
be the dutiful servant of God.

The second duty is of protestation and resolution to do and perform in
action what we acknowledge due from us upon such our Godfathers stipulation.
Fitly therefore follow those words By Gods help so I will. This brings the
duties home to us and fastneth them not only in our understanding; but in our
wills and affections. Many are content to profess this obligation, but the
most are slow to achieue this resolution.

A third following duty is of Prayer, and that in both kinds: First,
thanksgiving to God for calling us to this blessed estate; and then, petition
for the grace of perseverance.

Thanks to God is here first in order of nature; for who, considering himself
to be made the child of God, does not at the first apprehension break forth
into the acknowledgement of Gods goodness, and glorifying his blessed name for
such unspeakable mercy, before he dare presume to beg a further gift from
the same hand? Saint Paul in most of his Epistles begins with commemoration
of Gods fundamental mercies in Christ, and thanks for them before he proceed
to new Petitions for continuance of saving graces. Thanksgiving to God for
grace, is the fruit of the first grace, and the seed of the latter.

Lastly, petition for Gods grace, for continuance in grace; shows,

First, that it is not in our power to establish our selves, but that we must
crave this blessing of him, who is the first Author and last finisher of our
faith, by whose power we are kept and confirmed unto Salvation, namely, the
same power and mercy by which we are first taken out of the jaws of hell, as
I have showed before in handling the ability of forsaking the Devil.

Secondly, the difference herein appears, between the two estates of grace
and glory, the imperfection of this life, and the absolute Perfectness of a
better. Here we are still to entreat, Lord increase our faith: Lord strengthen
our hope: Lord assist our patience. But there we shall not need to make
request for establishment: our faith shall then be euacuated, by
accomplishment; our hope fulfilled, by fruition; our patience needless, where
there shall be no tribulation. There the exercise of the soul shall be in
admiring, adoring, and magnifying that mercy and bounty, which has preserved
us to the end of our mortal lives, and has crowned us with life everlasting.

Of the Creed.
Qu. 2. THou say that thou art bound to do as was promised for thee, which
was that thou should believe the articles of the Christian faith, let me
hear thee therefore rehearse the same.

Answ. I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost,
borne of the virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified dead and
buried, he descended into hell, the third day he arose again from the dead,
and ascended into heaven, he sits on the right hand of God the father
Almighty, from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead: I
believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints,
the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting. Amen.

The Symbol of the Apostles.
Explan. Before I come to speak any thing of these Articles in particular, a
few things are to be premised in general. First, touching the name whereby
they are called. What articles are, it is well known to every man, and so is
the other name, the Creed of the Apostles. The proper name hereof in Greek,
in which tongue, these Articles were first penned is (...), Symbolum
Apostolorum: which signifies either a note, a mark serving to distinguish
between one soldier and another, or a sum of money cast in, which we call
a shot.

It is likely, and History consents herein, that the Apostles dispersing
themselves over the world, according to their commission to preach the Gospel,
advisedly compiled an abridgement of the same to remain, as a rule, according
to the analogy whereof, (though the Church were scattered far and wide, yet
both teachers and hearers might be held in an holy agreement of the same
faith: and heresies arising, being brought hereunto, as unto a touchstone,
might be tried, and being found dross, rejected. And because that every one
of the twelve compiled some part, (which being put together make the whole) it
obtained the name of Symbolum: as Augustine testifies (if it be his own)
where he recites in particular the several words put in by every Apostle.
Aug. de temp. Con^. 114.
These were gathered says he by Peter. I believe in God the Father Almighty.
By John, The maker of heaven and earth, By James, In Jesus Christ his only
Son our Lord: by Andrew, Which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the
Virgin Mary: by Philip, He suffered under Pontius Pilate, etc. By Thomas, He
descended into hell and the third day rose from the dead. By Bartholmew, He
ascended into heaven and sits, etc. By Matthew, From thence he shall come to
judge the quick and the dead. By James son of Alpheus. J believe in the holy
Ghost, etc. by Simon Zelotes, The Communion of Saints: By Judas James his
brother, The resurrection of the body: By Mathias, The life everlasting. Amen.

All which I have here inserted, as probable, not as necessarily enforcing,
Jerome. Epist. 41. partis. 1. In the Symbol of the Church of Rome, this phrase:
he descended into hell, is not, neither in the Symbol of the Eastern Churches.
that just, according to this form, it was first set forth by the Apostles:
for both the phrases of descending into hell, and Catholic Church, may seem
to be of later stamp: and moreover, if it were thus certainly penned by them,
it were a part of Canonical Scripture The common opinion of our Divines is,
that it is called the Symbol of the Apostles, because it was gathered out of
their writings, it may be by some of their disciples that heard them. For mine
own part, having recited thus, what I find touching the name, and first
collection of these Articles, I will leave every man to judge, as reason shall
induce him to do.

Secondly, concerning the number of Creedes. It is certain, that there have
been many, some compiled by whole Councels, some by several learned men of
the Church, upon special occasion, but none of those, which have been made by
the Orthodox, do any whit differ in substance from this of the Apostles, they
do only set down in more words, that which is here contained in fewer, and so
may serve instead of some Commentaries upon this of the Apostles. The
principal is the Nicene Creed, made some three hundred years after Christ's
Incarnation, unto which were consenting 318, Fathers, Constantine the great
Emperor being President. This (because of Arius, who denied Christ's Divinity)
is larger in setting this forth, how he is very God of very God, and of the
same substance with the Father. Next is the Athanasian Creed, made by that
holy man Athanasius, who by the Arians was much persecuted: but he made this as
for a testimony of his own sincerity in the truth, so also to instruct and
confirm others. And of like sort is the Ephesine, the Calcedon, the Agathen,
etc. So that we need not be doubtful, because there be many, which to
embrace; know, and receive this, and so thou do know and receive them all.

3. The Creed penned, why.
Thirdly, concerning the ends, why this was committed to writing. They were
sundry and excellent. First (as has been already said) to be a rule of Faith,
and a preservative from Heresy, 2 That it might be a mean of distinguishing
betwixt true Christians and heretics, 3. That every man entering the
profession of Christianity, might continually have before his eyes that faith,
for which he should suffer persecution, and to the defense whereof, he should
stand unto the death; 4. That every one of the Catechumeni (which were new
converted Christians) might have in a readiness, what to answer in their
baptism: when the Minister should demand, what beleeuest thou? or according
to that of Philip to the Eunuch: ( If thou beleeuest with all thine heart, Acts
8.37.
thou may be baptized, unto which he answered, I believe that Jesus is the
son of God.) So when one of them was demanded: Beleeuest thou aright? he
could, according to this form of confession, answer: I believe in God, etc.
And if these be the ends, and according to these only be the right use of
the Creed; then must it be acknowledged a gross abuse amongst simple people,
to use it for a prayer; for the remoouing of which, as also for signification
of our readiness and constancy to defend the true Catholic Faith: it is
rightly provided in our Churches, that all should stand, whilst it is in
rehearsing. Standing at the Creeds rehearsing.
Some, I know, are offended hereat, and do refuse to conform themselves to
this order, but truly they are too too disorderly: for besides, that hence
there is a confusion of gestures in the Church, some standing, some sitting,
and others kneeling, to the hindering the ignorant, from the knowledge of the
right use, how do they answer the reverent behavior of the first Christians,
August: romans 10. p. 327.
who were wont to stand, during the whole time that the Word was in reading,
except very aged and impotent persons, it being now so far yielded unto them,
that they are required to stand only in the time of rehearsing the Creed, as
being a short abridgment of the Scriptures: Or how do they give testimony of
their consent, in the faith rehearsed, when as conforming themselves to the
Ministers gesture in prayer, to testify their consenting desires herein, they
are altogether uncomfortable in the other of confession.

Quest. What do thou chiefly learn out of these articles of thy faith?

Answ. First, I learn to believe in God the Father, who has made me and all
the world. Secondly, in God the Son, who has redeemed me, and all mankind.
Thirdly, in God the Holy Ghost, who has sanctified me, and all the Elect
people of God.

Explan. In this answer, one thing must be warily understood, viz. How Jesus
Christ the Son of God, may be said to have redeemed all mankind: otherwise,
every man's estate shall seem good enough, since by him all are redeemed.
Understand it therefore, as other like phrases in the Scriptures, Romans 5.18.
as that to the Romans; As by the offense of one, the fault came on all men to
condemnation: so by the justifying of one, the benefit abounded toward all, to
the justification of life, etc. By which is meant, that all men which attain
to the justification of life, are made partakers of this benefit, by no other
means, either in Heaven, or in Earth, within themselves, the observation of
the Law; or without them, the merits of others, holy men, or Angels; but only
by the righteousness of Christ. So according to Saint Augustines like
exposition of another Scripture phrase tending hereto: Aug. de predest.
Sanctili. 174.8^
Christ may be called the Redeemer of all mankind: not because all are
actually redeemed by him; but because no man is redeemed by any other but
Christ only.

When we say, he redeemed all Mankind, the meaning is, he is the only
Redeemer of all men, who attain this great benefit of redemption and
salvation, by no other, according to that memorable saying, Act. 4.12.
There is none other name given under Heaven, whereby to be saved, but the name
of Jesus. Such as like better of the distinction ( viz. He redeemed all men,
that is, in regard of the sufficiency of that he did, and suffered, but not of
the efficacy thereof) may follow it if they please: For the passion of Christ
was suitable to his person, his person of infinite excellency could not be so
abased, without infinite merit, accrewing by such humiliation: his dying was
more then equivalent to all the worlds perishing everlastingly in Hell.
Wherefore in giving himself a ransom for sinful man, he is rightly said to
have redeemed all mankind, for so much as he paid the full price of an
universal redemption: And this is the same in sense with that saying of John,
Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. Ioh. 1.29.
Wicked men and unbelievers are not hereby secured; but more justly and deeply
damned, as treading under foot the Son of God, and profaning his blood.

Quest. 3. Whom do these Articles of your Faith concern?

Answ. The first part of them concerns God; the second the Church of God.

Quest. 4. In the first part, concerning God, what do you learn to believe?

Answ. First, I learn to believe in God the Father: secondly, in God the
Son: thirdly, in God the Holy Ghost.

Explan. The articles of our faith, being a sum of all things necessary to be
known and believed unto salvation (as has been already said) comprehend
therefore not only things concerning God, but also the Church of God; so that
they may be fitly considered in these two parts. And because the knowledge of
God is principal, and the greatest part of a Christian man's task, the maine
things concerning him, are first, and more largely set down, and then briefly
those of the Church. Now, for so much as a Commentary of Catechism is in this
Treatise intended, I would not willingly leave any ground of our Religion
untouched, and therefore have thought it needful here to insert some things
more general, concerning God, and then to proceed to the several articles as
they lie in order. 1. Whether there be a God. 2. What God is. 3. How many Gods
there be. 4. That God is both Father, Son, and holy Ghost. 5. That Father,
Son and Holy Ghost are but one God.

Quest. 5. How know thou that there is a God?

Answ. Many ways, but chiefly by mine own conscience, accusing me for secret
sins, which cannot be but unto an infinite wisdom that knows the most
secret thoughts of the heart, such as is neither Man, Devil, nor Angel, but
God alone.

Explan. Such is the Atheism of these times, that this had need be taught for
a ground of Religion, though it be indeed a ground in reason merely natural.
Now this is to be read, not only in the book of conscience; but secondly, in
the book of Gods judgments, taking notorious wicked men oftentimes, in the
very instant of their sinning, and singling out guilty persons by lots, as
Achan, and Jonah, and wonderfully discovering murders, and other villainies,
that they might not escape unpunished. Thirdly, in the book of Prophesies, in
which are things certainly, and particularly foretold, long before they come to
pass, far passing the reach of any creature. And these two, the Prophet Esaias
produces as maine arguments against heathen Gods, for that they are both
wanting in them, and are only to be found in the great God of all. Esaias.
41.23.
Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know, that ye are
Gods: do good, or do evil, that we may declare it. Fourthly, in the book of
Gods creatures wonderfully made, and set in order, and ever since their
creation preserved, when as the nature of the earth is to be heavy, and there
is no solid thing to uphold it, for it is founded upon the waters, being
sustained in the place only by the hand of God, the nature of the water is to
ouerflow all the earth, and the nature of the visible heavens to be confounded
with the waters, 2. Pet. 3.5.
from which they were raised. Fifthly, the consent of all Nations, among which
there is none so barbarous and brutish, but acknowledges a divine power
governing the world, beneficial to mankind, and auenging sin. Nay, the very
nature of man does so far abhor direct Atheism, that rather then have no God
he will make him a God of stone or wood. Lastly, in the book of holy
Scriptures being maintained without any fleshly arm, against the rage of all
tyrants, especially since the incarnation of the Lord Jesus, where every page
gives some testimony of the godhead.

Quest. 6. How many Gods be there?

Answ. But one only true God, the rest are but Idols set up by men.

Explan. Strangely did men dote of old, that followed a number of Gods, our
light is such (thanks be to God) that in the darkest corner of this land men
do know that there is but one God: And this is most clear by the light of
reason: thus. God is infinite; but there cannot be two infinites, for then
there should be somewhat beyond the infinite, and vncomprized in it, which is
a contradiction to it self. Therefore there can be but one God. The like
reduction unto impossibility of plurality may be made out of the attributes of
omnipotency, independencie, supreme goodness, and the like, which are capable
only of unity. But herein I rather refer to the sound Principles of true
Philosophy, urged by some of the Platonicks and Schoolmen, or rather to the
tractates of the Fathers, who have spent much time heereabout in their
writings, and soundly proved the vanity of all other Gods.

Quest. 7. What is God?

Answ. He is a spiritual essence most simple, infinitely present, holy, wise,
just, and mighty, the Creator, preserver, and only governor of the whole
world.

Explan. Here I call God Essence, Exodus 3.14. Joh. 4.20.
because he alone has being himself, and can say I am, other things are all
of him, spiritual, because he has no body, nor members of a body as we have,
most simple; that is, most pure, without mixture of any corporal thing; Psalm
139. Esaias 6.3.
infinitely present, that is, filling all places with his presence, for he is
every where; infinitely holy, for the holiest Angels are not to be compared
unto him, infinitely wise, for he knows all things, Prou. 3.19.
past, present, and to come, and all secrets of all hearts, he knows how to
turn all things to the best for his own glory, and the good of his people;
infinitely just, Exodus 34.7. Genesis 17.1.
he cannot be corrupted, he will not suffer sinners to escape unpunished, but
will plague them to the third and fourth generation; and infinitely mighty, all
power is of him, the mightiest in the world are limited, and go no further
then they are permitted, he alone can do whatsoever it pleases himself; Genesis
1.
the Creator of the whole world, for he made all of nothing, both heaven and
earth, and the great waters, with all creatures; Psalm. 65.
the preserver it is he that preserues and vpholds all things ever since they
were made, by him the earth is established, that it moves not, the waters are
maintained for navigations, and the Heavens, with the Sun, Moon, and Stars
sustained above, Act 17.
for the comfort of this nether world; by him the fruits of the earth are
brought forth for the nourishment of man and beast, and by him we feed and
live, and one generation is provided to succeed another. Lastly, the governor,
for he rules in all things by his providence both small and great, Math. 10.29.
a Sparrow falls not to the ground without him, nor one hair of our head.

Quest. 8. Into how many persons is the Godhead distinguished?

Answ. Into three, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

Explan. It is not sufficient for the true knowledge of God, to be seen into
the nature of the Godhead, which has been already in some measure handled, but
we must also know God, as he is distinguished into three persons, of which
every one is very God. Therefore in this confession, is distinct mention made
of them all if we understand it thus: I believe in God the Father, etc. that
is, I believe in God who is the Father, and in God, who is Jesus Christ his
only Son, and in God, who is the holy Ghost. Proof.
Moreover the holy Scriptures do give large testimony hereof: First, that God
is the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Math. 3.16.
The holy Ghost descended upon him like a Dove, and a voice came down from
heaven saying, this is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Here is
the Father speaking from heaven, the Son baptized upon earth, and the holy
Ghost descending from heaven to earth: again, it is commanded to the
disciples. Math. 28.19.
Go teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost; and plainly. 1 John 5.7.
There be three that bear witness in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Spirit. Secondly, that every one is very God, not only the title ascribed unto
them, but their very works do declare. For what is the Creator of the world; is
it not God? but such is the Father. Genesis 1.
In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth, etc. Such also is the
Son. Joh. 1.10.
By him were all things made, and without him was made nothing that was made:
and such is the holy Ghost. Psalm. 33.6.
By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them, by
the breath, or Spirit of his mouth. Again, is the governor and preserver of
all things any other then God? But as the Father is such, without whom a little
Sparrow falls not to the ground, Mat. 10.29. Heb. 1.3. Psalm. 104.30.
so is the Son: for, the word sustaineth all things, and so is the holy
Ghost, Which is sent forth, and renews the face of the earth.

Quest. 9. If in the Godhead there be three persons, and every one be very
God, how say you then, that there is but one God?

Answ. Although there be three persons, yet is there but one onley God in
substance, one infinite power, and one eternity.

Explan. This point is very mystical, and therefore has bred many heresies in
some, denying the Son to be God, and some the holy Ghost, because they would
not subject humane reason to divine mysteries. But the Scriptures are most
plain for it: First, because they teach but one God only. Secondly, because
they teach this very point in so many words. These three are one. Thirdly, Job.
5.7.
because that ever when they express the Lord God, it is by these words,
Jehovah, Elohim, properly englished, The Lord Gods, that is, God in more
persons, which is but one Lord. Augustine shows by a comparison, that this
may be in natural reason: The light of the Sun, the light of the moon, and
the light enlightening the air are three lights, and yet but one Sun. But
what should we enter comparison betwixt things finite and made, and the
infinite Creator of all, betwixt terrestrial generations, and supercelestiall:
Why should we seek to tie him to the law of nature, who is above nature. It is
no argument, man cannot beget a son, sibi Contemporaneum, which begins to be
so soon as himself, and of whom it can be said, he makes but one man
together with him, therefore neither can the Lord: for so the Lord should be
like man, when as in respect of him not men only, but even all the world is as
a drop of water. It is far more absurd, Esaias 40.15. Mark. 12.18.
then that of the Saduces, comparing our present frail estate, with the
spiritual and eternal to come.

Sermon. 15. ad. frat. in eremo.
Aristodemus a Philosopher, says Augustine, labored many years in finding
out the nature of a Be, neither finally could he: and how then should we
comprehend the Trinity? See more in my Tractate upon the sixth to the Romans,
lib. 2. cap. 5. Sect. 3. and cap. 6. Sect. 1.

Quest. 10. What do you learn here to believe concerning God the Father, and
in which words?

Answ. I learn to believe, that God is my Father, able to do all things, the
Creator of the whole world, and the Lord and governor of the same, In these
words. I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth.

Explan. In the handling of these Articles of our Faith particularly, my
purpose is to follow one, and the same method throughout, viz. First to show
the meaning of the words, then the ground of holy Scriptures, out of which they
are taken, and lastly, how we are to express in our lives, our faith in every
Article.

First therefore touching the sense of this Article. I believe, that is, I my
self do particularly know, and believe whatsoever is here set down, and
acknowledge it my duty so to do, and not to rest contented with a general
faith, believing, as the Church believes, without knowing the things believed:
or with a general faith believing these things generally to be true, without
applying them to my self. Jam. 2.19.
For there is one kind of faith, which does only believe these things to be
true, such as is the faith of the Devil, who is said to believe, and tremble,
and this faith is natural, and historical, reprobates do attain unto it:
there is another, which believes these things to be true but yet in the
application is altogether doubtful, and only hoping well in regard of Gods
mercy, which is the uncomfortable faith of the Church of Rome, and this can
never speed at the hands of God, if that common speech of Christ be true,
According to thy faith be unto thee: and that of James, If any man want
wisdom, let him ask it of God, Jam. 1.5.6. The right Christian faith.
and let him ask in faith without wavering. The true saving faith exceeds all
this, and certainly resolves the believer, though in regard of sin, there
do oftentimes arise doubtings, but these are only weaknesses in believers,
not of the essence, or nature of faith. To proceed, I believe that God is my
Father: that is, I do not only believe, that God is the Father of the Lord
Jesus Christ, nor that he is only the Father of all things by creation, but
that he is my Father by adoption and grace, and that I am his child, though by
nature I be the child of wrath: so that he is a Father by generation, by
creation, and by regeneration, or adoption. My Father able to do all things,
that is all things, which it pleases him, all things, that are arguments of
infinite power, without exclusion of the Son, or holy Ghost, for the Son
also is able to do all things, and so is the holy Ghost, and thus I believe
him to be the creator of the world also, and the governor, for that this is
ascribed unto the Father, as his proper work, as the proper work of the
Son, is the redemption of his people, and the proper work of the holy Ghost
their sanctification, neither of them being excluded from having to do in the
work of creation, redemption, and sanctification. According to that maxim in
divinity. Opera trinitatis quoad extra sunt indiuisa, The works of the
Trinity without are all indivisible, And only within have the several
persons their peculiar works, here the Father only begets, the Son only
is begotten, and the holy Ghost only proceeds, and thus much for the meaning.

Proof. God is Father. Psalm. 2.7. Heb. 1.6. Math. 3.16.
Secondly, for the grounds of this Article, and first, that God is a Father, and
first by generation. Hence it is, that he calls Jesus Christ his Son. Thou
art my son, this day have I begotten thee, and his first borne. When he
brings in his first begotten, he says, Let all the Angels worship him, and,
This is my beloved Son: And in this generation do three wonders concur
First, he that is begotten, is equal in time with him that begat him, for he
is the Eternal God without beginning. The generation of God.
Secondly, he that begat, communicates to him, that is begotten his whole
essence, for the essence of the Godhead cannot be divided, part being
communicated to the Son, and part retained still to the Father. Thirdly, the
Father begets the Son within himself, not without, for there is no place
without him, he contains all places within himself. Secondly, that he is a
Father by creation, is plain. For, He created the heavens, Genesis 1. Psalm. 104.
and the earth: He laid the beams of his chambers in the waters, he set the
earth upon her foundations, etc. And this his work of creation was wonderful,
and far surpassing all other works of the greatest in the world besides.
First, in regard of the matter, out of which the world was made, viz. Nothing,
for all was made of nothing. Secondly, in regard of little or rather no pains
taken hereabout, for he spoke but the Word, and all was made, he did but say of
every thing, let it be, and it was so. Thirdly, in regard of the instruments,
and tools used, which were likewise none. Fourthly, in regard of the time, all
things were finished in six days, not that the Lord needed this time, for he
could have made all in an instant, but partly, that we might enter into a more
distinct, and particular consideration of all his glorious works, to set forth
his praise: partly, that his provident care over man might appear, for that
he prepared all things fit for him before his creation, to stir up the
greater care of his glory, in man: partly, to make known his sovereign power
over all creatures, when as he caused light to be without Sun, Moon, or
Stars, and trees, plants to grow without the influence of these heavenly
bodies, showing hereby, that howsoever he does use means ordinarily, yet he
is not tied hereunto, but can, and will, if it please him, work all things
without means, that we might learn to rely upon his help, when we are
destitute of all means of comfort; and lastly, to give example of laboring in
our callings the six days, and sanctifying a rest upon the seventh. Thirdly,
that he is a Father by adoption, is testified, where it is said, Of his own
will begat he us with the word of truth, and in that of John, Jam 1.18.
Those that are borne of God sin not, neither can they, 1. Ioh. 3.9.
for his seed is in them. Now to whom he is thus a Father, is declared in the
words following: Herein are the children of God known, and the children of the
Devil, viz. in that the one sort commits not sin, the other does iniquity,
that is willingly, and wilfully. Fourthly, that he is able to do all things,
himself witnesses to Abraham saying, I am God alsufficient, and where he
says. Genesis 17.1. Revel. 1.8. Luk 3 7.
I am the beginning, and the end, which is, which was, and which is to come,
even the Almighty. Yea, he cannot only do such things, as he does; but
whatsoever else. He can out of stones, raise up children to Abraham, he is able
to make many worlds. Fifthly, that he is the Lord and governor of the world,
and the preserver of all things created, yea, that the smallest matters are
under his providence, has been already showed before in the description of
God. And moreover, Psalm. 104.
the Prophet David is much in setting forth the same, how he prouides for
things both heavenly, and earthly, both for man and beast, and the Lord
himself in the book of Job. Job 39.40. Proof.
Wherefore that of the Poet is false and absurd. Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse
loui. Sixthly, and lastly, that I may come to the proof of that, which was
first said, and first that all these things are to be known particularly, and
all the articles of our faith. Ioh. 17.3.
This is life eternal to know thee, to be the very God, and whom thou have
sent Jesus Christ: and again, Esaias 53.11.
By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: from whence with
many like places, it is directly to be inferred, that I must study for a
particular knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ; and not rest satisfied with
an implicit faith, believing as the Church believes, without knowing what, as
their teaching is in the Church of Rome at this day, though Thomas Aquinns, and
others not long since have taught it, to be necessary to know all the
articles of the Christian faith, and only in other, more mystical points to
hold, as the Church holds, without prying into them.

Ob. The Apostles had a true faith, without this distinct knowledge, for they
knew not how the redemption of man was to be wrought, they were ignorant of
Christ's spiritual, and heavenly kingdom, even after the resurrection, in like
manner Rahab, who was saved by faith knew only, that the God of Israel was
most mighty, and above all other Gods.

Sol. I answer, and so questionles many more have been saved without the
distinct knowledge of these things, when either for want of means, or through
weakness of conceit, they have been incapable hereof. But note, that ever
where true faith is, there is striving after the increase of knowledge, as in
the Disciples, who were ever attending to their masters Sermons, and
questioning with him: Master what means this parable? and, good master teach
us to pray, etc.

Secondly, that these things are particularly to be believed by every of the
faithful, and without wavering, by reason of their weakness, (though as has
been said, the infirmity of our faith attaines not unto this at all times) is
the rather to be confirmed, Ses. 6. Can. 13.14.15.16.
because of the many canons, made here against in the council of Trent.
Examine therefore the faith of any recorded in the word of God, and you shall
find it to be such, Abraham by faith was fully persuaded: Romans 4.12. Gal. 2.20.
Act. 8.37.
Paul by faith believed, that the Son of God loved him, and gave himself for
him: Philip required of the Eunuch before his baptizing, that he should
believe with all his heart, etc. Again, faith is the testimony of Gods Spirit,
Romans 8.16.
according to that, The same Spirit bears witness with our spirits, that we
are the children of God, Heb. 11.1.
and who dare say then that this is uncertain. Lastly, faith is the evidence
of things to come, and the very existence of things not seen, now it is a
poor evidence, that gives none assurance, but leaves still in suspense, and
doubtful. Thirdly, that I am more specially bound to believe, that God is my
Father, will appear, if we consider, either his command willing us to call
him Father. When ye pray, Luk 11.2.
say our Father, etc. or the large promises made to those that rely upon him,
as upon their Father. If God prouides thus, says Christ, for fowls and
grass, how much more will he for you, O ye of little faith, Math. 10.
meaning if by a stronger faith they should rely upon him, as upon their
father, or lastly the examples of holy men, of Abraham, David, Daniel, etc. see
the Catalogue. Heb. 11.

1. Duty, Obedience.
Thirdly, for the duties to be performed by us; to show our faith in God the
Father, they are four. First, we must obey his will: Hereby we are sure that
we know him, that is, 1. Ioh. 1.2.3.
believe in his name, if we keep his commandments, and Christ publicly
disclames all such from being his brethren, and sisters, but only such as do
the will of our Father, Math. 12.
which is in heaven: and the Lord himself by his Prophet Malachy demands,
saying, If J be a Father, where is my fear, if I be a Master, Mal. 2.3.6.
where is mine honor. As if he should have said, ye are bastards and no
sons, which call me Father, but fear not to offend my will; they do vainly
flatter themselves, that they are coheires with Jesus Christ unto God the
Father, but yet do not his will, they do but think, and not believe, that
God is their Father, which keep not his commandments. And this is the estate
of most men, and women in the world, which make their lives a trade of sinning
against God, they do plainly mock God, and his Church in confessing that
they believe in God the Father.

2. Duty. Like unto God.
The second duty is, to be like unto God, and to bear in us some resemblance of
his Majesty, as natural children do resemble their Parents. Wherefore it is
said; Ephesians. 5.1. Leuit. 11.44. 1. Joh. 3.10.
Be ye followers of God, as dear children. Now this stands in two things.
First, in holiness or life; Be ye holy, as God is holy. Secondly, in love,
for God is love, and he that dwells in God, dwells in love, and this love
expresses it self by beneficence, an aptness, or readiness to do good; Math.
5.45,
Do good to them that hate you (says the Lord) that ye may be the children
of your Father, which is in Heaven, for he makes his Sun to rise on the
evil, and the good, etc. More particularly by mercy toward the poor, for the
Lord receives the miserable Prodigal, and the poor Publican, and the love of
God dwells not in us, Iam. 2.
says Saint James, if we see the naked, and cloth him not, etc. therefore see
how we shall be rewarded. Mat. 25. If these things be so, then is it not so
easy a matter to believe in God the Father, as the world dreams of, and to
come to the privilege of his children, but our corrupt natures must be purged,
and all wickedness must be emptied out.

3. Duty. Moderate care for the world.
The third duty is, to moderate our cares for worldly things, either food, or
raiment: For, what needs he to care for the world, who has a loving Father,
who is all-sufficient, and shall live still, ever to provide for him? and how
can any true Believer then, distract his mind about the things of this life,
seeing his Father is all-sufficient, most loving, and always living, and not
only so, but such an one as prouides him a Kingdom? Will the Heirs of Kings
take care for pins and points, or not rather have their minds taken up with
more princely thoughts? So, do not ye care for such things, Math. 6.32.33.
says Christ, for thus do the Gentiles; but seek ye the Kingdom of God, and
the righteousness thereof. As if he should say, This is unworthy, and
unbeseeming the dignity of your condition, to be so basely minded, and this may
serve also for the fourth duty.

Quest. 11. In which words do you learn to believe in God the Son?

Answ. In these. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, which was
conceived by the Holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, he descended into Hell, the third day
he rose again from the dead, and ascended into Heaven, he sits on the
right hand of God the Father Almighty, from thence he shall come to judge both
the quick and the dead.

Quest. 12. What do you learn here to believe, concerning God the Son?

Answ. Two things. First, his humiliation: Secondly, his exaltation.

Explan. Before we come to the particular handling of these things, it will not
be amiss to lay open some general things, necessarily to be premised, that we
may with the better understanding proceed to the consideration of these two
estates of the Son of God, as follows.

Quest. 13. What is the Son of God, who is also called Jesus Christ?

Answ. He is perfect God by nature, and of the same substance with the Father,
and perfect man, made so of his own good will, that he might become our
Redeemer, and thus is he subject to the Father.

Ioh. 1.14.
Explan. As the Father, so the Son, has been already proved to be very God,
in the general questions concerning the Godhead: now that he is also very man
like unto us, but without sin, is easy to be showed. St. John tells us, that
the Word was made flesh: And the Author to the Hebrews, that, The Son of God
took part with the children, for so much, Heb. 2.14.
as they were partakers of flesh and blood: Besides infinite places, wherein
he is called man, and said to be made man, and said to have become man, and
that he was without sin, is taught in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Such an
high Priest it became us to have, Heb. 7.26.9.14.
who is holy, harmless, and undefiled: And again, Jesus Christ offered
^imselfe without fault* which is alleged, to prove that he did much excel
all High Priests, after the order of Aaron; for they had need, being sinful
men, first to offer for their own sins, and then for the sins of the
people. Moreover, that he was made man of his own good will, the Apostle
shows to the Philippians; He made himself of no reputation, Phil. 2.7.
and took upon him the form of a servant: And whatsoever else he did
undergo for our redemption, was all voluntary. And in regard of this estate is
it, that he says, the Father is greater then I, and was before spoken of, as
his servant; Esa 42.1.
Behold my servant.

Quest. 14. How can this be, that God should be made man?

Answ. Not by turning the Godhead into the nature of man, but by taking man's
nature unto the Godhead, that so one person might be both God and man.

Explan. This is such a mystery, that natural men cannot conceive of it,
wherefore some supposing it to be impossible, that man's nature should be united
unto the divine, (which is infinite) but rather, that it must needs, upon the
union, be confounded herewith, have held one only nature to be in Christ, as
when a drop of Wine is cast into the Sea, we will not say, but that it is all
water still, and these were the Monothelites. Heresy a touching Christ's two
natures.
Others supposing that two natures could not concur in one person, have held
that there be two persons in Christ, and these were the Nestorians. But that
both these be errors, that which is written of Christ does plainly show.
First, that the nature of man was taken to the Godhead, and not abolished by
the Union. For, howsoever he is said to have become flesh, to have been made
man; which may seem to imply a conversion, or confusion of substances; yet he
is elsewhere said, Phil. 2.7. Heb. 2.14.
to have taken upon him the form of man, to have been made partaker of flesh
and blood, etc. Which latter phrases may serve to express the former, viz.
Thus, He was made man, that is, took to his divine nature, the nature and
form of man, so of the like. Again, if the nature of man were abolished after
the Union, he was mis-termed a man, or the Son of man, and he could not
possibly have been subject to sufferings. And on the other side it is absurd
to hold two persons in Christ; for, so he must not be one Mediator, and one
Jesus, but two, the Idioms, and properties of the divine nature, where falsely
in the Scriptures ascribed to the humane, and those of the humane to the
divine, Ioh. 3.13.
as in these sayings; Who has ascended up into Heaven at any time, but the
Son of man, which is in Heaven? The Son of man was not then in Heaven, but
God, unto whom man being united might be said, by the communicating of
properties, Heb. 6.6.
to be in Heaven; They crucify again to themselves the Son of God. The Son
of God cannot be crucified, nor his blood shed, it is a property of the
manhood, and by reason, of the Union ascribed unto God. To conclude, this
error breaks the Union of two natures in Christ, and makes his suffering
without merit, or efficacy.

Quest. 15. What need was there, that the Son of GOD should thus abase
himself to become man?

Answ. Great need on our behalf who could not be ransomed from our sins by
Angels, or earthly Treasures, but only by his precious blood.

1. Ioh. 1.7.
Explan. It is the blood of Jesus Christ, says S. John, that cleanses from all
sin; and Saint Peter excluding all other things of greatest worth, sets down
this alone: 1. Pet. 1..8.
Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as gold and silver, but with
the precious blood of Jesus Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled.

Q. 16. Does sin deserve so ill, that we could not by any other satisfactory
means be delivered heerefrom, but by the death of the Son of God?

Answ. Yet, it deserves the infinite curse of the Law, that is, all judgment
in this world, and everlasting damnation in the world to come.

Romans 6. Deuteronomy 27.
Explan The Sone of God did not needlessly submit himself to the curse of the
Law; for without this we had all perished: The wages of sin is death and the
Lord pronounces all them accursed, which continue not in all things that are
written in the book of the Law, to do them. Now God will be just of his
word, not one tittle shall fall to the ground. And therefore that Law supposed
to stand in force without remission, there must be real and equivalent
satisfaction made, either by the person offending, or by some other in his
stead: which supply and suretiship cannot be conveniently performed otherwise
then by the same nature which offended, nor can temporary satisfaction be
sufficient for the acquitting of an eternal punishment, unless performed by a
sacrifice of infinite worth and power. Wherefore Christ being God, must take
the nature of man, that he might repair and restore man. Certainly no
creature was able to perform this; for creatures are finite and cannot bear
an infinite burden, such as is the curse of God due unto sin, it must then
be the Prince of Heaven alone, the Son of God, who could not undergo this as
merely God; for God cannot suffer: nor atchieue this as mere man; for man
cannot conquer. Therefore he must needs become man, remaining God: and so he
reconciled God and man.

Q. 17. If he must needs be made fit to bear the curse, why did he not to
this end take unto him some other nature more excellent?

Answ. Man having sinned, it was most agreeable to the justice of God to
receive the payment of the debt of sin in the same nature, which committed it.

Canes. 2.
Explan. It is true, the evil Angels also sinned, but they are without
redemption kept in chains of darkness, as witnesses S. Jude: Of other
creatures man only needed a redeemer, man only has sinned, and man only
must by the justice of God dye the death, according to that; The same day that
thou shall eat thereof, thou shall dye the death: and for that thou have done
this, cursed art thou, viz: thou O man, therefore the suffering of any other
nature could not be so pertinent, nor kindly satisfactory.

Object. If Gods law, and absolute justice be urged, this due satisfaction
must be made, not only in the nature offending; but also by the person
offending: for, the direct Law is, Amima quae peccat morietur The soul it
self which sins, that must dye for its own sin.

Solut. I answer. The Law of God, and so his Justice, may be said to stand two
ways, in rigore, and in vigore. If we consider it in the utmost rigor and
strictness of the letter, surely it does not admit of any pledge or surety;
but requires that every singular man offending, must bear his own personal
burden. Can you say that the Kings Law is satisfied if a condemned Traitor,
being to be executed, shall hire his friend to undergo that lot for him, like
a Damon for a Pithias? But if we consider Gods Law as remaining in vigor, and
uncancelled in regard of a full weight of debt or penalty to be paid without
remission of any the least grain of it, then is it capable of a surety or
pledge. As for example, if a man owe me a sum of money, I am no less
satisfied if another pay me it for him, then if himself should bring it with
his own hands. This is the admirable temper of Gods mercy in admitting a
deputy or pledge in a capital debt; and of his justice, in receiving the
utmost mites of the debt. Thus, that he might spare us, he spared not his
only Son. O ye Angels admire and adore this wisdom.

Quest. 18. How came it to be thus with us men? were we created sinners?

Answ. No. God at the first made man righteous, but by yielding to the Devils
temptation he made himself a sinner.

Explan. This has been already further explained. Qu. 3.

Quest. 19. Wherein did man yield to the temptation of the Devil?

Answ. In eating the forbidden fruit, and not contenting himself with all
other fruits of which the Lord had allowed him to eat.

Explan. Read of this in the third Chapter of Genesis, and you shall see how
craftily the Devil comes to the woman under color of wishing her well, yea
better then God himself; whereupon she yields to eat, and offers of the
forbidden fruit to her husband, who did also eat. Now what this fruit was, it
is uncertain, and it is but lost labor to enquire after it.

Quest. 20. Was God so angry, that he would curse man for eating an Apple, or
Fig, or such like?

Answ. That was not the cause of Gods anger, but his unthankfulness, pride,
disobedience, and crediting rather the Devil then God.

Adams sin in disobeying Gods commandment.
Explan. In that one sin of eating the fruit forbidden, did concur many
sins, all very great. First disobedience, when there was but one
commandment, and man so qualified, as that he could easily have kept the same.
Secondly, ingratitude and forgetfulness of Gods great benefits: for the Lord had
done wonderfully for man, providing all things ready for him before his
creation, for necessity and delight, had given him a pleasant place to inhabit,
a Paradise, and power to eat all manner of fruit, of all sorts of trees which
he planted not, only he gave him a straight charge concerning one tree only,
that he should not eat thereof; for what day soever he should presume to eat
thereof he threatened death unto him: yet ungrateful man forbeares not, but
upon the very first occasion shows himself disloyal and goes beyond his
limits. Thirdly, pride, and aspiring unto an higher estate, even to be like his
maker, yea to be equal unto him, for the Devil told them that they should be
as Gods. He was not content to be man, made after Gods image, and Lord and
Ruler over all creatures in this world, beasts, fowls, and fishes: but seeing
the great Lord of all to be of greater dignity, he thought to sit in the same
chair of state with him. Fourthly, disloyalty, content to hear his maker
blasphemously discredited, as being envious, and therefore forbidding him that
tree, lest by eating of it, he should become as good as God himself: yea, in
his heart he consented to this blasphemy, thinking better of the cursed Devil
of hell, then of the God of Heaven, who is blessed for ever. So that here was
matter enough against him, for which to lade him with curses, and to pack him
out of Paradise.

Quest. 21. But though one man did thus, yet all did not, are we all then
sinners and under the curse?

Answ. We were all in his loins, and so what he did, and whatsoever estate
he fell into, it is common to us all.

Romans 5. Romans 5.12.3.23.
Explan. This may seem strange, and yet thus do the Scriptures plainly
teach; Sin came in by one man, and death by sin, forasmuch as all men have
sinned: And again, All have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God.
Neither indeed ought it to seem strange, for that we see the like daily for
matters of this world. A man nobly borne, and accordingly provided for with a
Princely estate, yet if he become a traitor; his children, and so his
childrens children throughout all generations, remain without all Nobility,
without all their fathers wealth, unless it pleases their Prince to restore
them, and anew to bestow it upon them: Even so our forefather Adam, losing that
estate wherein he was made, we his children throughout all generations, are
without all interest therein, until it shall please our great Prince and King,
out of his grace to restore us again, and repurifie our tainted blood, by the
most precious blood of his dear Son: in whom he repossesseth us of the lost
inheritance; and that with advantage.

Quest. 22. It seems then that we are sinners so soon as we are borne,
before we have actually done either good or evil?

Answ. Yes verily, the child which is but newly borne, yea but conceived, and
living in his mothers womb, is a sinner, and needs Gods grace.

Psalm. 51.5.
Explan. In sin was I conceived, says the kingly Prophet, and in iniquity
was I borne. It was said of Esau and Jacob even before they were borne, before
they had done good or evil, Esau have I hated, Iaacob have I loved; Romans 9.11.
now where there is no sin God cannot hate. Esau then was a sinner, whilst
he was yet in his mothers womb: and as it was with him, so is it with us all.
Otherwise we should not be mortal, for where sin is not, there is no
mortality. And this should make Parents betimes to pray heartily for the grace
of God to be shed upon their children.

Quest. 23. I perceive then by this which has been said, that we are all in
a miserable estate by nature, but you tell me of Jesus Christ, that he was
humbled for us, wherein stands this his humiliation, and in which of your
articles is it set forth?

Answ. In these words it is set forth. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our
Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary, suffered
under Pontius Pilate was crucified, dead and buried, he descended into hell,
and there be three degrees of his humiliation.

Quest. 24. Which is the first degree, and in which words?

Answ. First his incarnation: set forth in these words. Which was conceived of
the holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary.

Of Christ's humiliation.
Explan. Having by questions, and answers premised, made a way to the
consideration of the twofold estate of the Son of God, viz. his humiliation,
and exaltation, we now come directly to open the articles touching these, and
first of his humiliation. For the meaning, considering what has been already
said, I shall need to speak but little. And in Jesus Christ. That is, I
believe in Jesus Christ, as being very God, equal to the Father, but in the
order of the persons in the Godhead, the Son of God, and so the second person
of the Trinity, and his only begotten Son, for in regard of him only, is
God a Father by generation, as has been already showed, though he be the
Father of all true believers: also by adoption, and regeneration, and this
only Son of God I believe to be my Savior, my Jesus, to save me from my
sins, I bele^ue him to be Christ, that is anointed, or fore-appointed in the
council of the Father, before all worlds, to be the high Priest, the Prophet,
and the King of his Church. I believe him to be our Lord, that is to have
right of Lordship over us, even as the father has, and power both of life and
death, over such as love him and are obedient, and over the stubburne, and
disobedient. Who was conceived of the Holy Ghost: that is, though he was made
man, yet not by ordinary way begotten of man, but the power of the holy Ghost
made the blessed Virgin to conceive without man, borne of the Virgin Mary, that
is, this wonderful conception, was in the womb of Mary a pure Virgin, of whom
he was after borne, brought forth, and brought up after the manner of other
children.

1. Proof.
Secondly, for the grounds of holy Scriptures, from whence all this is taken:
and first, that he is very God, and Lord, equal with the Father, Philip. 2.6.
Saint Paul is plain. He thought it no robbery to be equal with God, and
enough has been already said above, concerning this. Secondly, that he was
made man like unto us in all things, sin only excepted, I shall need to say
no more for the proof hereof. Thirdly, that he became man after an
extraordinary sort, all the holy Gospels do plainly declare. For they show,
Math. 1. Luke 1. and 2.
how that Mary was contracted unto a man called Joseph, and before they came
together, she was with child by the holy Ghost: and that this should be so,
was prophesied long before: both imediately after Adams sinning, and
punishment. Genesis 3.
The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head: and again, by the
Evangelical Prophet Esaias: Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bring forth a
Son. Psalm. 7.14.
And though the Scriptures do not plainly teach thus much, yet the Church of
God does constantly hold, that Mary, the mother of God, was semper virgo,
always a pure Virgin, both because she never had child after, and Joseph her
husband was a man that feared God, and therefore in all likelihood, would not
presume to know her, whom the Lord had as it were appropriated unto himself.
Now for so much as we read of his brethren, Judas, James, and John, it will not
be amiss a little, to digress to set down the pedigree of Jesus Christ, as it
is registered by Epiphanius. He had to his grandmother one Ann^, Christ his
brethren.
who had three husbands. First ^oachim, by whom she had Mary the mother of
Christ, who were both of the same tribe of Judah, according to Dam^scene, but
according to Epiphanius, she was of the tribe of Leuy, then he being dead,
she was wife unto Cleophas, by whom she had a second Mary who was afterward
wife to Alpheus, and bare him James surnamed the son of Alpheus, and Simon
Cananeus, and Judas Thaddaeus. Lastly, she was wife unto Salome, who begat of
her another Mary which was wife to Zebedeus, and bare unto him James, who was
specially called the brother of the Lord, because most like unto him, if it be
true, which is written under the name of Aege^ppus, that lived next to the
Apostles times, where it is also added, that because he was like unto the
Lord, they sent Judas before to show the one from the other, she bare also
John the Evangelist. So that all these were but his cousen germans, and called
his brethren only according to the Hebrew phrase, by which Abraham, who was
Lots Uncle, Genesis 13.8.
tells him. We are brethren.

To return again, unto that, from which we have digressed, this birth of the
son of God is the chief and most stupifying wonder of the world.

The wonderful birth of Christ.
First in that a Virgin is a mother, that she bears a Son, who never knew
man, all the Historians in the world could never tell of the like, all the
Philosophers cannot find out, how this may be. Another, and far more
unsearchable and venerable wonder is, that the infinite God, whom the Heavens
cannot contain, is borne of a woman, the Creator of all becomes a creature,
he that comprehends the world in his fist, is comprehended in the steight
compass of a silly woman's womb, he that gives food and raiment to all,
becomes naked, and destitute of all things, he that is ruler of all is made
obedient to poor man, he that is eternal, without beginning, and end of his
days, is made mortal, and subject to the arrest of violent death: nay, of the
most reproachful and ignominious punishment. And in this admirable birth of
the Son of God, of a woman, there is a wonderful correspondence to the fall,
which came by a woman. Eve the first woman drew the curse upon man, Mary the
best-beloued of women, brought the salvation unto man, she gave the fruit to
man, by which he loses Gods favor, becomes a sinner, and subject to death
and damnation; but this woman gives him fruit, whereby he comes into Gods
favor, is made righteous, and inheritor of life, and salvation. And thus much
for this, that he was borne of the Virgin Mary.

Math. 1 21.
He is Jesus, viz. a Savior of his people, for this name was Joseph instructed
in by the Angel before his birth: saying, Thou shall call his name Jesus, for
he shall save his people from their sins and in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
Heb. 7.25.
He is able perfectly to save them, that come unto God through him, and besides
him there is none that can save us, Act. 4.12.
according to that. There is no name given amongst men whereby we may be saved,
but the name Jesus: and that of the Prophet, Esa. 43.11.
I am the Lord, and besides me, there is no Savior. And for the fur^^er proof
hereof, see what he has done. Was it necessa^^, that to ransom us, he
should empty the treasures of his riches, and become even poor and of no
reputation? Philip. 2.7.
He did thus. He made himself of no reputation. Must he endure the
fierceness of Gods wrath against sin, his very curse due thereunto? He did
thus also, Gal. 3.13.
He has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us. Must
he perform absolute obedience to the law, which we could not do? he did this
also. I came not, therefore says he, to dissolve the law, Mat. 5.19.
but to fulfill it, Lastly, must he live ever to provide that what he has
done, may be effectual for our salvation? Lo, He still ever lives, Romans 8.34.
and stands at the right hand of God, making intercession for us. So that he is
truly another Joshua, bringing us out of the wilderness of our miserable
estate by sin, trampling our spiritual enemies under our feet, and
victoriously putting us in possession of our heavenly Canaan.

Psalm. 2.2.
He is also Christus Domini, the Christ, or anointed of the Lord, for this name
is commonly annexed unto the other. Christ Jesus: In Hebrew he is called,
Messiah, by a word of the same signification. The Princes are assembled
together against the Lord, and against his Messiah, or anointed; and again it
is said of him, God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows: Psalm. 45.7.
and more peculiarly of Christ says Daniel, Dan. 9.26.
After threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be slain, though one of our
own men lately commenting upon this, has fowlely defaced this most pregnant
testimony, interpreting this Messiah, the Kings and governors of the Jews. And
this name, Messiah, Christ, or anointed, was familiarly known unto the Jews
before his coming; witness that speech of the woman of Samaria, who could
say, I know well, that the Messiah shall come, who is Christ, Ioh. 4 25.
and he will teach us all things. Now he is Christ, that is anointed unto a
threefold office. First of a King, that he might be King of his Church, ruling
in it by his laws, and in the hearts of believers by his Spirit, and defending
it against all enemies: for this, is he said, partly, to be after the order of
Melchisedeck that is, the king of righteousness, and he is also called Melchi
Salem, Heb 7.
that is King of peace, according to the last title given him by the Prophet:
Prince of Peace. Secondly, Esa. 9.6.
he is anointed to the office of a Priest, that he might sacrifice for the
sins of his people, even one all-worthy sacrifice, that is himself upon the
altar of the cross, as a large discourse is had hereof in the Epistle to the
Hebrews. Thirdly, to the office of a Prophet, that he might reveal the will
of his Father unto us, enlighten our understandings therein, and continually
pray to the Father for us. Of Christ under this name did Moses foretell. Deuteronomy.
18.15.
The Lord shall raise you up a Prophet from amongst your brethren, like unto
me, him shall ye hear: chiefly meaning the head of all Prophets Jesus Christ.
And according to this office it is said: Ioh. 1.18.
The only begotten Son. who is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared
him: and again, In these last days he has spoken to us by his Son: Heb. 1.1.
whereas he was wont to speak sundry ways by his Prophets, as if he should
have said, now he has spoken once for all by his greatest Prophet of all.

Ioh. 6.20.
The Son of Mary the Virgin, is this Jesus, and Savior of the world,
anointed, and none other in the world besides: for unto him agrees the time
of the Messiah birth, and suffering, the manner of his coming, of a pure
Virgin, poor, and in the form of a servant, of the tribe of Judah, of the
seed of David, the wonders he should work the universal Peace over all the
world, the departure of the Scepter then from Judah, the testimony of devils
the heathen Gods and prophets, the witnesses from Heaven at his baptism, his
miracles in healing maladies, raising the dead, darkening the Sun, his
glorious resurrection, and ascension, the misery of his enemies the Jews, and
the wonderful acts done in his name by his servants, the passage and power of
his Gospel through the world, the subjection of kings Scepters thereto, the
continuance of it to this day manger the rage of tyrants and persecutors.
Seventhly, that I am to believe in his name, it is the sum of his preaching.
Repent, and believe in the Gospel. And this is the work of God, says he,
that ye believe in him, Ioh. 1.12.
whom he has sent. And they only are judged to be such, as upon whom he will
bestow eternal life, which receive him, and they only receive him, which
believe in his name.

1. Duty.
Now follow the duties, by which we are to express this faith in Jesus Christ,
which are sundry. First, a thankful admiration of this unspeakable favor of
the Lord toward us, we were miserable under the curse, and through fear in
bondage to the devil all our life long, 1. To praise God for Christ
there was no way to be delivered, but the glorious Son of God must become
vile and wretched man, the King of Heaven must put off his glorious robes, lay
aside his princely Scepter, and come out of his royal throne of heaven, from
riding between the wings of the wind: and be basely clothed as a servant,
be ruled like a babe, and lodged in a stable with bruit beasts. If man's heart
be not lifted up to more then ordinary thankfulness for this, the very heavens
will wonder, the earth will be amazed, and the stones will utter his praises,
and cry out upon man's ingratitude. Mary that blessed virgin, that bare him,
breaks out into Magnificat anima mea, etc. My soul does magnify the Lord,
Luc 1.40.
and my Spirit rejoices i^ God my Savior, John that was to be his crier did
but hear the sound of his mothers feet, whilst he was yet in the womb, and
skipt for joy, verse. 41.
and Simeon no sooner saw him, but as though overcome with joy falls into Nunc
demittis, Luc. 2.29.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word, to
omit Zachary and Anne, The Angels and shepherds singing, wondering, and setting
forth the Lords praise for these things. But we unworthy wretches look for as
much good at his hands, yet do no way join in thankfulness with this holy
company. When Moses with the Israelites had been delivered from the Egyptians
by the red Sea, they sung praises: Jude. 3.
When Deborah and Barack were freed from the Midianites, they sang praises, and
so did Mordecay and Ester, when they had the upper hand of their enemies, ever
still we hear the sound of praises; and greater deliverance is wrought for us,
but where be our praises? what testimony do we give of our thankful hearts
therefore.

2. Duty. In humility to serve one another. Phil. 2.
The second duty, is humbling our selves, to seek the good one of another; for
the Apostle propounds this, as a sound argument. This mind was in Christ, that
being equal in glory with God, he became vile for our good, therefore we
ought to humble our selves for the good of our brethren: and Christ himself
uses the same. He takes water and washes the feet of his Disciples, and wipes
them, with a towell, Math. 23.
saying, What I have done, see that ye do likewise. We must think that we
are best and greatest Christians, when we are most serviceable, through love
one toward another, according to that; He which is chief amongst you, Ioh.
13.15.
let him be servant to all. This is the honor and Lordship over one another
that we must affect, and the higher our places be, the more must we exceed
this way. Not as some foolish Monks have done, to show the lowliness of their
mind, embrace lazarous persons, kiss their vlcerons bodies, and drink the
very water wherein they have been bathed, nor yet wilfully to impouerish our
selves of all worldly goods, with the Mendicant Friars: Gal. 6.1.
for it may rightly be said, Who required these things at your hands? But first
we are in meekeesse to restore such as are fallen through infirmity, and not
proudly insult over them. Secondly, we are to lay aside our greatness and
superiority over our brethren, in the case of offense, and to go unto them,
and be reconciled, according to that of our Savior Christ; Math. 5.23.
If thou bring thy gift unto the Altar, and there remembrest, that thy
brother has ought against thee, go first, and be reconciled to thy brother,
and then come and offer thy gift; and not to stand upon this; I am a better
man then he, let him come to me if he will. Thirdly, we are even to forget our
estates, and to visit poor men's houses, in the case of sickness, and to put
to our helping hands, for the relief of our brethren, in the case of danger,
by any sudden casualty, according to that allegation, to the comfort of Christ
his sheep at the last day; Math. 25. Exodus 23.5.
J was sick and in prison, and ye did visit me: and to that precept of old;
If the Ass of thy very enemy falls under his burden in the way thou shall
help him up again. Fourthly, we are to abate of our dainty fare, and of our
costly apparel; yea, we must spare out of our own bellies, for the comfort of
others in the time of extreme want, according the commendable practice of the
Christians in Macedonia, of which the Apostle witnesses, when the famine was
at Jerusalem, saying, 2. Cor. 8.3.
According to their power (I bear them record) yea, beyond their ability, that
they were willing.

3. Duty. To be lifted up in heart to heaven. Col. 3.
The third duty is (in the remembrance of this admirable Union of God unto man,
whereby man is beyond measure graced) to put upon us high spirits, both by
having our hearts lifted up to Heaven, where our nature sits at the right hand
of God; and also by being undaunted at the greatest dangers that may befall us,
or at the greatest terrors, that the Devil can strike into us; Psalm. 23.
we must say with David, Though I walk in the vale and shadow of death, yet
will I fear none evil, for the Lord is my Shepherd; for the Lord (we may
say) is in us: and with Paul, God is on our side, who can be against us. Rom 8.
We must stand fast in the evil day, when we are assaulted, not with flesh
and blood, but with spiritual powers. Ephesians 6.12.
For if our eye be but opened, to see who is with us, as Elisha prayed for his
servant; Lord open his eyes, we shall assuredly be without fear, 2 King 6.
more being with us, then against us. If it were a duty flowing from faith to
be high-spirited, according to the world, I know that many, yea all, would
easily frame themselves unto it; for every man's spirit is too high this way,
all meditate matters too high for them. But this highness must be abated and
brought low, that room may be made for that which ought to be: Thou must not
be altogether without an high mind; for every man is by all means to strive
to exceed herein, only be sure, that it aspire to the highest thing of all
(which is Heaven.)

4. Duty. To reverence Christ our Lord.
The fourth duty is, to yield due reverence to this Lord, and gracious Jesus of
ours; for that we are his, he has bought us: Neither are we under our
enemies hands, neither are our bodies our own (that I may speak with the
Apostle) we are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your bodies. 1.
Cor. 6.20.
He may rightly challenge at our hands, as the Father does, If I be a master,
where is my fear, or my reverence. Now, Mal. 1.3. Phil. 2.16.
what this reverence is, is expressed to the Philippians, God has given him a
name above all names, that at the name of Jesus all knees might bow, etc. that
is, that all might outwardly reverence the name Jesus, be reverently affected
inwardly, at the very sound thereof, and submit themselves to obey his will, at
the very first coming of the same to their ears, for that it is of him, who
is our Lord Jesus: as may best be understood, by comparing this place with
that of the Prophet, unto which the Apostle alludeth; Esa. 45 23.
I live (says the Lord) every tongue shall swear by me, and every knee shall
bow unto me. For swearing by Gods name is usually put for worshipping, and
serving him. We are therefore to serve the Lord Jesus, and in all things so to
behave our selves, in our souls and bodies, as those that remember they have
such a Lord. Masters must entreat their servants gently, Ephesians. 6.9
for that they also have a Lord and master, Jesus Christ, unto whom they must
give account: all higher powers and great persons must so use their authority
over others, Math. 24.
as that they may not be found by this their great Lord, Math. 25.
smiting their fellowse at his coming; all men of all sorts must take heed,
that they have so used their talents as that they be not found to have gained
nothing at his coming. If thou be such an empty and barren Professor of
Christ's name and service, though thou wear his badge, though thou with thy
mouth call him Lord; yet he will be a terrible Lord to thee at his coming,
he will cut thee off, and give thee thy portion with hypocrites, he will bid,
Take this bad servant, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter
darkness.

Quest. 25. Which is the second degree, and in which words?

Answ. He suffered the death of the Cross for my sins; set forth in these
words? He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified dead and buried.

Genesis 49.
Explan Having explained the first degree of the humiliation of the Son of God,
we come now to the second; He suffered under Pontius Pilate That is, a Heathen
Judge set over the Province of the Jews, by the Roman Emperor: for hitherto
they had Governors of their own, according to the Prophecy of old Father
Ia^cob, saying, The scepter shall not depart from I dals nor a law giver from
between his feet* until S^^loh comes. Eusebius. Joseph.
For Herod the son of A^tipater, was the first stranger that was Governor
over them, and the two and thirtieth year of his reign was the son of God
borne, and in the two and fortieth of Augustus Caesar the Emperor. Olympiad.
Luc. 3.1.
194. And after this Herod was Pontius Pilate set over Judea, under the Empire
of Tiberius Caesar. Before these, were men of the Hebrew Nation, Rulers there,
viz. Aristobulus, Hircanus and Antigonus, thirty fine years, and so ascending
upward to the times of Judas Macchabeus, etc. Under the government then of this
Pontius Pilate, Christ began to execute his office, for which he was sent, viz.
To preach the Gospel both by himself, and his Disciples: and continuing thus
to do, and to work many miracles, was spitefully entreated of the wicked
Jews, for the space of three years and upward, then villanously betrayed by
one of his Disciples apprehended, abused, and crucified, being full thirty
three years of age; He was dead: That is, he was not only fastened to the
Cross, to the shedding of some of his blood, where the nails entered into his
hands and feet, but there gave up the Ghost, was after pierced to the very
heart with a spear, so that water and blood came out, and being found
certainly dead, he had not his legs broken, as theirs were, which had been
crucified with him, And buried: That is, for the more certainty, that his
spirit was departed out of him, he was taken down from the Cross, and laid
into the grave. And this briefly shall suffice for the meaning.

Now follow the testimonies and grounds of holy Scripture, out of which this
is taken. First, 1. Proof.
that he suffered under Pontius Pilate. 2. That he was crucified, and dead. 3.
That he was buried. 4. That he did undergo all this for our sins. For the
first: It would be ouer-tedious to rehearse all, that the Lord suffered,
according as it is recorded at large by the Evangelists. We may therefore
referr all briefly to these two heads: First, to that he suffered before his
manifesting himself to the world, whilst he was under age, and then to what he
suffered after, whilst he was under age, great was the persecution, which was
raised up against him. Math. 1.
Herod the King understanding, that one was borne, who should be King of the
Jews, fearing to be deposed, called a Council, and learning certainly, that
Bethelem was the place of his birth, first sends cunningly by the wise men,
which came out of the East to worship this newborn King, to be better assured
of the house where he lay, pretending to come himself also and worship him:
the wise men having found out the Babe, forbear to certify the King hereof,
and depart home another way, as they were admonished from above, whereat he
being more incensed, gave charge forthwith to slay all the male children in
Bethelem, that were two years old, and under without sparing any, insomuch,
that as by some is recorded, his own child being noursed there dyed also:
whereupon one said, he had rather have bin Herod's hog, then Herod's child. But
the Lord provided wonderfully for the safety of his son at this time, by
admonishing his parents secretly to hasten away before this bloody Massacre,
and shedding of innocent blood. Thus the Lord of life was feign to flee for the
safeguard of his life, whilst he was yet in his swaddling clouts.

Luke 9.59.
Moreover, he suffered by want and poverty, wherefore he says, The Foxes have
holes, and the Birds have neasts, but the Son of Man has not whereon to rest
his head. For this is not only true of him afterward, but from his birth
upward. His parents were so poor, that when his mother should be delivered of
him, she had none other place to be in, but even without the town, The
Manger wherein Christ was laid. Luke 2. Basil.
in a cave of a rock, called the manger, where poor people rested that could
get no room in the town, as one well observes upon that place of Luke, where
this history is set down, viz. Basilius Magnus. For otherwise the Shepherds
could not have found him out in the night, but must have searched in the
stables of sundry Innes; moreover the article Te prefixed in the Greek, seems
to insinuate, that some certain Maunger known by that name was meant. Justin
Mart.
Hereunto consents also Justin Mart. In dialogo cum Tryphone: after other
words he says, that they rested in a certain cave near the Town; O^ig
contra. Celsum.
and Origin says, it was a thing commonly celebrated amongst the Christians:
namely the cave, where Christ was borne. So also Epiphanius, Theodoret, and all
antiquity. Luke 3.23.
After that he grew to be thirty years of age, he began to manifest himself
unto the world, following herein the rule set down by the Lord concerning the
Leuits. From thirty years old and upward, Numb 43.
even to fifty years old. Though he attained but to the thirty four year of
his age, according to the consent of Chronologies, howsoever it may seem
otherwise by that which the Jews allege against him. Thou art not yet fifty
years old. Ioh. 8.57.
Whereupon Ireneus concludes, that he was about this age, when he suffered upon
the Cross, and says, that the Elders of the Church learned the same of John,
and that place of Numbers, may seem to give some light and credit hereunto.
Now, Tertullian and Lactantius contrariwise teach, that he was but thirty. In
this great variety, because the Word of God says nothing, but that of John
8.57. It is hard to define infallibly his certain age. But to me the former
opinion seems most probable. The Lord at thirty years of age, as has been
said beginning to manifest himself unto the world, was still more and more
hardly used of the world. First, of the Devil; then of men. Math. 4.
He being led into the wilderness by the Spirit, Christ's sufferings by the
Devil, by men.
did undergo the want of all things forty days, and forty nights, and then
was most strongly assaulted by the Devil, when he was supposed to be weakest,
by reason of his continual fasting. Of men he was hardly used. First, by vile
and slanderous speeches, Math. 11.19. ^ho. 8.48.
they calling him a glutton, and a Drunkard, a Friend of Publicans and Sinners:
saying, that he was mad, that he had a Devil, and that through Beelzebub the
Prince of Devils, he did cast out Devils, and that he was a Deceiuer, or
Impostor, and if any thing more vile could be devised against him, Math. 27.63.
or his followers. Secondly, by their practices against him, without any open
violence: if any man followed him, Ioh. 9.22.7.49.
he was excommunicated out of the Synagogue, he was pronounced accursed:
therefore he himself was much more excommunicated and accursed; they called a
Council against him, Ioh 11.
as against a dangerous Arch-Heretique. Thirdly, by their practices against him
joined with violence, but without effect. Ioh. 7.
Once they sent officers to apprehend him, who being overcome with the grace of
his speeches, returned without doing their office: another time, 10.31.
they took up stones to have stoned him: and a third time they led him to the
side of an hill, Luk 4.
thinking to throw him down headlong, but he went through the midst of them,
and escaped. Yea, such, and so incessant was their rage against him, that
whereas many Rulers did esteem of him, yet they durst not profess it, Ioh.
12.42.
for fear of the Pharisees. Lastly, drawing near to his last Passion, he had
the apprehension of the wrath of God wrestling with him, which made his sweat
like drops of blood, Luke 22 39 40. etc.
the like to which was never heard of, being exceeding heavy and sorrowful, so
as that he could take no rest in the night, but prayed again, and again; and
the third time; Father, if it be (...), let this cup pass from me. And these
almost were his sufferings in general, which made him a man of sorrow,
according to that of the Prophet; ^^a. 53.3.
He is a man full of sorrows, and has experience of infirmities

2. Proof^. Christ crucified. Luke 23.45.46.
Secondly, that he was crucified, and dead, is also planely set down by the
Evangelists; with the circumstances aggravating this his accursed death; He was
hanged (says St. Luke) betwixt two thieves, and from the sixth hour to the
ninth, there was a darkness over the land, then he cried with a loud voice,
Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit, and gave up the Ghost. And St.
Peter vpbrayds the Jews herewith, Acts 2.23. Gal. 3.13. Ioh. 19.33.
telling them, that they had curcified, and slain him. And St. Paul says, He
was made a curse for us, for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on
a tree. Moreover, that he was dead, the Soldiers that came to break his legs
did testify, for seeing this, they let him alone. As for the circumstances of
his death, they make the matter far more heinous on the Jews part, and more
grievous on Christ's part First, Ioh. 18. Christ his apprehension.
they apprehend him like a Varlet, that had done some outrage, coming upon him
with swords and staves in the night time; Judas, one of his Disciples, being
their Guide, who was hired unto this with thirty pieces of silver, and most
obstinately proceeded they in their enterprise, though he gave them some taste
of his Divine power, Verse 6.
for he did but say, I am he, and with the breath of his mouth, they fell to
the ground backward, he did but touch the ear of one, which was cut off, and
healed it. Secondly, they carry him first to one High Priest, Ioh. 18.13. etc.
and then to another, then to Pilate, then to Herod, and back again to
Pilate, amongst whom he is mocked, laughed at, scornefully entreated, and
buffeted, questioned withal, spitted upon, and crowned with thorns. Ioh.
19.17.
Thirdly, they compel him to carry his heavy cross, till he fainted under the
burden, being without all pity and compassion toward him. Fourthly, though
they could charge him with no fault at all, worthy of any punishment, insomuch,
as that Pilate the heathen Judge would have acquitted him, Luke 23.
yet they cried out, Crucify him, crucify him, and had rather, that Barrabas,
a Traitor and Murderer, should be spared, Esa. 53.9.
then he. Fifthly, they hung him up between two thieves; the most harmless
and innocent man in the world, is numbered amongst the wicked, and evil doers.
Sixthly, not content to pierce his hands and feet, in most bloody manner, with
nails, by fastening him to the Cross, like most hard-hearted wretches, they
give him vinegar mingled with gall to drink in his great heat and thirst, Luke
23 35.
they do whatsoever they can, to increase his sorrows, by nodding the head at
him, by vpbrayding him with the saving of others, and telling him, that he
could not save himself: Otherwise, say they, let him come down from the
Cross, and we will believe in him. When in his greatest pangs, he cried out,
Ely, Ely, lammasabactani, they mercilesly scoff at him, and say, he calls to
Elias, when they knew well enough, that he called upon his God. Lastly, not
being astonished at the admirable Eclipse of the Sun, contrary to the course
of nature, (it being about the full of the Moon, an obscuring not of some
degrees, but of all the light of the Sun, and for three hours together) nor
moved at the veil of the Temple being rent, the opening of the graves, and the
coming forth of dead bodies, all wonders of the world, they rage against him,
when he is now dead, Ioh. 19.34.
a Soldier runs him into the very heart with a spear, so that the very
water, which is placed there, for the cooling of the heart, came forth together
with the blood.

Thirdly, that he was also buried, 3. Proof. 19.38.
the Text does plainly set down; Joseph of Arimathea, an honorable man, went
and begged his body of Pilate, and buried it in a new Sepulcher, in a garden,
near the place of his suffering. And this was, according to the prophecy of
Esaias; He made his grave, with the rich, Esa. 53.9.
in his death Which is also particularly in our Creed expressed, both for the
confirmation of his death, and for the mystery of our not only death, but
burial unto sin, prefigured hereby.

Fourthly, that all this was undergone for our sins only, 4. Proof. Ioh.
10.11. Ioh. 11.50.
is plentifully testified: 1. by himself saying, I am the good shepherd, the
good shepherd gives his life for his sheep, then by his enemy Cataphas the
high Priest, saying; That it was expedient, that one should die for the people,
and not the whole nation to perish, which he spoke, not of himself, but being
High Priest for the year, Prophetically: Thirdly, by his unerring servants,
the Apostle Paul, Rom 4. Pet. 1.18.
saying; He was delivered to death for our sins, and rose again for our
justification: Saint Peter saying; We are redeemed, not with corruptible
things, but with the precious blood of Jesus Christ; to omit what is said to
the same purpose, in the Epistle to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 5. Heb. 8.12.
He gave himself for his Church, to sanctify it: and in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, The blood of bulls, and goats, is not able to deliver, o^ cleanse from
sin, but that of the Son of God: And that of Saint John, 1. John. 3.16.
Hereby we perceived his love, that he laid down his life for us: with
infinite like places. Nay, it is the plain prophecy of Esaias, Esa. 53.5.
He was smitten for our sins, and broken for our iniquities, the chastisement
of our peace is upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. And to the
setting forth of this, tend all the types and figures of him, that were before
his coming. All the sacrifices and slaying of sheep, and oxen, calves, lambs,
and feathered fowls, made by the Jews, were types and shadows of this grand
sacrifice, for the expiation of sin: For, when men had sinned; they were
appointed to bring these sacrifices, that they might be forgiven, Exodus 29.39.
Ioh. 1.
and more specially, a lamb was to be slain in the morning, and a lamb in
the evening, every day continually, which in truth was the Lamb of God, Jesus
Christ, that takes away the sins of the world. Again, he that was not
circumcised, must die, as none of Gods people, and the blood of the Lamb in
the Passover, Exodus 12. Numb. 21.9.
stricken upon the upper post of the door, delivered from the destroyer,
Lastly, the brazen Serpent healed them, that looked thereupon, being set up
aloft in the wilderness: Ioh. 3.14.
so does Jesus Christ heal all such, as by the eye of faith look upon him,
being lifted up upon the cross, as he himself applies it, saying, As Moses
lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up,
which he spoke, signifying, what death he should die. And these his horrible
sufferings must needs be for our sins, for he himself was without sin:
There was no guile found in his mouth, 1. Pet. 2.22.1.19. Esa. 53.
neither did he any sin. He was the undefiled Lamb of God, and without
spot: He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, without any desert of his own,
so that he was able to challenge his enemies. Luc 23.4.
Which of you can accuse me of sin, yea, Pilate himself confesses, that
he found in him no fault at all, and Pilates wife, that he was a just man.

1. Duty. Godly sorrow for sin.
Touching the outlets, whereby we are to set forth our faith herein. The first
is godly sorrow, in bewayling our sins, the only cause of these great
sufferings of our dear Savior. The women that followed him to his death, wept
for him most pitifully but he instructs them better, saying, Luc. 23 28.
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for
your children. So are we to weep for our selves, the cause of this heaviness
being our naughtiness. Zach. 12.5.
They shall see him whom they have pierced (says the Prophet) and shall weep
every family apart, etc. so there is no true Israelite so stoically void of
all motion, but he will weep to see, how by his sins he has stricken
through, as it were, with sorrow, his most loving friend, master, Ephe. 5.
and maker. If a man has foolishly run into any such unlawful actions, as
that he must needs die therefore, or some special friend, unto whom his heart
is most entirely knit: he is more then flint-like hard, if it pricks not his
very soul, and much more if a woman has done thus, and her best beloved
husband must suffer. But such is the Lord Jesus unto us, and so ill deserving
are the actions, which we have, and do daily run into, either we our selves
must die therefore, and still most hideously live, ever dying, or our best
friend in the world (unto whom we are a spouse, and he the husband) must lay
down his life for us, yea, he has done it, and we cannot but daily behold it
in the Gospel. O then let us weep with Rachel, and not be comforted, let our
hearts break with sorrow for our so heinous iniquities, and let it continually
afflict us inwardly, as we are continually subject to sinning: and the rather
for that so doing we shall be comforted according to that. Blessed are those
that mourn, Math 5. 2. Cor. 7.10.
for they shall be comforted: and godly sorrow breeds repentance unto
salvation never to be repented of.

1. Duty Mortification of sin. Heb. 6.6.
The second duty is the mortification of our fleshly members and sinful
concupiscences, and that for three special causes: First because that by
living still in sin, we come to be accessarie to this odious murdering, and
killing of the Lord of all: for they that live obstinately in sin, do crucify
again the Son of God, and make a mock of him, so far are they from
believing in him crucified. Their daily practice is to draw Christ unto the
cross, to drive nails into his hands, and feet, to scoff at him, and to
run him in with a speeare to the very heart, howsoever in word they defy and
spit at such practice.

Romans 6.4.
Secondly, because all such, as unto whom Christ's death is effectual to do
away their sins, are conformable unto him in his death, and burial. All that
are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, and are by baptism buried with
him into his death etc. If the head be dead, and buried, the members cannot be
alive still, no more can any true member of Christ, be alive unto sin, such
as is every true believer: he does but prate then, and not believe that Christ
was crucified, dead, buried, whosoever lives still willingly in any sin.
Thirdly, because no man following the trade of sin, can be Christ's disciple.
For such an one must deny himself, that is, to be as he is naturally and
according to the carriage of his own disposition, and so follow Christ. He
must forsake all and go after him, if occasion require, father and mother
brethren and sisters, house and ground, and life it self, that is, all
profits, all pleasures, and whatsoever most precious things might be an
hinderance unto him. As he that would be into any man's service entertained,
must utterly forsake his old service unto his masters enemy, otherwise he
cannot belong unto him: No more can thou belong unto Christ, if thou be still
exercised in the works of sin, his utter enemy. Besides believing the
sufferings of Christ procures wonderful love of Christ, and where this love
is, there is a continual endeavor in all things to please him. If these
things be so, if the Son of man should come now to judgment, should he find
faith upon the earth, I fear he should find but a very little, and but in
very few.

3. Duty. Patience in suffering.
The third duty is patience and joy in suffering any thing for Christ's sake and
the Gospels, as those which are glad of any occasion to show their love for so
great love of his. And we are chiefly to rejoice herein for two causes.
First, because that by suffering we are made like unto him, according to this
his speech, Math. 15.25.
whereby he incourageth his disciples: It is well for the Disciple if he be as
his Master, and the servant as his Lord, and we shall be rewarded like unto
him afterward, for he says, Rejoice and be glad for great is your reward in
heaven. v. 5.22.
We are to be like minded unto Vriah, who being bidden (when he came weary
from the wars, to go to his own house, to cheer up himself, and to
delight in the company of his wife) answered, nay, 2. Sam. 11.
my Lord Ioab, etc. lies in tents in the fields, and shall I do thus, surely I
will not, and so was content with his, perhaps, hard lodging amongst the Kings
servants: so do all true Christians say, what did my Lord Jesus, suffer
poverty, hunger, thirst, violence and wrong, was he harbourlesse, abused, and
hanged on the Cross, and shall I never think my self well, but when I am
rich, honored, and abounding with all good things of this life? God forbid, I
will be glad rather, if I be counted worthy to suffer with him crosses,
persecutions, troubles, or death it self. Secondly, because that in suffering
for his truth, he does grace us, for so much as he takes us for his Martyrs,
and witnesses, as if the King should choose certain men out of his dominions
to be his Champions, to maintain his honor, furnishing them in such sort, as
that they could not be overcome, though they must strive, and take great
pains in playing their parts, yet they would do it cheerfully, and joy much
herein, for that they would take it as an honor done unto them by the King,
more then unto others: for even thus does the Lord Jesus honor those, whom he
calls forth to suffer for his truth, they be his Champions, chosen to maintain
his honor, and he prouides assuredly so for them, as that they shall overcome,
according to that glorying of Paul, Romans 8.37.
In all things we are more then conquerors through him that loved us. And this
was it, that made the Apostles glad for being beaten. They rejoiced, Act 5.41.
that they were counted worthy to suffer any thing for his sake.

The fourth duty is, to remain vnterrified with the pangs, 4. Duty.
and approaching of death unto us, because our Lord Christ has dyed, and in
dying has overcome death, he has taken away the sting of death, which before
made it terrible: for the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin,
is the law, but for the one he has satisfied by his death, the strength of the
other he has made to cease by the liberty, which he has brought us, insomuch
as we are not under the law, but under grace. So that now we may challenge
this our greatest and most terrible enemy with the Apostle. ^ Cor. 15. Romans 6.
Death where is thy sting, hell where is thy victory? Death of it self indeed
is most fearful, as being the wages of sin, and the passage to eternal
pangs; but Christ by dying has altered the nature of death; of a curse, he
has made it a blessing, of the passage to hell, he has made it the entry of
heaven to all the faithful. Again, though our grief in our sicknesses be
great, his pangs were greater, Heb. 4.15.
and so he has had experience of our miseries, and so cannot but have
compassion, and provide that we shall not be tempted above our power, and in
good time deliver us out of all our troubles.

Quest. 26. Which is the third degree of his humiliation, and in which words?

Answ. Thirdly, he descended into Hell, that I might he delivered from Hell,
and everlasting death to these words he descended into Hell.

Rus in Exposit. Symbol:
Explan This clause was wont of old to be inserted into most of the
confessions of faith: as Rus^^ says (...) est, quod in ecclesiae Romanae
Symb^lo non habetur additum W. must know, that it is not added in the Creed of
the Church of Rome: and neither says he, is this speech had in the Churches
of the Past, yet the meaning hereof seem to be the same with this: He was
buried. It is not in the Creed council of Nice, nor in the Creed of
Athanasius, nor in the Sirmian, nor in the Sardian, nor in the first Toletan,
nor in the Ephesine, nor in the first nor sixth Constantinopolitan, nor in the
Calcedon councels, nor in many other ancient confessions, and tractates written
by the learned Fathers, for the space of four hundred years and upward. See
Pirk: nemonstr: problematis. page 129. and. Notwithstanding it is now, and may
well be an article of our faith, or at the least this third degree of Christ
his humiliation, set down under it. About the meaning of these words great
disputations are held, and whole books written, to leave all which, only
signify briefly, that these words are interpreted five manner of ways.

Of Christ's descent into hell, diverse opinions.
Some holding them merely literally. He descended into hell, that is, went into
the place of the damned, or some lower places thereabout. They which understand
it literally of the place of the damned, say, that he went thither to triumph
over all the damned Ghosts, and Devils, his enemies. They, which understand it
of some place thereabout, say, that he went thither to free the Patriarks,
that were detained for their original sin in Limbo. The grounds common to
both, are both that to the Ephesians, Ephesians 4 9. 1. Pet. 3.19.
He descended into the lower parts of the earth, and that of Peter: By which
Spirit he went, and preached to the spirits that were in prison, which were
disobedient in the days of Noah, and that of the Psalmist! Psalm. 16.10.
Thou will not leave my soul in Hell. But the last sort, that stand for Limbo,
have some special allegations besides, as that to the Hebrews. Heb. 9.8.
The way into the holiest of all was not yet opened, whilst the first
Tabernacle was standing: And again speaking of the Patriarchs, he says, All
these dyed, and received not the promises. Heb. 11.


Secondly, others again hold them literally, but expound (...) the grave,
saying that, He died, and was buried, that is, anointed to the burial, and
descended into the Sepulcher.

Thirdly, others interpreting (...) the grave, make the descent to be
figurative thus, he descended into Hell, that is, remained in the grave unto
the third day.

Fourthly, some others interpret it as an Idiom, or phrase peculiar to the
Greeks. (...), He descended into Hell, that is, was in the estate of the dead,
for thus the Greeks were wont to speak of a man departed; whether good or bad.

Lastly, some others hold it to be merely figuratively spoken, He descended
into Hell, that is, suffered the torments of Hell, viz. the anger of God
against the sins of all the elect powered forth upon his soul, driving him
into that bloody agony in the garden, and making him cry out, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me.

Now of all those, that which stands for Limbo is to be exploded; as by other
sound positive reasons drawn from Scriptures: so in regard also of the
impertinency of the places alleged: for in that to the Hebrews: The way into
the holiest was not yet opened, is meant nothing else but that, which in more
words is there expressed, viz. heaven and happiness, the redemption of man, as
verse 12. was not obtained by the service done in this tabernacle: and in the
other, these dying received not the promises, is meant, the incarnation of
Jesus Christ so long before, and so often promised, but not sent in their times.

The second interpretation seems to me too much strained, and makes this
short Creed needlessly to labor with tautologie, for what else can this import,
He was buried, that is, laid in the grave, and descended into hell, that is,
went down into the grave, as if it had been said, He was buried, and was
buried.

The third not much different from this, and only shows that this his
burial was not a mere transeunt act or passion but had a due continuation by
his body so remaining, in statis quo, till his resurrection, which me thinks
is sufficiently employed in the specifying of his burial and rising the third
day, importing that for that interim his body lay still in the Sepulcher.

The fourth interpretation has far more probability, this Creed being
composed by those, who fitted it not only to the Greek style, (in which
language it was written) but also to the Hebrew ordinary phrase, which sounds
in this fashion, speaking of a dead man, namely, that he is dead and gone down
into Sheol, which whether you translate, hell or the grave, or some place of
bliss, it does not hereby specify any of these distinctly, but only
points at the state and condition of the dead in general, and considers
them by a confused motion, as opposite to the state of the living here upon
earth. So that by this construction, here is to be meant, that our Saviors,
not body only, but soul also did for this mean space undergo the common lot
of separation the one from the other, and so remained in the ordinary estate of
others departed this life. Howsoever it be yielded that this phrase may well
bear this sense; yet because both thus much is implied in the general word of
Christ's being dead, (which must needs mean a true death, putting him in the
common condition of other deadmen) and forasmuch as these words of descent,
etc. do rather import somewhat added to his death and burial, the more
current exposition is to make it a several and different Article or Parcel of
our Saviors performances: and so we will now consider in the remaining
interpretations.

That branch of the first interpretation, auouching that our Savior did
sometime in triduo mortis, really descend in soul into the place of the
damned, is most literal, natural, and agreeable to the words, no way liable
to tautologie, nor repugnant to the analogy of Faith; but consorting with the
plain terms of Scripture and testimony of ancient Fathers. In this sense the
Church of England, in the first times of reformation, Artic^ 37.
seems to understand and interpret this Article; both by insisting upon the
direct words, in the book of Articles of Religion, where the truth and realty
of Christ's descent into hell is avouched in the same manner with the realty of
his death, etc. as also by the explanation thereof in the larger Catechism
authorized by our Church called Nowels Catechism. The end of such descent
might well be to triumph over Satan in his own dunghill and dungeon, and
withal there to vpbraid unto the damned spirits of obstinate men, what a
gracious and glorious Savior they had neglected. Though some be of another
mind in this point, yet I see no coactiue reasons out of Scripture, or
otherwise brought by them against this plain literal construction. And
caeteris paribus, why should not the authority of our Mothr the Church of
England over sway? For my part, in my private opinion, I have much inclined to
the fifth interpretation, applying this descent into hell parabolically to the
dismal apprehension of Gods wrath lying heavy upon the soul of Christ, and
representing the pains of hell due to us. The reasons that persuade that our
Savior underwent such inward sufferings in his soul, are.

First, if he had not suffered extreme torments in soul, (besides what he
suffered by sympathy, through bodily pangs) he must either have been weak,
and ouer-yeelding, or else have dissembled, being without sorrow, Sixth.
Sennensi Bibl. Patrum. li. 6. Annot. 35.
when he expressed so great sorrow, (as one says, that Hillary sometimes
held, but afterward recanted, making a sound confession of his faith) for if
Christ did not truly suffer, we are not truly redeemed, or else the Saints
of God, which are by infinite degrees, more weak then Christ, God and Man,
must be acknowledged to have had more courage, and magnanimity, when they have
been under extreme torments, then he had. For before his passion upon the
cross, he was very heavy, and much troubled, Math. 26.38. verse 39.40
in so much as he said, My soul is very heavy even unto the death, and prayed
three times, if it were possible; that the cup might pass from him: at what
time also his passion was noted to be so great, that he sweat with pain, and
his sweat was like drops of blood, Luc. 22.43.44
and an Angel appeared from heaven comforting him: whereas weak men have by
Gods assistance joyfully prepared themselves, and have been ready to meet with
the most extreme bodily torments. Again, in the time of his passion, what a
wonderful deal of fear was he surprised withal, when he cried out, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me, Luke 24.46
yea, and he cried again the second time, and gave up the ghost: whereof
mention is made also in the Epistle to the Hebrews: verse 50.
In the days of his flesh, he did offer up prayers and supplications with
strong cryings and tears to him that was able to save him from death, Heb. 5.7
and was also heard in that which he feared: whereas weak men have been
under cruel tormentors hands with undaunted courage to the astonishment of the
beholders. Now there is no Christian but will acknowledge that Christ was ten
thousand times more able to endure any torments, then any of the most constant
Martyrs that have suffered for his name: and if he were without all comparison
more able to bear, whence could it happen that he was pressed with such
sorrow, heaviness, and fear, but for that he alone suffered more then all
Martyrs, if all their sufferings were put together ever since righteous Abel to
this day. And how could he suffer more, but in his Soul wherein he felt the
wrath of God, which is unsupportable to men, and Angels? Heereto is added this
reason also, Arg. 2.
Christ did sustain the person of the faithful, who without him were all
subject, not only to bodily sufferings, and death, but to the everlasting
death of the soul: now the only way whereby God is pleased to deliver us
heerefrom, is by sending Christ to be in our stead, and more or less to
suffer that, which we for sin should have suffered; wherefore it ^s said,
He was made sin for us that knew no sin, 2. Cor. 5.21
that we might be made the righteousness of God through him. And, He took
flesh that he might destroy through death, him that had the power of death,
Heb. 2.14
that is, the Devil. Therefore Analogy infers, that as the Lord Jesus
suffered for us in body; so he suffered in his soul also, and thereby has
perfectly redeemed us in both: but how, and by what particular passions he
suffered in soul, is not revealed, and therefore by us unutterable. Only we
must know that how great soever his passions were, he did in the end overcome
them all, and by the way, though he feared, sweat blood, and cried out through
want of present sense, and apprehension of the union with the divine nature,
yet the divinity was never separated from Christ Jesus, but supported him, and
made him conqueror over all when he seemed to be overcome.

The Meditation also upon these suffering of our Savior, is very needful and
profitable to us.

First, the remembering Christ's passion in his soul, 1. Duty. By the
remembrance of Christ's sufferings, to fear to sin.
is an antidote to preserve us from sin. For, though thou be so stout-hearted,
as that no bodily punishments can scarre thee, from following thy will and
resolution in wickedness: yet, do but behold Christ in his spiritual
conflict with Gods wrath due to sin, sorrowing, sweating sweat of blood;
comfortless, and crying out upon his Father without hope, and it will make
thee to tremble to think, am I forward to commit that which does thus anger
the King of Heaven, that he would not show any countenance nor favor, that
he would no whit spare, nor regard his own beloved Son, standing in the room
of sinners, though his groans and cries went up to Heaven. O then, if I do
thus, if I rot in the dregs of my sins, how shall I endure his anger? how
regardlesse will he be of me when I shall in my need cry for mercy? Surely,
I shall with Esau be sent away empty, Heb. 12.16
though I seek the blessing with tears.

2. Duty. Joy in all bodily sufferings.
Secondly, it begeteth an exceeding contentment and comfort in all our
sicknesses, bodily pangs and sufferings, Christ Jesus has endured greater
pangs then any of this kind can be, our sins deserve greater then these.
Wherefore, as a poor prisoner in for some capital crime, but again released
for his life, and only chastized with some few stripes, will rejoice in the
midst of these his petty sufferings, remembering what he has escaped: So
we, being in misery in this world, but delivered from the everlasting torments
due unto us for our offenses, cannot but rejoice in the midst hereof, seeing
we have escaped that misery, ten thousand times greater.

Yet I sincerely confess that though these reasons and motives be yielded
unto, as proving the truth of this doctrine; namely, that Christ did thus
suffer in soul; yet they enforce not, that this must be the sense of this
Article. There are many true positions in Divinity concerning the actions and
passions of our savior, which are not evident Articles of faith, nor directly
intended by any parcel of the Creed. So then, I neither press upon any man's
judgment herein, nor obtrude mine own; but rather refer both my self and
my Reader to the judgment of the more learned in our Church.

Quest. 27. Is this all the humiliation of the Son of God for our redemption?
Did he no way else abase himself for us?

Answ. Yes, he became obedient to the Law also, that by his obedience and
righteousness, we might stand righteous in the sight of God.

Christ obedient to the Law.
Explan. Howsoever this be not expressed in the Creed, yet is it implicitly
set down, in that he is said to be made man, borne of the Virgin Mary, and to
have suffered, that is, to have been obedient to sufferings: for, being man,
he is under the Law, Gal. 4.^
as witnesses the Apostle, God sent his Son made of a woman and made under
the Law, that he might redeem those that were under the Law: and becoming
obedient, even unto the death of the Cross, his obedience to the will of his
Father cannot but be admirable: and S. Paul seems hence to extol it, Phil.
2.8.
saying, He became obedient to the death, even to the death of the Cross. And
that which may thus be gathered from the words of this confession, is plainly
testified in sundry places. First, that he obeyed the whole Law of God, and
then, that he did this for us, that we might be accepted for obedient and
righteous. That he obeyed the whole Law of God, is testified, both generally,
Math. 5.17.
I came not (says he) to dissolve the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill
them. And again, as has been already showed, in that he was unblameable, and
without spot, and no man could accuse him of sin: and particularly, for that
no duty required by the law moral, or ceremonial, was omitted by him. The
love of God required by the moral Law, did show it self in him, when he
whipped those out that bought and sold in his house, and when he verified that
Prophecy, The zeal of thy house has eaten me up. The love of man in him
abundantly appeared, in his unweariable going about to do good, in his free
healing of diseases, and casting of Devils out, and in his compassionate
feeding of thousands, sundry times in the wilderness, being like otherwise, to
perish. Again, for the ceremonial Law, He was circumcised the eighth day, and
his name called Jesus: Luc. 2.21.22. etc.
when the days of his mothers purification were accomplished, he was presented
in the Temple, and an oblation offered for him according to the Law. When he
had cleansed the ten Leapers, he bad them go, Luc. 5.12.
and offer their gift, which was commanded by the Law of Moses, and so he did
ever, when he had cleansed any. He kept the Sabboths of the Jews, Math 26.
Heb. 9.28.
he frequented the Temple and kept the Passover: and lastly, being an high
Priest he sacrificed himself upon the Altar of the Cross, for the sins of
his people. All this he did and that necessarily, because the first Tabernacle
was yet standing, nothing ceremonial was disanulled, until the rent of the
veil in the Temple, at his death, and therefore he could not have been
perfectly righteous, had he omitted any of these things.

Christ fulfils the law for us. 1 Cor. ^.20.
Secondly, he did all this for us, that we sinful creatures might become
righteous through him, according to that, He is made of God unto us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. And in another place, 2 Cor 5.
That we might be made the righteousness of God through him. And more
largely to the Romans, That which was impossible to the Law, Romans 8 3.
in as much as it was weak, because of the flesh, God sending his own Son
in the similitude of sinful flesh, condemned sin in the flesh, that that
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us: that is, that Jesus Christ
his freedom from sin, and perfect righteousness in keeping the Law, might
turn unto us to righteousness. We could not keep the Law, neither can we
perfectly, as is declared at large, in the seventh to the Romans, and many
other places: Now it is not enough then for us, to obtain eternal life, that
the Lord Jesus should bear the punishments due to our sins, but he must also
fulfill the Law for us, according to that, Do this, and live.

1. Duty. Cheerefulnes in striving to keep the Law.
The duties, which we must perform to show our faith in this, are these. First,
cheerfulness in striving to fulfill the will and Law of God, in all things:
for though we be unprofitable servants, when we have done what we can, yet this
is our comfort, that through our Lord Jesus, we are good servants, that
wherein we are wanting, he has fulfilled for us. A scholar is commanded to
make such an exercise, as he is no way able to do: a servant is bidden to
carry such a burden, as he has no strength, or power unto: Now, this may
utterly discomfort both the one and the other, and because they know they
shall undergo stripes, what pains soever they take, it may justly harden
their hearts against al pains: but admit, that the scholar has a friend to
help him that the servant knows, how otherwise to provide for his carriage,
they will readily, and with a good cheer, go about their taskes appointed
unto them. We are the Lords scholars, we are the Lords servants, the exercises
appointed us be too hard, our burdens too heavy: but we have here a
sufficient friend that helps us, one whose shoulders are ready to be put under
every burden, that ouerlodes us; Oh then, how readily should we go about our
taskes, how cheerfully should we strive to do whatsoever the Lord has
appointed us: seeing, that in so doing, we shall assuredly please him, and have
a bountiful reward, even everlasting life. They of the Church of Rome are
afraid, that by teaching this, all good works would be neglected, and
therefore make men believe, that they may perfectly keep the Law; yea, and do
works of supererrogation also, more then the Law requires at their hands; but
you may easily perceive, by that which has been said, how little cause there
is of any such fear. The sons of Belial indeed, men without all grace,
grow secure hereupon, and endeavor to do nothing themselves, because Christ
has done all for them: but they are fowly deceived, as they shall find to
their cost another day. The Apostle says not simply, He has fulfilled the Law
for us, Romans 8.4.
but with this addition, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit:
that is, for us, which would feign be righteous, and keep the Law our selves,
but through the weakness of the flesh, are not able, he has done nothing
therefore for these secure persons.

2. Duty. To rely only upon Christ.
The second duty, is to cast out the anchor of our hope of eternal life, only
upon the righteousness of Christ Jesus, and not upon any merits of our own,
no not whereunto we are enabled, by the merits of Christ Jesus. For, as he
said unto Paul, My grace is sufficient for thee, 2. Cor. 12.
so may it be said of his merits and righteousness. His righteousness is
sufficient for us. Either it alone must make us righteous, or not at all, that
must not do somewhat, and our own righteousness somewhat, the Lord will admit
no such partnership: Romans 11.6.
But if it be of grace, it is no more of works, says he, else were grace no
grace: if of works, it is no more of grace, else were work no more work. Our
good works are ordained of God, as a way to eternal life, Ephesians 2.10. verse 9.
that we should walk in them: they merit nothing, lest any man should boast.
Let the Roman Catholics therefore sit at anchor here, if they will, let them
build their hope upon this sandy foundation: but let us stick fast, and
remain immovable upon the rock Christ Jesus, let us look for the sweetning
of all our imperfect good works, from the perfume of his righteousness, that
thus we may be sure to be accepted before God his Father, at the last day.

Quest. 28. In which words is his exaltation set down, and how many be the
degrees hereof?

Answ. In these words. The third day he rose again from the dead, and
ascended into Heaven, he sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty,
and from thence he shall come, to judge both the quick and the dead. And of
this, there be three degrees also.

Quest. 29. Which is the first, and in which words?

Answ. First, In that he arose again from death to life, and ascended up into
Heaven. In these words. The third day he arose again from the dead, and
ascended up into Heaven.

Two branches of the fifth Article.
Explan. As the Lord Jesus, taking upon him the work of our redemption, was
greatly humbled, as has been showed, so when this work was finished, he was
again highly exalted, and look by what steps of humiliation he descended, by
the like also he ascended, till he came to the height of his glory, beginning
first to rise from the lowest, in that out of the nethermost earth, he goes up
to the highest Heavens. Of this Article there be two branches* The third day
he arose again from the dead, is the first: He ascended up into Heaven, is
the second. Concerning the first. Being laid into the Sepulcher by Joseph of
Arimathea, and a great stone rolled to the door of the Sepulcher, a watch also
was set to keep his body, lest his Disciples stould come by night, and steal
it away, and say, He is risen again: being, I say, thus strongly guarded, he
is not hereby hindered, but powerfully rises, and comes forth of the
Sepulcher, the third day after his burial, which was the Lords day, or first
day of the week, as he had foretold unto his Disciples. Proof for the grounds
of holy Scripture, Math. 28. Mark. 16. Ioh. 20. Luke 24.
from whence this is taken, the history recorded by the four Evangelists, does
plainly declare thus much; who do all set forth his rising again, with the
circumstances thereof. Generally, this time was the time of the Passover, to
show, that the true Paschall Lamb was now come into the world, and the
religious killing of all other lambs, as merely a figurative, and shadowing
ceremony, should now cease, the substance it self being now present. Again,
it was the first month, about the midst of it, which answers to our March,
wherein in this Northern Hemisphere of the world the pleasant spring does
begin, to show, that the earth did in her kind rejoice, to receive the Lord
revived from the dead, according to that of Melancthon: Melancth.
Ecce renascentis testatur gratia mundi,
Omnia cum Domino dona red sse suo.
See how the worlds grace revived does show:
With the Lord of all, all gifts returned anew.


Gal 5 2.
Thirdly, it was early in the morning, before the Sun, to show that a brighter
Sun, the Sun of righteousness, was risen to the world. Fourthly, it was the
first day of the week, when he had lain all the Jews Sabbath in the grave, to
show, that they are dead still unto Christ, that keep their holy rests upon
that day, as is spoken of circumcision, If ye be circumcised, Christ profits
you nothing: and to show, that a greater work was now ended, then the creator
of the world, viz. the redemption of the world: and that, as under the
creation, the Lords resting day from that great work, was the Sabbath of Gods
people: so, under the redemption, Christ's resurrection day, and of ending a
greater work, became their Sabbath, to endure to the worlds end. Fifthly, it
was the third day after his death and burial; no sooner to show, that he was
truly dead, without all deceit: no later, lest through his longer tarrying, the
faith of his Disciples should turn into despair. Now, that he did rise again
indeed, and that he was not taken away out of his sepulcher (as the Jews, his
enemies, would make the world believe) is diversely testified; and so fully, as
that it were shameful impudency to deny it. First, he himself foretold thus
much, sometime darkely. Ioh. 16.16.
Yet a little while, and ye shall not see me, and a little while again, and
ye shall see me. Sometime plainly. Math. 12.40.
As Jonah was three days and three nights in the Whales belly, so must the
Son of man be in the heart of the earth. Sometime again more plainly, Math.
17.12 23.
The Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of sinners, and be crucified,
and slain, and rise again the third day. Secondly, as he foretold, so that it
came to pass the Angels do witness, He is risen, he is not here, Luke 24.6.
said they unto the women that came to imbalme him, Remember how be spoke unto
you, when he was yet in Galilee. Thirdly, Ioh. 20.18.
Mary Magdalen, Who came and told the Disciples, that she had seen the Lord,
and that he had spoken unto her, and other devout women, that followed him to
the Cross, concerning whom Cleopas, in his conference with the Lord, says,
Luke 24.22.23. etc.
Certain women made v^ astonished, saying, that they had seen a vision of
Angels, which said that he was alive. Now by the way is to be noted, that women
first of all, of mankind, were vouchsafed this joyful sight of Christ risen
again, and chiefly she, which had bin the fowlest sinner, Mary Magdalen, I
mean not Mary the blessed Virgin: to intimate unto us, that our comfort in
Christ his resurrection, comes not to any, in regard of their own worthiness any
way; for then, he would first have called man to testify the same, who is the
head, 1. Cor. 11.
the image, and glory of God; or if not man, some excellent woman, such as Mary
the Virgin, or Elizabeth, or if not some so excellent, one at the least, not
noted for some great fault: But whereas he does clean contrariwise, he
shows, that as no unworthiness past can hinder us of Gods grace in Christ: so
no worthiness in us being natural can further the same. Fourthly, the very
enemies of Christ, the wicked soldiers that watched at his sepulcher, they
came into the City, Math. 28.11.12.
and showed the High Priests how they were affrighted with the Angels, and
Christ his coming out of the sepulcher: but they had large money given them,
to say, that whilst they slept, his Disciples came and stole him away. Which
their report did not disprove their first testimony, because so manifest a lie:
For 1. it was contrary to their knowledge, and notice given to the High
Priests: and again, the very words convince them of lying, insomuch, as that
they say, Whilst we slept his Disciples stole him away: for if they slept, how
durst they have confessed it: their charge of watching being so strict: and if
it were true that they slept, how could they say, what was done in the time of
their sleep? Fifthly, we have many witnesses at once of his Disciples, Ioh.
20.25.
he appeared to ten of them being together in one room, and the door shut,
to the very day of his resurrection, who certified Thomas, then absent, hereof;
and because he was then incredulous, eight days after, verse 26.27.
he showed himself again, when Thomas was amongst them also, who feeling, and
seeing the prints of his hands, and feet, and side, made with the nails, and
spear, cried out, My Lord, and my God. Moreover, he ouertooke two of his
other Disciples, the same day wherein he arose, as they were traveling to
Emmaus, and after much conference manifested himself unto them; who so desires
to find more witnesses, may see the 21. of John, the first of the Acts, and 1.
Cor. 15.6 etc. And the same was long before typically set forth in Adam, cast
into a dead sleep, whilst the woman was taken out of his side, and then
wakening again: after which manner, Christ sleeping by death, had his side
wounded, whereout came water and blood (which give the very being to his
Spouse, the Church) and then after a while, he revived again. Then was it set
forth in Isaac, whom his Father Abraham received, in a manner, from the dead,
being bound, and laid upon the wood, for a sacrifice. Jonah was cast out of the
Whales belly the third day, when he had been before in the bottom of the
deep. And thus much for the testimonies and proofs of this clause

For the duties arising from this Faith; they are two: First, 1. Duty. To live,
as at peace with God. Romans 4. and Chap. 5.1. Ephesians. 2
to live as those, that be at peace with God; For, as he dyed for our sins,
so he rose again for our Justification, and being justified by faith, we have
peace with God: before, we were enemies, and so much at varience, as that we
are said, to have been without God in the world; but now, this difference is
taken away, and we are thoroughly reconciled. Now, that we may live as such, we
must practice these four things. First, contentation, Romans 5.2
and joy in tribulation, as is added in the same place, not only have we peace
with God, but rejoice in tribulation: the Prophet Esaias says, that He gave his
cheek to the nippers, Esa. 50.8
and his back to the pinchers for the Lord God, says he, will help me: and if
the Lord will help us, what can hurt us, if he be on our side, may we say with
the Apostle, Who can be against us? Secondly, Romans 8.33.
because our felicity stands in the continuance of this peace, we must by all
means remove whatsoever may break it, and because sin seperates betwixt our
God and us, Esa. 59.1.2
we must remove this chiefly far from us. Thirdly, because strang^nesse may
easily break off peace and love, and familiarity increases it and cuts off
occasions if any arise: we must have our Ligier-Ambassadors, as it were, lying
in the Court of Heaven for us, viz. our prayers by which we may obtain the
continuance of this, and if any contrary occasion be offered, cut it off.
Wherefore we are often warned of this, Pray continually, and in all things
give thanks, 1 These. 5.17.
and Christ by Parables shows often, Luc. 16.28
that we should pray importunatly, and without weariness: for, every day there
cannot but be occasions offered, on our part of breaking this peace, we being
so weak, and subject to fall, therefore every day must our prayers ascend to
the heavens. Fourthly, because God has his Ambassadors of Peace, the Ministers
of Gods Word amongst us, we must use them reverently, and redily hearken to all
good motions, which they shall make unto us on Gods part: lest the Lord, seeing
our base usage of them, and our regardlesnesse of such wholesome instructions,
as they offer unto us in his name, grow angry, and refuse to keep any more
peace with us. We must therefore take into our mouths, Romans 10.14
that of the Prophet, How beautiful are the feet of those, that bring glad
tidings of peace, and glad tidings of good things. We must yield those, that
labor in the World double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17
as the Apostle says, they are worthy.

2. Duty. To rise up to newness of life. Romans 6.4
The second duty arising hence, is to rise up to a holy and new life from the
death of sin, as Christ our Lord arose from death to life: Like as Christ was
raised up from the dead, to the glory of the Father, so should we also walk in
newness of life; yea, we must do this if we would not have the second death,
to rule over us, according to that divine voice. Revel. 20.6
Blessed, and holy is he, that has part in the first resurrection, for over
such the second death has no power, Now, as our first life, viz. our natural,
has certain signs, as breath, warmth, motion, etc whereby it is known: so
has this second, our spiritual life, and these signs are chiefly four.
First, an heavenly mind: If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which
are above, Signs of a new life. Col 3.1
where Christ Jesus sits at the right hand of God, etc. For if the mind be
still plodding upon the earth, and earthly things, if the thoughts be
altogether bent this way, how is there any rising, if the food that perishes
be still most sought after, how is there another kind of life, the means of
sustaining it being neglected; wherefore Saint Peter wills such, as be risen
to a new life, 1 Peter 2.2
As newborn Babes, to desire the sincere milk of the word, that they may
grow thereby. Secondly, an holy and innocent life: for such only are risen
with Christ, as have put on Christ, Ephesians. 4.14
as have put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and
true holiness. They which are still the old men they were, if they were
unholy, unholy still, if vile, vile still; they, I say, are not risen to a new
life, they are not ranged into the order of true Christians, our captain
Christ has put all his Soldiers into an other fashion. They are blameless,
and pure, Phil. 2.15
and the Sons of God in the midst of a naughty and crooked nation without
rebuke. Thirdly, greater joy in the grace of God through Jesus Christ, then in
any thing, either of pleasure, or profit, in this world, because worldly things
are old, joy in them is past, now we are come to live a new life, as he which
is preferred from a poor Farmer, to be Lord of great possessions: he is now a
new man, he joys not in his Farm which he had under others, it delights him
not, that he had such a poor common Estate, but in this his new advancement is
his comfort. So we (being risen from an old life to a new, from a natural to a
spiritual with Christ, from the life of the Children of wrath, and of sins
servants to the life of the Sons of God,) cannot but joy only in this, in
regard of exceeding joy, and we cannot but account all things dross and dung,
with the Apostle, in comparison of the excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ,
Phil. 3.8
and of him crucified, and risen again. We cannot but count it meat and
drink unto us with our blessed Savior, John 4.34
when we are thus doing the will of our Father, viz. in works of holiness.
Fourthly, growth, and increase in sanctification; for nothing which begins to
live and is like to come to perfection, and to continue, is without growth; no
more is any man, which begins to live a new life in holiness, he is not
forward herein to day, and backward to morrow, a babe for knowledge, and
practice this year, and a babe an whole year, or seven years hence: but he
goes forward, and grows in grace, 2 Pet. 3 18 John 15.1
and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, as St. Peter exhorts us to do. He is
a branch of the Vine Christ, which shoots much forth in a short time, Psalm.
1, 1.2
he is a tree planted by the waters side, and not some shrub coming up upon
the dry heath. If these things be so, what a nullity of Faith is there in most
men? when there be only words to express it, That Christ our head rose again
the third day, etc. but it is plainly disproued in deeds, by want of this
newness of life.

And hitherto of the first branch of this Article, now follows the other. He
ascended up into heaven, For the meaning. He being revived from the dead (his
soul coming again into his body) walked here a while upon earth for the
space of forty days, eating and drinking sometimes with his Disciples, not for
any need of sustenance, but for more assurance of his resurrection, and
offering his body to be felt, and handled, comforting and instructing them, and
then in the open sight of them all, he went up body and soul into the heavens,
they looking and maruelling at it.

Proof.
For the grounds hereof. Sundry times was it foretold, by many types was it
prefigured, and by sundry witnesses soundly testified. It was foretold by David
Thou art ascended up on high, Psalm. 68.18
thou have lead captivity captive, and given gifts unto men; and Christ
himself spoke hereof to his Disciples both before his suffering, I go to
prepare a place for you; John 14.2
in my Fathers house are many dwelling places, and I go my way, and will come
again and receive you to my self, that where I am, Ioh 20.17
there ye may be also, and after, I ascended to my Father, and to your Father,
to my God, and to your God. And the same was prefigured in Enoch, Genesis 5.24
the seventh from Adam; who is said to have walked with God, and to have been
taken away from amongst men: and in Elias the Prophet, who, whilst he was
walking, and talking with Elisha his servant, 2 King. 2
was taken up into heaven in a fiery Chariot; and also in Moses, who though he
did not ascend up to heaven as the other, yet he is said to have gone up upon
an high Mountain, the mount Nebo, and his body was afterward seen no more
upon earth. Deuteronomy. 34
Wherefore he is brought in with Elias conferring with Christ, upon the Mount
Tabor, at the time of Transfiguration; that the Types, and Antitype as it were,
might meet altogether before Christ's ascension. Lastly Saint Luke sets
down, Acts 1.12
how he ascended, with the circumstances before spoken of, and that two Angels
like men, in white apparel, asked the Disciples, who were looking up to
heaven, after that he was ascended from them. Why stand ye gazing into heaven?
this Jesus, which is gone up into heaven, shall so come, as ye have seen him
go up to heaven. Ephesians. 4.10
And Saint Paul says, He is ascended far above all heavens, viz. all
visible heavens to the highest, where the throne of God is, yea, Steven the
first Martyr adds, and says, Acts 7.56
I see the heavens open, and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of
God: and he did once more yet manifest himself to Saul a persecutor to be
there, when he called from heaven unto him, Acts 9.4
saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? which indeed did wonderfully
confirm this thing, even to unbelievers, for that so forward a persecutor was
suddenly heerevpon turned to be a most zealous Preacher, for that he which
hated Christ, did set forth Christ his resurrection, and ascension up into
heaven, in every place where he came. And we are chiefly to gather all
testimonies about this matter, because that seducers and coozeners (who would
make the world believe that themselves were some great persons, when they have
done many and great matters, have altogether failed in this last act of rising
from the dead, and going up to heaven, peculiar indeed to the Son of God
alone. Such was Simon Magus a Coniurer, who by his inchauntments much hindered
the Gospel, and advanced himself, and made the world believe, that after his
beheading, he made himself alive again: but when he by his impostures, made
a proffer to ascend to heaven also in the sight of many, he fell down again,
and breaking his neck, miserably ended his days. Such also was Mahomet the
great Prophet of the Turks. He commanded that his body should be kept from
burial until the third day after his death, promising that he would then
revive again; but it being kept not only to the third, but to the thirtieth,
even till a most horrible stinch came from him, no such thing appeared, only
they put his body in an Iron coffer, which hangs upon the top of his Temple
by the virtue of Loadstones, to the deceiving of simple people to this day.
Like to these, are all false Christ's, that lewdly have taken upon them this
honor. Only this, our blessed Savior as he was wonderful in his life, so
was he in his death; whatsoever he promised, he did accordingly, even after
his death perform.

1. Duty. To do the duties of our calling. Ephesians. 4 8.
The duties whereby we are to show our faith in this, are two, First, to do
the duties of our callings, without pretending any want of ability hereunto:
for he ascended up on high, as witnesses the Psalmist, to give gifts to men,
which is also applied by the Apostle, saying, He gave gifts to men. Now these
gifts are such, as be fit for their callings, Act. 2.
as is showed in the history of the holy Ghost coming down upon his
disciples, ten days after his ascension in the shape and likeness of fiery
tongues, accompanied with the rushing as it were of a mighty wind: at what
time they were made able to speak all languages, according to their office of
preaching in all countries among men of diverse languages, and endued with
zeal, to go through with their Apostolical function. And as any more were
added to the fellowship of the Apostles, they were in like manner fitted with
gifts needful, as Saul, who before his conversion was an enemy, but now a
friend to the Gospel, before ignorant of these divine mysteries; but now in
knowledge not inferior to the very chief Apostles: for he learned nothing of
any, as he says, no not of Peter, Gal. 1. etc.
James and John: and as many more as the Lord had employment for in his Church,
through the holy Ghost were wonderfully enabled thereunto. Wherefore apply thy
self in what calling soever thou art placed, to walk worthy of it, pretend
not insufficiency for a cloak of idleness; for so thou disparagest the virtue
of Christ's ascension, that said, It is necessary that I go away from you; for
if I depart I will send the comforter unto you: And when he is come which is
the spirit of truth, Ioh. 16.7. verse. 13.
he will lead you into all truth, etc. If thou be a Minister, then neglect
not thy office, plead not want of leisure, want of memory, want of ability to
preach the word, and to be instant in season and out of season, for the spirit
inables thee against all these: if thou be a master of a family, neglect not
the office of a master, Deuteronomy. 6.
plead not ignorance, disuse incombrance of many businesses hindering thee from
reading or speaking of the law of God to thy family, from catechizing thy
children and servants, from praying with them, or examining the Sermons which
they have heard. As thou art a common Christian, favor not thy self in thy
weaknesses and sins, Plead not that every man is subject to sin, and has
his infirmity to be hindered from mortifying thy corruptions, to make thee rest
contented with some clog of sin still hanging on. If thou be a Magistrate,
neglect not causes that come before thee, upon pretense that thou have not from
God the gift of wisdom and discerning: but above all, take heed that thou
be not overtaken with gifts from men, which blind the eyes of the wise, and
will hinder thee from executing justice and judgment, from delivering the
poor and oppressed. And so let all others of what estate or degree soever,
fear to color over their negligences with the pretext of insufficiency: for
Christ, that sets them in their estates and places, has ascended and obtained
gifts fit for them all: either therefore thou art an intruder, and never called
to such estate; or else in some measure fitted with gifts for thy calling, and
still obtainest increase by seeking: According to that, If any man ^ant
wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives liberally etc.

2. Duty: Iam. 1.5. To live as strangers here.
The second duty is, to carry our selves as strangers in this world, all the
time of our abiding here, because our head Christ Jesus is in heaven; another
world as it were, unto which we also do belong, so many as believe in his
name; of this the Apostle speaks thus, 1. These. 4.14.
If we believe that Jesus is dead and risen even so they that sleep in Jesus,
will God bring with him: and both of these, and of them, that shall be living
at his coming to judgment, he says, verse. 17.
We shall be caught up in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so
shall we ever be with the Lord. Our country then is Heaven, the place of our
abode is provided there where Christ is, and has been ever since his
ascension, according as himself speaks: Ioh. 14.2.3.
In my fathers house there be many dwelling places, and I go to prepare a
place for you, that where I am, there ye may be also. 15.19.
For this cause is it that he tells Christians, that they are not of this
world, and we are said to be Pilgrims and strangers here, as they which are
so much commended for their faith, Abraham, Sara, Isaac, Iaacob, Moses, etc.
Concerning whom it is written, that they saw, that they were Pilgrims, and
strangers upon earth, Heb. 11.13.14.15.16.
by which they declared, that they sought a country, which is a better then
their own, an heavenly one, a City which God has prepared for them.

To live like strangers, what required. 2 Cor. 5.2. Phil. 1.17.
Now then, that we may carry our selves as strangers here, four things are
required: First, we must long after our Country and City, heaven: as S. Paul
says in the name of all believers; We sigh, desiring to be clothed with our
house, which is from heaven, and particularly of himself, Desiring to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best of all. If we put our selves
upon a journey into a place far from our own home; especially, if the wife
goes from her dear husband, or children from their loving Parents, we have a
longing desire to be at home again, and the rather, if we be hardly used
abroad, and undergo many dangers: but we are here absent From God our loving
Father, and from Jesus Christ our dear Husband, in a world of miseries, and
which hates us; oh, how can we then but long to be at home with them.

Psalm. 62.10. 1. Ioh. 2.15.
Secondly, we must not care any more, nor be more in love with the goods and
possessions of this world, then travelers, that come to Innes of best
entertainment, and richly furnished, are in love with them: but as they use
them for their necessity, a night and away, not further regarding any thing
they find there: So must we use things of this world; If riches increase,
according to David's counsel, we must not set our hearts thereon. If we have
the world, as S. John advises, we must not love it, nor the things of the
world, but use it, as it is said in another place, as though we used it not.

2. These. 3.6.
Thirdly, as men upon their travail in strange places, are very inquisitiue for
the right way, and will now and then be at the cost to hire a guide, but will
not associate themselves with every company, but be choice in this regard: so
must we ever be careful of our way to heaven, inquire for the right at Gods
word, and his faithful ministers, and rather then fail be at cost this way,
and not company with lewd persons, lest we be seduced by them, either through
error, if they be heretics, or through vice, if otherwise wicked.

Fourthly, as they which be in a strange country, do comfort themselves, in
all the misery which they endure, because they hope, yea long to be at home
again, and to be recompensed for this, with the love of their friends
congratulating their return, and all other pleasing contentments, which they
wanted abroad: so must we in the midst of all our sufferings be
comfortable, remembering that we are in a strange country: when we shall
return to our Fathers house (unto which time it will not be long) we shall
be recompensed with joys unspeakable. Thus did Moses, when he might have had
the pleasures of Pharaohs court, and lived like a Kings son: He chose
rather, Heb. 11.25.26. Phil. 4.4.
to suffer affliction with Gods people for he had respect to the recompense of
reward. And for this is it that we are exhorted, always to rejoice, and to
rejoice again, for that the coming of the Lord is at hand, at which time we
shall be taken up to our own country, and ever remain with that Lord. And
here is added by S. Peter a fit thing, 1. Pet. 2.11.
viz. As Pilgrims and strangers, to abstain from fleshly lusts that fight
against the soul, which as utter enemies do their endeavor to hinder us, and
to keep us out of our Souls Country. Even as a woman that is taken up with a
delight in strangers love, grows out of favor with her husband, and is for
this justly divorced from him: so, whosoever is taken up with fleshly lusts,
either by covetousness, or uncleanness, or surfeiting and riot, etc. procures
such dislike at the hands of our jealous Lord, as that he shall for ever be
kept from coming at him.

Quest. 39. Which is the second degree of his exaltation, and in which words?

Answ. Secondly, he has all honor, power, and authority in heaven, and in
earth together with God the Father. In these words, He sits at the right
hand of God the Father almighty.

Explan. In this Answer is set down the very meaning of this Article,
containing the second degree of his exaltation, the second step of his rising,
answering to the second degree of his humiliation. There he was despised and
placed upon the gibbet between two thieves, and hung like a poor creature, as
unable to help himself: here he is honored, placed in the state-chayre of
heaven, and full of power both in heaven and in earth: there he was poor,
weary, hungry, thirsty and harbourlesse; here he sits at ease, full, rich,
and abounding with dwelling places even for all that seek unto him. Lastly,
there he was scorned, mocked, and derided with robes, and crown, as unworthy
to wear them, he was less esteemed then rebels and murderers: here he is
crowned and robed with glory, and in earnest, as most worthy, he has all
knees bowing unto him, and a name above all names. For thus is this phrase of
sitting at the right hand wont to be used in the Scriptures. 1 King 1.19.
Psalm. 45.9.
Solomon is said to have made a throne for his mother Bathsheba, and to have
placed her at his right hand, which was a doing of great honor unto her, so as
that whatsoever she would command should be so. In the fortieth five Psalm
the Queen is placed at the Kings right hand in a vesture of gold, that is, is
highly honored by him. In which places, with the like, howsoever there is
truth both in the words and in the literal proper sense; yet here it is not
so: the Lord of Heaven has no right hand nor left, (as some ignorant and
unlearned Monks have taught long ago, because hands and feet and face, and
other parts of the body are ascribed unto him) neither has Christ any seat in
heaven; for there is no need of any there: for which cause he is said also to
stand at the right hand of God, Act. 7.56. Romans 8.34.
and to be at the right hand of God making intercession for us. The meaning
therefore here is only to be taken, that he has all honor, power and
authority, in heaven and in earth together with God the Father; even Christ
Jesus, both God and Man, receives these in his whole person, but collated upon
him in regard of his Manhood, his Godhead in it self being incapable of any
new real accession of glory or power.

For the grounds of holy Scripture from whence this Article is taken, they be
many and most evident, which confirm both his being at the right hand of God
in heaven, and secondly, his honor there, and thirdly his power, and
authority. First that he sits at the right hand of God in heaven, Proof.
Collo. 3.1.
is plainly set forth, where we are bidden to seek the things above, Where
Christ Jesus sits at the right hand of God. The very words are to be noted
against the Vbiquitaries, which will have Gods right hand to be every where,
and so the very body of Christ to be every where, and really present in the
Sacrament of his Supper. But mark these words, and they teach us not thus, but
that his body and soul now glorified, are above in heaven: and like unto this,
is that place to the Ephesians: Ephesians. 1.20.
He set him at his right hand in heavenly places. Moreover, the Apostles, as
has been already said, Acts 1.12 Acts 7
saw him go up into Heaven bodily, and Steven saw the heavens open, and the
man Christ there; and Paul, though he saw nothing, yet he heard his voice from
Heaven; Saul, Saul, Acts 7
Why persecutest thou me? And where he was then, the Angels plainly told his
Disciples, he should remain, till at the last, he were seen coming down
visibly, in the same sort, that he ascended: wherefore it follows in the next
Article; From thence he shall come. From whence, I pray you, is this? The
Vbiquitary must needs answer absurdly, From every where: But the Apostle
answers; These 4.16
The Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of
the Arch-Angell, etc. Likewise this refuteth the Papists, who, though they deny
Christ's body to be every where, yet are so bold as to feign it to be many where
by the fiction of bodily presence in the Sacrament. Surely, Christ's body is so
in the Heavens, that it is held and contained there, How then is it at the same
time, there, and here upon an Altar, nay, on many Altars? which plurality of
places must needs take away, and destroy the Essential nature of a true body,
and so turn it to an imaginary phantastike body, with the Marcionits.

Phil. 2.9.10
Again, that he is in highest honor there, the Apostle shows, in that he
says, God has highly exalted him, and given him a Name above all names, that
at the Name of JESUS, every knee might bow, of things in Heaven, and earth, and
under the earth: And is not that the highest honor, which is cited in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, out of the Psalms; Worship him, Psalm. 97.7 Heb. 1.6
all ye Gods Lastly, for the infinite power communicated unto him, and
soueraignety over all things, himself speaks, as already in possession
hereof; All power is given unto me, Math. 28.18
both in Heaven and in earth. Yea, he is made King of all the world: for, Ask
of me, Psalm. 2
says the Father, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and
the ends of the earth for thy possession. Psalm. 110.1
He has power over all his enemies, according to that, Sit thou at my right
hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool. And that of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 15.25
He must reign, till he has put all his enemies under his feet.

1 Duty. ^oy for Christ his honor.
To come now unto the duties of this Faith. The first is, to exult for this
exaltation of our head, Christ Jesus, for our nature thus honored and graced.
Even, as Israel rejoiced and shouted for joy, so that the earth rang again,
when the son of David, Solomon, was crowned King; 1 King. 1.40
and as Steven in the midst of his persecutors, now ready to be stoned,
joyfully brake out and said; I see the Heavens open, and Christ Jesus standing
at the right hand of God. So the beholding of the same, Acts 7.56
by the eye of Faith, must cause the like gladness in us, even in the middst
of our greatest dangers. If we have Christ on our side, who can be against us?
If we have him who is dead, or rather, who is risen again, and sits at the
right hand of God: Romans 8.34.
If he be with us, whom all the Angels do worship, before whose iron Scepter,
al his enemies are but as a potters vessel. It is joy enough for the wife,
Psalm. 2
if her Husband be crowned, or invested into any great dignity; It is joy
enough for all good Subjects, if their King subdue, and get the upper hand of
his enemies: It is joy enough for a loving friend, if his dear friend be any
way advanced; but our husband Christ is here crowned, our King Christ makes his
enemies his footstool, our friend Christ is highly advanced. What then,
though we be poor, afflicted, and disgraced: yet, through him thus raised,
We are more then Conquerours: we are advanced, Romans 8.37
we are raised.

2. Duty. Reuerencing the name of Christ.
The second duty is, willingly to yield obedience, and to be subject to Christ
Jesus; even as we are willing, yea, desire to be under the Prince, or some
most noted person of honor; for, we count it a credit for us so to be, though
some servitude, or attendance, be required hereunto, which otherwise we could
be content to be freed from. For, what Prince is so high in dignity as the
Son of God, the Prince of Heaven? What person of honor may be compared with
him? Yea, he excels all, Phil. 2.9.
in all things, that may make us willing with subjection, and bowing the knee
at his name, which is inferred hereupon. First, in power and might, whereby he
is most able to do us good, and to subdue our enemies under us, seeing (as was
showed to Saul) they that persecute his people, Acts 9.
do but kick against the pricks. Secondly in the love of his Subjects; for,
that he does not compel to his service, but says. Jf ye love me, keep my
Commandments; he is not rigorous and austere to the willing, John 14.15
if they fail in many things, he forgiueth unto seventy times seven times, he
leaves them not to themselves, to perform their hard taskes, but gives them
his Spirit to help their infirmities. Thirdly, in his facility and easiness
toward them, he presses them not too heavily, but his Yoke is easy, and his
burden is light. Matthew 11.28 1 King 12.
If it had been thus with Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, toward the people
of Israel, they would for ever have been his servants; for, they desired but
to have their yokes made more easy: and why should we not then be servants to
this Son of God, and offer ourselves much more readily to do his will all
our days? But alas, most men are so blinded, that they make no account of
this, as a preferment unto them; they think it better, to be the base
servants of sin and the Devil, that they may have a little pleasure of the
vanities of this world; and so by falsifying their promise made in Baptism (as
formerly has been showed) they exclude themselves from the benefit of their
baptism. For they are none of Christ's servants, that live in sin, John 8.34
seeing that he that commits sin, is the servant of sin.

3. Duty. To use Christ as Mediator only. 1 John 2.2
The third duty is, to come unto the Throne of Grace, in our prayers, only by
Christ, and utterly to refuse the help of other Mediators whatsoever; If any
man sin (says Saint John) we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous, and he is a Propitiation for our sins. Having him therefore so
good a friend, yea, and ever making request for us, and perfuming our prayers,
Romans 8.34
with the sweetness of his merits, as it were with incense, out of a censor:
what need have we of Saint, or Angel, to help us to access and acceptance
before the Father? Yea, I need not say, what need? but what Faith can we have
in so doing? seeing, that both himself has bidden us ask in his own name,
and in the case of sinne-guiltinesse, we are directed only to him, as our
only Mediator and Advocate. Wherefore, the profession of the Church of Rome is
in this point, by all means to be rejected, as a profession and practice of
infidelity in Christ's sitting at the right hand of the Father. Their comparison
from earthly Princes are chaffie, and of no moment, if they be brought to the
balance of the Sanctuary, and are merely colors, whereby they seek to dawbe
over their blind devotion, and to gull the doting people.

Quest. 31 Which is the third degree of his exaltation, and in which words?

Answ. Thirdly, he shall come from Heaven, at the end of the World, to judge
all, that shall then be found living, and all that have dyed since the world
began, in these words. From thence he shall come to judge both the quick and
the dead.

Explan. For the meaning of this Article, it is opposite to that, which sets
down the first degree of his humiliation; for, as there of God, he was made
Man, yea, a poor man, under the government of Joseph and Mary: so here, he
is of a poor man, set over all, both rich and poor, great and small, that
they might be disposed of, according to his pleasure: And as there he was under
earthly Judges and Rulers, who did often decree hard things against him: so
here he comes, as Judge, and Ruler of all, to decree vnalterably extreme
things, against all the stoutest of his enemies; and comfortable things, for
all his lovers and friends. He shall come from Heaven: that is, as man, for
thus only he can remove from place to place, his Godhead ever fills all
places, as man then he shall come down visibly and openly, with great glory,
and troops of Angels about him; as Judges are wont in pomp, and with great
attendance, to ride their circuits, and he shall come down, toward this
nether part of the world, where they have lived, whose causes shall be heard,
and proceeded in, as Judges are wont to go, to sit in Judgment in such places,
as wherein they dwell, which are to be brought before them; To judge those that
shall be then living: for the World shall be full of people, even to the hour
of his coming, and then the dead being raised out of their Graves, even all
from the first Adam, shall be joined with the living, (who shall only, instead
of dying, be changed) and thus all people together, of all Countries and
Nations, shall be presented before his Tribunal, to receive sentence,
(according to the equity, yea, and justice of his Gospel) whether of
Absolution, to pass into the Kingdom of the Father; or of condemnation into
the Kingdom of Hell, with the Devil and his Angels for ever.

Proof.
Secondly, for the grounds of holy Scriptures, whereupon all this is founded,
the coming of Christ to judgment, according to all these circumstances, is
plainly here set down in many Places. First, that he shall come again, the
Angels sent of God for the same end, told his Disciples thus much, immediately
after his ascension, saying, Acts 1.12
This Jesus shall even so come down from heaven, as ye have seen him go up
to heaven: Heb. 9.28
And in another place it is said that Christ unto them that look for him,
shall appear the second time without sin unto salvation: and of himself, he
says, I go away, but will come again. Secondly, that he shall come to judge,
John 14.
not in poverty, but in Majesty, not basely accompanied, but gloriously with
Angels not like a Lamb to be slain again, but like a Lion, to tear in pieces
his enemies: all this does he himself promise, saying, Then shall they see the
Son of Man come in the clouds of Heaven, with power and great glory, Mat
24.30.31
and he shall send his Angels with the sound of a Trumpet, etc. And what is here
wanting, is further supplied in the next Chapter, Chap. 25.31.32
When the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him,
then shall he sit upon the Throne of his glory and before him shall be gathered
all nations, etc. Thirdly, that the world shall be then full of people living,
as at other times, and that all shall not die; before, the Apostle shows, both
where purposely he entreats at large of the resurrection, saying, We shall
not all sleep, but we shall be changed in a moment, 1 Cor. 15.51
in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet; 1 The. 4
and where he comforts the Church of God in this that their dead friends, and
they alive, shall meet again at the last day. And the Lord himself plainly
says, that as it was in the days of Noah, and in the days of Lot: so shall
it be, at the coming of the Son of man then the world was full of people,
which were eating, and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage etc til the
flood came, Luc. 17.27
and swept them all away, till fire came from Heaven, and consumed them all: so
shall it be at Christ's coming to judgment. Fourthly, that quick and dead shall
all come to judgment before him, was long since confirmed unto John by vision.
He saw a Throne set, and the Son of of Man sitting thereon, the books opened,
and al even the dead, as well as the living, brought before him to be judged,
according to the things written in the books, Revel. 20.12
then the earth gave up the dead buried there, and the sea gave up the dead
that were therein. Romans 14.10
And S Paul hence gives warning, that we judge not one another. For we must
al appear before the Judgment seat of Christ. Fifthly, that the manner of his
coming shall be most terrible, to all his enemies but comfortable to his
friends, and faithful people: for the terror, it is set forth by comparisons
taken from the flood, Luke 17.27.
fearfully drowning the old world, without mercy, or compassion, from the fire
and brimstone descending upon Sodom, Prou. 1.
from the sorrows coming upon a woman in travel, Math 24.
from a severe master returning from a far country, and adiudging his
unprofitable servants to be cut off, and to have their portion in the place of
weeping, and gnashing of teeth; and from a thief breaking into an house, to
rob and slay, in the dead time of the night, etc. For even such, and more
terrible by far, shall Christ's coming to judgment be.

2. Pet 3.10.
Again, this terror is set forth by particular accidents, that shall accompany
this time, viz flaming fire, in which the Lord shall come to render vengeance
to the wicked, wherewith the earth, with the works thereof, shall be burned
up, The Heavens shall pass away as a scrowle, and the elements shall melt with
heat A devouring fire before him, Psalm. 50.3. Math. 24.
and a great tempest round about him. The Sun and the Moon darkened, and the
Stars losing their light. A great trumpet sounded, peircing from one ence of
the world to another: and all this in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye.
Lastly, it is set forth in the effects. Io^l 2.6.
All faces shall gather blackenes. They shall see him, whom they have pierced,
and mourn every family apart. And as the Lord himself says, Zach 12. Math.
24.30. Revel. 16.20.
All the kindreds of the earth shall mourn They shall run away, and call
upon the mountains to fall on them, and upon the rocks and hills to cover
them. But unto those that wait for the coming of the Lord, it shall be
comfortable, wherefore Christ says, Luk 21.28.
When ye see these things, lift up your heads with joy, for your redemption
draws near: And the Apostle uses this argument to the Thessalonians, to
dissuade them from sorrowing, like unto the Heathen: 1 Thessalonians 4.14.
for at his coming, we shall be taken up into the clouds, to meet the Lord,
and so remain ever with the Lord. Sixthly, at the time of this judgment, it
shall be proceeded according to men's works; Ioh. 5.29.
They that have done good, shall go into everlasting life, they that have done
evil, into everlasting condemnation. Math. 25.
The sheep of Christ that have fed the hungry, clothed the naked, visited the
sick, etc. Shall be invited into the Kingdom of the Father; 1. Cor 4, 5.
the rest, into everlasting fire. And secretest evils shall not then be hid,
for thoughts shall be manifested, and most hidden things discovered. Reu.
20.12.
The book of every man's conscience that was shut up and benumbed, here shall
be opened, and according to the things here written, he shall be judged. Not
only for sins committed, but even for omitting good duties, men shall be
sent into Hels torments. No outward thing shall then stand any man in stead,
the foolish Virgins with lamps, but wanting oil, Math. 25.1.
shall be shut out of the Bridegroomes chamber. No crying, or craving, shall
then prevail, for such, as have lived impenitently in sin: if they shall
say, Lord, Lord, open unto us; he will answer, Depart from me ye workers of
iniquity. I know you not: Math 7.21.
If with Esau thou then seek the blessing with tears, Heb. 12.6.
there is no place for repentance to be found. And thus much for the grounds of
Christ's coming to Judgment, and the further setting forth of the same: Now,
if any man shall ask the time when these things shall be? ^t is easily
answered; Math. 24.36.
The day and the hour knows no man, no not the Son of Man himself, but the
Father only but for the year, diverse men have gessed diversely, and because
they be but conjectures, I will not trouble the Reader herewith. A principal
unaccomplished forerunner to be taken heed unto, the Gospel, having been
already preached to all nations, and Antichrist, that man of sin discovered:
is his further laying open, and confusion, when the Kings of the earth, that
honored him, shall make a mock of him; and a gracious conversion of the
Jews, the stiffest enemies, unto the Lord Christ: and then shall the coming
of the Lord unto Judgment be.

1. Duty. To keep a good conscience.
For the duties of this faith. The first is, to keep a good conscience before
God, and men, because at the day of judgment, every conscience shall be a
book opened, and all the world shall read, whither it be good or bad. This
Paul professes to be his care, saying: Act. 24.16.
Herein I endeavor to have a clear conscience always toward God, and
toward men. The reason he alleges before, viz. For that he had hope, Verse.
15.
that the resurrection should be both of the just and unjust: that all should
be brought forth another day to judgment. And in another place, speaking of
the Gentiles, which had not the written law, Romans 2.16. Verse. 12. Verse. 15.
he says. At the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ,
those that are under the Law, shall be judged by the Law, and they that are
without, without the Law: for unto both the conscience is a law, bearing
witness for, or against, and the thoughts accuse, or excuse: that is, in every
man's nature there remains some impression of good and bad, of right and wrong:
a light whereby to discern these, and for those that have done ill; here will
be an accusation at that time, they that have done well shall be excused. And
this we cannot, but in some measure conceive by experience daily, for that,
when we have done amiss, we feel afterward an inward trouble in our minds
and though we would gladly put off the thinking hereupon, yet we cannot, but
still perplexing thoughts this way come unto us, and disquiet us, and chiefly
when we are alone, The excellency of a good conscience
and in greatest darkness of the night. Now all this is nothing else, but our
consciences beginning the part, even whilst we are alive, and as it were
warning us to take heed of sin, though never so hidden, for it will not
suffer it to be blotted our through forgetfulness, but is, and will be a
continual register hereof so long as we live, and most of all then present it
self before the Lord, when final, and irreuocable judgment shall pass upon
all. Wherefore as he that is continually watched by one appointed of his
master, who has power of life and death over him, (so that in no place he can
be hidden from his sight, and he will not by any bribes be hired to conceal
what he sees) will carefully carry himself in all things as a good servant,
and not by any allurements be drawn to wast his masters goods, or to neglect
his business, or to any unfaithfulness toward him. Even so let us be
contained always in the fear of the Lord from all disloyalty toward his
Majesty, and from all abuses either against our selves: or our neighbors, even
when opportunities of secrecy are offered hereunto: because our own
conscience notes our doings, and will not be hired to give any other, but true
testimony against us, when we come to our reckoning at the last day. Oh! how
comfortable will it be then to have a good conscience.

2. Duty. To abstain from judging other man.
The second duty is, both to abstain from judging and censuring others, and to
neglect, and not to set by men's judging of us, if so be our consciences judge
us not: because there is one judge of all, and it is presumption in whomsoever,
to take his office out of his hands, in judging these to be hypocrites, these
reprobates, and these damned creatures: and it is such presumption, as that
whosoever uses it, Romans 2.1,
shall not escape the judgment of God, according to that: Thou art
inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art, that iudgest, etc. And it is a flat
precept, not only for some, but for all: 1. Cor. 4.5.
Judge nothing before the time, that the Lord comes who will lighten things
that are hid in darkness, and make the counsels of the heart manifest. And
what need we to care, what judgments of idle headed men pass upon us: seeing
that it shall not stand as they judge, but as the Lord judges. Romans 8.33.
Let us therefore get the Lord to be on our side, and so not care how man in
his judgment is against us. But ye will say, what? are we not to judge
others at all? whereunto then tends that of our Savior Christ? By their fruits
shall ye know them.

Act. 8.23.
I answer, yes, we may by way of caution judge others, in whom we see the works
of darkness to abound, for the preservation of our selves and others, who for
want of information, and notice taking, might otherwise be subject to the
infection of their poison: Again we may judge, to make the^ ashamed, and to
come to repentance from their dead works, as Peter did Simon Magus. But to
judge, that is, to pronounce, but in our hearts, any man a castaway, thus to
cease using means, as unto a brother of his reformation (except such an one as
has sinned against the holy Ghost, which how know we this?) this is to enter
into Christ's iudgement-seate, and to procure inevitable judgment against our
selves. If it be further demanded, and are we so lightly to esteem men's
judgments? how is it then, that we are bidden to procure things honest before
all men: yea, before those that are without, viz. Infidels, and unbelievers? I
answer, that this is spoken in regard of just occasions of being censured,
which we must by no means give, nor make any show hereof, but walk so
blamelesly before all men, as that they, which speak evil of us, as of evil
doers, may be ashamed, and seeing our good works, glorify God in the day of
their visitation. 1. Pet. 2.12. 1. Cor 4.3.
But if walking thus, thou be yet judged, thou need not with the Apostle,
pass for this judgment of man.

3. Duty. To watch against the Lords coming. Math. 24.38.
The third duty is, ever to be vigilant, and watchful against the Lords
coming, because it will be sudden, as of a theife in the night. The same which
I say unto you, (says our Savior Christ hereupon) I say to all men, watch.
All comfort is promised to them that watch, and wait for his coming, and all
terror is threatened to them, that do otherwise. Now this watching is well
doing with the good servant, who being found thus, Math 24.
is bidden to enter into his masters joy: it is to have oil in our Lamps with
the wise virgins, ( viz. soundness, and sincerity of Religion) who were
admitted to nuptial delights with the Bridegroom: Math 25. 1. These. 5.5.
to walk in sobriety, and temperance, as children of the light, and of the
day, to whom the coming of the Lord shall not be unawares. And to be watchful
in this manner is also most necessary, because that by our works we shall be
judged, and where then will our place be, if we be not ever thus exercised? For
not only shall we be judged, according to our works in general, but
according to those, wherein we are taken at his coming: if we be then working
wickedness, Ezech. 18.
if we be taken wallowing in sin, no good thing which we have done, shall
advantage us, but the fearful sentence of condemnation will pass against us,
for the sin, wherein we are found. Wherefore as we believe this, so let us
express it, by our daily setting a watch over our ways; by our starting up
without delay from our falls, least the Lords coming to judgment prevent us;
by our observing, and taking all occasions to increase the number of our good
works, in our several callings, according to our ability, that thus we may be
sure to be found in the number of those, upon whom the sentence of absolution
shall pass, Come ye blessed of my Father, Math. 25.
into the Kingdom prepared for you* for I was hungry and ye fed me, naked and
ye clothed me, sick, and in prison, and ye did visit me, etc.

4. Duty. To pray for the confusion of Antichrist.
The fourth duty is, to pray for the further manifesting of Antichrist to all
the world, that he may be stripped of his triple crown, and all his robes of
honor, more then imperial, and be pointed: and wondered at of all men, as a
monster amongst men, and a seducer plainly set up by the old couzening serpent
the devil, as we read in the book of the Revelation. For these things must
be, and then will Christ come to the comfort of all the faithful.

5. Duty. To be strong in the faith of Christ.
The fifth duty, is to be strong in the faith of Christ against all the assaults
of Satan, and manfully to resist his attempts to drive us into despair in
regard of our sins, and unworthiness: for Christ our Savior, not any other,
shall be our Judge; according to that of the Apostle, uttered to the
encouragement of all faithful people: It is God that iustifies: Romans 8.33.
the Lord Christ, the great Judge of all, that acquits thee, even he that dyed
for thee, who then shall condemn? Thy cause shall come before him, that loved
thee thus dearly, when thou were yet an enemy, but now much more by faith,
being reconciled, who then can lay any thing to thy charge? Romans 5.
assuredly none. Be not therefore faint-hearted, but make resistance herein
against the Devil, and he will fly from thee. 1. Pet. 5.9.
The more weakly thou acquittest thy self in this, and the more fearful
thou art, the further art thou from faith, in Christ's coming to judge all the
world.

Quest. 32. What do you learn to believe concerning God the Holy Ghost, and
in which words.

Answ. I learn to believe that he is God equal with the Father, and the
Son, and the Sanctifier of all the elect people of God, in these words: I
believe in the holy Ghost.

Of our faith in the holy Ghost
Explan These few words of the Creed, do teach no less concerning the holy
Ghost, then is here set down: I believe in the holy Ghost: that is, as I
believe in the Father, and in the Son, and do hereby acknowledge both
Father, and Son to be God: so by b^leeuing likewise in the holy Ghost, I
acknowledge the Holy Ghost to be God also: again, for that God is but one, as
has been already showed, in acknowledging the holy Ghost to be God, I
confess him to be one, and so equal with the Father, and the Son.
Furthermore, in that I believe in him the holy Ghost; I acknowledge his office
of sanctifying and making holy the people of God: for otherwise the Father also
is holy, and so is the Son, but this is the peculiar office of the Spirit to
sanctify, from hence has he this name of the holy Ghost Lastly, I believe in
the holy Ghost that is I put my whole trust and confidence in him, as I do in
the Father and the Son for my preservation, and salvation: and more
especially, as I depend upon God the Father, as my Creator, and daily
Protector, and upon God the Son, as my Redeemer and daily Mediator; so do I
depend upon God the holy Ghost, as my comforter, and the worker of grace and
all virtue in me being of my self a lump of sin, and a mass of corruption.

1 Proof.
For the grounds of this Article: and first that the holy Ghost is God, S. Peter
makes it plain, when as having told Ananias that he had lied unto the holy
Ghost, Act. 5 3. verse. 4.
he added, Thou have not lied unto men but unto God. These last words
expressing who the holy Ghost was, of whom he had spoken before; viz. God. Act.
28.25. Esa. 6, 8.9.
Moreover, well said the holy Ghost, says Paul by his Prophet Esaias: Go make
the heart of this people fat, and say, by hearing ye shall hear, and not
understand, by seeing, ye shall see and not perceive: Whereas the Prophet
tells us, that Jehovah the Lord God spoke these words unto him, whence plainly
follows, that the holy Ghost is very God and Lord.

2 Proof.
Secondly, that the holy Ghost is equal with the Father and the Son, and not
inferior or servant, as Macedonius wickedly taught, is plain from diverse
reasons. First, because he is one with the Father and Son, according to that
of John, 1 Ioh. 5.7.
There be three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Spirit, and these three are one, That is, one substance and essence, one
infinite wisdom, power, glory and majesty: Secondly, because he is alike
worshipped with the Father and Son, as in that prayer put up alike to them
all. The grace of Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 13.13.
the love of God, and the Communion of the holy Ghost be with you all, Amen
Lastly, because he is alike the Creator of the world, and the preserver of all
things: for when God in the beginning made the heavens and the earth, etc. the
Spirit is said to have moved upon the waters, incubasse, by a word that
signifies to sit and hatch, Genesis 1.2.
and breed life, as a Hen does, to bring forth her chickins. And Elihu
mentioned in Job, a man of an excellent spirit, says, Job 33.4.
The Spirit of the Lord has made me, and the breath of the Almighty has given
me life: and in the Psalms, it is. Psalm. 104.30.
If thou send forth the Spirit they are created, and thou renewest the face of
the earth, speaking of all other creatures, which are so made and preserved by
Gods Spirit, the holy Ghost.

3 Proof.
Thirdly, that the holy Ghost is the Sanctifier of the people of God, will
easily appear, if we consider, either this attribute holy, ever to be
annexed unto the Spirit, as Jesus and Christ serve to set forth the Son of
God in his office: or the comparisons, by which he is for the further declaring
of the same, compared; for he is said to be fire, and therefore John the
Baptist speaks thus of him: Mat. 3.11.
He that comes after me viz. Jesus Christ, shall baptize with the holy Ghost
and with fire, that is, the holy Ghost, who is as a fire, purging away and
re^ning from the dross of sin, as is further set forth where we are
forbidden to quench the Spirit of God: 1 These. 5.19. Ioh. 3.3.
again he is compared to water, in that saying to Nicodemus, Unless a man be
borne again of water and the holy Ghost, be shall not see the kingdom of
God, that is, of the holy Ghost in the use of water in baptism, setting forth
the power thereof, viz. to cleanse from the filthiness of sin, as water does
from the filth of the flesh. Or, if we consider the works of sanctification
to be all wrought by the holy Ghost: as first saving knowledge, which is all
one with faith, that most excellent and holy-making grace. Romans 8 ^6. 1 Cor.
2.12.
The Spirit witnesses with our spirits that we are the children of God It
makes us to know and believe those things, that are given us of God that is,
righteousness in Christ, through whom we are his adopted children, and in the
way to eternal life, according to that. This is life eternal, Ioh. 17.3.
to know thee to be the very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.

Romans 8.10.
Secondly, spiritual government, whereby evil is suppressed, and that which is
good increased in us, error is avoided, and the truth in all things followed.
They which are in Christ Jesus, to whom there is no condemnation, walk after
the Spirit, and not after the flesh, the spirit rules in them, and causes them
thus to walk, and all the sons of God are thus ruled, and led, Verse. 14.
for all that are led by the spirit of God, as he adds, are the sons of
God. Particularly the spirit so governs, by striving against evil motions,
and by offering good: for ^he spirit fights against the flesh, Gal. 5.17.
as the flesh fights against the spirit: in our weaknesses it helps us: for
when we are unable to pray acceptably, it works with us, and helps us to
offer up sighs that cannot be uttered: Romans 8.26.
in our ignorances it directs us: for it leads us into all truth. Thirdly,
spiritual consolation, Ioh. 16.13. Ioh. 14.
in our several afflictions and tentations, which is another part of holiness:
for this, he is called the Comforter, whom Christ promises to send, to
mittigate the heaviness of the disciples after his departture, he is called the
oil of gladness, which makes cheerfulnes even to appear in the face; he is
called the spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba. Psalm. 45.8. Romans 8.15.
Father that is, affecting us with the assurance, and comfort of Gods children,
when we are feared and troubled. Fourthly, power commendably to do the
weightiest duties of our callings, therefore it is said to be the spirit, Number.
11.
that was taken of Moses, and put upon the Elders of Israel, that they might be
able to judge and decide controversies arising amongst their brethren: it was
by the Spirit, Exodus 35.31.
that Ahohab, and Bezaliel were enabled to work all curious works about the
tabernacle: it was the Spirit that made the Apostles sufficient, unto a far
greater work about the spiritual Tabernacle, viz. to preach the gospel
effectually to men of all languages, Act. 2.
they being unskillful of any, but their mother tongue, and for this cause he
is called by the Prophet, the Spirit of power. Esa. 11. 2.

1 Duty. To keep our bodies pure. 1 Cor. 6.19.
The duties of this faith are: first, to keep our bodies holy and pure, as
temples of the holy Ghost, and not to defile them by uncleanness: for our
bodies are his temples, as the Apostle teaches. This therefore we are to do
with all readiness; as they to whose houses the King vouchsafes to come, or
some great person, by whose coming they are like to be bettered in their
estate, all their life after, they will not have any noisome or unclean room,
but their very entrances, and courts shall be fit to give contentment unto
those worthy guests: for Gods Spirit is the King of heaven, by his coming he
makes us the members of Christ, but no dunghill is so loathsome as a body
defiled by uncleanness. The body by whoredom is taken from being the member
of Christ, and made the member of an Harlot, 1. Cor: 6.1^
the temple of the holy Ghost is made a stews. Wherefore let this, and all
smell hereof in thoughts incontinent, and speeches filthy, be far removed,
otherwise there is no faith in the holy Ghost. When Christ found in the Temple
at Jerusalem; Mark. 11.15.
which was made but of stone, buyers, and sellers, and money changers, that made
the house of God, but an house of merchandise, he waxed so angry, that he
whipped them all out, and overthrew their tables: how much more then will he
disdain, and scourge those, that make the Temple of the holy Ghost, this
living Temple, not an house of merchandise, but a sink of filthiness, and
uncleanness? On the contrary side, when the material Arc was entertained into
the house of Obed-Edom, 2. Sam: 6.21.
the Lord blessed him, and all that he had, exceedingly: how much more then
will he bless us, if we entertain more nearely into the house of our body,
not an Ark made of Cedar wood, but the Lord hereof himself, the holy Ghost,
which is, when we keep our bodies holy.

2 Duty. To believe the Scriptures.
The second duty is, to believe without doubting, whatsoever is contained in the
holy Scriptures: because, that all were given by inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
and were set forth by holy men, not of any private motion, 1. Tim. 3.16 2. Pet.
1.21.
but as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Now, we cannot then believe in the
Holy Ghost, but we must also believe, whatsoever comes from him. We are
therefore generally to believe the promises, the threatenings, the histories here
contained, to be true; the doctrines, precepts, and prohibitions to be of God,
and necessarily to be obeyed: particularly we are to believe places mystical,
which pass humane reason, and places seemingly repugnant in themselves, in the
reconciling whereof, we cannot be so fully satisfied. Such things as be
historical, we must not hold parabolicall, as Porphyrius did the book of
Job, because he could not conceive, how so strange an history should be true.
Such things as be more unpleasing, we must not hold to have come from an evil
God, and the more pleasing and sweet only from our good God, as the Manichees
and Marcion did the old Testament, for which they rejected it, and received
only the new. Such things as were written by men formerly scandalous, but
after their conversion holy and virtuous, are not therefore to be reputed as
unworthy our belief as the Seueriani, and the Ebionites did all the Epistles
of Paul. Such things as were written after, not concurring in all circumstances
with the former, are not to be rejected, as the Ebionites did all the
Evangelists, but Matthew; and Cerinthus, all but Mark. And if there be any
other, that have done the like, they have, in stead of believing in, resisted
the Holy Ghost, and are therefore to be abhorred. As for all such as truly
believe in the Holy Ghost, I may more confidently use the words of Paul unto
Agrippa: Act. 26.27.
I know that they believe all the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and
whatsoever penmen of the Scriptures.

3. Duty. To use our gifts to the honor of God.
The third duty is, to use all our gifts to the honor of God, who is the holy
Ghost, from whom we receive them all, whether wit and learning whether agility
and aptness, whether courage, strength, and magnanimtiy, or eloquence or
diverse languages, or any other: for it is the Holy Spirit of God, that makes
men able to the duties of their callings, as we have heard in the seventy
Judges joined with Moses, and in Aheliab, and Bezaliel, etc. and as the Apostle
does more then affirm, saying; 1. Cor. 4.7.
What have thou, that thou have not received? If then thou abuse thy wit unto
deceit, thy power to tyranny and oppression, thy language to ostentation, thy
learning to pride, thine agility to cogging and cheating, thy magnanimity to
stoutnesse and stubbornness against Gods Word, thy strength to strength of
drinking Wine, and of pouring in strong drink; what do thou else but turn
the weapons, wherewith the Spirit has armed thee against thine enemies, upon
his very face: as if thou should take the sword by a friend offered unto
thee in thy great necessity, and seek to sheath it in his bowels. Let us
therefore fly such monstrous ingratitude, and use our gifts according to his
good pleasure, let our learning, wit, and best cunning, be strained to further
our own, and the sanctification of others: let our might, power, and courage,
be bent for the strengthening, and the encouragement of the feeble, and
faint-hearted, let our agility and aptness, be forced to a readiness, upon
all occasions of doing good.

4. Duty. To submit our selves to Gods Spirit.
The fourth duty is, to submit our selves in all things, to the government of
Gods Spirit, and not to stick in our own ways, nor to follow the sway of our
own natures: for whom should we rather follow and be ruled by, then he,
upon whom we place our confidence, whom we believe, to be the leader into all
truth, and our Guide. For, if we follow our own thoughts, they will deceive
us, 2. Cor. 3.5
We cannot think a good thought* if what we imagine to be best, we shall foully
err, for all the imaginations of man's heart are only evil continually. Genesis
6.5
Se what Gehazi gained, when he thought, by following his own way, 2. King. 5
to get him geat riches, and in the heart, condemned his Master Elisha, of
folly and niceness, who was led by Gods Spirit, in refusing again, for doing
a miracle upon Naaman. 1. Sam. 15
Look upon the misery, into which Saul the King brought himself, when he
thought to deal more wisely, in the matter of the Amalekites, then Gods Spirit
by Samuel directed him: for, he thought to please God well enough by
sacrifices, and to enrich himself also, by that which God had appointed, to
perish by sword and fire. And no less foolish, was Achan, and Ananias, and
Saphyra, to their smart, as their Histories do declare; and Solomon in taking
many wives, and contracting affinity with most Princes for the increase of his
power, and establishing his peace. For, Ios. 7 Acts 5
Gehazi is thus made a loathsome Leper, Saul is turned out of his Kingdom,
Achan and Ananias lose their lives, and Solomon, almost ten Tribes of his
posterity. Let these examples therefore be warnings unto us, that we trust not
to our own inventions, but go out after the Spirit, speaking in the Word with
Abraham, Heb. 11.8
though we our selves know not whither. Even as silly Orphans, which know not
how to buy and se^l, and to deal in this wily world themselves, do willingly
submit themselves to some faithful friend, that undertakes this care for them.

Quest. 33. Which is the second part of your articles of faith, concerning the
Church of God?

Answ. The second part is The holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints,
the Forgiveness of sins, the Resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting.

Quest. 34. What learn you here to believe, concerning Gods Church?

Answ. Four things.

Quest. 35. Which is the first?

Answ. First, I learn to believe, that God has a Church, consisting of a
certain number of true believers, of whom some be in Heaven, and some upon
earth, and that I my self am a member of the same.

To believe in the holy Catholic Church.
Explan. We are to prefix in our understanding? I believe, and so to confess,
I believe the holy Catholic Church etc. and not, I believe in, as we say of
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. For the meaning of the words then, it is
fully set down in the answer, viz although I cannot see with the bodily eye,
into the invisible Church of God, consisting only of true believers, yet I do
by faith firmly hold, that (as there is an outward and visible Church militant
here upon earth, that is, a company of people outwardly called, by the sincere
preaching of the Word, and further marked out, by the right administration of
the Sacraments amongst them) so there is such a Church, as is seen only by
the eye of the Lord, inwardly called by the efficacy of the Spirit, part of
which is already triumphant in Heaven, and part here still in this world, the
one sort being the Saints and faithful departed, the other faithful men and
women yet living: And because I can no otherwise have no comfort in all this, I
believe to my further comfort, that I am a member of this invisible Church, and
of the same body with the godly in heaven.

2. For the grounds of this, they are first to be brought, which testify,
that God has a Church. 2. That this Church is a visible company called
together, by the preaching of the Word, which is the Church before men. 3. That
they yet only are the true Church before God, which are Believers. 4. That no
Church is to be believed in, that is, to be made the foundation of our faith;
but only to be believed, that is, to be acknowledged, and to be cleaued unto,
when it is found to be Gods Church, and to be obeyed in all things, wherein it
obeys Jesus Christ the head of all.

First, that God has a Church, is plain, 1. Proof. That God has a Church.
from the often mentioning of the Church of God in the Scriptures. Great
persecution is said to have bin raised up against the Church, in the Acts; and
God is said, to have given some Apostles, etc. Acts 8 1 Ephesians 4.12 Revel 2.3.
for the building up of his Church. And in the Revelation, there be seven
Epistles, directed to seven several Churches, one to the Church at Ephesus,
another to the Church at Laodicea, etc. This is so generally acknowledged, that
it shall not need to be further insisted in. But that this Church is a visible
company called together, by the preaching of the Word, etc. The true mark of
the Church.
these being the principal marks and signs, by which it is known amongst
men, is somewhat contradicted, yea, exploded by the Romanists, and other signs
of universality, antiquity, succession of Bishops, etc. substituted, and
therefore, aliquantulum operosius, (as this Commentary will bear) to deal
herein. And first of all, the word Ecclesia, a Church, coming of (...) and
(...) in Greek, that is, to call out, gives great light herein, the Church
being according to the signification of this Word, a people called forth out of
the rest of the world, as the Apostle, not naming the Church at Rome, yet in
effect calls it, saying; To you which are at Rome, Romans 1.7
called to be Saints: now, if it be a people called out of the world, the
best note whereby to know it, must needs be the voice calling, which if it be
the Talmud of the Jews, it is a Synagogue of Christ's enemies, if the Alchoron
of Mahomet, it is an assembly of Saracens; if the Word of God corrupted by
false interpretations in matter of faith, it is a Sect of Heretics: But, if
it be the pure Word of God, purely and sincerely preached, it is the Church of
God. For, this has ever been a certain note of Gods Church, and such as
cannot deceive. Thus has it been noted to be in the family of Enoch, that
walked with God, viz. by obedience to his voice; Proofs of the old Testament
and of Noah, for he did thus also walk with the Lord, and of Abraham, who
went out at Gods Word from his Fathers house, and amongst his posterity, the
Jews, who at the Word of the Lord, followed Moses and Aaron through the red
Sea, through the wilderness, and the numberless turnings by which they were
directed from the Land of Egypt, unto Canaan. And still under the new
Testament, this was the infallible mark of Gods Church, first amongst the
Apostles, who were called out from others by the Word of God, to follow the
Lord Christ, then amongst other faithful people, as they were added to the
Church, they were called by the Word: witness that great work of conversion,
Acts 2.41
wrought by the Ministry of Peter at one Sermon, there were three thousand,
who, when they heard it, were severed from the rest of the World, and added
unto the Church, Verse 47.
and it is immediately further noted, that the Lord daily added unto the Church
such as should be saved, viz. calling them, by the Sermons of his Apostles and
Ministers. To proceed from History, to the Doctrine of holy Scripture. Does not
the Prophet Esaias teach the same thing? Esaias 8.20.
when he says, To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according
to this Word, it is because they have no truth in them, viz. When Seducers
shall go about to draw them to the service of Idols, Verse 19.
and to follow South-sayers, and such as have the spirit of Divination, as in
the 19. verse, they were still inseparably to stick to the Law of God, and not
to follow them, which do otherwise: and the mark whereby to know these is,
that they spoke not according to this word, then the mark of Gods people, must
needs be this word purely spoken, 2 John 10
and taught amongst them. Again, S. John says; If there come any unto you,
and bring not this doctrine, receive him not to house, neither bid him God
speed; And in the verse before, he twice names the doctrine of Christ; Verse 9
He that continues in the Doctrine of Christ, has both the Father and the
Son. So that, if John be made judge of the Churches marks, the principal
shall be the Word, the true doctrine taught there. Aand to the same effect
speaks Saint Paul, Gal. 1.8
Though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach otherwise unto you, then we have
preached, let him be accursed, corrupt preaching is still made the mark of
Seducers, and then on the contrary side, sincere Preaching cannot but be the
mark of Gods people. What should I multiply more testimonies in this case?
Christ himself has plainly taught the same with his Disciples. For, to what
else tend these words against the Pharisees; O hypocrites! Esaias prophesied
well of you, Math. 15 7. Verse 9.
saying; In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines men's precepts:
Does he not condemn the Pharisees, for their false doctrine, to be a false
Church? and what is this else, but to justify this, as a certain mark of the
true Church, viz. true doctrine, and teaching out of Gods holy word? and what
has been said of the Word of God, the same is true also of the holy
Sacraments, these rightly administered, are further certain marks, of the true
Church; for these are the seals of Gods word, the signs of his covenant,
whereby he binds himself to be our God, and receives us to be his people, and
sure pledges of his love toward us, which we really have, till we come
actually to be possessed of perfect holiness, and glory with Christ, in stead
of which, these are here given unto us. The Sacraments of old, were
Circumcision, and the Passover, the Baptism in the redd Sea, the water flowing
out of the rock, etc. which the Apostle reckons up, as marks of the
Israelites, where he says, that unto them pertaines the covenants, Romans 9.4.
the giving of the Law, and the service of God, etc. And more particularly,
when he would describe the old Church visible, and the true Church of the
Jews, for example to the Church that then was, he sets it forth by these
marks; They all eat of the same spiritual meat, 1. Cor. 10.2. Verse 4. Verse
2.
and drank of the same spiritual drink, for they drank of the rock that
followed them. And again, They were all baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea
unto Moses. And in the Epistle to the Hebrews, comparing the first Tabernacle
with the second, that is, the Church under the old Testament, with the Church
under the new, he makes the marks of that Church: The Candle-sticke, Heb.
9.3.4.
the table, the Shewbread, the golden pot with Manna, and Aarons rod,
sacrifices, etc. All Sacraments setting forth Jesus Christ. And more
specially, at the first ordaining of Circumcision, and the Passe-ouer, this is
by the Lord assigned to be the end of them, viz. to be a sign and mark of
his People. Of Circumcision, he says to Abraham, This shall be a sign of my
covenant unto thee, Genesis 17.11.
that is, whereby all that would might know him and his posterity to be Gods
people: Likewise of the Passover; The blood shall be a sign upon the post of
the door, Exodus 12.13.
by this Sacrament, the very Angel that came to destroy, should know where
Gods people dwelt, and it was a perpetual sign till Christ's coming, Verse.
27.
for their children many generations after, must be still continually
instructed herein. Now, under the new Testament, Proofs of the New Testament.
Mar^ 16.16.
two others have succeeded in the room of these; Baptism, and the Supper of
the Lord. Concerning Baptism, the Lord says, He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved: Here Baptism is made a mark of Believers: 1 Pet.
3 21.
and S. Peter compares Baptism with Noah's Arc, which was easy to be known
from other buildings, by the floting alone upon the water, so is the Church by
true Baptism; and always so soon as any embraced the Word, the first mark
of the Church, they are exhorted to this second, without delay, as the Jews
that were at Peter's Sermon. When they were pricked in their hearts, and would
know what they should do; Act 2.38.
Be baptized (says he) in the name of the Lord Jesus for the remission of
sinn^s And this was the next thing that the Eunuch proceeded unto, after he had
received the word, Act. 8.
What hi^ders me, (says he) from being baptized? It was the next thing done
to Cornelius, to the Iaylour: and all others of whose conversion we read in
the holy Scriptures. It is true indeed, that afterward some famous men did
delay their baptism, upon some sinister conceit, as is to be feared, that is,
left by sinning after Baptism, they should for ever be cut off from being
Gods people, Theod: lib: 4. cap. 12. Athan. Ap^eg. ad Constantin. Socr. ib. 5.
c. 6. Basil exhort. ad baptismum. Naz. orat. in bap. Chrisost. hom. 1. in Act.
Greg orat. de non differ. bapt.
though some other reasons have been alleged on their behalf, as that
Constantine the Great deferred his Baptism, that he might receive it at the
river Jordan, where Christ was baptized, as says Theodoret: and in the same
delay did his sons follow him: Constans, and Constantius, and Valens, and
Theodosius, as has Athanasius, Theodoret, and Socrates. And this was so
common, that there were Clini^i, and Grabatarii, so called, who deferred until
their last sickness; but this was ever misliked by the sincere Fathers, who
therefore did often inueigh here against, as Basilius, Nazianzen, Chrysostom,
Gregory of Nissen, etc. Lastly, for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the
Apostle makes it so certain a mark of Gods Church, that when he would
express the company of Gods people, of which they cannot be which partake of
the table of Devils, he says; 1 Cor. 10.11.
Ye cannot partake of the Lords table, and of the table of Devils, and cannot
drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils: the reason is evident: for
that the Lords table, is a mark or cognizance of Gods people; the Devils
table, of the Devils: and not long after, speaking of corrupt partaking of the
Lords Supper, when men came together in heart-burnings and contentions, he
says; 1 Cor. 11.16.
We have no such custom, nor yet the Church of God, as who should say, that
this is no mark of a true Church, which is noted, Verse 23.
not only by the creatures used in the Lords Supper, but by them rightly used,
according to his appointment, as soon after he does further allege. And for
this cause was it, that they met unto the Lords table every first day of the
week, according to that of S. Paul; 1 Cor. 16.
Every first day of the week when ye are come together to break bread, etc.
And this custom lasted long, as Basilius the great, and others do testify.
Basil. Epist. 21.
And thus the true marks of the Church are manifest, without any suborning, or
glosing, or wresting of sacred writings But as for these of antiquity,
visibility, succession, consent, etc. if these shall pass for certain and
perpetual marks, see what absurdities will follow heerevpon.

M^rkes of the Church set down by Romanists refuted.
First, the Church is only marked out unto the learned, and to such as have
been long exercised in Ecclesiastical histories a long time, no simple
person, or barbarous, can possibly come to the knowledge hereof; for how
should these know such things, seeing that they depend upon history, large, and
much different in regard of the variety of writers, some affirming, some
denying, some reporting this way, some that, the same things. Now the Church
has ever been marked so, as that, (supposing the admittance of the written
word of God) it has been known to the simplest, though all writings of
record made by man should have been burnt. Secondly, the primitive Church in
the Apostles days, and their successors must by this reckoning have been
without any certain mark whereby to be known, there being neither antiquity
nor universality, nor succession in those times, and the like might be said of
Abraham's time, and Moses, and Aarons, etc. Thirdly, the Church of the Pharisees
must have been the only true Church of God in Christ's time: for they only
could plead antiquity, etc. they only could allege the consent of their
Elders, and succession of high priests for many years. Whereas none of these
absurdities will follow, if we acknowledge the Word and Sacraments, the marks
of Gods Church, the simple may know it as well as the learned, it is a mark
common to the Apostles times and these, the Pharisees, and all heretics are
soon detected. Again, say that no such gross things would follow here upon,
where have you any testimonies for antiquity, etc. to be marks of Gods Church?
I am sure that in the most worthy of credit, ye have none at all: Whereas the
Lord himself gives plentiful testimony in his word to the other marks, and
the name of this very Creed, is an ancient monument of the Fathers of the
Churches consent herein, viz. their calling it Symbol^m a badge or cognizance,
as who should say, that the doctrine in this Symboll contained, is a certain
mark in the^ of whomsoever it is received of Gods Church. If any man shall yet
stick, because we do not know who interprets the Scriptures truly, and
receives them according to the meaning of the holy Ghost, and so of the
Sacraments. O let not this be any hindrance to our receiving of the truth,
because most are so unripe in their understanding: and so unacquainted with
Gods Spirit. Iam. 1.
For if we ask more understanding to know this, the Lord will give it us, if
we ask his Spirit to direct us to his own meaning, Ioh. 14.
he will give it also. Moreover, we have for helps this analogy or rule of
faith to try the truth by, we have the form of baptism, and of administering
the Lords Supper plainly set down; so that a discreet ordinary Christian may be
sure, when they are rightly used, and when the faith is truly preached. We
have the burdensome traditions of men plainly condemned, Math. 15. Gal. 3.
Gal. 5 17. Romans 3. Gal. 4.
the love of Jewish of superstitious Ceremonies expressly censured, Idolaters,
and Image worshippers adjudged to the pit of Hell, works in the case of
justification excluded, and grace magnified, him that seeks to set up
himself above Gods, that is Kings, and Emperors pronounced Antichrist,
outward things vilified, 2. Tim. 3. Marc. 7. Ioh. 4.20. Math. 10.
and spiritual service commended, will-worships disgraced, doers of works
supererogatory pronounced unprofitable servants, persecutors detected as
woolues, etc. If this will not serve to resolu us, but with Thomas we will still
be doubtful, let us pray for some more special certificate, and the Lord sure
will vouchsafe us his special favor, as he did Thomas, according to our
infirmity. And let not weak Protestants be so unstable, as to be carried away
herewith, when they have begun in the spirit, to end in the flesh, when they
have lived in the Church of God, by reuolting, to die out of the same. Many
cauells more would be met withal, about the promise of Christ's building his
Church, upon the Petra, a rock, of the constant remaining of this Church, of
his being present here always to the end of the world, to save them from
error, and to lead them into all truth, of telling the Church in the case of
offense, which they say must needs therefore ever be visible: and on the
contrary side of the novelty of our Church, our unlawful ministry, and in
detracting from the first reformers, etc. but I have been too long already for
this brief treatise, and therefore will refer the reader to the learned
writings of others, of this argument purposely, where he shall find them like
chafe blown away, by the spirit of Gods truth: for that the rock, upon which
the Church is built, is not Peter, 1. Cor. 3.11.
but Christ, for other foundation, then Christ can no man lay, S. Paul plainly
teaches: again, his promise of the holy Ghost, Objections answered.
and of being present with his Church unto the worlds end, proves nothing for
any particular place, but for the persons of true believers, according to that,
When two, or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them, and these shall not be suffered to fall, and lie in damnable heresies,
but be led by the Spirit into all truth: and lastly his bidding: Tell the
Church, proves no more, but only, that where the true Church of God is
formally governed by excommunications, and other censures for sin: there
obstinate, and otherwise incorrigible offenders, are to be complained of; and
this discipline is to be exercised against them. For if it proves the being of
Gods true Church visible always, it must also prove it in all places, else when
any person is thus grieved, how shall we come to the Church to complain? and
thus this rule shall remain still imperfect. For our ministry and Church, it
is sufficiently justified before, it much matters not, how lately the word
began to be purely preached, and the Sacraments rightly administered, so that it
now be so amongst us, this makes us a lawful ministry, and the true Church
of God, against which our adversaries may only bark; but not be able to utter
one word with reason: more specially for our ministry, howsoever perhaps we
might answer, that when an ordinary calling cannot be had, there is place for
an extraordinary, yet we can truly maintain that we can derive canonically
our ordination from the successors of the Apostles, as Master Mason has
learnedly declared.

Proof. Believers only the true Church.
Now it follows to be proved, that they only are the true Church before God,
who are believers. And this appears plainly: first, for that many of the
visible Church are reprobates, and without part in Gods Kingdom, as our
Savior Christ teaches by many parables, both of the sower that went forth to
sow, some of his seed falling upon the thorny ground, Math. 13
some upon stony, and some upon the high way, and so bringing forth no fruit:
and in the parable of the drawnet, Math. 25.
of the good corn, and the tares, of the Virgins, of the servants with their
talents, etc. all which tend to set forth the state of Gods Church to be such,
as that therein there be many castawayes. Moreover, he teaches the same
plainly, Math. 7.21
wherein he says, They shall cry, Lord, Lord, open unto us, we have prophesied
in thy name, and, etc. and in another place, Thou have eaten and drunk in our
streets, Luke 13.25
and taught in our Synagogues, but I will say unto you, depart from me ye
workers of iniquity. Which being so, it must needs follow, that all the
visible Church is not Gods true Church, but only the company of true
believers. Secondly, this is further manifest, because faith only sets us
into Jesus Christ, and makes us members of his body, Ephesians 4.12.
which only is the true Church: for to this effect speaks the Apostle: They
were broken off by unbelief, and thou sta^dest by faith. Romans 11.20.
viz Ingrafted into the Olive tree Jesus Christ, out of whom the Jews were
broken by unbelief. Faith only makes us the children of Abraham, Gal. 3.
and heirs by promise. Thirdly, the same appears from the description of the
true Church to the Ephesians: which he calling them, and magnifying Gods mercy
in calling them to this estate, he says; Ephesians. 2.8
By grace ye are saved through faith in Jesus Christ and again through him,
ye are Citizens with the Saints, Verse. 19.20.21.
and of the household of God, and are built upon the foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles. Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, in whom all
the building coupled together, grows to an holy Temple in the Lord. Here
faith only is that, which makes us grow to this Temple, and to be thus near
unto the Lord. No man therefore can believe himself to be a member of the true
Church before God, by reason of any outward privilege, entering him into the
visible company of Gods people, unless he be inwardly before God, through
saving faith made a member of the same. Fourthly, The Church to be believed,
and not believed in. Jeron part: S. Epist: 41. Non dicimus credo in, sed credo
ecclesiam.
that the Church is only to be believed, thas is, acknowledged, where it is
found to be, and to be cleued unto: but not to be believed in, that is, to be
made the foundation of our faith. This point, as it consists of several
members, so are they distinctly, and severally to be laid open. First it is to
be acknowledged, wheresoever it is found out by the marks before spoken of;
thus the Church at Rome, was once famous all over the world; and Peter
indeauoured much, after that he had once been with Cornelius and the Gentiles;
Romans 1 8 Act 12.5.6
to bring the Church of the Jews to acknowledge them to be the Church of God
also: and indeed, how otherwise can I say, I believe the Church? Which is
firmly to hold, and constantly to acknowledge it. Secondly, it is also to be
cleaued unto; for when the Church began first to flourish under the Gospel, it
is said, Act. 2
that God added unto the Church daily such as should be saved, he provided that
they should be joined unto the assemblies of his people, so that as Peter said
unto the Lord, whether should we go? thou have the words of eternal life:
Ioh. 6.68
so says every faithful man and woman of his spouse the Church. Eternal life
is no where else to be obtained, all the creatures out of the Arc perished, so
do all that keep out of the Church. The word preached therefore, is by all to
be attended, the Sacraments are reverently to be received, the assemblies of
Gods people to be frequented. Cantic. 1.8.
Thus the Lord directs all his to do in that mystical song: Get thee forth
by the steps of the flocks, and feed their Kids by the tents of the
shepherds. Thirdly, it is not to be made the foundation of our faith, because
so the spouse should be set in the room of the husband Christ, and because
that so we might err, and fall from true Christianity, as any visible Church
may do, and many have done. For the first, it was before showed, that there
can be none other foundation: for the next it is manifest, that the Church of
the Jews did often times err, and chiefly in crucifying the Lords Messiah.
The Church of Galatia did err so far, that the Apostle professes himself
to be afraid that he had labored in vain amongst them: he was afraid also
of the Church of Rome for the same error, which makes him so long in proving
justification by faith without the works of the Law. Revel. 3.3.
The Church of Sardis was so far gone, that the Lord says, it had only a
name to be alive, but was indeed dead, and the Church of Laodicea was
spiritually miserable, poor, blind and naked: and ecclesiastical history does
show, that scarce any Church has been free, but at sometime infected with
heresy, which though it was not in former times noted in the Church of Rome;
yet I take it, it could not be far from heresy, Jerome: Damasus.
when the head thereof Liberius subscribed unto Arianisme and Honorius unto the
error of the Monothelites: when Marcellinus sacrificed to Idols, and Siluester
the second sold himself to the Devil, and became a Coniurour, and
Negromancer. But say it was free a long time, does that prove, that it must
needs be so ever, nay, rather it is likely, that as other Churches had their
time of infection formerly, so the Romans turn came more lately. Again, that
the visible Church may fall into heresy is plain, because it has sometimes
made decrees, and afterward the contrary hereunto, Of the supremacy. Con: Nic,
Can. 6.
even in matters of great moment. As about the supremacy of Bishops: In the
counsel of Nice it is decreed, that as the Bishop of Alexandria had authority
over all Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, and the Roman Bishop, had the like
custom for the Churches about him; so the Bishop of Antioch, and of every
other Province should be supreme within his own Diocese. and the same thing
is decreed in the Constantinopolitan Council under Theodosius the Emperor,
and in many more, and in the sixth African council, Con. Constant. Can. 2
when the Bishop of Rome labored for the supremacy of all, he was discovered
to falsify the Council of Nice for his purpose, by comparing the Copy which
he had sent, with others, kept by the Patriarch of Constantinople, and of
Alexandria, and so was rejected with disgrace, both Zozimus, Boniface, Con.
Affric 6
and Siluester, and it was decreed, that it should not be lawful for any of
Africa, or any other Province, having Metropolitanes of their own to appeal to
the Bishop of Rome. But first their own Bishops; and Metropolitan, should
have the cause brought before them, then a provincial council, and then a
general. And in the seventh African all Prince-like supremacy is taken away
from the highest Bishop. Can. Affric. 7 Can. 6.
Primae sedis episcopus non appelletur Princeps sacerdotum, aut summus
Sacerdos, etc that is, the Bishop of the first seat may not be called the
Prince of Priests, or chief Priest or such like: but only the Bishop of the
first seat. Hist: ^sagde: Cent* 6. cap. ^. page 41.
And according to these councels some Roman Bishops themselves have affirmed.
John the third has left written, that, none ought to be called chief Priest,
or universal Bishop. Clement the third Bishop of Rome from Peter, (as they
reckon) living in the days of John the Apostle wrote an Epistle unto unto him
with this superscription. Clement: Epist. Johan.
Clement to the Brother of the Lord, the Bishop of Bishops, governor of all
the Churches of God, wheresoever the are founded by his providence: Now if the
Apostle as longest liver of them all, were chief governor of al, as he
acknowledges, he denies his superiority to any other in the world: that I may
add no more of the learned Fathers of the Church, that could not bear this
high title in any, but the Antichrist; as in Gregory the great, Bishop of Rome,
who affirmed, Gregor. Epist. lib. 4 Epist. 32.34.36.38.39.
that the title of universal Bishop agreed to none but either to Antichrist,
or to his forerunner, etc. But the Bishop of Rome has intruded upon this title
in degenerating times: in the Roman council called by Boniface the third, this
thing was chiefly handled and decreed, that the Roman Bishop should be Pope,
and Pontifex, that is chief Bishop, and have full power to call, and to
disssolue Councels, and to ratify, or abolish things decreed by Council;
through the favor of wicked Phocas, Anno 606.
who slew his master Mauritius to obtain the Empire, and being reproved by
the Bishop of Constantinople preferred his adversary the Bishop of Rome in this
manner, who had a long time gaped after it. And this his privilege was after
confirmed by Pipin, who was made King of France, his master being deposed, and
did this to gratify the Bishop of Rome for this good office done unto him. But
his authority over councels has since again been reuersed, and he made
subject unto them by the council of Constance, and of Basil.

Again, for free will, you may see the contrary decrees of councels before in
the Treatise of man's corrupt estate; under the third question. For the
worshipping of Images, it was the plain decree of the Constantinopolitan
council under Constantine Copronymus wherein were 338. Hist. Magd. C^m. 8.
cap. 9. pa 550. Of Images.
Bishops, that if any man should presume to make the Image of God the Father,
or of Christ, or of any Saint, he should be accursed.

Hist. Mag. Cent. 8. cap. 9. p. 639.
And about forty years after, viz. Anno 794 under Charles the Great was a
Council held at Franckfort, wherein it was decreed, that, It should be
altogether estranged from the Christian faith, and held agreeable to the
superstition of the Heathen, to worship and adore Images. And with this, does
all antiquity consent. But contrariwise in the second Nicene Council,
assembled by Irene, the Empress of Constantinople, (who wickedly and
unnaturally, put out her own sons eyes, and drove him into banishment) it
was decreed, that they should be worshipped; Con. Trid. Ses. 25 c. 2.
and more lately, in the Council of Trent order is taken, that the same Nicene
decree, be of all men followed. The like might be showed of the calling of
Councels anciently by Emperors; but now by Popes of supreme honor, which was
wont to be given to Kings and Emperors, but now to Popes. Of Purgatory, the
real presence in the Sacrament, the adoration of the Host, works meritorious
and supererogatory, of Monkery, and infinite ceremonies of which nothing
anciently, but now the world is full of decrees hereabout.

But these contradictions already observed may suffice, to show, that the Roman
Church it self is not free, but subject to error and heresy, for
contradictories cannot be both truths, therefore it must needs sometime
only have been in the truth, and sometime again carried away with heresy.
Lastly, this further appears, from the consideration of the manner, how
things have been carried from time to time, in the Church, viz. sometime
according to the will of one Emperor, King, or Pope, and sometime of some few,
and that not sincerely, but apparently seeking themselves, and oftentimes to
satisfy their malicious minds. I should dwell too long here, if I should
enter into a particular exemplification of this: it is so plain to all that
read of their proceedings, as that it cannot be denied. First, something has
been conceived by an higher power, then a Council called, and his mind being
divulged, they fear to appear, that be of a contrary opinion, or if they
appear, they are not admitted into the Council, or through fear recanting,
are received; and so it is proceeded to the matter propounded. Then a great
show is made, of calling upon the Spirit of truth, for his assistance, but all
is concluded, according as was before conceived: and accordingly is taught in
the Churches; and thus the people of God, under the pretext of Councels, is
seduced. Which things being so, let the Reader judge, whether the Church
visible may not easily err: seeing the fountain, from whence things there
held do proceed, is thus troubled and filthy. Again, admit that freer
councels, which represent the Church, be called (which cannot be granted to
have been in the Roman Church, certain hundreds of years last past) yet who
be they that make up councels? are they not men: that I may not say, men
altogether entangled with voluptuous living, aspiring after nothing but honors
and filthy lucre for the most part? and what assurance, I pray you can we then
have that they cannot er? yea, what fear may we not justly have, that they
have altogether erred? For if one, or some may, what more privilege can they
have altogether?

if no certainty of truth to be had, then is there just cause of suspicion
given, that there is no certain truth at all; and then says the Atheist, all
is fabulous. I answer, that this consequence is most false: for though all the
Churches visible in the world, were in an error, yet there is certainty of
truth to be had, viz in the holy Scriptures, to which Gods people taking heed
may be saved from following Baal, 1. Kin. 19.18.
with the seven thousands in Israel in Elijahs time, who complained of the
common revolt of all, but himself alone, but was comforted with this, that the
Lord had left unto him seven thousand, whose knees had not bowed to Baal, nor
their mouths kissed himself. For thus taking heed unto the holy writings of
the Prophets. 2. Pet. 1.19.
Saint Peter commends them of his time, calling it a sure word, and a light
shining in a dark place, and telling them, that they do well: and Saint Paul
would have the Galatians not to regard the very Apostles, in comparison of the
Gospel, which they had received, saying, If we our selves, Galat. 1.8.
or an Angel from Heaven, teach any other wise, let him be accursed.

The truth known, without the Pope Judge.
If it be said further. All Heretics do paint over their heresies, with
allegations out of the Scriptures, how therefore shall we know them? Can every
simple man, barely by the Scriptures, discover their craft, and keep himself
from their poison? they are rather thus in the way of being perverted, to their
inevitable damnation, 2. Pet. 3.16.
as S. Peter teaches; I answer, that this is a marvel, seeing S. 1. John 4.1.
1. Thessal. 5.21.
John bids every man try the Spirits, Whether they be of God, or no: and
gives a general rule to know them by: and S. Paul says, Try all things, and
cleave to that which is good: and the men of Beraea are commended, Acts 17.11.
for searching the Scriptures, to find, whether those things were so, which
were taught them by chief Pillars in the Church of God. What impudency then
is it, to count this the high way of error? How did the people of God of old,
Esaias 8.20.
that had none but the Law, and the Testimony, with the help of Gods Priests,
to direct them? What? were those of the Primitive Church more slenderly
appointed, then we of these last times? Or is there any now superior to the
very Apostles, who submitted their teaching to the trial of this rule? Let the
Romanists then be a ^amed of this shameful advancing their Pope, as infallible
Judge of all points of religion: For this is indeed the way to Atheism, the
way to all error, when one Pope shall contradict another, or any shall fall
into heresy, as they have done, and yet be held for infallible.

2. Cor. 8.
Our rule is more certain, and never deceives; but when fickle-headed persons
will wrest it to their own wills, and not bring their conceits into
subjection to it, which is S. Peter's meaning. For here holds the promise of
Christ, concerning the Spirit, to lead us into all truth, viz. if with humble
hearts (thinking that we know nothing, as we ought to know) we come to read,
and hear the word of God, and compare places more hard and obscure, with
plain and easy places, praying heartily in the name of Christ to be directed
aright) and no way belongs to the Bishop of Rome, as head of the Church, as
his flatterers vainly pretend.

Of Points maintained by Papists from plain Scriptures. Iam. 2.24.
If any man will further object, that this cannot yet make any Church, appear
to be a true Church to them that are without: For thus also the Roman Church
will rather be justified, for that many points there held, different from us,
are plainly set down, which without glozing, or paraphrasing, is not so in the
Church of the Protestants. For example, Saint James has taught plainly; We are
not justified by faith, without works: It is not so of justification by faith
alone. Our Savior Christ has said plainly, This is my body: but not so of the
sign of his body. Saint Paul has said; Work out your salvation with fear
and trembling. Saint James again says, If any be sick, let him be anointed
in the name of the Lord Jesus, etc: and express mention is made of traditions
etc. I answer: It is good for the Roman Catholics to deal herein, but with
some lighter points of their religion, for fear (if they should proceed
further, to their grand doctrines, of invocation of Saints, of
Image-worshipping, of worshipping the bread in the Sacrament, of withdrawing
the Cup from the Laity, of their Latin Service, and ridiculous ceremonies and
works of Supererrogation, etc.) of being altogether grauelled here. A man
would not think, that they had the face, to bring their stubble to the
Scriptures without blushing; for, if they have one sentence of Scripture, in
words speaking with them, we have ten for the Protestants.

Exodus 20.4.
We have an express command, forbidding Images, and their worship, and a
further commentary hereupon made, by the Lord himself; Deuteronomy. 4.5
Take heed for you saw no image, in the day that the Lord spoke unto you, Esa.
63.16
etc. against invocation of Saints, it is said; Abraham knows not of us, Jsaac
is ignorant of us, and Angels and Saints have refused this honor: against the
Popes Supremacy: They that are great amongst the Gentiles, have dominion over
them, but it shall not be so with you. Against the adoration of the Host. They
worshipped the creature, Romans 1
in stead of the Creator. Against the merit of Works, We are unprofitable
servants, we have done but our duty, when we have done all. 2 Cor. 3.5
Against free will; We cannot think a good thought of our selves. With
infinite places more, of which very children are not ignorant. For the places
by them alleged, they are but mere shows. James must be compared with Paul,
who is more large in the point of Justification, and so his meaning will
appear, that we are justified, that is, declared to be just before men by our
attentive and impartial works, the rest are eiusd^m farinae, easy to be
answered, as no Reader is ignorant. And therefore if the Scriptures be
acknowledged the rule of truth, the Church will soon be made manifest even to
the unconverted.

The Scriptures translated, Gods Word.
If it be further objected, that plain people cannot know, which be the
Scriptures because the languages, wherein they were first written, is hidden
from them, now there be diverse translations indeed, but much differing one
from another, how then can they know the truth by the Scriptures?

I answer, This is a very silly shift indeed: for are not the Scriptures
translated, the very Scriptures of God, as well as the Originalls? If there be
difference of translations, it is no more, but as if the same history written
in a strange tongue should be told in English by diverse, some expressing it
after one manner, some after another. Now for this little difference in words,
no man I suppose, will say, that no certainty can be had of the truth of the
thing told, by such as are unskillful of that tongue; but that he may the
rather perceive the truth, because they all agree in the matter, which they
interpret. Yet this is not the only thing, that brings them to the knowledge
of the truth, but to the first beginning of knowledge. As the people of Samaria
were brought first to believe in Christ by the report of the woman, with whom
he had talked, but afterward they professed, that they did believe, not
because of her words, John 4.42.
but for that they had heard him themselves: so they acknowledged the truth at
the first, because they find it so written in translations, but afterward,
because they are certified by the Spirit, and their faith is not built upon
men, as the Church of Rome does slanderously allege, thus pulling themselves
by the ear.

The Familists and Brownists.
If it be still further objected, that this justifies those inordinate heady
persons, the Brownists, Anabaptists, Familists, etc. for that in simplicity
seeking for the truth in the Scriptures, they do find it to be the doctrine
taught amongst them, and cannot find ours to be so. I answer, that they do
foully deceive the world under the color of simplicity, and religion: for that
they seek not the truth, but to bring the truth to the favoring of their
conceits, as may easily appear to such, as shall observe their insolent
carriage and lewdness, which they follow, under the pretense of conscience.
Moreover, as Gamaliel well noted, unto the Council gathered against the
Apostles; Acts 5.38
If this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to naught, but if it be
of God, ye cannot destroy it. So may it be said of them, If they were of God,
they should at some time or other, have flourished; but in that their work
comes to naught, it is a sign, that it is of man. For they have long troubled
the world, and yet they are at this day almost none. As their fighting has
been for shadows, and about no substance, so have these fantastical
Enthusiasts themselves, as shadows vanished away.

Of Lutherans and Caluinists.
Lastly, if it be objected, that yet it will remain doubtful, notwithstanding
this rule of the holy Scriptures, whether the Lutherans, or Caluinists so
called, be the true Church of God: because they both propound unto themselves,
to find out the truth hereby: both are content thus to be brought to their
trial, and both do almost flourish alike. I answer: That howsoever the
Lutherans be grievous enemies unto their brethren, especially some more harsh
and hot-spirited amongst them, yet we do think so well of them, in regard of
the points, wherein we consent together, as that we hold them to be the true
Church of God also. The only thing that misleadeth them is, that they are
addicted too much, Iurare in verba Magistri, that is, to stick to Luthers
teaching, who no marvel, though he could not see to reform all things
himself alone, and so were overtaken with some small errors. If they be not
so charitably affected unto other reformed Churches, the Lord rectify both
their judgments and affections in his good time.

1. Duty. To ^r^quent the Word Preached.
Now follow the duties of this faith. The first is, diligently to frequent the
preaching of Gods word, and duly to read it: because it is Gods voice, whereby
he calls us into the company of his people: it is that, whereby we must find
out his Church, it is that, by searching whereof we must find eternal life, 1
Peter 2.2.
as says our Savior. To this S. Peter exhorts; As newborn babes desire
the sincere milk of the word; for this, the Bereans are commended, unto this
all are by the Prophets and Apostles urged, as has been already showed. Other
writings without this, are but as pits, that will hold no water. Wherefore, as
thou love thine own soul, suffer not thy mouth to be musled by any massing
Priest, or thine eyes to be turned herefrom, for fear of seeing, as ^ue did
that, which may turn to thy destruction: nay, look warily into this word,
pray heartily that thine eyes may be opened to see the truth, lest by turning
away, thou come to destruction, and know it not.

Ioh. 3.20.21
He that is in the truth, seeks not to have the mouths of all others stopped,
but is willing to let every man speak: and so it will appear the better, that
the truth is with him. If there be any then that cannot abide that others
should be heard, but only themselves; what shall we think of these men, but
much more if they cannot abide their chief witness of which they brag, to
be heard speaking? Surely we will say their matter is naught, it cannot be
otherwise. And what shall we think then of the Romanists which straightly tie
their people from reading any Adversaries writings, yea from the holy
Scriptures, the chief witness of the truth: Their matter must needs be
naught, and their works evil, as our Savior teaches: He that evil does
hates the light, neither comes to the light, l^ast his deed should be
reproved: but he that does truth, comes to the light that his deeds may be
made manifest, that they are wrought according to God.

2 Duty, To cleave constantly to the Protestant Church^es
The second duty, is to stick inseparably to the Protestant Churches, as
having the true and infallible marks of the Church of God, viz. the word
purely taught, and the Sacraments rightly administered; and to account all the
fair shows of the Church of Rome in the antiquity, universality, etc. but as
the whiting of Sepulchers, which inwardly are full of rottenness and dead men's
bones. For trees often times seem a far off to be men, but come nearer and
with better light, and they are soon discovered what they be: So the Church of
Rome, which is but a trunk or dead tree in respect of the living Church of God,
may seem the Church by this divine light; and if we be held thus a far off:
but come nearer, and bring the light of Gods holy word, and it will appear as
it is, there being no page almost in the Scriptures, but some way depraved by
their false interpretations: none of the Sacraments, but so laden with their
superstitious ceremonies, as that there is scarce any appearance of their first
institution. Wherefore, whatsoever it shall cost us, though all our substance
and lives, yet let us remain for ever severed from the Church of Rome, and as
Philip said unto Nathaniel concerning the Messiah, Come and see: Ioh. 1.40.
so let us come and see by the marks, the true Church of God, and having found
it amongst the Protestants, though some be ready to think and say with
Nathaniel: Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? Let us lodge with it as the
two Disciples did with Jesus, all our days.

3. Duty. To be inwardly called. Romans 2.29.
The third duty is, not to rest satisfied with an outward calling unto the true
Church visible, but to study, and strive by attending upon Gods ordinances to
be inwardly called, by being endued with a true faith, which is, to become a
member of that, which is the only Church before God. For he is not a Jew that
is one without and according to the letter; but he that is one within, whose
circumcision is of the heart: 1 Cor. 9.27.
all outward things will stand a man in no stead, God may still notwithstanding
all these, be displeased with thee, and thou may prove a castaway, as the
Apostle speaks by his own example. Do thou believe therefore in word,
believe in heart, and in truth also? do thou make clean the outside,
cleanse the inside also? do thou appear to men to be a believer, O provide
that thou may appear such unto the all-seeing eye of God?

4. Duty, to know the fundamental points.
The fourth duty is to be well acquainted with all doctrines of the foundation,
and that by comparing things written hereupon with the fountain, the word of
God, and not to hang upon any man's sleeue, lest if he fall into the ditch, he
pull us also after him. For every visible Church, as has been showed, is
subject to err: Let us therefore only follow the Church, as it follows
Christ Jesus. Take heed that in reading or hearing, Rules of direction, to be
kept from error.
thy mind be not forestalled with error: think nothing, conceive nothing, know
and resolve upon nothing, until that thou find it in the holy Scriptures.
Whatsoever thou have learned hence, walk still in humility, be not puffed up
above others. Pray heartily for the instruction of Gods Spirit, and with David
look up to the Lord, and say, Lord open mine eyes to see the wonders contained
in thy Law. And lastly, where the foundation is rightly laid, where the
substance of religion is held, separate not thy self for trifles, and
by-matters: for as the Apostle says of meats and drinks, that they neither
commend us, nor discommend us before God: so is it of all outward things, they
may be inconveniences, but the greater is with Peter, to go from the company
of our fellow Disciples: for this is a degree to the denial of Christ
himself, with the Israelites, to go up to fight against the enemy, Numb 14.
without Moses and the Arc, and ineuitably, to thrust our selves upon horrible
destruction.

Quest. 35. Which is the second thing, that you learn to believe, touching the
Church?

Answ. Secondly, I learn to believe, that Gods Church is holy, that is,
sanctified, and washed by water, and the holy Ghost, and such as daily
proceeds in holiness, until it come at the last, to be presented before
God, without spot, or wrinkle of sin.

Explan. This thing is specially to be attended, as another notable mark of
the Church of God, and lest any occasion of error be taken by them that seek
occasion, the sense is first carefully to be opened, which is, 1. That the
invisible Church of God, viz all true believers, are accepted for holy in
Christ Jesus, at the very first act of their conversion unto the true faith,
though before they were most unclean by sin. 2. That they are all endued with
actual holiness, through the operation of the holy Ghost, viz. with a
constant hatred, and striving against all sin, and with the love of virtue
and grace, and with an earnest study and care to grow herein. 3. That, as they
which are recovering from any dangerous disease, that had brought them very
low, grow every day stronger, until they have recovered their perfect health
and strength, and as children grow up in stature, and in the lineaments of
their body; till they come to be perfect men: So do true believers grow in
holiness, bringing forth daily more fruits hereof, until that at the last in
death, all wickedness be subdued, and they be in holiness perfected, and so
without spot, or wrinkle presented before the Father. 4. That every true
visible Church is holy also, viz. in regard of the best members thereof, though
not in regard of the most, or greatest therein. 5 That howsoever the corruption
of manners abounds, yet the doctrine remains holy, and pure, reproving
these corruptions, and urging to all holiness of conversation.

For the grounds of holy Scripture setting forth all this. 1. Proof.
First, that through faith all true believers are accepted for holy in Jesus
Christ at the very instant of their conversion: this appears plainly,
because that faith justifies, that is, Romans 3.28.
makes a man just, and holy: Romans 11.10. Gal. 3.17.
faith ingrafteth into Jesus Christ and makes us partakers of his holiness:
faith makes, that Christ dwells in our hearts. Again, faith makes us to be
the Sons of God; for, to such as believed in his name, Ioh. 1.12.
he gave power to be the sons of God: it makes up the marriage betwixt
Christ and us, that we become flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.
and bone of his bone. And what more can be said then, to prove the holiness
of true believers? will any man deny any thing in Christ to be holy? dare he
say, that the sons of God are not holy? can it enter into his thought, that
the place where Christ dwells is not holy? The Father imbraceth his Prodigal
son at his very return home unto him? the Master of the vineyard prefers
those, that were called at the last hour of the day: our Savior Christ
receives the penitent thief into Paradise the very day of his conversion,
shall we not think then, that all these were holy, which was, not through any
holiness of their own, for they had done nothing, but through their faith in
Christ, making his holiness to be theirs?

2. Proof.
Secondly, that they are endued with actual holiness, the Apostle intimates,
when he says to the Romans, that they were called to be Saints, and Saint
Peter, when in praise of Gods Church, Romans 17 1. Pet. 2.9. Ephesians. 2.9. 1. Ioh.
3.3.
he says, Ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, a^ holy nation,
etc And again to the Ephesians, Ye are Citizens with the Saints and Saint
John says, He that has this hope, purges himself, even as he is pure, that
has called him. Moreover, that all believers are thus, is plain, because they
have one common calling to be Saints, whatsoever they shall plead at the last
day, if this be wanting, if they be workers of iniquity, Math 7.22.
they shall be bidden: Depart ye workers of iniquity, I know you not: for
this are the holy Apostles so diligent in stirring up hereunto. Phil. 2.14 15
Do all things, etc. That ye may be blameless, (...) pure, and the Sons
of God without rebuke. Have your c^nuersation honest among the Gentiles, that
they which shall speak eu^ll of you; as of evil doers, may by your good
works glorify God: 1. P^^. 2.12.
and it is the plain sentence of the Scriptures. Without holiness no man
shall see God: Lastly, that this holiness is a constant hatred and striving
against sin, and an unfeigned love of virtue, and endeavoring thereafter; and
not only an outward observation of holy duties; nor yet on the contrary side,
habitual righteousness, sufficient to justify us before God. All this is
also plainly taught, especially by St. Paul in his own example, Romans 7.
he professes of himself that he loved the good, and did strive after it,
and that he hated the evil, and eschewed it, in such words, as if he would
describe a man panting in his strife with most deadly enemies, and grieved that
they should any whit ouermaster him, and therefore plucking up his greatest
courage, and uniting all his forces against them. And the same affections
against sin he shows to have been in the Galatians, where he says: The
flesh fights against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, Gal. 5.17
so that ye cannot do those things that you would: and exhorts all men to
the like, saying, Take unto you the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6.13
that ye may be able to resist, etc.

Esa. 29.13
More particularly that the holiness of the faithful is not only an outward
observation of holy duties; (as some pervert it) but this earnest hearty
endeavor against sin, appears, because that this affected singular outward
holiness, (as being a mere Image to deceive the beholders) is rejected, and the
endeavor of the heart only (as the substance) is accepted. The Jews of old
had otherwise been holy enough, when they drew ne^re unto the Lord, with their
l^ppes, their hearts being far away: and the Pharisees had been the holiest
of all, for their fastings, prayers, and alms: for their Sabbaths, and
Synagogues, for their often washings, Math. 6. Esa. 1.
and outward devotion: but they are condemned for most vain, their service is
so distasted that they are bidden to bring no more oblations, they are
challenged for their incense, new moons, and solemn assemblies. Math. 7.
C^ap. 6.
For not the hearers of the word, but the doers are blessed, not the offerers
up of many prayers, but the secretly deuouted are rewarded, not the
sacrificers, but the merciful do the will of God the Father. Again, that our
holiness is not righteousness sufficient to justify us before God, the Lord
himself affirms, when he says, If ye have done all tha^ ye can, ye have
done but your duty, (...) are unprofitable servants; and S. Paul has spent
many of his writings purposely here about, viz. to show, that all such as seek
this way to be justified shall surely miss of their mark, let them color it
over how they will, alleging our union with Christ, so as that our actions
are meritorious and perfect through him, I am sure that none of the Apostles
do give any limit unto this doctrine. Paul notwithstanding his union,
acknowledges the imperfections of the flesh in him and S. Romans 7.18. 1. Ioh.
1.8.
James says, in many things, we sin all, and S. John, If we say that we have
no si^n^ we deceive our selves and the truth is (...) in us.

And if there be such a mixture of sin with our holiness how can any member
of Christ trust at all to his own righteousness: Can he justify himself
more then the very Apostles, and the excellent Christians of their times: nay,
let him take heed rather lest by so doing he be condemned, seeing, that, 1.
Cor. 11.31
if we judge our selves, we shall not be judged, and not if we justify our
selves.

Ephesians. 2.20
Again, that the faithful are ever growing in holiness, until that they come
to be perfected in death, and then shall be presented without spot or wrinkle.
Their growth is plainly taught in the Epistle to the Ephesians, where speaking
of Christ, it is said. In whom all the building being coupled together grows
to an holy Temple in the Lord, that is, as any building which becomes sit for
habitation, grows nearer perfection every day, till at the last it be fully
finished; so does the Church of God. Wherefore we are often remembered hereof
by Peter, 2 Pet. 3.18. 1. Pet. 2.2.
who says, Grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and where he
exhorts, to desire the sincere milk of the Word that we may grow thereby:
Ephesians. 4.24
and by Paul, saying, Be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put off the
old man, and put on the new, that is, put him off more, and become more holy,
and righteous: Heb. 5.
and again, where he reproves the Hebrews for their weakness even then,
when by reason of the time, they might have been strong men in Christ; to omit
the Lords vpbraidings of his Disciples, for that having been with him long,
still they understood not his parables, they were yet weak in faith, they had
not yet grown in mortification of their fleshlinesse. Gal. 5.17
Moreover, that perfection is not attained till death, appears, because
whilst we live, we carry the flesh about with us, by reason of which we cannot
do those things we would: we are but like a bad writer, having his hand guided
by a more skillful master, and this scholar notwithstanding is unable to write
a perfect fair hand, by reason of his own untowardness: so the holiest of Gods
children is short of perfection, by reason of the fleshes weakness, though they
be guided by Gods Spirit. Phil. 3.9
And this they are not ashamed to confess against themselves, Both Paul, I
strive, says he, after the mark, not as though I had already attained it,
and. and James and John, as has bin already showed. But in death all
imperfections vanish away, Ephesians. 5.27
then shall they be presented without spot or wrinkle: for Christ therefore gave
himself for his Church, that he might cleanse and Sanctify it, not having
spot or wrinkle: then the Bride is in her perfect beauty, in a vesture of Gold
of Ophir, with needle-works, all glorious: she is then as a city, Psalm 4 5.
the pauing of whose streets is of Gold, Revel 21.
the walls of precious stones, all things most bright and shining: she has a
silver Palace built upon her, if she be a wall, if a door, Cantic. 6:9.
she is enclosed with boards of Cedar, if she be in any degree of true grace,
she is perfected, and made happy. There is not need of an imaginary purgatory
fire to purge them, Christ's blood alone has done it, his merits hide all their
blemishes, and through him they are accounted worthy to enter immediately into
Paradise, to receive their penny of eternal glory, Math. 20.
though they have wrought but one hour of the day. If any perfection be
ascribed to any in this life, it is meant only of integrity, and vprightnes of
heart, and not of perfect degree of holiness, and absolute fulfilling the law in
all things.

Math. 13.
For the holiness of Gods visible Church, that this is in regard of the best,
not of the greatest therein, our Savior Christ makes it plain in his
comparisons, comparing the Church unto ground, wherein corn is sown, some
falling in the highway, some upon thornie, some upon stony grounds, there
being for all these but one good ground: and unto a field wherein is sown both
good corn, and tares by the enemy, which grow up together, etc. now all this
ground thus sown, has the name of corn ground, though the best of it only
be corn. So is it with the Church, it is called holy by reason of the
faithful, not of the most or greatest therein, which are tares, or thorns,
and briars coming up amongst the corn. And this has ever been the estate of
the Church, 1 Cor 10.
under the law. They were all baptized unto Moses, and did all eat the same
spiritual meat, and did all drink of the same spiritual drink, yet with
many of them, was God displeased: and under the Gospel, the Church of the
Corinthians, was troubled with incestuous persons, with branglers, and with
drunkards, the Church of Gallatia with false teachers, and many so inclined
unto them, that the Apostle feared, that he had spent his labor in vain. The
7. Churches in Asia, named in the beginning of the Revelation, had many bad
members in them: and the same is true of all others before, and after them.

Math 5.
Lastly, for the holiness of doctrine taught in the Church, this is so
necessary, that wheresoever it is wanting, it is a certa^ne sign of a false
Church, of a Strumpet of Satan, and no spouse of Christ. Even as salt, when it
has lost his savor; or a light hidden under a bushel, is no light, no salt,
good for any use, but to be trodden under foot of men: so is the goodliest
Church corrupted in the substantialls of doctrine, it is no more worthy to be
honored as Christ's spouse, but to be spurned, and trampled under foot, as his
most treacherous enemy. The teaching of the true Church is Christ his own
teaching, according to that: He that hears you, hears me. Mat. 10. 1 Cor.
11.23. 1 Pet. 2.2. Deuteronomy. 13.
And I have received of the Lord, that which I have delivered unto you: And as
newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, not mixed, and corrupted
with the poison of false doctrine. Yea, whatsoever signs be showed, and
wonders done, the company of those, that teach Idolatry, or any grand error
fighting against Christ's kingdom, or vilifying his precious blood, and
mediation, is to be avoided, it is a sure sign, that they are false Prophets,
wicked teachers.

1 Duty. To separate from the Church of Rome.
For the duties of this faith. The first is to make us still to be more
separated from the Church of Rome, for that she shows her self in this to be
a very strumpet, a false Church. Witness her teaching, that it is unlawful
for Priests to marry, howsoever unable to contain, when as the Apostle calls
this the doctrine of Devils forbidding to marry: Whence it comes to pass, 1 Timothy 4.3.
that in stead of holy Priests, she is full of filthy fornicators, and stands
to the justifying of those abominations, teaching that it is better for them
to have many whores, then one wife, that simple fornication is no more, Campeg.
Comiti^s August. an. 30. Pi^^bius. Ecci^^.
then aure^ scalpere, ^o scratch a man's ear, Wherefore without making any
scruple, is whoredom publikly practiced all over Italy, and infinite stews
are tolerated in Rome by the Pope, who takes a yearly pension of 30000.
crowns therefore, which they call, lactis census. Pope Clement would have
women common upon this ground. By the order of nature, the use of all things
should be common. Conc. Toll. ^. Ca^. 7.
In a certain council under Pope Leo the first, it was decreed, that he,
which has no wife, but a concubine in stead of a wife, should not be expelled
from the communion, if he were content only with the conjunction of one woman,
or concubine. And upon this liberty given, it would offend all chaste cares, to
hear the reports of their filthiness in Rome, made by such as have been there.
One says, Elias Hasen muller Hist. Ordinis Jesunici. cap. 10.
that being at Rome he saw Prelates, and Priests take with them openly from the
Churches common whores, and carry them in their Coaches to their houses, and
gardens: and in the time of processions, that honest Matrons durst not come
abroad for fear of them, laying in wait to take them. The same man further
protests, Cap. 7.
that he can truly, and holyly testify, that in Italy and Germany he found
not five Priests amongst an hundredth, which had contained themselves from the
filthy company of whores. And why should this seem strange; seeing the Popes
themselves have been so beastly? Baleur.
Innocent the eight had sixteen bastards, Pius the fourth was so vile a
lecher, as that in his old age he took things to provoke lust, and so
exceeded that he died in the bosom of his strumpet, as his Epitaph does
witness. John 13. set up public stews, and being reproved by the Cardinals
he cut off the priuities of one, the nose of another, the hand of another, etc.
till at the last he was slain in the bed of adultery, by her husband, whom he
thus abused. Who so lists may read more in Platina, and others writing of
their lives.

But this may suffice, to make all true Christians, in stead of loving, to
loath the Roman Church; whose inerrable Head being such, what shall we judge of
the tail? If they shall say, that as great corruptions of manners are found
amongst the Protestants also, our Apology is, that it is the envious man,
which has done this, there is no such corn sown in the field of our Church,
but wholesome, and holy, we abhor these as the devils tares, and shame to
defile our paper with writings patronizing these evils, as they do: yea we
say with the Apostle, Absit, God forbid, that such abominations should reign
in the Church of God.

2. Duty. To study to far holy.
The second duty, is for every man to study to be holy, an hater of sin, and
a lover of virtue, to strive against all false ways, and to endeavor after
perfection of obedience, to walk in sincerity, Ephesians. 4
and to banish Hypocrisy: seeing that all the true members of Gods Church are
wont thus to do. They are Saints, as has been said, they put off the old man
with the lusts, and put on the new. This we do all acknowledge, when we
confess, I believe the holy Church, but alas, how few do accordingly? how is
holiness scorned? he that is not carried away with the stream of common
impieties, but is careful to have a good conscience before God and man, shall
be made a gazing stock and laughing stock. They say a young Saint an old devil,
only good fellows, that defile themselves, with swilling, whoring, swearing
and vanity, they are the men most generally esteemed in these miserable days.
The Lord then has but a poor Church even in the midst of his true visible
Church, it is but a little flock, upon which he will bestow the kingdom.
Wherefore let all such as love this kingdom, beware this broad way, Heb. 11.14
and study for true holiness, without which no man shall see God.

3. Duty. To renounce confidence in works
The third duty is, to renounce all confidence in our own works, and
whatsoever we can do, and to seek for justification, only by the merits and
obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ, who is made unto us of God, 1 Cor. 1.30
justification and redemption. We must be holy, and exercised in holy and good
works, that we may be members of the holy Church: but far be it from us, to
rely upon our own works or holiness, for so we may seek after
righteousness with the Jews, Romans 9
but not attain it. We must have the long white robes of Christ's
righteousness to cover us, that we may be unblameable, and without spot,
before the Father, his blood washes the Church, Revel. 6
and sanctifies it, that it may be presented without spot or wrinkle.
Wherefore let not the standers of Papists hinder us, from following this rule,
though they falsely charge us with abrogating good works, whilst we seek to
be justified before God, by the righteousness of Christ alone: for, in so
doing, we may boldly say with the Apostle, We do not disanull the Law, but
establish the Law, seeing we teach the necessity of holy and good works.

4. Duty to be confident against Purgatory.
The fourth duty is, to be confident against the fear of Purgatory fire
(wherewith the Papists teach, that we al must be purged, before that we can
enter into Heaven, and that the torment hereof, exceeds the pangs of any
suffering in this world) because that by death the flesh is abolished in the
faithful, and perfect holiness is attained, as has been already showed.
That fire is but man's invention, to scarre fools and babes, and to cony-catch
them of a great part of their substance. Our Purgatory fire, of which it is
spoken in Saint James, and in sundry other places of the Scripture, is
affliction in this world, which is, as the fining pot for silver and gold; all
other Purgatories were unknown to the Prophets and Apostles, and to the
Christians of former times, and therefore no cause is there, why we should
fear them.

Quest. 36. Which is the third thing, that you learn to believe, concerning
the Church?

Answ. Thirdly, J learn to believe, that Gods Church is Catholic, that is,
consisting of persons of all sorts, scattered all over the world, and of all
times and ages.

Esa. 2. cap. 40, etc.
Explan. In this answer, is fully laid open the meaning of the word Catholic,
being a Greek word, it signifies Universal, and the Church is here declared
to be universal: First, in regard of persons belonging to the Church, viz. men
and women, of all sorts and conditions, high and low, rich and poor, bond and
free, Princes and Subjects, noble and ignoble, the Lord takes some out of all
these estates and degrees into his kingdom: Secondly, in regard of places, the
Church is dispersed East, West, North, and South, and not tied to any certain
place, or places; neither to Jerusalem, nor to Rome, neither to Graecia, nor to
Barbaria, but wheresoever the word of God takes effect, there is the Church
also: Thirdly, in regard of time, the Church was from the beginning, is now and
shall be, throughout all ages, and in the end of this world, be crowned with
Eternity, as the head thereof Christ Jesus is.

Secondly, for the proofs of these things. Nothing is more common in the
Scriptures, than that all people, and all nations, shall come and worship the
Lord, shall see the salvation of God, and have joy, light, and gladness,
instead of sorrow and heaviness. And this was typically represented in Noah's
Arc, whereinto entered the creatures of all sorts, four footed beasts and
creeping things, feathered fowls, and all manner of cattle, both clean and
the unclean: Now, the clean of these, set forth the Jews; Act. 10.
and the unclean, the Gentiles, as was showed unto Peter; the clean, set
forth the righteous and godly; the unclean, the lewd and wicked, as the Lord
would have the Jews understand, when he forbad them to eat of the unclean:
the feathered fowls, and the more noble beasts; great and noble persons; the
creeping things, Leuit. 11.
the poor and needy; of all which, some were received into the Arc, and some
are received into the Church; yea, the very unclean wicked, when they repent.

Revel. 7.
Moreover, in the Book of the Revelation, as some were sealed of every Tribe of
Israel, Dan only excepted, because of his Idolatry: so were some of all
kindreds, nations, and tongues, which together made such a multitude, as could
not be told. And this universality of the Church, was noted to have been, even
whilst the Temple stood: for, when the Holy Ghost did wonderfully give
utterance to the Apostles, in all languages, some of all nations are said to
have been there, Acts 2.5.
Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, and the Inhabitants of Mesopotamia, men of
Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia etc. men fearing God, which dwelt there for religions
sake. More particularly for persons belonging to the Church, the Lord does both
inuit all, when he says, Come unto me, Matthew 11. Marc 16.
all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and J will refresh you: and, Go
preach the Word to every creature. And by his Apostle Paul saying; 1 Timothy 2.1.
Verse 3. Verse 4. 2 Pet 9.
Let prayers, and supplications, and giving of thanks be made for all men: For
this is good and acceptable, in the sight of God our Savior, who would that
all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth: and Peter
saying; The Lord would have no man to perish, but all men come to repentance.
Even as he that inuiteth to a feast, Matthew. 22.
is willing that all the guests which are bidden, should come and partake of
his feast: only if worldly temptations hinder any, he is wroth, and will
destroy them, if they refuse to come, because of their profit, Luc. 3.
their pleasure, their security, etc. And the Lord does receive all such as
come unto him, whether they be Pharisees, Publicans, or common people, of what
calling soever, bond or free, male or female, Jew, or Grecian, or Barbarian, of
what estate, sect, or sex soever, prodigal children, lost sheep, Gal 3 28.
Luc. 15. 1 Timothy 1.12
notorious sinners, persecutors, and blasphemers. Secondly, for places, Christ
says, That neither at Jerusalem, nor at Iaacobs well, the Father shall be
worshipped, but every where, true worshippers should worship him in spirit and
truth, that is, John 4 20
the Church should not be tied to this, or that place, but be universally in
all places: and Peter says, In every nation he that fears God, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him. Acts 10 35
And not to multiply more Texts of Scripture, we have the places of Gods
Church, even in the Apostles times, particularly registered.

At Jerusalem, in Caesarea, Palestina, in Tire, Countries where the Gospel has
been received. Eusebius Jrenaeus Necephorus. Tertullian. Vincentius. Lyrinensis,
etc.
and Ptolemais: in Antioch of Syria, in Tharsus of Cilicia, in Mesopotamia,
Ephesus, and Smyrna: amongst the Sardians, the Trallians, the Philadelphians,
the Colossians: in Magnesia, Hierapolis, Pergamopolis, Troas: in Nicomedia,
Phrygia, Mysia, Galatia, Ancyra: in Vicomanus, Pontus, Amastria, and Synope:
amongst the Parthians, Medes, Persians, Hyrcans, Brachmans, Indians, Armenians,
and Elamites: And in all the chief Countries of Africa, in Egypt, Thebais,
Marmarica, Cyrenaica, Numidia, Mauritania, Getulia, Lybia, Aethiopia: in
Alexandria, Carthage, the Islands Pathmos, Creet, Gortyna, and Messana a city of
Sicily.

In Greece there were many famous Churches, amongst the Athenians, the
Corinthians, the Lacedaemonians: in Achaia amongst the Philippians, and
Thessalonians: in Laryssa, Thracia, Anchiolis, and Debeltis. In Illiricum, in
Dalmatia, in Croatia, in Corinthia, Vindelicia, Rhetia, Noricus, Laureacus, by
Danubius. In Maguntia, Treniris, amongst the Tungrians, Agrippines, and
Bardenickes. In Germany, Rome, Tirinus, Genua, and Derdona. In France, at
Vienna, Lugdune, etc. and amongst the Celts. In Spain, at Compluto, and
Tolledo; in Scotland, and England, amongst the Sarmatians, Dacians, and
Scythians, and other barbarous people.

For the times of the Church, The Church in all ages descending from Adam.
no age has ever been without the Church of God, though sometimes it has
been amongst a very few, and sometimes invisible to the world.

1 King. 19.18.
At the first it was in Adams family, when Abel was slain, (that God might not
want a Church) he sent Seth into the world. Afterward it was in the Family of
Noah, then of Abraham, Isaac, Iaacob, and of the Patriarchs, and their
posterity, the Jews, unto whom few of other nations joined themselves, and so
most were without the Church: and at the coming of the Gospel, it was amongst
the Disciples, and Followers of Christ, and afterward in all Nations, as has
been already showed, of which, though many revolted to Turcisme, and many were
infected with the superstions of Popery, or rather oppressed with the tyranny
of the Papacy, yet some few still cleaued unto the truth, and in these last
times, the light brake forth again out of darkness, and the pure preaching
of Gods Word out of infinite corruptions, by false interpretations, blind
traditions, and affected wrestings. The true Church was invisible, in Elias his
time, who thought, that he was remaining himself alone, until that the Lord
had told him, that he had left seven thousands, that had not bowed their knees
to Baal, and whose mouths had not kissed him: which the Apostle applies also
to his times, wherein the Jews did so much oppose themselves against the
proceedings of the Gospel, that they seemed to be all enemies to the truth;
yet without doubt, he says, that there is a remnant through the election of
grace. Romans 11.5.


Luke 24.21.
And the same was the state of the Church, at the time of Christ's apprehension
and crucifying, all fled from him, one of the chief denied him, others
plainly professed their distrust in him: and oftentimes since has it been
brought to the same pass, through the tyranny of Persecutors and Heretics,
and chiefly by the tyranny of the Roman Bishops, who, as they were given over
to corruptions, together with their Churches in Italy, by their proud affection
of an universal Dominion over all other Churches: so they have ever enforced
the same corruptions upon others so strongly, as that few durst mutter against
them, but some have ever been endued with heroycall spirits to resist, and
speak, and write against the same, by whose forwardness we may gather, that
there were many more in secret, in all times, which groned under the burden of
popish superstitions, and that Luther, and Zwinglius, were not the first, (as
they would bear the world in hand, as though before them there were never any
dissenting from the Church of Rome) but to lay down briefly what we find in
Ecclesiastical Histories. After that the foundations of a new Church under the
Gospel, were laid by Christ and his Disciples, the storms and billows of
persecution arose, and continued under the reign of many Heathen Emperors,
for the space of three hundred years and upward: by all which, though it was
brought under, and much hazarded of drowning, yet it was only drenched, and by
the good Emperor Constantine the Great, repaired, and much refreshed. Yet this
was but a calm for a season, for in his sons times, Arianisme was set
abroach, and caused almost as great troubles, as in the time of Heathenisme:
the Orthodox, notwithstanding, claue still to the truth, and manfully endured
all the brunts of this long lasting storm, though it was at times, more then
two hundred years.

After this, the Monothelits, and Nestorian Heretics lifted up their heads,
and having higher powers on their sides, did not a little by their persecutions
trouble the Church of God. After these things, about the year 800. the
worshipping of Images began to be set up by a wicked Empress, Irene of
Constantinople, against which, Gregory opposed himself, allowing the use of
Images, but not the adoration, nor praying before them, and the Divines under
Charles the Great. But before this, the Church of Rome having advanced it self
by the means of Phocas (who of a common Soldier, came to the Empire of
Constantinople, by murdering his Master Mauritius, the lawful Emperor, his
wife and children) labored much with superstitious ceremonies, and strove to
conform all other Churches hereunto.

For this cause, anno 617. Columbanus and Gallus were sent forth with the
authority of the Roman Bishop, to set up their ceremonies in all places: but
were in all likelihood then prevented; for two Councels were hereupon
assembled, the one in Bauaria, against the ceremonies of Columbanus and Gallus;
Auentin. Annalium Batorum, lib. 3. Author vitae Eustatij in 3. tom. operum
Beda. Beda Vincentius Balaeus ^oan. Mayer. Bed. ^d. 3. c. 25. lib. 4. cap 4.
Episcop. Lindisfarnensis.
the other in Mariscon, under King Lotharius, of both which the bare titles
only remain, the matter is suppressed, because that would have been too great
an evidence against them. Not long after Ardanus Bishop of Northumberland under
King Oswaldus opposed himself against the same, alleging, that the grievous
things of the law, the burdens of the Pharisees were not to be propounded to
the people. Anno. 670. Colmanus another Bishop stoutly resisted the shauing of
Priests, and other fooolish ceremonies, that were urged: but the King taking
against him, he prevailed not, and therefore went from his Bishopric into
Scotland, with those that took part with him. The like resistance had his
Predecessor Fannanus made before.

Auintint. lib. 3. Annalium, etc.
Afterward, anno 714. when Boniface who was called the Apostle of the Germans,
was sent of Gregory the second, for the like purpose, of establishing Romish
ceremonies, he was resisted by Adelbertus Gallus, Clemens Scotus, Sampson
Scotus, Virgilius and Sidorius, learned men, who could not endure the
ceremonies urged about the Sacrament of the Lords Supper and Baptism, but they
were oppressed by the Popes authority, viz. Gregory the second, Gregory the
third, and Zachary. Anno 774. Egila, Nist. Magdeb. Cent. 8. cap. 10.
a Bishop in Spain (who before, had much reverenced the Bishop of Rome)
afterward understanding that his traditions depended not upon Gods Word, he
contemned them, for which cause he stirred up other Spanish Bishops against
the said Egila. Anno 899. there was one Claudius, Cent. 9. cap. 10.
who had been a Priest in the Court of Charles the Great, which taught the
same doctrine that Luther afterward did, inueighing against the imagery, and
superstition of those times. Baleus Trithsnus.
Anno 841. Bertram a Priest in France, who was greatly esteemed by Charles, the
brother of King Lotharius, taught that the body of Christ was not really
present in the Sacrament, but is by faith received. Anno 847. Thergaudus Bishop
of Treuiris, inueighed grievously against Pope Nicolus, he called the Pope
Antichrist, and a Wolf, saying, Auentini^ Regin^l* lib. 2,
Cum sis seruus seruorum, Dominus Dominantium esse contendis: When as thou art
by profession a servant of servants, thou striuest to be a Lord of Lords. He
called Rome Babylon. Being called to Rome, together with Guntherius, Guntherius
Bishop of Calle^.
he was excommunicated, unheard, and after slain. Anno 859. S. Vdasrick,
Bishop of Augusta, held, that the Roman Bishop might err, and proved learnedly
by sundry arguments, that it was lawful for Priests to marry. Hist. Mag. Cent.
9. cap. 10.
Anno 1054. Berengarius, a learned man, had many followers, who stoutly
maintained, that the body of Christ was not really in the Sacrament. Anno 1071.
Lanfranke, Hist. Magdeb. Cent. 1^. cap. 10.
Archbishop of Canterbury, is said to have corrected the writings of the
Fathers, according to the Catholic Faith, whence it must needs follow, that
the Church was then gone from the purity of the Fathers times, which was noted
by some, but to blind their eyes this correction was made.

In the Epistle of Anselme, there is a form of visiting the sick, prescribed
in this manner: The Priest should say: Thou confessest, that thou have lived so
ill, that thou have deserved hell: Hist. Magd. Cent 11. cap. 6.
The sick answers, Yea: Do thou repent thee of these thing? He answers;
Yea: Do thou believe, that the Lord Jesus Christ dyed for thee? He answers,
Yea: Do thou give him thanks? He answers; Yea: Do thou believe that thou
can not be saved, but by his death? He answers; Yea: Go to therefore whilst
thy soul is in thee, put thy whole trust in this death, trust in no other
thing, commit thy self wholly to this death, with this cover thy self all
over, wind up thy self all over in this death. S. Anselme was a Lutheran.
Whence it appears that according to the present doctrine of our Church, it
was held then, and that meritorious works wrought by men, were in no request,
for justification and salvation. Anno 1110. Florentinus, a Bishop avouched that
Antichrist was then born, Platina Blondas
for which he was called to account by Paschalis the second, and suppressed.
Anno 1135. one Francis an Abbot maintained, that Christ's body was not really in
the Sacrament. Hist. Magd. Cent. 12. cap. 5.
Anno 1110. Petrus de Beuis a Priest, and Henry a Monk in France, taught, that
the body and blood of Christ, were not offered in the Mass, neither that it
was a sacrifice made for the salvation of souls, that Altars were to be
destroyed, that the substances in the sacrament were not altered, that
sacrifices, and masses, and prayers, and alms, etc. being made for the dead,
Cent. 12. cap 9.
were fooleries and profited not; that Priests and Monks were rather to marry
then to burn; that Crosses were not to be reverenced; that the Canonical
Scriptures were only to be believed, and that the writings of the Fathers
have not equal authority; and of these, the one was burned, the other hardly
escaped. Bernardi vita.
Anno 1190. Bernard, a learned Father, though he was not so sound, through the
iniquity of the times in all things, yet in the case of justification, he
speaks like a Protestant, when being in danger of his life, he said, I am not
worthy, J confess, neither can I by mine own merits obtain the Kingdom of
heaven: but my Lord obtaining it by a double right, viz. of inheritance, and by
the merit of his passion, being content with the one himself, h e bestows
the other upon me. Anno 1220. one William a Goldsmith, said, that Rome was
Babylon, and the Pope Antichrist, and was therefore burned. Hist Magd. Cent. 13.
cap. 2.
Anno 1250. G^lielmus de sancto Amore, was banished for an heretic, and his
books burnt. Robert Grost^d, Bishop of Lincoln, a zealous opposer of Papal
tyranny, should have had his bones dug up and burnt, but that the Pope being
terrified in a dream desisted from this his enterprise. Anno 1260. on
Laurence, an Englishman had his bones burnt, after that they were taken out of
the grave. Anno 1350. there were many sincere Teachers, specially Johannes de
rupe Scissi^. Anno 1360. Armachanus, an Archbishop in Ireland. Anno. 1370.
John Wick^liffe disputed openly at Oxenford, and was defended by K. Edward the
third, and the Nobles, against the Pope.

Summa Conc. a Bartholom^o Goranza collecta.
The points maintained by him, were; That the material substance of bread and
wine remained in the Sacrament: That outward confession to the Priest was
superfluous and unprofitable: That if any man gives alms to the idle Friars,
he is excommunicate: That he which enters into any such order, is made more
foolish and unfit to observe Gods Commandments: That the Church of Rome is a
Synagogue of Satan, neither is the Pope the Vicar of Christ: That it is a
foolish thing to believe the Popes Indulgences, etc. Anno 1410. John Husse and
Jerome of Prague, were famous in Bohemia: Conc. fol. 415.
The said Husse began first with reading the writings of Wickliffe, and
defended these things unto the death: That Peter neither was, nor is the head
of the Church: That the Popes dignity came from Caesar, and that his
institution, and perfection flowed from Caesar, that they had done unjustly,
that condemned the Articles of Wickliffe, etc And an hundredth years after, as
he had foretold, came Luther: for he had said, that they might indeed burn
the Goose, which the name Husse signified, but within an hundredth years such a
smell should arise out of her feathers, as all Italy should not be able to put
down, for a remembrance whereof, these words were written in certain coin,
which remains with Husses Image. Post centum annos Deo, mihique sunt
responsuri: After an hundredth years they shall answer to God and to me.

And thus have I led thee along (Christian Reader) throughout all ages, giving
thee a little view of the disposition of former times, by which thou may stop
the mouths of slanderous Papists, cauilling at our religion as too new, and
but of yesterday: when as in very truth, the maine things wherein they differ
from us, viz. ridiculous ceremonies, Idolatrous imagery, popish supremacy, and
abuses about the Sacrament, etc. could never have approbation from all, but
partly fear of the Pope his tyranny, and partly the mutability of the most
being apt to follow great ones (according to that, Regis ad exempl^r, etc After
the Kings example all the world is framid) first made these abuses common, and
in process of time to be held the very religion of the Catholic Church of
God: well affected, and sincere persons in the mean time seeing into these
abominations, and according to their slender power fighting against them.

1. Duty. To praise Go^s mercy ^or excluding none out of the Church:
Now follow the duties of this faith. The first, is to praise and extol the
Lords mercy, who without respect of form or beauty, of wealth or portion, of
quality or condition, of country or nation, is pleased to espouse us unto
himself in spiritual marriage and to endow us with his heavenly Kingdom. Us,
I say, in special this nation and Church of England, which God of his mercy
has vouchsafed to call, not only out of the utter darkness of Paganism of
old, but also out of the dregs of Romish superstition of latter years. Even
as Hester was more pleasing to King Ahasuerosh then all the virgins, that were
brought in unto him: so should we be to the King of Kings more then all which
be out of the Church, whether Turks, Jews, Papists, or other Infidels, and
heretics. If there be any amongst them zealous for their superstitions,
devout, charitable, just and true in their dealings, much more should we all
be such* that we may please him, the beams of whose grace have been more
shed upon us. But it being far otherwise with most amongst us, with what face
shall we look upon him? when he shall call to a reckoning, where shall our
place be found? verily, as it was said of the Sodomites, they shall rise up
against such, and condemn them, idolatrous and heathen men shall rise up
against them and condemn them.

2. Duty. Not to be discouraged because we are poor.
The second duty is, not to be discouraged from coming to the Lord, because we
are grievous sinners, or poor, or base of condition, and thus without all
likelihood of attaining to so great dignity, for the company which he receives
be of all sorts, as well poor as rich, as well sinners as righteous, as well
low and base ones, as high and noble. Persecuting Saul is as well accepted
amongst his Disciples, as preching Peter* the poor Publicans and sinners, as
just Zachary, and rich Joseph, Mary possessed with devils as* John Baptist
endued with the holy Ghost, the Prodigal spendthrift son, as the stayed good
husband, that never brake his fathers command. Wherefore let us all come boldly
to the throne of grace, that we may find help in time of need. Heb. 4.16.
If a great feast were made, from which none should be excluded, neither
ragged nor rude ones, neither lame nor blind, neither leprous nor loathsome,
how would all that need, come flocking thereunto? How much more then should we
thrust into the Church of God and take his Kingdom by violence, seeing he has
set the gates open to us all, how loathsome soever we are by reason of our
sins, so that we may come not to a full feast for one meal, but to be fed so,
as that we shall never hunger any more, to be watered so with the water of
life, as that we shall never thirst any more. But let not impudent and hard
hearted sinners herewith, as with fig leaves cover their filthy nakedness, let
not profane ones, whose lives are a trade of sinning, apply this as a cloak
to hide their vicerous sores of sin, making them the more to putrify. For it
is physic only for the sick, it is a medecin only for the wounded, groaning
under the burden of their sins. Math. 11.


3 Duty. To pray for the Church in all places.
The third duty is to be like affected, and to pray alike for Gods Church in
France, in Germany, in Denmark, in Grecia, in Sweuia, and wheresoever else, as
well as for our selves, and near neighbors, because the mystical body, of
which we are members, is in all these places also; yea, in all places scattered
through the world: and wheresoever it be, yet it is all but one body, one holy
Catholic Church, we are to pray then as heartily for the weakening, and
rooting out of the popish heresy from amongst the French, and the setting over
them sincere governors; as in the like case we would do for our selves: we
are to grieve as much for the Churches in Hungary, and Transyluania so spoiled
by the Turk, as if it were our own case. Romans 12.
For in the body, if one member be grieved, all are grieved with it, and so on
the contrary side, in like manner ought we to have a fellow feeling of one
another joy and misery, though in places far distant one from another.

4 Duty. Not to be troubled at antiquity pretended by, Romanists.
The fourth duty is, not to be driven from our hold for the antiquity of our
Religion, by any popish forces; seeing it is most true, that our Church is also
Catholic for time, that is of all times, and ages, and that of the Church of
Rome has been merely forced upon the world, and in continuance of time for
want of knowledge of the better, came to be esteemed for the truth, as
Mahumetisme is amongst the multitude under the Turkish dominions. No age, as
we have seen, has been without some witnesses hereof, and no doubt but there
were many more, but who was there then to register such things? Wherefore let
us not waver in our faith, but maintain it to the death, seeing that, which
the Romanists make their greatest strength, viz. antiquity, is strongest for
us. If others even in the darkness of popery, having but a little dim light,
did follow it, though left alone, and through many dangers: let us much more
walk ever in our clear light, having many companions, and all encouragements.

Let us not love darkness more then the light, as many do, least turning
unto it, I mean, to popery again, it turn to our condemnation.

Quest. 37. How may a man know certainly, where this Church of God is?

Answ* By these two special marks, viz. holiness taught, and professed and
antiquity, when both go together.

Quest. 38. Is not the Church of Rome then the true Church of God, seeing it
exceedes in holiness, and is most ancient?

Answ. No, it was a true Church indeed in the Apostles times, and many years
after, but now it is neither holy (for great uncleanness is there maintained)
nor ancient, for the ancient religion, being defaced with a new Religion, and
so a new Church is started up there.

Quest. 39. Where then may we find the true Church?

Answ. In England, and all other places, where these corruptions are done away,
and religion is restored to the first puri^.

Quest. 40. How can this be, seeing the religion of these places, is, but as it
was of yesterday, and never heard of before Luther and Calvin?

Answ. This is a mere slander, for there has never been any age, since the
Apostles, wherein there have not been some, which have stood to the
maintenance hereof, and against Romish corruptions.

Quest. 41. How happened it then, that the Church of Rome still ever prevailed,
and was accounted of all the world for Christ's true Church, and these oppugners
were never of any esteem?

Answ. By the greatness, and tyranny of the Roman Bishops, whose chief care
it has been almost ever since Constantines time to magnify their own Church
and themselves, and to suppress their adversaries.

Quest. 42. But, is it possible, that the Roman Church having been once a true
Church, should fall, seeing God has promised his spirit unto his Church to be
always present to lead it into all truth?

Answ. The Lord tyth not his spirit hereby to any place, for then the famous
Churches of Asia, long since collapsed, should still have been true Churches,
but the Spirit is always present to the faithful in all places of the world.

Expla. All these questions are before resolved in the opening, and confirming
of the ninth Article, only I have thought it necessary to insert them here,
for the better understanding of such, as cannot so well conceive of a continued
discourse. Let the Reader therefore seek above, and he shall find all these
things more fully laid open, by arguments and reasons, by Scriptures,
Histories, and observations. It is time now to proceed to the tenth Article,
setting down the fourth thing to be believed concerning the Church.

Quest. 43. Which is the fourth thing, which you learn to believe concerning
the Church?

Answ. Fourthly, I learn to believe, that there be certain special benefits
belonging to the Church, and to every true member thereof, viz. The Communion of
Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting.

Quest. 44. What mean you by the Communion of Saints?

Ans. That holy and sweet fellowship, which all the members of Christ's Church
have one with another; as they make all but one body in Christ, so
communicating of all good things unto one another, whether Spiritual or
Temporal, as their mutual necessities do require.

Expla. After the description of the true Church of God by the marks, here
follows the comfortable, and blessed estate thereof set down in these
Privileges: The Communion of Saints etc. that no man may think it lost
labor, either to seek out the true Church, or to endeavor to join himself
unto the same. For the meaning of this first privilege: The Communion of
Saints is as much in effect, as their common union unto Christ their head, and
through him unto God the Father, and of one unto another, even as there is an
union betwixt members of the same body, which union stretches not only to the
Church militant, howsoever dispearsed, but even to the Church triumphant also,
and the Saints in heaven. So that first in believing the communion of Saints. I
do hold, and acknowledge that none in the world of what company or degree
soever, are so highly advanced, and so happy for the fellowshippe, into the
order of which they are joined, as the Saints are, as they which are of the
company of Gods Church and people; Because that they may happily be joined to
men famous upon earth, but these are joined to the holy ones placed in heaven;
they may be joined to Princes, and men great upon earth, but these are joined
to the King of Kings, to the greatest both in earth, and in heaven. Secondly,
the communion of Saints is as much, as their communicating with their head
Jesus Christ, and with one another, whereby Christ's merits and righteousness
are made common unto them, and their sins and miseries unto him: and their
prayers, fastings, and devotions are made common unto one another, not only
amongst the living, but even amongst the living, and the Saints departed also;
and lastly, whereby temporal, and outward things of this life are made common
unto them, through Christ, who is heir of all things, so as that they only
have true right, and title before God unto earthly things. I do then in the
second place here acknowledge, and believe that no small good comes of this
communion, but such as the world cannot afford; for my sins are laid upon
Christ, and his righteousness serves to cloth me, if I be in misery, he is
not without sense and feeling thereof, but what is done against me, he
accounts it, as done against himself: Moreover the continual, and daily
prayers of all good people ascend up for me, if I be afflicted they grieve, if
in welfare they joy, yea, the Saints in heaven cry to God for the shortening of
our days of misery: Lastly, though mine estate be never so poor in this
world, yet I am richer then many, that have great possessions, they being
usurpers, but I having right unto my poor clothes, and slender diet, and unto
more, as God shall be pleased to send it me: and if I be rich, I communicate
unto the necessities of Gods children, and thus provide me riches, that shall
never perish, or be lost.

Proof.
For the proof of these things, and first of the union of the Saints with
Christ Jesus. This benefit the Lord himself prays for, saying, of all such
as should believe in his name; Ioh. 17.11.
I pray O Father, that they all may be one, as thou art in me, and I in thee,
that they may be also in us. And as he prayed for it, so he has by a
spiritual marriage of his Church unto himself effected it, for which cause
the Apostle is bold to say, that as the wife is one flesh with the husband, so
we are of his flesh, and of his bones: Ephesians. 4.30. Cap. 2.20. Romans 11.
and that the Saints are the building, and Christ Jesus the chief corner
stone: and that, as imps are ingrafted into an Olive tree, so are we into
Christ, with many like comparisons setting forth this union, And that we might
be able the better to apprehend it, he took our nature to the Godhead in his
incarnation, and propounds himself wholly to be taken into us in his last
Supper. Secondly, for our union with one another; it is set forth by the
members of a body, by the parts of an house, by the branches of a vine, and by
the spouse of an honest husband, which is one only: so are the Saints but one
body, one house, one vine, and one spouse, though they be many parts, and
members. Romans 12. Ephesians 4. Ioh. 15.
Wherefore it is said, that in Christ Jesus, there is neither Jew nor Grecian,
neither bond nor free, neither male, nor female, but all are one. Gal. 3.28.
Who so would see more for this, let him read over the twelfth Chapter to the
Romans, and the second to the Ephesians* Thirdly, for our union with the Saints
in Heaven, though they be removed far from us into another world, they still
remain our fellow servants and our brethren, as the Lord told them in the
Revelation, Revel. 6.11.
wherefore look what favor the Lord bears toward them, the same he
bears toward us: for neither shall they without us have perfect glory, Heb.
11. 1 These. 4.
neither shall we at the resurrection prevent them: but as fellow members of
the same body, we shall begin to reign together with our head Christ.
Fourthly, for those things, which are more properly set forth by the word
Communion, viz. first our communion with Christ our head, whereby his
righteousness becomes ours, and our sins his: the Apostle says, that he
made him sin, which knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.
that we might be made the righteousness of God through him: and the Prophet
Esaias says, Es^ 53.4. Verse* 5.
urely he has borne our infirmities, for he was wounded for our
transgressions, and was broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. And as in our sins,
so he partaketh with us in our miseries, for that which is done to his
faithful servants he takes, as done unto himself, whether it be matter of
benefit or of affliction and neglect. To such as have not fed his members being
hungry, nor clothed them being naked, etc. Math. 25.
He will say; I was an hungry, and ye fed me not, I was naked and ye clothed
me^ not, etc. And on the contrary side to those that have done contrariwise.
When his Disciples should come and preach unto any City, or house, such as
received them, were judged to receive him, they which persecuted them, were
judged to persecute himself, as may be seen in the example of Saul, unto whom
posting from one place to another, to draw forth the Saints to punishment, it
was said from heaven, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Math. 10. Act. 9.
Fifthly, for the Communion betwixt the Saints themselves living in this world:
this is first in their hearts and affections, in which they are knit one unto
another through love: thus the Disciples were said after Christ's ascension to
have been together, with one mind. And we are all exhorted, Ephesians. 4.3. Verse 4.
To keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, forasmuch as there is
but one body, and one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, and one baptism. 1. Cor. 3.
When the Corinthians were divided in their minds, they were sharply taken up
for carnal, and not spiritual, and Saint John makes it a note of men, 1.
Ioh. 3.14. Esa. 11.
translated from death to life, if we love the brethren. In the mountain of
the Lord, they all dwell together, says the Prophet, both the Lion, the Kid,
the Wolf, the Lamb, the Leopard and the Ass, viz. Through the unity of their
affections, though they were as diversely affected before as these creatures:
yet now they are all alike, truly, holy, and heavenly minded, meek, gentle,
temperate, sober, and addicted to every good way, and to every good work.

Rom 12* 15.
Secondly* this communion is in the effects of their hearts thus united. viz.
first joys and sorrows, virtues and weaknesses, mutually communicated
amongst them: unto which the Apostle exhorts, saying, Rejoice with them which
rejoice, and weep with them which weep; and professes it to have been in
himself, saying, 2. Cor. 11.29.
Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended and I burn not? Secondly,
hearty prayers put up to the Lord for one another, with supplications, and
giving of thanks. This S. Paul desires at the hand of the Ephesians, both for
himself, and for all Saints. And, Ephesians. 6.18. Iam. 5.16.
Pray one for another (says S. James) for the prayer of the righteous man
avails much, if it be fervent. This is so necessary, as that to neglect it,
is a great sin, according to that of Samuel: 1. Sam. 12.23.
God forbid, that I should sin against the Lord, and cease praying for you.
Thirdly, exhortations to the mutual excitation of Gods grace in one another;
for which the Hebrews are effectually moved, where it is said; Let us consider
one another to provoke unto love and good works: and again, Let us exhort one
another, and that so much the more, because ye see that the day draws near.
Heb. 10.24. Verse. 35.
Fourthly, repairing and edifying one another: for, where men's affections are
aright, there such as are fallen through weakness, Gal. 6.1.
are restored by the spirit of meekness and this is the repairing of grace
decayed: such as stand are strengthened, according to the saying of the Lord
unto Peter; When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren* and this is the
edifying of men in grace, when every man, according to his measure of knowledge
in the mystery of the Gospel, endeavors to breed knowledge in others, as
Paul dealt at Ephesus, when he protested, Acts 20.10.
That he had kept back^ nothing which was profitable for them, but showed, and
taught openly, and throughout every house. Fifthly, the communication of
worldly goods. The practice of the Primitive Church was wonderful for this,
the necessities of their fellow-seruants requiring it, they sold their
possessions, and laid down the price at the Apostles feet, to be distributed,
as every one had need: The Christians of Macedonia are commended for their
liberality to the poor Saints of Jerusalem, wherein they are said to have
been willing, beyond that they were able, 2. Cor. 8.
and the Corinthians are exhorted unto the same, that is in all likelihood,
they did even diminish their own estates, and herewith make provision for the
poor in the famine, leaving scarce sufficient for their own maintenance. Nor
does this favor the Anabaptisticall Community of all things: for, we are not
otherwise to conceive of the Community of things in the Apostles times; but
only, that as any man did sell, and dedicate any thing to the Apostles and
Disciples which had not wherewithal else to live, so that only, so dedicated,
did remain as the Church treasury, out of which, the faithful that wanted
were relieved, there remaining unto every man, still some things which were
proper unto himself: or at least there remained a liberty to have retained
some parcel unto himself. As in all populous places abounding with poor,
there be stocks and treasuries at this day: the only difference is, that then
men being more devoted, and the necessities of the Saints greater, it was more
abundantly brought into this treasury, but now more sparingly. For if all
things had been common, that exhortation to the Church of Corinth, 1. Cor. 16.
of laying aside for the poor every first day of the week, as God had blessed
every man, had bin to no purpose: there had bin no use of their loue-feasts,
which were made by the richer, for the comfort of the poor, neither could some
by excess have been drunken, and some hungry, as they were when the use of
these feasts was corrupted amongst them. 1. Cor, 11.


Col. 3.1.
Sixthly, and lastly, for our Communion with the Saints departed, it is first in
our conuersing with them, by heavenly thoug^ts, according to that exhortation
to the Colossians; Set your affections on things which are above; by holiness
of life, according to that profession of the Apostle to the Philippians; Our
conversation is in Heaven, from whence we expect a Savior: Phil. ^.20.
and by sighing after Heaven, according to that consolation of the Corinthians;
2. Cor. 5.2,
Therefore we sigh, desiring to be clothed with our house which is from
Heaven. Secondly, in our like affections unto Gods glory, and against the
enemies of the Church: for, as we pray for the advancement of the one, and the
confusion of the other, so much more do they; for they cry, Revel. 6.10.
How long Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our bloodshed
by them upon the earth: which they say, not because they are endued with less
charity toward their enemies and persecutors, then faithful Martyrs upon
earth, who have prayed for them; but partly through the love of their
fellow-seruants, still subject to their fury, unless they be cut off, and
partly through their understanding, cleared to discern reprobate persecutors,
and chiefly through the desire, that Gods glory may be magnified, by taking
away such maine lets and hindrances of the Gospels proceedings. For it may
well be held that the Saints in Heaven do cry unto God in general against
Satan, and all his instruments, at all times, knowing their fury, even to the
end of the world, against Gods people in the world: but the error is, to
believe that they know our particular necessities, or can hear us upon earth
complaining of the^, which is a property of the Godhead only, which is
infinite and all-sufficient to such as call upon him.

1. Duty. To renounce wicked societies.
Having thus at large dealt with the meaning of this Article, and the grounds of
holy Scripture, from whence it is taken, it remains now that we lay down the
duties. Of which the first is. To abandon all wicked societies, because we
profess fellowship with Saints, betwixt whom and these, there is no agreement:
For, What agreement is there, 2. Cor. 6
says the Apostle, betwixt God and Belial, betwixt light and darkness, betwixt
righteousness and unrighteousness? wherefore we are forbidden to have
fellowship with such. 1. Cor. 5.1^
If any be called a brother, that is a Fornicator, or Drunkard, or Idolater,
through covetousness, with such an one eat not: and again, If any walk
inordinately we command you, that you withdraw your selves from them. And, 2.
These. ^.^
With the fool (says Solomon) thou shall learn folly, and the companion of
fools shall be afflicted, with many other places purposely restraining us from
such companions. And indeed, how can thou believe thy self to be of the
Communion of Saints, and yet have voluntary inward fellowship with the wicked?
Verily no more then those that lived among the Samaritans; and had dealings
with them, could defend themselves to be of the Jews Commonwealth, seeing as
the woman of Samaria told Christ, Ioh. ^
the Jews meddlenot with the Samaritans* no more then they which haunt the
Stews daily, can defend themselves to be chaste and honest men, seeing that
such come not into these dangerous places. It is true, I grant that the Saints
may come amongst vicious persons, as amongst strangers, to eat and to drink,
to buy and to sell with them: or they may use their company to win them to
Christ, as S. Paul says, that to all men he became all things, that he might
win some, but to make them our choice companions to delight in them and
single them out to be our consorts, can no more stand with the communion of
Saints, then the Suns cleerest light with the most pitchy darkness of the
night. Let us abstain then from such company with John the Apostle, let us
cry, Properemus hinc, Let us hasten hence, lest the house fall upon us where an
enemy of the truth is, when he understood entering the bath, that Cerinthus the
Heretic was there.

3. Duty. To walk in the light.
The third duty is to walk in the light of Gods holy Word by virtuous living,
because of our fellowship with Christ, and through him with God the Father: for
God is light, says S. John, and if we walk in darkness, and say that we
have fellowship with him, we lie, and do not truly. 1 Ion. 1.7.
So Christ calls himself the light of the world, and pronounces this the
condemnation of the world, because light was come and men loved darkness more
then light, because their deeds were evil; that is, when he came to inlighten
them with his holy precepts of faith and repentance, they neglected this, and
persisted in unbelief, and sin, which would be their damnation. Whosoever
therefore treads in the same steps, may well expect the same end, they are
not in Christ, they are far from any union with him; for such walk after the
spirit, speaking in the Word, and so there is no condemnation unto them. Romans
8.1.
This is the spiritual whordome of which the Prophet did so much complain,
causing a divorce betwixt the Lord and his people, and so a deprivation of all
goodly ornaments before bestowed: so that as the case of a woman is which has
played the whore, and for this is put away from her husband with shame and
without all mercy burnt in the fire: so is our case: if we neglect his will,
and follow our own corruption, our union with the Lord is clean broken off,
we are put from him, and without all pity must endure the euer-burning flames
of hell fire.

4. Duty. To do good unto all. Gal. 6.10.
The fourth duty is to do good unto all, but specially to those of the household
of faith, as the Apostle warns: because of our communion with them, and that
not only in distributing our temporal goods, but our spiritual, and in being
like affected toward them, rejoicing with them that rejoice, and weeping with
them that weep: For in the members of our body, to use the Argument of the
Apostle, Can one be pained, and not all of them in like manner grieved? so in
the spiritual body of Christ, of which we profess our selves members, there
can be none grieved, but it must be our grief also; none comforted, but it
must be our comfort also. And if we be thus affected toward one another, we
shall need no spurs to prick us forward, to any duty of love toward one
another; but Ministers will preach diligently to inlighten their fellow
members, people will pray heartily that a door of utterance may be given unto
them, neighbors will not suffer one another to sin, but plainly rebuke vice, the
forward in matters of religion, will not suffer others to be slack, but
provoke them to love and good works, the stayed will not suffer the unruly to
go on in their inordinate courses, but restore them in the spirit of
meekness, the rich will not suffer the poor to perish for want of food, but
relieve them, they which have plenty, will supply the necessities of such as
suffer through scarcity, even beyond that which they are able, and all this
readily and cheerfully, because it is to the benefit of our common body, of
which we are all members alike. Neither is this all, but in thus doing, we do
wonderfully please our dear Savior, and shall have it remembered at the last
day, to our unspeakable comfort. Math 2^.
Wherefore let our hard hearts break within us, let them resolve into bowels
of compassion toward the poor: and let our security, in regard of others,
become anxious carfulness, for the keeping of them upright in the way of
righteousness.

5. Duty. To be comfortable in distress. Heb. 4.15.
The fifth duty is to be comfortable in all our sufferings, whether by
persecutors, or slanderours, by sicknesses or l^sses, by poverty, or wants:
because our head Christ is not without a Sympathy, and feeling of these
miseries, and will not suffer us to be tempted hereby, beyond that we are
able, but will give the issue together with the temptation. Was it not a
wonderful stay to the minds of the Disciples, when Christ told them; Math* 10.
He that receives you, receives me, and he that receives me, receives
him that sent me? And on the contrary side, to those that do contrariwise? Did
it not confirm Paul much becoming a Preacher of the Gospel, to hear that
they, which persecuted the Christians, did persecute Christ himself?
Doubtless, it did. Likewise then, should it confirm and comfort us in all our
troubles and crosses. If any man were so near unto the King, and so great in
his favor, as that whosoever dares to touch him, it were as good for him to
touch the King himself, he would be secure in all wrongs and injuries done
unto him. But we are so near unto the King of Heaven, as that whosoever
touches us, goes about to pull the signet out of his right hand, and touches
the apple of his eye. Esa 49.15.16.
What joy and comfort then should we exexpresse, even in the time of our
tribulations? seeing that when we suffer, Romans 5.
the Lord is grieved, who will not hold his peace for ever; but as a mighty
Giant waked out of his sleeep, will surely come forth and smite all his
enemies, with a great destruction, and with Sampson shake off the cords and
ropes of all miseries, as threads burnt in the fire.

6. Duty. To lead an heavenly life.
The sixth duty is, to lead an heavenly life whilst we live upon earth, because
there is a communion betwixt us, and the Saints in heaven. And this is, by
having our hearts lifted up to heaven by meditation, by setting up Iaacobs
ladder to Heaven by prayer, by having our mouths seasontd with speeches of
Heaven, and of heavenly things, by making unto us wings with the Angels, for
swiftness and readiness in doing Gods will, by being fiery through zeal,
with the Seraphims, for Gods glory. If we look well about us, all things
consent together to work in us this heauenlines, our Father is in Heaven, our
head and husband Christ in Heaven, the Prophets and the Apostles with the rest
of our fellow-seruants in Heaven, our riches, our joy, and our crown in
Heaven, and our dear Country and pleasant dwelling places no where, but in
Heaven. How is it then, that we so far forget our selves, as to be sensual
and earthly, and have so little savor of heauenlinesse in us? Why do we not
hang down our heads, and be ashamed, that the Lord should see our hearts and
tongues so basely taken up, so estranged from our dear Husband, Father,
Brethren, and Country, where so excellent things are provided for us?

Quest. 45. What mean you by the forgiveness of sins?

Answ. That wonderful grace of God in Jesus Christ, whereby he accounts of
sin, as if it had never been committed.

Explan. We shall not need to be so large about this Article, because it is
easy to be understood. The meaning is nothing else, but as is laid down in
the answer, viz. that the Church of God, and every member thereof, has all
their sins so done away, that they shall never be laid unto their charge, no
more then if they had never by them been committed, and all this* through the
mere grace, and only mercy of God in Jesus Christ.

Proof.
For the proofs of holy Scripture, here is plainly set down: First, that the
forgiveness of sins is a wonderful favor: for, He is blessed, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. ^2.1
to whom his sins are forgiven, and good cause is there, why he should be
counted blessed indeed, who attaineth unto this, seeing that he is forgiven
ten thousand of talents, of which he was not able to pay one penny, and so
stood every hour in danger to be cast into prison, to lie there in misery
perpetually. Man. 18.24


Deuteronomy. ^7.
Again, he is delivered from the curse of God, which attends upon sinners;
for, Cursed is he that continues not in all things, written in the book of
the Law, to do them: and this curse is death, according to that, Romans 6
The wages of sin is death, the death of the body, which is terrible, for
death came in by sin, and all such punishments, as do hasten unto, and be
forerunners of this, for, Romans 5. Lament. 3.3^
man suffers for his sins, and which is most terrible of all, the death of
the soul, which is the loss of it, the intolerable pangs to be suffered by
it, in the fire, Matthew. 25
that never goes out, and by the worm^, that never dies: Lastly, he is freed
from the bondage of Satan, who rules in the children of disobedience, that
is, in sinners; who is their master, and they his servants, according to that:
Ephesians. 2.2 2 Timothy 2.25 Romans 7
He which commits sin, is the servant of sin, Who has them in his
snare, and carries them away as captive slaves, at his pleasure, who
terrifieth them, and puts them in fear all the days of their lives.
Secondly, that God is the author of this grace, is evident, for no man
forgiueth sins but God only, Marc. 27.
it is one of his attributes, as was declared by the Lords own voice unto
Moses, saying* The Lord, the Lord, strong, gracious, and merciful, slow to
anger, and abundant in goodness, and in truth, forgiving iniquity,
transgression, and sin, etc. Exodus 34.6. Verse. 7.
Wherefore, as was objected by the Pharisees against Christ* it may truly be
said of the Popes of Rome, This man blasphemeth, for none can forgive sins
but God. Ioh. 20.23.
It is true indeed which our Savior said unto Peter; and the rest of his
Disciples: Whose sins ye remit they are remitted, and whose sins ye
retain, they are retained. But what authority has the Pope given him here,
more the any other minister of Gods word? what ground is here for his ma^ifold
indulge^ces, by which he beguiles the simple world of such a mass of Money,
and increases his treasuries? For the Disciples had none other power hereby
given them, but that, which was fit for men appointed to carry the glad tidings
of salvation to the rest of the world, viz to publish forgiveness of sins to
all such, as did, or should repent, and believe in Jesus Christ, and the
retention of sins, unto all that remained hardened against this faith of
Christ and impenitent.

1 Cor. 5.
For, as when by their preaching they were said to convert any to Christ or to
beget any to Christ, nothing else is meant, but that faithfully executing their
office of preaching, men were through the working of Gods Spirit made
believers, and so the members of Christ: in like manner; when they are said to
forgive sins it is meant, first in general, that preaching forgiveness to
believers, it should not be in vain, but so many as became hereby, through the
working of Gods Spirit, believers, should have their sins forgiven them
before God in heaven, and contrariwise to unbelievers. The words also have a
further meaning in particular of forgiving sins by admitting into the Church
notorious offenders, becoming penitent, and retayning them by just
excommunication, and casting out of the Church, as Saint Paul seems to
comment hereupon in his first and second epistle to the Corinthians, for first
he gives charge that gravely, and orderly the incestuous person be delivered
to Satan, here is retaining of sins then he wills them upon his repentance to
receive, and comfort him again, here is forgiveness of sins: yea, he uses
the very word of forgiving, saying, Contrariwise ye ought now rather to forgive
him, and comfort him, 2 Cor. 2.7, Verse. 10.
and again, To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also. Whence it is most
plain, that the power of forgiving, and retayning sins, and consequently of
the keys of heaven, consists in admitting, or duly, and rightly casting any
out of the Church, and equally belongs unto the Disciples, and equally to the
grave ministers of Gods word; so that some Paul sit at the stern to moderate
this weighty action: and this is not the Bishop of Rome, but every Bishop
within the limits appointed unto him.

Math. 1.
For the meritorious cause of the forgiveness of sins, that it is Jesus
Christ, his very name does show: for he is therefore called Jesus, because he
shall save his people from their sins, as the Angel told Joseph, before that
he was borne: and there is none other name given amongst men, Act. 4.1^. 1 Ioh.
1.7.
Whereby we must be saved says Peter: it is the blood of Jesus, says John,
that cleanses from all sin, with infinite other testimonies tending to the
setting forth of the same thing. We did not love God first, that for our love
toward him, he might forgive our sins, for he loved us first, yea, when we
were enemies, Romans 5.
and hated him: we did not seek for it at his hands, that for our
importunity, he might be moved to forgive our sins, for, I am found, Esa.
65.1.
says he, of them that sought me not: our good works did not so please him,
as that therefore he should forgive our sins: for we were so far from good
works, that we could not think a good thought of our selves: 2 Cor. 3.5.
Lastly, neither men, nor Angels do solicit him for us, or can obtain the
pardon of our sins, but Jesus Cbrist the righteous is our advocate with the
Father, who is the propitiation for our sins. 1 Ioh. 1.2.


Psalm. 32.1^ Verse. 2. Esa. 38.17. Mich. 7.19.
Fourthly, for that, which is further added: Whereby he accounts of sin, as
if it had never been committed, it is taken out of the Psalms, where the
Prophet says: Blessed is the man, whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose
sin is covered; blessed is the man, to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity.
The Lord is therefore said to cast all our sins behind his back, yea, to
cast them into the bottom of the sea; even, as when a debt is discharged, the
bonds, and writings, which were before carefully kept, are now cancelled, and
carelessly cast about, because it is no more any debt; so, although before the
remission of sins, the Lord did carefully keep his books, as it were, and
account of all our sins, as infinite debts, yet being forgiven, Col. 2.14.
he has put out the handwriting that was against us, and it is, as it were,
nailed unto the cross of Christ, because it is now no more any debt to be
exacted at our hands.

Math. 12. Chap. 23. Ioh. 15.
Lastly, we must further know, that this forgiveness is only to the faithful,
all others remain in the bands of their sins, and this partly appears by
that which was said before, that he shall sau^ his people from their sins.
Unto others he denounces manifold woes, saying, Woe be to thee Cor^zin, woe
be to thee Bethsaida, and woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites,
and if I had not come amongst them, the had not had sin, but now their sin
remains: yea, he threatens many of his followers, that he will bid them,
Mat. 7.21*
Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not, so that even they are
without this benefit, of the forgiveness of their sins, viz. all such as
notwithstanding their profession of the Christian faith, do still live in
sin.

1 Duty. To pray for the pardon of our sins.
For the duties of this faith. The first is to pray unto God earnestly every
day, above all things of this world, for the pardon of our sins: because this
is so great and wonderful a grace. For if a man were greatly endebted, and for
his debts imprisoned, or sold for a slave, ever so to continue in most hard
bondage, would he desire either good cheer, or apparel, pleasures or fits of
ease, wealth or health, in comparison of freedom from this miserable estate?
in like manner, seeing we be so far indebted by our sins, and thus made
miserable slaves of the devil, why do we crave so earnestly against worldly
wants, and for worldly good things, and not rather against our sins, and for
this blessedness to be delivered from them. And the rather, because, if our sins
be vnremitted, we cannot look to speed in any other desire: for our sins do
separate betwixt our God and us. Esa. 5^ 2. Ios. 7.
All the time that sinful Achan was in the Israelites camp, they could not
prevail against Ay: 1 Samuel 28.
when Saul had sinned, he could get none answer at Gods Oracle either by
vision, by Vrim, or by Prophets: so whilst we are in our sins, we may ask
indeed, but we shall not have, we may make many prayers, but not be heard, for
the prayers of the wicked are abomination to the Lord. Wherefore let this be
the first and chief thing which we pray for in all our supplications, and as
we will use all humility, and importunity to speed of some special benefit,
and renew our ^uite from day to day, that we may speed, so let us never give
over praying unto the Lord for the pardon of our sins, being a benefit of
benefits, and the most necessary thing for us in the world.

2 Duty. To love the Lord.
The second duty is to love the Lord, and our Savior Jesus Christ with all our
hearts, and with all our might: because God is the Author of this great grace,
Christ Jesus has merited the same for us. A miserable bankrupt owing a
thousand pound, if he should have all forgiven him, if some rich man would
undertake the payment of his debts for him, and set him up, that he might live
a freeman again, and exercise his trade in as good manner as ever he did
before, were a most ungrateful wretch, if he should not love so great a
benefactor, and that unfeignedly, all his life: but much more ungrateful should
we show our selves, when as the Lord has raised us from our bankrupt estate,
being indebted not a thousand pounds, but ten thousands of talents* yea,
millions without count, and made us blessed and happy, if we shall not love his
Majesty without all dissimulation, and therefore study to please him all our
days. With what thankfulness does S. Paul exult for his deliverance from
sin by Jesus Christ, when being but even now at the point of despair, he
presently lift^th up himself through faith of the pardon of his sins, having
cried out, miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? he presently answers himself: Thanks be unto God through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Romans 7.14.2^*
How desirous is he, by publishing Gods mercy to the world, to express his
wonderful thankfulness, for this wonderful grace, when so openly he
confesses; When I was a Persecutor, and a blasphemer, and an oppressor, God
had mercy on me. ^ Tim* 1.^3*
And thus greatly affected should we be, not in word, but in deed, in that we
study to set forth his glory, as he did, and in all things not to please men,
but God: they which do otherwise love not the Lord whatsoever they say, but as
the Gentiles who by their sins dishonored him, are said to have been, so
are these haters of God, and hated of him. Romans 1.


3 Duty. To cease from sin.
The third duty is, to break off all our sins by righteousness, and not
continue any longer therein: because we have been already enough endangered
through sin, nay if we live in sin, we are still in the same danger,
seeing the workers of iniquity are shut out of doors, whatsoever they plead
for themselves. If a man through surfeit has fallen into any dangerous disease,
which had like to have cost him his life, but be again recovered, he will take
heed of falling into the same again, and likewise if he had fallen into a
deep pit, or into any other great evil: so should we being restored from the
surfeit of sin, being lifted up from the dangerous pit of wickedness having
escaped through Gods great mercy the greatest evil that could have befallen
us, we should I say, be at defiance with this evil, and above all watches,
watch against sin. And the rather, because we do otherwise still remain
endangered through this deadly surfeit, we still lie, and are like to lie
without all help in this horrible pit, till we exchange for the pit of hell.
The Lord has not so much as promised, or spoken any syllable tending to a
promise of forgiving sins, but to such as forsake their sins. He is often
in these and the like comfortable speeches. Ezech. 18.
When a wicked man shall turn from his wickedness, and do that which is
lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive. He that confesses and
forsakes his sins shall have mercy, etc. Prou. 28.23.
but where is it to be found that men living in their sins shall save mercy,
that such as go on in their wickedness, shall have their souls alive? not
any where in Gods book; but the clean contrary, that they shall die in their
sins, that they shall have judgment without mercy, according to that, Thou
which after thy hardness of heart, that cannot repent, do heap up to thy
self wrath against the day of wrath: Romans 2 4.
so that it must needs then be the devils book, whence men learn that they
shall be forgiven, although they go on in adding sin unto sin, and so
neglect all holy admonitions of breaking off their evil course of life.

Quest. 46. What is meant by the resurrection of the body?

Answ. That, although the body after death lie rotting in the grave, yet at the
last day it shall be raised again, by Gods great power, and being joined to
the soul* shall stand before Gods judgment seat to give account of all that
it has done, whether good, or evil, and be rewarded accordingly.

Explan. This last article, as it consists of two members, the one the
resurrection of the body, the other the life everlasting, so have I propounded
to speak severally of them; because they are both weighty points, and deep
mysteries. Touching the resurrection of the body, it is nothing else, but that
first I do acknowledge, that our bodies are all frail and weak, and how many
years soever they continue, yet fall to the ground they shall at the last,
even as they were taken out of it. Secondly, that howsoever they fall, or
whenever yet they shall be raised again by a supernatural power, the souls
being reunited unto them, and that not only the bodies of the just and
righteous, but of the unjust and wicked, the bodies of all, both high and low,
rich and poor, great and small. Thirdly, all this shall be at the last day
together, in a moment, at the sound of a Trumpet, and not some at one time,
some at another. Fourthly, being thus raised, they must come to judgment, all
the secretest things that ever they did, being laid open, and the hidden things
of all hearts being manifested.

Proof.
Now for the further manifestation and proving of these things, and first that
our bodies shall fall, as it is intimated in the word resurrection (for that
cannot rise again, which did not first fall, so it is proved by the experience
of all times, and ages of the world: for even they of the first times, whose
bodies were most durable; yet their end was they dyed, when they had lived nigh
a thousand years, these strong oaks, though they stood never so long, they fell
at the last: but long since the state of men's bodies grew more weak, which
made ^ob compare man's life unto a shadow, Job. 1^* Esa. 40.
a Weauers shuttle, and a flower, and David to a light that is soon put out,
and to a spans length, and Esaias to grass, which is green in the morning, but
is cut down before night and withered. And daily examples confirm the same
thing, every small matter overthrowing the strongest man, and making him to
fall to the earth from whence he was taken. Secondly, that our bodies having
lien rotting in the grave, shall be raised again by a supernatural power
which is more specially here intended: S. Paul proves at large in the
fifteenth chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinths, making this the
overthrow of all religion* to deny the rising of the dead: and our Savior
Christ before him, opposed himself earnestly against the Saduces, which denied
the resurrection, saying: Math. 22.31. Verse 32.
Have you not read of the resurrection, what is spoken unto you of God, saying,
J am the God of Abraham, Isaacke, and Jaacob, now God is not the God of the
dead but of the living, and long before this, Esaias has said, The dead shall
come forth, with my body shall they rise, and Daniel; Dan. 12.2. Job. 19.25.
Many of them that sleep in the dust shall awake: and Job, I know that my
red^emer lives, and I shall stand at the last upon the earth, and though after
my skin, the worms shall consume my body, yet I my self shall see him, etc.
and thus it is plain, that the resurrection shall be, though we say nothing
of Ezechiels dried bones reviving, nor of Adam, whose sleep was a type of
death, and his waking, of the resurrection.

Revel. 10.12.13. Math. 25.32.
Now, that it shall be general of all without exception, is showed in the
book of the Revelation, where all, both great and small are seen coming
forth, the earth giving up the dead in it, and the sea yielding up the dead
therein: and Christ says, that at his coming, all nations shall be gathered
before him. Wherefore that of Daniel, speaking of many, is to be understood, as
though he had said, that they being a great many, an infinite multitude shall
awake. Lastly, that all shall be raised by a supernatural power, and not by
any thing in the course of nature is showed, where the Lord says, The dead
shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, it is then by the virtue of his
call, that men every where shall rise again; 1 Cor. 15. Math. 24.
The trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall rise incorruptible, says the
Apostle: He shall send forth his Angels to gather them, he says in another
place, the meaning is the same, that as God, at the first by his word made all,
so he will at the last revive all, and use his Angels as Ministers to gather
them together from all parts of the world.

1. King. 17.
If this shall seem strange, because it has been a rare matter that any have
been raised at all after death. I answer, is it true, that many being truly
dead, have been raised again (as it cannot be denied, for such was the woman's
son, the Shunamites, raised by Elisha; the widows son of Sarepta, raised by
Eluah; Lazarus, and two more raised by Christ; Dorcas, by Peter; and Eutychus
by Paul) then me thinks, it should not be supposed impossible, that there
should be a general resurrection of all. For, if in the winter time, some
plant or herb shall put out, and grow green, it is an argument, that others
may do so too: if a man expert in any curious trades, as the Goldsmith, in
trying gold and silver from dross* the Glasse-man in making Glasses, etc.
Shall do but one, or seldom acts of their trade, is it not an argument, that
they can do many more when they shall think good? In like manner, some having
been already, by the divine power raised from the dead, springing up again
after death, is it not an argument that this having been done in the winter of
this worlds standing, all shall in like sort rise again at the spring time of
the resurrection? The Lord having in some performed this hard work, that he
can do the same in all, it being (as it were) his profession, and his skill
sufficient for it.

All shall be raised, howsoever they have perished.
If it shall further seem yet an hard matter that all should be raised, because
some are drowned in the sea, and eaten up by fishes, and these fishes being
taken by men, etc. Now if it shall sound, as a thing imposssible, that even men
coming thus to their ends should be raised for where shall the parts of their
bodies be found? seeing the same becomes the substance of diverse bodies? I
answer, with God all things are possible, and to use the comparison of a
learned Father, When Doves fly diversely abroad, and are mixed with others: yea
infinite numbers together, being far from home, yet they return unto their
several Doue-coats: Greg: Nyssen: lib: 1. de opificio hominis, cap: 26.27.
so the souls of diverse men departing out of their bodies, and remaining long
from home, yet they have some natural, or rather supernatural motion by which
they are addicted to return to their own bodies, unto which they have been
used. Quicksiluer being powered forth amongst the dust, is mixed with nothing
else, but though diversely parted, yet it remains in little globules, so that
it is easy for a man to gather it together again, and then joins in one, as
before: and much more easy shall it be for the great God of heaven, to gather
in one the parts of the same bodies, howsoever dispersed and powered, as it were
into the dust of the earth. When seeds are cast into the ground, every one
draws unto it self that virtue and sap which is necessary for the
nourishment, though it be alike common unto them all: so men in the
resurrection shall receive these parts, and all that substance which does
severally belong to them, although in the mean season they lie in common
together in the bowels of the earth: and thus far out of that learned Father
Gregory of Nyssen. Epiph. lib. de trino and vno Deo 14.24 de Resur.
Another also handling the same matter, reckons up many things as types of
the resurrection, the day succeeding the night, the seed of the earth that
springs up after corruption, the locust reviving again the nails of our hands
when any go off, the hairs of our head being cut, and growing again, the
Ring-doue reviving again, and a little beast called Myoxus, the Phoenix an
Arabian foul, which burns it self at fifty years of age, and after three
days arises again out of her own ashes.

1. Cor. 15.52.
And that this general resurrection shall be in one moment, it is the plain
doctrine of the Scripture. In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye at the last
trumpet. The Lord shall need no space of time to effect it: but as at the time
of the Assizes all the prisoners are brought forth, so at these general
assizes of the whole world, all shall come out of the prison of the grave.

And lastly, for the end of the resurrection, that the works of all men shall
be made manifest, and all secret thoughts, that they may be rewarded
accordingly, has been already handled and proved under the sixth branch of
the seventh article, touching Christ his coming to judgment, and therefore
the Reader is to be referred thither, to see more, and also for the time when
these things shall be. But for the further understanding of the doctrine of the
resurrection, I have thought it not amiss further to annex here two or three
questions more.

Quest. 47. What manner of bodies shall we have in the resurrection?

Answ. The very same which now we have, only whereas they be now natural,
they shall rise again spiritual; not subject to death any more, as now they
be, nor sustained by natural means of meats, and drinks, warmth, and
sleep, or the like.

1. Cor* 15.35. Verse. 36.
Explan. This question is even thus moved and answered by the Apostle to the
Corinthians; But some man will say, how are the dead raised? with what body
shall they come forth? He answers, that even as corn being cast into the
ground, springs up again, and the Lord gives every grain its own body,
whether wheat, or some other: So, in the resurrection of the dead every man
shall have his own body, the only difference is, that it is sown a natural
body, Verse. 43. Verse. 44.
but raised a spiritual body: it is sown in dishonor, raised again in
honor, sown in weakness, raised in power, etc. Now the variety of words
here used of honor and power, serves specially, to set forth the manner of
the rising again of the faithful, all others shall also have spiritual
bodies like unto the damned spirits in hell, that is ever continuing, seeking
death through the greatness of the misery, but not being able to find it.
That we shall have the same bodies, Job also testifies, saying: I shall see
him, not with other, but with these eyes. Job 19.25.
And good reason it is, that as our bodies have together with our souls been
instruments, either of Gods glory, or of sin to his dishonor, so together
with the souls, they should partake of glory or misery.

Quest. 48. Amongst those that dye, some be crooked through age, some tender
infants, some blind, and some lame, shall their bodies then at the resurrection
be the same?

Answ. No, for all these are weaknesses, which shall be done away to the
faithful and strength, perfection* and comeliness shall be to every one of
them.

Explan. This also is good to be known, because the holy Scriptures do speak
hereof to the comfort of Gods people: where we are taught, that the body shall
be ralsed in power, and in honor, there must then needs be instead of the
weakness of decrepit old age, and infants, strength and might in stead of
deformity, beauty; in stead of lamenesse, agility; instead of blindness, the
sight: which could never here be attained unto, viz. Whereby we shall see the
most glorious God of all. As for other questions about the knowledge of one
another, of the cessation of the difference of sexes. etc. For that they be not
so necessary nor very profitable, we will wade no further herein.

2. Duty. To live as those that expect the resurrection.
For the duties of this faith. The first is, not to live as they which are ever
to continue in this world: for we must all die; we must first fall, and then
shall we afterward rise again, the strongest and stoutest could never be
privileged from death: no not one day or hour by any strength of nature.
Wherefore we are not to use any unlawful means, to get any of the goods of
this world, either by carking and caring, by robbery and stealth, by fraud and
oppression, for who can tell that he shall live to enjoy them; yea, who can
tell that his very enemy shall not reap the fruit of his labors? and then what
shall it profit a man by his toil to scrape together mountains of gold? If a
man lived in a Country where he were in danger of public Officers every day,
to be drawn out of his house, and to be spoiled of all his goods, he would not
I suppose take any great pleasure in gathering together and increasing his
wealth, much less would he seek to pull from others, seeing this were nothing
else but to procure more enemies by making the booty greater for the spoilers:
but this is our estate in this world, we live in this earthly country, subject
every day to be pulled out of our houses by Death, the common all-conquering
Officer, and to be spoiled of all our worldly goods: Oh, what madness is it
then in us to rob and to devour one another, to be insatiable in our heaping
up of wealth, and without end, in our delight in worldly vanities? for men
could not more exceed in their affectation of worldly things, if they should
live here ever, then the men of this generation who have no sooner gotten any
thing, but they are ready again by death, to be deprived of it all.

2. Duty.
The second duty is, not to live as they that deny the resurrection, whose hope
only is in this world viz. like bruit beasts, eating and drinking, as says
the Apostle, 1. Cor. 15.32
because that to morrow they should die, and then they should be cut off from
all pleasure: for we hope for a resurrection, in which, they that have done
good shall arise unto life, Ioh. 5.29.
they that have done evil, to condemnation. We ought then to be ashamed, to be
sensual like the beast, whose end is, when he dies: to be like the Epicure
Sardanapalus, whose Epigram was. Ede, bibe, lude, dormi, post mortem nulla
voluptas.
Eat, drink, sleep, and play:
In death all pleasure flies away.
But we know that this is the voice of the black children of the night, that
want the light of the understanding of this thing, or that will not understand
the same; we are all children of the light, we all confess the resurrection
of the body, why do we not then cease from the works of darkness, from
surfeiting and drunkenness, from chambering and wantonness, and walk as in
the light, in sobriety, temperance and chastity? 1 Thessalonians. 5.


3. Duty. To bear all diseases patiently.
The third duty is to bear all our bodily imperfections and sicknesses
patiently, because in the resurrection all shall be done away, weakness shall
be strength, deformity shall be beauty, crookedness shall be straightness,
natural shall be spiritual. It would not grieve a man to be in a little pain
for a moment, so that he might be free from all pain for ever after, to be
sick a day, that he might live the more healthfully all the year after yea,
men will in this case put themselves to pain, and make themselves sick by
loathsome drugs of the Apothecary: No more ought it to grieve us that believe
the resurrection, if we suffer by sickness, or weakness, or any aberrations
in our nature in this world, which is but a short time, seeing that ever
hereafter we shall be freed from all these. If we have any friends or children
that be thus, let us neither be ashamed of it, nor trouble our selves hereat,
but let it rather trouble us if they have deformed souls, miserable, blind,
and ugly through sin, for these will remain upon them as black badges for
ever, disgracing them before God and his holy Angels, whatsoever their outward
proportions be.

4. Duty. To serve God with all our members.
The fourth duty is, not to account it sufficient to serve God with our hearts,
but with our tongues to speak of his praises, with our hands to work the
thing that is good, with our feet to run to religious exercises, with our
mouths to glorify God in daily prayer, with our ears to hearken to his holy
Word, with our bodies to practice sobriety, with our eyes to be stayed from
wanton looks, and to offer up our whole selves, as sacrifice unto God, to do
his will with all our might: because that even our bodies shall rise, and be
honored, and become spiritual. Romans 1^.1.
But how can we expect, that it should be thus with us in our bodies, if our
members be instruments of sin? How can he, which by uncleanness weakeneth
his body, and brings it into a filthy case at the stews, look that it
should be strengthened and healed at the resurrection? He that drinks out his
eyes, how can he expect to have them made more clear at that day? He that
breaks his bones by quarrelling and fighting, how can he expect so much favor
as to have them rightened again? Such whorish women, as by painting their
faces, bring them to ill-fauourednesse, how can they expect to have faces as
Angels at that day? And so for all other injuries offered to men's bodies by
serving sin. No King will pity his rebellious subjects so far as to send
Chyrurgians or Physicians to cure them, if in their rebellion they have been
wounded, or gotten through distemper any dangerous sickness, but will rather
send out his Hangmen to do execution upon them: no more will the King of
Heaven heal the infirmities of such, as by sins have rebelled against him,
but will give them over to his Executioners, the Devils, to be further
tormented. Wherefore think it not enough to serve God in thy heart, and in thy
soul, but offer unto him thy body also, that the estate of both may be
amended in the resurrection, and so remain for ever.

5. Duty. Not to be over sorry for our friends departed. 2 Samuel 13.
The fifth duty is, to mittigate our sorrow when by death we are parted from our
dearest friends; because we are not without hope with the Heathen, of meeting
again at the resurrection. They are not lost, which dye; but as David said of
his child, so is it true of all that dye in the Lord: He shall not come to
me, but I shall go to him, We cannot but grieve, I grant, so many as be
endued with natural affections, at the departure of our friend, but as Christ
said unto the women, that followed him to the Cross; Weep not for me but for
your selves, and for your children: so is it to be applied unto us, when our
friends go to their death; weep not for them, but weep for your selves who
shall for the time of this frail life, want their sweet society, counsel, and
company; but we shall all meet again.

Quest. 50. What mean you by the life everlasting?

Answ. All that euer-induring happiness, and all those joys, which the Lord
imparteth to all his Elect, in the world to come, which are so great, as that
the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, neither can the heart of man
conceive thoroughly of them.

Expla. This member of the last Article, as it is placed last of all, so is it
the greatest comfort of all, to all believers. Under these two words, Life
everlasting, is set down a surpassing weight of glory, which all the words
devised by the best wit, and uttered by the most eloquent tongue of man, cannot
express. It is not only life, but joy; not only joy but riches; not only
riches, but glory; and all these; not in some measure, but in excess; not
mixed, but absolute, without grief, without want, without dishonor, not by
intermissions and fits, but continually, not after some long time to end, but
everlastingly.

Proof.
Secondly, for the grounds of these things. 1. Everlasting life taken at large,
is common to the Elect, and to the Reprobate; for, even these shall seek for
death, and not find it, but to live shall be a pain unto them: It shall not
be so with the elect, their life shall be full of joy: for, at Gods right hand,
Psalm. 16.
there be pleasures, and fullness of joy: They break out into singing for joy,
according to that of the Prophet, My servants shall sing for joy of heart. They
shall have all things to make them joyous, the pleasantnes of their dwelling
place, Revel. 21.
the pauements being of gold, the walls of precious stones, their amiable
company, none but holy, Esa. 11. cap 65.
none that hurt or devour, shall be in the holy mountain of the Lord: the
presence of the King of heaven their Father, who will himself, Esa. 65.24.
with his glorious presence, dwell with them, giving them every thing, even
before they shall ask; the impassible constitution of their bodies, Revel. 7.
not distempered through heat or cold, hunger or thirst, sickness or
infirmities: and lastly, their continual rest from all labor and pains, and
yet no darkness of the night; for, they shall keep a Sabbath from week to
week, and from month to month, Esa. 66.23.
and the Lord shall be a perpetual light unto them. 2. They shall have added
unto their joy, Reu. 21.25.
riches; for, be not there wonderful riches, think you, where the very
Pauements shall be of Gold? chap. 2.26.
etc. where the riches of all the Gentiles shall be brought in to them. 3. Unto
their riches, shall be added glory; therefore it is called a crown of glory,
reign over nations, our bodies shall shine as the Sun, and be like the
glorious body of Jesus Chirst. Phil 3.21.
4. Our happiness shall exceed for all these, even as the glory of the Sun
exceeds all the rest of the Stars; and the glory of Kings, all the rest of
their subjects; for this life shall be unto us a Kingdom: and hence it is
that the Prophet says, The eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, any other
God, that does so to him, that waits for him. Esa. 64.4.
5. Our happiness shall be absolute, uniform, and entire, not mixed, as all
worldly happiness is, pleasure having irksomenesse abundance having wants,
glory and honor, accompanied with shame and ignominy: but in this life, Revel.
7. Esa. 65 19.
All tears shall be wiped from our eyes, we shall sorrow, nor grieve no more,
our delight shall ever be fullness of joy. 6. These things shall not be by
intermission and fits, but continually, yesterday, and today the same: as the
damned in hell can have no remission of their pains, so shall the saved in
heaven have no diminution of their joys, but as they that live, shall not
sometime be dead, and sometime living, no more shall they that live the
everlasting life, be sometime in pleasures, and sometime without, for their
life is pleasure, riches, and glory.

Prou. 16.4.
Lastly, all this shallbe for ever and ever, for far more thousands of years,
then the Sea has drops of water, the earth has spires of grass, and all men
hairs upon their heads, and so beginning again circularly without end. For
herein is God perfectly glorified and the wicked are fully judged, which is
the last end of all Gods works, according to that, He made all things for his
glory, and the wicked for the day of Judgment. For though the word (...), for
ever, does some time set forth no more, but a certain large time, at the last
to be ended, as the time of the Mosaicall Law, or the time of this worlds
continuance: for thus it is said of ceremonies, ye shall observe these things
for ever; and of the earth, Eccl. 1.4.
It stands for ever: yet when it is said, that the life ^o come shall last
for ever, the meaning is, as the Lord lives for ever, unto whose days
infinite millions of years can put none end, for death is swallowed up of
life, all cause of death is taken away, and so never, never can this life
cease, but still, still remains simply without respect unto any period of
time, The life everlasting.

1. Duty. Carefully to fly such sins, as are threatened with death. 1 Cor. 5, 9,
10.
For the duties of this faith The first is, carefully to break off all those
sins, the doers of which are expressly threatened, that they shall never enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. Such are named to be fornication, adultery,
Idolatry, buggery, wantonness, theeuing, covetousness, drunkenness, railing,
extortion, for such, says S. Paul, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

Gal. 5.19.20. Verse. 21.
In another place, he reckons up the same sins again, and further adds,
witchcraft hatred, debate, wrath, seditions, heresies, envy, murder and
gluttony, of which (says he) I tell you before, as I also told you before,
that they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Math.
25. Revel. 22.15.
And our Savior Christ further numbreth unmercifulness to the poor, and the
holy Ghost, by John the Divine, inchanters, liars and dogs, meaning contemners
and neglecters of holy things, of whom he says, That they shall be without
the gate of the City.

1 King. 1.
Wherefore let us all with one accord, be at enmity with these vices, and
watch over our hearts and ways, that we commit them not. When Shimei was
threatened by Solomon, saying, Whenever thou shall go over the brook Kedron,
thou shall dye the death; what else could he expect, though under so merciful
a Kings government, but death, when he should transgress? as he found it to
his cost, so what other thing can we expect, if we live in any of these, or
other grievous and heinous sins; concerning which the Lord has said, if thou
do these, thou shall not enter into life, but to be shut out indeed at the
latter day? Jerusalem, in which we look to live, is above, our souls must
fly unto it; to use the words of the Prophet, Esa.
as Doves unto the windows: but sin is an heavy clogge, and presses down,
if we think to be rid of it at leisure, when we list, we are deceived, for it
hangs on fast: Heb. 12.1.
how then can we hope to get thither, unless we do lighten our selves
hereof? All our faith is vanity, our profession is deceit, and instead of this
endless life, our end will be miserable death.

2. Duty. To enter the way of life.
The second duty is, to strive to enter, and to walk on in the way, that
leads to everlasting life, and never to go out of it to our dying day, and
this is the way of good works which God has appointed that we should walk in
them. Ephesians. 2.10. Ioh. 5.29.
They that have done good shall enter into life, they that have done evil,
into condemnation. Revel. 22.14.
Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that their right may be in the
tree of life, and that they may enter in by the gate of the City. Though it be
a straight and narrow way, and there be few that find it, most men go the
contrary way; yet if thou will enter into life, thou must keep the
commandments.

Math. 7.14.
Wherefore go not with the multitude which be in the broad way; but embrace
the counsel of Christ: Strive to enter in at the straight gate: and that
whilst thou have time. Will any man, being in a strange Country, return to
his home, and yet not take the right way thither? And will any man then being
in the Country of this world, come to his home in Heaven, and not take the
right way? How is it then, that we hope to come to eternal life, and yet
refuse to take the way thither? yea, to hearken to the guides, or to be led by
them, whom the Lord has appointed to be a direction unto us? For never more
guides in every corner, poynting and haling men, as it were, to the right way,
yet never were they so little regarded, which brings our profession into a
suspicion amongst the enemies, as teaching good works to be needless unto
life; but they shall answer for it, who are an occasion of this blasphemy.

3. Duty. To remember everlasting life in all tro^bles.
The third duty is, to use the remembrance of eternal life, as a salve against
all sores, as a cordial to comfort our hearts against our greatest heaviness.
Are we in misery, in poverty, in pangs, in disgrace, in danger, in the midst
of continual crosses? What are all these to dismay us? the Lord has provided
an excellent estate for us ever enduring, our suffering of these things is but
momentany: the Lord has assured his servants, of Heaven, and of Crowns of
glory, how can he then but give us deliverance from these things, and supply
our temporal wants in his good time? Nay, which is more, the Lord has
sweetened the bitter pills of the troubles of this world, by working through them
the health of the soul, by making them means of further assurance, that we
are his children, and that he is our Father, and by leading us through them,
as through the right way unto the everlasting life. 1. Cor. 11.28. Heb. 18.
Iam. 1.
If a beggar might have twenty pounds for traveling in the wet and cold one
night, or for some few stripes to be given unto him with a rod, he would not
be much grieved hereat: no more would we at our crosses, if we had faith to
be assured, that instead of these we shall have an other day so great glory,
and the less would we murmr at it, because our stripes be upon us worthily:
as if a poor prisoner that had deserved death, should be set free, and
rewarded with a great sum of money, for willingly submitting himself unto
some light chastisement. Romans 5.1.
Let us therefore, not only be content to bear our crosses, but with the
Apostle, through faith, rejoice in our tribulations, and praise the Lord for
them, as Job did, saying, Job. 1. 4. Duty. To pray for the ^astening of glory.
The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the Lord.

The fourth duty is to pray, that this time might be hastened, 4. Duty. To
pray for the hastening of glory.
wherein we shall enter into life, and even to rejoice when we see it approach
to any of us in particular: because it will be so happy a change for us, of
mortal for immortal, of weakness for strength, of dishonor for glory: and
(as one dying said) of tin for silver, of copper for gold. We must learn
therefore to be like unto the Brides which says, Come; Revel: 22.17 Verse: 20
2. Cor. 5.1
and unto St. John, who when he had had some sight of these things, said, Even
so come Lord Jesus. We sigh, says Paul, desiring to be clothed upon: that is
to go out of this clay house, and to ascend to our house in heaven. What faith
have they then, that by the course of nature, or by the danger of sickness,
being brought almost home to this house, desire to be far away from it
again? How unseemly a speech is it in old men to say, I would I were young
again? how lamentable a fear in sick men, to hear that they shall die? let
us be more strengthened in these things, that at our departing hence we may
truly believe and have everlasting life.

Standing up at the Creed.
There be two circumstances further used, in the rehearsing of these Articles,
the first is the rising and standing up, which is a ceremony neither vain, nor
superstitious, as some suppose, but they think amiss, that more reverence is
hereby done to the Creed, which is no Scripture, then to the written word of
God. For first of all, it is not vain, because it serves to testify our
consent to the points rehearsed, and is a silent confession of the same faith,
by all the Congregation, as in the time of prayer all kneel, by this gesture,
manifesting their consent with the Minister in this heavenly action. In other
duties done at Church in public, there is not the like reason of following
the Minister in his gesture, whether he reads, expounds, or preaches,
because that in all these, the Hearers are Patients, and he only an Agent.
Read more of this above, at the end of the fifth Question. Whereto may also be
added, that this gesture of standing upright is the most suitable and
convenient, as being the posture of soldiers, and champions ready to fight unto
the death for that faith which they then proclaim by recital.

Amen, Why added.
The second circumstance is, the addition of this word Amen; signifying verily,
or certainly, or undoubtedly. It is added, 1. To show that we do not in word
only believe these things, but from our very hearts. 2. Not waueringly, but
certainly, and without doubting. 3. Not as though it were in our power, as if
we were secure for our firm and steadfast belief of these things, but
earnestly craving this faith at the hands of God, and thus it is as much, as So
be it.

The abuse of the Creed.
All which shows the wonderful abuse of this Creed; first, first, amongst
heretics, which say these words with their mouths, but the contrary in their
hearts: some denying belief in the Son of God, for that they hold him to be
mere man, and God only in name, as Princes are called Gods upon earth, as the
Arians: Some in the Holy Ghost, as the Macedonians, for that they affirm him
to be servant, and inferior to the Father and Son: some deny belief in the
holy Trinity, for that they believe only in one God, holding the distinction of
persons, a monstrous fiction of man; as the Anttrinitaries.

And some again denying Christ's body's real being in heaven, because they
hold it to be present in every Mass: his Office of mediation sitting at the
right hand of God, because they appoint other Mediators to commend us unto God:
and the belief of the remission of sins, with the life everlasting, because
they teach doubting till the last gasp.

The Creed abused by the Papists. 1. Cor. 13.13
Secondly, this Creed is further abused amongst the Papists, because when they
pretend to make a confession of their faith, they do only confess their
hope, which is a distinct thing from faith, according to the Apostle, There
remain these three things, Faith, Hope, and Love: Now, besides that they teach
Faith to be a believing in general of all the Scriptures to be true, they make
it to be all one with hope through the mercy of God of being saved.

Thirdly, it is further abused by all infidell-like Christians, which say with
their mouths, I believe in God, etc. But like Parrets, not regarding, what
they say, not considering the fearful estate of such as want this faith, what
obedient, and godly living is required to have comfort in this faith, and how
scandalous professors hereof shall be barred out of eternal life, even as
they that never knew how to rehearse this confession at all.

They also which imagine faith to be in their own power, and therefore neglect
to pray for it, when the Apostles themselves prayed, Lord increase our Faith.
So many as be faithful indeed, let us be otherwise minded, believing all
these things in heart without doubting, studying above all things to be more
and more confirmed herein by godly living, and ever heartily praying, Lord give
faith where it is wanting, and where it is, increase our faith more and more.

And thus by the grace of God have we finished our commentary upon the first
part of the Catechism, concerning the things to be believed, and maintained to
the death, that we may come to life.

The end of the Creed.
Of the Commandments.
Quest. THou said, that thou were bound to keep the Commandments of
Almighty God: Which be they.

Answ. God spoke these words and said, I am the Lord, thy God, which have
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shall
have none other Gods but me.

Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in the heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water
under the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, for I the
Lord thy God am a Jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the
children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show
mercy unto thousands, of them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain.

Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor
and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God: in it thou shall do no manner of work: thou, nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, thy man-seruant, nor thy maid-seruant, thy cattle, nor the stranger,
that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven, and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

Honor, thy Father, and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Thou shall do no murder.

Thou shall not commit adultery.

Thou shall not steal.

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing
that is his.

Qu^st How many things do thou learn out of these commandments?

Answ. Two things: My duty toward God, and my duty toward my neighbor.

Explan. Before that we come to show in particular, where these duties are set
down, it will not be amiss to speak some things in general by way of
preface or introduction to the commandments.

The time of the law giving.
First, of the time when these commandments were given, and this was about two
thousaods and five hundredth years after the Creation: not that they were left
all this time without a law, (for there was a law written in men's hearts by the
pen of nature) but to make that more plain, which by the corruption of nature
was become very dim and much defaced. That there was a law even before these
commandments given, the Apostle shows, where he says; that the Gentiles
not having the law are a law unto themselves, which show the effect of the law
written in their hearts, etc. so that, as long as men have been, there has
also been a law, although not expressed in words, yet written in the heart.

The knowledge of the law before it was written.
Wherefore if it be well observed, we shall find, that even before the giving
of the law, all these precepts were known and acknowledged.

Gen 17.1.
The first Commandment was known to Abraham, when as almost in so many words
the Lord said unto him, I am God all-sufficient, stand before me and be upright:
and there were no false Gods brought into the world before the flood. Clemens
Alexandrinus, Clem. Alex. ^^. 1. Strom.
a learned Father shows, that Bacchus, a great God amongst the heathen, was
made a God 604 years after Moses, and so most of the Gods of the Grecians: he
shows further, how the chiefest God of all Jupiter, was made by one Phydias,
and the chiefest Goddess Juno, by Euclides, Orat. Hortat. ad Gent.
and that Socrates, Plato, Xenophon, Cleanthes, Pythagoras, the ancientest
Philosophers, and that Aratus, Hesiod, Eurypides, and Orpheus the ancientest
Poets acknowledged but one God.

Gen 35 2.
The second commandment was known unto Iaacob: for he purged his house from
Idols, when he was to build an Altar in Bethel, acknowledging hereby, that
this was a corruption, that the true God would be offended at; yea, heathen men
themselves did see by the light of nature, that it was a gross thing to
represent God by an Image, Eusebius. de praepar. Euang. lib. 9. cap 3. Jbid.
as Numa an Emperor sometime in Rome who forbad the use of any Image, because
he held it a wicked thing, that things so incomparable excellent, should be
set forth by baser matters: and Plato an excellent Philosopher, did so agree
with Moses herein, that he was said of Numenius a Pythagorean to be none
other, but Moses speaking in the Atticke tongue.

Gen 21.23.
The third Commandment, touching the right use of Gods name, both Abraham
seems to have known well, when he swear by the true God unto Abimelech, to
confirm his league, and Jacob when he swear unto Laban, Genesis 31.53.
by the fear of his father Isaacke. And the very heathen Ephesians, who were
led only by the light of nature, showed how odious a thing they held it, that
the name of their gods should be blasphemed, when suspecting such a matter in
Paul, Acts 19.34.
and in his companions, they grew to such an vproare, and cried out so long,
the greatness of their goddess Diana.

Genesis 2.2.3.
The fourth Commandment is recorded to have been given in Paradise: for the
seventh day, says Moses, GOD rested, so he blessed and sanctified it, because
that in it he had rested from all his works, which he had created and made.

Genesis 28.2.
The fifth Commandment: Jacob showed in his practice, when he followed his
parents direction in taking a wife, herein giving an instance of his obedience
unto them: and the children of Iaacob at his command going down into Egypt to
buy food for him, and being so careful to give him contentment in the return
of his son Benjamin: and Joseph nourishing him in Egypt in his old age, etc.
The sixth command against murder was written in Cains conscience: for that
made him to cry out after the murder of his brother Abel. Genesis 4
My sin is greater then J am able to bear, and whosoever shall find Caine
shall kill him. Verse. 23.24
And Lamech from hence aggrauateth his own case, when he had slain a man, for
that he had this law not only written in his heart, but a warning in his great
Grandfather Cain. And immediately after the flood, the Lord does expressly set
down: Genesis 9.6
Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the Image
of God has he made man.

Genesis 39.9
The seventh command: was to be seen in Joseph's heart, when being tempted by
his mistress to adultery, he said, Shall I do this, and sin against God? in
the other sons of Iaacob, also, Genesis 34
when Dinah their sister had been defiled by Shechem, who do therefore put
him to death.

Gen 31.30
The eight Commandment Laban urges upon Iaacob, saying; Though thou wentest
thy way, because thou longedst to come to thy Fathers house, yet why have thou
stolen away my Gods? unto which he answers, acknowledging this to be so great
a fault, as that he says, Genesis 44.5
With whomsoever they be found, let him dye. And this was held to be so heinous
a sin, as that Iaacobs sons being charged by the steward, with Joseph's silver
cup stealing, yielded themselves upon the finding of it, with any of them, to
become his bondmen.

Genesis 20.9
The ninth Commandment, heathen Abimelech showed to be written in his heart,
when he complained of Abraham's false testimony concerning his wife, of whom
he had said, that she was his sister, Genesis 26.9
telling him, that he had done things, which ought not to be done: and Isaac
is afterward reproved by him also for the like faults.

Lastly, for the tenth, so many as did know God aright, could not but
acknowledge also, that it was a sin against his Majesty, to entertain evil
motions in the mind, contrary to any of these Laws, because where these are,
there cannot be the uprightness commanded unto Abraham, God cannot be
honored with the heart: and thus much of the first thing.

The difference of the laws of God.
Now we are to speak of the difference betwixt the Law of God, containing these
Commandments, and other Laws given also by the Lord: for besides this Law,
which is called Moral, there is another called Judicial, and a third
Ceremonial. The Moral is so called, because it is a perpetual rule of good
manners, without the observation of which, the world cannot stand, or if it
should stand, it would be but as a confused Chaos, and without form of a
world. The Judicial is so called, because as a statute law, it sets down
with what judgments and censures men were to be censured, that did offend in
special cases. The Ceremonial is so called, because it is altogether
conversant about rites and ceremonies, showing what ceremonies were to be used
by the church of God, and what not in his service.

Esa. 1.12. 1. Sam: 15.22
Now, the difference betwixt these, stands in many things. First, in that the
morral Law was published, and written by God himself, so as that all the
people did receive it from his mouth: but it was not so with the Judicial and
Ceremonial; for the Lord instructed Moses only herein, and the people
received them from him, who wrote them down for them. 2. The Morrall Law was
first given, as most worthy, the other two afterward, as not so much to be
regarded, in respect of it: for when the Moral Law has been neglected, and
the other most diligently observed, the Lord has been as much moved, as if no
Law at all had been regarded, which may easily be gathered, both from that of
the Prophet Esaias; Bring no more oblations in vain, incense is an abomination
unto me, etc. And from that of Samuel to Saul, Has the Lord as great pleasure
in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed?
behold, to obey is better then sacrifice, and to harken, then the fat of rams:
that is, to obey the Moral Law, far exceeds all ceremonies. And David has
the like saying in the Psalms, Do I eat bulls flesh, or drink the blood of
goats? Psalm 50
offer unto God praise, and pay thy vows unto him, etc. And I will have mercy
says Christ, and not sacrifice, with many more places to the same effect.

The same also appears from the practice of corrupt man, which has ever
been most diligently to observe ceremonies, but most negligently the precepts
of the moral Law: for our nature is set upon contraries, and therefore look
what we should most carefully observe, that we most neglect; look what should
be cared for in the second place, that we look unto in the first. Math 23.
The Pharisees tithed mint and cummin in the payment of their tithes, but let
pass the weighty matters of the Law: and thus was it the manner of the Jews
ever to do. Wherewith say they in Mc^a, shall we come before the Lord? Mich.
6.6.7
Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, and calves of a year old? will
the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or ten thousand rivers of oil?
And this is the manner of most men at this day, they are most strict in outward
obseruances, but most remiss in the substance of godliness: in the very act
of hearing, and prayer, not regarding that innocence, charity, and
righteousness, which should accompany this outward devotion.

3. The ceremonial Law has been oftentimes broken without sin: but the
moral Law never without some special countermand from God, Genesis 22. Exodus 12.36
as when Abraham was bidden to kill his son Isaac, when the Israelites were
bidden to rob the Egyptians: yea even in these very cases the learned of the
Schoolmen do by sound distinction maintain, that the law it self was not
broken, no nor dispensed withal if we speak properly, but only the matter or
object of the precept changed by God, and so the Israelits did not steal from,
or defraud the Egyptians, but took their own, when God (who has an absolute
power to dispose of all these) had before by his command transferred the right
and dominion of those rights from the possessors to the takers. So likewise did
Abraham, in offering to kill his son upon Gods command, no more break the
Law then a Soldier, that at the command of the General, (who has power of
life and death) kills his fellow Soldier. As for that act of circumcision,
or sacrificing, Math. 12.5
by which our Savior Christ says, that the Priests break the Sabbath, it is
not so to be understood, as though the Law were broken, being rightly
understood, or as though the Lord went about to justify this, that a man might
without sin break this command: but he speaks of their strictness,
showing their weakness in maintaining that it was against the Law, to do any
work at all upon the Sabbath day: for that in this sense, their very Priests
did continually break the Law. His intent then was, to show the right meaning
of the command to be this, that they should do no manner work, except such,
as was of present necessity, or helped to the sanctification of the Sabbath
day. Now for the Ceremonial Law, that it might be omitted without sin, the
Lord himself shows, where he says, I will not reprove thee for thy
sacrifices, or burnt offerings, Psalm. 50.8.
that have not been continually before me: and for Circumcision, all the time
of the people of Isreal's being in the wilderness, for the space of forty
years, their children were uncircumcised, and yet no sin imputed, and
without doubt they failed in sundry other things also, Joshua 5. Matthew. 12.
as the Priest did in giving David of the shewbread, which it was not lawful
for the people to eat, and yet we do not find, that they were therefore reproved
by any of the Prophets, howsoever it cannot be denied, but that when they
presumed to alter any ceremony, they were grievously punished, Leuit 10.
as when the two sons of Aaron adventured to sacrifice with common fire, they
were destroyed by fire coming from heaven: When Vzzah presumed to carry the
Arc upon a Cart, and to stay it with his hands, (when as he ought not to have
touched it, and it should have been borne upon men's shoulders) he was smitten
with present death. All which I do not speak, to the end, 2. Sam. 6.
that men should think that any of Gods laws might lightly have bin broken
without offense, but that there being just cause, the ceremonial law was many
times transgressed, and yet the transgressors remained blameles, which is not
so with the Moral.

4 The Moral Law being neglected, makes men (of how holy Rom 2.26. Verse. 27.
If thou be a transgressor of the Law, thy Circumcision is made
uncircumcision: and shall not the uncircumcision, which is by Nature (if it
keep the Law) condemn thee, which by letter and circumcision art a
Transgressor of the Law? It makes men worse then bruit Beasts, which have not
a reasonable soul, according to that of the Prophet. The Ox knows his
owner, Esaias. 1.1.
and the Ass his Masters Crib, but Israel has not known me. It is not so
with the ceremonial, that being neglected, makes only worse, then the
servants, and peculiar people of the Lord should be, and a confused multitude
of altogether.





The cerimoniall Law ceased.
For, first to speak of the Ceremonial Law, that was then without doubt to
cease, even as there is no further use of a Candle, when the Sun is risen, of
a picture, when the person is present; of the A. B. C. when the Grammar is
taught. For the ceremonies of the old Testament had none other use, but a
little, as they were able, to set forth Christ Jesus, who was to shed his
blood for our sins, as the blood of beasts was shed and sprinkled in the
Tabernacle and Temple of the Jews; to offer himself upon the Altar of the
cross, as the beasts were offered there upon an Altar: to bear our sins,
as the escape Goat did the sins of the Jews especially, and so of the rest,
according to which Saint John says, Ioh. 1.17.
The Law was given by Moses, but grace, and truth came by Jesus Christ: and
this may serve for a first reason of the abrogation of the Mosaicall Ceremonies.

For all the time, that the ceremonial law was of force, God would not suffer
it to be thus, but if for sin he did, he soon returned in mercy again, at
the humiliation of his people; and restored these services.

Heb. 7.8.9.
Thirdly, Christ was a new high Priest, after the order of Melchisedeck, who was
greater, then Aaron, and therefore his order was to cease at the coming of
this worthier, even as at the change of head officers amongst the Romans, the
Dictators ceased, when the Emperors came on. This argument the Apostle
handles learnedly, and at large to the Hebrews.

Fourthly, Christ's coming made us to be of age, when as before men were
children, and nothing differing from servants, as the Apostle reasons to the
Galathians, saying: When we were children, we were in bondage, under the
rudiments of the world, etc. Now such things as serve for the instruction of
children, are of no further use, when they come to be men; and so is it with
this law.

2. Judicial Laws cease.
Secondly, as for the Judicial laws, some are willing to grant that those of
them were to cease, which concerned some special civil customs of that
people, the entailing of their Lands, the freedom of servants in the year of
Iubilee, and such like: but as for all those Judicials, which vpheld and backed
any Moral Law, they would have them to be still in force, and to bind all
Christians. Of those that lay this yoke upon us, I must crave pardon, and
rather think, that all obligatory power of those Laws was to cease at the
dissolution of the Jews Commonwealth, in as much as those Laws were by
special measure of circumstances squared and fitted to the nature of that
people, as well in the Civil, as Ecclesiastical estate and government. Here I
tread in reverend Master Caluins stepps, Call Instit. lib. 4. cap. 20. Sect. 16.
who in his Institutions does very soundly determine this point, showing that
it is neither necessary, nor expedient, that the Laws of other Nations should
be the same that were prescribed unto the Jews in punishments of crimes, even
against the express Moral Law, Theft, Adultery, etc. But referring the
agrauation, or mitigation of such penalties to the nature and propensitie of
particular Nations, and to the necessities of diverse times and occasions. To
the Jews (says he) God was peculiaris legislator; and, as a wise Lawmakers,
ordained those Laws with a singular respect to that people: and so he there
concludes against foam more nice then wise impostures of those laws upon us;
Quod iactatur a quibusdam fieri contumelium Legi Dei per Mosen Latae, quum,
abrogata illa, nouae aliae illi preferuntur, vanissimum est. It is an idle
conceit to think that it is any disrespect to Gods Law delivered by M^ses, if
other new laws be preferred before ti, and established in stead of it. To this
authority of Calvin and others I may add this evident reason for the refuting
of that motive, drawn from relation to the Moral Law. What Law of the
Iudicialls of the Jews; nay, what Civil Law almost at all in any orderly
Commonwealth throughout the world, tends not to the maintaining some Moral
Law, and forwarding some duty concerning the lives, goods, chastity, good
name, peace, and justice of, and among our neighbors? must therefore the Laws
(I mean the just and honest laws) of all other Nations bind us? must the same
penalties in ever several offense be current through the world? Surely I know
no Law for that. General equity is diuersified by particular, and not only
due punishments, but also offenses are truly greater and lesser in variety of
times, places and people, especially in those actions, which conserve the more
remote parts and skirts of the Moral Law. What shall we say then? ate we
Christians no more in duty tied to the Judicials of Moses, then to the
Positive Laws of the Persians, Lacedaemonians, or the Romans, made for the
punishment of vice, and upholding of common honesty? I dare not in any wise
say, or think so. These were devised by the light of Nature only, those
suggested by immediate revelation from God, and therefore incomparably
exceeding for eminent wisdom and justice. Nay, moreover, the Judicials,
howsoever they have not in themselves any obligatory power, or legal force to
bind other Estates and Kingdoms; yet in regard of the general equity implied
in them, they remain as a seasonable and conscionable direction unto
Lawmakers now adays in Christian Commonwealths, where the nature of the
people, and strong motives from experience does not enforce another way. This
exemplary direction, though it be less to be regarded in those provisions,
which are most circumstantiall and variable, as being far off a kind to the
Moral Law; yet me thinks, in the more essential and fundamental parts of the
perpetual and universal Moral Law, the discreet imitation of Gods positive
Laws is very requisite, It pertains not to us private subjects to prescribe,
but only to wish and mention with humility, what we conceive out of a good
conscience. For my part, in my poor understanding, it many times grieueth me
to think, how in our days the foul adulterer usually escapes in a manner
unpunished, and the pilfering cutpurse is trussed up on the cursed tree
without redemption: whereas Gods positive Mosaicall law struck far deeper in
the former, and in the later more gently, providing also in this a means of
relief to the party wronged, by accumulated restitution. If any man be so
presumptuous, as in this heinous crime of violating wedlock, to take Sanctuary
in the new Testament, and to claim thence impunity for this impuritie. I see
not what ground of mitigation can be built upon that, which is by some
alleged out of Saint John, John 8.
how Christ dismissed the Woman taken in Adultery without punishment: for he
was no Earthly Judge, and did this only to take down the insolency of the
proud Pharisees, which were greater, and more stiff sinners, then she was.
Wherefore let us mourn for the impuritie which is now adays in this case, and
seek to the Lord for a redress herein, by moving the hearts of the higher
powers to consider of it, and to fortify the law against so spreading, and
dangerous an evil.

Differences betwixt the old testament, and the new.
which is of the new, and these do differ:

1. In the manifestation, the Law is known by the light of Nature, as has
been already showed, even before that it was solemnly given: but the Gospel
is a mystery unto Nature, as Saint Paul calls it, saying; Without all
controversy, 1. Tim. 3.6.
great is the mystery of godliness; it is a thing hidden from man's reason,
yea, from the very Angels, according to that of Peter, 1. Pet. 1.12.
Which the very Angels desire to behold: (...), the word signifies, prying
into a thing ouer-veyled and hidden from sight. It was first revealed by God
himself, after published by Angels, by Men, by Children, by Devils, and by
dumb Idols.

2. The Law does only show what is to be done, that God may be pleased, but
here leaves us, without instruction how to do it, because that way, which it
sets down is to us impossible: but the Gospel does fully inform us, how
this may be done, namely by Jesus Christ who has fulfilled all for us, and is
made unto us believing in him, righteousness, as the Apostle teaches: and so
the one may rightly be termed, the Law of Faith, the other of works.

3. The Law is full of terrible threatenings, and without comfort in the
promises thereof, because nothing is promised, but upon too hard conditions,
Do this, and thou shall live; it does therefore only cast down, and wound
with the wounds of deadly sin; Romans 7. Gal. 2.
by it none can be justified, or saved, according to the doctrine of the
Apostle in sundry places: but the Gospel serves to heal all our wounds, and
to lift us up with comfort, for that it is full of sweet promises, flowing from
Gods mere grace and mercy, so that how unworthy soever we are, yet turning to
the Lord by true repentance, we may be justified, and saved hereby. The law is
therefore the letter that kills, the Gospel is the spirit that gives life.

2. Cor. 3.6. Gal. 3.24.
Lastly, the Law is a Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, as the Apostle
says; for as without a Schoolmaster first had, and used for entrance in
rudiments, children come not to the universities, so without the law we cannot
be sufficiently taught to be preferred unto Christ, because we rest contented
through ignorance in sin, wounded to the death, and yet not knowing, that we
need to seek a remedy: but the Gospel admits us unto Christ, and
incorporateth us into his body, it opneth the gate unto us, and gives us
entrance into his most stately palace of heaven. The Law is also a
Schoolmaster, when we are come to Christ, ever checking and correcting us,
when we walk not according to the straight rule thereof: but the Gospel upon
our humiliation comfort us, and assures us, that al our aberrations, and
going astray are remitted, so that there be an heart unfeignedly hating that
evil which we do.

Romans 7.
Now, as there be differences betwixt the Law and the Gosspell, so there be some
things, wherein they agree.

The agreement of the old Testament and the new. Heb. ^.1. Mat 3.
1. In the author, God; not, as the mad Manichees taught the bad God to be the
author of the law, and the good God, the author of the Gospel: for the same
God, which spoke by his Son Jesus Christ in these last days, spoke also at
diverse times, and in diverse manners in times past: he that said from heaven,
this is my beloved Son, hear ye him, the same God spoke all these words, and
said from heaven, I am thy Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of bondage, etc.

2. They agree in the threatening of sin, and urging obedience unto the Lord in
all things: but the Law urges it for fear, the Gospel for love, If ye love me
keep my Commandments, the Law as the meritorious cause of life, the Gospel,
as most necessary signs of the life of faith, and the way that God has
appointed us to walk in unto life, the Law gives no hope in the case of
swaruing from the strict rule thereof, the Gospel gives hope to the penitent,
and where the like hope is given by the Prophets, they do rather play
Evangelists, then Preachers of the Law.

3. They agree in this, that howsoever the Gospel gives hope to the penitent,
yet it denies all hope to those that live, and die in transgression of the
Law, for against such most common are the threatenings contained in the Gospel,
They that do such things, Gal. 5.17.
shall never inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

4. They agree in this, that there is no contradiction betwixt them, but as
they come from one, and the same spirit, so there is a sweet harmony and
consent between the^, the one only shows, what God does strictly require in
his justice, the other, how his justice is satisfied, and yet his mercy to
sinful man appears; the one says, he that breaks the Commandments shall
die; the other says, that because man through the weakness of his nature could
not but break them, one man, that never brake any the least of them, died in
the stead of sinful man, and thus freed him, that was the son of death, from
death and damnation.

5. They agree in the Ministers of them both: for they of the Law were to be
without blemish, their lips were to preserve knowledge, they were to live of
their service, they were diverse sorts, both Priests and Leuits, they were
watchmen, etc. so ought the ministers of the Gospel, they must be unblameable,
apt to teach, they that preach the Gospel, are to live of the Gospel, 1. Tim
3. 1. Cor. 9.24. Ephesians. 4.12. 2. Pet. 5.2.
some are Doctors, some Pastors, etc. they are Pastors watching and keeping
their flocks, as those, that must give accounts for them. And thus much of the
third general.

The manner how this law was given. Exodus 19.20.
The next thing to be spoken of in general, is the manner how this Law was
given, and that is described in the nineteenth, and twentieth of Exodus.

1. First, there was great preparation, three days together, the people were
sanctified according to the manner of those times, by washings and purifyings,
showing, both what need we have by prayer, and reading of the holy Scriptures
(which may bring us from worldly to heavenly meditations) to prepare our selves
ever, before that we come to hear the Lord speaking unto us in the Ministry
of his holy word: and also, how we must ever be more and more doing away, by
the Spirit of Sanctification, the blots and blemishes of our natures, that we
may be the fitter to come into the presence of the Holiest.

2. Secondly, a straight charge was given, that neither man nor beast, under
pain of death, should come near the Mount, whence the Law was to be
delivered, but certain marks were set beyond which none might dare to pass:
showing, as the Apostle hence notes, 2. Cor. 3.6.7. Heb. 12.19.
how glorious was the Law, now to be delivered, and, if such as passed the
marks set them, were without mercy to die the death, that much more the
transgressors of any of these precepts should die, and find no mercy.

Heb. 12.2^.
Thirdly, the Lord descended with great terror, the Trumpet sounding, the earth
shaking and Lightnings flying abroad, insomuch, as that the people are noted to
have run away, and Moses himself to have said, I tremble and quake: showing,
that the things here uttered, were grave and weighty, and to be received into
the heart, with a fear of offending against them: and also, that when the time
shall be, of calling the offenders to account, with what wonderful terror
the Lord will then come against them.

4. Almighty God himself spoke al these words in the hearing of all the people;
but when they were too weak to bear his words, and desired that the Lord would
not speak any more (for so they should die) but promised obedience, if Moses
should speak; two tables of stone were given unto him, written with Gods own
finger, that he might carry them to the people, showing hereby, how stony-hard
our hearts be, and that Gods finger alone is able to imprint them there, his
speech from Heaven must work in us a reverence of them, otherwise we shall all
be too negligent of his Laws.

5. When Moses had broken these Tables through zeal (seeing how God was
dishonored in his absence; by golden Calves, which they had set up, and
worshipped) the Lord bad him hew two other Tables, and therein he wrote all the
words that were in the first: showing hereby, that man's heart by Gods creation,
had all the laws ready written in it, as the Tables prepared by God himself
had, but the heart, which he had gotten unto himself by falling away from God,
is without any letter hereof in effect, until that the Lord wrote them anew,
as it was with the Tables prepared by Moses.

6. Lastly, when Moses had been long with the Lord, and came with these Laws
unto the people, his face shone so, as they were not able to look upon him:
for which cause he used a veil when he came unto them, and put it off, when
he returned unto the Lord: showing hereby, as S. Paul notes, 2. Cor 3.13.^4.
that the Jews should not be able to see into the end of the Law, Christ
Jesus, until the vale of blindness and hardness of heart were taken away by
the Lord, neither yet could any of the Gentiles, without the same his helping
hand.

The use of the Law in these times of the Gospel.
for howsoever other Laws be done away, as has been showed, yet this still
ever remains, as it has ever been in the heart, yea, even before man's fall.
And this appears (now to use more proofs) from our often being urged unto an
holy and new life, from the many caueats given against sin, and from the
threatenings, that they which do such things, shall never enter into life, even
in the new Testament. Ephesians 4.24.
For when the Apostle wills us to put off the old man, and to put on the new,
which after Christ Jesus, is in holiness, to put of the works of darkness,
Romans 13. Leuit. 11.44.
and to put on the armor of light, what does he else but revive the Law? Be
ye holy, as J am holy, John 2.1.
says the Lord. When S. John says, These things write I unto you, James 2.10.
that ye sin not. And S. James, He that keeps the whole Law, and yet
saileth in one point, is guilty of all: what do they else, but preach the
continuance of the Law? Deuteronomy. 5 32.
Thou shall keep all these Commandments, not declining to the right hand, nor
to the left? Lastly, when all the writings of the new Testament are full of
sweet promises to such, as constantly go forward in a Christian course of life,
and that bring forth the fruits of the Spirit; but on the other side, full of
terrible threatenings to the disobedient, and such, as bring forth the fruits of
the flesh: what other thing do they tend unto, but to make another Deuteronomy,
for that they repeat, as there it is repeated out of Leuiticus? Leuit. 26.
Deuteronomy. 28.
If thou shall diligently observe all these laws, then shall thou be blessed
at home and abroad. etc. but if thou break them, Cursed shall thou be in every
thing that thou put thine hand unto. And to make it out of doubt, our
Savior Christ, when it was suspected, that he would give liberty from the Law,
says, I am not come to destroy the Law, Mat. 5.19.
and the Prophets, but to fulfill them. But it will here be objected then, If
it be thus, how can those places of the new Testament stand, where it is often
said, We are not under the Law, Gal 4.18. Romans 7.
but under grace. Even as a woman, when her husband is dead, is freed from the
law of her husband: so are we freed from the Law under the Gospel and Christ
was made of a woman and made under the Law, Gal. 4.4.
to free those that were under the Law; with many like places? What is all this
to make a show only of liberty, we being still bound to keep the Law, as we
were before Christ's coming?

I answer, that most of these, and the like places, are to be understood of
the ceremonial Law, against which, occasion was then daily offered to write, by
reason of the Jews, which were turned to the faith of Christ, and yet held it
necessary to keep this law by circumcising, etc. there was little, or none
occasion to write so earnestly about the disanulling of the Moral, but only
to show, how unable it was to justify, for then Christ's coming had been
needless. Let the Epistle to the Galathians be well looked over, and this will
easily appear to be the Apostles scope there, for that he tells them with
wonderful vehemency: If ye be circumcised, Christ will profit you nothing:
Gal. 5.2.
and he makes this the occasion of prosecuting this matter of immunitie from
the Law so earnestly, for that Peter being at Antioch, seemed to be too cold
in this doctrine, when at the coming of the Jews, he abstained from meats
forbidden by the Ceremonial Law, for which he says, that he reproved him to
his face, for that justification before God was not thus attained, but hindered,
Chap. 2.11.
which is the only thing he labors in, throughout the residue of that
Epistle. But it cannot be denied, but that some liberty also from the Moral
Law, is here published, it will be worth the while therefore to see what this
is.

Liberty from the Law. Gal. 3.24. John 1.18.
And first, this is in regard of the time, before Christ's coming we were under
the law, as under our only schoolmaster to teach, and to direct us, but now we
have another Schoolmaster Christ Jesus, who came more lately out of the bosom
of God the Father, to declare him and his ways unto us. Now both Moses the
mediator of the Law, and Christ Jesus teach one, and the same thing: only, as
he that goes from a country School to the University, changes his Tutor,
and is no more under him, that taught him in his younger years, but under
another: so at the coming to Christ we are no more under the old tutor the
Law; but under him, who does deal more gently with us, teaching us more
familiarly, helping us toward more perfection, and where we fail, pardoning,
and forgiving us, and because of his merciful dealing, we are said, not to be
under the Law, but under grace, and for this it is, that the Lord himself
said, that the law and Prophets were until John.

Heb 2.14.
Secondly, in r^gard of the power, and authority of the Law being now put down,
by exercising of which, it did tiranize over men's consciences, and put them
into a slavish fear, all their lives long, before Christ's coming: but now,
having another master to admonish, to reprove, to threaten, and to correct us
the laws threatenings need not to terrify us, it has none authority over us,
no more then a master, whose servant is dismissed, and gone from him, has over
the same servant: and for this cause is it, that the Apostle says, Gal. 3 19.
The Law was added, because of the transgressions, until the seed came.

Matthew. 11.
Thirdly, in regard of the seasoning, which has come to our hearts by Gods
Spirit ruling, and reigning in us: so as that the things of the Law, which were
before difficult, hard and burdensome, are now become sweet, light, and easy,
according to that of our Savior, My yoke is easy, and burden light. And
hence is it, that as an Apprentice, when his time is out, takes the same, or
greater pains in his Trade, then he did before, yet is a free man, although
he serves his old Master still, for it is a delight unto him so to do,
especially remembering in what fear he was before, but now without fear, how
rigorously compelled unto his task, but now doing it voluntarily, and by
reason of his rudeness, and ignorance how hard it was, but now by reason of
his experience, how easy: so our time of Apprentiship to the Law being as it
were out, at the sending of Gods Spirit unto us, we are free from it, though
we do still the things of the Law, for that neither fear leads us
thereunto, not rudeness makes it hard, but Gods Spirit leads us, and
fitteth our hearts so unto them, as that all things become delightful and
easy. And this is the meaning of the Apostle, when he says: Such as are led
by the Spirit, Gal. 5.18.
are not under the Law: and when in another place he says, 1. Tim. 1.9.
The Law is not given to the righteous, but to the lawless and disobedient.

Romans 8.1.
Fourthly, in regard of condemnation the laws curse. Without Christ, all are
under heavy plagues and punishments, denounced in the law against the
transgressors: but Christ coming, has set all such as believe in his name,
free here-from, according to that, There is no condemnation to such, as are in
Christ Jesus: and again, he has delivered us from the curse, being made a
curse for us. Without Christ, Gal 3.13. 2. Cor. 8.
do what we could, we should still have bin untoward and wicked servants, and
accursed; but through Christ our will is accepted, and we are delivered.

And thus ye see, how there is freedom from the Law, and yet the Law
continues. Wherefore, neither the licentious Antinomi, nor the fantastical
Anabaptists, are to be heard, which deny all use of the Law under the Gospel,
and maintain, that the motions of the mind only, which they call
Revelations, are to be followed: Neither are we to account otherwise of that
new invention, then false and fantastical, and flowing merely from idle
fantastict brains, which teaches the freedom from the Law, to be the Gentile
freedom, unto whom it was never given, but only to the Israelites, neither
does belong unto them, but only so far forth, as it agrees with the Law of
nature, and is explaned in the Gospel.

This is new, because all antiquity was ignorant of it: Tertullian knew it not,
for otherwise he would not have taught, as he did, that God gave Moses his Law
to all men, and not to the Jews only: that reverend Father Athanasius was
ignorant of it; Lib. aduersus Jud. prop. 2.
for otherwise he would not have taught, that the Law was not brought in for
the Jews sake only, neither were the Prophets sent only to them, but were
appointed to this, Athan. de Lege. and Euang.
that they should be Masters and Pedagogues to the whole world, and that they
might be accounted a public and holy school, as well in those things that
belong to the knowledge of God, as to the discipline of the soul. And the like
may be said of all other Ancients, witness their continual laboring to
commend Moses, and to magnify his writings, that they might breed a reverend
opinion hereof, in the unbelievers.

Wherefore this is a new device, and as it is new, so is it dangerous many
ways and to be taken heed of. Let us then knowing the truth, cleave unto it,
knowing that Christ has given no liberty to sin against the Law, in the
smallest things; let us still walk as strictly, in regard of the Law, as if we
had no liberty at all therefrom, that thus we may be answerable to our times
of freedom by Christ Jesus, and being led by the Spirit, have comfort, that we
are not, neither shall ever be under the curse and condemnation of the Law:
from which, thou Lord, finally deliver us. Amen.

Having been long enough already in the generalities touching the Law, we are
now to proceed unto particulars.

Quest. 51. How many Commandments be there? and how are they divided?

Answ. There be ten, which are divided into two Tables.

Explan. This number of the Commandments, as also the division, was made by
God himself, who gave them written, as has been already showed, in two Tables
of stone, to his servant Moses, The Commandments divided into two Tables.
and herein therefore do all Writers agree, both ancient and modern, both
Protestant and Popish, the only difference is about the right distinction of
these Commandments. For some have placed five in either Table, as the Jews,
Philo and Josephus, learned Writers amongst them: Some have placed three in the
first Table, and seven in the second, as sometime Augustine did, to express
the mystery of the Trinity: but the Papists do it at this day, to defend
their Idolatry, and yet to keep the number of ten, they divide the last
Commandment into two; and so do the Lutherans. Some again divide them by
four in the first Table, and six in the latter, as almost all ancient Greek
fathers, Athanatius, Origin, Gregorius, Nazianzenus, Chrysostomus, etc. and
some Latins, as elsewhere, Augustine, Hierom, Ambrose, Sulpitius, etc. But
this controversy might soon be ended, if men would bring their religion to
Gods Law, and not Gods Law to their religion, as they of the Roman Church do.
For if the first table be the first and greatest Commandment of the Law,
teaching us to love the Lord with all our heart; and the second be like unto
it, teaching our duty toward our neighbor, how we should love him, as our
selves, as Christ himself has taught, then it is without doubt, that all
which teach the love of God, belong to the first; and all which teach our duty
toward our neighbor, belong to the second Table. Which being so, and four
distinct things given in charge, touching the love of God; and six touching our
neighbor, and no more, how can the distinction fitly be otherwise made, but
into four and six? Again, let the last Commandment be well considered, and
it will easily appear to be but one, even all that, which forbids
coveting, both because it touches but one thing only, and is again repeated
in a different order, in the book of Deuteronomy, Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, Deuteronomy. 5.21.
thou shall not covet thy neighbors house; whereas in Exodus it is, Thou shall
not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife. Which
would not have been, if it had been two distinct Commandments: but as all the
rest, so these in their repetition, would have kept their proper places.

Quest. 52. In which Table do you learn your duty toward God?

Answ. In the first: containing the four former Commandments.

Quest. What is your duty toward God?

Answ. My duty toward God, is to believe in him, to fear him, and to love
him with all my heart, with all my strength, and with all my might: to worship
him, to give him thanks, to put my whole trust in him, to call upon him, to
honor his holy name, and his word, and to serve him truly all the days of my
life.

Our duty toward God in the ^^^wer first Commandments.
Explan. This is in general the content of the Commandments of the first
table, and is thus without further distinction set down, having respect unto
young children, with whom it is well, if some good things in general be put
into them, as they are able to bear, and with such breuity, these things could
not better have been couched together. The first words express the first
Commandment, of having the Lord for our God; for this is to believe in him, to
love him, to fear him, and to pray unto him, the second is expressed in the
next words, to worship him, and to give him thanks, it being the duty of this
Commandment purely to do the parts of his worship: the third is expressed in
the words following: to honor his holy name, and his word, it being the maine
matter specially pointed at there, that in all things Gods name and his Word be
glorified: and the fourth, of keeping holy the Sabbath, and then devoutly
serving God, in the duties by him appointed, is expressed in the last words:
and to serve him truly all the days of my life: as will appear more plainly
in the larger opening of every of these Commandments, as here follows.

Quest. 53. How many be the parts of every of the Commandments of the first
Table?

Answ. Two, the Commandment it self, and the reason thereof.

Explan. Before that we come to the particular handling of each Commandment,
two things are further to be premised, first, certain rules are to be laid
down, tending to the better understanding of them: and then is to be showed
the singularity of these Commandments concerning God, above those that
concern our neighbor.

Rule 1. Rules for expounding the Commandments.
First for the Rules, one is this: Every affirmative commanmandement includes
his negative, and the negative the affirmative: as for example, the third
commandment is negative. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord in vain,
now it contains also the affirmative, thou shall honor the name of the Lord,
and so of the rest: and this is plain, from sundry places thus expounding
them. The fourth Commandment expounds it self thus, when the Lord unto the
affirmative, Keep holy the Sabbath day, adds the negative. Thou shall do no
manner of work therein. The fifth is thus expounded, where it is said: He that
curses Father or Mother, or that is disobedient unto them, shall be brought
forth, and stoned to death, and generally the commandments of the second Table
being all negative, but one, are thus expounded of our Savior Christ, saying
the second is this, Thou shall love thy neighbor, as thy self.

Rule 2.
The second rule is this; Every negative commandment does bind always, and
unto all times: every affirmative does only bind always, but not unto all
times also, as for example: Thou shall not have no other Gods but me: the
affirmative of having the Lord for our God does bind always, so that he
sins; whosoever at any time denies the Lord in his heart, or does contrary
to the fear or love of God: but he sins not, that does not actually
exercise these affections at all times, because that a man sometime sleeps,
sometime through the violence of diseases loses the use of his reasonable
soul, many times also is possessed with vehement thoughts which employ the
mind another way; and lastly, occasions are not at all times offered to try our
hearts. The fourth Commandment in the affirmative has, Remember that thou
keep holy the Sabbath day: against this he sins, whosoever does break the
Sabbath: but he sins not, that does not keep it at all times, and parcels
of times, because the weakness of our natures requires some rest and pause,
at what time we cannot be busied in holy exercises. The like is to be said of
honoring our parents etc. But come to negative Commandments, and you shall
see, that whosoever cease from observing them at any time, is a sinner; for
example; Thou shall do no murder, is a negative command: and so is, Thou
shall not commit adultery: if any man then shall murder at any time, or be
adulterous, whether he be drunken or sober, angry or quiet, tempted or not, in
whatsoever place, time or occasion, he is a transgressor, and this distinction
is set forth amongst, Schoolmen, by the terms of semper and ad semper.

The third Rule is this: Rule. 3.
Every commandment forbidding any sin, does not only forbid the sin
named, but all sins of the same rank also, and all occasions of the same; and
the maine sin only is named, to make the branches the more odious, as being
of the same nature before the Lord. Thus Christ himself interprets the
sixth, seventh, and third commandments, where reproving the Pharisees
doctrine, Math. 5.
only forbidding murder, and the act of adultery, and false swearing by Gods
holy name, he teaches, that even unadvised anger is a sin, and to look upon
a woman to lust after her is adultery, and to swear any oath at all in
ordinary communication, is from the Devil, by which we may gather how we are
to understand the other commandments also.

The fourth rule is this: Rule. 4.
The Commandments of the first table are absolutely to be kept, and for
themselves, the other of the second table are to be kept for the first. For,
if any man shall observe this, Thou shall have none other Gods but me. Thou
shall not make any graven Image, etc. or thou shall not take the name of the
Lord in vain, in mere obedience to the Kings Laws, or thereby to please holy
men, who do spit at the workers of such abominations, and not through an
imediate reverence of that heavenly majesty which has commanded, that man's
obedience is none obedience, his keeping of these laws is no keeping of them,
because the maine thing here intended is neglected, viz. the setting up of God
in our hearts above all, and that which is most abhorred, is practiced, viz.
the fear of God taught by the preceps of men. Esa 29.13.
And on the other side, who so shall observe these laws, Thou shall not kill,
Thou shall not steal, etc. without being moved hereunto through a conscience
of the first table, commending the love of God unto us, and the love of man for
Gods cause, after whose Image he is made: his keeping also is no keeping of the
law, because the praise of men is the mark, at which he aymeth, or else, that
he may be dealt friendly withal again, and thus did the very Pharisees and
Publicans. Math. 6. Math. 5.
He only loves his neighbor aright, which makes the love of God the
fountain and beginning of his love to his neighbor.

Rule. 5.
The fifth Rule is this. Howsoever the least commandment is not so small, but
the breach thereof deserves death; yet the breaches of some commandments are
greater, and more heinous, then of others. Thus to break the commandments of
the first Table is in it self simply more heinous, and this sin shall have a
more grievous punishment in hell then sins against the second table. For
Sodom and Gomorrah, says Christ unto the Jews, Math 11.
shall rise up against you, and condemn you: because their sin in refusing
and denying their God and Savior was greater then all the sins, though most
loud crying of that people. And for this is it, that the maine sins against
every precept of the first Table were censured with death, but it is not so
with all those of the second Table.

Yet do I not so rigorously press this rule, as to infer, that the least
sin against the first Table, must needs be more heinous then the greatest
against the second, which has been rashly concluded by some. Can any
Christian persuade me that I commit a more damnable sin in being overtaken
with a nap at a long Sermon, or coming once late to Church, then if I had
murdered my own Father? Let me be thrown out of a window if I think that.
Eutychus, Act. 20.9 sinned more grievously then Cain, Genesis 4 8. In gathering a
proportion between one sin and another, all respect is not to be had to the
object against whom the offense is done, but regard must be had also of the
kind of the action committed, of the malice or infirmity of the committer,
etc. These be sometime so superlatiue, that they ouerbalance the general
respect to the object. The comparison therefore between the two Tables, is, to
receive modification and moderation by restraints, as caeteris paribus, or
where there is not overmuch imparity otherwise, in eodem gradu aut specie,
wherein affections, intentions, malices, presumptions, infirmities, neglects,
etc. are to be counterbalanced among themselves and one against another.

The sixth Rule is this, there is so near a relation betwixt all the
commandments of the moral law, Rule. 6.
that whosoever observes all, failing only in one point, is guilty of all,
because, as S. James teaches, there is one, and the same, the Author of them
all. And hence it is, that, Of two evils, Iam. 2.^0.
being mala culpae not penae, not the lesser, but neither is to be chosen.

And hitherto of the first thing: now follows the second, Rule. 2. Of the
singularity of these Commandments.
of the singularity of these commandments, which is in this, that every of
these four has both the commandment, and the reason, which is plain in the
three latter, and is only called in question in the former, because it is not
placed, as a reason, but as a preface to all the commandments, before any
charge given. Whence it is, The first commandment has a special reason.
that some have made it a general preparatiue persuading to the obedience of
all these laws. But it will appear I take it to be a special reason of the
first also, and more properly belonging unto it, if we consider, first that the
other three being subordinate, have their special reasons, and much more then
should, this being chiefest, and ground of all.

Secondly, the identity of the reason here used, and in the second, I am the
Lord thy God, and I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, both being alike fit to
strike terror into the offenders, as the precepts are alike, the one
forbidding inward, the other outward Idolatry, so that, if this of the first
be made only general, for the same cause may that of the second, and neither
shall have their special reason.

Thirdly, if it be further considered, how this reason does specially fit the
precept, I am the Lord, therefore thou shall acknowledge me and none other, I
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, etc. therefore thou shall be
ungrateful, if thou deny me, or join any fellows with me.

Quest. 54. In which words is the first Commandment contained, and in which
is the reason?

Answ. The Commandemennt is in these words, Thou shall have none other Gods but
me. The reason in these, I am the Lord thy God, which has brought thee out of
the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

Quest. 55. What are we here commanded?

Answ. To have the Lord for our God, which is to love him above all, to fear
him above all, to put our whole trust, and confidence in him, and to make our
prayers unto him alone.

The manner observed in handling the Commandments.
Explan. The method which I intend generally to follow in opening the
commandments, is first to handle the commandment it self, and then the
reason, and in every commandment these two parts, the duty enjoined, and vice
forbidden, where the commandment is affirmative, and contrariwise, first the
vice forbidden, and then the duty, when it is negative. This first commandment
is mixed, or compounded of both, thou shall have me for thy God, and none other.
1. Duty Enjoined.
Touching the duty it is to have, and to set up in our hearts and practices,
the Lord Jehovah, who only reigns in Heaven and in earth, for our God, which
is the maine and principal scope of the whole Law: even as the maine duty of a
Subject toward his Prince, is to acknowledge him, and to swear allegiance
unto him, which if it be not, what will all other Laws and Statutes avail?
What likelihood is there of being contained in obedience in other things?
Surely, none at all; but that the person which is uncomfortable in the first,
will live like a disorderly Riotour, and dangerous Traitor. So if we refuse to
set up the true God in our hearts, which is our vowing allegiance, what other
account can the Lord make of us, but as of a company of Out-lawes, and unworthy
to live in the Commonwealth of his Church, and to be fellow-Citizens with his
Saints. Now the Lord is not then acknowledged, this duty is not then performed,
when we make profession in word, and outwardly of serving the true God, but
when we love him in the highest degree, when we fear him, trust in him, and
seek unto him, in all our necessities. Wherefore Almighty God, in commenting
upon this precept, in other places of his holy Word, has showed expressly how
earnestly he requires all these things.

1 Duty, To love God.
First for love, he urges it with such a Preface, and straineth himself to so
many varieties in pressing it, as if he would make known, that all else were
nothing without it; Hear, O Israel, Deuteronomy. 6.3.
(says he by his servant Moses) and take heed to do it, that it may go well
with thee, and that thou may increase mightily, etc. And again, Hear, O
Israel, the Lord is God only, Verse 4. Verse 5.
and thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, with all thy
soul, and with all thy might.

2. For fear, he calls for it by his Prophet, 2. Duty. To fear God. Mal.
1.6.
as they would have him to account them for his servants and children, If I be
a father, where is mine honor? if J be a master, where is my fear? says the
Lord of Hosts. And our Savior Christ so prefers this fear, as he puts
down all fear of great ones in this world, in regard of it, saying: Fear not
him, which can kill the body, but is not able to kill the soul: but fear him,
Math. 10.28.
who is able to destroy both body and soul in hell.

3. For trust and confidence, 3. Duty. To trust in God Psalm. 20 8. Psalm. 125.
they which trust in other things, either men or horses, strength or wit, shall
be confounded, only he that puts his trust in the Lord, shall stand
steadfastly: he shall be as Mount Zion, that can never be moved. Wherefore all
other trust is straightly forbidden, and this alone every where commanded, as
being a most mighty and strong arm and tower.

4. For seeking to the Lord by prayer, 4. Duty. To seek unto him by Prayer.
Psalm. 50 14.
which is also an action of the heart, the lifting up of the soul: we are hoth
directed unto him, saying, Call upon me in the time of trouble, and J will
hear and deliver you: and unto him only, where it is said, Thou shall worwip
the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 6.13.
and him only shall thou serve. And by the examples of holy men, mentioned in
the Scripture, of which not one is to be found negligent in this duty, not one
that did the Lord this dishonor, to make the lifting up of his heart common to
any other Saint or Angel. And truly there is great reason, that we should
thus set up the Lord in our affections. For who is to be found so worthy of
love as he, Iam. 1.17.
seeing that he is our maker, and every good gift, and every perfect gift
comes down from him the Father of lights: and if excess of love require the
like in those, who are thus affected: then the very love of God toward us, if
there were none other motive may constrain us to this excess of love toward
his Majesty. Romans 5. Psalm. 10.3
For he loved us, yet being enemies, he loves us with that love with which
Parents do love their dear children, Esa.
yea with greater then tenderhearted mothers; for though they should forget
their children, the fruit of their own wombes, yet God will not forget his
people.

Who so mighty as the Lord God Esa. 40.
Again, who is so terrible as the Lord and so worthy to be stood in awe of?
Princes are but grasse-hoppers, and all the world but as the drop of a bucket,
in comparison of him. When he comes down, the earth trembles and quaketh,
the brightest body of the Heavens for fear cover themselves with blackness:
His voice is thunder, casting down the strongest things, and making the very
Hindes to calue for fear, Psalm. 29.
his breath a smoke, and consuming fire, his chariot the strong tempestuous
winds, for he rides upon the wings of the wind, his rod an iron Scepter,
beating in pieces whole Nations, as a potters vessel; his eyes, as flames of
fire casting forth lightnings; his hands such as that he can span the earth,
and hold all the waters of the Seas within his fist; the Heavens are his
Throne, and the earth his footstool; his armies are Angels twenty thousand
thousands; let him but begin to speak, Exodus 20. Exodus 33.
and all men will run away; let him but show himself, and no flesh can live;
yea, let but one of his Angels come, and we shall tremblingly fall down like
dead men. Who then is to be feared like unto him, with him we may take courage
and say, Rom 8.33.
who can be against us; but having him against us, it will no whit avail,
though all the world be on our side

None to be trusted in but God. Prou. 23.5. 1. Tim. 6.17.
Moreover, what is there to be trusted in besides the Lord? not riches, for they
have wings like an Eagle, and will fly away: great substance is the
uncertainty of riches: not friends amongst men, for they ebb and flow as we be
in prosperity or adversity, their breath is but in their nostrils, as a light
they are soon put out; nor amongst the Saints departed, for they know not of
us, and of our cases; not cunning and wit, Esa. 64.13.
for Ahithophels wit is soon turned into foolishnes; not our own strength,
courage, and preparation, for an horse is but a vain thing to save a man, our
strength is but as grass that is soon cut down and withers. The Lord only
then, is a sure Tower of defense, a Fortress, and strong Castle to such as
fly unto him. Of this had Iehoshaphat experience, when his enemies coming
upon him, he said, 2 Chronicles. 20.
We know not what to do but our eyes wait upon thee, O Lord; and so he put
them to flight, without striking one stroke: And the like experience had
Ananias and his brethren, who did, rather then fall down before
Nebuchadnezzars golden Image, offer themselves to the fiery furnace, being
seven times hotter, then at other times, because they knew that God was able
to deliver them, and so escaped untouched of the fire. What should I further
speak of Iaacob, Joseph, Daniel, the Prophets and Apostles? Was there ever any
that trusted in the Lord in vain? No verily, examine all histories and you
shall find none: But contrariwise, Martyrs rejoicing against their exposing
unto wild beasts, upon tormenting racks, and in the midst of fiery flames,
and oftentimes saved out of strong Prisons, and the very jaws of death:
innocent souls wonderfully justified, and their adversaries shamed; men
distressed, and almost famished, miraculously provided for: and whole Nations
unjustly attempted by the proud enemy, with help from Heaven delivered, and
their enemies confounded, and all this, when they have put their trust in the
Lord.

Genesis 17.1.
Lastly, can it enter into any reasonable soul to think that he had need to
pray to any other saving to the Lord only? seeing he alone can thus powerfully
save, and needs no helper. Indeed, when we seek succor from humane wit,
counsel, strength, friends or allies, it is good to make our side as strong as
we can, by seeking unto many; but gross impiety, because we should thus join
unto him, fellows and partners, and thurst subjects (as it were) into the
chair of their Prince, when he alone requires all our heart, we should give
room to others, a thousand times inferior to him: when he commands, that we
should serve him only and worship him, we should sacrilegiously communicate our
service unto creatures also. Neither does it help, which is alleged, that we
do not ioyn the creature with the Creator, but only use him in his place, being
near and dear unto the Lord, that through his mediation, we may the rather be
accepted: for God is not like earthly Princes, unto whom a poor subject
usually cannot have access, without the help of some near about him, or if he
be, he is like unto the best only, such as the Emperor Rodulph was, anno,
1273. who was wont to say to those about him, Give leave I pray you and room,
Cant. 13.
to my subjects to come unto me, for I was not therefore made Emperor, that I
should be shut up from men, as it were in a chest. So the Lord would have us at
any time to come unto his own Majesty, and whereas this is slandered with the
name of presumption, let not any word or syllable tending hereunto, be showed
in all the Scriptures, and then we will yield it to be so also, but sure it
is that all things there sound to the contrary, that God is very gracious to
all that seek unto him, without the help of Advocates. Or if we need an
Advocate (as sure we do, such an one as partaketh both natures) we have one
appointed us, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 Ioh 2 2.
who is the propitiation for our sins: and therefore I am sure, that such as
fly to others in avoiding supposed presumption, do incur very damnable
superstition.

Romans 10.
Now we cannot thus set up the Lord yet in our hearts, unless we know him,
according to that, How shall they call upon him, of whom they heard not? So how
shall we pray unto him, whom we know not? How shall we love him and trust in
him? Ignoti nulla cupido: There is no desire of a thing unknown: we will never
take any pains in serving the Lord, unless we know him. For this cause is
ignorance so much exclaimed against, and the knowledge of God so highly
commended, as that it is said to be life eternal. Wherefore we must also
endeavor our selves in this as the foundation of all, Ioh 17. H^b. 11.
seeing he that comes unto God, must first know what God is. But concerning
this, we shall not need to add any more in this place, because it has been
already handled in the sixth Question under the title: What God is.

Quest. 56. What are we forbidden in this Commandment?

Answ. First Atheism; which is the acknowl^dgement of no God. Secondly,
ignorance; which is the neglect of he knowledge of God, or of his Word.
Thirdly, profaneness; which is a regardlesnes of God and of h s worship, that
is, prayer, hearing of the Word, and receiving of the Sacram nts. Fourthly,
inward Idolatry; which is, the giving of Gods worship unto creatures, by
praying unto them, trusting in them, or setting our hearts upon them.

Explan. After the duty, Vices forbidden in this Commandment.

1. Breach by Atheism.


here follow the vices and sins against this Commandment, not all, but the
principal, which have also other branches springing from them. The first and
maine breach of this Commandment, that strikes at the very head, is Atheism,
a monster in nature, whereby the creature rises against the Creator, not as
the men of Babell, to stop the passage of his judgments, but unlike to all
men, to disanull him, and to make him without being, who gives being to all;
to pull him out of his Throne, and to leave him no authority, who is above
Kings and Princes, and to put down his power, who alone by his power vpholdeth
all things, and in whom only we live and move. Yet such a sin as this there is
amongst monstrous and unnatural men, and that not only amongst some barbarous
people in profession, which is the height of Atheism, but even secretly in
the heart, with which kind many are infected even under the Gospel: And this
is, when men do but in their hearts imagine that it is all vanity, which is
spoken of God, or that there is no such God as the word does describe unto us.

The diverse kinds of Atheism.
Thus there be sundry sorts of heart-Atheisme, as first, that which David
complains of in the Psalm; The fool has said in his heart that there is no
God. Which is, when men through a selfe-conceitednesse affect to be wiser then
all the world, Psalm. 14.1.
do hold this, that there is a God, not really, but in opinion or show, being
an Idol Scar-crow, fit only to keep simple persons in awe, by these their
reaching imaginations, proving themselves most simple and foolish of all
others. For, what greater folly can there be, then to have the understanding
blinded more then brute beasts, Psalm. 104.
whose eyes do look unto God, and so receive their food in due season? but
these being daily fed, and clothed by the same God, are not able to see so
far, as to him that reaches out the hand of providence continually to
sustain them. O Aegyptiacall darkness, with which they are beset which never
befell any that were left unto nature only, except Epicures and Belly-gods,
that lay ouer-whelmed in the bottom of pleasures gulf: Act. 17.
all others scorned to be Atheists, and rather, than unto none, did sacrifice
to the unknown God, as we may see by the Athenians.

Psalm 10.3.
A second heart-Atheisme is, to conceive otherwise of God, then he has revealed
himself in his Word: for, whatsoever is there spoken of God such an one he is,
yea, every attribute of God is God, so that the heart conceiving a God without
any of these is guilty of Atheism. Now the attributes of God are mercy, power,
justice, presence, wisedme, and holiness all infinite, and in the highest
degree: so that he which goes on in sin, and blesses himself with the
covetous: he which flattereth himself with a conceit of Gods absence, far
above in the Heavens, and covered with the clouds, with the wicked against whom
Ioh sharpeneth his tongue: and he which kisseth his hand in secret, Job.
22.22.3.
and sacrifices to his nets in his prosperity, praising his own diligence and
industry, with the wicked ones of Zephanies time, Zeph. 1.12.
ascribing neither good nor evil to the Lord, he I say, has an heart
possessed of Atheism. And hence arises also a third Atheism, when any shall
conceive otherwise of God, in regard of the persons in the Godhead, viz.
denying either the Son, or Holy Ghost, as Turks and Jews: 1 I^h. 2.23.
for he that has not the Son, neither has he the Father, and then must needs
be an Atheist, as by the same reason he is, that has not the Holy Ghost. For
the ground of this truth there is a God: See above under the sixth Question.

2. Breach is by Ignorance.
The second breach of this Commandment, is by ignorance, which is the very next
door to Atheism, because, that where ignorance prevails, there can be but a
poor deal of love, little confidence, and simple, service done unto the Lord.
This ignorance is sometime simple and sometime affected. Simple ignorance, when
the means of knowledge be wanting, either within a man there being dullness
and want of capacity, or without, there being no vision, prophesying failing
preaching coldly, or seldom, exercised; and this excuses not simple people,
thus living in ignorance, Luc. 12.
if they do things worthy of stripes, for they shall notwithstanding, be
beaten: even where vision fails the people perish. Ezech. 3.
But if there be fault in the watchmen, their blood shall also be required at
their hands. Neither ought this to seem strange, considering that natural
visible means, the Heavens, Sun, and Stars, Romans 1.20.
do reveal to the conscience, the invisible God head, power, wisdom and
goodness, that all may be without excuse. Affected ignorance is, when there is
no fault in the means wanting, but people are content to be ignorant, even
under the means, that they may sin the more freely, pretending, that they are
not booke-learned, want leisure, and have business enough, both to toil and
study for necessary bodily sustenance. And this was the ignorance of the Jews,
who told Ezechiel, that they would not hear nor obey, Ezech 3. Ioh. 3.1.9.
and of whom Christ says, that light was come into the world, but men loved
darkness more then light: but what says he of such? Verily, This is the
condemnation of the world, for he that does good, loves the light, and comes
unto it. And this is verified at this day, for as poor and as unlearned as any
that use these pretenses, come, to the light of Gods word, and are blessed with
much divine knowledge, and are never a whit the further from means of
sustentation here neither.

Math. 4.
Yea, if all these naturalls were not blind, they would see that man lives not
by bread only but by every word, that proceeds out of the mouth of God. If
following this excellent light, were some hinderance for the world, yet they
would see that it were to advantage, seeing the one is but food that perishes,
the other food that indureth to eternal life. Ioh: 6.
Which I do not therefore speak to favor or encourage poor souls, in
leaving the works of their calling, and gadding up and down to follow
Sermons, far off, to the pinching of themselves, wives and children: I do
rather pity such, and advise them to consider what the Lord bids them
remember, viz. to keep holy the Sabath, and in the six days to do all which
they have to do, Amos 8.
considering that there is now no famine of hearing Gods Word, in which there
should be need of wandering until faintness, but great plenty, for which
his name be blessed and praised for ever. Let such therefore continue their
devotion, but not rack it without reason, in traveling after men's persons, a
thing too unusual in many places now adays, neither yet grow so remiss as to
neglect good husbandry for the soul, of reading, meditation, prayer, and
hearing Sermons when opportunity is offered and allowed by authority. And for
the other that set so light by divine knowledge, whatsoever their pretexts be,
they are but as fig-leaues to cover their souls nakedness, they shall
notwithstanding be found out, and placed in the next rank to Atheists at the
last day

Sol
They say, what needs so much studying, and hearing, can all the Preachers say
more then this: Love God above all, and thy neighbor as thy self? and believe
in Jesus Christ with all thy heart? But oh lovers of folly, and delighters in
blindness, be there not also for all trades and professions certain general
short rules, which all know, but all are not therefore of knowledge enough for
the same trades: they had need we grant notwithstanding to be trained up many
years, and to have a long time to be acquainted with the mysteries thereof:
and shall we then be so basely conceited of the Christian profession, as to
think that a little superficial knowledge of these generalities is sufficient
to make a tradesman in this kind, especially considering that the mysteries
here be far exceeding, and we have nothing this way naturally, 1 Cor. 2 14.
but as we are taught of the Spirit, neither do we know, but when we have
experience, according to that of the Psalmist: Come taste and see how good the
Lord is.



Sol.
Thou art deceived (O man) whosoever thou art, that go about thus to
disgrace that which the Lord will honor: is it not Christian knowledge of God,
and of his ways, that makes a man thus unlike a Christian, but the corruption
of nature, and Satan's wilines, misguiding some to hypocrisy. Such, to use the
phrase of the Apostle, know nothing, 2. Cor. 8.
as they ought to know, they have none experience seasoning the heart, but some
borrowed words of wisdom, tipping the tongue, and affected carriage and
gesture of sanctity and austerity, wherewith some seek to catch others with
admiration. Yet good means and measure of knowledge is not be condemned nor
contemned, because some (perhaps) make a mask of it to cloth their own
impieties. Wine and other good liquor is not therefore avoided, because
distemper follows, when it meets with light brains: neither is humane
learning condemned, because some great proficients this way, have been most
adverse to Christianity.



Sol.
It is true indeed it is the mother of popish devotion, who yet require
knowledge of the grounds of Religion, but not to meddle any further, because it
is dangerous to their state: and as our Savior Christ said of publicans and
sinners, so may we truly say, that wicked, and profane persons shall enter into
heaven, and these honest dealers be shut out of doors, viz. if they harken to
the voice of wisdom, these pleasing themselves in their estate, and
delighting in folly.

3. Breach. Prophannes.
The third breach of this commandment is prophanenes, which is a regardlesnesse
of God, when a man being about any villainy, remembers not, or cares not that
he is in Gods presence, but rusheth unto it as an horse into the battle, or as
a Lion seeking his prey goes on, not being daunted by any lets in the way, and
a regardlesnesse of the worship of God, which is, when prayer, word, and
sacraments are not used at all, or without all reverence, as if some stage play
were acted, or some old wives tale told. But to deal more strictly with this
sin, it has the beginning from Esau, whom God hated, as witnesses the
Apostle, saying, Let there be no fornicator, Heb. 12.16.
or profane person, as Esau who for one portion of meat sold his birthright.
It makes that the persons infected heerewith, prefer any small worldly thing
either of pleasure or profit before heavenly things. And this sin shows it
self many ways.

Esa 3.9.
First, by living securely in open sins, being without shame, or regard of God
or man, as the Jews were accused by the Prophet, saying, They declare their
sins as Sodom, they hide them not, just as if he should describe the
drunkards, and desperate swaggerers of these times, for what do they else, but
make their lives a trade of sinning, as if this were the end for which they
were borne into the world? What do they else, but as much as in them lies,
discouraging all men from following the Lord, prostitute both themselves and
others, to Beliall? Prou. 1.
whosoever loves his own soul, will take heed of joining with them, what
pleasure soever they vainly promse to their associates, as the thief does all
riches to his partners.

Secondly, by brutish living, without all practice of devotion, little or no
praying, reading, or meditation upon the holy Scriptures, if outward duties be
performed in the Church, it is with such irksomeness, and distaste in some, as
that they are glad when they are at an end.

1. King. 18.
Thirdly, by following and professing one Religion, as that there is a
disposition, if need requires, unto a contrary, this is by Eliah termed,
halting betwixt two opinions, betwixt God and Baal, and the Lord had rather
that men should follow Baal altogether, then to follow him thus sidewayes. A
profane heart causes this, for where it is otherwise, there is the constancy
of the Apostles, It is better to obey God than man. Act. 4.
Which constancy was heroically renewed by a noble man in Germany in this last
age, who is worthy eternal fame: Osiand: Cant. 16.
It was Henry brother to Gorge Duke of Misnia, unto whom the said George sent,
lying upon his deathbed, to offer, unto him the inheritance of his Dukedom,
with all his plate, jewels and treasure, if so be he would promise to defend
the Roman Religion: but he returned this answer unto his Messengers, this your
Embassage seems to resemble that offer of Satan unto Christ, All these will I
give thee if thou will fall down and worship me. And unless a man be thus
resolute in his profession, how can the Lord love such a fickle turne-coate?
But surely he hates the profane, and though they shall hereafter seek his
blessing with tears, he will show himself unflexible, as Isaac did to Esau,
and send them away discomforted.

4. Breach. Inward Idolatry.
The fourth breach of this Commandment is inward Idolatry, or of the heart,
when creatures are there set up, where only is the room of the Creator. And
this is first, by love, joy, and delight of the heart without measure: for thus
the covetous man is an Idolater, because his chief delight is in his gold, and
worldly pelf, Col. 3.5. Psalm. 62.10.
and the Psalmist gives us warning hereof, saying, If riches increase, set
not thine heart thereon: thus also is the Epicure an Idolator, for that he
loves his belly, his pleasure, his ease above all things, his study is how to
provide for this, he spares no cost this way, he is only then at his hearts
ease, when he spends his time in eating, drinking, and being merry, like the
fool in the Gospel: Luc. 16. Phil. 3.18.
for of such the Apostle says, Their God is their belly, their end is
damnation: and thus lastly, the proud person, whose delight is in himself, his
wit, his beauty and comeliness, or the height of his place, is an Idolater,
wherefore the Prophet gives warning against all these. Let not the strong man
glory in his strength, nor the wise man in his wisdom: and proud
Nabuchadnezzar was cast forth amongst the wild beasts, for example to all that
are conceited of their greatness.

1. Sam. 2.
And heereunto may be referred Parents cockering their children, through
imoderate love toward them: when Father Ely did thus, he was said to love and
honor his children more then God, for which such judgments were threatened to
fall upon him, as that he which should hear of them both, his ears should
tingle. And the like may they fear, which make Idols of their children, and in
no case can endure to give them correction. And here may be also numbered in
general such as love their own wills more then Gods holy will: for that if a
private offense be committed against them, they fall into a great rage, and
seek revenge; but if against God, they are meanly, or not at all moved, they
honor themselves more than God.

2. The creature is set in the room of the Creator by trust, and confidence,
whereby the creature is so relied upon, as that with it there is total
assurance and no fear: but if it be wanting, nothing but fear, and mournful
despair, and thus the covetous man is the second time an Idolater, because
when his barnes and storehouses be full of goods, he cheareth up his soul,
and bids it be merry, his heart tells him, that in his need, the wedge of
gold will come and help him: but if by any casualty these things fail him, he
has no comfort, no rest, but pineth away, and walks about like a shadow, as
though his life consisted in his goods. Thus they which trust in men are
idolaters, and the people of Israel are often sharply reproved for so doing,
the Prophet sometime threatening them for their more gross outward idolatry,
sometime for this more secret, and inward by trusting in the King of Egypt,
and Ethiopia. David was also infected heerewith, when he caused his people to
be numbered, and all such amongst us as wholly and merely trust in the great
forces of united nations, or help from beyond the Seas in the day of battle.
Unto these may be added, such as imperiously and tyrannously bear themselves
upon Princes and great persons being their favorites, as Haman did, and
therefore is there none end of their insolences: and also such as trust to
Horses, and weapons, ships and Castles, and other furniture for the wars,
none are so bold as these in the time of peace, and none so forsaken in the day
of danger, and so cowardly, and the reason is, because their God, in whom they
trusted, the arm of flesh, appears to be a vain thing to save a man. Last
and worst of all are witches and Wizards, and all such as seek unto them in
their sickness, or losses, these are express idolaters, have palpably changed
their God, and therefore the true God has commanded, that they should not be
suffered to live. They set up his greatest enemy the deuell, and the least
offenders this way do in effect, say to the black fiend of hell, come and
help us. Which (Lord) open their eyes to see, that run daily to these sinister
means, from God to Satan, that they may be finally delivered from Satan.

3. The creature is lastly set in the room of the Creator by praying unto it:
for it must hereby be supposed to be every where, or to be able to hear at
the least, wheresoever it is called upon; and this only can the Lord do, for
it is a property of the infinite alone. Wherefore whosoever calls upon Saint,
or Angel, sets up the same as infinite, and so makes a God thereof.

Thus then they of the Church of Rome cannot shift but be idolaters, whatsoever
they allege of the glass of the Trinity, as representing to those in heaven,
all things done here upon earth, for who ever told them of such a thing? what
revelation have they for it? Or if such a thing were certain, what warrant is
there of lifting up the heart, the very Esse of prayer, and a worship due only
to their Lord, and ours: what warrant, I say, of doing this unto them? seeing
the King would think his subjects made his fellows, and greatly disdain, if
in his presence we should first kneel, and put up our petitions unto them, and
then unto himself. For the Papists do much worse, praying oftentimes to the
Virgin Mary, letting the Lord to stand by as it were a cipher.

Quest. 57. Whence is the reason of this Commandment taken?

Answ. Both from the equity of it, because he is the Lord our God, and none
other, and also from the benefits bestowed upon us, in bringing us out of the
bondage and thraldom of the devil.

Reason of this Commandment.
Explan. The sins against this law being so great, and the duties so
necessary above al others, great need there was, that it should be fortified by
strong reasons: and therefore the Lord has not omitted to use these, although
out of his authority he might have commanded, and with threatenings have
compelled us unto the obedience of his will. Which teaches us first, how
inexcusable men are living in sin, there being no means to draw them to a
virtuous, and holy course of life omitted: for first, it is revealed, what the
Lord would have us to do, then have we his absolute command, with which no
man can dispense, and lastly, most forcible reasons to move us, as we are not
brute beasts, but reasonable souls.

Again, this same teaches the servants of God, the ministers of his word, not
to handle it negligently, but to study for the aptest, and best reasons,
wherewith it may be more enforced, and fastened upon the hearers, because God
himself has vouchsafed thus to do, and the other remiss handling of Gods
word is, as the laying of twiggs without bird-lime, the casting of a net into
the water, without weights to press it down. O let us study then to deal
most workman like, as divine artists, neither playing with texts, and
multyplying tantologies, to the wearying of the hearers, for want of pains,
but let us study with evident demonstrations, and arguments of the Spirit, to
convince men's consciences of sin, that they may be ashamed, and cease here
from; and of the truth, that they may come to be firmly grounded herein, and
followers of it.

Romans 1.20.
The reasons of this Commandment are two: First, from common equity, I am the
Lord thy God: Every one is easily yielded unto, when he challenges but his
due: but in requiring you to have me for your God, and none other, I challenge
but my due, for I am the Lord thy God, that is, I only am such: therefore ye
may easily yield this unto me, and ye shall deal most unjustly, and contrary
to all equity, if ye yield not to have none other Gods but me. There is
nothing here to be further proved, but that the Israelites, and all we have
daily experience of, viz. that the Lord is God only: they had experience of it,
when all the gods of the Heathen, were not able to stand against him alone: and
the visible most goodly creatures of the heavens and earth, do teach us no
less every day, but that the infinite power and wisdom, which made them all,
is the only God of the whole world, and this is Jehovah the Lord, whose very
name, essence, or being, does imply no less, but that he alone has being of
himself, and gives being to all other things.

his people, Which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, Heb. 2.
out of the house of bondage: Which Egypt was a type of Satan's kingdom, unto
whom we were all in bondage, till the Lord by his Christ came and delivered us.
Now it is an unthankful part, as if the Lord should have said, not to make him
thy Lord, and Sovereign only, unto whom alone thou art beholding for thy
freedom, who has delivered thee, when as before thou were a slave, and under
hard bondage: but if thou deny to make me thy Lord and God, thou shall show thy
self thus unthankful, because that I alone have delivered thee, when as
before thou were in slavery, therefore thou shall have none other Gods but me.
Here all things are most plain both to the Israelites, and unto us: they were
in Egypt under Pharaoh, and questionless they did there serve other Gods, yet
it profited not, but still they were in sore bondage, Exodus 3.4.
toyling continually in making brick for Pharaohs buildings, they had
taske-masters over them most rigorously exacting, that they should do their
stintes, and not sparing to beat them when they failed; and which was most
grievous of all, Col. 2.14.
their male children were appointed unto the slaughter, so soon as they were
borne, which did strike them as much, as continual tormenting with swords in
their sides. But when through the greatness of their grief, the voice of
their cry came up to heaven, the Lord sent Moses and Aaron with signs and
wonders to deliver them, and by his judgments so subdued Pharaohs hard heart,
that he was glad to let them go; and when he was again hardened, and
followed with his forces to bring them back, the Lord divided the red Sea, and
let them through, but drowned their enemies in the bottom of the deep.

Again, for us of the Gentiles, when we were in bondage unto Satan, who did
employ us in filthy works, which it is a shame to speak, and had power over
our selves and children, so that we were all but dead men, dead in sins, and
condemned to death everlasting: when we were, I say, in this fearful estate,
the Lord sent his own Son in the flesh, who in the cross overcame, and
triumphed over the devil, and made us free, yea, sons and heirs unto God
the Father, of a kingdom in heavenly places. If therefore thou do either
reverence the commander, the most high and mighty, if equity be of any force
with thee, to give every one his due, and if thou abhor the infamous note of
ingratitude: then tremble to show any disloyalty any way to the Lord, be
ashamed to deny the best of all his due, and study by all means to show thy
self thankful for so great benefits. Deny not him that gave thee being,
with the Atheist; neglect nor divine knowledge, with the ignorant; be not
loosely minded toward Gods worship, with the profane; rob not God of his
honor with the Covetous, Epicures, Selfe-louers, and Papists; but give unto
the Lord, the love of all thy heart, fear him above all, put thy whole trust
in his holy name, and make thy prayers unto him only.

Quest. 58. In which words is the second Commandment, and which is the reason?

Answ. The second Commandment is; Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
image, nor the likeness of any thing, that is in heaven above, or in the earth
beneath or in the water under the earth, thou shall not bow down to them, nor
worship them. The reason is. For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, and visit
the sins of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me and show mercy unto thousands, in them that
love me, and keep my Commandments.

Quest. 59. What are we forbidden in this Commandment?

Answ. All outward Idolatry which is, first, by making the image of God, or of
any creature, to be worshipped: secondly, by falling down before any image:
thirdly, by serving God according to our own fantasies.

^ees f^rbidden in this Commandment.
Expl^n. This Commandment being negative, we do first begin with the vice
forbidden, which is outward Idolatry, every corruption in the outward duties of
Gods service, image-making, and image-worshipping, are only named, to make it
the more odious. And we call it Idolatry, because this word signifies a
serving, or worshipping of Idols, or images, which in Greek are al one, the
word Englished Idols, signifying a show, representation, or likeness; the word
Englished Image, signifying a lively picture, or portrayture: now this Idolatry
is again subdivided.

1 The making of Images to be worshipped.
The first is, the making of Images to be worshipped, of things in Heaven,
either of God, who fitteth in Heaven, as in his Throne, or of his holy Angels
and Saints, which give attendance about his Throne. Of all these, the image of
the Lord is simply forbidden, as it is further illustrated, by other places of
Scripture, the making hereof may not in any wise be attempted.

Esaias 40.25. Verse 22.
First, because it is impossible, as the Lord himself signifies by his
Prophet, saying; To whom now will ye liken me, that I should be like him,
says the holy One? He sits upon the circle of the earth, and the
Inhabitants thereof are as Grasse-hoppers; he spreads out the Heavens as a
curtain, and stretches them out, as a tent to dwell in. Look into the
chapter, and ye shall see, how greatly the Lord disdaineth, both the work and
the workman: and good reason, seeing every image of the Godhead, Ior. 10.8.
Heb. 2^ 18.
is a doctrine of vanity, and though most curiously polished, yet a very
stock, yea, it is a teacher of lies. An earthly King, or great person, would
stomach it much, if a paultry painter should presume to set forth his person
in base colors, without any appearance of royalty or nobility, with a swines
head, and a Pigmees body: and much more then will the Lord, if by any Image man
shall dare to set him forth; for he must needs be as much belied, and as
greatly abused, in being pourtrayted by any human shape, he being immense, and
infinitely glorious; this base, and not the ten thousandth point of his person.
Wherefore well might the Apostle say, Acts 17.29.
that We ought not to think the Godhead to be like unto gold or silver, or
stone, graven by the Art and invention of man.

Deuteronomy. 4.15.
Secondly, because we have an express command to the contrary; Take good heed
unto your selves (says the Lord by Moses) for ye saw no image in the day, when
the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire, that ye
corrupt not your selves, and make you a graven image, etc. neither can there
any toleration be found hereof, representing God by the image of a man, for
that the likeness of other baser creatures, is only expressed, seeing Saint
Paul, in reckoning up the images of the Heathen, Romans 1.23.
says, in way of reproof, that they turned the image of the incorruptible
God, into the image of corruptible man. Moreover, the Lord has not only
forbidden to make images, but has also straightly charged, that they be pulled
down, Exodus 23 24.
and broken in pieces. In the book of Exodus he says, Thou shall utterly
overthrow, and break in pieces their images. Chap. 34 13.
And again, Ye shall overthrow their altars, break their images in pieces,
and cut down their groves. And when any King otherwise well affected, has
been negligent herein, he is branded with it, as with a note of disgrace, The
high places remained yet in his days.

Exodus 31.
Thirdly, because the Lord is wonderfully provoked by Images. When the golden
Calves were set up in Moses absence, how grievously did he take it? how much
moved was he with it? how hardly could he hold his hands, from destroying all
the people? certainly he was never more moved to indignation, then by this base
Idolatry. If any shall say, that his anger was not, because they would make
some remembrance of the true God, but for that they ascribed their deliverance
to the Egyptian Gods, which were wont to be set forth under these likenesses. I
answer; that without doubt they intended hereby to set forth the true God; and
because their ignorance could not better devise how to do it, they did it by
the similitude of calves, the chief gods of the Egyptians, amongst whom they
had lived. For first, they could not be so simple, as to think any worth to be
in the Egyptian gods, seeing their people had bin wonderfully plagued, and at
the last drowned in the sea, and they, their enemies delivered and saved.
Again, they proclaim the holy day unto Jehovah; Verse. 5.
and lastly, they only desire some visible thing to go before them, because
Mo^es was a long time absent from them, who was wont by his presence to comfort
them, and to be (as it were) the Lords Oracle unto them; for which purpose it
should seem rather, that they would have the golden calves, fondly supposing,
that they could not have Gods presence, unless they had some outward thing,
unto which they might go with their blind devotion.

Judges 8.27.
Fourthly, because Images have been occasions oftentimes of gross Idolatry.
Gideon who had been a Champion of the Lord, yet making a golden Ephod,
procures the destruction of his own house, and corrupted all Israel: for it
is said, that They went a whoring after it. The brazen Serpent, which was set
up by the Lords own command, 2 King 18.4.
yet turned to be an occasion of Idolatry, so great is the danger of Images.

Moses his Law with the practice of Romish Catholics, who make so much account
of Images, when the Lord has put them down for so great abominations.

Psalm. ^15.8.
Thus ye see, that simply to have, or to make the Image of God, is utterly
unlawful, or to make any Image to be worshipped. But we must here take
heed, that we make not this Commandment stricter, then the Lord has made
it, to cast a snare upon the consciences of men: it is true, that as the Image,
so the Image-maker, and Image-worshipper are alike abominable, and so be all
such, as wittingly labor about any ornament, or implement, to the setting
forth of Idolatry. But God forbid, that every Image and Image-maker, should
be therefore accounted abominable; for so the excellent Art of painting,
serving in lively colors so to express our friends absent, as if they were
ever present with us, and picturing many emblemes of virtue and vice, for
ornament and delight, should clean be put down, and our very coin were
unlawful.

Therefore here are first to be excepted, civil pictures, for the delight and
comfort of the beholder: secondly, all such as serve for some remembrance,
tending to our instruction, for virtue, or vice, for wit, policy, discretion
and diligence. Thus the old Romans offended not, in painting a drunken man
goggle eyd, foaming at the mouth: thus Time is well pictured, bald behind, and
hairy before: Justice with a pair of scales, with the hands and eyes shut,
etc. And lastly, such Images, as serve for good remembrances, to stir up
devotion or Christian affections, Joshua 4.22.
without abuse. Thus Joshua set up twelve stones on the further side of Jordan,
for a remembrance of the miraculous parting of the waters, Joshua 22.
whilst the people went over: and the people that dwelt on the other side of
Jordan, set up an Altar like that at Jerusalem, for a remembrance, that they
were all one Nation, and served one God; and many like monuments were there of
old, tending to the same ends. Of this commemoratiue nature, was the use of the
transeunt sign of the Cross in baptism, amongst the most ancient Fathers in
the purer times. Nor can I upon due consideration, see any just reason why the
same should not be so reputed, as it is now in use retained in the Church of
England, being intended as a sign merely monitory, not operative; that is, as
putting us in mind of our duty and profession, not as infusing any spiritual
grace or protection, or making up any part of that Sacrament, as imperfect
without it. I would to God that we all could grow to a like resolution about
this ceremony.

2 Kind of Idolatry to fall down before and worship an Image.
The second kind of Idolatry, is the falling down before an Image, whether
with an intention the better to be put in mind of God, or of any Saint, or by
bowing before the image to give worship to the thing represented, or ignorantly
only according to the tradition of the Fathers. For howsoever, or under what
pretense soever, if the knee be religiously bowed before any Image Idolatry is
committed, and this Commandment broken. And this is so plainly set down in
the holy Scriptures, as that, were there no Patrons of this vice, it were
superfluous to speak much. But for their sakes; first, consider the beginning
of this evil, from whom sprang it? from any of the Patriarchs, Prophets, or
Apostles? from any of the ancient Fathers of the Church, since the time of the
Gospel? Eusebius. li^. 7. cap. 18.
No verily; but if Gregory Bishop of Neocaesarea, or Eusebius may be heard,
they will tell you, that the use of Images came from the Heathen, Heltogabalus,
Alexander, Seuerus, Hadrianus had first in their Chapels the Images of
Abraham, Moses and Christ.

If Theodoret and Augustine may be heard, they will tell you, that Simon Magus
first offered his own, and the Image of Selene his Concubine, to be worshipped
by his followers. If Ierom may be heard, he will tell you, that the Cretians,
whom Paul to Titus so much disgraceth, brought Images first into the Church.
Wicked Marcellina, began the worshipping of the Images of Christ, Paul, Homer,
Pythagoras. Iren. lib. 2. cap. 6.
The filthy Gnostics worshipped the Image of Christ and are therefore
condemned of Ireneus* Irene a most wicked woman, who murdered her own son
Constantine, through a desire of reigning, called the first Council, that gave
any allowance to Images, and there her flatterers without all reason ordained,
that Images should be both set up and worshipped. Their maine arguments are
recorded in the book of Charles the Great; John, Calvin. I^stit. lib. 1. cap
11. sect. 14.
Legate of the East, said, That God made man after his own Image; therefore it
was fit, that there should be Images of God. Another said, That no man
lights a candle, and puts it under a bushel, therefore Images were to be
set up in Churches, etc.

Tom 3 qu. 25. art. 3. Bellar. de Eccles. triump. lib. 2 c. 2. lib. 9. cap. 6.
Secondly, consider what foul error^ the Patrons of Image-worshipping have
fallen into. Aquinas says, Because the Cross represents Christ, who is God,
it is also to be worshipped with divine worship. Bellarmine says, That Images
are properly to be worshipped. Azorius says, It is the constant opinion of our
Divines, that the Image is to be worshipped with the same worship, wherewith
the thing represented by it, is worshipped. Constantinus, Bishop of Constance,
said in the forenamed Council of Nice; I do worship the holy Images with the
same worship, with which I worship the consubstantiall Trinity. John, the
Legate of the East, The Image of the King, is the King, and so the Image of God
is God, and therefore if any man worshippeth it with the same worship, he
sins not.

Neither is there error herein only, that they give the worship of the most
glorious God, to wood and stone, to the work of men's hands: but in that they
Deifie, and make a God (as it were) of every relic about Christ's body, the
napkin, linnen-clothes, etc. Yea, of every instrument used to torment, and
tear him upon the Cross, as the spear and nails; witness their hymmes made
unto them. To the Cross they say, O Crur, Bell. l b. 2. de Imag cap 20.
^^e, spes vnica, auge pijs iustitiam, reisque dona ventam: that is; Hayle O
Cross, our only hope, increase righteousness to the righteous, and give pardon
to the guilty. To the Spear they say; Aue ferrum triumphale, intra^ pectus tu
vital, cost^^ pandis ostia. Foecundata in ^ruore foel^x hasta, nos amore, per
te fixed saucia: that is, Hail, triumphant iron, thou entering the vital
breast, Cron. Crossin.
did open the door of the rib; O thou that were made fruitful by his blood,
Oh happy Spear, wound us with the love of him, which was wounded by thee. To
the cloth, with which his head was bound, they light two Candles, and by the
Acolith it is exhibited to every one being upon his knees to be adored, and
reverently kissed, etc.

This gross and palpable erring from the truth, following upon the use of
Images, a man would think should be sufficient alone to make Image-worshipping
odious to all, but only to such, as are given over to strong delusions, to
believe lies: for, who would drink of that cup, the bottom whereof he sees
to be full of poison? or who would lie down in that channel, the stirring
whereof causes a most horrible stench.

Psalm 115.4, 5.
Thirdly, consider how they are derided and mocked, that bow before Images The
Psalmist, even as if he should set forth the vanity of babes and children,
about their puppets made of clouts, so does he ascribe the Heathen; Their Idols
are silver and gold, mouths have they, and speak not, eyes and see not, ears
and hear not, and noses and smell not, etc. They are like unto them that make
the^, and so are al they that put their trust in them: that is, they have even
as little wit and reason as they. And Esaias mocketh them thus, Esaias 28.9.
saying; Both the Countryman, and the Nobleman, boweth himself to the work
of his own hands. And again; Esaias 46.6.
They bring forth gold out of the pouch, and silver is weighed in the balance,
they hire a founder, who makes thereof a God for them, they carry him, they
bear him upon the shoulder, and set him in his place, etc.

^^n. 35.4.
Fourthly, consider how greatly the worshipping of Images or Idols (for they be
all of one bastard brood) has been impugned by all holy men from time to time.
Jacob, when he had once knowledge, that some of his household, favored, and
kept images, he took them away, and having ready no other means to destroy
them, he hid them under an Oak, where they might never come to light again.
Moses was so much moved at the golden calves, as that he could not be quiet,
until that he had broken them in pieces, Exodus 32 30. Verse 28.
beaten them to powder, caused the people to drink them, and destroyed three
thousands of them by the sword of the Levites. Josiah did burn with such zeal
against these idolaters, 2. Kings 2.3. 2. Kings 28.
as that he put them to death, and burnt their bones upon the altars of Baal.
Hezekiah spared not the very brazen Serpent being worshipped, but brake it in
pieces, though at the first there was an holy use thereof. The Christians of
the Primitive Church were at so great defiance with image-worshipping, that
they would not eat of the meat offered to idols, they would rather choose to
die, then that the world should have the least occasion to think, that they
consented to the worshipping of Idols. When the manner was amongst the heathen,
to wear a garland upon their Emperors birthday, for the superstitious
honoring of him: the Christians having garlands offered them, carried them in
their hands, and refused to put them upon their heads, and being asked the
reason; because, said they, we are Christians, and thus they endangered their
lives, as witnesses Tertullian, who wrote his book de corona milit^s, of the
Souldi^rs Garland, in the defense of them. When Julian the Apostata had
cunningly brought the Christians to cast every man a grain of Incense into a
C^ns^r of fire, wherein perfume was made to idols, they understanding his
deceit, came and cast down his gold, wherewith he had hired them, and offered
themselves to martyrdom, to expiate this heinous offense.

Dan. 3 2.
Fifthly, consider, that the means which have been used to establish
Image-worshipping, are altogether carnal: even as Nebuchadnezzars golden Image
had so many of all sorts to fall down before it. First, the violent and
peremptory command of the most haughty King. Secondly, the acceptance and
flattring of Nobles and Officers. Thirdly, the glittering and alluring matter,
of which Images are made, viz. Gold and Silver. Fourthlie, their outward form
and beauty, being most curiously wrought, and apparreld. Fifthly, most grievous
penalties threatened to those, that refuse to bow themselves. Sixthly,
enchanting music of all sorts. And therefore the thing it self was sutably
carnal, and devilish, and all such of the like sort, which are enticed by
these fleshly means, or compelled through fear to fall down before images.

3 Ki^^ of Idolatry, to serve God according to our own fantasies*
3. The third kind of outward idolatry, is to serve God according to our own
fantasies, either by a kind of worship, which we our selves have invented, or
other men for us, merely out of their own brains, or by resting in the work
done bodily, and outwardly; or lastly, by serving God without repenting us
truly of our sins. For all these are abuses in Gods service, and he is hereby
made an Idol.

As for the first, most true it is, that not only the whole Church, but also
every particular Church has liberty and power to ordain convenient Rites and
Ceremonies for the better furnishing, and commending the outward service of
God. Caluins judgment concerning Ceremonies.
Caluins judicious resolution herein I prefer before a thousand over hasty
disrobers, who would have all outward worship stripped stark naked: he in his
Instituts, lib. 4. cap 10. Sec. 30. Dominus totam verae iustitiae fummam, etc.
God has in the Scriptures evidently set down the whole sum of true
righteousness, and all the parts of his worship, without omitting any thing
necessary to our salvation. But as for outward discipline and ceremonies, it
pleased him not to prescribe in particular what we should follow; in as much as
he foresaw, that this depends upon the diverse estate of times, and knew very
well, that one form and fashion in those externals would not fit all ages. In
this case therefore we are to have recourse unto the general Rules (namely,
of order, decency, and edification), which maxims are to be diversely
accommodated, according to the manners of every people and age, as shall be
most auailable for the good of the Church. Thus in effect Calvin; which me
thinks, should allay the vehement rashness of some, who peremptorily conclude,
that in Gods service, no external Rite, gesture, or habit is to be imposed or
admitted, without express authority of scripture. But as this strict shutting
up the gates against al ceremonies devised by man, is a kind of nice
superstition, so on the other side, to set open all doors, to break down all
bars and hedges, by neglect of these general rules, and hand over head to
take up from Jew or Pagan, whatsoever occurreth; this adorneth not, but
ouercloudeth and polluteth the sincere worship of God in spirit and truth.
Verily it is no less then a fantastique Idolizing, to obtrude upon Christian
people, as parts of Gods worship, a load of duties, and performances, invented
and imposed without either special or general warrant out of the book of God.
Which, if they were instituted as circumstances tending to decency and
edification, and as upon occasion abrogable, the presumption were less; but
being thrust upon the Church as doctrines, and performed by the people as part
of the Essence of Gods worship, surely they advance not, but rather euacuate
the worship of God. Esaias 19.13. Matthew. ^5.
In vain do they worship me (says the Lord) teaching for doctrines the
precepts of men. It is vanity then, and idolatry, which is daily practiced in
the Church of Rome, where traditions of men are received, and followed, even as
the holy Scriptures; yea (which is horrible) before them, and against them; It
is a far greater wickedness accounted amongst them, to omit auricular
confession once in the year, which was invented by man, then to lead a vile
life all the year long: to taste a little flesh upon the Friday, then to
wallow in the filthy sin of uncleanness: that a Priest be coupled unto one
lawful wife, then that he defile himself with many whores: Pap. pharis. cap.
^7.
to neglect a vow of going on Pilgrimage, then to break the necessary vow of
obedience in diverse Moral and Christian duties to God and man, etc. and
therefore, whereas any light punishment suffices, when Gods laws are broken,
such as break any of their traditions are punished with imprisonment,
banishment, death. Neither does it make any whit the more for their
justification, whereas they pretended them to be the Traditions of holy men,
and ancient: for this was the color of the Pharisees, theirs were the
Traditions of the Fathers, yet they were threatened for teaching, and following
them, as Papists do at this day Yet on the other side this hinders not, but
that a true Christian Church may without any imputation of Idolatry, invent
according to Ecclesiastical prudence, and impose decent circumstances of time,
place, habit and gestures for the outward clothing of Gods worship, so they be
neither burdensome in multitude, nor superstitious, nor unsavory, but tending
to edification, good order, and comlines, whereby the sincere inward worship
may be not choked, but cherished Such are those which our blessed Mother has
thought fit to retain, as being used of old in the purer age before the
corruptions of Popery crept in: but as for the later Ceremonies, which are the
very spawne of Romish superstition, our Church has most piously and wisely
cast them out of her doors: I pray God, and hope, they shall never rush in
again.

John 4.20.
Secondly, an Idol is worshipped, and not the true God, when as men rest in the
outward work of his service, without the truth of heart, and spirit. For God is
a Spirit, and all true worshippers worship him in Spirit, and in truth. As the
Apostle says of coming together to the holy Communion: 1. Cor. 11.20.
When ye come together into one place, This is not to eat the Lords body. So
is it, of all other duties, the outward hearing and preaching of the Word, the
outward praying, singing, and giving of thanks, are not always acceptable
service unto God, but when the life of the Spirit, and heart is annexed. The
drawing near with the lips, when the heart is away, is abomination to the
Lord. And herein again are they of the Church of Rome to be taxed, for that
they place the worship of God in outward things, in kneeling, knocking,
crouching, kissing, crossing, repeatings, praying upon Beads, sprinkling with
holy water, going on pilgrimage, etc. and some dull and ignorant people of our
Church, which serve God with the bare reciting of the Pater noster, Creed, and
ten Commandments, with resorting to the place of his worship, and inwardly
profiting no more, then stocks and stones. All these and the like do please
the Lord no better with their service, then Kain did with his sacrifice, or the
Jews imperfect offering.

Lastly, an Idol is worshipped, and not the true God, when men presume to
compass about the Lords Altar with unwashed hands, when they come impenitently
to do any holy duty. For the Lord professes, that he is not delighted in any
such service, yea, that he requires it not; yea, which is more, that it is
abomination unto him. Wherefore he deals with the Jews in this case, by his
Prophet Esaias, Esaias 1.12.
as a man would deal with his professed enemy, who notwithstanding makes a
show of love by offering his best service, he sends him, as it were, to meet
them upon the way, and to stay them from their incense and Sacrifices, new
Moons and Sabbaths, bidding them to bring no more oblations in vain, and
professing, that he is weary of their solemn Assemblies, etc. and the cause
hereof was, for that their hands were full of blood; that is, they lived
impenitently in oppression, and wrong, and other heinous sins. Now if God be
not served, but grieved, and made weary by being thus served, what else can it
be but an Idol, unto which homage is done, when holy duties are undertaken by
wicked persons, living, and proceeding in their sins? Whence we may see the
fearful estate of sinners, which make a trade of wickedness, they run
still more into sin, even into the worshipping of an idol, when they would
be holiest, when they would give God honor, they do most dishonor him, when
they would bring a present to pacify his wrath, they make him more angry, and
to bid them, bring no more oblations in vain. Wherefore whosoever thou art,
that would please God, by doing the parts of his worship, present him first
with a broken heart, and contrite Spirit for thy sins, as David did, Psalm.
51. Luke 16.
wash the feet of the Lord with thy tears, as Mary Magdalen did, be dejected,
and have a sense of thy sins foulenes, as the poor publican had; Romans 7.
let there be an hatred of that which thou have done, as in Paul, let there be
a forsaking of sin, as in him, that shall have mercy, Prou. 28.13.
and then shall thou be like to bring an acceptable present, and not to depart
without thy full load of mercy, and justification.

Quest. 60. What are we here commanded?

Answ. To perform all outward duties of Gods service, according to his will
revealed in his word.

The duties of this Commandment.
Explan. This duty of doing all the parts of Gods worship according to his
will, etc. does necessarily follow upon the contrary forbidden, viz. the
following of our own heads in the service of God, for if we may not make our
fantasies the rule of our doings, then certainly Gods word alone must be our
rule in all things. Again, our God is so wise and provident for our good, as
that it cannot, but be a great disparagement unto his care over us, to think,
that he has left us at six abd seven, in matters of so great moment, as the
parts of his worship be. In the old Testament the temple was distinctly plotted
out, and all sacrifices particularly prescribed. Matthew 6.
And in the new Testament, the Lord directs his Disciples, not only in the
matter, but in the manner of fasting, prayer, 1. Cor 11. Chap. 14.
and giving of alms. Saint Pau^ sets down the manner of rightly coming to
the holy Communion, and how the word is to be preached and heard. But yet there
is difference for matter of circumstance betwixt the old Testament, and the
new. Gal. 4.
In the old, as in the infancy of the Church, every particular is set down
about every duty (for that was the time, in which they were under age) but in
the new, as in the Churches riper age, we have only general rules, according
to which we are to be ordered in all particulars.

Rules of circumstance under the Gospel. Matthew. 3.15. 1. Cor. 14.
First, all things are to be done in order, and not confusedly; the author of
this is Christ Jesus, when as he offers himself to be baptized of John,
urging him to do it for orders sake, for thus says he, ought we to fulfill
all righteousness: and Saint Paul teaches the same concerning prophesying,
that one only should speak at a time, and the rest be silent, till that he
had uttered all which he had to say. Hence it appears, that all disorder
about Gods service, is a fault not to be tolerated, either in undue coming
to Church, or going out or walking, sleeping, talking, or by Hawks, dogs, or
unruly children, which breed a confusion in the congregation, or when any shall
presume to teach, or administer the Sacraments publicly without a calling.

must be uncovered, women must be covered, not only in praying, but also as I
think (yet herein I refer to the laudablest custom of our Church) when the
Word of God is read: 1. Cor. 11.
for this is the preaching of the Prophets and Apostles, who were infallibly
guided by the Spirit of truth. The Thessalonians are commended for this, that
they receive the word, as the word of God; 1. These 2.13. Acts 20.
Paul with his company is noted to have kneeled in prayer, even upon the bare
ground, and ancient Christians to have stood bare-headed all the time of their
being in the Church. Which reproves greatly our irreuerence, either of
Ministers in reading, or preaching, as if they were uttering table-talke, or of
people in sitting at the time of prayer, lying along, sleeping, or proudly
behauing themselves any way; the Turks shall condemn them through the
reverence which they use to the Alchron of Mahomet. And this seems to me to
justify our reverent and humble receiving of the holy Communion, with the most
submisse gesture of kneeling, which many impugn, but without sufficient
ground. It mattereth not that Christ sat, he sat also preaching, but we stand;
and I am persuaded if we should kneel, and the people kneel in hearing, to
express our unworthiness about these holy things, though we differed from the
Apostles, and Christians of the Primative Church, we should not offend at all.

Matthew, 6.1.
Thirdly, all things are to be done without show of vainglory: for this was
the great fault of the Pharisees; and Christians are warned to take heed of it,
in their praying, fasting, and giving of alms, we are not to desire to be
seen of men, that we may have their praise, but in our private devotion to be
most private, and in public, not to affect notoriety, by exceeding the rest of
the congregation in sighing, groaning, knocking the breast, etc.

1. Cor. 13.
Fourthly, all things are to be accompanied with love to our neighbor, and
zeal for Gods glory: for without love, whatsoever we do, is as a sounding
brass, or tinckling Cimball: if zeal be wanting, and we be lukewarm, we
shall be offensive to the Lords stomach, Revel 3.
and he will spue us out of his mouth. Wherefore if the minister shall preach
coldly, or the people hear coldly, if they shall together be lukewarm in
prayer, and praise giving to the Lord, there will be a sacrifice indeed, but
for want of the fire of zeal, undressed, and such as the Lord cannot digest.
Therefore let Paul his zeal, and Peter's and Steuers be imitated by ministers,
Acts 17. Acts 2. Acts 7. Nehem. 8.6.
by burning in the spirit against gross abuses, by earnest exhorting to
repentance with most effectual words, and by reproving with all boldness, the
gainsayers of the truth: and let the zeal of the godly in Nehemiahs time be
imitated by our people, by giving the greatest, and most heedfull attention, by
lifting up the hand in prayer, and adding to the Ministers petition. Amen, Amen.

1. These. 5.22. 2. Cor. 6, 17.
Fifthly, all things are to be done without show of idolatry, according to that,
Abstain from all appearance of evil: and, Touch none vncl^a^e thing* and ye
shall be my sons and daughters* says the Lord. Therefore of old, the Temple
was garnished without images, and newly the Lords supper made of naked
elements. Which if it be so, how can the Church of Rome be excused, being full
of representations of heathenisme; and in the very Sacrament having the image
of a Lamb upon their wafer Cake? If any scrupte shall arise hereupon, touching
the Cross, Copes and Surplisses, used in the Church of England. It may well
be said, that they were used in the Churches purity, and had not their
beginning from religion corrupted, and so are not resemblances of things
merely naught but first good, afterward perverted. So that if it be replied,
that when these things are used, there is an outward face of Popery: I may
as well say, in like manner of Gods ancient Catholic Church: Even as, when the
people of Israel had sacrificed to Molech, and other Baals, such as afterward
did offer sacrifices unto God, made some resemblance of their abomination, for
that both offer sacrifice, and consent in some ceremonies, yet it follows
not, that their sacrificing is unlawful, because that is cut off, which makes
it naught: so when these things are used in our Church, it follows not, that
they must be naught, for some ill resemblance; because that is cut off, which
made them naught, they had them yoaked with idolatry, and superstition, we with
the truth.

Quest. 61. Whence is the reason of this Commandment taken?

Answ. Partly from the punishments to be inflicted upon such, as break it unto
the third, and fourth genera ion, and partly from the benefits to be bestowed
upon such as keep it unto the thousandth generation

Reasons of this Commandment of two sorts: 1. of terror: 2. of comfort.
Explan. The reasons used to persuade to the obedience of this commandment be
of two sorts, the first of terror, the second of comfort. Their estate is most
terrible, whosoever they be, that dare to offend here, the Lords jealousy is
kindled against them, and he will punish both them, their children, and their
childrens children after them. Their danger is set forth by three degrees.
First, their sin is such against the Lord, as his sin is against a jealous
husband, that violateth his wives chastity; no price will appease an husband
thus provoked, but he will kill the adulterer; and as greatly incensed is the
Lord against those that commit idolatry, it is spiritual adultery, the Lord
had married them unto himself, Hosh. 2.
that like a good, and obedient spouse, they might be to him only; but they
have communicated their love unto others, either stocks, or stones, or the
invention of their own brains.



Ezech. 18.
Object. Thus the Lord should not be so just, as he professes in Ezech: The
soul that sins, shall die, one shall not die for the iniquity of another.

Sol It is commonly seen, Like fathers, like children; and in this case is the
Lords threatening, of visiting sins of fathers upon their children, viz. they
making their fathers sins their own, by imitation, as commonly they do.
Therefore it is not said, that he will visit the sins of the fathers upon all
their children, and every one of them, neither upon the child of every such
father: for it is possible, as Ezechiel shows, that a wicked man's child may
abstain from treading in his fathers stepps, and then the Lords wrath is
pacified toward him, whatsoever his fathers wickedness is.

Deuteronomy. 15.
Thirdly, as an honest man accounts the Adulteress his wife, and her
companions, his greatest enemies and haters: so does the Lord account of
Idolatours, they be haters of God, and therefore he has ever willed his
friends to abstain from familiarity with them, and to cut them off, and to
root them out of the land of the living, without putting difference betwixt
strangers and kinsfolks. So that Idolatry is a most unnatural sin, for all
the Lords love in creating, preserving, and multiplying his blessings, he is
requited with hatred and enmity, which is a certain argument of the Lords
hatred against them, as our love of the Lord is an argument of his love unto
us: and if the Lord hates them, all the creatures are against them, they lie
open to all dangers.

Reasons of the second sort of comfort. Deuteronomy. 28.
The second sort of reasons here used, is taken from the benefits, which the
Lord promises to bestow upon such, as keep his commandments. First, they
shall have mercy showed them, Gods blessings of all sorts shall be upon them and
theirs, in the house, and in the field, in their out-going and in their coming
in, in their corn, and their cattle, and in all things that they put their
hands unto, and when mercy will stand them in most stead, at the last most
terrible day, the Lord will show mercy unto them, and speak comfortably, Come
ye blessed of my Father receive the kingdom prepared for you, Matthew. 24.
from the beginning of the world. Secondly, they shall have mercy showed them
in their posterity, unto the thousandth generation, that is, far longer then
the wicked shall be punished in their posterity, so much does Gods mercy exceed
his anger and severity.

And this is commonly seen, even in the things of this life, wicked men often
coming to ruin, and their houses being quite cast down, and if not in their
own days, yet in the days of their children, their goods which they have
heaped up together in great abundance, are soon wasted, and scattered abroad:
whereas the sincere worshippers of God are wonderfully prospered, and their
children for the most part after them are largely provided for, according to
that of the Psalmist: I have been young, and now am old, yet never did I see
the righteous forsaken, or their seed begging their bread. If it falls out
otherwise, as sometime it does: it is either because they degenerate, 2. Chron.
32. Ezech. 18.
and are not like their righteous parents, as Manassah was unlike to his godly
father Hezekiah, and in this case it is threatened, that the child shall die,
notwithstanding his fathers holiness: or else because of too much confidence in
the world, and worldly things, Why righteous men's children are punished.
as David confesses, that he thought he should never be moved, but he was cast
out of his kingdom by his son Absalom, and if the children of righteous
parents should ever enjoy prosperity here, it would make them think it not to
come of mercy, but as hereditary to the righteous for their works, and so Gods
mercy should not be so much depended upon, and magnified: or lastly, for the
probation and trial of them that their graces might shine the more, and be
perfected, as it was with Job, whose patience had not been so admirable, had
not his affliction been so great. So that the Lord in promising mercy to
thousands, is so to be understood, as if they walk in their fathers stepps, if
he sees it not necessary to cross for the removing of worldly assurance, or
for the reviving or perfecting of grace in them.

Secondly, they which keep his Commandments, are accounted the Lords friends
and lovers, which is the greatest grace in the world: for the Lord Christ to
express his love to his Disciples, says, I have called you my friends; and
hereby, says he, ye shall know, that ye love me, if ye keep my
commandments. Comfort enough therefore there is in the sincere worshipping of
the Lord, and terror enough in the contrary, wherefore let the punishments
terrify thee, and make thee afraid of all kind of Idolatry, let the mercies
allure thee, and make thee frame thy self always so to serve the Lord as he
requires.

Quest. 62 Which is the third Commandment?

Answ. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain.

Quest. 63. What is here forbidden?

Answ. All abusing of the names of God, which is, first by blaspheming, or
giving occasion to others to blaspheme the same. Secondly, by swearing falsely,
deceitfully, rashly, commonly, or by creatures: Thirdly, by cursing, and
banning: Fourthly, by vowing things impossible, or unlawful, or neglecting our
vows made unto God. Fifthly, by lightly using the holy name of God, or his
word; Sixthly, by vain protestations, and asseuerations.

Vices forbidden.
Explan. This Commandment being negative, gives occasion again to begin with
the vice forbidden, which is, all abusing of Gods holy name: for the honor of
God is the maine thing aimed at in the first Table, which is, when he is set up
in the heart, that is the intent of the first commandment; by the parts of his
outward worship rightly performed, which is the intent of the second; by the
magnifying of his name in all things, which is the intent of the third: and by
observing rightly the appointed times of his worship, which is the intent of
the fourth.

Is blasphemy.
Now, that the Lord may be honored in all things, the abuses are to be noted,
and taken heed of. The first is blaspheming, etc. Concerning which, note first,
that it is, to speak any thing derogatory to the glorious attributes of the
all-sufficient Creator of all. The word signifies the hurting of a good name
by disgraceful speeches, and thus largely it is blasphemy, whereby man is
disparaged, as in Naboths example, he is said to have blasphemed both God and
the King; as also, whereby any doctrine is disgraced, thus Paul the fourth, a
Bishop of Rome blasphemed the holy Gospel, when unto Bembus a Cardinal he
called it a fable, saying; O how much has this fable concerning Christ, gained
us. And Bonner here in England blasphemed the doctrine of the Apostle Paul,
when unto one Mill^ a Martyr, he alleged that saying of the liberty of a
woman, her husband being dead, and said, that when her husband was asleep,
she was at liberty for another man.

Lastly, it is the greatest blasphemy, when the Lord is disgraced, as by
Pharaoh, who said unto Moses; Who is the Lord, Exodus 3. 2. Kings 19.
that I should let the people go. And by Senacherib, who alleging unto the
people, how the King of Assyria had destroyed all people, and burnt up their
gods, asked, Who is the God of Israel, that he should deliver you out of mine
hands? as if they should have said, he is of no such authority and power. 2.
This sin is most odious: for amongst men, Take away his good name, (we say)
and take away his life; So, take away the Lords good name, and put him out from
having a being, and fill the world with damnable Atheism. 3. A man is made
accessory unto it, by giving occasion to others, to blaspheme, which is, when a
man's profession is holy and Christian, and yet his practice lewd and wicked,
which raises this blaspemous opinion in others, that the God which he serves,
is like unto himself.

Romans 2.24. 2. Sam. 12.
With this, the Jews are charged by the Apostle, saying; The name of God is
blasphemed through you amongst the Gentiles. And Nathan tells David that he
had caused the enemies of God to blaspheme by his adultery: for we use to say,
Like will to like: and Augustine does from hence convince the Heathen, August
de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 1 cap. 32.
that their gods were filthy Idols, because they did represent them with
obscene and filthy spectacles, and were not taught to live in any virtuous, or
commendable course of life by them.

Psalm 50.21.
And may not the Jews and Turks use the same argument against the Papists for
their authorized idolatries, and superstitions? And against the Protestants,
for their drunkenness, whoredoms, prophannesse, and many more abominations,
though not authorized, yet too much winked at? yea, they do daily hence take
occasion to blaspheme the name of our God, as though he were not the true God,
his servants being so wicked. And well may they thus think of our God, seeing
that the wicked man does himself thus blaspheme God in his heart; These things
thou did (says the Lord) and whilst I held my peace thou thoughtest that I
was like unto thee.

by Iezabel, to testify against Naboth, and against Christ, as touching the
destruction of their Temple, when as they knew not, that he meant the Temple
of Solomon. Secondly, by swearing deceitfully, which is, when a man shall
affirm any thing upon his oath, that he will perform and do it, when his
intent is otherwise, or not do it, when his meaning is to do it; or when he
shall be careless, and negligent of his oath, and of this we have no
President, as I remember, in the holy Scriptures, 2. Sam. 22.
but only that of Saul, the forsaken of God, who brake the oath, 1. Sam. 24.
by which Joshua had tied all the people, not to do any hurt unto the
Gibeonites, and the oath by which he bound himself unto David, not to hurt
him, as it is likely. Joshua 9.
For Joshua when he had bound himself by an oath, he was moved with such
reverence hereunto, as that, though he were deceived, he would not break it,
no, nor yet the wicked Jews, which had tied themselves by an oath to an
unlawful act, Acts 3.
to kill Paul, but that they were by Gods Providence prevented.

And both these kinds of unlawful swearings, are commonly called by the name
of perjury, the odiousness of which sin will the rather appear, if we
consider: First, how much it has ever been abhorred, even by heathen men, and
void of true godliness. The Pharisees themselves forbad forswearing a man's
self, and commanded men to perform their oaths unto the Lord. Matthew 5 33.
August de ^^uit. Dei ca. 15. lib. 1.
And Saint Augustine recites an history of Marcus Attilius Regulus, a Prince
amongst the Heathen Romans, who being captive, taken by the Carthagenians, was
sent home to his Countrymen, being first bound by oath, if he did not effect
this, for which he was sent, viz. an exchange of Captives, Carthagenians for
Romans, he should return to them again. He, when he could not prevail with
his Contrymen, or rather would not, for so much as he thought it unprofitable
for the Roman Commonwealth, returned again for his oathes-sake, which was
taken by an Idoll-god, and then was put into a vessel of wood made of purpose,
either side being full of sharp pointed awles, or bodkins, that he might not
lean any way, but be wounded by them, and thus he died a most cruel and
bloody death, choosing rather this, then to be forsworn. Much more then should
Christians having taken an oath by the true God of heaven, abhor the breaking
thereof, whatsoever they should lose by observing it.

Consider again, that by perjury God is made Patron of a lie, which is the
Devils own property; for he is a Liar, and the father of lies: for the Lord
is called to give testimony unto a lie, which is the greatest indignity in
the world.

Moreover, consider that the perjured person prays against himself, and
binds his soul over to everlasting torments, for so much as he desires the
Lord so to help him, as it is a truth, unto which he swears; and on the
contrary side then, to plague and punish him, if it be a falsehood, and this is
mere madness and unnaturalness, it was never heard, that any would pray
against themselves, but all they can for themselves. Consider also that it is
the bane of all societies, and the very highway to hellish confusion; for that
if oaths shall be taken falsely, Kings will be Tyrants to their subjects,
subjects Traitors to their Princes; Magistrates, Wolves unto the people,
Ministers, Deuourers of the Lords flock; Neighbour-nations, Cutthroats to one
another, notwithstanding any league betwixt them.

By swearing rashly, Genesis 31.53. Common swearing.
A third abuse in swearing is, to swear rashly, and without due consideration
what an oath is, and by whom it is taken: for swearing rightly is a part of
Gods worship, and must be done with high reverence, as Jacob is noted to have
sworn by the fear of his father Isaac. Fourthly, swearing commonly in our
communication and talk one with another, which we are by Christ's own authority
forewarned to do; I say unto you, swear not at all, Matthew. 5.33.
neither by Heaven for it is the throne of God; nor by the earth, for it is his
footstool, etc. Whence do arise these three conclusions, necessary to be
considered of, by all common swearers.



1. Because (as our Lord elsewhere expounds himself) He that swears by
the Temple, Mat. 23.20.21.
swears by him that dwells therein: So he that swears by creatures,
swears by God, who created them, and yet he will not be heard to swear by
the sacred name of the Lord; as if a child, abhorring any bitter thing, or
poison, should notwithstanding take the same under a little sugar.

2. Because he calls upon dumb things, that cannot hear, he brings them
to patronize his cause, that can neither hurt, nor help: like unto Baal^
Priests, unto whom he was not able to give answer, though they called upon
him from morning, till noone-tide: or like infants, that prate unto babies made
of clouts.

3. Because that having taken up this childish custom of swearing, they are no
whit daunted, either at the authority, or charge given here against by our
Savior Christ, no more then children (that are yet without all understanding)
are moved to leave any foolish quality, whatsoever, and how great soever he be,
that does admonish them thereof.

Eccles. 9.2.
Secondly, it is a most ungodly thing to use common swearing. 1. Because the
Devil is the author hereof for, let yea be yea, says he, and your nay, nay,
for whatsoever is more then these, comes of the evil one. 2 It is to agree
with the Pharisees, who did not forbid swearing by smaller oaths. 3. It is an
argument of a profane person. All things fall out alike to all (says the wise
man) to the clean and the unclean, to him that swears, and that fears an
oath: in which words, he makes swearing an evident proof of a profane
person.

4. It is a great indignity offered unto the Lord to call him to witness to
every trifling matter, as the common swearer does; no man will offer the like
to his familiar friend, much less to a greater person. 5. It is hereby
derogated from the majesty of the Lord, in whose room base creatures are
placed: at which our Savior also glanceth, when he says, that heaven is Gods
throne, as if he should have said, it has nothing in it worthy the swearing
by, it is not God, but his seat, and the earth his footstool. 6. Because it
is most straightly forbidden both here, and by S. James who propounds it as a
prime, and most necessary charge; Before all things my brethren, swear not.

Ier. 5.7. Amos 8.14.
Thirdly, to swear by the Mass, by the Rood, is wicked in an higher degree,
because all these have been made Idols; and thus considered, Gods greatest
enemies: as he that does royal honor unto a subject usurping the Princes
throne, and having been condemned for a traitor therefore, shows himself
herein to be a most vild traitor, and unworthy to live, as being a preferrer of
his Princes greatest enemy. This makes the Lord break into such impatience
against the Israelites. How should I spare thee, thy children have forsaken me,
and sworn by them, that are no Gods. And again: They that swear by the sin
of Samaria, saying, Thy God (O Dan) lives, shall fall, and not rise up again:
answerable to which be the sins of the Papists, the Mass, and the Rood, etc.
And thus much both for swearing commonly, and by creatures.

By cursing and banning.
The fourth way of abusing Gods holy name, is by cursing, or banning, which is a
calling for plague, or murreine, or any fearful evil upon those, with whom a
man is offended. For this is first a malicious sin, and therefore noted to be
a fruit of such hearts, as are full of gall, and bitterness: Rom 3.11.12.
as they are described out of the Psalms. Their throat is an open sepulcher,
the poison of aspes is vnde^ their lips, their mouth is f^ll of cursing and b
tternesse. For which cause the people of God are forbidden all cursing, and
commanded to bless, yea, even such as curse them. Bl^sse your persecutors,
bless I say and curse not. Romans 12.14. James 3.
And Saint James makes it an infallible argument of a corrupt fountain, to
send forth this sour water of cursing. And it is very corrupt indeed, for as
much as for small hurt received, or a little offense given, reason being
blinded with malice, any mischief or grievous plague is wished upon the head
of the offendour. So that the Lord may rightly say another day of the wicked
curser; Out of th^ne ^^wne mouth shall thou be condemned* seeing that for small
offenses thou have adjudged others to the plague, or the Devil, much more
shall my fearful plagues be thy portion, and the Devil possess thy soul as
his vassal for ever. Secondly this cursing is a presumptuous sin, because
that, he which curses another enters upon Gods office, unto whom alone it
belongs to say unto plagues and punishments, as the Centurion to his
soldiers, Come, and he comes. For what else is it in the wretched curser of
his brother, bidding the Devil take him, but to do that which is in the Lords
power only, and to make a man's self equal unto God; as the Pharisees
obi^cted against Christ, taking upon him to remit sins, which none can do,
but God. Wherefore we read not, that any of the holy men of God, have given
the adventure to curse, without special commission from the Lord, Jude v^es 9.
no, nor so much as Michael the Archangell: for he durst not curse the Devil
in his fight with him about the body of Moses; plainly noting the arrogance,
and blasphemous presumption of cursed man, that shall dare to curse: N^mb. 23.
Baalam shall rise up in judgment and condemn them, for that being hired by
Balaack to curse, he durst not do it without commission from the Lord, which
he could not obtain; and therefore, notwithstanding the great rewards
promised, turned his speech to blessing the people of Israel The false Prophets
shall rise up in judgment against these cursers, and condemn them: for they
were sharply censured only for blessing, and promising mercy without commission
from the Lord. But these do take upon them by their own authority to curse,
without any instigation of higher powers, without hope of reward, only some
little distemper carrying them hereunto.

By vowing things impossible or unlawful.
The fourth way of abusing Gods holy name, is by vowing things impossible, or
unlawful, or by neglecting of our vows: which vows be either general in the
time of our baptism; or special, upon any special occasion of danger, or
benefit, whereupon some special promise is made unto the Lord, or without any
such occasion, only upon a free resolution, the rather hereby to glorify God.

The first kind of vow we all make, both before God and his people, to forsake
the Devil and all his works, etc. not that we are not thus to do without a
promise (for it is our duty by the Law of nature) but the rather to stir up our
dull hearts, and to prick forward our unwilling wills, when as by a double band
we shall be tied hereunto. The other vows are made to move the Lord, the
rather to moderate our chastizements, and the more speedily to remove them,
when in the time of sickness, or danger, we promise to dedicate our selves
unto the Lords service, if we recover again: or else they are more special,
of giving this, or that unto the Lord, or of abstaining from, or doing this, or
that particular duty, for the preventing of sin, and the furtherance of grace.
Thus Jacob vowed in the time of his danger, to make the place of his rest,
Bethel, Gods house. Genesis 28.22.
Thus Job made a covenant with his eyes, that they should not look upon a
maid. Thus were they wont freely to dedicate some thing of their substance, Job
31.1.
to the maintenance of Gods service.

Acts 5.
Now, to neglect any of these vows, or the like, is a great indignity offered
unto God, and a dishonor of his name, which he will not endure, as may appear
by that which befell Ananias, after he had vowed his lands unto the Lord, but
would have kept away part of the price, he was smitten with sudden death: and
it is destruction to a man, says Solomon, to devour that which is hallowed,
and after the vows to enquire. And truly great reason, for that God is hereby
deluded, and mocked, a light account is made what is said, or promised unto
him, as if a man had to do with some person of no worth: and if he only,
that promises unto man, and performs shall dwell in the Tabernacle of the
most High, but they which break their promises, be excluded: much more shall
they only, that perform their vows unto the Lord, inhabit there; and they
which make no conscience to do as they have vowed, be excluded, and for ever
shut out. Oh that this would enter into the hearts of careless Christians that
live, as though they were the devils sworn servants, howsoever they have
solemnly in their baptism, vowed their service unto God, and that with the
Israelites only promise, and express some good resolutions, under the terror
of Gods rod, but in being removed, are as licentious as before.

2. Sam 21. Mal. 3.8.
And as ill do they provide for their own good, which deny things vowed to
the Lord, by whomsoever, or upon what occasion soever: for this brought a
famine upon Israel, and destruction upon Saul's house, viz his slaying of the
Gibeonites, unto whom was vowed immunity, and freedom from danger, it is a
robbing of God. See more afterward touching sacrilege.

Having thus explained first, the last member of the answer, the first yet
remains of vowing things impossible, or unlawful, which cannot be without
great impiety, and dishonor unto the Lord. Things impossible are either so unto
al men, as to restore the dead to life, to heal incurable diseases, etc. or
though not unto all, yet to the party that voweth, as if a poor man should
vow, that he would be a King, a man burning in the disposition of his mind and
body, that he will ever live chaste a single life, or a lame Creeple, that he
will go a foot forty miles in a day. Of this kind is the vow commonly made by
the Romish Priests, and Votaries, that enter into any religious order, seeing
that most of them do daily show by woeful experience, that it is as possible
to live pure, and free from all sin, as from sinning against that special
vow. Witness the frequent adulteries, and fornications, the rapes, and
murders of infants committed to cover these unclean copulations. It is well
known that the Monks at Spira of Saint Germans did so lewdly abuse the
daughters, and wives of the Citizens, under a color of religion, that they
were utterly expelled thence, and their Monastery pulled down. I can go on in
more lewd examples of the most eminent in the Romish Church, even in the
unerring demigods, but modesty bids me forbear. If it should be objected,
that these have been but the faults of some special men, it appears to be
most false by Popes tollerations, Decrees of Counsels, and iustifications of
Popish Writers. See Article 9. under the Title; The Church of Rome unholy.

Acts ^3.12
And thus much for vowing things impossible. Things unlawful, are either
against the Laws of God, or against the wholesome Laws of the Country,
wherein a man lives Of this sort was the vow made by those forty conspirators
against Paul, who bound themselves neither to eat nor drink, until they had
slain him.

Thus Russians and Swaggerers do, upon any disgrace received vow the death of
one another, and if any wrong be done, to be revenged once in seven years:
which besides that it is a cursed fruit of malice, is an intolerable
indignity done unto the most just God; for he that is called as it were to be
a party and a favorer hereof. Of this sort also be the vows of women (who
are tied by the law of their husbands) even in things, otherwise lawful, and
honest, Romans 7.
if against the liking and consent of their husbands. For if a woman voweth a
vow which her husband disaloweth, it must not stand. Numb. ^0.
And the like is to be said of children being in their parents house, that is,
under their government. And yet these vows are common, and well approved of in
the Church of Rome. Wherefore one has said well, that they are for many causes
to be reproved: They impugn the law of God; they are oftentimes impossible to
be performed; they are against Christian liberty: they are a renewing of
Iudaisme, Idolatry, Hypocrisy. Pi^k Armil. Aur. cap. 21.
Wherefore to conclude this point, let us in our vows observe these things
First, let them not be against Gods word. Secondly, nor against Christian
liberty. Thirdly, with the consent of superiors. Fourthly, agreeable to our
calling: Fifthly, of things not impossible. Sixthly, with good deliberation:
Seventhly, with a good end and intention.

Light using of Gods holy name.
The sixth abuse of Gods name, is the light using thereof, by saying (O Lord) or
(Oh God) upon every light occasion, without having the heart lifted up unto
him: or by way of admiration, crying out (good Lord) upon every news, or light
accident. For the name of the great God of all is reverend, and terrible, as
the Lord said to Manoah asking his name; Judge. 13. Esaias 66.2.
Why inquire thou after my name, which is wonderful And his word is such, as
that it is to be trembled at. Wherefore let all such, as fear this great God,
learn better to temper their tongues that they not only swear not in their
common talk, but that they do not triflingly use his holy name, or any
parcel of the holy Scriptures.

6. The sixth, and last abuse is by vain protestations, and Matthew. 5.37.
Let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, for whatsoever is more then
these, comes of the evil one, of the devil.

Quest. 64. What are we here commanded?

Answ. To glorify the name of God in all that we do, think, speak, or
desire, and to labor, that others may be won by our means to do the same.

Duties of this Commandment.
Explan. This is the duty of this Commandment, and is thus abreuiated by the
Apostle; Whether ye eat, or drink^, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God. For if it be a thing so much displeasing unto the Lord, to abuse
and dishonor his holy name, then to honor it by all means, must needs be
highly pleasing unto his Majesty.

Deeds.
First, by our doings, Gods name is honored, if they be either deeds of piety,
praying, reading, hearing, preaching of his holy word, Psalm. 50.14.15.
etc. For thus says he by the Psalmist; Call upon me in the time of trouble
and I will hear, and deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Which is, as
if he should say: By calling upon my name, vowing unto me, and performing thy
vows, by giving thanks, and praising my name, thou shall glorify me. Phil.
1.20.
And for preaching, the Apostle professes, that he rejoiced, that he was an
occasion to many to preach the Gospel; for his hope was, that Christ should be
magnified thereby.

2. Cor 8 19.
Again, God is glorified by deeds of charity: For Paul exhorting the
Corinthians to liberality toward the poor Saints at Jerusalem, signifies,
that a faithful brother was chosen to accompany him in his journey, to carry
and distribute their benevolence, and he calls it the grace, that was
ministered by them, to the glory of God, and the declaration of their prompt
mind. Because that when the poor are relieved, homage is done unto God, who is
in their persons, ready to receive our liberality, and his name is also praised
by the poor thus relieved, and so is he further glorified. Now (because it is
not the doing, but the right doing of these things, which is accepted: Esaias 1.
Matthew. 6.
for we read of some, that have sacrificed, kept Sabbaths, and solemn
assemblies: and of some that have fasted, prayed, and given alms much, and yet
have been rejected) I will here set down the right way of performing these
these duties, that Gods name may have glory. First How good works must be
done. John 15.8.
Herein is my Father glorified, says our Savior Christ, that ye bring forth
much fruit. Good Christians are good trees, good ground, profitable sheep,
that are ever yielding some profit. It is not then sufficient to give alms
sometime, to preach, and hear, and pray sometime, but very often. Wherefore
we are expressly commanded to give liberally, so many as have, 2. Cor. 9.6.
even as he sows his ground liberally, that expects a good crop at harvest:
to cast our bread upon the waters, Eccles. 11.1.
to give a portion to six, and to seven; that is, though they, to whom we
give, can no more yield us our own again, then the waters, if seed be sown
in them, or give liberally to the poor, for this is to sow upon watery ground,
which in those parts is most fruitful. We are commanded to be instant in
preaching, 1 Pet. 2.2. 1 These. 5.17.
and as newborn babes, to desire the sincere milk of the word. To pray
continually, and in all things to give thanks.

2. Secondly, these duties must be done in sincerity, and God is a Spirit,
John 4 24.
and the worshippers of God do worship him in Spirit and in truth. If any
other thing be aimed at, as the praise of men, estimation amongst the people,
to merit hereby at Gods hands, or to gain any thing in the world, it is but
Pharisaicall devotion, Math. 6.
and has all the reward here.

Iam. 2.6.
Thirdly, these duties must be done in faith, that is, both by persons
believing, and in assurance of being accepted in all our devotion. For in
prayer, he that comes unto God must believe, that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of such as seek unto him: he must not waver, least he be like unto
the waves of the sea, and in every other duty. Hearing must be mingled with
faith. The Jews are noted, Heb. 4 2.
not to have profited by hearing the word, because it was not mixed with faith.

Heb. 11 6.
And it is written, Without faith it is impossible to please God. Wherefore all
the virtues and good works of Heathen men, have been censured for splendida
peccata, glorious sins. And the many prayers, whippings and pilgrimages
performed by the Papists, cannot but be in the like sort being partly done in a
false faith, viz. to merit hereby, and partly their own inventions, and not
Gods word being the grownd of these superstitions.

Esa 1. Esa. 66.3.
Fourthly, that these duties may be to the glory of God, a man must be separate
from sin, that is, not live impenitently in, or make a trade of any sin. For
the people of Israel in stead of glorifying God, were censured for such as did
offer abomination, when they brought incense, as did weary the Lord, when they
kept their solemn assemblies. He that sacrificed a bullock, was as if he had
slain a man, he that offered a sheep, as if he had cut off a dogs head.
And all this was, because their hands were full of blood, that is, Esa. 1.16.
they lived in oppression, and other grievous sins. And the very prayer of
the wicked is abhominaaion to the Lord.

2. Speeches glorify God.
Secondly, we must glorify God by our speeches, as herein we are privileged
beyond all other earthly creatures, and this is by the right use of the tongue.

Ephesians. 4.29. Iam. 3. Phil. 2.10.
First, when our talk is not corrupt, but tending to the edification of
hearers: if it be railing, cursing, slandering or filthy, the tongue is made a
corrupt fountain, but if it be holy, gracious, sober, peaceable, exhorting and
admonishing one another, blessing of God, and wishing good unto our neighbor,
it is a fountain of sweet water to the praise of the Lord.

Phil 2.10.
Secondly, when we speak reverently of the name of God: for many things do
urge us hereunto. First, Gods commanmandement: Thou shall reverence the
fearful name Jehovah, and at the name of Jesus, one of the titles of God,
every knee shall bow, both of things in heaven, in earth, and under the earth.

2. The same reverend phrase always used in the Commandments, when the Lord
is named: in the first, I am the Lord, thy God; in the second, I the Lord, thy
God; in the third, the name of the Lord, thy God; in the fourth, the Sabbath of
the Lord, thy God; and in the fifth, which the Lord thy God gives thee.

3. The signification of every name of the Lord, used in the Scriptures being
such, as that it puts us in mind of great reverence. He is sometime called
(...) which is strong, and mighty, and sometime in the plural number,
strengths, sometime Jehovah, Essence, or being, as in whom, all things have
their being, sometime (...) almighty, sometime (...) the Highest, and the Lord
of hosts, the beginning and the end, which was, which is, and which is to
come, etc.

4. The reverence, which was wont to be used by the Israelites, the Lords
ancient people, in naming Jehovah, they would not pronounce it out of the
Temple, nor put the letters of it (...) or (...) into their numerals, least it
should be profaned.

3. When in all things we make conscience of speaking Joshua specially says
unto Achan, Ios. 7.19.
My son, give glory unto God, and speak the truth: The tongue is, Index
mentis, The bewreyer of the mind and heart; if then a man shall lie and
dissemble herewith, he does pervert the nature of it.

4. When an oath is rightly taken, or a vow rightly made: Deuteronomy. 6.13. Iere. 4.1.
Thou shall fear the Lord, and serve him, and swear by his name. And in
Jeremy it is said; If thou return (O Jsrael) return unto me, and thou shall
swear: the Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness. For as by
perjury and vain swearing, the name of God is highly dishonored, so by
swearing reverently, and rightly, it is honored and glorified.

Thirdly, we must glorify God in the thoughts, 3 To glorify God in thoughts.
and desires of our hearts, which is, when even here we are contained with a
reverence of his holy name, and do burn with a desire of his glory above all
things. For the outward reverence is nothing without this, as may appear by
the people of Israel trembling, and falling down before the Lord, with
offering their obedience, if Moses only should speak unto them, Deuteronomy. 5.29.
unto whom the Lord answers, saying; Oh that there were such an heart in them
to fear me: as who did not set by this outward reverence, unless together with
it there were the inward of the heart. And for the earnest desiring of Gods
glory above all, we are put in mind of it so often, as we rehearse the Lords
prayer, wherein we first, and chiefly pray. Hallowed be thy name. And where
true zeal is, this desire so exceeds, as that like a fire consuming all
things, it even eats up such as are inflamed herewith, it makes them to
neglect themselves, so that God may have glory, Exodus 32. Rom 9.
as Moses, and Paul, who rather, than God should have dishonor by the
destruction of his people, wished their own names to be blotted out of the
book of life.

4. To win men to glorify God. Math. 5.16.
Fourthly, we must labor to win others to the glorifying of Gods name,
according to that of Christ; Let your light so shine before men that they may
see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. There is no
good child that does entirely love his father, and reverence him, but he
seeks by all means to bring others also to speak reverently, and well of
him. Wherefore if it may further Gods glory, amongst others to endeavor after
their conversion and reformation, he is attentive about exhorting, instructing
and admonishing them: if it may further Gods glory to avoid all scandal giving
even to those that are without, he will live purely and blameless among all
men. He is not a Cain that says, Am I my brothers keeper? neither is he a
spot and blot by his scandalous life amongst Christians, as the false brethren,
of whom Jude speaks, and the careless people of these times. But if his
endeavors may glorify God any way, he acknowledges, that all which he can
do, is too little, and therefore his care extends even to others, as many as
he can possibly win, to the praise and glory of God.

Quest. 65. Whence is the reason of this Commandment taken?

Answ. From the fearful estate of such as any way abuse the name of God, the
Lord holds them as guilty of dishonor done unto his blessed majesty.

Reasons implicitie of this command against profaning the Lords holy name.
Expl. The reason of this commandment, howsoever it may seem to be but
single, yet indeed it is twofold. The first implicit: It is the abusing of his
name, who is the Lord our God, and so the very words of the commandment do
yield a weighty reason. First, because he is Jehovah, the great God of heaven
and earth, whose name is abused; 1. Sam. 2.25.
it is great presumption, man is not abused, who might be dealt withal for a
pacification, but God, for the pacifying of whom, who can, or dare plead, as
the Prophet says. 2. His name is abused, who is the Lord thy God, who is thy
king, thy sovereign, thy father and Savior, from whom comes every good
gift, Iam. 1.17.
which is gross ingratitude: The very heathen did not thus requite their kings
and benefactors, but did rather honor them too much, even when they were dead,
and their greatness ceased: and yet thou vile swearer, wretched curser, and
abominable blasphemer, do daily abuse that great name, which not men but
Angels, and the very devils do reverence: yea, thou abusest him with thy
tongue, who bestows upon thee the great benefit of the use of the tongue,
without whom thou can not stir either tongue, hand, or foot, or thy least
finger. 3. His name is abused, whose dishonor the Devil in hell himself
endeavors in vain, for he both can and will turn all things to his glory.
How vain was Pharaohs light rejecting of the Lords messengers Moses and Aaron,
Exodus 3.
with the blasphemy which he added, Who is God, that I should let Israel go?
For this was turned to Gods great glory, when he drowned him with his army in
the bottom of the deep. How vain also were the blasphemous brags of
Senacherib insulting over this great God? 2. King. 19.
for without any army he was confounded, and like a silly fish, as with a
hook taken, and brought back into his own country, and perished there, to
the great honor of the almighty God of Israel. And in like manner, if any be
so hellishly disposed, that they will still go on to blaspheme his holy name,
as Satan's sworn champions, to anger God, they shall not prevail, but in
spite of them, the mighty God will have glory by their confusion.

Romans 1.24.
The reason expressed. He holds them as guilty of dishonor done unto his
Majesty. They are already set down in his book, as damned persons, and in
themselves they bear the palpable mark of profaneness. Even as the
Gentiles, because of the dishonor, that they did unto God, were given over to
reprobate minds. For in like manner is it with common swearers, and cursers,
they have this brand of reprobation upon them, to be generally insensible of
sin, especially they are given over withal to lying, drinking, filthy
talking, gaming, and vanity, neglect of prayer, and the exercises of Gods word,
quarrelling and profaning of the holy Sabbaths, scorning and mocking at all
reproofs, though most just. So that he which has an eye to see, may easily see
them stand guilty, and the sentence already denounced, written in their
forheads.

What blasphemer would not this make to tremble, if he would but set his heart
to consider of it, and whilst he has time, seek for a pardon, by unfeigned
turning from this cursed wickedness of the unruly tongue. Helps thus to do, are.

1. To pray often, and specially against this vice; for he is noted by the
Preacher to fear an oath, Eccl. 9.2.
that uses to sacrifice, that is to pray.

2. To hear and meditate much upon Gods holy word: for thus David says, have
hid thy word in my heart, that I might not sin against thee

Psalm 119.11.
3. If oaths or cursed speaking have at any time proceeded from our mouths, 2
Cor. 7.^^.
to be revenged upon our selves, by refraining even from speech in such
company, and in such cases, as wherein we have been so much over seen.

4. To admonish one another hereof, according to that straight charge given by
the Lord, Leuit 19 17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart and suffer him to sin, but shall
plainly tell him of his faults.

Quest. 66. If there be such danger in swearing, may a man lawfully swear in
any case whatsoever?

Answ. Without doubt, a man may sometime lawfully swear, either for the
confirmation of a truth, which cannot otherwise be known, and yet necessary; or
for the strengthening of honest leagues and covenants made between me^^ or
lastly, we being called hereunto before a lawful Magistrate.

Swearing lawful Math. 5.33.
Explan. Here are two things further to be explaned. First, that it is not
altogether unlawful to swear. Secondly, that a man may lawfully swear in
these cases. Concerning the first, diverse have been contrariwise minded,
because of those words of Christ; I say unto you; swear not at all, neither by
Heaven, etc. Not only the Anabaptists have upon this, withstood all swearing,
and the Heretics called Manichees, who did utterly reject the old Testament,
because it commands to swear by the name of God: but Ierom also a learned
Father held, that the liberty of swearing by the name of God, Math. 5.33.
Chrysostom. ^^om. 7. in Math.
was only granted unto the Jews, as unto little children, lest they should
swear by devils, even as he says, he would have sacrifices done unto him,
rather then unto Idols: And certain Martyrs, above two hundred years agone,
are recorded to have refused the taking of an oath, being offered by the
Magistrate, upon the same reason. But alas, good men, they were in an error,
as will plainly appear, if we consider first, that the Lord has commanded
his people to swear by his name, not once, but oftener, as was showed a little
before out Deuteronomy. 6.13. Iere 41. where it is put for a maine part of his
worship: and of him that shall dwell in the Tabernacle of the most High, it is
said, that he swears to his own hinderance, and changes not. Wherefore,
Psalm 15.4.
not only the more hard-hearted of the people, but the holiest of all,
Abraham, Iaacob, Joseph, etc have sworn upon some occasions, which they would
not have done, if it had only been tolerated unto the people, because of the
hardness of their heart. 2. If we consider, that, as it was commanded in the
old Testament, so is it pronounced in the new, to be an end of controversies
amongst men: Heb 6.16. Phil 1.8.
therefore Paul sometime swears to the Philippians, God is my record how I
long after you. And to the Corinthians, J call God for a record unto my soul.
2 Cor. 1.23. Heb. 6.14.
And the Lord is said, to have sworn by himself unto Abraham, to confirm his
promise of blessing: And the Angel in the Revelation, Revel. 10.6.
swear by him that lives for evermore: all which would not have been so, had
it not been lawful in any case to swear.

not be certainly known, but by calling God for a witness, who is the knower
of all secrets. 2. For the making of leagues and covenants sure, it was the
common practice of Abraham, Isaac, Iaacob, and all holy men to swear by the
true God, that he being called to be witness of what they had promised, they
might not dare to deal falsely. 3. The lawful Magistrate is Gods Vicegerent
here upon earth, and therefore if he call thee to swear, thou must not
refuse, but obey herein: Romans 13.1.
for to obey the lawful Magistrate, is to obey God, seeing the powers that be,
are ordained of God. And to these may be referred all other lawful cases of
swearing; otherwise, they are abuses of Gods holy name.

Quest. 67. What else is required, that our swearing may be lawful?

Answ. These four things. 1. We must swear only to such a truth, as we know
to be so. 2 We must swear according to the known intent of him unto whom, or
before whom we swear. 3 We must swear only things possible, and lawful. 4.
This being a part of Gods worship, we must do it with great reverence.

Explan. These things must also be known, and considered by him, that would
rightly proceed in the taking of an oath. For; 1. Although it be a truth, unto
which thou swearest, yet if thou know it not to be so, thou art perjured,

3 To swear things impossible, or unlawful, is to mock

4. If it be not reverently performed, Gods name is indeed Vzz^h. Wherefore,
though it be a truth, swear not unto it, unless it be weighty, and thou
disposest thy self hereunto with reverence.

Quest. 68. What if a man shall swear that, which is unlawful, is he not
bound, notwithstanding, to perform his oath?

Answ. Nay in no wise; for so he should add unto his sin of swearing
unlawfully, a further sin of doing unlawfully

Psalm. 15.4.
Explan. This is plain of it self, to every man of understanding. A man being
in danger of his life, is through fear constrained to swear, that he will
not discover, but maintain a company of thieves to his power; he has
offended, by taking this oath, but he shall much more offend, if he does
accordingly, for he shall be accessory to their wickedness. But the case is
changed, if a man by ouer-sight, shall swear any thing to his own hinderance,
but without prejudice to the good of others for here the oath is to be
performed. This was the case of Israel, as touching the Gibeonites, unto whom,
when they had sworn, though they were brought unto it by craft, yet they
feared to break the oath, and suffered them to live.

Object.
If any man shall say, if this be a rule to be followed, then even unlawful
oaths are to be kept; for it was unlawful for them, to suffer any of the men
of those countries to live

Sol.
I answer: That this was not simply unlawful; but first, if they should be an
occasion of temptation unto them. 2. If they could bring them into their power,
for some still remained to try them withal. 3. They were enjoined this for
their own good, that room might be made for them to inhabit there. Now the
Gibeonites, by their subtilty, freed themselves from this danger; so as that
they had no power over them, by reason of their oath, to destroy them, and it
was but to their own hinderance, or rather, as they turned it, to their
commodity,

Quest. 69. Which is the fourth Commandment?

Answ. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, six days shall thou
labor, and do all that thou have to do; but the seventh is the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God, in it thou shall done manner of work, thou, and thy son, and
thy daughter, thy man-seruant, thy maid-seruant, thy cattle and the stranger
that is within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the
sea, and all that in them is and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

Quest. 70. What is the duty here commanded?

Answ. To keep holy the Sabbath day, and to be mindful of it.

Quest. 71. How may this be done?

Answ. By assembling together, to pray unto God, and to praise him, to hear
his holy Word, and receive the blessed Sacraments.

Quest. 72. Is this all that is required to the right keeping of the Sabbath
day?

Answ. No; but we must prepare our selves by prayer, and emptying our hearts of
sin, and meditate upon Gods works, and the Word which we have heard, suffering
it so to work in us, as that we may be furthered in all holiness of life.

Explan. This Commandment being affirmative, we begin again with the duty;
for the further opening whereof we are to consider it, according to the
several members. Which are first, to keep holy a time. 2. To remember, and to
be mindful of it. 3. To keep holy a Sabbath. 4. To keep holy the Sabbath,
that day, which the Lord has appointed. For the first, it offers again two
things to our consideration: both what it is, to keep holy a time, and
wherefore it should be kept holy.

1. To keep holy any time, is to separate, and set it apart 3. The exercises
of the Word. Nehem 8.4. Verse 8.
are either our speaking unto God, which is by Prayer, or Gods speaking unto
us, which is by reading, preaching, and hearing of Gods holy Word: these were
in use at their holy meetings, under the old Testament. In the days of
Nehemiah there was a pulpit made, out of which, both God was praised, and the
words of the Law read, and the sense and meaning opened unto the people, that
they might understand. And of this James makes mention, in the Council held
at Jerusalem, saying, Acts 15 21.
that Moses had in old time, them in every city, which did preach him, seeing
he was r^^d in the Synagogues every Sabbath day: Their Synagogues then, being
as our places of meeting for every Congregation in every town and village, and
their reading was that before spoken of in Nehemiah, with the giving of the
sense; and thus is it, that the doctrine of Moses was preached, and made
plain. And that this was still their custom unto the Apostles times,
appears both from this speech of James, being in the Present-tense, and where
it is noted, that the Master of the Synagogue sent unto Paul and his
companions, Acts 13.15.
after the Lecture of the Law, and the Proph^ts, that if they had any word of
exhortation for the people, they should say on. Which shows, that as it is in
use amongst us, to have a first and second Lecture, and then a Sermon, the
people being gathered together to hear: So it was in those days under the
Law, one Lecture was taken out of one of the five books of Moses; the other,
out of the other parts of the old Testament, which were penned by the Prophets.

1. Tim. 4 13.
And much more are these holy exercises commended unto us in the new Testament.
S. Paul charge Timothy, to give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to
doctrine, and concludes, that in so doing he should save both himself, V^rse
16. 1. Cor. 14.
and those that heard him. And in comparing that excellent gift of those times,
of speaking with tongues, with prophesying, or preaching, he prefers far the
preaching of the Word. Therefore are such glorious things spoken hereof, 1. Cor
1 18.21. 2. Cor 2.15.
to be the power of God to the salvation of those that believe, a sweet savor
unto God in all, whether they perish, or be saved, etc. and hearers are willed,
1. Pet. 2.2.
As newborn babes, to desire the sincere milk of the Word, that they may
gr^w thereby Which serves to commend the care, both of the Governors of the
Church in former times, who would not have any Lords day passed over without a
Sermon, Just. Martyr. Apolog.
as witnesses Justin Martyr, saying, That the Word was read and preached, for
the space of an hour every Sabbath day, at one meeting. Tertullian says of
his times, that there was not any holy meeting, wherein they were not fed with
divine Sermons; and if the Pastor were sick, or necessarily hindered, the Deacon
read an Homily. In a Council in Germany, Council Frances.
under Carolus Magnus, it was ordaind, that there should ever be some man to
preach upon the Lords day, so also has both the Trullan and Moguntine
Councels. And the like is the care of our worthy Governors of these times, it
being ordained, that the Word should be preached every Sabbath, and the
Catechism explaned in the afternoon, though many places, alas, may say
hereof, as of sundry good Laws besides, they are well enacted, if they were
well executed,

2 Prayer and thanksgiving. Nehem. 8.
The other kind of holy duty, is Prayer and Thanksgiving: for, when Ezra was
ascended up into the pulpit, he prayed unto, and praised the God of Heaven,
and all the people said, Amen, Amen. And there were forms of prayer and
thanksgiving to be used in public as the 92. Psalm more specially for the
Sabbath, the 104. 105. 106. 107. for all times of Gods public worship. This
also is spoken of in the new Testament, 2. Cor. 14.
as used by the Minister in their meetings, and it is provided, that it should
be in a known tongue, that the people might say, Amen. Prayer has ever been
so essential and proper to the house of the Lord, that it is called for this,
The house of prayer. Some rash spirits would have no prayer used in the
Congregation, but conceived prayer, without any set form; which would breed
such a confusion, as the like has not bin known in the Church of God: some
through insufficiency of the Minister, being without any prayers, or too
slenderly appointed in this regard. Others, through the variety of men's
dispositions, and humors so diversely appointed, one following this fashion,
and another that, as that in the same Church, which is one body, no unity, or
agreement almost would appear.

3. Singing of Psalms to the praise of God. 3 Singing of Psalms.
Much time in their meetings was wont to be spent herein, under the old
Testament, as may easily be gathered, from the many Psalms committed to the
Masters of the Quiristers, and special holy songs, appointed to be sung upon
special occasions, by Moses, by Barack and Debrah, etc. Unto which music
made, with playing upon instruments, and upon triumphant occasions, comely
dancing was sometime added. And unto the like are we excited in the new
Testament, with Psalms, and Hymns and spiritual songs, Ephesians 5.19. James
5.13.
to sing and make melody to the Lord in our hearts. Is any man merry, says
James, let him sing Psalms The practice of the poor persecuted Christians of
the primitive Church does show, that this duty was wont to be used in their
assemblies since Christ's time; for as he according to the ancient manner, after
the Passover, sung a Psalm with his Disciples, so did they at their
Communions, which were then every Lords day, and not having the liberty of any
other time, they came together thus before day, or early in the morning, for
which they were called Hymni antelucani. Plin. Epist.
Let the Papists therefore deride our serving of God with Psalms sung in our
assemblies, we know notwithstanding, that if it be done from the heart, it is
better then al their Latin Chaunteries, which the hearers understand no whit
at all.

4. Receiving the Sacraments.
Fourthly, the administration, and partaking of the blessed Sacraments, because
it is the Lords day, in remembrance of whom, the Communion is received.
Wherefore in describing this day, this circumstance is commonly added; Acts
20.7.
when they were come together to break bread: for without this, no Lords day
was wont to be passed over, as has been already noted. And for Baptism this
day is fittest, being the time of Christian congregations, and as it were a
representative Church, whereinto the baptized is to be admitted, and made a
member of the universal Church thereby.

5. Holy conferences and meditations, for of old they were restrained from
thinking their own thoughts, where the Lord forbids the seeking of their
own will, or speaking a vain word, Esaias 58.13.
and if he that keeps the Sabbath aright, must be free from these things,
then his thoughts must be holy, his speeches and conferences holy. Moreover,
does not the husbandman cover his seed with mouldes, when he has committed it
to the ground, that it may grow, and bring forth fruit? Do not we chew our
meat, when we have put it into our mouths, that it may turn to our
nourishment? and how shall we think, that the seed of the word will fructify
in our hearts, unless we hide it there by musing, and meditating thereupon?
how can we think to have it turn to the nourishment of our souls, unless
we chew it by further talking, and conferring about the same? David did thus
hide the word in his heart, that he might be preserved from sin, and that
corruption may not grow up in us, the Apostle wills, Psalm. 119.11. Col 3.16.
that the Word should dwell plen^iously in our hearts. So that the best keeping
of the Sabbath is, when as we not only hear, pray, sing, and communicate in
public, but privately think again, and again upon those things, wherein we
have been instructed, confer one with another, read, pray, and sing Psalms
in our private houses.

Quest. 73. Is there no duty to be done toward our neighbor, for the
hallowing of this day?

Answ. Yes, it is a special time of exercising mercy, by helping against
sudden dangers, by collecting, and distributing to the poor, by visiting the
sick, and reconciling dissentions amongst neighbors.

To help against sudden danger.
Explan. The holy duties to be done toward our neighbor are; first, works
of present necessity, which could not be avoided, which are not only then
tolerable, but good and commendable, according to that speech of Christ, when
they watched him, whether he would heal the man with the withered hand upon
the Sabbath day; Mark. 3.4.
Js it lawful to do good on the Sabbath, or to do evil to save life or to
kill? as if he should say, this is a right Sabbath days work, to do good, or
to do any thing, tending to the saving of a man's life in danger. So to save
the poor helpelesse beast, either fallen into a pit, Matthew. 12.11.
or wanting sustenance, he shows elsewhere to be a work of the Sabbath.
From the equity of which it follows, that to put to our helping hand against
any casualty falling upon a man's person, goods, cattle, or house, is a work
so good, and holy, as that it well becomes the Sabbath day. In like manner is
it to be held, for the saving of good things, which otherwise would be lost, by
gathering of Saffron, milking, and making out the milk of kine, and sheep,
and if there be any thing else of this nature. Likewise, household businesses
in making ready of meat, and keeping things in decent and comely order, are
lawful upon this day; for God will have mercy, and not sacrifice, he made not
man for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath for man: that is, Matthew. 12.7.
he does so much favor the good of man, as that when the strict keeping of
this time, is prejudicial to the necessary good of man, he would rather have
it give place hereunto, then that it should hereby be neglected.

2. Works of mercy to the poor, in gathering relief for 1. Cor. 16.2.
that every first day of the week, collections should be made for the poor,
as God blessed every man.

3. Duties of love, to the comfort of our neighbor in distress, Visiting the
sick. Matthew 25. Chap 5.
comforting those that mourn under any cross or calamity, and making peace
betwixt those, which be at variance: for as these duties are holy, and have
excellent promises, and become us at all times, so specially upon the Sabbath
days, when the public worship, and service of God is ended.

Reasons of keeping the Sabbath.
The second question touching the sanctification of the Sabbath is, wherefore,
and for what special causes there should be times thus observed for the
public worship of God, seeing that the spirit, and heart, which are inward,
and private, are the principal in his service? I answer, that the causes
hereof are sundry, and weighty.

1. Hereby are exercised the faith, and obedience of men, when as because of
Gods commandment, only they shall separate, and set themselves apart from
worldly businesses, what haste soever they have, to go forward with the same.
And at three times in the year, especially were the ancient people of God
tried, both for their obedience, and faith, and affiance in Almighty God in
keeping their Sabbaths. For all the males were to appear at Jerusalem three
times in the year before the Lord, many of them coming from a far, and
leaving their houses destitute and void of men, to be made a prey to the enemy,
unless God by his providence, should marueilously preserve them. And
accordingly were they ready to yield themselves to the Lords ordinance, yea, to
more then he required at their hands, for when their enemies set upon them on
the Sabbath, they were so precise and superstitious, that they would not stir
to arm, and defend themselves for fear of breaking the Sabbath, 1. Machab. 2.
and thus lost their lives, without sufficient warrant.



1. Cor. 14.
and wicked in behavior. For this is the effect of the preaching of Gods word,
the sinner coming, is reproved of all men, and accused of al men. Moreover,
the same prayers, the same word, the same Sacraments, the same God served there
by us altogether, do put us in mind of the unity, whereby we are united one
unto another, so that as brands being laid together, do make the greater
flame, so our love toward one another is the more inflamed by our being thus
joined together in these holy duties.

of all, does also tender: for admit, that there were no Sabbaths, unmerciful
minded men would work out the very hearts of their servants, and cattle,
wherefore it is often alleged by the Lord, that thy servants and cattle may
rest as well as thou.

5. The service and worship of God is thus vpheld, which would otherwise decay
and fall to the ground, if there were no times of public meetings, but all men
were left unto their private devotion, some utterly forgetting what they owe
unto GOD, some neglecting all, and most through ignorance, serving him with
superstition, in stead of true devotion.

Ezech. 20.12.
Sixthly, the Sabbaths thus publicly kept, are a sign unto the people of God,
both to distinguish betwixt them, and the heathen, that know not God, and to
represent in some sort the Sabbath, that shall afterward be kept in heaven
from month to month, and from week to week for ever: Esa. 66.23.
when the Saints of God shall rest from all labor and sorrow, world without
end. That even hereby, they may be brought to some comfortable meditation of
their happiness to come, if it be some comfort to rest from toiling for one
day, and to be recreated with Gods sweet promises preached unto us, and singing
of Psalms, and praises: oh what a comfort may we think it will be, when as
we shall rest for ever, and be in possession of those joys, which are here
promised, in the company of the holy Angels delighting our selves with singing
Alleluiah, continually.

To remember the Sabbath.
The second member of the duty here enjoined is to remember, and to be
mindful of this sanctification. And this remembrance must be first general
all the days of the week, when we bargain, covenant, and undertake any
business afterward to be done, we must not as hap hazard promise to do
this, or that, without any respect of the time, but we must call to mind,
whether our intended time will not fall upon the Lords day, least we be
constrained by virtue of our covenant, sometime to pay a sum of money, to
take this or that journey, to meet upon this, or that worldly occasion upon the
Sabbath day.

Math. 27 62.
Again, we must make a special remembrance hereof upon the day going before,
for this was wont to be called, the day of preparation unto the Sabbath, and it
has been an ancient custom amongst Christians upon the Saturday after dinner
to abstain from working, and to dispose themselves toward the Sunday.

Exodus 19.
Neither was this preparation without cause, if it were made aright by prayer,
reading, meditation, and confession of sins, that they might be cleansed
therefrom: seeing that our infirmities, and fleshlinesse does make us unfit for
these spiritual and heavenly duties, we are made unholy by the sins of the
week, and so full of filthy blemishes, that we had need to wash and to purge,
before we come into the presence of so holy, and glorious a God in the assembly
of his people. Even as the Israelites were commanded to wash, and to sanctify
themselves before the day of the Lords coming down amongst them upon the
mount, so should we remember, that to morrow is the day, wherein the Lord has
appointed to come down amongst us, in the place of his worship, and therefore
to purge our hearts from malice, envy, anger, and all wickedness, and to
beseech the Lord for his grace, and direction both to speaker, and hearers,
that we may keep holyday to the glory of his name.

Esa 58.
Lastly, we must also remember, and keep the Sabbath in mind, when it is past,
viz. by thinking upon the holiness, which we then made show of, in appearing,
humbling our selves before, and hearkening unto the Lord, as though we were
scholars of his school, that we may be ashamed to walk otherwise the days
of the week following, and by thinking upon the instructions delivered unto
us, that we may at the least practice them in special more carefully then
before. For through the want of this remembrance, it comes to pass that even
they, which are holy upon the Sunday, are wicked all the days of the week
besides, that our Sabbath-keeping is like the Jews fasting, or hanging of the
head, like a bul-rush for a day, which the Lord does greatly disdain.

keep holy a Sabbath, that is, a cessation, a rest: for this is so inseparably
joined unto the time, which is to be kept holy, as that, take away rest, and
you take away the holy day, for the holy day is a Sabbath, a rest. Therefore,
Leuit. 23.
whereas there were many festival times appointed in the Mosaicall Law, the
feast of the Passover, of Pentecost, of the gathering of fruits, etc. they
were all called by the name of Sabbaths.

Esa. 1.16. What we must rest from upon the Sabbath.
Now the Sabbath, or rest, which we must keep, is first, and chiefly from
sin, and thus our life should be a continual Sabbath, according to that
divine rule. Cease to do evil learn to do well, seek judgment, and
relieve the oppressed: but principally upon the Lords day, when he is most to
be honored hereby. But alas, how foulely is this rest abused in these
miserable times, no day in the week being a day of such licentiousnes as this,
wherein, as though hell it self were broken loose, some spend their time, and
money, and wits in the alehouse, drinking and swilling like drunken swine, some
waste that which they have gotten with hard labor, in carding and dicing.

Leuit. 2.3.
Secondly, this rest must be from ordinary (not absolutely necessary labor,
which is further expressed in the words following; In it thou shall do no
manner of wo^ke: and in another place speaking of this time, he says: There
shall be no work done therein, it is the Sabbath of the Lord in all your
dwellings: this being added as a reason, why no work might be done, because it
is the Sabbath of the Lord, as if he should have said, ye cannot keep a
Sabbath, unless ye cease from working.

(...) ad Elpid.
Thirdly, we are to cease from works of special times, as plowing, sowing,
reaping, etc. Constantine in his Epistle to Elpidi^s, wills, that all should
rest upon the Sabbath day, only he speaks of dangerous weather at some
time, yea, often in the time of planting, and graffing, and sowing, through
which experience taught, that their fruit perished, and was lost, in which case
he gives liberty to these businesses, rather then that the good gifts of God
should be lost.

Anno 27. Hen. 6
Others long agone provided, that no Faires or Markets, should be kept upon the
Sabbath day, as in the time of Henry the sixth here in England, and yet before
that, even before the Conquest, Con^ VVinch.
in the time of Canutus it was ordained, that Faires and Markets, and worldly
works should cease upon that day: and Charles the great commanded his
Visitors, that all worldly businesses should cease, whether it were sowing time
or planting, Conc. Dingulo-sunens. Can. 13.
or cutting of vines, etc. And in an old Council it was decreed, That if any
should work his beast upon the Lords day, it should be forfeited to the King.

Six days shall thou do all that thou have to do. Shopkeepers ought not
therefore to follow their trades of selling, Millers of grinding, etc. and if
there be any else of the like nature, they must rest from the works of their
callings at this time of rest. Likewise it is fit that Bayliffes, and
Apparitors should on this day forbear serving their Processes, according to
the decree of Leo, and Anthemius, who ordained, That if they should execute
these offices upon the Lords day, they should be proscribed, that is, forfeit
all their goods.

Esa. 58.13.




Quest. 74. Is there any set day under the new Testament, thus to be sanctified
and kept holy?

Answ. Yes: the day which is commonly called Sunday, but in the Scripture the
Lords day, or the first day of the week, is thus to be kept without
alteration, to the end of the world.

Explan We enter now upon one of the most controuersall questions of these
times, wherein I will notwithstanding plainly proceed, as is fittest for this
Treatise, making Gods Word my only rule of direction to set down the truth
herein, as by his grace I shall be enabled.

Reasons of the Sabbath under the Gospel.
First then, I say, that we under the new Testament, are tied to the observation
of a Sabbath, as well as the Jews were of old, and by as great authority.

Romans 5.
And this appears, first from the time of the Institution of the Sabbath,
which was, when man lived in Paradise, immediately after his creation, when he
was free from sin, when he had the substance of true holiness, and needed
no figuring Ceremony for his comfort, his present estate being all
comfortable. For if a Sabbath was to be observed in Paradise, and came not
first in with any ceremonies, which were to have an end at Christ's coming in
the flesh: how can it enter into any man to think, that this observation
should cease, as they did, at this his coming? And not rather after a new sort
be revived under this second Adam, to the likeness of that it was in the time
of the first Adam? For, by the second Adam, who is Christ, we are restored to
that estate; which we lost in the first Adam, and why then should it differ by
the cessation of the Sabbath? Some think that the words of Moses Genes. 2.3.
were set down there by way of anticipation, and not to be meant of that
beginning of times, but of succeeding times afterward about the giving of the
law. But this lies upon them to prove. In the mean time we are in good
possession of this argument.

One jot or title of the Law shall not fail, Math. 5.20.
though heaven and earth perish. Now if this law be moral, as the ranging of
it does imply, and all other moral Laws be of force, to bind to the
obedience thereof, as before Christ's coming, what rashness is it in any to
deny the like force unto this law.



Pray that your flight be not in the W^nter, Mat. 24.20.
nor on the Sabbath day. That which is here spoken has relation to the times
afterward to ensue (for the destruction of Jerusalem was thirty six years
after Christ's suffering) therefore even then also there was a Sabbath, the
breach of which would be some addition of grief unto the people, as also if
they should be constreined to fly in the wet, and cold of winter. If any
shall rather take these words, as spoken of the Jews sabbath, the necessary
breach whereof was most grievous unto them, I will not much contend hereabout.
Let the former reasons then suffice.

2. Our Sabbath ^ata^ne.
Secondly, I say further, that our Sabbath is not uncertain, but precisely
determined and set down, as theirs was, viz. the Lords day, or first day of
the week, which is the day of Christ his resurrection from the dead. For he
arose the third day after that he was crucified upon the Friday (which was
their preparation to the Sabbath) and had lien in the grave all the Sabbath day.

The reasons that serve to confirm this are diverse.

Acts, where the Evangelist tells, that after their coming to Troas, they
abode there seven days, and upon the seventh, which was the first day of the
week, the Disciples being come together to break bread, that is, Act. 20.7.
to the holy Communion, Paul preached unto them. Which does plainly show, that
the Jews Sabbath was now antiquated, and done away, and that this was the
Christians Sabbath, otherwise they would not have let pass the day before, as
they did.

1. Cor. 16.1.
Another place is in the Epistle to the Corinthians, where the Apostle
prescribes unto them a rule of gathering for the poor every first day of the
week, when they were come together, which he also says, that he had
established amongst the Galatians, and why I pray you upon the first day of the
week, and not upon the Jews Sabbath? None other reason I suppose can be
rendered, but that this Sabbath was at an end, and in stead hereof the
Christians had another, viz. the first day of the week, wherein they made
their meetings.

Revel 1.10.
A third place is in the Revelation, where it is said, that John was in the I Will
of Patmos upon the Lords day ravished in the spirit. Now what means this,
that he calls it the Lords day, unless a day appointed by the Lord? For
hence is the Passover called the Lords Passover, the Communion the Lords
Supper, the bread the Lords body, because he did appoint all these in his
Church. Why is he noted to be ravished then in the spirit, unless that being
in holy meditations, as was the special manner of the Church, now forty
years since Christ crucified, he was rewarded by the Lord with this
wonderful illumination in most hidden mysteries? From whence may be framed
this unanswerable argument:

That day, which by the inspired Apostle, is called the Lords day, and was
appointed by the Apostle, taught through revelation, to be kept by holy
meetings in the Churches of Christians, not once or twice, but every time, that
it came, is certainly the Christians Sabbath: but such is the first day of
every week. Therefore not any other, but this day is the Sabbath of Christians

The force of this reason stands in the second part, which is most firmly
grounded, according to every branch.

Apoc. 1.10. Act 20.7.
1. That it is called the Lords day. 2. That it was appointed for holy meetings,
to preach and hear, etc. 3. Not in some one Church, but generally in the
Churches of Christians, at Troas, Galatia, Corinth, etc. 4 Not in some week
only, but every week.

Exodus 20.10.
The second reason is taken from places of Scripture, which prove the same by
consequence; as that in Exodus, where the Commandment being given, this is
added as a reason. The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, and the
Lord rested the seventh day.

Math 12.8.
A second place is that in Matthew. The son of man is even Lord of the Sabbath
A third place is in John: All men should honor the Son, John 5.23.
even as they honor the Father.

The reason may be framed thus. If the same reason grounded upon Gods word, be
as well for the first day of the week, as it was once for the Sabbath of the
Jews, then we are as certainly tied to the observation of this day, as they
were for their Sabbath: but there is the same reason. Therefore we are
certainly tied unto this day.

The first part of this argument is plain, for the same reason is of the same
force, the second part appears by the places noted in the margent. The maine
reason of the Sabbath of the Jews is, because it was the Sabbath of the Lord,
and therefore his people must necessarily do him this honor, that there might
be a conformity betwixt God and his people: and in like manner, our Sabbath is
the Sabbath of the Lord Christ, when he had finished the work of our
redemption: for which cause he also gives the same name; The Son of man is
even Lord of the Sabbath: As if in more words he should say: When God the
Father had once ended the making of the world, he rested and published himself
to be the Lord of that rest, and dedicated it unto himself, giving it the name
of the Sabbath of the Lord: In like manner, when I shall have finished the
work of man's redemption, I will rest, and will have the day of my rest
dedicated unto my self, for which cause, I say, that the Son of man is even
Lord of the Sabbath also, it shall be called (...), The Lords day.

And thus shall the will of the Father be fulfilled, which is, that as they
honored the Father, in keeping the Sabbath, betwixt the creation and
redemption; so they should honor the Son, in keeping the Sabbath, betwixt the
redemption and consummation of the world.

Matthew 28.
A third reason may be drawn from the uniform practice of the Church, even
from the time of man's redemption unto this day. Christ himself first began it
when he arose early in the morning upon this day, and thenceforth ever observed
it, so long as he continued upon the earth. John 20.19.
When the Disciples were gathered together for fear of the Jews, the doors
being shut, he came and stood in the midst of them upon that day. Again,
Verse 26.
when incredulous Thomas was amongst them, he came and showed his hands, side,
and feet upon that day, and immediately the Evangelist subioyneth. And as for
the practice of the Apostles herein, it is so plain, as that it were great
impudency to deny it.

Again, for the practice of those that lived next unto them, whether Greeks or
Latins, they followed the same order. Read for this Ignatius, in his Epistle
to the Magnesians, Iustie Martyr in Apologeticis. Ireneus in his fourth book.
chap. 19.20. Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 4. chap 23. Origin. Hom. 3. in Exodus
Cyrill in Johan. Tertul. de Idolat. Ieronym. in vita Paulae. Ambros. sermon. 62.
August. in Johan. Gregor lib 11. epist. 3. etc

Lastly, for the Churches of these times since, and at this present, whether
Protestant or Popish, of what Country soever, all consent for the observation
of this day, though in opinion there be some difference about it; some
grounding it upon Gods Ordinance, according to that which has been said, as
Beza, Iunius, Piscator, Bollocke, Hooper Fulke, and the book of Homilies, yea,
and some Papists also, as S^^tas, Panormitanus, Syluester, Felicius, and the
Schoolmen: some upon tradition only, as the Rhemists Testament, Tollet and
Bellarmine. Whence we may reason thus: That day which the Lord Christ has
sanctified by his resurrection, wherein he came together with his Disciples to
instruct and to confirm them, wherein all Christian Churches of all Ages have
made their Assemblies, is certainly the Sabbath of the Christians: but such is
the first day of the week. Therefore certainly our Sabbath.

Anno 1583. whilst they were beholding the Beare-baitings in Parish-garden,
upon this day, the scaffold burst down suddenly, and eight persons were slain
outright, and many more hurt and maimed.

August de temp. sermon 25^. Notable ^hi^gs upon this day. N^^^m. 154.
Christ arose upon this day, the elements were framed, the world begun, the
Angels created, and Manna began first to fall upon this day, the Israelites
passed through the red sea, Christ was baptized, turned water into wine, fed
five thousand with a few loaves upon this day, and upon it we hope, Wolph.
Cron. lib. 2. cap. 1.
that he shall come to Judgment, says Augustine. Upon this day Christ was
borne, Aaron and his sons consecrated, etc. Upon this day Christ appeared at
sundry times after his resurrection, the holy Ghost descended upon the
Disciples, and John was enlightened.

1. Cor 2 14.
A sixth argument may be drawn from the approbation and consent of all the best
men, who are spiritual, and most able to discern the things of God; and the
opposition of godless and most evil men, who are led like brute beasts, who
are natural, and perceive not the things of God. For the best men have ever
since Christ's resurrection, observed, and kept this day with all due reverence,
only the profane and licentious have cast away all conscience hereof. Whence
we may reason thus: That which is embraced, and held by all godly learned men:
but oppugned by the ungodly, as not standing with their corruption, is
certainly the truth: but such is this doctrine of the first day of the week to
be the Sabbath Therefore most certainly true. For the first part of this
argument, wherein the strength consists; and first, that, that is the truth,
which is held by the godly with one consent: our Savior tells them, To you
it is given, to know the secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven. And, if any man
shall do his will, he shall know the doctrine, Matthew 13.11. John 7 17. 1. Cor.
3.19.
whether it be of God or no. And on the other side, The wisdom of this world
is foolishness before God: and they, which are after the flesh do savor the
things of the flesh: with many like places: from whence it follows, that the
constant consent of all godly men, is no small argument of the truth, and
contrariwise of the wicked. And thus ye see, upon most firm grounds, that
there is not only a Sabbath to be observed under the new Testament; but the
Sabbath, the first day of the week, which the Lord has appointed. Which
meets with sundry fantastical opinions.

Errors touching the Sabbath Romans 7.
First, of the Anabaptists in Germany, and the Familists in England, which hold,
that all days are now alike, and none more a Sabbath then another: neither
does it any whit help them, that they allege, We are free from the Law, even
as a woman, when her husband is dead, from the law of her husband: for by the
Law here, is meant the ceremonial Law, the heavy yoke of which, Christ took
from our shoulders, and if in any other place freedom from the law be spoken
of it is either meant of the Ceremonial and Judicial, or of the rigor of the
Moral Law, exacting perfect obedience in every point, or else threatening
condemnation. If they shall say; Col 2.16.
Let no man condemn you in respect of a Sabbath, etc. and that the Apostle
says reprehensiuely; Ye observe days, and times, and months, and years*
neither does this make for them, seeing that the first place speaks of feasts
abrogated, Gal 4.10.
and done away only, the other of times used to be observed by the Gentiles.

Secondly, it appears to be an error which is held by the Jews, by Ebion,
and Corinthus, and the Sabbatary Christians, viz. that the old Sabbath is still
to be kept, as before Christ his coming, for the abrogation of which, these
places are most plain, Col. 2.16. 1. Cor. 16.1. Acts 20. etc.

Thirdly, they also err, that yield a Sabbath now, but hold it uncertain,
whether it be the seventh, eighth, or tenth.

Fourthly, they which ho d this day, but with all, that it may be changed upon
the consent of Churches, sufficient cause concurring, which I take it, is
suppositus impossibilium, a surmise of things impossible. Lastly, they which
hold the same day, but merely upon the ground of tradition, as the Papists, to
make their other fond, and corrupt traditions in the more request.

3 To rest upon the Lords day.
3. Thirdly, I say, that this day is not remisly to be kept by us under the new
Testament, although it may rightly be said, that the strict resting enjoined
the Jews, does cease, viz. as figuring our Christ his resting in heaven after
the work of our redemption finished, according to that Scripture; He that has
entered into his rest, Heb 4.10.
has rested from his own works, as God did from his. Yet considering, that
there is a rest also for Christians, Heb. 4.9.
as is contained in the same place; There remains therefore a rest unto the
people of God; it were great temeritie, to deny a day of resting, now from
servile work, holding that the Lords day is rightly kept, by coming together
to public duties, though the times of vacation be spent in following worldly
affairs. For as Gods resting upon the Sabbath did prefigure Christ's resting
upon his day, so there is a rest to come unto all Christ's members in heaven,
which is figured out by our resting upon the Lords day: to the apprehending of
which sweet, and most joyful rest, we are more sensibly quickened, by tasting
the sweet of resting here (after six days painful labor) upon the Lords day.

Acts 15 ^1.
Moreover, it is necessary, that we cease from worldly affairs, that we may
be more profitably employed about heavenly, which without doubt, was one end of
resting upon the Sabbath of old: for they attended then upon Gods public
service every Sabbath day, seeing it is said, that Moses is read in the
Synagogues every Sabbath day. They must therefore rest, that they might labor,
rest temporally, and labor spiritually, men being unfit to do both these
labors to the best advantage the same day, especially the spiritual, if there
be an incombrance of the corporal, we being fitted unto the one by nature,
but to the other not only not fitted, but most unapt unto it by nature, so
that we had need to be bowed, and bent by meditation, and prayer before the
public meetings, and to be confirmed, and made tenacious of the things which
we have been taught, by recounting them after these meetings. And to do thus
we have plain direction given us in the holy Scriptures; Eccles. 4.17.
Take heed unto thy feet (says the Wise man) when thou entrest into the house
of the Lord, and be more near to hear, then to give a sacrifice of fools;
this is for preparation before: and after the publishing of the law; Take heed
(says Moses) that ye do, Deuteronomy. 5.32. Deuteronomy. 6 6.
as the Lord your God has commanded. And again; These words which I command
thee this day shall be in thine heart; this is for recounting of the word
again after. And that royal Prophet professes according to this direction, I
have hid thy word in mine heart, Psalm. 119 ^^.
that J might not sin against thee. Notable is the admonition of Chrysostom,
to this purpose; ye ought not, In Mat. cap. 1. Hom. 5.
when ye go from the congregation, to be entangled presently with businesses
contrary to this study, but to go home, and there to call together your wife
and children, to the rehearsing of those things which have been spoken, and
when ye have more deeply and thoroughly ingraffed them in your minds,
afterward to go about the necessaries of this life. For if going out of the
Bath, thou do avoid public meetings, lest the benefit of bathing be turned
into a greater hurt, much more ought thou to use this care, when thou
come from public meetings. Alas, most men have so much business upon the
week days, and are so dull in respect of heavenly learning, as that (unless
they use great care, and labor hard to attain spiritual knowledge, and grace
upon this day) they are like to be very slender proficients, and trewant-like
Scholars in Gods school; yea, even such (that I may use the Apostles phrase)
as had need to be taught the first rudiments, when by reason of the time they
might have been Heb. 5.11.
If there be a Fair, or a Market upon a day, will he that has need of stuff
or provision (the buying whereof, will take up his time all that day) let any
more time, then he must needs, from buying, and providing to carry home his
commodities? or will he, that is desirous to profit in the skill of Music,
Dancing, Writing, Arithmetic, etc. for the learning of which, he sets apart
in a week weekly some time, will he I say, loose any time, when his Master
comes to teach him, but apply himself hard to these exercises? and how much
more then should we seek to improve this one Market, or Faire-day of our
souls in the week, this one Lords day, wherein the preacher is appointed to
come, and teach us in the sweetest and most delighting noble skill of divinity,
unto the greatest advantage, gain, and storing of our souls with heavenly
necessaries? It were needful therefore, besides the public meetings, and
meditating, and conferring upon that, which has been taught, that men should
read the holy Scriptures, endeavoring to remember, and to understand them by
such helps, as are now most plentiful, that they may not be strangers in
Gods book, but make the histories, and divine instructions here set down so
familiar unto them, as that upon any occasion, they may be able for their
comfort, to turn to such places as they need: and moreover, if they would
read and study some good prayers, that they might be well furnished this way,
according to their several necessities, upon the way, and in the fields (as
Isaac is said to go out to meditate, and to pray in the fields) and in the
night season, upon sea, or upon land: what wonderful great comfort should men
have, and how much more should they grace, and walk worthy their holy, and
Christian profession, than now they do, or can do through the mispending of
the Lords day, in idleness, or vanity, or which is worse, in running to all
manner of excess of riot?

Lastly, it is a base thing upon so glorious a day, as the Lords day to put our
hands to worldly businesses, any more then necessity inforceth, for so we
should mingle things high and low, divine and humane, earthly and heavenly, and
so make a more unpleasing linsy-woolsy, then was forbidden by the Lord, under
the ceremonial Law, We should do like the heathen, that knew not God, who
had their dies festi, profesti, and intercisi, holy days, holy day eeues, and
mixed holy days, serving partly for the worship of their Gods, and partly for
labor in the works of their calling.

Phil. 3.8.
The true God would never allow this in any of his holy days, he will not be
content to part stakes with us, and therefore you shall find every of his holy
days guarded with this clause; Thou shall do no servile work therein. Will a
man upon a plentiful feast day, go from dinner to seek for scraps in the
poores basket? having had plenty of the gold of Ophir powered out into his
lap, go seek for pinnes, or nails in the dust? having sought precious
stones of inestimable worth, and the time of this seeking still continuing,
will he attend upon the gathering up of dung? But even thus does he, that
upon the Lords day puts his hand to worldly business for gain, seeing all
these things are but as dross and dong, in regard of the excellent knowledge
of Christ: Psalm. 19.
and the word of God is more precious than fine gold, sweeter also, than the
honey and the honey comb.

Did we but consider, the double occasion of meditation under the new
Testament, both of the creation, and redemption of man, whereas they had but a
single of the creation under the old: the bond of thankfulness now enlarged, a
greater measure of the Spirit now given, and that implacably-malicious enemy of
man, the devil now more enraged, knowing that his time is but short, we would
be so far from making this day a time of riot, excess and outrage, that
we would rather (as far as our weak nature will bear) sequester our selves
unto godly and spiritual exercises, whereby we may be fenced against the
devil, walk worthy of the rich grace of the Spirit, and answer the
incomparable beneficence of the Lord in Jesus Christ by due thanksgiving.

The Sabbath begins when.
And here again is occasion offered of diverse questions, to the further opening
of the doctrine of our Sabbath. As first, When does the Sabbath under the new
Testament begin, and end.

Mary was gone from the Sepulcher, which was at the dawning of the day: so that
as the argument was good for the beginning of the old Sabbath, (the Lord
rested, when the evening and morning of the sixth day were at an end, therefore
then must begin the rest of that Sabbath), so it is good also for the beginning
of our Sabbath, Christ having finished the work of our redemption, arose again
early in the morning, therefore it seems, early in the morning must we begin
the rest of our Sabbath. So may we rightly hold, that it has again been
turned from evening to evening, to be from morning to morning, to set forth
man's rising through Christ from darkness to light by grace, John 19.
according to that of John; He is the true light, that lighteneth every one,
which comes into the world.

The Sabbath to be kept how.
But how is the Sabbath comprehending both day, and night to be kept?

Answer. Not as some heretics, of whom Origin writes, by remaining in that
position of body, wherein we are taken at the approach of the Sabbath, nor yet
as the Essees, a strict sect amongst the Jews, by abstaining from doing the
necessary businesses of nature: as Matthew Paris writes of a Jew, that would
not be drawn out of a noisome Privy upon their Sabbath. But look what time
thou art wont to rise about thy worldly business, which thou art most desirous
to set forward; at the same arise by prayer, and heavenly meditations, and
loose no convenient time, till thou betakest thy self again to thy rest at
night; and if any occasion be offered, for the furtherance of thy souls
health, persevere herein: yet with entermingling of convenient relaxations of
mind and body, lest thou ouer-whelme Nature by ouer-strict intentions. And
(which is the chief end of this discourse, about the beginning of our Sabbath)
presume not, before a whole day of rest be complete, to put thy hand to thy
worldly businesses, as some do, going forth with their carts toward Faires,
or Markets, or in carrying carriages, some about one work, and some about
another, unless in the cases before allowed for necessity.

Acts 1.12.
We read in the Scripture of a Sabbath days journey, by which it should seem,
that it is not altogether unlawful to travel then, what is to be said of this?

It cannot be denied, Answ. A Sabbath days journey.
but that the holy Ghost speaks of such a journey indeed: yet Ierom imputes
it to the Rabbis, as an invention of their; and Joseph de bell Jud. lib. 7.
cap. 24. This river runs betwixt Archas and Raphaneas, two cities of the
kingdom of Agrippa. This was showed unto Titus in his return from Jerusalem,
and if it were true, it is worthy to be showed al men, as being a miraculous
teaching of rest upon that day from travel, seeing a River did rest from
running according to the ordinary course.
Josephus writes a strange story of a River, called Fluuius Sabbaticus, which
was wont to run full all the six days, but when the seventh came, the water
abated, that a man might see the bottom of the river, it ceasing then from
running. But Theophilact brings Origin for his author, that the Sabbath days
journey had the beginning then, when the Tabernacle was placed in the midst,
and the Israelites tents far off round about, which, as he says, was a
thousand paces, from whence they must needs come to the Tabernacle upon the
Sabbath, and this continuing for the space of forty year, might well give
occasion of this phrase, a Sabbath days journey. So that it may be granted, as
certain, that there was such a journey allowed by the Lord, but the doubt
still remains, how far this journey extended. Calvin and the Latin
Interpreters hold, that it was two miles, and that by comparing this place of
the Acts, with that in Luke, Luke 24.^0. John 11.18.
where it is said, that he blessed his Disciples in Bethany, and ascended
thence, which Bethany is from Jerusalem 15. furlongs, two little mils.
Tremelius the Syriacke interpreter says, that it was but seven furlongs, and
so translateth it, and affirms, that the Rabbis with wonderful consent, do
all agree herein: for they count it 2000 paces, according to their Talmud, but
these are ordinary paces, but half so great as Geometrical paces, so that
they make but 1000. Geometrical paces, which are but a mile.

2. Kings 4.23.
But the matter still resting in the distance of Bethany from Jerusalem, which
was on the further side of the mount, and 15. furlongs off, it must be
concluded, that this is the Sabbath days journey there meant Neither does it
hinder, that Josephus writes of the mountain being distant from Jerusalem but
five furlongs, or since but 500. paces, or more lately, that Bethany is from
Jerusalem three miles: for the mountain is great and large, and therefore some
part might well be so nigh, and since Jerusalem reedified, it being set upon
other ground including Golgotha, where Christ was crucified, which was then
without the gates of the city, Bethany might well be three miles off.
Howsoever we are to hold, that a Sabbath days journey is about the businesses
of the Sabbath, about which we are not always tied to the same distance of
places, but may travail, as occasion serves for our greater comfort, or the
good of the Church, so that lawful order be not broken, as the Shunamites
Husband answered her when she would have her Ass sadled to go to the man of
God; wherefore will thou go to day, seeing it is neither new Moon, nor
Sabbath? By which is intimated, that upon Sabbath days she was wont, if the
case did so require to ride unto him. For conclusion then of this point, let
these rules be observed.



walking to preach, to the wearying of man, or beast, Amos 8.
when the journey might we l have been taken the day before: or by traveling
in like manner to hear, when as no famine of the word constrains hereunto.

3. To travail to our ordinary, and appointed place of



Exodus 16.
Ans. No verily, whether thou be rich, or poor, the same law of God binds
all alike: for let the poor now work, and he can have no hope of benefit
hereby, as those of the people of Israel, that went forth to gather Manna upon
the Sabbath, found none, Hag. 1.6.
and they that neglected the building of the Lords Temple earned wages, but put
it in a broken bag: so they, which neglecting Gods ordinance, shall follow
their worldly works, shall get nothing by so doing, it is not man's labor, Psalm.
127.
but Gods blessing, that makes our endeavors effectual, of this blessing
there can be no hope, when his Law is broken.

Object. Sol.
If it be said, the Lord will have mercy, and not sacrifice?

I answer, this is in case of necessity not to be avoided, he means not,
that if thou be poor, he had rather thou should work upon his Sabbaths,
but abstain, serve him faithfully, and he will stir thee up mercy for thy
relief.

Quest. 75. Are we bound to do the holy duties of Gods service all this time
without ceasing?

Answ. No, for we may refresh our selves with eating, and drinking, singing and
music and other honest delights, whereby the mind is cheared up, and joy and
gladness befitting the Lords holy day expressed.

Hos. 2.11.
Explan. Although we teach a strict keeping of the Sabbath under the new
Testament, yet it is not so to be understood, as though we were bound upon
this day, to do nothing but spiritual duties all the day long; for in respect
that we have flesh, as well as Spirit, that would be wearisome to us, and would
turn the Lords day, which is for a delight, into a heavy burden. I say
therefore, that we have liberty to refresh our selves with such things, as
cheer the outward man, and express joy befitting the Lords holy day. For
every holy day of the Lord is a festival, and joyful day for outward joy and
delight, which is expressed by the Prophet Hosea saying; I will cause all her
mirth to cease, her feast days, her new Moons, and her Sabbaths. When he
threatens judgments against the land. Nehem. 8.9.10.
And Nehemiah inuiteth the people to eat of the fat, and drink the sweet;
reproouing them when they began to weep, because it was an holy day of the
Lord. Whence it appears plainly, that mirth and joy even external do well
become the holy day of the Lord, neither were the people of Israel ever
reproved for this, but that through their covetous minds, they accounted the
Sabbath a burden, and thought long to have it gone, that their servants might
go to their labor, and they themselves to their markets: for in this respect
they are threatened by the Prophet Amos, Amos 8 5.
Hear ye this, that swallow up the poor, and say, when will the new Moon be
gone, that we may sell corn, and the Sabbath, that we may sell wheat, etc.
And some of them not staying the ending of the Sabbaths, trod Wine presses, and
laded, and carried out burdens, against which Nehemiah provides, being
grieved hereat, Nehem. 13.15.
as at a great abomination. Yet let no man understand this so, as though it
were hereby tolerated to spend this day in outward, and vain bodily pastimes,
for for then how shall we improve it to the best advantage of our souls, as
has been already showed, we had need, and ought to do: but so far forth we
may use bodily delight, as it does not hinder, but further the hallowing of
this day, as it does not express an heathenish feast, such as were the old
Bacchanalia, but sets forth a divine feast, kept in the honor of the Lord
Jesus.

1. Let no man therefore be eating and drinking, and making merry, when the
public service of God calls for him, Phil. 3 ^7.
for that were truly to make a man's belly his God, as the Apostle speaks,
seeing he attends upon that, when he should attend upon God in his service.

2. Let no man so affect outward pleasure, as that he should forget the chief
pleasure, and comfort of the soul, by neglecting to prepare to Gods worship
before, or to meditate, that it may sink, and take rooting in his mind after.

3. Let every man, as he is able, exercise himself in private in reading, and
studying the holy Scriptures and prayers with other helps to strengthen the
inner man in grace, and knowledge.

4. Shun and avoid all obscene and filthy pleasures, which are rather
corrupting, then hallowing, and all unlawful gaming, or over laborious
exercises, which in the end do rather trouble, and dull the Spirits, then
quicken, and cheer the^ up. Let there be no frequenting of Alehouses or
Tauerns unto riot, no chambring and wantonness, or in a word, let there be no
mirth, but what becomes sober, temperate, and chaste minds fearing God, and
reuerencing his ordinances. And that licentious persons may be the rather
restrained from their vain pleasures upon this day, the Lord has apparently
executed judgment upon diverse for contempt of this day.

Quest. 76. Is this all that we are bound unto, to keep the Sabbath our
selves, in ceasing from labor, and doing the duties thereof?

Answ. No, but whosoever has son, or daughter, man-seruant, or maid,
cattle, or stranger within his gates, is alike bound to provide, that all, as
much as in him lies, observe this day in their kind, both man and beast.

Genesis 17.
Explan. The Lord, the author of this commandment, as in giving other laws he
speaks not unto inferiors, and the governed, but unto the governors, as in
the law of circumcision he commands all unto Abraham, both for the act to be
done, the time, and manner; in the law of the Passover he commands all unto
masters of families, Exodus 12.21.
and Moses opens the matter unto the elders only: so in commanding the
observation of the Sabbath, he lays all upon the governors, saying; Thou,
thy son, thy daughter, thy man-seruant, thy maid, thy cattle and stranger
that is within thy gates.

Governors charged with children and servants.
And not without just cause, because that, 1. Parents and Masters of families
are in Gods stead to their children and servants, and have his titles upon
them, which, for what else is it, but only to remember them so to bring up
those, that are under them in all godliness, and holiness, as if God himself
did more particularly take upon him the training up, and nurturing of them?



Ephesians. 2.2
now what a corasiue must it needs be to the heart of any kinde-hearted father,
or mother, to consider that they have bred children to be firebrarnds of hell?
and what a care then must this needs work in them, to help them to be
delivered here-from? and the chiefest ordinary way unto this, is to bring them
to the Sanctuary upon the Sabbath, to urge them, and help them by prayer,
examinations, and instructions to the fruitful observation hereof.

4. Because they cannot look for a blessing upon those things about which they
employ their servants and children, unless they be Jacobs, or Joseph's, godly
and righteous, which none are without the conscionable observation of the
Sabbath. Josh. 24.15.
Therefore the example of Joshua is to be followed by all masters of families,
do not only say, I, but I and my household will serve the Lord, and keep his
holy Sabbaths: seek that praise before God, which was given unto Abraham. I
know Abraham, Gen 18.19. 1. Sam. 1.
says the Lord, that he will command his to walk in my ways. With ^lcanah,
and Hannah bring Samuel to the Temple, whilst he is young, that he may be a
servant unto the Lord all the days of his life. With Timothies grandmother,
1. Tim 3 15.
breed in him thus knowledge of the Scriptures from a child.

Ezech. 3.17.
Now howsoever the charge of inferiors lies upon the superiors, yet this will
not excuse the inferiors, if they shall neglect this holy day: but as the Lord
tells Ezechiel, when he had made him a watchman over Israel, if thou admonish
them not, and the enemy comes, they shall die in their sins, but their
blood will I require at thine hands: so they shall die in their sins, and
feel the smart of Gods eternal wrath in the world to come. Even as it is said
of all persons uncircumcised, or that keep not the Passover, they shall be cut
off from amongst the people, be they masters, or servants, children grown up,
or parents, howsoever the Lord would have slain Moses, because his son
Gershom was not circumcised. Wherefore let children, and servants, as they love
their own welfare, Exodus 4.25.
be as forward to observe the Lords holy days, as their governors to command
them, as diligent about their private Christian exercises, as they to perform
them, and as studious to satisfy them in holy endeavors, as they to help
them herein.

Quest. 77. Does the Lord only take care for our right spending of this day,
and leave us to our selves upon the six days?

Answ. No doubtless, but it is his will, and command also, that we should upon
the six days abstain from idleness, and diligently labor in the works of
our callings.

Explan. Before we come to the explanation of this; by cattle, The charge
concerning the six days.
whose rest is also commanded, are meant their Camels, their Oxen, their Asses,
etc. whose strength, and labor they used about their carriages, treading out
their corn, and works of husbandry. Now the Lord out of his mercy, as he would
not have the poor servant, and bondslaue to by torn, and worn out with sore
labor under the hands of unmerciful masters: so would he not have the poor
dumb creatures, and therefore elsewhere explaining further this commandment,
he says, that thy servants and cattle may rest, as well as thou. Moreover,
the cattle could not labor, but men must be in some sort assistant unto them,
and so neglect the Sabbath. The stranger was a people not coming of the stock
of Israel, but of some other, either following them out of Egypt, or taken, and
bought out of other countries, whom they had for slaves perpetually, as the
Gibeonites. Now the Lord would not have there to do any work upon the Sabbath
day, Josh. 9.23.
though borne without the covenant, and living without circumcision, without
passover, without sacrifice, without God in the world: partly, that through
being favored, they might come to affect the true religion, the fountain of
this their sweet rest, and partly, that being in the bosom of the Church,
there might be an outward uniformity of al in the reuerencing of this holy
day, which shows, that they which live in the same Nation, and under the same
government, are to be compelled to an outward conformity of religion, though
the heart can only be turned by the Lord; and whatsoever thy servant be
inwardly, thou must cause him to be conformable to all good orders outwardly,
but this extends not to such, as come strangerwise unto thee, over whom thou
have none authority. To return now to the proper question. Some hold, that the
Lord does only remit his own right, in saying: six days shall thou labor,
etc. because all the days of the week are his, otherwise the people of God
had not done well, in setting apart some of the six days unto holy exercises,
Working upon six days commanded here.
upon any occasion whatsoever. But they are deceived, and their ground is too
weak: for in every commandment we are not only enjoined the duty, right,
and free keeping of the Sabbath, it helps not a little to spend the six days
well about the works of our callings: partly, for that our worldly businesses
being done, we are the freer from any intanglement hereby, therefore he says;
Thou shall labor and do all that thou have to do. Partly for that being
weary of laboring, the rest of the Sabbath will be the more sweet and pleasant
unto us, according to that of the Prophet: If thou call the Sabbath a delight:
Esa 58 13.
and partly for that the Lord of his goodness, will the rather sanctify us, and
make us fit to sanctify a Sabbath, when as we diligently do the works of our
callings upon the six days, according to that comfortable saying of John; Of
his fullness we have all received, and grace, ^oh. 1.16.
for grace: having the grace of faithfulness, and diligence in the duties of
our callings, we receive further grace of diligence about Sabbath day
exercises, which is peculiarly verefied in this very thing, in that the most
idle, which spend their time of the six days in gaming, sporting, and least
doing, are least holy, and most profane upon the Sabbath: but contrariwise the
honestly diligent, and intentive to their callings.

2. The iniunction of working upon six days, is given thou shall do work,
in the second is (...) thou shall not do work.

3. As there be reasons alleged of ceasing from work upon the seventh day, so
there is reason laid down also of working God rested the seventh, so the
reason of the second is; In six days the Lord made heaven and earth, he
wrought. If it be said, This needs not to be here commanded, it rather
belongs to the second Table. I answer, that one and the same duty may belong
to diverse Commandments in diverse respects, and in what respect this of
laboring belongs unto this, has bin already showed, neither is mine intent
otherwise to bring it in here, and for some questions, which are fitly here
further to be discussed.

Again I say, that the ground of the former assertion is too weak, for not
men, but God himself has again set apart, since the giving of this law, some
of these days for holy duties And a good construction may be made hereof, and
yet this stand for an vnder-commandement; Six days shall thou labor, unless
the worship of God shall hinder, and call thee from thy labor: for we must in
reason yield as much to the businesses of Gods service upon the six days,
notwithstanding the command of working, as to bodily labors upon the seventh,
notwithstanding the command of resting: therefore as, when we are bidden to
rest all the day, we are not yet denied works, whereunto necessity or charity
call us: so when we are bidden to work the six days, we are not yet denied
ceasing, when religion, and Gods worship call us heereunto. But for the further
clearing of these things, here arise certain weighty, and needful questions.

Quest. 78. Is it not lawful then to forbear working to attend upon God in
his service in the six days?

Answ. Yes, it is not only lawful, but necessary to do the duties of Gods
service every day of the week in private, and in public, when just occasion
is offered.

1. These. 5.7. 2 ^im 4 1. Deuteronomy. 6.7.
Explan. It is the corrupt manner of most men, when the Sabbath is ended, yea,
when public service is done, never more to call the Lord to mind all the
week after, or if they do, to perform their devotion very slenderly, and
weakly, as though they were sufficiently sanctified in two, or three hours
upon the Sabbath for all the week after, or as though they were Gods people
only upon that day, and their own only all the week after. But this is great
forgetfulness, and by all means to be rooted out from amongst Christians, for
the Lord is to be served every day of the week, with the best heart and care
that we can. First, we have for this, his command: Pray continually, and in
all things give thanks; and preach the word of God, be instant in season, and
out of season: and Thou shall talk of the Laws of God continually, when thou
tarriest in thy house, and when thou walk in th way* as thou lie down,
and as thou risest up: So that duties of religion, do not only tie us semper,
all the days of our lives, but ad semper also, to every day and time, when
good opportunity is given, we must express our devotion, by praying, reading,
meditation, hearing, and conferring at fit times.

2. We have for this the example of holy men: Daniel Dan. 6. ^0.
and the Text shows, that it was his manner thus to do. David prayed early
in the morning: he wept in prayer, even in his bed, Psalm. 5 2. Psalm. 6 6. Psalm
22.^. Psalm. 34.1.
so as that he made it swim with tears, I call by day, and by night (says he)
I will always give thanks unto the Lord, and his praise shall be in my mouth
continually: Morning, and evening, and at noone-tide, he called upon the Lord.
Anna a good widow, is said, to have served the Lord in the Temple, Luc. 2.37.
Acts 2.46.
wi^h fasting and prayer, night and day. They were daily together in the
Primitive Church, with one accord in the Temple. And Sozomen reports out of
P^^lo Iudaeus, Sozom lib 6. cap. 18.
that the Christians in Egypt continued all the six days in devotion so
earnestly, as that they forgot to take their food from morning till night: and
the people of Edessa would not be terrified from their often meetings, Ruff.
lib. 2. c. 5.
through the fear of death threatened unto them. Which I do not rehearse, as
favoring the Monastical life, which is wholly spent in blind devotion: (for
every man must live in a calling, not only general, as he is a Christian,
but specially as he is a member of a Commonwealth: and if Anna did live in the
Temple, she had doubtless some other employment, besides prayer and fasting:
and for those of the Primitive Church, their time was extraordinary and most
dangerous) but I rehearse these examples, to commend the general, of omitting
no day, without giving the Lord his due.

3. We have for this great encouragement given. He is Psalm. 1.1. Psalm 119.^8.
Verse 99.
that does exercise himself in Gods word, and meditae therein day and night.
David says, that because Gods Commandments were ever with him, he was made
wiser than his enemies, Yea (says he) ^ have had more understanding than all
my teachers, I understood more than the ancient. So that he which will be wise
indeed, must do as David did, have ever Gods Commandments with him, and make
Gods testimonies his daily meditation.

4. We have to urge us to holy duties, our own great necessity every day. We
are daily subject to sin, and therefore must daily seek the remission of our
sins by prayer, according to the direction, Give us this day our daily bread:
We have daily businesses, upon which we need, but cannot look for a blessing,
without daily earnest prayer, otherwise we may build, Psalm. 1 27.
watch and work, but in vain: we are subject to daily dangers, either by
reason of the Devils rage, the cry of our sins, or our weak constitutions,
which we cannot look, should be prevented, without diligent prayer every day,
prayer being our last and greatest refuge, Ephesians. 6.^8.
according to the Apostle: and we daily receive at Gods hands, great blessings,
the course of which we shall cause him to break off, unless we be daily in
rendering praises to his holy name.

Ephesians 6.17
Again, for the reading and meditating on Gods word, our necessities do all so
require, that we should be somewhat employed herein every day. The Word is the
sword of the spirit, without which, how can we combat with our spiritual
enemies, that will not leave us unassaulted any day? The Word is the milk, 1.
Pet. 2.2.
whereby we must be nourished, and grow up, in regard of which, we are as newborn babes, how then can we in any day live without it, but be very Dwarffes
in grace? The word is the seed of God, by which we are kept from sinning, 1.
John 3.9.
and brought to be his beloved, and holy children: If this seed then be not
daily in us, how shall we be kept from being ouergrowne with weeds and briars,
and so from being reprobate and accursed ground? The word is a light unto our
feet, and a lantern unto our paths, how then can we walk on, and be kept
upright without dangerous stumbling and falling, Psalm 119.105.
unless we have every day this light set up in our minds? To say nothing of
the readiness and dexterity in the Word of God, which we shall grow unto by
daily exercising ourselves therein, according to the proverb, Use makes
perfectness, and how much the more apt we shall thus become for public
instructions, to receive them for our greater comfort.

Quest. 79. It seems then, that every day ought to be made a kind of Sabbath,
how can this stand with the command; of working upon the six days?

Answ. Yes very well, because that, howsoever God is to be served upon the six
days, yet they are for the most part to be spent in the works of our
callings.

Quest. 80. All this being but general, what more special rules are we to
follow in our weekly devotion?

Answ. 1. We must pray every day, morning and evening. 2. Before and after
the use of Gods good creatures. 3. The more our necessities urge us, to pray
the oftener, and the more instantly. 4. Let no day pass without some reading
and divine meditations. 5. Neglect not the week day Sermons, when opportunity
is offered to come unto them.

Explan. After the necessity of performing Gods worship every day declared, I
have thought it not amiss, to set down special rules for the direction of all
men: for, though we are to make every day a kind of Sabbath, yet we are not
to follow the practice of Monks and Friars, framing our life to idleness, in
regard of worldly affairs: nor yet of some ouer-zealous persons, traveling
from place to place, to hear the Word of God, spending many whole days in
this manner, the businesses of our calling being neglected, they can have
little comfort herein, when God shall ask, who required these things at your
hands? But he that is desirous to perform his weeke-dayes service acceptably
unto the Lord, must,

1. Reuerendly commend his supplications, and giving of Daniel kneeled down,
and prayed three times a day; Dan. 6.10.
for a figure of which, it was commanded under the old Testament, that they
should sacrifice a Lamb morning and evening, every day continually, which
Lamb did represent Christ, Exodus 29.39.
and this sacrificing was a coming to God, by prayer in his name, and in the
merits of his bloodshed. Now this was done publicly, at the door of the
Tabernacle, showing, that in every little Tabernacle, or Church, Verse. 42.
such as is every Christian man's family, the like should be performed in the
company of the members thereof, children and servants. Wherefore heathen
families, wanting the true knowledge, and fear of God, are branded thus, that
they call not upon his name: as in that imprecation of the Prrophet, Power out
thy wrath (O Lord) upon the heathen, Iere. 10.25.
and upon the families that call not upon thy Name. It is not enough to say the
Lords prayer, or some other drowsily, being half asleep, or without minding
it, as is the manner of most men, for this is the sacrifice of fools, who know
not that they do evil, Eccl. 4 17.
neither is it enought for Governors, to pray by themselves alone, but the
right worshipper of God prays heartily, if he be the master of a little
Tabernacle, he sacrifices in the door thereof.

1. Tim 4.5.
Secondly, thou must pray before, and after the use of Gods good creatures: for
every creature of God is sanctified by the word and prayer; when Adam had
sinned, all things serving for man's use, were accursed; now by Jesus Christ
alone, this curse is removed, but not without presenting him in prayer before
the Father: So that come to partake of these benefits without prayer, and thou
feedest thy self with curses, which thou may look should be the overthrow,
and not the upholding of thy body.

Psalm. 50 15.
Thirdly, the more our necessities urge us, we must pray the oftener, and the
more instantly. David, in this case, prays day and night, and without
ceasing, and shows that continual praying is therein required: Call upon me
(says the Lord) in the time or trouble. Iam. 5 13.
What must we call upon him then only: no but oftener, and more instantly then,
above all other times. To this purpose, says S. James, ^s any amongst you
afflicted, let him pray, that is, let him make this a time of continual
prayer, and so in the like cases.

Exhort one another daily, says S. Paul: Hebr..13. 1. Tim. 4.13.
and to Timothy, Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. If
any shall say, This is needful indeed for a Divine, but binds not the
people. I answer, That it does not bind them indeed, unless they esteem of
Gods blessing, and desire to be saved, but if they do, they are bound, as well
as the Divine. He only is blessed, that meditateth thus in the Law of God,
and thus doing, says Paul to Timothy, Thou shall save thy self, as a
Christian, and others as a Divine. Fifthly, thou must attend upon Sermons, when
opportunity Amos 8.12.
From the North to the East, they should run to and fro, to hear the word of
the Lord.

Quest. 81. What is to be thought of whole days in the week, set apart to
holy duties, as Saints days, and days of thanksgiving in public.

Answ. All this may lawfully be done, and is commendable by Gods Word, and
therefore we are reverently to conform our selves, to the ordinance of
authority herein.

Holy days to be kept.
Explan. Howsoever all good Christians do yield to that which has been
already said, about our weekly devotion, yet there is great difference about
making whole weekdaies, holy days, and specially the days of Saints, the
fountain whereof is said to have been Popery. To handle this poyint therefore
somewhat more largely, I say first, that it is lawful for the Christian
Magistrate, to command some of the week days, to be observed as holy, by
abstaining from public ordinary works of our callings, and frequenting Gods
public Service.

1. Because the Magistrate is ordained for our good, but a Romans 13.3.
then next unto the sanctifying of the Sabbath, to provide for the solemnity
of some other days, of which just occasion is given, that thus Gods service
may be vpheld, even upon the week day.

Hester and Mordecai, upon the wonderful deliverance of the Jews, Est. 9.21.
and the sword put into their hands, to be revenged upon their enemies, set
apart the fourteenth and fifteenth day of the month Adar, to be kept holy from
year to year continually: And Judas Maccabeus, 1. Mac. 4.59.
after that he had purged the Sanctuary, and set up a new Altar, ordained that
the remembrance hereof should be continued with joy, by keeping a feast
Dedication eight days together, from year to year: which feast Christ
himself graced with his presence, Ioh. 10.22, 23.
preaching in the Temple, that he was the true Shepherd, and that he did give
unto his sheep, that heard his voice, and followed him, eternal life.

Leuit. 23.
Thirdly, because the Lord himself, howsoever he has said, Six days shall
thou labor, yet upon just occasion, has set apart some of these, at certain
times of the year, to be kept holy, as for the feast of the Passover, of
Tabernacles, and of first Fruits, that there might be then a more special
remembrance of the great benefits bestowed at those special times: which the
Magistrates, his Vicegerents following to their great commendation, as further
occasion was offered, do plainly show, that it is not only lawful, but
requisite, that it should be thus in all ages, amongst the Lords people. And
thus much for the confirmation of the first.

Jeron. Gal 4.
and then of some singular Martyrs, betwixt whose days there was yet this
difference, the Apostles were kept in all Churches, these only, where they
suffered, all which Ierom testifies in his Commentary upon the Epistle to the
Galathians, chap. 4. Adding there further, that then the histories of their
lives and deaths were read, and their godly examples commended unto others,
after all which this prayer was added; Concede. O Deus, vt quorum natales
celebramus, eorum virtutes imitemur: Grant, O God, that we may imitate their
virtues, whose birth-daies we celebrate. Now, although antiquity is not
sufficient of it self, to justify this or that observation, yet next unto the
Holy Scriptures, it is to be reverenced, according to that of Augustine: Post
sacras Scripturas, Aug. Tom. 2. Epist. 118.
ea nobis sunt obseruanda, quae vel ab Apostolis profecta esse per traditionem,
vel a vniuersalibus consiliis definita esse iudicantur: Those things are of us
to be observed next unto the holy Scriptures, which are judged to come from the
Apostles by tradition, or to have bin defined by general Counsels.

New holy days rightly made.
Thirdly, I say, that to set apart any day to prayer, thanksgiving, etc.
without just cause, is superstitious, and if for the honoring, and praying
unto any Saint, it is idolatrous: for, neither God, nor good men have thus made
any holy days. A just cause is therefore, 1. When any great benefit, and
extraordinary

2. When any great and wonderful deliverance has been Hamans bloody plot; and
from Gorgias, under Judas Macch^beus so that the Temple was cleansed, and the
Altar repaired, for which they kept the Passover, the feast of Purim, and the
Dedication: and such have been our deliverances from the Spanish Navy, from the
Gunpowder Treason, and Gowries Conspiracy, for which we are to continue
solemn times of praising the Lord.

Joel 1.14.
and hanging over their heads: thus Joel having foretold of a famine to come,
calls for a fast, and a solemn assembly: Jonah 3.
and the Nineuites, when Jonah threatened their destruction, having only the
light of nature to guide them, kept solemnly three days together, fasting,
and crying unto the Lord for mercy. And thus have our Magistrates godly
provided, that there should be solemn public meetings for humiliation in our
great danger, Anno 1588. And in the time of famine and pestilence, and it were
to be wished, that (before we be again pressed with the like, or greater
judgments, which our sins cry for) some times were solemnly appointed, for
the pacifying of Gods wrath toward us.

How turn ye again to beggarly and impotent rudiments, Gal. 4.9.10.
whereunto, as from the beginning ye will be in bondage again? Ye observe
days etc.

Six days thou shall labor.

Sol.
I answer, that this precept must not, nor can be simply understood, but
conditionally, unless the Lord shall call us to public duties of holiness
upon any of these days: otherwise the Lord himself had amiss appointed some
of these days yearly afterward for holiness, and godly magistrates of old had
been much to blame.

shall also become Sabbaths, and of as great account, Differences between holy
days and Sundays.
as the Lords day: I answer, God forbid, for yet there is great difference
betwixt the Lords day, and days appointed by men.

First, in regard of the stricter kind of rest required upon the Lords day,
from which there is more liberty upon other holy days, insomuch as now we may
lawfully go or ride iourneyes, keep markets or faires, and also do the more
private works of our callings, so that we observe the times of public
meetings, and give no scandal to our brethren, nor offense to our Governors.

Secondly, in regard of more free recreations, in which we may now exercise
our selves, all ways excepting the times of public prayer.

Thirdly, in regard of speeches, and thoughts, out of the public times, we may
in some convenient sort and measure, talk of our worldly affairs, and devise
in our thoughts for the best for them. If any do otherwise esteem ordinary
holy days appointed by men, he does derogate from the dignity of the Lords
day; as they of the Church of Rome, which make more account of some Saints
days, then of the Lords day it self, and are more careful then to exercise
their devotion, and tyrannise in their strict censures, more remiss, and
licentious upon this most holy day.

Quest. 81. What is the sin by this commandment forbidden?

Answ. All profaning of the Sabbath day. Which is, first by doing works that
are not of present necessity, by iournying, by idle resting, or absenting our
selves about worldly businesses from the public duties of Gods service.
Secondly, by forgetfulness of the Sabbath upon the six days, by which we
often bring upon our selves a necessity of profaning the same. Thirdly, when
being parents or governors, we leave our children, pupills, and servants to
their own liberty upon this day.

Labor on the Sabbath.
Explan. The sins against this Commandment, I refer to three heads, the
first whereof is a direct, and the greatest profaning of the Lords day. 1. For
labor (unless we be necessarily called heereunto, such as it is only then,
when it is a necessary work of mercy, as has been already showed) it is the
most direct breaking of the Sabbath, and takes away the very nature of it,
because the Sabbath, is the rest. And how great a sin this is, the Lord has
sundry ways made known unto his people the Jews. Which motius though they
bind not us in the same rigor, as the Jews were of old, yet they are a good
inducement to us to stir up our reverence unto Gods ordinance, and our care
to observe the Christian Sabbath, though not in any ceremonious degree of
stricktnesse; yet in convenient decency and sequestration of our selves, such
as may stand with Christian liberty. How close the Jews well held by God to
the precise observation appears.

Exodus 31.15.
and lawful in it self; Whosoever does any work upon the Sabbath, shall die
the death.

Numb. 15.32. Ier. 25.
that the land might enjoy her Sabbaths, and sundry examples tending to the
same purpose have been already brought amongst the arguments for our Sabbath,
which I spare to repeat, referring the reader thither.

3. How displeasing to the Lord it is to work upon this day, appears by his
providence for the rest hereof: rather then any work should be done even
about their daily food, he sends the Israelites Manna enough for two days,
the day before the Sabbath; Exodus 16.
and whereas at other times the Manna would putrify, and be full of worms, if
they kept any of it until the morrow, after they had gathered it, now they did
keep it sweet, and good all the next day.

Moses is most earnest in many places against it, Nehem. 13.
Nehemiah threatened to punish the Merchants, that came to Jerusalem to sell
their wares upon the Sabbath days; and Esaias, Jeremy, and the rest of the
Prophets, do all of them put to their helping hands, to root out this sin
of working upon the Sabbath day. Wherefore if thou make conscience of
stealing, because the Lord has forbidden it, make conscience also of doing the
works of thy calling upon the Sabbath, because God has so strictly forbidden
it, so severely judged it, so carefully provided against it, and stirred up so
many holy men to beat down this gross abuse.

2. For iournying, I shall not need to add any thing, because Exodus 16.29.
Tarry every man in his place, and let no man go out of his place upon the
seventh day, viz. about his worldly unnecessary business, though it may seem
unto thee to be time gained, so that thou shall not be hindered now from thy
work upon the week day, or though it may seem otherwise to redound to thy
benefit. Let them consider this, that forecast to make their iourneyes
specially upon the Lords day, surely this wisdom comes not from above, but
from the devil, whose thou art, John 8 44.
whilst thou do his will.

3. For idle resting, and sitting at home all day, or most Idle resting.
when others assemble themselves to the worship of God, or sleeping, and lying
longer in bed in the morning, so that a man cannot prepare himself fitly, and
come in due time to the place of Gods public worship, this is also a most
unworthy usage of a man's self upon the Lords day. He that does thus, like the
vain echo, resoundeth the last word of the Lords precept, Thou shall
Sanctify the Sabbath taking only Sabbath, an idle resting unto himself, and
therefore as idle watchmen appointed over Gods people, that see the enemy
coming, and danger at hand, yet do only sit still, and behold it, but sound
no trumpet to give them warning, shall be so far from any reward of their
office, that the peoples blood shall be required at their hands: so these idle
Sabbath-keepers shall be so far from the blessing attending upon such, as
sanctify a Sabbath, as that they shall be called to account for this precious
time lost through their idleness, and the usurpation of that to their own
ease, which they were bound to spend to Gods glory. Let all therefore, that
would consecrate this day, as glorious to the Lord, fly this idleness, and
learn of Nehemiah to rise early in the morning, at the least in their hearts
to sanctify the Lords day, and duly repair (whilst God inableth) to the place
of public meetings, otherwise to keep holy day at home, as his infirmities
permit.

Absence from Church.
and read some good prayers, and other good books, especially, if the weather
be but a little tedious, and think that they keep the Sabbath, as well, as
any other, or as they need to do, and more especially, if there be nothing,
but divine service at the Church. But let all such know their error, and
repent of it, they do indeed sanctify the Lords day, but it is not after the
Lords, but their own manner, and therefore cannot be accepted of, no more then
a master can accept of the best endeavors of his servant at home at that time,
when he appoints him to travel about his business abroad. For the Lord does
now appoint thee to attend him in the public place, Acts 3.
he has now employment for thee there, Christ himself, the holy Prophets, and
Apostles lurked not at such times in corners, or in private houses, but went up
to the Temple to pray, to preach, to converse with Gods people in public
duties. Acts 2 41.
Here is the place, where Gods ordinance is chiefly used, and only at the
times appointed, here the Lords presence is promised, here has his glory ever
shined by the conversion of souls, and sometime of thousands at once. Let the
proud seperatist therefore go by himself now into corners, as ouer-iust in
his own esteem, to come with others to Gods ordinance in public, let the
idle, or dainty Sabbath-keeper stay at home in his blind private devotion, and
the over scrupulous absent themselves from Church in the case of no preaching
at that time: let those contemn public prayer that know not Gods house (the
Church) to be the house of Prayer. But let all that fear the Lord, fear thus
to pervert the Lords day, least in so doing, sin lie at their doors.

The second head, Head. 2. Forgetfulness of the Sabbath.
unto which I refer the profaning of the Sabbath, is all forgetfulness of
this day upon the six, either in general in any of them; or in particular,
the day before, according to our distinction, when I spoke of the duty in the
word Remember; and it may have reference also to the Sabbath past, Remember how
holy thou were then, what rules of holiness thou were then taught, how thou
did then make show of a good disciple of Christ, when thou sattest to learn
thy lesson of him: as Saul, who fell down before the Lord, and said; Lord,
what would thou have me to do? Acts 9. 1. Sam. 2.
and as Samuel; Speak Lord, for thy servant hears: Least doing contrariwise
in the weeke-dayes after, and as one, that rather listeneth to Satan, and to
thine own corrupt heart, thou be condemned out of thine own mouth, for
drawing near unto God with thy lips, but having thine heart far estranged
from him.

The third head, Head. 3. Neglect of inferiors.
unto which I refer the profaning of the Sabbath, is by leaving such, as are
under our government, to their own unbridled and licentious liberty upon the
Sabbath day, which is no small fault in parents, masters, and governors. For
whilst every private man does thus neglect his domestic charge, the minister
may preach, reprove, admonish, and teach, but little will it profit, to bring
them to the right observation of Christian duties. Besides, does it not grieve
any good parents, or masters to see their children, or servants miscarry and
come to misery? but to be negligent of them at these times, is the right way to
bring them to all lewdness, and consequently to smart and misery, for which
they may also then with heavy hearts thank their governors, that were too
gentle, and remiss toward them, 1. Sam. 2.
as Ely was unto his children, whose lamentable estate in his children and
posterity, what hard heart can read of, without relenting.

Quest. 83. What be the reasons of this Commandment?

Answ. They are partly infolded in the Commandment, and partly expressed in
these words; for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, etc.

Quest. 84. What are the reasons infolded in the commandment?

Answ. Three. 1. Because the law of the Sabbath is ancient, and was of force in
Paradise before man's fall. 2, Because it is most equal, the Lord allowing us
six days for our worldly affairs and requiring but one of seven for the
works of his worship 3. Because the seventh is the Lords peculiar day, so that
without sacrilege, we cannot any way profane it.

Reasons infoulded in this Commandment.
Explan. This commandment being of maine and special use for the furthering
of true godliness, and such, as upon which the rest of the law hangs, is
therefore both placed in the midst; and because man naturally is most unapt
to be moved with the reverence hereof, fortified with many reasons beyond the
rest. Which reasons are every one of great force, partly infolded, and not
distinctly placed out of the words of the commandment, and partly expressed,
and set down at large by themselves.

Remember: as if the Lord should have said; Howsoever all the rest of these
laws have hitherto passed without such express mention, especially, when man's
nature was vncorrupt in Paradise, yet this law of the Sabbath was expressly
given at that time, and now I give you warning only to remember it, as most
ancient, and ever used amongst all my devout people: so that if old customs will
bear any sway with you, the very remembrance of this must needs be of force to
move you to keep holy my Sabbaths. Or else, Remember is a reason of force,
because it is a note of special charge for the duty, unto which it is prefixed.
For when a master commands his servants diverse things, and would chiefly
have some one thing done, he impresseth it with this word remember, as if he
should say, I would not have that neglected, or forgotten by any means. If
therefore any earnest special charge given by the Lord be of any force with
thee, if the old custom of Gods Church ever since the creation be of any
force, do not profane, but keep holy the Sabbath day.

Gene. 2.
The second reason infolded, is taken from these words; Six days shall thou
labor, etc. as if the Lord should have said, It is no unreasonable matter, or
hard unto thee, that I require in bidding thee keep holy the Sabbath day, it
is but one day of seven, I allow thee six for the works of thy calling, I
will be content only with the seventh, though I have made all the days, and
could require six, and leave thee but one, therefore do thou willingly keep
this day. This is a reason of great moment, and oftentimes only used, as being
alone sufficient to move any honest heart to obedience. In Paradise it was the
maine reason to Adam and Euah. Ye shall eat of all the trees in the garden,
but of the tree in the midst ye shall not eat: it was the reason used to
move the Israelites to let their land rest the seventh year, that the poor
might have some comfort of that which grew then of it own accord, Deuteronomy. 10.12.
because they were in times past servants, and poor, and had the liberty of
tilling, and sowing, and reaping six years for themselves. And he must needs
be judged an unreasonable servant, who (if he serves so kind a master, as that
will allow him two, or three days in a week for his own business) does not
willingly go about his masters work the other days.

1. Sam. 2.
The third reason infolded, is taken from these words; The seventh is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God; As if the Lord should have said, I have specially
marked the seventh for mine own holy, and peculiar: so that he which shall
presume to take that, or any part of it, and make it common by doing worldly
works, or following vanity, is a thief, and a robber unto me, even as he,
which being an hired servant, takes the time to follow his own businesses,
wherein his master appoints him to do his work. Therefore as no honest
servant will thus use his Master: so no honest servant of God will thus abuse
the Lord, for if a lewd servant thus abusing his master, cannot endure his
presence, though he be but a man, how shall he, that presumes thus to abuse
the Lord endure, when he comes: seeing that if one man sins against
another, the Judge shall judge it, but if a man sin against the Lord, there
is none that dares plead for him.

Quest. 85. What are the reasons expressed?

Answ. Two, first from the Lords example, who rested upon the seventh, from
all his works of creation: Secondly, from his blessing inseparably linked unto
the hallowing of this day, so that he that keeps it holy shall find it unto
his comfort a blessed day also.

The Reasons expressed.
Explan. The Lord not content to have interlaced the reasons, of which it has
been already spoken, adds further weight of reason: For in six days the
Lord made heaven and earth, and rested the seventh, etc.

Ioh. 13.
First, from his own example, who having finished the great work of the
creation upon the six days, rested the seventh, and for a memorial hereof
has commended the care of this rest to all his loving subjects, every seventh
day throughout all generations. As if he should have said; I command you (O
people) nothing but what I your Sovereign Lord have done before you, who when
I had made the Heavens, the earth, the Seas, and all creatures, rested from
this my labor and recreated my self in the beholdiog of that I had done:
follow me therefore, and do likewise, after the labor of six days, rest and
refresh your selves, by sweet and heaueely contemplations and exercises, that
so in all ages to come ye may be known by your holy rests, as by my
cognizance, to be my people, and true subjects. This reason Christ uses to his
Disciples to persuade humility, saying, If I your Lord and Master have washed
your feet, then ought ye also to wash one another feet. And very apt are all
men to be led by examples, especially of great ones, according to that, Regis
ad exemplar totus componitur orbis.

After the Kings example the whole world is framed.

If the King were maimed in any member, Fu. Solin: Pompen: Mela.
or had but one eye amongst the Aethiopians, they would all willingly make
themselves, herein like unto him, though to their great pain: how much more
should all the people of the Lord be led by his example, and be like unto him,
in keeping holy rests wherein he rested?

Esa 58.13.^4.
Secondly, from the blessing annexed unto this day, being hallowed and kept
holy, The Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it. So that if thou be
faithful in the observation of this day, thou shall not lose thy labor; for
hallowing this time, has always Gods blessing accompanying it: according as
more fully it is promised by the Prophet Esaias, If thou turn away thy foot from
the Sabbath, etc. Thou shall thou delight in the Lord, and I will, cause thee to
mount upon the high places. Chap. 56.2.
And again, Blessed is the man that does this, and the Son of man that lays
hold on it: that keeps the Sabbath, and poluteth it not. And it is commonly
seen, that such are blessed men, blessed with divine knowledge, and blessed
with all the fruits of saving faith, Justice, innocence and true mercy, and
blessed with a diligent endeavor about all holy exercises: and this is to
those, that see it, the greatest blessing: for blessed is that man, that
exercises himself in the Law of God, Psalm. 1.1.
and meditateth therein day and night. If then this Law be so ancient, and such
as has been observed from the first beginning: if it be most equal and
indifferent; if it be an entering upon Gods peculiar right to break it: if the
Lord has gone before us in the rest of this day, in his own example: and if
it be a blessed day also to such as keep it aright, and redounding to their
exceeding great good and comfort: then rouse up your dull hearts, cast off the
clog of worldly thoughts and businesses, and lift up your spirits, to the
highest Spirit, in the due keeping of this holy day.

Quest. 86. Which is the first Commandment of the second Table, or the fifth
of the Law?

Answ. Honor thy father and mother, that thy days may be long in the land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Quest. 87. In which Commandments do you learn your duty toward your
neighbor?

Answ. In the six latter Commandments which be of the second Table.

Quest. What is thy duty toward thy neighbor?

Answ. My duty toward my neighbor, is to love him as myself, to do to all
men as I would they should do to me, to love honor, and succor my father and
my mother, to honor and obey the King and his Ministers: to submit my self to
all my goueenours, teachers, spiritual pastors and masters, to order my self
lowly and reverently to all my betters. To hurt no body by word nor deed. To be
true and just in all my dealing To bear no malice, nor hatred in my heart. To
keep my hands from picking and stealing, my tongue from evil speaking, lying
and slandering. To keep my body in temperance, chastity and sobernes. Not to
covet, nor desire other men's goods, but to learn and labor truly to get mine
own living, and to do my duty in that estate of life, unto which it has
pleased God to call me.

Explan. All these recited particular duties are by me to be prosecuted
hereafter in the explication of the several commandments of the second table.
I shall not need therefore to adioyne any literal comment upon them here, but
rather remit the Reader to observe the^ in the branches of streams, whereto they
severally belong. Now for the methodicall handling of the second Table, I will
invert these three questions thus, the last first, then the second, and the
first last.

Math 19.19.
First, What is your duty toward your neighbor? For having finished our duty
toward God, in the next place comes to be considered our duty toward our
neighbor, which is only generally and at large here laid down in the
Catechism, in imitation of our Savior Christ, who being asked which were the
Commandments, answered. The first is, Thou shall love the Lord, etc and the
second is like unto it: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; and to the
young man which asked which they were, Thou shall not kill, thou shall not
commit adultery, thou shall not bear false witness, honor thy father and
mother, and thou shall love thy neighbor And the Apostle in the same brief
manner gives the sum of these commandments: not that good Christians should
not search any further into the depth of the^, but content themselves with this
short epitom, for they do more largely in other places express every bra^ch
of every of these Laws, Math. 5.
and Christ does in precise words tax the blind Jews for thus slighting over
Gods laws, teaching only thus: Thou shall not k ll, then shall not commit
adultery, etc. and not teaching further the sins here forbidden. These briefes
therefore serve for remembrances for the wekest memories, which when they are
held and rightly understood, do acquaint us more fully with Gods will in every
thing.

Who is our neighbor.
Secondly, Jn which Commaundemement is your duty toward your neighbor? Good
reason is it, that our duty toward our neighbor should be placed in a second
Table, after that containing our duty toward God; both because God is the
most high, and far above men and Angels: and also because this must be the
first wheel, as it were, that must set us a work to love our neighbor, even
for our duties sake toward God, who requires it at our hands. Now our
neighbor is every man without exception, unless God has noted him for his
enemy, though he dwells among the furthest Indies, and we never see him,
though he be our enemy, yet we are bound to love him: and if by Gods
providence we be brought to behold his necessity at any time, we are bound
to show our love by putting to our helping hand. This is made plain by the
parable of the Samaritan, Luke 10.30.
who in his travel saw a man wounded by thieves, and helpelesse, unto whom,
though he were a stranger, he showed mercy, pouring oil into his wounds, and
setting him on his own beast; Esa 58.7.
and by the Lord commending to us our duty toward our poor neighbor, Is it
not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and to bring the poor wandering into thy
house, when thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and hide not thy self
from thy own flesh? so that whosoever is flesh as thou art, is thy neighbor.

This commandment exceeds the rest. Ephe. 6.1.
Thirdly, let this question follow, Which is the first of these Commandments?
Honor thy father and thy mother etc. This Commandment has in it some thing
singular, and wherein it exceeds the rest of this Table, viz. a promise,
according as the Apostle has noted. It is the first Commandment with promise.
Namely, the first of the second Table, or the first, and only Commandment,
with a special promise expressly annexed, so as it is not the promise of the
second Commandment, which is general, and belonging to all. But I speak this
only, according to the reason of others; for, without doubt, the Apostle
calls it in the same sense, the first Commandment, and the Commandment
with promise, so usual is it with him, speaking of the Commandments, to
restrain them to this second Table only. And, as the first of the first Table
is the ground of all the rest; so is this first of the second Table, the ground
of the five Commandments following. In that first is commended unto us, a
right esteem of God, in this, of man made after Gods image, and specially
bearing Gods Image in him: of the Magistrate, bearing the Image of his
authority and power, whence he is said to be a God: Psalm. 82.1.
of the ancient bearing the image of his eternity, whence it is, that he is
said to have appeared, as one ancient of days: Dan. 9 37.
of parents, bearing the image of the Creator of things, which before were
not; of Tutours, Ministers, and Teachers, bearing the image of his wisdom and
divine knowledge.

And where this due esteem of men according to their places is settled: and
again in superiors toward their inferiors, the duties of the other
commandments will easily follow, even as when God is rightly set up in the
heart, he is not disgraced by base Images, by blasphemies, and profaning of
his Sabaoths: so give the honor due to the Parents, magistrates, masters and
instructers, and murdering, adultery, theft, false witnesses, and coveting
will easily be put away. Murdering of a superior is a debasing of him as of
an Ox or Sheep, when he bears the Image of God in him: of an inferior, it
is an extinguishing of that reciprocal affection, by which thou should be
provident for his safety, because he gives honor unto thee. Adultery in a
superior, is a vilefying of his body, making it the member of a foul
strumpet, when God has graced him with a resemblance of himself: in an
inferior, it is a gross neglect of the counsel of good parents, and of wise
tutors, and of the magistrates authority. Theft is a trumpet to sound forth our
discontent with our present estates, and our envying in stead of honoring
others. False witnesse-bearing is, a plain shaking off, and rooting out of our
hearts, and the hearts of others, this esteem of our superiors, and branding
them so, as that they may be had in base account. And for covetousness, there
will be no room left for these desires, if there be a settled esteem of every
man in his place, with his house, his wife, his ox, and other things about him.

Quest. 88. What is here commanded?

Answ. To honor. That is, to love, reverence, cherish, and obey our natural
parents, the parents of our Country, and our fathers in Christ. 2. To carry
our selves lowly and reverently toward our masters, being ruled by them, and
toward the ancient, and all our betters. 3. Jf we be superiors, to walk
worthy the honor due unto us from our inferiors, and to use all gentleness
toward them.

Father, how taken.
Explan. That we may the better know the duty of this Commandment, it is to be
understood, that the word Father is diversely taken in the Scriptures, even for
every superior in any thing. 1. For our superior in government, thus every
King is called a Father, because he is Parens Patriae the Father of the
Country, it was a common name of the Kings of the Philistines, who were called
Abimelech, Gen 20.3.
which is the King my father. 2. For a Superior in knowledge, and in wise
counsel, thus the counselors of State, are Fathers of the State, as Joseph,
Pharaohs chief Counselor, speaks of himself, God has made me a father
unto Pharaoh, Genesis 45 8.
and Pharaoh caused the name Abrech, that is, Father, to be proclaimed before
him; and the Senators of Rome were commonly called, Patres conscripti,
reverend Fathers. 3. For a Superior, in private, and household government, thus
masters of families are called, Patres Familias, Fathers of the Family, as
Naaman the Syrian is called Father, by his servants. 4. For a Superior, 2
King. 5.13.
in the invention of any Art or Science: Genesis 4.
thus Iubal is said to be the father of all that play on the Organs and harp;
and Iabal, the father of all that make tents. 5. For a Superior, in things
spiritual toward God: thus the Ministers of the Gospel are called Fathers in
Christ, because that through that spiritual knowledge and grace exceeding
others, they beget men unto God, 1 Cor. 4.5.
as Paul, who therefore calls the Galatians his little children, and professes
to the Corinthians, that he only was their father, for, J begat you, says
he, unto Christ. 6. For a Superior in holiness and power with God: thus the
King of Israel calls Elisha Father, saying of the Host of the Syrians, 2
Kings 6.21.
Shall I smite them, my Father? 7. 2. Kings 2.12.
For a Superior in oversight, and instruction: thus Elishab called Elijah, who
brought him up in the knowldge of prophesying, My father, my father, the
chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. 8. For a Superior in estate and
condition; thus rich men using their riches aright, are fathers of the poor,
Job 31.28.
From my youth he has grown up with me, as with a father, says Job. 9. For
a Superior in age and years; thus the gray headed is called a father, and the
ancient are as fathers to be exhorted, and not to be rebuked. 10 According to
the common acception amongst children, 1 Timothy 5.1.
there is a natural father and mother, which beget, bear, and bring us
forth, and up in the world, and if one of them dies, or he, or she, that
suruiueth, be married again, and he or she unto whom, is now made also thy
father, or mother, though not by nature, yet by law, and there is an honor due
unto them.

Superiors diverse ways.
To honor, is to give that reverend respect, which is due to every superior,
whether in authority, and power, in place and calling, or in worth and dignity.



Ephesians. 6.1. Col 3.20.
And this is first obedience in all things in the Lord; Children obey your
parents in the Lord. Children, obey your parents in all things, for that is
well pleasing unto the Lord: and he is an unnatural beast, and no child, that
gives not this obedience unto both father and mother.

2. To bear their corrections with submission: of this the Heb. 12.9.
We have had the fathers of our bodies correcting us, and we gave them
reverence.

3. To reverence them, in giving them all outward respect, Mal. 1.6.
A son honoreth his father, and a servant his master; if I then be a Father,
where is mine honor; if I be a master, where is my fear?

4. To cherish them, and to give them maintenance in time Why do ye
transgress the commandment of God by your tradition? Matthew. 15.3.4.5.6.
for God has commanded. Honor thy father, and thy mother. But ye say,
Whosoever shall say to father and mother, by the gift that is offered by me,
thou may have profit, though he honor not his father and mother, shall be
free. That is, if he dedicate his goods, and suffer them to want, whereas he
might therewith have relieved them; If a Widow has children, or nephews,
says Saint Paul, let them learn first to show godliness toward their own
house, 1. Tim. 5.4.
and to recompense their kindred; for that is an honest thing, and acceptable
before God. Which he further expounds afterward, saying, Jf any faithful
man, or woman, have widows, that is, Verse 16.
to their mothers or aunts, let them minister unto them, and let not the
Church, that is, other Christians, be charged. And God has made the Storke a
wonderful example to condemn children, that are this way unnatural to their
parents in their age: for she nourishes, and brings food to her parents in
their old age, wherefore she has the name, Chesidah, Pious, or Merciful, in
Hebrew. And in Greek (...) signifies this kind of mutual retribution, being
derived from (...), which signifies, a Storke.

In these things consists the honor due to father and mother, and for
examples we may take Jacob, who obeyed his father and mother in the choice of
his wife: and Shem and Japhet, who reverenced their father Noah, and went
backward and covered his nakedness: and Joseph, who recompensed his father
Iaacobs care, with providing for him in his old age, and all holy men, who have
readily performed these duties. They are wicked children therefore and
accursed, as breaking this Commandment in the head, that do continually grieve
their godly parents by their disobedience, and light esteem of them, living
out of all good order, being Drunkards and Swaggerers, and plunging into the
estate of marriage without, yea contrary to their liking. The Lord provided of
old, that such should be put to death: If any man has a disobedient son, Deuteronomy.
21.18.19.20.
which will not hearken to the voice of his father, nor the voice of his
mother, and they have chastened him, and he will not obey them. Then shall they
take him, and bring him out. And all the men of the City shall stone him with
stones unto death.

Honor due to Magistrates. Romans 13.1.
The Superiors in authority, by the Law of Nations, are Magistrates and
Governors of the Commonwealth. The honor due to them is, 1. To be subject
unto them, according to that precept: Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers. And again: 1. Pet. 2.13.14.
Submit your selves to all manner ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether
it be unto the King, or unto Governors that are sent of him. 2. To pay tribute
unto them: Give to all men their duty tribute to whom ye owe tribute, and
custom to whom custom: and in the verse before it is said, For this cause ye
pay tribute unto them. Romans 13.7. Verse. 6.
They are, as it were, the belly, upon which all the members depend, and for
which they therefore labor. 3. To give all outward reverence unto them, not
only when they are courteous and kind unto us, but even, when unjustly they
are harsh toward us. This Paul acknowledged, and excused his ill language
toward the high Priest, when he had commanded him to be smitten, Acts 23.5.
saying; I knew not (brethren) that he was the high Priest.

The honor due to Step-fathers and Step-mothers.
Superiors in authority by the Law of contract, are step-fathers, and masters
and husbands. 1. Step-fathers and step-mothers are to be honored, as the
natural parents, if they be as natural parents, nourishing and bringing their
step-children up, and providing for their good, and the reason hereof is good;
for a step father is now one flesh with thine own mother, and he is thy
father, if thou live in his family. In this case we see what honor Moses
gives to his father in law Iethro, coming to see him, Exodus 18.17. Ruth. 3.
and giving him good counsel. He obeyed him. Thus Ruth obeyed Naomi in all
things; and Christ himself was obedient to Joseph, Matthew 2.1.
the husband of his Mother, as he was unto her: for it is said, that he was
subject unto them. But if step-fathers, and step-mothers, seek to make a prey
of their step-children, as it is sometime seen, when they are left rich,
endeavoring to match them for their own advantage, in this case, and the like,
they are not bound to obey, because the bond is now broken, by which they were
first tied, viz. natural affection, which is turned into strange and
unnatural.

Honor due to masters. Colos 3.22. Verse 23. Verse 22.
Masters of families are to be obayed, as the Lord Christ. Thus the Apostle
commands; Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters in the flesh
in all things: and whatsoever ye do, do it as unto the Lord Christ, of whom
ye shall receive the recompense of reward. They are therefore to be served: 1.
Diligently at all times, not only in their presence, as is the manner of
eye-pleasers. 2. Faithfully being true unto them, and with the best endeavor,
seeking to bring to pass what they command, and to prevent evil, and losses
from them, and to procure their good. Such a servant had Abraham, Gen 24.
that was the steward of his house, whom he sent to fetch a wife for his son
Isaac, from amongst his kindred. He did not only endeavor to bring to pass
what he had in charge, by going to the place, and observing his opportunity to
make this motion: but also he prayed unto the Lord for good success, and
hastened his return home with all speed, when he had obtained. Not as many
loytering, and careless servants now adays, who, howsoever they go, when
their master bids them, yet they are without all care, and study about the
dispatch of their business, and delay their return to the uttermost. This
stranger servant shall rise up in judgment against them, and condemn them. 3.
With fear and reverence, not daring to displease them, even as young scholars
under most severe Masters. Thus the Apostle Peter commands; Servants be
subject to your Masters with all fear. 1. Pet. 2.18. 1 Timothy 6.1.
And the Apostle Paul; Let servants count their Masters worthy of all honor.
Thus Jacob served his uncle Lahan, Genesis 31.39.
in keeping his sheep. If any were torn with beasts, he brought it not to
show his master, but made it good; and likewise, if any were stolen by day, or
by night. So should servants fear their masters, as to avoid all occasions of
offending them, though against themselves. 4. Without all exception, whether
they be wicked, or godly, if thou be under the yoke; but if thy Master be a
believer, 1. Tim. 61.2.
then serve him thus much rather. Whether they be unreasonable in their
correction, chastising thee wrongfully, 1. Pet. 2.19.
or reasonably, correcting for just cause: as Hagor was bidden to return, and
humble her self to her Mistrisse, even when she was most severe toward her.
Genes 16.6.
Whether they be wise or foolish, as Nabal, whose servant fore seeing the
danger toward him, did the parts of faithful servants, in telling their
mistress, how unworthily he dealt with Daui^s men, when they had well deserved at
his hands. 1. Sam. 15.
Which will condemn many servants at the last day, who contrariwise conceive
malice against their masters, and are glad of revenge, if they be any thing
harsh, and severe unto them: and much more will it condemn such as having
godly, and kind masters, do hate them even for their goodness toward them, and
refuse to be learned by their good instructions, and to be ordered as it
becomes Christians, in matters concerning religion, and the fear of God.
Which, though it be most strange, yet daily experience teaches to be most
true, but woe will be unto them more, than unto other servants, at the last,
for that their means have been double to the means of others, but they have
hated to be reformed.

Honor due to husbands. 1. Pet. 3.6. 1. C r. 11.3 Ephesians. 5.24.
Husbands are to be obeyed by their wives, according as it is written of Sarai,
that she ob^y d Abraham, and called him Lord: and good reason, for by the
contract of marriage, the husband is made the head of the wife, even as Christ
is the head of the Church. Therefore the wife must be governed by her husband
in every thing, as the Church is by Christ: she must submit her self to be
taught of her husband; 1. Cor. 14.34. Ephesians. 5.33.
if the wife w^ll know any thing, she must ask her husband at home: and
lastly, she must reverence her husband in her speeches, not brawling, or
scolding with him, and in her behavior, showing all due observance toward him.

Nabal, is the wife notwithstanding to reverence and obey him?



Honor due to Ministers.
Having spoken of the superiors in authority, it follows now of superiors in
place and calling: and these are, first, ministers of Gods word, which are over
several congregations in the Lord, as Paul describes them, 1. These. 5.12.
which labor amongst you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you. The
honor due to them in brief, is set down to be double honor; 1. Tim. 5.17.
The Elders, that rule well, let them be had in double honor, specially such
as labor in the word and doctrine. Contrary to the manner of the world, that
gives them none honor at all and esteems of them as most unworthy persons,
especially such, as think themselves better, in regard of their pelf of the
world. But to meet with such degenerous persons, the holy Ghost gives a
greater charge for the honoring of faithful, and painful ministers, then of
any other. And this double honor is first love, which is further expressed. 1.
These. 5.12.
Have them in singular love for their works sake. And the Prophet Esaias, in
admiration of this ezcellent office, cries out; Esaias 52.7.
How beautiful are the feet of those, that bring glad tidings of peace, and
glad tidings of good things: and accordingly the Galathians are commended, for
receiving the Apostle of Christ, as if an Angel from heaven had come unto
them, and for such earnest love unto him, as that if it had been possible, they
would have pulled out their eyes, Gal 4 14.15.
and given them unto him. And from this love arises obedience, and submission
according to that precept; Obey those, Heb. 13.17.
that have the ouer-sight of you, and submit your selves unto them. For, where
singular love is, there is weight in the doctrine, to sway him that is taught,
and estimation of the person, to move to all due reverence, and submission,
seeing this is a proper effect of special love toward those that be in any
place above us.

1. Cor. 9.14.
Secondly, they are to be honored with the payment of tithes, and duties,
which by Gods ordinance belong unto them for their maintenance: for God has
ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. But
none other way do we read of, whereby God has ordained, that they should
live. And unto this agrees that precept; Let him that is instructed, Gal. 6.6.
make him, that has instructed him, partaker of all his goods, that is, as I
take it, pay him the tith of all his goods growing and increasing; otherwise he
must make his estate common unto him, which is Anabaptisticall and absurd. If
it be here demanded.







1. These. 5.12.
Observe those that labor amongst you, and have them in singular love: and
good reason, seeing that, although there be other laborers also, yet he
labors to feed this flock, to watch for these souls. Whence it appears,
how far they err, that extol strangers, and oftentimes more unworthy ones,
God knows, then their own Minister by many degrees, that prefer readers of
Lectures in their own towns, or elsewhere, before their own proper painful
Pastor, and even young new vpstart Curats, before the grave and learned
Rectours of the Church.

Honor due to ancients.
Superiors in place are elders, and ancient persons, the duty toward whom, is
for younger persons to rise up unto them, and give them reverence, according to
that; Leuit. 19.32.
Thou shall rise up before the hoare-head, and honor the person of the old
man, and even of the best and greatest younger men, the poorest and meanest
ancients are to be used with respect for their gray hairs.

Heb. ^3.4.
Superiors in place are married persons, whose estate is honorable, according
to that saying of the Apostle. Marriage is honorable amongst all men and the
bed undefiled. The honor due to them, is for single persons of like quality,
to give place unto them, as it is every where usual amongst us, which is a
civil and commendable custom. Superiors in Honor due to the rich.
or else rich and wealthy persons, which distribute and give of their goods
unto the poor, as has been already said of Job: they are to be reverenced of
the poor, toward whom they are Gods stewards. So that it is a fault to be
reformed in the poor, that need the help of alms, if they be irreuerent
toward them, that are both able and willing to bestow alms on them.

Parts of reverence.
Now because much has bin spoken of reverence toward superiors, I have
thought it not amiss to set down more particularly the parts of this
reverence. The first is, to rise up unto them, according as has been already
said, Leuit. 36.32.
Thou shall rise up before the hoare-headed. So children are to rise up before
their parents, scholars before their masters, common people before
Magistrates, servants before their masters, and all inferiors before their
superiors. The second is to go to meet them, when they are coming toward
us, Genesis 18.2.
as Abraham is said to have gone to meet the men that came toward him, and
Solomon to meet his mother Bathsheba, 1. King. 2.19.
when she came unto him, as a suitor. The third is to bow the knee unto them,
as Abraham is also noted to have done toward the same men. The fourth is to
stand by them, whilst they sit, as Abraham also did, and all the people stood
about Moses, Exodus 18.
whilst he sat to judge them.

Genesis 43.
The fifth is, to give them the chief seat, and our selves to take the lowest,
as the brethren of Joseph did sit every one according to his senioritie, and
as the Lord commands, when thou art bidden to a feast to take the lowest
place. Luke 14.10.
The sixth, is to be silent before them, whilst they have spoken: thus Elihu,
one of Jobs friends, hold his peace, because he was yung, whilst the ancient of
days spoke. Job 32.6.7.
The seventh is, to be silent in Courts, and places of Judgment, until we be
bidden to speak: thus Paul being before Felix accused of the Jews, was
silent, Acts 24.10.
till the Governor bad him answer for himself, and it is want of good
manners in those, that take more liberty before Judges and Justices, unless
apparent wrong be offered unto them. The eighth is, to give every one his just
title: 1. Sam. 1.14. 1. Pet. 3.7.
as Hannah when she was blamed by Ely, as a drunkard, I am not drunken (my
Lord) says she; rnd as Sarai reverenced her husband, and called him Lord, or
by a title of reverence. The ninth is, to order all our speeches and gestures
so, as that we pass not the bounds of reverence; for what avails it, though
thou bow the knee, and give titles, if thou scorn, or deride him in unseemly
speeches, or behavior, as Cham that cursed son against his father Noah.
Genes. 9.
The tenth is, to uncover the head before Superiors, and to stand uncovered,
if the quality of the person does so require. And as these be the parts of
reverence due to superiors, and they that wilfully offend herein, do not only
pass good manners, but sin against Gods Law.

Having hitherto spoken of such, as are to be honored for their authority, or
place: it follows now to be spoken of all others, which are to have any
honor done unto them, for any dignity, or worth appearing in them.

Men worthy of Honor by Learning and knowledge.
And these are, first, men worthy by learning and knowledge, or by any other
excellent quality in them. Thus King Salomen was honored of all the Kings
round about, so that many sent him presents, and many came from far to see
him. The honor due to such, is highly to esteem of them, to praise them
according to their worth, and to prefer their acquaintance, and friendship.
After this manner did the Queen of the South, 1. King. 10. Acts 18.24.
honor Solomon for his wisdom: and Luk, Apollos for his eloquence and power
in the Scriptures: and Paul, Titus, and the Brethren sent to Corinth for their
holiness, and integrity, calling them the glory of the Church of God.

2. There is a kind of worth also in men, even for this, because they are
Christians, Phil. 2.3.
and we are all members one of another: for which cause every man is first to
esteem another better then himself: because other men are not so unworthy in
our knowledge as we our selves. 2. Rom 12 10.
In giving honor, we must go one before another, and not in taking, such
should our humility be. 3. As we meet one another in the way, giving due
salutations, this was often prescribed to the first Christians: as by Peter, 1
Pet. 5.14.
Greet ye one another with the kiss of love. And by Paul Romans 16.16. etc.
provided always, that if any were known an enemy to the truth, 2 Ioh. 10.
they should not bid him, God speed. Not that there is danger in saluting
strangers, in a Christian commonwealth, where all are supposed Christians, as
some have foolishly thought, but if any be known to be Christ's enemy.

3. There is also a kind of Worth, because of Gods ordinance. 1 Pet. 3.7.
as to the weaker vessels, and not for their weakness to despise them, and to
think them unworthy of all respect, because that howsoever the woman is weaker
then the man, yet she is also the child of God, and an instrument of much
good in the Church. The honor therefore due to them is the like to that, which
has been said toward man in the like cases. And thus much of the honor
commanded here. Now we are to speak of the duties of persons honored, which
(as is contained in the answer) is to walk worthy the honor due unto them
from inferiors.

1. The duty of Parents toward children. Ephesians. 6.4. Genesis 18.19.
And first to begin with natural Parents. Their duty toward their children, is
first to give them good education, as it is commanded; Parents bring up your
children in the information and fear of the Lord. Season them with knowledge
of the first principles, and command them to do accordingly, as father
Abraham, of whom the Lord says, I know Abraham, that he will command his
sons, and his household after him, t at they keep the way of the Lord; as the
vessel is first seasoned, it will favor long after.

2. Discreetly to chastize them for their faults, whilst they are young;
according to that, 2 Duty. Heb. 12.9.
We have had the fathers of our bodies, which corrected us. And, He that
spares the rod, says Solomon, marreth the child. They are now young and
tender plants, and may easily be set to rights, defer till they be grown,
and then, as Elies children, they will be incorrigible, and accursed of God.

3. Duty.
3. Not to exceed in giving correction, but tempering the vinegar of sharp
correction, with the oil of gentle exhortation, Ephesians 6.4.
so that they be not provoked (as the Apostle says) unto wrath: For, too harsh
usage is so far from amending them, as that it does obdurate and harden them
like unto the smiths anuil, with continual beating upon it.

4 Duty.
4. To provide like good parents for them, both food, raiment, and the like, and
in time convenient fit marriages, and if ability will serve, some competencie
of living. For it dishearteneth a child much, to see his father spend all upon
vanity, and without all providence for his children; or when they do their
duty, and earne something with their labor, to have it taken from them, and to
be left without comfort. Good Parents have been evermore provident, Genesis 25.
as Abraham, who left Isaac his inheritance; and gave so much as was fit to his
other children. Ruths very mother in law, was careful to provide for her a
good husband, and this is commended to all Parents by S. Paul.

1. Cor 7. 5. Duty.
5. To bear an equal affection toward their children, unless there be
inequality of desert: otherwise it breeds envy amongst brethren, and
undutifulness to Parents. Thus was it amongst Iaacobs children, who sought the
overthrow of Joseph, for his fathers too much cockeriug him: and this was a
fault in old Isaac, as he knew afterward, placing his affection most upon
Esau. Parents must take heed therefore that they prefer not the eldest so,
giving him all, as that they leave nothing for the rest; nor yet the younger,
depriving the eldest without just cause, of his du^: for either way, there is a
breach of natural duty. What is a just cause of disheriting the eldest, Gen 49.
we may see in Iaacobs last will, where Reuben the eldest is put besides his
right for incest, and Simeon and Leui for bloodshed. So that no deformity, or
defect, but only sin, which puts out of Gods favor, ought to put any
besides this right. Lastly, to be grave, sober, honest and holy, and in all
things to give the example of a father, that is, of one in Gods stead unto his
children: for it is a vain thing in parents, to forbid their children lying,
swearing, drinking, and to be liars, drunkards, and swearers themselves, to bid
them fear God, and serve him, and to be profane themselves. Rather as
Iosuah, thou must be the first and chief in all goodness, saying, J and my
household will serve the Lord, Ios. 24.
Otherwise that sharp sentence belongs to thee; Romans 2.17.
Thou that say a man should not steal, do thou steal etc.

The duty of Masters toward servants. Genesis 18.19.
Masters do also owe a duty unto their servants, as being fathers of their
families, They must teach them also, and command them to fear the Lord, as
Abraham his household. 2. Not be too harsh toward them, by ouer-correcting, by
churlish usage, by too sore laboring them: but to use them, as those that
remember that they also have a master in Heaven: according to that, Col. 4.1.
Ye masters do unto your servants that is just and equal. There must be
discretion therefore used in corrections. Sins against God, are more severely
to be punished, then against themselves; if they be often, more; if seldom,
less; if obstinately, or of purpose, more; if by infirmity, less. And for
labor, they must remember, that the righteous man is merciful to his beast,
much more to his servant. 3. They must duly recompense their labor with fit
maintenance and wages; Iam. 5.4.
for there is a cry against those that keep back their wages, which comes
up to heaven for vengeance. 4. They must not despise their good counsel, if
they can advise them well at any time, but follow it as Naaman did his
servants; and Job acknowledges of himself, saying; If I have despised the
judgment of my servant, and my maid, when they did contend with me. Job 31.13.
For what avails it for a servant to bend his mind for his masters good, if
his advice be never heard. It had been better for the Leuite in his travel, if
he had heard his servant counselling him, Iudic. 19.
he had escaped a great danger, which he doing contrary fell into.

The duty of Princes to subjects.
Kings, Princes and all Magistrates, do owe a duty to their subjects, and to the
common people, which is to deal justly and truly with them, to be coragious to
maintain the right, and to hate covetousness, Exodus 18.2.
as Jethro did wisely counsel Moses to provide for, in setting Judges over the
people, to judge the fatherless and widow, Esa. 1.16.
supporting them in their just causes; not to lift up themselves above their
brethren, or pressing them too much with charges, Deuteronomy 17 19.
as the Lord commands to the Kings of Israel: to reward the good, and to
punish the evil, which is the maine cause why he bears the sword, and has
the Scepter committed to him.

The duty of Ministers to people. 2 Timothy 4.2. Ez^ch 3.17.
Ministers owe a duty to their people, which is publicly to pray for them, and
with them, to preach the word unto them with diligence, in season and out of
season, to watch over them as Ezechiel is charged, to espy their danger, by
reason of their sins, and to admonish them with all earnestness, even as
watchmen do, when the City is in danger by the enemies coming: to care for
them, studying how best to further their sanctification, 1 Pet. 5.2.
as Peter exhorts, Feed the flock of Christ that depends on you caring for
it: not to domineere, or tyrannically to rule over them, Verse 3.
as it follows: Not as Lords over Gods heritage, but that yet may be
examples to the flock. Ephesians. 1.
And lastly, in their private daily prayers, to commend them to the Lord as
Paul professes that he did for the Ephesians and Thessalonians, 1 These 1.2.
Ephesians 6.28. Duty of Husbans to their Wives. Ephesians. 5.30. 1 Cor. 14.34. 1 Pet.
3.7.
etc. and as the people are also bound to pray for the Minister.

1 Cor. 7 3.
Husbands owe a duty to their wives, which is to love them dearly, even as their
own flesh, as Christ loves his Church, to teach them, if they would or ought
to know any thing, to dwell with them as men of understanding, and not to live
separate; and to keep their bodies as proper and peculiar by a sacred band, to
them only, and not as their own, to abuse them with other women, or to deny
them to their lawful wife, as the wife is also bound to her husband.

The duty of rich toward the poor. 1. T^^^. 6.17.
The rich owe a duty toward the poor, and such as be meaner, which is not to
carry themselves haughtily and proudly toward them: for against this the
Apostle gives warning: Warn rich men that they be not high-minded. Wherefore,
as meaner persons give them reverence, so let them be courteous to the
poorest: and another duty is to distribute of their goods unto the poor, as it
follows in the same place. That they do good, and be rich in good works,
and ready to distribute and communicate: This if they do not, they are false
stewards, and shall be turned quite out of office, and have their portion with
hypocrites. 7 If any be learned, or excels in any faculty or science, his
duty is not to be strange and lifted up in the sight of his gifts, but to do
the more good, to seek in all humility to win the more glory to God. As
Apollo is commended to have done, Acts 18.
mightily confuting the Jews out of the Scriptures: and Paul that did so much
excel, became all things to all men, that he might win some.

Quest. 89. What is here forbidden?

Answ. All irreuerence toward those, that be in place and authority above v,
and churlish behavior in such, toward those that be of a low degree.

Explan Before that we come to speak of the sins, something is here to be
premised. Wherefore is the duty of Inferiors only expressed in this
Commandment, and not of Superiors, if all be alike bound hereby? Answ. The
Commandment indeed is here in singular, and different from the rest: but this
omission does not give any whit the more liberty to Superiors, because Parents
and children, Masters and Servants, etc. are relatiues; so that the duty of
the one cannot be set down, but the duty of the other, is by the rule of
relation understood: nay, Superiors are more taxed hereby, if they fail of
their duty, as being of more understanding, and such as therefore must more
readily do without any pressing by express words, seeing (which is also a
more special motive) they are as Gods toward others, in authority, in
majesty, in greatness, and in reverend antiquity.

Oh how foul a thing is it then in them, not to carry them selves accordingly?
if it be a fault in inferiors, in any thing to neglect their duty, much more
are they faulty in neglecting theirs: because they do not only neglect their
duty, which they ought to do, but being so strongly bound, by Gods beneficence
toward them, and it being presumed so far of their readiness on Gods part,
for this honor given unto them, that (as though mere conscience would not
suffer them to be so foully negligent) he makes no mention of that, which they
ought to do.

Disobedience.
Touching the sins against this Commandment, they are of two sorts, as the
duties were. 1. Of Inferiors. 2. Of Superiors. The sin of Inferiors is
irreuerence, that is to be without that awful regard, which ought to be
toward Superiors, and it may be referred to these heads. 1. Disobedience, and
refusing to do, and to be ruled: thus stubborn and unruly children and
servants sin greatly, and stubborn people that will not yield to follow the
directions of Ministers: they were by Gods censure all subject to the same most
fearful punishment: viz. to be stoned to death. For it was the plain Law of
God touching children. See before in their duties to parents. Deuteronomy. 21.18. And
for people, it was commanded, Thou shall do according to all, that they, that
is, Deuteronomy 17.10.11, 12.
the Priests and Levites, teach thee: According to the Law, that they teach
thee thou shall not decline, neither to the right hand, nor to the left: And
that man that will do presumptuosly, not harkning to the Priest, shall dye.
Thus people, that obey not the wholesome laws of the Magistrates, sin
greatly; and if any refuse to be ordered by them, they resist the ordinance of
God, Rom 13.2.
and are specially threatened, that they shall receive to themselves
condemnation.

Quest. Is it a sin then in any thing to do contrary to the Kings laws, for
examples sake, to eat flesh in Lent, or upon Fridayes?

Answ. If the intent of this Law were, that every one should use this
abstinence without exception, it were a sin to disobey, unless necessity did
compel: but the chief politic intent, being, that Fishermen might have
utterance for their fish, and so be encouraged for the good of the
Commonwealth, as the title of that Law shows, and that young things might in
Lent be preserved and not spent before they come to some age and greatness; if
this be observed, and the Law be not purposely crossed, I take it that it is
no sin of disobedience against the higher powers, in regard of the civil and
political prohibition: and the like is to be thought of all other
statute-lawes, their intent and scope must be duly, by all good subjects
observed.

Quest. It is a sin for children to disobey their Parents, by deuoting
themselves in their youth to any religious course, or order, or without, or
contrary to their liking?

Numb 30.1. Math 15.4
Answ. Yea doubtless, for God has taken order, that such a vow, as unlawful,
should be counted of no force. It is therefore merely pharisaicall in the
Romanists, that in this case allow, nay commend disobedience of young and
ignorant children, in deuoting themselves to any Monastical order, though to
the great offense of Parents.

2. Fraudulent and deceitful obedience: Thus servants Deceitfulnes.
but are slothful and negligent behind their backs, they rob and steal from
them, taking meat, drink, and wages to do their work with diligence, but
contrariwise neglect it, and prefer their own ease, they can have but cold
comfort, when they look to the great Lord of all Christ Jesus, that sees all
their sloth and deceit.

3. Deriding and scoffing at Superiors, as Ham mocked at Noah, for which he
was accursed in himself, Genesis 9. Deriding Superiors.
and posterity. This is a common vice in wayward youth, when they are taught
any thing, that is good, or admonished of their vanity, if not openly, which
they dare not, yet in heart they mock at the admonitions of Parents, Masters
and Ministers. But see what a cutse of God is out against them. Pro. 30.17.
The eye that mocketh his father and despises the instruction of his mother,
let the Ravens of the valley pick it out, and the young eagles eat it. This
irreuerent scoffing never escaped Gods punishing hand. The children that mocked
Elisha, 2 King. 2.
calling him Baldpate, were suddenly torn in pieces by Bears to two and forty
of them. The Ephraimites that mocked Iphtah, and his Gileadites calling them
runagates of Ephraim, were slain to two and forty thousands. Nahash with his
Ammonites, 1 Samuel 11.
that mocked at the conditions of peace offered by tbe men of Iabesh Gilead,
saying, that if they might put out every man's right eye, and bring that shame
upon Israel, they should have peace, were all slain and scattered, so as that
not two of them were left together. And what fearful end the Jews came to,
that mocked at Christ, and the holy Apostles, we all know. Fear therefore to
scoff at any good man, but much more at such as thou ought to reverence for
his place and function.

Cursing Superio^rs. Exodus 21.17. Exodus 22.28
4 Cursing and backbiting Superiors; He that curses Father or Mother, shall
die the Death. And the Lord expressly commands; Thou shall not rail upon
the Judge, nor speak evil of the Ruler of the people. Thus therefore
children, servants, people, that let loose their tongues against their
Governors, to curse and rail upon them, take the right way to bring Gods curse
upon themselves. Numb. 23
Balaams case shall be easier at the last day, then theirs, for he durst not
curse, where God forbade him.



Too much obedience to Superiors.
Now, as this Law is broken by detracting, and taking away from the reverence of
Superiors, so their is a sin in over reuerencing them.

Acts 4.19
We must rather obey God, then men. If Parents, or Masters bid thee lie,
steal, work upon the Sabbatth, or the like, for their gain, thou must in all
modesty deny so to do: If Kings and Rulers command Idolatry, Superstition, or
Heresy, obey not lest escaping their hands thou fall into the hands of the
Lord.

Quest. Whether is a Minister of Gods Word, being forbidden to preach, by the
Magistrate, to forbear to execute this his office of Preaching, seeing the
Apostle did not though straightly charged?

Ministers suspended may not preach.
Answ. The ordinary Ministers of these times, are bound in this case to obey
the Magistrate, as touching the public execucution of their office; because,
that howsoever they have an inward calling from God, yet their outward, to the
public place is from man, or by man, and may again be taken away by man: but
it was not so with the Apostles, who as the other Ministers of those times,
were immedialy and extraordinarily set a work by God only. The only
preaching that they may now in this case exercise, is by way of conference and
exhortation in private, provided always, that it be not contrary, but as the
Law does allow: otherwise the power is resisted. Here we may see what the
Anabaptists are, that are enemies to authority, viz. even a sinagogue of
fantastic braine-sick souls, enemies to Gods ordinance: and so are many other
humorus people of these times, who though in word they acknowledge the higher
powers, yet in practice they do not, seeing all their opinions, and practices
in matter of religion are still to disgrace authority, and government hereby
established, both Civil and Ecclesiastical. I know that many of them are
zealous persons, but they are zealous, as the Apostle says to the Galathians,
amiss. Oh that they would weigh, that next unto zeal toward God, is zeal to
Gods vicegerents, and where they are ill spoken of, and despised in the heart
(as it is, where their ways of government are impugned) there can hardly be
right zeal toward God: it being a mark of such as are ordained to damnation,
to despise government, Jude, verse. 8.
and to speak evil of those that be in authority.

Acts 12.
Secondly, Superiors are over reverenced, by ascribing too much unto them, and
extolling them too highly; as the people are noted to have done to Herod,
saying the voice of God, and not of man, whereat the Lord was so displeased,
that he struck him with an horrible death: and as the Popes flatterers extol
him, calling him, alterum deum in terris: another God upon earth; and Dominum
Deum papam, the Lord God the Pope: with other the like blasphemous appellations.

1. Cor. 11.1.
Thirdly, by making them absolute patterns to be followed in all things: for it
is no excuse for people living in sin, to say they follow their minister, or
for children to follow parents, or subjects their Princes: for examples of the
greatest are no further to be followed, but as they follow Christ, as Paul
speaks of himself; Follow me as I follow Christ Jesus. The blind guide, and
he that follows him, shall both fall into the ditch. 4. By preposterous
observance toward them in the Congregation, which is, when we rise up to great
persons, being in the very act of Gods worship; this is absurd, and as much as
if we should say, by thy leave, Lord, a little, here comes a greater then
thou; for why else do thou rise, if he be greatest, and most worthy, whom
thou do now worship? Wherefore look not for, nay, suffer not this absurd
honor to be done unto you; ye great persons, parents, and masters, unless ye
would part stakes with God, yea, be better accounted of, whilst men rise off
their knees to God, to bow unto you.

5. By our humble prostrating the body unto them, as unto God: Acts 10.
Saint Peter forbad this unto Co^nelius, and the Angels raised up Daniel, and
Saint John prohibiting this kind of reverence to be done by one fellow-seruant
to another. This gesture where it proceeds from religious humiliation and
worship, comes very near the brinkes of open Idolatry, and cannot but
incur that reprehension, Take heed thou do i^ not. But in civil worship
performed to Kings, I dare not condemn the lowest prostrations, whereas I see
in the Scripture that such gestures were usually exhibited to the most pious
Kings. 2. Sam. 14.22.
So Ioab to David, fell to the ground on his face, and bowed himself. Yet
could I wish, that Christian Princes in their piety, and by their authority,
would enact a difference between the signs of reverence, yeeldable to the
heavenly and the earthly Majesty, that there might be some outward, as well as
inward, adoring gesture appropriated to Gods worship utterly uncommunicable to
any mortal man, though bearing the image of God, and exercising a vice-gerency
of his Sovereignty.



Answ. Kneeling to ask blessing.
I take it, that this custom is lawful, and grounded upon this Commandment;
Honor thy father, and mother, that they may prolong thy days, that is, by
their blessing, which in godly parents has ever been accounted a sacred ^^ing.
Therefore Isaac would give his blessing to his son Esau before his death, and
Jacob to his children, and the children of I seph, which examples, though they
were extraordinary, as far as they were special prophesies, yet they show it
to be a very ancient and laudable custom, and of excellent use, for children
to ask and parents to give their blessing unto them, because, as their curse
has always been ominous to wicked children, and disobedient; that is, such as
has bin followed with Gods curse: so their blessing has been auspicious, that
is, such, as has been followed with Gods blessing upon good children, and
obedient. And the like is to be thought of the blessing of spiritual parents,
that it has virtue by Gods ordinance annexed unto it, and therefore is not to
be neglected, but reverently to be received, before that we depart the
congregation. For kneeling unto parents, and unto Princes, if it be but as unto
men, it is as lawful as any other low bowing unto them: for nothing can be
pressed against the one, but it alike impugneth the other: if it be otherwise
intended by way of religious adoration (as some Heathen Emperors have taken
upon them the honor of Gods) it is Idolatrous.

The sins of Superiors.
And hitherto of the sins of inferiors. Superiors sin against this
commandment by too much austerity and rigor, or by too much remissenes. Their
sin may be referred to these heads. 1. Cruelty, and threatening: for this is
most unjust, and unequal for the reverence and service, which servants, and
children do to their parents, and masters: wherefore it is forbidden; Ye
masters do the same things to them, Ephesians. 6.9.
putting away threatening, knowing, that even your master is in heaven, and
there is no respect of persons with him. Thou do rather represent the devil
(who strikes fear into men, and terror) in thus doing, then God, whose Image
thou should bear.

2. Denying them things convenient, meat, drink, cloth,

2. Tim. 5.8.
If there be any that provides not for his own, and namely for them of his
household, he denies the faith, and is worse then an infidel.

Ioshuah Abraham, El^ana, Hannah, and all good governors sitting down in the
kingdom of God, and themselves shut out of doors.



Samuel, 1. Sam. 12.
and David the King, after that he was well schooled, witness that, which he
professes saying; Psalm. 101.1.
I will sing of mercy and judgment. And so scrupulous was he, that he would
not take of gift, much less by violence, the threshing floor of Arannah, but
would buy it, to offer sacrifice there, 2. Sam. 24.21.
although the Lord had commanded him to build an Altar in that place.

The dispensation is committed to me, says Paul, 2. Cor 9.16.
woe is unto me then, if I preach not the Gospel A threefold woe then is unto
them, that have not only the calling, but the hire also, and that double, and
trebble, if they use not diligence, as is sometime seen to the scandal of the
ministry.

so that they pull upon them the burden of their sins also: and because many
are ready to follow them, more then men of meaner condition, they make their
estate by far more fearful, then others, the sins of multitudes, besides
their own, lying at the door. Wherefore, when a grievous fall is threatened to
wicked Judges, it is said, Ye shall fall, Psalm. 82.7.
as one of the Princes. The Kings of Israel, that were wicked, are said to have
made Israel to sin, they are even the eldest sons of Satan, that be such, and
therefore good reason, that they should share deeply in his inheritance.

Quest. 90. Whence is the reason of this Commandment taken?

Answ. From the promise of long life, if God please not to prevent us with the
blessing of eternal life.

1. Tim 4.19.
Explan. The promise here annexed may be also read; That they may prolong thy
days. Not, that parents have any power so to do, in themselves, but partly
keeping them from many dangers, which they are ready to run into, to the
shortening of their days, but are prevented, whilst they obediently follow
their grave, and godly counsel; and partly blessing them by virtue of Gods
ordinance with such efficacy, as that this redoundeth to their great good, even
for the prolonging of their happy, and good estate in this world. And in this
sense it is usual in the holy Scriptures, to ascribe that to the instrument,
which is proper to God. Paul commending to Timothy, the study and teaching of
the word of God, says, in so doing, thou shall save both thy self and others.
And to the Corinthians he says, I have begotten you, unto Christ Jesus.
Therefore of the reason then is thus.

1. That is duly of all to be done, by which they may live Honor thy father,
and mother. Therefore all are to honor father, and mother.

2. Thou will honor them gladly, by whom thy life may

For the first of these. Life is so sweet, that all desire it, and most, though
it be joined with much bitterness, and sorrow: but to live long well, all do
naturally most earnestly desire, so that they would follow any rule, though
very hard, for this: but all other rules are vain, this only effectual, the
Lord the greatest Physician tells thee so. Do not therefore harden thy self
against it, but bring down thy rebellious nature, and become obedient
servants, children, and people of all sorts.

For the second. Every physician, whom experience teaches to be a means of
the health and long life of his patients, men will honor in the time of
necessity, seeking to them, and carefully following their directions, and he
thinks himself a happy man, that can come to the best, neither will he for
any thing displease him, though he be froward, and hasty toward him, although
his skill often fails him, and he be, till that time a very stranger unto
him: but thy parents are no strangers, but such, as may challenge something at
thy hands, because they have bred, and brought thee up with care and pains,
and God gives them this blessing to prolong thy days, and not to fail, if
thou honor them. Foolish then, and out of his wits is he, and worse then a
brute beast (which always does that, which is natural) whosoever gives not
honor to his parents, according to the scope of this commandment.



How parents prolong their childrens life.
or the Gallows with shame, in their very prime.

2. It is always verified: because obedient children live well, and in the
fear of God, and to live well, is to live long, according to the proverb; 1.
Tim. 5 6.
Been viuere, bis biuere est; To live well, is to live twice: and to live ill,
is never to live, but to be ever dead, as S. Paul speaks of wanton widows;
She that lives in pleasure, is dead, whilst she lives: so that, though the
disobedient live long, yet they have not this blessing of long life, the
obedient, and dutiful have it, though they live not many years: for one day
is better, then a thousand of the rebellious, Eccles 8.12.
which is the cause, that the Wise man makes no reckoning of a sinners life,
though he live an hundred years.

3. If it be not verified for life here, yet it is more then made good by
their taking hence, they receiving for frailty, strength; for baseness, glory;
for temporalitie, eternity. Who will say, that if the King promise any of his
houshold-seruants by name, one of his Guard, a Pentioner, or Porter, that he
shall ever enjoy his place, and yet remoueth him to be the Master of his Horse,
his Treasurer, or Chamberlain, that he is not so good as his word unto him?
and who can say then, that the Lord of all, if he promise along life in this
miserable world, and yet remoueth to a Kingdom everlasting, that he is not
true of his promise?

1. King 14.
Does any man think Enoch the less blessed, because he was taken away some
hundreths of year sooner, then others? or does he think it an unhappiness in
the good son of Jeroboam, for that he was taken away in his youth? no more
are they unhappy, or less blessed, but so much the more, whom the Lord is
pleased to take away from the evils of this world to come, as says the
Prophet. Esaias 57.1.






2 More specially, because children that honor parents, may be said in some
sort to prolong their days, through that joy, wherewith they are affected,
when they do well: for as sorrow shortneth the days, according to that of
father Iaacob, ye shall b^ing my gray head, with sorrow, to the grave; Genesis 42
38.
so joy prolongeth them. Again, by nourishing them in their necessity, they
prolong their days, even as young storkes, so that it is most equal with the
Lord, to give them this recompense, in prolonging their days: which also is an
argument of force, to move to obedience, and to make them fly disobedience,
seeing this is a death to their good parents, and they are like the viper
herein, which, as is thought, is the death both of sire and dam in the
breeding, and coming forth into the world.

3. Because the way to come to an estate of honor, is giving honor, according
to our proverb, qui nescit parere, nescit imperare, He knows not how to rule,
that knows not how to obey first. Wherefore it is just with God to cut off
the disobedient, that they may not live to honor, and to prolong the life of
the obedient, that they may come in their age to be obeyed and honored.

Quest. 91. Which is the sixth Commandment, or the second of the second Table?

Answ. Thou shall do no murder.

Quest. 92. What is here forbidden?

Answ. All murdering of our selves or others, and all approbation hereof,
either by command, counsel, consent, or concealment: secondly, all injurious
actions tending to the prejudice of our neighbors life: thirdly, all railing
and reuiling speeches: fourthly, all murtherous desires and affections of the
heart, as malice, hatred and envy: fifthly, all cruelty toward the creature,
which shows a murtherous mind in us.

Matthew. 5.22,
Explan. The Lord having provided for the upholding of every man in his estate
and condition, to prevent a confusion amongst the orders of men, proceeds
here to take away particular abuses, which, if they should be, this order
cannot stand, and first the most horrible of all other, murder, the despoyling
men of their lives. Now, because the Pharisees erred, when they restrained the
sin here, to the outward and complete act of murder, our Savior Christ
reproving this their absurd cleaving to the letter of the text, I have more
largely according to his blessed direction set down, the sin against this
commandment. It may well be referred to these five heads.

First, actual murder, which is either of our selves, or of other men. 1.
Thou shall not murder thy self, howsoever thou art pressed by temptations of
poverty, disgrace, or other heavy crosses, whereupon the devil is busy about
thee, and seeks to drive thee to this desperate selfe-execution. Thou shall
fear, and never yield to so horrible an act, whatsoever becomes of thee. And
that thou may the better be preserved, because the devil prevails against
many in these days, and against some, that have formerly had a care to do
well, I have set down here the most effectual means of preservation in all
assaults.

Forerunners of selfe-murther.
First, take heed of all forerunners of these temptations, as of pride, and
carrying a higher sail than thy estate will bear: for when a man comes thus
to be spent, and must necessarily come down, and be laid open to the world,
according to his means, his proud heart cannot endure to yield, if by any
means he may avoid this open debasement, whereupon Satan is ready, and bids
him murder himself: this is plainly to be seen in many examples in our
days* Another forerunner of this, is some notorious sin, or sins, which
are committed in secret, but the conscience will not suffer to be secret, but
accuses for them, and d then Satan lays hold heerevpon, pressing the
threatenings of the Law, and never cease till he has driven a man to the
desperate making away of himself.

These hideous sins are murder, adultery, perjury, apostacy, or backsliding
from the truth before embraced, and such like. A third, is general security,
in matters of religion, from which when the eyes come to be opened, there
arises an horror and trouble in conscience, which the Devil further presses
to desperate selfe-murther. Wherefo^e let every man first be careful to avoid
these ways.

Let him put on humility, living rather in meaner fashion, then he is worth:
let him watch over his hands and heart and tongue against mu^thering, against
adultery, and uncleanness, against lying and fo swearing, and over his ways
against backsliding: and let him in all his dealings keep a good conscience.
If thou shall say I fear not this temptation, I hope I shall keep me without
this pensive carfulness, far enough from it: hear what the Apostle says,
Rom 9.
^ee not high-minded but fear: consider that thou art a man, and if a man,
subject to the like passions, as the meanest and worst of men, if thou take not
the better heed. It is no wisdom to surfeit the body, and then to seek a cure,
neither is it wisdom, to let the enemy into the City, and then to seek to
drive him out again. In like manner, it is no wise dome but great folly to put
a man's self into the hazard of this desperation, thinking then to be cured
again.

^ Labor for pitience.
Labor for patience in all crosses, according to the example of thy master
Christ, if being a servant thou be buffetted, pinched with hunger, and hardly
entreated; or being a child, art neglected of thy parents, and discouraged, or
being a subject, thou art in danger through thy Princes displeasure; consider
not so much the greatness of thy cross, as the reward, if thou have patience
consider the vanity of the most excellent things in this world, the shortness
of all crosses here, and the most worthy partners which thou have, both Christ
and all the holy Prophets, and Apostles, to whose society, it is joy to be
joined.

The want of this patience breeds discontent, and discontent, with the Devils
furtherance, desperation and murder.

3 Consider, if at any time thou be thus tempted, that to murder a man's
self, is the most unnatural Sin, that can be in the world: and therefore
(because other means of punishment is taken away) the law does brand the dead
carcass with infamous burial.

2. It is also the most dangerous and unrecoverable (except the sin against
the holy Ghost) for it seldom gives any time of repentance, and perhaps more
seldom any probability. He that dies thus, dies alas in Satan's work, and I
fear me in Satan's hands. Yet I presume not to confine Gods extraordinary and
boundles mercy, that can reach it self forth inter ^ontem and font^m, after
voluntary headlong percipice. I deny not this to be possible. But O dreadful
trial of this balance, which in probability weighs down so heavy on the
other side, as to press wretched man to hell it self. Distressed Brother, art
thou tempted to this hellish and monstrous sin? Gather thy strength unto
thee, say, Avoid Satan; if thou tell me I shall notwithstanding be saved,
commending my soul to God when I dye, say thou art a liar, and the father of
lies: for the truth says, ^f a righteous man turns from his righteousness
and commits iniquity in the sin wherein he is found he shall surely dye.
If he tells thee that thou shall thus end thy sorrows, say, thou art heerin
a liar also Satan, I shall pass thus rather from sorrow to greater sorrow,
from temporal woe to eternal, to be gnawed upon by the worm that never
dies, and to be burned with the fire that never goes out.

If it be said, there are some that dye thus, Object. 2. Selfe-murther ^^
p^eseru^ virtue inuiolate. August. de Ciuit: D^i.
to preserve virtue inviolate, as Lucretia to preserve her chastity, and
certain Matrons of Rome, of whom S. Augustine writes: and some, that they may
be glorious Martyrs, as the Donatists of old, holding, that if they could
procure death to themselves they should immediately pass to glory in heaven.

Sol.
They are all in the same dangerous and demnable plight; notwithstanding,
without extraordinary, and even miracu-repentance, they perish, as guilty of
their own death. Read S. Augustine, in the same place, excellently setting
forth the vice of Lucretia, which by the Heathen* was commended for a virtue.

2. Murthereing of other men: 2. Unjust bloodsh^d.
This is unjustly to shed the blood of any man, by any means whatsoever.
First, I say, it is an unjust shedding of blood: because there is a shedding of
blood, that is no sin, as of the blood of creatures, which are given unto man
for meat, or which are any way noisome unto him, contrary to the Tacian
heresy, which denied it to be lawful to kill any thing. Again, there is s
shedding of the blood of man, which is no sin, viz. when it is done justly,
by such persons as to whom it does belong: and this is by the Magistrate, or at
his appointment only, and that by just proceedings: for, He ^eare^h not the
sword in vain, Romans 13.4.
but is Gods Minister, to take vengeance on those that do evil. And it is so
necessary for them to put to death, where there is just and necessary cause, as
that if they spare, Gods curse will follow: for the Lord has expressly taught,
Number. 35.33.
that blood defiles the land, and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that
is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it: And on the other side if
they put to death unjustly through malice or for any private revenge, they are
murderers: for so far forth only may they revenge by death, as they are Gods
Ministers set a work by him.

Ioh. 21.15.
Whence we may see that heathen Kings, persecuting the poor Christians to the
death, were murderers: and in like manner are such, as be in authority in the
Church of Rome, that do diversely murder the poor people of God, by burning,
by the sword, and by cutting their throats in butcherly manner, only for
following a righter, and more holy way, then is allowed amongst them. Peter, of
whose succession they brag so much, durst not so to have turned his masters
charge, Feed my sheep, feed my lambs, into killing them though they had run
out of the fold. He would not have taken heart upon so sleighty a ground, Act.
10.
up Peter, kill an eat, as some do, to justify this killing of the poor
sheep of Christ; nay, to murder or expose to murder Gods Anointed. Lastly,
there is another just cause of shedding blood: viz. in lawful and just wars,
and in defense of a man's own life: for just wars are called the Lords
battles, 2 Chronicles. 20.15.
as Iehoshaphat encouraging his men, says, The battle is not yours but Gods.

Answ.
This is the fancy of the Anabaptists, whose follies are easily refuted out of
their own furies and ourages in Germany, where they that impugned lawful war
and Magistracy, made use in their rebellions of that which themselves
disauowed, namely, the Sword. And as for the vocation of a Soldier, surely,
John Baptist when the Soldiers came unto him, Luke 3.14.
demanding of him, What shall we do? Did not answer them that they must of
necessity cast off their Swords if they would be the servants of God, but
rather advised the^ to remain still the Military servants of Caesar, else what
place can those precepts have, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any
falsely, and be content with your wages. Another frenzy of the same sect,
denies all use of the sword, at home in time of peace by way of civil justice,
as if it were against Christian perfection put any man to death by the hand of
public authority though for never so grievous a crime tending to the
dissolution of humane society, and defacing the Image of God. Alas, frantique
souls, that in hatred of Murder, maintain Murder. Shall he, that has
murdered one man, be suffered by suruiuing to embrue his hands with the
guiltless blood of more. Our Savior himself (whose nearest Disciples these
saintly innocents would seem to be) expressly pronounced this law of Justice.
Math. 2^.52.
They that take the Sword shall perish by the Sword. That is, private auengers
that wring the sword out of the Magistrates hand to usurp the use of it, for
their own passions, must expect to feel the edge of it, and to be cut off by
it. This public revenge is so far from being a sin, that (as even now I
showed) it is a necessary duty in him that bears the Sword. If this Sword had
no edge, or were not employed upon just occasion, verily it were borne in vain.

Ob^ect.
But the Apostle Paul, say they, speaks of Heathen, not Christian Magistrates.

Gods Minister? Do we not owe tribute and honor to Christian Kings, as well
as to heathen? Surely much more. Are there not that do evil (malefactors in
an high kind) among Christians. Alas too many. I conclude therefore, that that
God who in this Commandment says to every private man, Thou shall not kill,
does therewithal and thereby not only permit, but also command his own public
Minister to kill for the prevention or auengement of killing other heinous
crying sins.

Q^est.
Here it may be demanded whether this use of the Sword belongs always and
only to the Magistrate, seeing there are in the Scripture examples of others,
who have killed and have therein been not only blameless but also commended,
as Phinees and Moses.

Phinees had no civil power, yet is greatly commended for killing Cozby and
Zimri. But this he did out of special instinct, and extraordinary zeal, which
God stirred up in him for the quenching of an extraordinary plague* Moses,
being yet but a private man, slew an Egyptian that strove with an Israelite:
But Moses was an eminent type of Christ, and performed this and other such
actions as a rescuer of the people of God. And lest we should doubt whether he
had a special instinct unto this enterprise, Saint ^teuen shows that Moses,
even before the solemn commission given him by God appearing in the flaming
bush, had an inward vocation and notice of his own office of a Deliverer,
whereof this slaying the Egyptian was, as it were, the first act an hands^l:
which, as himself knew, so he thought that the people of Israel would
acknowledge. Act 7.^5.
For he supposed his brethren would have understood how that God by his hand
would deliver them. In brief, I say, to such Heroical examples, that we
Christians must live by rules and not by exceptions, within the line of our
ordinary callings, and without aspiring to a boundless imitation of
extraordinary actions.

Heree it may be demanded unto what crimes the use of the Magistrates Sword
ought to be extended: and how far the prescript of Capital Laws given to
the Israelites binds Christian Commonwealths. Whereto I answer: first (as
modesty requires) that I will not take upon me the office of a Lawmakers, by
defining this. Secondly, that many of those Laws were peculiar to the
Commonwealth of Israel, and agree not with our, and other Commonwealths.
Thirdly, as for the chief defiances of the first Table, as hellish blasphemy
and gross Idolatry, I doubt not but that in all Christian Estates they ought
to be capital, as they were among the Jews.

As for the second Table, this commandment above all the rest is in all
Nations fenced and guarded with this extreme punishment ex lege talionis. in
the same kind. Limb for limb, life for life, which is of force so generally,
not out of imitation of the laws of the Jews, but out of the instinct of
nature, and balance of evident justice. How far other offenses against our
neighbor are to be made capital is a greater difficulty by reason of the
variety of natures and dispositions in diverse people: with true respect,
whereunto there may be joined an aim at the best and most principal positive
Laws prescribed by God unto the Jews, as I have heretofore touched in the
preface before the Commandments.

Genesis 9. Exo. ^^2.
To proceed now in the description of that which is here forbidden under that
name of murder, I say it is to shed blood unjustly, that is, ad d^liquium
animae, to the spilling of life, for thus the Lord describes killing every
where. Again I say, it is a shedding of blood, that is, direct and purposed,
not an act by which blood is shed by accident, besides the intent of the doer.

Exodus 21 13.
For in this case it is no sin but in a fort Gods act, according to the words
of the Law; If a man has not laid wait, but God has offered him into his
hand, I will appoint thee a pla^e whither he shall fly: and a particular
instance is given, Deuteronomy. 19.5.
If a man be felling a^ree and his hand strike with the axe, and the head slip
from the helu^ and hit his neighbor, that he dies: here it is no murder,
therefore he is not worthy to dye by whose stroke this was done, there was a
place of refuge for such to save himself in. But it is not so if two men
quarrel and fight, and one kills the other. Men may mince it here, and call
it only manslaughter; but indeed it is plain murder, as is evident by the
very English word of this commandment, Thou shall do no murder, which is the
translation of the Latin, N^n o^ci^^es. And surely those that are co^uicted of
Manslaughter, have in their indictment their load of this word occia^^t. So
then murder legally, and precisely taken is either comprised under occision,
or else it is not forbidden in this commandment, which were very absurd.
Moreover, the case of our excused and refined manslaughter, differs much from
this case Put by the Lord, by which the Law for the quitting of him that slew
his neighbor unawares, is illustrated.

For though the word, not laying wait* be used, and not hating his bro^her in
times p^ssed; looking to which words only, his sin may be extenuated, for
that he that slays his neighbor in a sudden quarrel, may be said not to
have hated him before: yet consider the instance that is given, of one cutting
wood, to make plain this Law, and it will appear that the Lord has no
meaning to give any toleration, to any killing in quarrels, but only out of
all pretending before, or intending then, as it is not with him that kills
another in heat and fury, seeing howsoever he does it suddenly, yet he
endeavors it and does it willingly.

Indeed it somewhat lesseneth the fault, if it shall manifestly appear, that
slaying was against the intent of the striker, either for that the instrument,
wherewith, was but some little stone or stick, not likely to kill, or for that
the part of the body smitten, was not any principal, and not much wounded, and
herein favor may be showed. Because that otherwise a master giving his
servant correction, by the striking of one blow unawares, and death following,
should become a murderer, whereas oftentimes death has followed upon a small
cause.

But in these cases our Laws and Statutes do sufficiently provide. And as for
the case of Manslaughter now discussed by me, I do not presume to make my
self regibus Sapientorem, but only declare Gods positive Law, which if I deem
to be more equal and judicious then the law of other Nations, I see not why
any man should be agrieued thereat.

Sam 12.
Lastly, I add by any means whatsoever, and thus all accessaries to murder,
are murderers. First and chiefly he that commands, or counsels, as David
made himself guilty of the murder of Vriah, Achitophel of David, if it had
been proceeded according to his counsel, and the high Priests of the murder
of Christ.

2. He that consents as Pilate did unto the Jews, about the killing of
Christ, Act. 8.1.
though he washed his hands, and ^aul unto the killing of Steven.

3. He that concealeth, as is set down in the case of a man found slain,
whose murderer is unknown, the Elders of the City nearest shall purge
themselves of the guilt of this blood by washing their hands and saying, Deuteronomy.
21.7.
our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it: so that if
any had seen it, and not revealed the murder, he had made himself guilty of
murder.

Now, this murder is so odious before God, as that he which does it, must die
without any favor; yea, Exodus 21.14.
if he flies to the Sanctuary, he shall be pulled away from thence; for, thou
shall take him from mine altar* says the Lord, and put him to death. Whence we
may see, how great the Popes presumption is, in giving pardon for gross
murders, to such as fly to any popish sanctuary.

1 Murder, a most grievous sinno.
But justly has the Lord appointed this severe punishment: first, because
murder is the destruction of a little world, as man is rightly called, wherein
the wonderful, wisdom, power, and mercy of God does as much appear. 2.
Because it is the defacing of Gods image, which is in every man, betwixt which,
and the clipping of the Kings coin, having his image, there is no comparison.
3. Because it is an incroching upon Gods office, to whom alone it belongs, to
call men when it pleases him, out of this world. 4. Because it is the greatest
breach of love and peace, and so the greatest sin against man* John 8.44.


Genesis 4.
Whence it is, that Christ entitleth the Devil a murderer, as by his proper
name, and how secretly soever murder be committed, it is noted above all
other, to be a crying sin. Cains murder cried to Heaven against him. The
Egyptians murder made amongst the Jews children, cried against them. The sin
of the rich, denying the hire of the poor, cried to Heaven, and this is a kind
of murder also: James 5.4.
in these places we read of sins that are crying for vengeance; to show,
that murder of all sins is the most crying sin, so that the murder shall
not rest, but if man reuengeth not, God will, if man cannot know it, God will
make it known, sometime making the dead body to bewray the murderer, sometime
the birds, and sometime the murderers own conscience. And hitherto of the
head sin against this Law.

2 Against quarrelling.
A second sin here, is the next degree unto murder, all injury done unto our
neighbor, tending to the prejudice of his life. 1. By striking and fighting in
private, unjust quarrelling, whereby it comes to pass, that an eye, or tooth
is lost, the head, the face, or the arm is bruized, or broken, or some other
part of the body hurt. The Lord provides for the punishment hereof; Eye for
eye, tooth for tooth, Exodus 21.24.
hand for hand, and to pay the charges of the party stricken, during the time
of the healing. 2. By grinding the faces of the poor, in selling, and letting
without all conscience, in diminishing their hire, or in taking their means
away from them, this is also called oppression, Esaias 1.15.
by which rich men's hands are filled with blood, and such an oppressing bloody
sin, as that it shall escape no more then actual murder, when the poor cry
out under this burden: Exodus 22.24.
the Lord threatens, that his wrath shall be kindled, and he will kill them
that use it. 3. By using any outward means of impairing our neighbors life,
or health; as if the Physician or Surgeon shall deal falsely with his
patient, giving him rather things against, then for his health, that he may be
the longer under his hands, or having no skill, or but little, shall pretend
skill sufficient, and so keep him to the indangering of his health and life,
from such as be more skillful: and likewise if the Apothecarie, through a
greedy desire of gain, or by neglect shall give one thing for another,
unwholesome, improper ingredients, in stead of the prescribed, here is not only
a wicked deceit, but a degree of murder. And as it is, in regard of others, so
also is it in regard of a man's own self, if he shall by any means willingly
impair his own health, rather choosing to endanger his life in time of
sickness, then that he will be at charge for the means of recovery in the time
of health, rather staruing through idleness, then working: or on the contrary
side, following drunkenness, surfeting and whoring, to the breeding of noisome
diseases in his body; thus, and whatsoever way else he takes, to the prejudice
of his own life, besides his sin against other Commandments, he is guilty
of self murder.

3 Against railing speeches.
The third sin is to rail, and revile in speeches, although no stroke is
given: for this is also a degree of murder, Christ himself being Judge, where
speaking of murder, he says, Whosoever shall say unto his brother, Matthew.
5.22.
Racha, shall be worthy to be punished by a Counsel; and whosoever shall say,
Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire: Prou. 12.18.
For railing, and bitter words, are like the pricking of swords, and therefore
are not only forbidden, but all appearance hereof by crying out aloud, Ephesians.
4.31.
where the Apostle bids to put away anger, evil speaking, and crying. And
good reason, that this should be forbidden here, as a degree of murder, seeing
experience teaches, that of words, blows do commonly arise.

4 Against malice, hatred, and envy.
The fourth sin, is to have murtherous affections of malice, hatred, and envy
against our brother, or but the first degree hereof, unadvised anger: for to
prevent the height of these evil affections, the Lord threatens such, as be
unadvisedly angry, as culpable of judgment; and Saint James says, Matthew 5.22.
Matthew. 5.22. James 1.20.
that the anger of man does not work the righteousness of God. This unadvised
anger is heat arising in us, upon some private injury done unto us, or to our
friend, pricking us forward to revenge, and this may well be said, not to work
the righteousness of God, because it sets not a man the right way, but
contrary to that, which the Lord has appointed us, saying; Romans 12 19. Ephesians.
4.26.
Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it. There is a kind of anger, which is
commanded; Be angry, but sin not, but this is not an humane, but holy anger,
and has these properties. First, Properties of holy anger. 1. Against sin.
it is only against sin, and not against that, which is a private displeasure
done unto us. Such was the anger of Moses, when as coming from the Lord with
the tables of the law in his hands, seeing the idolatry of the people, he threw
them down, not being able to hold, when he saw God thus highly dishonored.

2. It is only, because God is offended: 2. Because God is offended.
for the same sin may be to the offending of God, and of our selves also,
because it is some injury unto us: as when a servant neglects his masters
business behind his back, or spends his money at the Alehouse; or when a
people walks stubbornly against their Minister, or ruler; in these, and the
like cases our anger must not be for our selves, but for our God. Here meek
Moses himself erred at the waters of Meribah, when the people murmured for
water, so that he could not enter into the land of Canaan.

3. It is not sudden, but upon deliberation, 3. It is not sudden. James 1.19.
Theodor. 5. cap. 17.
according to that precept; Be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath:
Thus Ambrose Bishop of Millaine obtained at the hands of Theodosius the
Emperor, after that he had greatly offended by sudden anger, that he should
not suffer any decree made in his anger to be executed till thirty days after.

4. It does not continue long Psalm. 03.89. Ephesians. 4.26.
4. It does not continue long, but is soon over again, where there is
repentance, according to the example of our Lord, who is slow to anger, and
ready to forgive: wherefore it is said; Let not the Sun go down upon thy
wrath.

5. It arises from love. 1. Cor. 13. Gal. 6.1.
5. It arises from love, and is guided by love, the love of God, and the love
of our neighbor, that has sinned: for whatsoever is without this, is sin:
and if any be fallen by infirmity, says the Apostle, restore such an one with
the Spirit of meekness. When anger is thus ordered, it is so far from being
a sin, as that it is necessary in all men it is zeal for Gods glory, and out
of this anger, the disgraceful words of fools, wicked children, sons of a
whore, etc. have rightly, and without sin been used, as by the Prophets, our
Savior Christ, and by the Apostles. But out of these cases, anger is fleshly,
and if it be more violent, it is hatred, if it dwells in a man to make him
watch his opportunity to be revenged, it is malice, if it causes joy, when it
falls out ill unto our neighbor, and grief, when it is well with him, it is
devilish envy, if it be a perpetual bar to reconciliation, it is a
reprobate affection, as of such as cannot be appeased. Romans 1.30.
Now as the very act of murder has been showed to be a most odious sin, so
are these degrees of railing, anger, etc.

1. First, the heart and tongue is here set on fire, of the fire of hell, James
3.
neither good men, nor good Angels durst ever do thus, no, not Michael the
Archangell, when he strove with the Devil, about the body of Moses, Jude,
verse 9.
he durst not blame him with cursed speaking, but said, the Lord rebuke thee.

2. To sin thus, is to be a murderer before God, even as Cain was, John 3.15.
for, he that hates his brother is a manslayer.

Romans 3.13.14.
3. It is a proper brand of the wicked; His throat is an open Sepulcher, the
poison of Aspes is under his lips: his mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.

5. Properties of cruelty. Prou 12.10. Cruelty in the looks. Genesis 4. Genesis 31.2.
5. The fifth sin against this Commandment is al cruelty toward man or beast:
for the righteous man is noted to be merciful, even to his beast. Cruelty is
sometime in the very look and countenance, when it is cast down toward any
man, thus was Cains toward Abel, before his murder, and Labans countenance
expressed his malice against Jacob, before his departure: and this downward
look is a sin in any, when an ill mind is hereby set forth, as it is for the
most part. 2. In the behavior there is cruelty, when it is harsh, In their
behavior.
and churlish, as Nabals is said to have been toward his servants, so as that
they could not tell how to speak to him: of him therefore it is said, He was
churlish, 1. Sam. 23.3,
and ill conditioned and this is an ill condition indeed, and unworthy a
Christian, seeing our lesson is, Learn of me, that J am meek and gentle.
Matthew. 11. Too much severity toward the poor.


3. When any way too much severity is used, by the rich toward the poor, by
officers toward malefactors, dealing with them in all extremity, by
governors, toward such as be under them, unreasonably correcting, or
otherwise expressing an hateful mind against them. This was a sin in the
Pharisees, that brought the adulterous woman to Christ, John 8.
breathing out cruelty against her, and al they shall have judgment merciless,
that are thus without mercy.

4. Cruelty is in the unmerciful usage of the dumb creature, Unmerciful
usage of the dumb creatures.
working them without reason, pinching them in things necessary, beating, or
killing them without mercy, or otherwise abusing them, so as that they surfeit,
or grow diseased hereby, all these are wicked acts, and show wicked men, Prou.
12.10.
whose mercies are cruelty.

1. Cor 9.
For howsoever the Apostle says comparatively: Does God take care for Oxen? it
is certain, that God does take care for Oxen and Horses, and for the very
fowls of the air: Deuteronomy. 22.6.
seeing that he has made a law, forbidding, when a man finds a birds neast,
to take the old together with the young. It is therefore to be understood, that
he does not take care for Oxen principally and chiefly, but subordinately, as
his care is toward all the creatures. And hitherto of the sins against the
bodily life.

The murder of souls. 1. Cor 8.11.
Now there be sins also against the spiritual life and soul, according to
the teaching of Saint Paul, who shows a case, wherein a man destroys the
soul of another, viz. when he is an occasion of his stumbling, and falling
into sin. Thus Ministers murder, 1. In Ministers.
or at the least make themselves guilty of murdering the souls of the people,
committed to their charge, when as through their default any of them perish.
This is plainly taught in Ezechiel, Ezech. 3.
whom the Lord told, that he made him a watchman over the people, and if the
enemy, which is sin should come, and destroy any, he not giving them warning,
their blood he threatens to require at his hands. If any minister therefore,
either by neglecting to teach, and watch over the people, and much more if by
false doctrine, or a wicked life, he be an occasion, that any die in their
sins, he shall undoubtedly answer for this soule-murther: if he endeauoreth,
being furnished with gifts necessary, to save them, whosoever shall perish, he
is acquitted, and shall have his reward.

2 Parents and Masters.
Again, parents and masters, and all private governors are murderers, if by
their neglect, or bad example, their children, servants, or pupils perish by
ignorance, prophanenes, or any other sinful course of life, which they might
have amended in them, by teaching, charging, reproving, and requiring better
things at their hands, and leading them on by a good example. For this, as has
been showed, is their duty, as it is to furnish them, with things necessary
for the bodily life, and therefore, as in the denying of these, they which are
under their government perishing, their blood shall be laid to their charge: so
is it, when they deny them means necessary for their souls, and much more, if
they give them the poison of bad counsel, or bad example, this murdering of
souls shall be charged upon them.

3 Neighbors.
And lastly, every neighbor, that gives his neighbor drink to make him
drunken, that stirs up one against another to sighting and quarrelling, and
generally, if he enticeth to any sin, or does countenance, and favor, and
defend it, to the heartning of a man on therein, every of these ways, he is
the cause of the destruction of his neighbor, and shall answer, as a
soule-murtherer. For this is taxed in Gods word as an high offense; Habbac 2.15.
Woe be to him that gives his neighbor drink; that is, to make him drunken:
and it is set down as an height of sin; Romans 1.31.
Which not only do such things, but favor such as do them. And good reason,
seeing every man is bound to keep his neighbor, as much, as in him lies,
from sin, otherwise he is censured, as hating his brother: For, Thou shall
not hate thy brother in thy heart, Leuit. 19.27.
says the Lord, but rebuke him plainly and not suffer him to sin. Oh then,
how shall he answer it, that provoke his brother to sin? without doubt he
shall be judged as an hater, yea, a murderer of his brother at the last day.

Quest. 93. What is here commanded?

Answ. Out of the love that we bear to our neighbor, as much as in us lies,
to preserve his life and health, and specially the life of his soul, by good
counsel, exhortations, admonitions, and the like.

Explan. The duty here commanded, arises from the consideration of the sin
forbidden, for if it be forbidden to murder, then it is commanded to save
life, because he that saves not life when it is in his power, is guilty of
murder. Now, as murder is either of a man's own self, or of another man, so
the duty, that we may be free from the guilt of any murder, is to endeavor to
save both a man's own life, and the life of another man.

1 To save our own life by flying in time of danger.
First then, thou art here bound to preserve thine own life, by the use of all
lawful means. 1. In the time of danger, flying from one place to another,
whether the danger be by persecution, as David was endangered by Saul, and
therefore fled from him, and as Athanasius, an holy father of the Church, hid
himself a long time, when he was sought for to the death by the Arians, and as
Eliah long before fled from Jezabel: 1. King. 19.
or if the danger be by famine, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Naomi, and other
holy persons have commonly done: or if there be danger by the plague, the
chief cure of which devouring evil, next to repentance, is to change the
air, and that speedily, not in an opinion to be safe from Gods stroke, but in
obedience to his will, who would have us to preserve our lives by all lawful
means, in the time of danger. And a principal ground of all this, is that
commandment of our Savior; Matthew. 10.23.
If they persecute you in one City, fly into another, and the special command
unto Eliiah in the time of famine, 1. King. 17. Gen 12. Genesis 20.
and the Lords manifest approbation of Abraham's flying then, comforting him,
and taking his part against Kings.



Answ. That Ministers may fly in time of danger.
Without doubt they may, if it be Gods will to preserve themselves for the
greater good of the Church, whereas, if they should harden themselves, and stay
amongst the infected, there were apparent danger of being cut off, and so to
be prevented of doing further good in the Church.

2. By using lawful mean in times of sickness. Esaias 38.21.
Secondly, in the time of sickness, keeping thy self warm, and taking such
things, as whereby thou may be freed from the matter of thy disease, and by
Gods blessing be restored. Thus Hez^chiah that was sick unto the death, is
bidden to take a ^umpe of dry figs, and lay it upon the boil.

3. To defend our selves with our best force.
Thirdly, being set upon by wicked men, or by the enemy, defending our selves
with our best forces.

4. By using lawful recreation.
Fourthly, by using lawful recreation at lawful times, by some extraordinary
motion of the body, or otherwise chearing our minds and spirits, with the use
of pleasant pastimes, that are in themselves indifferent. Such is shooting, of
which m^ntion is made in the holy Scriptures; ^. Sam. 1.18.
He bad them teach the children of Israel to shoot, as it is written in the
book of Jasher: And Music, Nehem. 7.67. Judges 14 9.
unto which, many were brought up, and propounding of riddles and the like. But
here is no tolleration for gaming merely for gain, which in stead of
recreating distempereth the mind and body, and is commonly accompanied with
many foul sins.

To preserve another man's life. 1. By almsdeeds. Job 3 9.
For the life of another man. This is preserved; 1. By alms deeds, where
necessity does require: for thus Job says, that he had not seen any perish
for want of clothing, etc. and some there are in this danger continually,
unless they be relieved, and he that sees it, and has, wherewithal to help
them, but does not, if they perish, is guilty of their death.

2. To help in time of danger. 1. King. 18.13.
2. By rescuing and helping a man in any danger, as Obadiah hid the Prophets of
the Lord in caves, to save them from Ahab, and Iezabel, in time of persecution.

3 By patience and me^knes.
3. By patience and meekness, preventing quarrels, and bloodshed, that does
otherwise often times follow. The parts of this gentleness, and meekenes, are:
1. Soft answers; when any means be used to provoke us: Prou. 15.1.
for, a soft answer puts away strife. David's fury was calmed, when Abigail
came unto him with gentle and pleasing words: and without doubt, servants and
children might escape many cruel blows, if they would frame their tongues to
this soft answering.

2. A stayed temper of affections whereby we are not suddenly moved, and for
trifling matters, neither do we keep our anger, as has been showed
already; Be slow to anger, and let not the sun go down upon thy wrath: for
thus is this dangerous sin prevented, which for want of this stayed temper,
many do commonly run into.

3. A disposition always to interpret such things, as are done against us, in
the best sense that we can: as it is noted to be the property of love; It
thinks not evil: 1 Cor. 13.5.
for by a misconstruction, men are often provoked causelessly to sin against
their own souls, or when small matters are aggrauated, and accounted greater.

4. A love of peace, and seeking it, with all men, as much as may be, according
to the precept; As much as in you lies, Ro^ 12.8.
have peace with all men: And again; Do thou desire to live long, and to see
good days, refrain thy tongue from evil, Psalm. 34.12.
and thy lips that they speak no guile, cease to do evil, learn to do
well, seek peace and ensue it.

5. Lastly, a mind content, for the love of peace sometimes to depart with a
man's right, as Abram the uncle, Genesis 13. Math. 17.
gave Lot his nephew, his choice, being content that part, which he left; and
Christ, when he had proved, that he was not to pay tribute, or poll money, did
notwithstanding pay it being demanded.

By interring, and timely bringing to the burial, dead bodies of Christian
people, or others, which being unburied would be noisome, and prejudicial to
the lives of the living, Wherefore Abraham provides a place to bury Sarah in.
But this taxes not the hanging up of paricides, or other notorious murderers
in chains, without burial, who are unworthy of the honor of Christian
burial. And this duty does more properly belong to the fifth Commandment.

1 Pet. 2.2. To. 10.14.
Now, as there is a spiritual murdering as well as a corporal, so there are
duties to be done to preserve the spiritual life, and first to preserve thine
own, thou art bound to desire the sincere milk of the word, as S. Peter
says, that thou may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. Romans 10.14.
attend the preaching hereof, whereby faith may be wrought and confirmed, and
that with all diligence, as it is to be preached in season, and out of season:
thou must hide the word in thy heart by serious meditation, as David did, Psalm
119.11. Cor. 3.16.
and let it dwell plenteously in thee, pray continually for grace, and
reverently receive the Sacraments, and unto all these join obedience; be doers
of the word, and not hearers only deceiving your selves. If any of these
things be neglected, Iam. 1.22.
thy soul cannot live, thou destroyest thy self everlastingly.

To preserve the life of the soul.
To preserve thy neighbors spiritual life. 1. If thou be a minister, teach,
exhort, rebuke, use all meekenes, discretion, and diligence in doctrine and
life to keep in the right way, to bring in such as are out, to strengthen the
weak, to comfort the faint-hearted, to curb the unruly, to inform the
ignorant, and erroneous, and to further the sanctification, and salvation of
all.

2. If thou be a Judge, a ruler, or a magistrate in executing justice, seek
not only in regard of temporal punishments, to make men afraid of sinning
but much more, because they shall thus damn and destroy their own souls,
commend an honest and devout course of life, both by word, and example: so as
S. Paul says to Timothy, thou may save both thy self and many others.

3. If thou be father, or mother, master or private governor, teach and season
youth in good things betimes, command them with Abraham to walk in the way of
the Lord, instruct them in the grounds of religion, out of the holy Scriptures,
even in their childhood, with Timothies grandmother, chastize them duly when
they sin against God, as Ely did not, and in all things be an example of
holiness unto them, bringing them to the public place of Gods worship, and
praying earnestly for them with Elchana, and Hannah, and thus thou shall
dedicate them with Samuel to the LORD, and well provide for the salvation of
their souls.

Heb. 3.13. Leuit. 19.27.
4. If thou be a private person, exhort such as are backward, and provoke unto
love and good works, reprove such as offend, and suffer them not to sin;
such as are forward in goodness, encourage with the Kingly Prophet, who says,
I was glud, when they said, Psalm. 1 22. 1 Cor. 10^
let us go up to the house of the Lord, and by no means lay any
stumbling-blocke, before thy brother, by which he should fall and perish, and
thus many private persons to their great joy save the souls of others, whilst
others careless of these duties, like Cain, have murtherous minds, and say;
am I my brothers keeper?

Quest. 94. What is the seventh Commandment?

Answ. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

Quest. 95. What is here forbidden?

Answ. First all outward unclean actions of Adultery, Fornication, etc.
Secondly, all filthy and unclean speeches, songs, and Books and Ballads of
this sort. Thirdly, all incontinent thoughts and lusts of the heart. Fourthly,
whatsoever is an occasion of uncleanness, as surfeiting, drunkenness and
idleness, etc.

Mat. 5.28.
Explanat. The sin here forbidden, is not only the act of Adultery, but
whatsoever is any way against chastity or soberness, either in deed, in word
or in thought, directly or indirectly, as a means of sinning here against:
For thus large our Savior shows the extent of this Commandment to be; where
he says; Whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after her has committed
adultery with her in his heart; stretchihg this commandment to the very
thoughts, and the means of such wicked thoughts, a wandering eye

Gen: 19.18.
First therefore this commandment is broken by unclean actions of every kind,
whether by beastiality, Leuit. 18.23. or by unnatural lust, Romans 1.26.27 and
so foul an evil is this, as that the Lord has done more against it, even in
the view of the world, then against any other sin, sweeping away even whole
Kingdoms with fire and brimstone from Heaven, not sparing any of that impure
people, and continuing the memorial of his judgment unto this day, by the
dead sea, which is there, by the apples outwardly fair, having nothing within
them but smoke, and by the general desolation of the Country, void of every
living creature.

Deuteronomy. 22.22.
Or the act of uncleanness is committed with a man, or woman married, or
betrothed, and this is adultery which is also so foul, as that the punishment
appointed is death. If any man be found lying with a woman married to a man,
then they shall dye, even both twain, to wit, the man that lay with the wife,
23.
and the wife. If a maa be betrothed to an husband, and a man lie with her:
then shall ye bring them both out to the gates of the City, and shall stone
them with stones to death. And good reason that adultery should be thus
puninished; because it is an abominable sin diverse ways.

Against adultery.
1. It is a breach of a most sacred covenant made before God, and the
congregation of his people in most sollemne manner: yea, it is a breach of
promise made with God, for the strange that is the whorish woman, Pro. 2.17*
is said to forget the covenant of her God.

2. It is the greatest disgrace to a family that may be, the mother being a
whore, the children bastards, and through the curse of God, following hereupon,
the father being likewise and whoremaster, according to that which Job calls
for, as just against himself. Job. 31.9.10.
If my heart has been deceived by a woman, etc. let my wife grind unto other
men, and let another bow down upon her. For this is commonly seen, where the
husband is naught, the wife is given over to be such also. And the children
begotten of such, beside that the Lord esteems them as base, Deuteronomy. 23.1.
excluding them from bearing office in the congregation, to the tenth
generation, do commonly follow the steps of their adulterous parents, a family
is made of a chaste household, and a Church of God, as it ought to be a very
brothel house and stews, loathsome to God, and to all good men.

3. It is an intolerable wrong to the husband, to be thus abused; in that he
nourishes, brings up, and provides for as for his own, the bastard brood
of lewd knaves, and thus adultery is greater then any theft, because a man is
hereby robbed of his whole estate, defrauded of his chiefest worldly treasure,
and prevented of his greatest comfort here, through the want of genuine
true-begotten children, these bastards being suggested in their stead. And
therefore, as murder has been and is daily miraculously discovered, that it
may be accordingly punished, so did the Lord appoint a miraculous way for the
detection of adultery, that it might not escape unpunished: viz. holy water,
which the woman suspected should drink, that should cause her thigh to rot,
Numb 5.12. Sed non ego credulus illis.
and her belly to swell: and there is a certain precious stone as some report,
at this day, which being laid upon a woman sleeping, makes known whether she
has been false to her husband.

Boem.
How odious this sin is, appears by the punishments appointed by men, led
only by the light of nature: some adiudging the Adulteress to be punished,
with the cutting off of her nose; and the adulterer, with a thousand stripes,
as the Egyptians: some allowing to kill such, as were taken in adultery
instantly, as Solon: Hackluit. p. 561. Munst. Cosmog.
some adiudging that the adulteress should cut the throat of the adulterer,
and the next kinsman to him should cut her throar, as a people dwelling
southward from the Indians: and some stoning them both to death, as the Turks.
Nebuchadnezzar hearing that one Acab and Zedechiah, Jews, had committed this
wickedness with two married women broiled them to death, upon a gridiron. Pet.
Mart. in 2 Samuel page 241.
Zaleucus, a Lawgiver of the Locrians appointed both their eyes to be put out,
and when his own son was taken in adultery, rather then the Law should be
broken, he spared one of his sons eyes, and caused one of his own to be
put out. And yet more to show how abominable it is to natural reason, when
Cabades King of the Persians made a Law to tolerate it, his subjects took it
so hainously, that they would not suffer him any longer to reign over them.

Not only men, but other creatures, led by the instinct of nature, without
reason, do in their kind hate adultery. The Elephant will not endure it in
his female, and it is reported, Topsel Histor. of Beasts.
that a certain Elephant seeing another man lying with his mistress in the
absence of his master, slew them both: and the like is said to have been done
at Rome, whom also being slain, the Elephant covered up and showed them both
to his master at his coming home: and another time, when a man had murdered
his wife and married another, his Elephant leading her upon a time to the
place, where the first wife was buried, opened the ground with his trunck, and
showed her the dead body. Wherefore whosoever thou art that bear the name of
a Christian, abhor to commit this wickedness so foul, and so much detested
even by heathen men-and by the very bruit beast: assure thy self, that how
secret soever it be, God beholds it, and if not here, yet hereafter he will
open it, to thine eternal confusion.

Against fornication.
Or, the act of uncleanness is committed with a single woman, by a single man;
for if either be married, it is adultery, but this is fornication: the
punishment of this sin, of old, was to be enforced to marry her that was
defloured, and to pay her father fifty shekels of silver: Deuteronomy* 22.29.
and if her father refused to give her to wife unto him, he was to pay money,
according to the dowry of virgins. Exodus 22.17.
And straightly has the Lord charged, saying, Deuteronomy. 23 17. Verse. 18.
There shall not be an whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a whore-keeper of
the sons of Jsrael. And in the verse following, a whore is compared unto a
dog; for, ^hou shall not bring, says the Lord, the hire of an whore, nor the
price of a dog into the house of the Lord. This sin is next unto adultery,
and so placed every where in the Scriptures, both because it is next unto it in
foulness before God, and such, as that whosoever falls into the one, never
makes conscience of the other. Many ways is this a most detestable sin. 1.
Because indignity is hereby offered unto Christ, the member of Christ being
thus made the member of an harlot: 1 Cor: 6 14.15.
for, Know ye not, says the Apostle, that your bodies are the members of
Christ? shall I then take the member of Christ, and make it the member of an
harlot? God forbid. Know ye not that he which coupleth himself to an harlot,
is one body.

2. Because that by no sin is the body so much wronged, as by this
uncleanness, wherefore the same Apostle proceeds, and says, Every sin
that a man commits, is without the body, Verse. 18.
but he that commits fornication, sins against his own body. That is,
actually cutting off himself from Christ hereby, and dissoluing the covenant
with his God. For the Lord has vouchsafed to join us that believe unto
himself in marriage; now by other sins, we offend greatly this our dearest
love, and are blemished, and made loathsome unto him, so as that he is at the
point of cutting us off: but by fornication, either spiritual, which is with
Idols; or corporal, a man cutteth himself off from God.

3. Because, that by fornication, the Spirit of God, the Spirit of all comfort,
is wronged, and that extremely, being thrust out of his own house and temple:
for, your body, Verse. 19.
as it follows in the same chapter, is the Temple of the holy Ghost, bought
for a price, and is not your own. All which being put together, or any one of
which shows this sin to be abominable to all Christians, that are not of
feared consciences, and altogether without feeling of Gods grace toward them.

Genesis 38.
And it is to be noted, that whatsoever difference has been put, betwixt the
punishment of this and adultery, yet it appears even before Moses his Law,
this sin was death: for when Thamar, Iudahs daughter in law, had played the
harlot, Judah hearing of it commanded that she should be brought forth, and
be burnt to death.

Gal. 5.19.
And amongst the Turks, they are punished with eighty stripes: and how slightly
soever these sins of fornication and adultery be passed over amongst men in
these miserable times, there is a greater punishment then a thousand bodily
deaths expressly threatened heereagainst, viz eternal death: for he that does
these things, says S. Paul, shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Genesis 6.
Secondly, this ranketh them with men of the old world, who are said to have
taken wives of all that they liked; that is, by brutish and inordinate coming
together with them, before they took them, and with uncircumcised Shechem, who
first defloured Dinah, and then would have married her, Genesis 34.
but he smarted for it, he and all the men of the City being slain therefore.

Thirdly, this is a continual heart-smart, and grief unto them, even when
they behold that, which otherwise would be one of their greatest worldly
comforts, viz. their firstborn; or any other in what number soever, being the
fruit of the body; whom, when they behold, they hehold their sin: and if
contrariwise it be a joy, as it is to many, woe is unto them, the guilt of
their sin is yet upon them.

Against Incest.
Or, the Act of uncleanness is committed with a near kinswoman, viz. the Aunt,
the Sister, or the Wives Sister, etc. and this is Incest, Leu 20.10.11
whether it be in marriage, or out of marriage, and so heinous is this, that
death is appointed for a punishment hereof. 1. Cor. 5.1
When Saint Paul heard, that one among the Corinthians had taken his Fathers
wife, he detested it, as abominable, and so abominable, as that the like was
not heard of among the Gentles, and cease not, till he had caused him to be
excommunicated and cast out of the Church of Gods people.

Answ.
and perpetual for ever: the law of the brothers taking the brothers wife
wanting issue, was a special exception to this law, peculiar to the
Israelites, and to last, but for a time, whilst there was a special reckoning
made of the first borne, and of his seed, still continuing him, as it were
alive, thus typifying the first borne amongst many brethren, who without having
any seed further raised up unto him, does himself remain alive for ever.
Wherefore in no case may the like now be tolerated, for it is a foul sin.

Polygamy.
Or the act of uncleanness is with a second wife, in the time of the first: for,
howsoever it may seem, that there is no direct law against this, and because
the most holy Patriarchs had many wives, that it is no sin, to have more
wives together: yet now certainly it is no less sin then Adultery in
continual practice, to take a second wife, Le^it. 18.18.
during the life of the first. For first there is a direct Law against it, made
by God himself; Thou shall not take unto a wife her sister during her life;
which may also be read, one wife unto another, that is a second, whilst the
first is living: Otherwise, it might be lawful, the wife being dead, to marry
her sister, which is against all equity of these laws. For, whatsoever woman
becomes any way thy sister, Leuit. 18.11.16,
thou may not marry, if she be but the daughter of thy fathers wife, begotten
by thy father, or thy brothers wife; and the reason is, because she is thy
sister; only such an one as is called sister, but is not, viz. the daughter of
thy fathers wife, begotten by another husband, may thou marry. But thy wives
sister is thy sister, and therefore it is unlawful to marry her, though thy
wife be dead; whence it follows, that this law must be understood, as being
against Bygamie, which is, having two wives together, though they be not
sisters, but strangers one to the other. 2. The first institution is against
it, God making but one man, and one woman; and why did he make but one, says
Malachy, because he sought a godly seed. 3. There is no express and positive
tolleration throughout all the book of God, for having more wives together, then
one, Malac. 2 15.
but much to the contrary, They twain (says Christ) shall be one flesh,
Matthew. 19.5. 1. Cor. 7.1.
not three, or more. And, To avoid fornication, says Paul, let every man have
his own wife, and every woman her own husband, not wives or husbands. And
Lamech is branded to be the first that had two wives.

Object.
It is not a toleration, when Abraham does hearken to Sarahs voice, willing him
to go in, to his maid Hagar and when she being with child by him, has an
Angel sent to comfort her, in regard of that she went withal? And when Nathan
tells David, that the Lord had given him Saul's wives and concubines: And when
Jacob obtained so much favor, in the midst of his wives and concubines?

Sol.
It seems to have been a secret and implicit toleration to them in
particular, and so for others of those times: but what is that to us under the
new Testament? The Lord, who made the Law, can dispense with his Law, as it
pleases him, for ends best known to himself. Though it were no sin in
Abraham, taking Hagar upon his wives motion, Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 26.
yet it was a sin in the Emperor Talentinian to take Iustina, upon the
commendations of his wife Seuera and to make a law, to tolerate it in others.
Though it were no sin in Jacob to take four wives and concubines, yet it was a
sin in the Emperor Charles the Great.

Whence it appears, how gross the impudency of the Pope is, who has taken
upon him to dispense with these sins, as with incest, in Emanuel King of
Portugal, who married two sisters; and Katherine Queen of England, had two
brethren; and Ferdinand. King of Naples, married his aunt, by the dispensation
of Pope Alexander the sixth; and Pope Martin the fifth, gave leave for a man to
marry with his own sister. The same may be said of fornication and whoredom,
the Popes of Rome do generally tolerate it, taking tribute of the stews.

Lastly, there is an act of uncleanness committed without a companion, namely,
by wilful pollution; yea, and sometime by casual arising from voluntary
foregoing occasions.

1. Cor. 15.34.
Secondly, this commandment is broken by unclean and filthy speeches; Evil
speeches corrupt good manners. Corrupt talk is a sign of a filthy and corrupt
mind, which is within. And good reason is there, that if poisonous drugs be
forbidden to be kept in the house, that the sign should be forbidden to be
hanged up also: if stews, and whoredom be forbidden, that the signs and
allurements should be forbidden also. Yea filthy words are expresely forbidden;
Ephesians. 5.3.11.
Let not fornication, or uncleanness be once named amongst you, as it
becomes Saints: and it is a shame to speak of the things, that are done of
them in secret. If thou will be merry therefore, make not mirth by filthy
talking, or reading: for this is scurrilous and sensual, beseeming men given
over to brutish uncleanness, without al commemoration of the account to be made
at the resurrection.

Matthew 5.28.
Thirdly, this Commandment is broken by unchaste thoughts and desires of the
heart; for he that looks upon a woman to lust after her has committed
adultery already with her in his heart. These desires and lusts do sometime
exceed, for that they are not motions vanishing away again, but continuing the
trouble, and disquiet of the mind, 1. Cor. 7.9.
and this is called a burning in lust; It is better to marry, then to burn.
Lust, and fleshly desires in any measure, are members upon earth, that must be
mortified, even as fornication and adultry it self: according to that precept;
Mortify your members, Col. 3.5.
which are upon earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affections, and
evil concupiscence.

Fourthly, this Commandment is broken by entering upon any degree of
uncleanness, or unnecessary occasions and prouocasions hereunto. For as every
link of a chain is a part of the chain, and every skale of the ladder, a
part of the ladder; so every step to adultery, and every link to this chain,
is a part hereof, and so is it for the means inducing, and drawing unto it.

Gal. 5.19.
Here then are first to be censured wantonness either in men or women: it is
one of the fruits of the flesh reckoned up with others, against which it is
threatened, that they which do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of
heaven. Now this is partly in the eye, when it wandreth here and there in light
manner, being used as a window to let in vanity, Esaias 3.16.
such were the eyes of the daughters of Jerusalem, who are said to have
wandering eyes; and these are called by Saint Peter, 2. Pet. 2.14.
Eye^ full of adultery: it is partly also in the apparel, when the hair is
over curiously broyded, or curled, when the attire is ouercostly, or the
apparel light and vain, as is intimated by Saint Paul to Timothy and partly
in the gesture and carryage, 1 Timothy 2.9.
which indeed is the principal wantonness, when as thus there shall be any
allurement to adulterous acts: these gestures are to be seen in the whorish
woman, in the book of Proverbs, she is light-footed, now here, now there,
familiarly kissing, and full of smooth, and flattering speeches. Pro.
7.12.13.14.
Wherefore let all, that hate adultery, abstain from every of these degrees,
and not by any otherwise considering of them, labor in their judgment to make
them tolerable, but weighing them, as accidents or inducements of adultery,
let them fly them, as adultery it self.

Against idleness.
Secondly, to live in ease and idleness, is here to be reproou^d: for it is a
true saying, Otia si tollas, periere Cupidinis arcus; Take away idleness, and
prevent wantonness. 2, Sam 11.
David may be an example, who paid dearly for the experience, which he
bought of the mischief coming by idleness: Numb. 25 1. 1. Tim. 5.12.
and the Israelites, who being idle in Shittim, fell to adultery with the
daughters of Moab: and the young widows, that wax wanton against Christ, are
noted to be idle goers above, from house to house. 3. Surfeiting, and
drunkenness are to be ^proued, Drunkenness.
as degrees and occasions of uncleanness. Amongst the Sodomites there was
fulness of bread, Ezech. 16.49.
and abundance of idleness, and from hence it followed, that they committed the
abomination of uncleanness. Experience shows this daily, that uncleanness is
the usual companion of drunkenness.

Ephesians. 5.^4.
It is very true, Sine Cerere and Baccho frig^t Venus; Use meats, and drinks
temperately, and there will be no such heat of venery.

4 Being present at obscene and filthy stage plays; namely, such wherein the
way and manner of uncleanness is acted, and so taught to the spectators: against
which, there is an express precept: Obscene pictures. 2. These. 5.22.
Let not adultery, or fornication, be once named amongst you, neither fill
hinesse, nor foolish talking.

Fifthly, to have obscene and filthy pictures, and much more to make such,
whereby filthiness or wantonness is represented: contrary to which it is
commanded, Abstain from all appearance of evil.

Sixthly, to dance lascivious and wanton dances, men and women together. Some
dancing indeed has been approved among Saints, as when Goliath was overcome,
the daughters of Jerusalem danced, and played upon instruments in praising God,
and so did: Miriam and the women long before, and David danced before the Arc.

Mark. 6.22.
But to dance, as some men and women do in these times, in amorous sort kissing,
and dallying, and using wanton gestures toward one another, cannot be without
sin, for here is plainly the wantonness before censured, as a fruit of
the flesh, and an offering of themselves to further temptations. The daughter
of Herodias danced before Herod and others, perhaps not so wantonly, as some
do now adays; yet this John Baptists head.

Munst. Cosmog. lib 3. page 739.
One Ludouicus an Archbishop, of whom you may read in Munsters Cosmographie,
whilst he was together with others present at this vanity, they were all
destroyed by the did cost house falling down upon them.

Lastly, for women to gad, and wander over much abroad, to meetings of vain,
and light persons, and in the twilight: for this is a great show of leuitie,
and of an unstaid mind: the harlot is also set forth by this, that she walked
in the twilight, stayed mind: the harlot is also set forth by this, that she
walked in the twilight, in the evening, Prou 7.9 11.
when the night began to grow black and dark: and to be such, as whose feet
cannot abide in the house Let Dinah the daughter of ^arob, be an example to
take warning by, who going abroad to see the country, was taken by Shechem,
and deflowred: and the daughters of Shiloh, Genesis 34. Judge. 21.32.
who going out to dance, were taken by the men of ^eniamin.

Quest. 96. What is here commanded?

Answ. To live in temperance, chastity, and sobernes, and so to labor to keep
my body holy, and pure, as a temple of the holy Ghost.

1. Cor 6.19.20.
Explan. Having showed the sin, the virtue to be embraced follows, which is
to keep as the soul, and mind, so the body, and members pure, and holy,
without any adulterous spot, and stain of uncleanness; and the reason is
yielded by the Apostle; Your bodies are not your own, ye are bought with a
price, and your bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost. If a man has an
house of his own, he may use it, as he thinks good; but if the palace of
some noble person, or Prince be committed to his keeping, to which that great
person does usually resort, he dares not let it lie slouenly, or unclean: no
more will a Christian man, or woman, his body, but keep it pure for the great
person of Gods Spirit, who does daily come to him, as to his palace and
temple. Wherefore, when the Apostle would in short deliver, what the will of
God is, he says; This is the will of God, even your sanctification, 1. These.
4.3.
and that ye should abstain from fornication. And distinguishing men into
some married, and some unmarried, he wills them to be all alike minded for
this, seeking by purity to please the Lord. 1. Cor 7.29.
Now that we may the better be preserved thus pure and holy, consider first the
parts, and then the means. The parts are modesty, and sobriety. Modesty is a
decent and comely carriage of our selves in all things.

1 Modesty wherein it stands. Job 31.1.
First, in the eyes, when they are stayed, and not wandering, as the adulterous
eyes spoken of before, but as Jobs, tied by covenant, and steadfast purpose of
not sinning herewith.

Secondly, in the countenance, when it is bashful, and not impudent, to
express which, maids were veiled in old time.

Prou. 7.11.
Thirdly, in speech, when it is sparing (for the harlot is a babbler), when it is
submisse and low (for the harlot also is loud); and when with the best words,
and becoming a modest spirit, in speaking of things shameful in themselves, as
is the phrase of the Scripture: Adam knew his wife Euah.

1. Tim. 2.9.
Fourthly, in apparel, when it is such as becomes men and women fearing God,
not strange to the disguising of the person, as the Courtiers at Jerusalem,
whose strange apparel the Lord threatens, Z ph. 1.8.
saying: I will visit the Princes, and the Kings ch^ldren, and all such as
cloathe themselves with strange apparel: not exceeding a man's degree and
calling, not light and vain, nor over curious, as the apparel of the
daughters of Jerusalem, against which it is threatened therefore, That instead
of a sweet savor, Esaias 3.24.
there shall be stink; in stead of a godly, a rent; in stead of dressing of
the hair, laidnesse; and instead of a stomacher, a girding with sackcloth, and
burning in stead of beauty.

2 Sobriety, wherein it stands. Luke 21.34.
2. Sobriety is Christianly and temperately to carry our selves in the use of
meats and drinks. First, by avoiding excess, Take heed, least at any time
your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, says the Lord, and
when thou sit down to eat with a ruler, says Solomon, if thou be a man
given to the appe^ite, Prou. 23 1.
put thy knife to thy throat. Secondly, by honest mirth seasoned with some
holy and good speeches, as the feasts were unto which Christ was called, and
the eating and drinking together of the first Christians. Luke 14. Acts ^ 46.
Thirdly, by eating and drinking at fit times, and not still ever, as we are
invited by company, or disorderly appetite, for necessity, and not for fashion;
for woe be to thee O land (says the Wise man) when thy Princes ea e in the
morning: Eccles. 10.16. Verse 17.
Blessed art thou (O land) when thy King eats in season, for strength, and
not unto drunkenness. Fourthly, by a sanctified use of meats and drinks,
which is, when prayer and thanksgiving are used before and after them. Meats
God has created to be received with thanksgiving; ^. Tim. 4.^.5.
for every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by the word, and prayer. If
these rules of modesty and sobriety be observed out of a conscience of
purity, then all acts repugnant unto these will much more be avoided, as
being too gross, not only for such as are Christianly, but even ciuilly
modest and sober.

The means to be preserved thus pure and holy, are either general belonging
to all, or special, some for married persons, some for the unmarried.

The general preservatives are:

1. To consider the near union betwixt God and us, Ephesians. 5.30. Preseruatiue^
general.
so great is his love, as that he has married us to himself, insomuch as
that he is our husband, and we are his spouse, and as there is good reason, he
is most jealous over us, and cannot endure any impurity in us, if there be, he
does in the very instant of uncleanness cast us off, as the members of an
harlot.

2. To consider, that God is holy and pure, and the Devil an unclean spirit,
unto whom he is joined in fellowship, that sins by uncleanness.

Job 31.1. 2. Cor. 7.10.
Thirdly, to tie and bind our selves by covenant and vows from the occasions,
which as sparkles of fire do light upon the tinder of our corrupt nature, as
Job; I have made a covenant with mine eyes, why then should I think on a maid?
otherwise, where is that Christian care of not si^ning, of which Paul speaks?
What care?

1. The special preservatives of single persons are: First, 2. Cor. 9.^.7.
Preservatives for single persons.
to beat down the body, and bring it into subjection, as the Apostle did: to
be abstemious, especially from such meats and drinks as inflate and lift up
the body, and provoke to fleshlinesse; and in case of fleshly motions to pray
heartily for grace against them, as also did the same Apostle. Secondly, 2.
Cor. 1^.
to abstain from the company of a woman in private, and alone, and in the
dark, Genesis 39.
as Joseph with all speed went out from the presence of his mistress, who in
this case tempted him. Thirdly, if notwithstanding these means thou can not
contain, but art troubled with fleshly motions, then fly to Gods ordinance,
which is the last remedy for single persons, 1. Cor. 7.1,
according to the doctrine of S. Paul: To avoid fornication, let ^u^^y m^n
have his own wif^, and every woman her own husband. This is the rule of Gods
spirit, therefore, whereas in some sinister respect, many young gallants in
these times, very incontinent, yet will not marry, but rather burn in lust, or
wallow in the mire of uncleanness with harlots, because they are younger
brethren, or their parents be living, and the inheritance is not yet come unto
them, so that they cannot marry so richly, or because they will not be tied to
a wife, and the cares attending marriage. These, I say, do plainly show, that
they are not scholars of the Lords school, but of the Devils, the master of
uncleanness. And whereas the Romanists do seek to prevent men of this
means, by orders of Priesthood and Monkerie, binding them by vows here-from,
how incontinent soever their minds be: it shows plainly, that they are nor
like Catholic Christians, 1. Tim. 4. r. 2.
(...), Taught of God, but of the Devil, to whom it is proper to teach the
doctrine of forbidding to marry, as Saint Paul shows.

The special preservatives for married persons are;

1. To dwell together, and not separate, as some do; The husband must dwell
with his wife, 1. Helps of puriti^ in married persons. 1. Pet. 3.7.
as a man of understanding Sometime it falls out, that they must necessarily
be separated for a time, as when the necessity of wars does call hereunto.
Now there is danger, as we may see in the wife of Vriah, but the Lord calling
then to this separate living, we must take it as a calling in special manner
to continency, for that time: in cases unnecessary, it is an advantage giving
against our chastity to the common adversary.

2. To follow that rule of the Apostle, Let the husband give unto the wife due
benevolence, 1. Cor. 17.3.
and likewise the wife unto the husband: and as he further expresses, to carry
themselves so toward one another, as those whose bodies are not in their own
power, but mutually in one another power.

1. Cor. 7.5.
3. To contain at times of extraordinary devotion, by mutual consent,
according as Paul also teaches; Defraud not one another, except it be by
consent for a time that ye may give your selves to fasting and prayer.

4. When women love to be at home, and their delight is in their huswifrie, as
the virtuous wife is described in the Proverbs; Prou. 30. ^. Tim 5.14.
and Saint Paul charge, saying, Let younger women marry, and bear children,
and govern the house.

5. When the man esteems best of his own wife, above all other women,
covering her infirmities by love, and the wife does likewise of her husband,
and therefore they delight most in the company of one another.

Quest. 97. Which is the eighth Commandment?

Answ. Thou shall not steal.

Quest. 98. What is here forbidden?

Answ, All stealing: which is first by violent, or secret taking away that
which is our neighbors. 2. By oppression and tyranny in the rich toward the
po^re. 3 By deceit, in buying and selling. 4. By using an unlawful trade or
way of gain. 5 By prodigal^ty, for thus do men rob their children and
posterity.

Deuteronomy. 22.29. Exodus 22.1.
Explan. The sin against this, I say, is all stealing, that is unjust going
about to diminish the goods, or estate of another man, any manner of way.
Unjust, I say, because sometime men do enter upon, and take away the goods and
estates of other men without theft, viz. when they do it justly, either being
specially commanded by God, as the Israelites spoiled the Egyptians, and took
away the inheritances of the Canaanites; or when men being deputed by God, upon
due consideration, do take away men's goods and lands, as forfeited by the law,
or any part of them, as a mulct, or punishment for some offense justly laid
upon them: the Lord himself is the Author hereof, where he appoints, as a
punishment to the fornicatour, the payment of fifty shekels of silver, and to
the thief, of making restitution fourfold: and it seems that the
punishment of blasphemy, besides death, was also the forfeiture of a man's
estate, for that Naboth, 1. King. 21.
against whom it was pretended, was thus punished.

1. Kind. Of Robbery and theft.
To steal then, is unjustly to take away any thing from our neighbor. First,
by robbery, or theft, either with violence, or in secret it is the highest and
first degree of sinning against this Law. The punishment of this sin, was
appointed to be a fourfold restitution, if he had stolen a sheep and had
killed it; a fiuefold, Exodus 22 1. Verse 4.
if he had stolen an ox and killed it, and double, if the beast stolen were
yet alive: not that the sin was thus expiated and done away; but for that,
without this restitution, it eould not be done away, according to the maxim in
Divinity; Non remittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum; The sin is not
forgiven, unless the thing taken away be restored: Luc. 19.8.
Which Zacheus being converted, knew well enough, and therefore says, If I
have taken from any man by forged cauillation, I restore it fourfold. I say
yet, that the sin is not thus done away, because as a common punishment of
sin, 1 Cor. 6 10.
it is threatened, that neither thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, shall
inherit the kingdom of heaven. Whereas thieves and robbers are felons amongst
us, and punished with death it is done upon good reason: because without this
aggrauation of punishment, no man should possess his own in peace, the baser
sorr of our Nation, being through idleness, and want of constraint unto
labor, so prone to filching and robbing. But alas, were it not much better to
take a stricter course for the employment of such idle men, at home or abroad,
then to send such troops of able and vigorous bodies to make literam longam,
for pilfering? Though they have nothing to restore; yet we have mines to
dig, and many other public works, and may have more (...) besides
Bridewell. This is my poor iudgemedt concerning these poor offenders.

To take spoil of the enemy.
whether is not this a great robbery?

viz if the nation thus spoiled, has in former times notoriously wronged, and
infested them without restitution, if it has broken covenants solemenly made,
etc. for in the like cases the Egyptians were justly spoiled, and the
Amalekites, by David and his men.

But if wars be made out of malice, or through vainglory, out of
insatiable desire of reigning far and wide, and getting together abundance
of riches, it is a great practice of robbery. As one Diomed^s an Arch-pyrate
answered unto great Alexander, Nauel. genesis 57.
being challenged for robbing and infesting the Seas: What is that to thee who
infestest, the whole world, but because I do it with a little Navy, and thou
with a great one, I am called a thief, but thou an Emperor?

A poor man's stealing.
What if a poor man, driven through necessity, steals to warm, to cloth, or
to feed himself, having none other means of relief?

Prou. 6.30.
Men do not despise a thief when he steals to satisfy his soul, because
he is hungry: but it is added, If he be found, he shall restore seuenfold,
Verse 31.
or give all the substance of his house, that is manifold, according to the
first Law, or be sold for a servant. Wherefore take heed of the least theft,
thou that art poor and needy, if thou can, then work and take pains
honestly for thy living; if thou be not able, with Lazarus rather lie and
dye at the gates of the rich, than steal, and so may thou be recompensed
with him in heaven; otherwise, thou take the way to hell. And for young
dissolute persons that will rob to maintain their riot, they shall assuredly
pay dear therefore with shameful ends, being hanged like dogs, and which is
worst of all, unless they duly repent with eternal most horrible pains, for
a little pleasure in riot, mixed also with dread and fear.

2. The second kind of theft is oppression, and wronging without recompense
making, Oppression of many sons. 1 Kind.
and this is a far stretching sin, a monster with many heads. 1. In Kings
and Princes, when as tyrannically they exact upon their poor subjects, taking
unreasonably of them for their own pleasure. The Lord made this an occasion of
the peoples revolt from Rehoboam, when without all mercy he threatened, saying:
1 King. 12.11.
My least part shall be bigger then my fathers loins whereas my father did
burden you with a grievous yoke, I will make your burden more heavy.

2. In the Officers of Kings and Princes, which extort from the people more
then they are by their Lords commanded, even to the private enriching of
themselves. This was the Publicans sin, who were the Officers of the Romans,
the Lords of the world, and therefore were odious amongst all people, and
therefore called Publicans and sinners. When they came to John's Baptism,
desirous to know what they should do, this was commanded them as their maine
duty; Require no more then that which is appointed unto you, Luke 3:13.
as if failing in this, they were guilty of so notorious a sin, as that
whatsoever else they did, they could not escape Gods wrath to come.

3 Kind.
3. In noble men and great persons, which take away the lands or commons of
meaner persons, or enforce them to sell, for fear of their displeasure, at an
vnder-reckoning. This was Ahabs sin against Naboth, King. 22.
and so felonious a robbery, as that God arraigned him, and condemned him to
lose his blood, as Naboth had done. If any now adays do the like, as God
knows there be many, though he murder not directly that he may possess,
yet if he abuses his power to the wronging of the poor, or meaner persons,
he is a robber by oppression, and may look for his punishment threatened in
this case. Hos. 5.20.
The Princes of Judah are like those that remove the bound^, therefore will J
pour out mine anger upon them like water, that is, without any stay, or let.

4 Kind.
4. In rich men, that take advantage of the poor man's necessity, through which
he is constrained to sell lands, or goods, not giving to the worth for them.
Against this, as a fore oppression, the God of Israel gave a Law to his people,
saying; Le^it. 25.14.
If thou sel^est ought unto thy neighbor, or buyest of him, thou shall not
oppress, but according to the number of the years from the Iubile^, thou
shall buy of thy neighbor if there be many years increasing the price, etc.
But this law, or the equity hereof is little regarded now adays, even amongst
such, as take themselves to be Gods people, every man almost every where being
only for himself.

5 K^nde.
5. In Judges, and Iusticers, or any other Ministers of Justice, or Subordinates
under them, which have their hands open to receive bribes, and then they are
ready to work on any side, Esa 1.23. Verse 24.
Their Pr^ices are rebellious, says the Lord, and the companions of thieves,
every one loves gifts and follows after reward^. Therefore I will ease me of
mine a^uersaries and avenge me of mine enemies. I would to God, that this were
ever before the eyes of every corrupt Judge and Iusticer, and of every griping
unconscionable Lawyer, and pilling officer in every Court, that such are
companions of thieves, and Gods grievous enemies.

6 Kind.
In such as toward dear seasons hoord up their corn, and the like, in
Fore-stalling of Markets, Regratours, and Ingrossers, which are so set upon
their own private gain, as that they endeavor by all these means, to
inhaunce the price, to the utter undoing of the poor. These are thieves of the
Commonwealth also they are accursed; Prou. 11.2^.
He that withdraws the corn, the people will curse him, but blessing shall
be upon the head of him that sells corn. Many bitter cries be daily sent up
against such Cormorants, by the Lords poor people, and curses uttered, which
shall not be in vain.

7. In such as take pledges of the poor, 7 Kind.
which they cannot spare, but to their great hinderance and hurt, and such as
restore not the pledge; for the Lord has forbidden to take thy neighbors
garment to pledge when he has no more, or at the least, Exodus 12.2^. Deuteronomy.
24.6.
to restore it yer the evening when it serves to cover him: also, No man shall
take the upper or the neither millstone to pledge. And for restoring any pledge
taken, it is a property of him that shall live and not dye; Ezech. 18.7.
He has restored the pledge to his debtor, whereas he that has not
restored, shall dye. A fearful doom against many misers in these times, that
without all conscience, take advantage against poor men, when lands being laid
to pledge by morgage, are forfeited, the poor man not being able to redeem
it: for in this case, thou must give the full price as it is wortb; otherwise,
look how many pledges thou keep, so many witnesses do thou keep to
testify thy oppression against thee at the latter day.

8. In such as let lands or moneys, 8 Kind Oppression in letting lands.
setting them upon the rack, and not so as the hirer, by Gods ordinary
blessing, may be saved harmless, doing his best endeavor, this is called a
biting and devouring of our neighbor. For these lettings are both so alike as
I take it, as that they may well be ioned together, according to that law,
which, if it be rightly applied, belongs equally to them both; Deuteronomy: 23 18.
Thou shall not give to bitting to thy brother, either money, meat, or any
thing, that is put to usury, or biting: so that, if there be any way that the
wicked heart of man has devised to oppress by, in letting any thing it is a
breach of this law, and a devouring oppression. Wherefore let both the
caterpiller-like usurer, and the unconscionable Landlord apply the threatenings
of the Law, wheresoever they find them, as well to the one as to the other,
being both deep plunged alike into the same damnation.

It is the sin of this nation to oppress both these ways, and no doubt but
the Lord has some great judgment to punish it, and such is the blindness of
the Usurer, oppressing with his money, as that he cries out upon the Landlord,
and of the rent-racker oppressing with his land, as that he cries out upon the
Usurer, and neither of them see into their own sin, to turn therefrom. It is
the practice of too many in our nation to oppress this way, no conscience
being used, but as a man can by most cunning devises procure his own greatest
gain. Wherefore repent, and let neighbourly love bear rule, which is the
fulfilling of the Law. Let nothing to the hinderance but to the benefit of the
hirer: be content with a moderate gain, so shall thou show love and have love,
which through inconsionableness is waxen cold all over this our world.

9 Kind.
9. In such as sell upon trust, come or ware, the buyer wanting ready money,
which take more then a just price therefore, without all reason. Is this the
love wherewith thou love thy neighbor as thy self? Is this an helping hand
reached out unto him in his need? It is a reaching of him a knife to cut his
throat, when he asks thee bread; a treading him down into the water with
thy feet, when he craves thy hand to help him out. Wherefore either sell not
upon trust at all, and so deny altogether to do the office of love, or else
sell for an indifferent gain, even when thou trustest.

10 Kind. Against Bank^^p^s.
10. In such as feign themselves bankrupt, to deceive their creditors, bringing
them thus to compound for their debts, sometime at five shillings in the pound,
sometime at less. He is a wicked man that borrows and pays not again.
Their credit is rupt, that is, broken before God and man. Under the color of
poverty, they enrich themselves with other men's goods; and rob the poor indeed.

11. In such as hire laborers to do their work, 11 Kind. To deny laborers
hire. Deuteronomy. 24 14.
but either defer to pay their hire, or deny some part of it. Against this the
Lord has commanded, saying, Thou shall not oppress an hired servant. Thou
shall give him his hire for the day, neither shall the Sun go down upon it,
lest he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee. So that
this is an oppression, and a crying oppression, to put off the poor labourer
by delays, who has present need of his wages, but much more, if any part be
withheld from him. This is a sin making so loud a cry, as that it ascends
up into the ears of the Lord of hosts for revenge, as S. James shows. Iam.
5.4.
The greatest men are most guilty of this, who abound here, but if they had
none other sins, they shall be st^ipt even for this, of all comfort, and
every penny detained from the poor, shall be a fearful testimony against
them at the day of judgment.

12 Kind.
In such as having wronged his neighbor any way, though unwittingly, yet if
coming to the knowledge of the wrong done, he shall refuse to make any
recompense, the fault being only his: as when cattle break into a man's corn,
being sufficiently fenced on his part that owes the corn, if he shall demand
recompense and show his loss, it is oppression not to make recompense in some
reasonable manner, but much more if he in his own knowledge could not but
conceive before of this loss like to come to his neighbor.

13 Kind.
The thirteenth kind of theft, is fraud and deceit in buying, and selling, and
this is alike threatened as oppression; Let no man oppress or defraud his
broeher in any matter, 1 These. 4.6.
for God is the auenger of all such things. Deceit is practiced diverse ways.

Deuteronomy. 25.13.14.
First, by false weights and measures, or by some device, giving less then
measure, this is an abomination to the Lord. For, Thou shall not have, says
God, in thy bag two manner of weights, a great and small, neither shall thou
have in thy house diverse measures, a great, and a small. For all that do such
things, Verse 16.
and all that do unrighteously, are abomination to the Lord thy God, Let them
look to it therefore, that have two kinds of weights and measures, one to buy,
and another to sell by, their practice is abominable.

Amos 8.4.
Secondly, by mixtures of base things, and such as be naught or little worth
with things of price, and so selling all together, as if all were best. This
was the sin of the Israelites, cormorants, against whom the Prophet
inueigheth, saying; Hear this O ye that swallow up the poor, that ye may
make the needy of the land to fail, Verse 6.
saying, when will the new month be gone, that we may sell corn etc. and
sell thr refuse of the wheat? And this is the sin of many tradesmen,
corne-maisters and hop-maisters, and of such as deal in every commodity in
these days, strange are their devises to make things, that are sold by weight
heavier, and to stretch such things as are sold by measure, and to make the
greatest gain of base corn or other necessaries, wines, and the like, which
are too many to be named. I think that no age did ever come near this our age
for this deceit, wherein there are so many Zachensses unconverted, taking away
from one another by forged cauillation; God grant that they may speedily repent
as he did, for their own comfort and salvation.

Thirdly, by setting a fair gloss upon things to be sold, that the buyer may
think it far more precious then indeed it is, and pay for it accordingly.
Thus they sin by theft that sophisticate any wares, or use false lighrs and
slights, or ouerreach the buyer by outwardly placing that which is goodly, and
hiding the base and little worth. This is a colon able deceit to circumuent the
simple, but they that use it, shall be taken in their own craft.

Fourthly, by setting forth the thing to be sold, by extolling speeches,
though it be unworthy. This is so common, as that many who are accounted honest
men, do fall into this dissimulation also, and prove themselves stealers.

Fifthly, by factions, when as two or three compact together, that when one is
selling the other shall come and bid him such a price to deceive him that
intends to buy indeed.

By these and the like devises fetched from hell, whilst they think, that they
deceive others, and advantage themselves, they do greatly deceive their own
souls, loosing eternal life, for the base gains appertaining to this life;
Luke 9.25.
For what shall it profit a man to win the whole world, and to loose his own
soul?

The fourth kind of theft is the practice of unlawful Arts and means to get
riches; as judiciary Astrology, whereby it shall be undertaken to judge of
particular future events, the Black Art, whereby the devil is consulted with,
to find out things lost, and Palmistry, whereby it is pretended to tell
fortunes by beholding the hand. Howsoever it may, and does oftentimes fall out
to be true, which is thus foretold, yet these Arts are to be condemned, as for
the open, or secret compact betwixt the practizers, and the devil, and the
presumption, entering upon the search of Gods secrets, and so climbing, as it
were, into his chair of Omniscience: so for that they are altogether vain and
unprofitable to such, as make use hereof, no danger being the more prevented;
and if things lost be recovered, the loss being no whit the less
notwithstanding, but far greater, because God is lost for the devil, who
thus discovers things lost, and gets souls.

Again, to make a trade of gaming to gain hereby, because men are hindered
hereby, and many undone in their outward estate. Moreover, to make paintings
for women's faces, disguising, and monstrous attires, uncivil and immodest
apparel, and many other things, which serve merely to set forth pride and
vanity, and to sell these things, it is an unjust gain for the blazons of sin.

Lastly, to keep stews, or whores to gain hereby, is to tolerate this
wickedness for yearly pension of money, raked out of these sinkes (as the Pope
does), as it is an intolerable abuse against the seventh Commandment, so it
is the most odious theft against this Commandment of all others.

Against prodigality.
The fifth kind of theft is by prodigality, and riotous wasting that, which God
has lent unto a man, to provide herewith for wife and children, and to pay
every man his. For our goods in this world are not our own to use as we list,
but committed to our dispensation: that we should honestly and soberlie use
them to such ends, as God has appointed: as a servant therefore having
received money of his master, to be laid out to such, and such uses, if he
shall spend it upon his own pleasure, is a thief to his master: so he, that
having the goods of this world, more, or less, at the hands of the Lord, to
the end, that he may live comfortably hereupon, owe nothing to any man, and
provide for his own, if God permits; if contrariwise he shall wast, and
consume them amongst harlots, and drunken companions, and gamesters, he is a
thief to the great Lord of all, 1. Tim. 5.8.
and a worse thief, as S. Paul calls him, then many an infidel. He robs
and depriueth his own bowels, his children, his own flesh, his wife (O
savage, and inhumane) of all means of maintenance, and leaves them
helpelesse, exposed to hunger and cold, and poverty.

Quest. 99. Is not this Commandment broken any other way?

Answ. Yes, covetousness in heart, is also a great sin against it, and
unmercifulness; and lastly, robbing of God in things dedicate, in Tithes and
offerings.

Explan. These sins are not put off to the last place, because the least, for
they are most heinous, but because they deserve a distinct consideration by
themselves, as being rather against God, then against man. Covetousness is an
insatiable most eager desire of having more, carrying a man on, to the
obtaining of worldly gain, through any means, though unconscionable and
wicked.

Matthew. 6.25. 1. Tim. 6.10.
For, first it is called (...), a desire of having more, and (...), a love of
money, that is, (...), in a superlatiue manner, so as that the mind is taken up
night and day with worldly cares, and devises to get the things of the world,
there being an over great distracting fear of wanting these things, according
to the word used by Christ, (...), Be not careful. This very desire of the
world is covetousness, and the root of all evil, this is the serving of
Mammon, so as that the man that has it, Matthew. 6.24. 1. John 2.15.
cannot serve God; for he that thus loves the world, the love of the Father is
not in him.

Secondly, I add, carrying a man on to the obtaining of worldly gain, through
any means, because hereby covetousness does express it self before men, and
when any man is come to this, without conscience of right and wrong, James
114.15. 1. Tim. 6 9. Luke 21.34.
to get what he can, his sin is perfected, nothing remains now for him, but
as a just reward, death and damnation, the drowning of his soul in perdition,
for this foolish admiring the dust of the earth, and adoring the wedge of gold,
and that that day should come upon him unawares, wherein he shall be sent into
the torments of Gods enemies. If any man's heart therefore be oppressed with
worldly cares, choking the feed of Gods word, hindering from heavenly
meditations, and devout prayer, though there be no means of wicked gain
outwardly used, yet it is a covetous heart, a seruer of Mammon, and an hater of
God, but this is only betwixt God, and a man's own conscience. Again, if any
man seeks gain by oppression, by deceit, by unreasonable sparing, when he
ought to spend, he utters himself for covetous, before men also. And this is
the right understanding of covetousness, whence it appears, how fowly they
err, that account him covetous, who is only frugall, and desirous to keep
within the compass of his estate in his expenses. There may be a covetous
heart in the sight of God indeed, but that is not seen to thee, and therefore
if thou iudgest, if thou shall take him for covetous, thou sinnest by taking
upon thee Gods office. Contrary to which is that precept of the Apostle; Judge
nothing before the time, 1. Cor. 4.5.
till the Lord come who will lighten things, that are hid in darkness, and
make the counsels of the heart manifest. Woe is to them; that condemn the
righteous, and a double woe then is to them, that delighting in riot
themselves, do pass their sentence upon men of more sober and stayed minds,
taxing them as covetous, because they will not drink, and spend superfluously
at the alehouse, nor entertain lavish and riotous idle-packs, good fellows,
as they call them, in their houses.

that he makes such hard hearted misers examples of his vengeance, Matthew 25.
even for this adiudging them to hell sire with the devil and his angels. For
the Lord comes in the person of the poor, which are poor indeed, that is
impotent of body, and unable to help themselves, or necessarily by Gods hand
cast into poverty and want, and what thou deniest unto such, thou deniest unto
the Lord, from whom thou receiuest al, and unto whom thou owe all, who will
also require at the last day, saying; I was hungry and thou did not feed me,
naked, and thou did not cloth me, sick, and in prison, and thou
visitedst me not.

3 Against sacrilege.
Lastly, robbing of God, which is called sacrilege, is in things dedicate, when
they are taken away, and in tithes and offerings, when they are unjustly paid,
and without conscience of the right. For as the Lord has forbidden stealing
from men, so, and much more strictly has he forbidden stealing from himself,
and appointed more precisely the duties to be paid to his Ministers in his
stead. Now that we may say something of this sin, to move the consciences of
all such, as make conscience of any stealing, it shall first be showed, Tithes
due by Gods Law.
that tithes are due by Gods Law under the new Testament: secondly, wherein it
is offended about the payment of tithes: and thirdly, how God is robbed in
things dedicate.

Leuit. 27.30.
1. That tithes are due even in these days, appears, from direct Scripture;
All the tithes of the seed of the ground, and of the fruit of the trees are the
Lords, they are wholly to the Lord he says not, shall be, or let them be, as
Origin has well observed of other ceremonial Laws, which were to last but
for a time, as of the Passover, This shall be a Law or an ordinance unto thee:
and so of other ceremonies. But as it is said of the seventh day, it is the
Lords Sabbath so of tithes, Exodus 12.24.
they are the Lords. Whence arises this sound reason. That which is the Lords
peculiarly, and perpetually, and not by any new ordination for a time, that is
to be paid always, without al difference of times of the old and new
Testament: but such are tithes, they are the Lords, and not made so by any such
ordination, therefore they are to be paid even under the new Testament also. It
cannot be maintained, that tithes are ceremonial, or appurtenances of the
Leuiticall Priesthood: for God, though he gave them to the Levites, yet did he
not first found them in that encorporation: but only transferred his own right
to that Order of Priesthood quousque, so long as it should endure, and after
the ceasing of that Priesthood, the same right descended, as it were, by
entaile to the succeeding Ministry of the Gospel. In a word; Tithes were due
to the Leuiticall Ministers, not as Leuiticall, but as Ministers; and so are
successively due to the Evangelical Pastors, as Pastors, and not formally as
Evangelical. And if per impossible, the Gospel could cease, yet should not
tithes cease, but be rendered to whatsoever Ministry could be feigned to
succeed in place thereof.

2. This appears further by Scripture, 1. Cor. 9.14.
concluding the It is ordained (says the Apostle) that they should live of the
Gospel, that preach the Gospel: even as they did live of the Altar, that did
wait at the Altar. Whence I reason thus, That is due now, and to be paid under
the Gospel, without the payment of which, the preachers cannot be maintained,
according to Gods ordinance: but such are Tithes, God having ordained them
only, and not other means: for if none other means can be showed to have
been ordained by God, to maintain preachers, then tithes only are of his
ordinance. Therefore tithes are due now in these days of the Gospel.

3. This appears further, because that, as unto Aaron, Melchisedeck, after
whose order is Christ, in whose name, and representing whose person, are the
ministers of the Gospel: according to the Apostles reasoning to the Hebrews;
Here men receive tithes, that die, Heb. 7.8.
and there he is said to have received tithes, that lives for ever etc. Hence
I reason thus: That which is Christ's due, as he is a means of Gods blessing
unto the people, that is the due of his ministers serving in the same office:
but tithes are Christ's due, seeing they were Melchisedecks, even as they were
due to the Priests after Aaron, because due to Aaron, and they are Christ's and
Melchisedecks, as they were a means of blessing; for, Eonomine, in this
respect Abraham is noted to have paid tithes to Melchisedeck, when he met him,
and blessed him. Therefore they are due to the Ministers of the Gospel. And to
such as will understand, the Apostle Paul is most plain for tithes: Let him
that is instructed, make him that has instructed him, partaker of all his
goods. Call 6.6.
What, must he make his goods common unto him, that he may use any of them as
himself? none will grant this, I am sure. Must he only give him some small
matter, as an alms at his discretion? Ah forced construction, to make part of
all, some gratuitie only out of the money. Thus there remains no way else to
make him partaker of al thy goods, but by the due paying of thy tithes from all
sorts of thy increased goods, namely, which arise from thy Corn, from thy
Fruit, from thy Cattle, etc. which are called, all thy goods.

Genesis 14. Genesis 28.22.
A fourth argument may be taken, from the custom of the Church of God in all
ages. Abel and Cain acknowledge something due to the Lord, when they bring unto
him part of their increase. Abraham more particularly pays the tithe of all.
Jacob voweth to give the tenth to the Lord. Under the new Testament, there was
a community of things amongst Christians for 200. years, according to
Tertullian, which being dissolved by Vrlan, Bishop of Rome, tithes came again
into use, according to Origin, Ciprian, and Gregory, long before the Laterane
Counsel, by which the Popes of Rome makes them ceremonial, took advantage
of impropriations for their own gain. Who so would be further instructed
herein, may read the learned Treatises, written of this subject by Doctor
Carlion, now Bishop of Chichester, by Master Roberts, Minister of Norwich and
others. It is to be renounced therefore, as an error, to hold, that tithes are
not now due by Gods law, and the Ministry should live upon the benevolence of
people, as Wickliffe, being deceived in his judgment, did. It is not enough to
say, it was a ceremony, and so belonged only to the time of the Law: for though
a figure might be found herein (as Athanasin, has observed, ^ an Hebrew letter
expressing ten, setting forth the first letter of Jesus), yet it was not
merely ceremonial, as other things, that had no further use, but to prefigure
Jesus, this being a maintenance for Gods ministers, such, as he has ordained
always to be in his Church, though not after the same order, yet such (as
has been showed) as unto which tithes are also paid.

2 The right paying of tithes.
It follows now therefore, that I show the manner of paying tithes rightly, in
all such, as would live by rule, and keep a good conscience.

Leuit. 37, 31.
First, they are to be paid without diminution, either when they are paid in
kind, or a price is given for them. If any man among the Israelites would buy
his tithes, he must add a fifth part to the price, if he pays it in kind,
it must not be changed, giving a worse for a better, for if it be changed,
then both it, and that, for which it is changed, Leuit. 27.10.
shall be holy, he shall forfeit both. Contrary to which, is the corrupt manner
now adays, wherein for the most part, either the worst, or least, is paid for
tithe, or less money then the tithe is worth, it being a common reckoning of
worldlings, that the tithe is not so much worth, as one of the nine parts. And
yet this is one of the least abuses, if we consider the customs, by which, in
stead of giving a fifth part more, only a fifth, or fourth part is paid six
pence, for a tithe worth two shillings and six pence, or a penny, or three
halfe-pence, for that which is worth a shilling, or more: and he thinks, that
he deals honestly with God, that does thus. But let any man indifferently
consider this Law, and he shall find, that no such custom ought to be
amongst men fearing God, although Gods Minister, for quites sake, be content
to accept of it, and no more has been paid a long time; for the thing, and not
the custom is to be regarded, if thou will go by the rule of Gods Law, which
can only order thy going aright.

Leuit. 27.30.
Secondly, tithes are to be paid yearly every year, of the increase of corn,
of cattle, of fruit, etc. for, All the tithe of the Land, both of the seed of
the ground, and of the fruit of the trees, is the Lords, and every tithe of
bullock and sheep, etc. Deuteronomy 14.22. Numb. 18 21.
Thou shall give the tithe of all, year by year. For I have given, says the
Lord, all the tenths of Israel, unto the children of Leui for an inheritance:
and the reason is added, for their service about the Tabernacle.

Deuteronomy. 14.24.
Now, whereas it seems to be put in the man's power, so that he duly pay his
tithes, to impart hereof unto the poor, and to eat and drink, and be merry
herewith, he and his family: because the Lord says; If the way be too long for
thee, thou shall put it into money and carry it, and when thou come at the
place, which the Lord shall choose, thou shall bestow the money, for whatsoever
thine heart desires, etc And again, whereas it may seem, that it was
sufficient to do thus once in the three years, because it is said, Deuteronomy. 14
28.
At the end of the three years, thou shall bring forth the tithe of all thine
increase the same year, etc. We must for the right understanding hereof, have
recourse to the original law, by which, as has been showed, the tithes are
appointed for an inheritance to the sons of Leui, they dedicating the tenth
of them unto God: now, if they were their inheritance, then no private man
could have any power, in the disposing of them, more then the Leuite had power
over the land given to any other tribe for inheritance. I take it therefore,
that the man thus appointed, to bring his tithe in money, had not any part of
the worth of it in his power, to dispose, but putting more hereunto, as was
provided, a fifth part, or more, according to Gods blessing upon him, he had
power in this, to make provision, and to eat and drink hereof, and rejoice
before the Lord, Deuteronomy 16.16.
and to impart of it to the needy. For thrice in a year did the Lord appoint
feasts, and willed them, not to come to his house empty, but to bring every
man according to Gods blessing upon him, a gift of his hand, to feast
therewithal. And for the tithe of the third year, I take it, that the Law
has none other meaning, then has been said, viz. that out of the abundance of
Gods blessing, as some thing should be taken to feast withal at the Lords
house, so privately the Leuit and poor should be refreshed herewith at home.
Some hold, that the tithe of the third year was a tithe arising out of the
nine parts for charitable uses, which question I need not debate any further
having been large in this point.

Mal. 3.8.
Thirdly, touching things dedicate to an holy use, if any man shall presume to
take them, and turn them to a private use, he steals from, and robs God,
according to that challenge made by the Prophet, saying: Ye have robbed me,
and yet say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. And the
same Law makes things dedicate sacred also, and such, as it is a robbing of
God, to take them from the Church. Leuit. 27.28.
For, Every thing (says the Lord) separate from common use, whether it be man
or beast, or land, is most holy to the Lord, it may not be sold, nor redeemed.
And it is destruction to a man, says Solomon, to devour that, which is
sanctified, and after the vows to enquire.



Jesus I know, Acts 19.13.
and Paul: but who are ye? Fourthly, they offend by oppression, taking the
tithes of the people for nothing, hiring for small pension some simple cheap
Sir John, under whom the people perish for want of knowledge.

them for inheritances by their parents, and want all other means of living?

Officio, as in Beneficio. Nay moreover it is not improbable, that upon such
condition imposed, the Ministers possessing thus as purchasers in Lay-fee, and
yet being bound to all Church-performances, will be content to convert the
Tithes into Church-fee, reserving only the Patronage to themselves and their
heirs; and so in process of time the Church may be reinuested in Gods right,
throughout many now wronged Parishes in this Kingdom. Deep judgments may
perhaps propound other more plausible or passable courses; I have made bold to
cast in the mite of my weak understanding, but fervent wish: not so much, I
protest, for the enriching any of our profession, as for the restoring God his
own, and the disburthening many deteinors of so heavy a load of sin. In
this, or any other probable course for restitution, there will, I grant, be to
the restorers, some loss of worldly wealth, but it will turn to great gain,
viz. of a good Conscience, which will feast thee every day, whereas thou can
not but lose this way still, cleaving to that unjust gain, offensive so many
ways, as has been showed. Oh that God would give power to these words, that
they might enter into men's hearts, and never cease speaking there, until they
dispose themselves to cease from robbing God, and make some restitution of
these holy things, meaner persons doing as has bin said, and the greater which
have thousands besides, extending their bounty, restoring freely to the
Church, and sparing from many superfluities.



Of Religious houses.
Those cages of unclean birds were deservedly dissolved, both for their own
impurities, as also for their original foundation, being out of blind zeal
ordained to the maintenance of idle bellies, superstitious Massemongers, and
inuaders of Tithes, which were due to the local Pastors, and not to the
swarms of mungrell Friars. And truly it were to be wished, that the footsteps
and memorials of those Church-robbers were abolished, and not still preserved,
by exempting Abbey lands from paying any Tithes. The Friars had then some
pretenses, that they prayed for the people, and sometime preached to them also:
but now the Lay men that succeed the Friars in those purloyneries, have no
shadow of such pretense, but defraud the Church against all reason, and
against law to, as I have cause to think. Now as for the lands and Manors thus
bestowed by our devout Ancestors, I do not see that superstition did so
unseperably stick to them, that they might not at the suppression have bin
diuerted to some better public use for the Church or Commonwealth, at least
some large portion of them. But of all in this kind, most laudable is their
work, that have converted any such lands and houses to the maintenance of
students in good learning, which may grow up, as profitable plants in the
Church of God.

Quest. 100. What is here commanded?

Answ. To do to all men as I would they should do to me, and by diligent
paines-taking to get mine own living, in that estate of life, to which it
pleases God to call me.

Matthew. 7.12.
Explan. Having been so large already in showing the sin, it does more easily
appear, what the duty according to this law is. And this in brief is set
down by Christ; To do to all men, as ye would that they should do to you:
and that is in the excuting of any office, in buying and selling, in lending
and borrowing, and in giving and taking, etc.

In executing any office, as of a King, or a Judge, or of a Iusticer, etc.
without respecting the person of the rich, or favoring the person of the poor,
Leuit. 19.5.
doing justice betwixt a man and his neighbor, even as thou would have it
done unto thee, if thou were to be judged, and therefore shutting the eyes
against kindred in the flesh, acquaintance and greatness, and thy hands
against bribes. In doing the office of a steward, or collector of any duties,
taking no more then the due. In doing the duty of a master, to allow servants
things convenient, of a servant to be faithful in doing service, and every
other office, dealing justly, though power be in thy hands, to advantage thy
self in doing otherwise.

2. In buying and selling.
2. In buying and selling, thou must do as thou would be done to, not seeking
to live out of other men's losses, but selling according to the worth of the
thing, and no more, and in buying, giving accordingly, as the Lord has by Law
provided, Leuit. 25.

3. To lend freely.
3. In borrowing, and lending to the needy, lending freely, as thou would
gladly borrow, if thou were poor and needy, Luke 6.35.
and as is commanded; Lend freely, looking for nothing again: no, not for the
thing lent, being but some small sum, which thou can well spare: and if
thou can gratify any neighbor without thine own hinderance by lending, to
do this freely also for love.

2. Kings 4.
Again, if any thing be lent for gain, which we call letting, not to exact
upon any man, but to cleave to this rule: and if thou borrowest, be careful to
pay again, not only at the time appointed, but by continual providence
against that time; and if thou have not otherwise wherewithal, sell such
things as thou have, to satisfy thy creditour, as the poor widow of the
Prophet sold her oil. If thou find ought of thy neighbors, if the owner
may be known, thou must restore it as is by law provided: Deuteronomy. 22.1.2.3.
Thou shall not see thy brothers Ox, nor his Ass go astray, and withdraw thy
self from them, but shall bring them again to thy brother, and if thou know
him not, thou shall bring them to thy house, until thy brother seeks after
it, and so shall thou do with all lost things of thy brother. If any thing be
committed to thy trust, Exodus 22 7.8. Verse 14 15.
not by any deceit to beguile thy brother of it, but to deliver it again, when
it shall be required. If thou have hired any thing, and it perish, or be hurt
under thy hand, thou must make it good. If thou be any way wronged, not to
go to law, if by any other means thou may be restored, and not for trifles;
for we must rather depart from our right in something, especially where the
Gospel is scandalized by contentious brabbling among Christians, according to
the Apostle; Why rather suffer ye not wrong? 1. Cor. 6.7.
why rather sustain ye not harm? And as we read of Abraham, that to avoid
contention, yielded unto Lot, being his Nephew, from his right. And if we be
constrained to go to law, then not to prosecute matters in malice, seeking the
hinderance, but the reformation of our adversary, and recalling him from his
error, if it be a criminal cause; and fair recovery of our own right, if it
be a Civil cause. 4. In giving and taking, do as thou would be done to, in
mercy relieuing the poor with clothing, meat and drink, James 1.27.
and other comforts, according to his necessity. The pure religion and
undefiled before God, is to visit the fatherless and widows in their
adversity: So that he which performs not this duty, having this worlds
goods, has no true religion in him: yea, 1. John 3.17.
he has no love of God; for, If any man has this worlds good, and seeing his
brother in want, shuts up his compassion toward him, how dwells the love
of God in him? yea, he has no faith; for, James 2.20.
faith without works is dead. yea, he has no sure foundation; for, 1. Tim.
6.17.18.
the rich are warned to be rich in good works, to be ready to distribute and
communicate, laying up in store for themselves, a good foundation: yea, he
has no conformity with God, as the child of God has: for, do good, says
the Lord, to them that hate you, Matthew. 5.45.
that ye may be the children of your father which is in heaven. Now that this
duty may be rightly performed, it must be done liberally, according to a man's
ability; for, he that sows liberally, shall reap liberally, and with all
chearefulnes, and not grudgingly; 2. Cor 9 6.7.
for, God loves a cheareful giver. And for taking, there must be no more taken
then is given, neither must they ask, and receive alms, that are not pressed
hereunto by necessity: labor must not be neglected, and an idle, loitring,
vagrant life entered upon, for this is to breed a confusion, and to hinder the
poor indeed, and to rob the spittle. And thus much of following the rule,
which has been embraced, even amongst the heathen by the law of Nature, Quod
tibi non vis fieri, alteri nefeceris: Insomuch. as that Alexander Seuerus, an
heathen Emperor of the Romans, caused it to be written in all open places, and
marketplaces, that it might be continually before the eyes of all people;
That which thou would not have done to thee, do not to another man.

Rules of obedience to this Commandment.
Now, there is further added, as a special means to enable unto this duty: by
diligent pains taking, to get mine own living, in that estate of life, to
which it pleases God to call me.

1. Cor. 7.20.
For that we may do the duty of this Law: we must first be in a lawful estate
and calling, according to the precept; Let every man abide in the same
vocation, wherein he was called: and as a remedy against stealing, and as a
means to enable us to give to the needy, it is said, Let him work with his
hands, the thing that is good: Ephesians. 4.22.
so that thy calling must be good and honest, otherwise what thou gainest
hereby is stolen, and if thou give, it is not accepted: it must be
profitable to Church, or Commonwealth.

Genesis 3 17.
Secondly, thou must be diligent herein: for, In the sweat of thy brow (says
the Lord) thou shall eat of thy bread until thou return to the earth.
Diligence was at the first enjoined Adam, when he was set to dress the
garden. The Lord himself (though a most omnipotent essence, and pure act) is
in continual action, ruling all things; the Angels have wings, to express
their diligence and celerity; the Sun, Moon, and Stars, with all the
heavenly orbs, are always in motion; and the smallest creatures, the very
Be, and little Pismire, are diligent in their kind, all which teach man
diligence in his calling.

1. Tim. 6.6.
Thirdly, thou must be content with thy present estate; for, godliness is great
gain with contentation. Discontent, besides that it is ingratitude against
God, is a ground of all unlawful practices, to gain more, and cools, and
kills the spirits, from the works of our callings: but contentation stays
from that, which is unlawful, and puts life into our honest labors and
endeauours.

Prou. 21.5.
Fourthly, thou must be frugall and thriftie, to save that wherewith the Lord
has blessed thee, not spending it unnecessarily upon vanity, nor loosing it
through neglect; The thoughts of the diligent do surely bring abundance: so
that a man by thrift, having in reasonable sort enough of his own, shall not
need to gape after other men's goods, but may have wherwithall to give to others.

Psalm. 15.4.
Lastly, thou must be constant, to perform all thy lawful promises: for, Who
shall dwell in the Tabernacle of the most High? he that swears to his own
hinderance, and changes not: or, if he makes any speech, or promise, of
doing any thing, to the benefit of another: For, he that boasts of false
liberality, Prou. 25.14.
is like clouds, and wind without rain. He brings poor men into a vain
hope of some benefit to be received, but does nothing, or he makes a show
before others, as is the manner of many, seeming good and beneficial, and
making fair promises; but in deeds least of all, they shall have reward
accordingly.

Quest. 100. Which is the ninth Commandment?

Answ. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Quest. 101. What is here forbidden?

Answ. All false witness bearing, which is first, falsely accusing, and
witnessing against our neighbor before a Judge. 2. By slandring and
backbiting, and by all readiness to hearken to such false reports. 3 By
flattering and soothing any for advantage against the truth. 4 By lying or
telling any untruth against our conscience.

Explan. In this Commandment, the maine intent and scope is, to preserve the
good name of our neighbor, and our own credit, and good name: for, by false
witnessing and lying, as our neighbors disparagement is sought, so a man's own
is procured. The maine sin therefore here, is unjustly, or out of malice to
detract from the good name of our neighbor.

1. King. 19.
First, I say, unjustly; because sometime a man is so bad and notorious, as that
he which should go about to maintain his credit, should endanger himself of
the woe to such, as justify the wicked. Of such like it is just and right for
a man, according to their deserts, to complain, either before God, as David
did of Ahitophel and Doeg, who had most notoriously expressed their malice,
and as Eliiah did against the Israelites, who had killed the Prophets, and
broken down the altars: Or before men, as Paul does of false teachers to the
Galatians; and so does Peter and Jude giving them disgraceful names, that
others might take heed of their company, and being infected by them: or before
themselves in public, as Paul calls the Galatians foolish, Gal. 3.1.
and bewitched. And Esaias the Israelites, Princes of Sodom, and people of
Gomorrah. Or lastly, Leuit. 19.17. Matthew. 18.17.
in private reproving offenders; for, Thou shall rebuke thy neighbor for his
fault, and not suffer him to sin: And if he hears not thee, tell it to the
Church, says Christ, complain to the Governors of the Church, from whom he
may receive due censure. But it is offended in making such complaints upon any,
either if it be but upon conjecture, and not apparent certainty, or in
doubtful actions, that may have a better construction, or out of malice, or
vainglory, seeking by the disgrace of our neighbor, to bring our selves into
credit: or lastly, John 8.
being in as great, or greater fault our selves: for, He that is without sin
amongst you, says Christ, cast the first stone at her. And hypocrite, cast
first out the beam which is in thine own eye, and then shall thou see more
clearly, to cast the mote out of thy brothers eye.

The sin against this Commandment therefore, is unjustly to detract from the
good name of our neighbor, by any means.

Deuteronomy. 19.17.
First, by unjust and false accusations, and witnessing, before any Judge: If
any does thus, the Lord provided, That he should by the Judge be done unto, as
he had thought to have done unto his brother: and where it is concealed from
men, God will be avenged, 2 Kings 22. Unjust accusations.
as in Naboths case, against Ahab and Iezabil. This is a double most heinous
sin, a most high degree of taking Gods name in vain, when in his presence,
before his Vicegerent, the false is witnessed, and the height of sin, against
Deuit. 17 6.
and the Judges proceeding hereupon in sentence of condemnation: for by Gods
positive law, there must be sufficient witness of two, or three, when Pilate
proceeded to judgment against Christ in this case, he made himself as guilty,
as the Jews that falsely accused him.

Leuit. 19.16. Romans 1.30.
Thirdly, by slandering and backbiting: for, Thou shall not walk about with
tales, says the Lord, It is noted, as one of the properties of such, as are
given over to a reprobate sense, to be back-biters, and much in complaining
against this is the book of the Proverbs. Such are worse then devouring
beasts, and fowls, making a prey of men, even whilst they live, whereas others
devour only dead things. He that has an ill name we say is half hanged,
the back-biter therefore that raises an ill name is half an hangman to his
neighbor, poisoning, as with dead Cantharides, with his venomous tongue, the
box of precious ointment, of his neighbor, which is his chief treasure, and
with the sharp Rasor of his tongue, cutteth his throat, and pierces his
sides, as it were with swords and spears.

And yet this is a common practice in these miserable days, out of the same
fountain, as to send forth the sweet water of blessing God, so the brackish
water of malediction, or speaking evil of our neighbors. But so much as thou
falsely detractest from thy brothers good name before men, is detracted from
thine before God in heaven, to the razing of it out of the book of life which
he has written.

Exodus 13.1.
Fourthly, to have a man's ears open to receive false rumors and tales against
a neighbor: For, Thou shall not receive a false tale, says the Lord. The
slanderer is as the thief, he that hearkens to him as the receiver: for if
there were not some which delighted to hear, and so did give incouragcement,
there would be no carrier of tales.

Gal. 6.1. Prou. 11.13.
Fifthly, to be long-tongued, and be ready to blaze abroad the infirmities and
slips of others: for he that is not carnal, like Jsmael, after the flesh, but
spiritual, does restore such by the spirit of meekenes. The man of
understanding will keep silence; he is a fool that seeks thus to disgrace
his neighbor: He that is of a faithful heart, concealeth a secret; he is a
slanderer that discovers a secret.

Hard surmises. 1 Cor. 4.4. Romans 2.
Sixthly, in the heart to think, and judge ill of our neighbor, without
apparent cause, or for some infirmities to pass sentence of judgment against
any man: for, Judge nothing, says the Apostle, before the time, when the Lord
will lighten things that are hid in darkness. He is made subject hereby to Gods
judgment that judges another man.

Vainglory.
Seventhly, to be possessed with vainglory and self-love, which is the
fountain of all disgrace doing unto our brother: as Eliab David's elder brother,
out of an high conceit of himself and of his own valor, made base account of
his younger brother David, and extenuated his worth. When a man is puffed up
says S. Paul, hence comes strife, envy, railings, evil surmisings. 1 Timothy
6.4. Prou. 27.2.
Wherefore, Let another man praise thee, says Solomon, and not thine own
mouth. Such is the baseness of a proud mind, as that it will build up the
own credit, with the ruins of another man's, and varnish it self over with
oil pressed from another credit, even to the utter spoiling and tearing of it
in pieces. As he that without conscience seeks to in rich himself out of
another man's goods: so is he whose tongue runs over the world, to rob his
neighbors of their good name, and to make all other men no body, that himself
only may be some body, it was a special mark, wherewith the false teachers
amongst the Galatians were branded.

Against flattery.
Eighthly, to flatter and sooth men contrary to the truth for advantage,
praising him, that is, or may be beneficial unto thee, or into whom thou
desire to insinuate thy self for thine own benefit, when he is not worthy
any such praise, or when the contrary is true of him. As if a man should praise
him for liberal, which is vainly prodigal, or covetous, for wise, and
understanding in such things, as wherein he has little or no skill, for
devout and holy, when he is negligent of holy duties, and profane, for
discreet, when he is Machiauell-like politic, for humble and familiar, when
he is base, and degenerous, for ordering himself well in all things, when he
does palpably amiss in many things, and like Gnatho in the Comedy, swearing it
to be true, that Thraso says, how false soever. Flattery is called in hebrew
Chalac, signifying either blanaus, swooth, and mollis, soft, because the
flatterer uses smooth, and soft speeches; or diuidere, to divide, because in
flatterers, the tongue is divided from the heart. So that flattery is the
framing of the tongue to smooth speeches against the conscience to curry favor
with a man, in some worldly respect, or as Augustine has defined it; Est
fallacilaude seductio: A seducing by a deceitful praise. In the new Testament
it is called (...), sycophansie, from a decree made amongst the Atticks, that
they should be punished, that carried figs out of the country, and if any
man could detect them, he was appointed a reward, whence it came to pass,
that many promooter-like persons accused many, and sometime falsely, pretending
to be best commonwealths men, and lovers of the country, but intending their
own gain by oppressing others, like most of our Informers, and Catchpoles.
Now of flatterers there are four sorts.

1. Some flatter to circumuent others, that they may the more easily affect
their malicions proiects, as Ioab dealt with Abner, asking him how he did, or
using some such kind speeches unto him, but with his hand smote him, 2 Samuel
3.27.
that he dyed; as Saul's servants flattered David, commending it as an high
favor to be the kings son in law, that he might be intrapped and
endangered.

2. Some flatter, by commending beyond all measure, for their own private
benefit: of such it is said; Prou. 27.14.
He that praises his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning,
it shall be counted for a curse unto him.

3. Some flatter so, as that for the pleasing of some, they care not how they
detract from and disgrace others, with whom they are at enmity, or whose
discredit, they account their own credit. These are tale-bearing flatterers,
whose words as the wiseman has it, Prou. 26.22.
go down into the bowels of the belly.

4. Some flatter by speaking things pleasing, when their duty is to rouse up
the sleepy spirits of men, by crying aloud against their sins, thundering out
Gods judgments due therefore. These sow pillowes under men's elbowes, Ezech.
13.10.
and daube with untempered mortar, and a storm of Gods judgments is threatened
both against it and them.

Against lying
Ninthly, and lastly, this law is broken by lying, which is the speaking of any
thing contrary to truth, against a man's knowledge, with an intent to deceive.

First, against a man's knowledge, because if unwittingly an untruth be told, it
is no lie, and if a truth be told, the person telling it, thinking it false, it
is a lie in him, for, mentiri, to lie, is, as some derive it, contra mentemare,
to go against a man's mind, and knowledge. Otherwise a man receiving a report
from another, and telling it forth, without any fault on his part, should be a
liar. Whereas mendacium, a lie, is menda, a fault, it is (...), in Greek;
quasi (...), as a flying, because all men naturally fly, and hate liars.
Aristotle deriueth it of (...), vituperandus, to be dispraised, and Plato, of
(...), sleeping, because he is asleep in sin, that trades in lying. In
Hebrew it is, (...) iniquity.

Psalm. 12.2.
Again, if a truth be told against the knowledge of the teller, it is a lie,
for it is not that which a man speaks, but the manner how he speaks that
makes it a lie, according to the description of the Psalmist; They speak
deceitfully every man with his neighbor, and speak with a double heart.

Lies amongst the ancient have been distinguished into three sorts;
Officiosum, perniciosum, iocosum. An officious, a pernicious and a jesting lie.
The officious is the telling of an untruth, merely to save a man's own life,
or his neighbors, or their goods, or their freedom, and peace without
intending any hurt unto another. This kind of lie has found favorers amongst
the ancient. Origin defended it, and Gregory held it to be lawful under the
old testament, wherefore he says that the midwiues lying unto Pharaoh to save
the children of the Hebrews were rewarded, God made them houses. The
Priscilianists held this to be lawful, and so continued undiscovered in their
heresy a long time, wherefore Consentius feigned himself a Briscillianist to
discover them, but it is reproved by Augustine; especially upon this reason, if
it were lawful to pursue a lie with a lie, then robbery might be pursued with
robbery adultery with adultery and one sin with another. This officious lie was
the common refuge of holy men in their dangers, of Abraham, of Isaac, of
Rebecca, of Iaacob, of Rahab, and of Iehu, in the hottest of his zeal for God.
This has ever yet been held a sin amongst soundest Divines, who have
excused Abraham and Iaacob, etc. from being guilty hereof. Abraham, for that
she was his Sister, Iaacob, for that he said Prophetically, I am thy first
borne Esau, and Paul, for that he also said Prophetically, I know him not to be
the high Priest, seeing the Priesthood after Aarons order was at an end in
Christ. It is extenuated and lessened indeed, the less it breaks the rule of
love: for this is the maine reason why lying is sinful, Ephesians. 4.25.
and unbeseeming a Christian, because we are members one of another, and by
lying we deceive and beguile one another, like strangers, yea like enemies.
Hence it is that the lies before mentioned, though they be recorded in the
Scriptures, yet they are not taxed in those persons, because it was to save
life, not to destroy; to fulfill things pleasing unto God, not against his will.

2. The pernicious lie, is the telling of an untruth to deceive, and to hurt a
man's neighbor, either for some base gain, or out of malice. This is a common
practice amongst tradesmen, and buyers and sellers of all sorts, and amongst
Sycophants before spoken of. But it is an essential property of the Devil,
and makes them the children of the Devil, at which all should quake and
tremble: He is a liar from the beginning, and the Father of lies. He deceived
Adam and Euah, Ioh. 8.44.
to the woe of us all, he was a lying spirit in the mouth of the false Prophets
of Ahab, and is in the mouth of all such as speak lies.

3. The jesting or sporting lie, is the telling of things not true for the
recreation of the hearer, having none other end of morality; or it is to tell
untruths, to make a gull of the hearer, or to sport and please a man's self and
his own vain glorious humor. Thus Iesters make a practice of lying and
sinning, whilst they exercise their scurrilous wits, in telling strange
inventions of their own which be most false. And the ouer-witty rakehels of
these times, who devising and spreading false news, account it the best sport
to deceive the credulous and simple, they are all liars, and set a work of the
Devil: and to be ranked with them are vain travelers and praters, which
merely out of vanity because they would say something, set such things as they
have seen or heard, upon the tainters, stretching them most palpably beyond all
credit, or coining incredible things out of their own mynt, that never before
saw any light: it is not so with mythologies, riddles, and parables, having
good and useful moralls; for they are none other but parables, the more
plainly and effectually to set forth good things.

2 King 5. Act. 5.
And unto these may be added an other kind of lie, which may be called f^cosum,
a varnishing or coloring lie, to hide, and cover over some sin after that it
has been committed, as Geheza sought to color over the matter to Elishah his
master, saying, thy servant went no whither, and Ananias and Saphira sought
thus to color over their sacrilege, but it turned to their greater sin.
This is to lay a plaster lenitiue upon a corrupt sore, making it the worse,
and the covering of bad feed with earth, making it to grow the rather. The sin,
which was but single before, is thus made double, because the party sinning
having thus salued it, has no further care of being purged by repentance, and
amendment, and deludeth justice, so that all means of reformation are taken
away.



non tenere, or respondere; or else, if he will answer positiuely, he must
profess his own innocence, or confess his own guilt expressly.

Out of a necessary ground Joshua exhorts Achan to confess his theft; My
son give glory unto God, and tell the truth: so that, as thou make
conscience of giving God glory, thou must not in this case deny, but confess
the truth, whatsoever thou suffer, seeing thou art worthy.

into, not for the edification of any, but for his own destruction?

he that denies me before men, says the Lord, I will deny before my Father
which is in Heaven. Math. 10.33. 1 Pet. 3 15.
Herein Peter fell grievously, and therefore being converted, he indeauoureth
to strengthen others against the like falls, willing them to be ready always
to give an answer to every one that asks you a reason of that hope, that is
in you. So that a man must not only not deny with the Priscilianists, his
religion, but when like cause is offered in the midst of greatest dangers,
with Paul, to confess the maine of his belief: as nature binds him still
notwithstanding in circumstances, and other quiddities, he may be silent for
his own safety.

Against equivocations.
May not a man by equivocations, or mental reseruations blindfold the truth, to
save himself from danger?

Dii, Gods had a double sense, there being superi and inferi, such as be called
Gods in hell beneath, as in heaven above, and (...), scientes, knowing, which
is as well by experience, as by theory, or contemplative understanding. And
ever since the Devil has made equiuocating his ordinary phrase of answering
such as seek unto him.

When Julian consulted with his Oracle at Delos, Delphos, and Dodona, being to
fight against the Persians: it was answered, Omnes dii decreuimus trophaeos,
and spolia Thera, iuxta fluuium ducere: All we Gods have decreed to carry the
trophies, and spoils by Thera besides, or nigh to the river; Thera being the
name of a place in Iulians Empire, and the name of a river, that runs
through Assyria, in the Persian Creek, so that the victory being gotten by the
enemies, the prophecy was verified, and he deceived by equivocation. In the
days of Iustitian, it was foretold by the Devil, Mundum cum prole periturum,
that Mundus, Munst. Cosmog.
or the world, with the offspring should perish, insomuch, Theodor. li 3. c 2.
all expected an end of the world, but one Mundus with his sons went to the
wars, and were slain, thus the Prophecy was fulfilled. Socrat. li. 4. c. 15.
In the days of Valens, he foretold that one whose name began with these
four Greek Letters th e. o. d. th. e. o. d. should reign next, of which sort
there were many, which was the occasion of Valens his tyranny against many. And
many such like instances more might he given. When Arius presumed thus by
equivocation to deceive, he was punished with a miserable, death, voyding out
his very bowels vpen the stool. And yet this is an ordinary practice amongst
Jesuits, defending it also from the best examples of Christ and the Apostles.
Whereas they do herein most foully blaspheme. For though Christ were
misunderstood of the woman of Samaria, touching the water that he spoke of, and
by his Disciples touching the temple that he could destroy, and raise up again
in 3. days, yet he had no meaning to deceive by thus speaking, but to remove
their minds from carnal to spiritual conceits, betwixt which and the Jesuits
equiuocating, there is no more proportion, then betwixt heaven and hell.

And the same is to be said of the Apostles, speaking words that might be
taken two ways, or in two diverse senses: Mental reseruations are such
answers, as wherein some clause is reserved in the mind of the answerer,
making the answer true, how contrary soever the words are to the truth.

For example, it being demanded, Did you not come lately from beyond the seas?
he answers, no, though he did, with this mental reservation, to pass into
Scotland, Poland, etc. Did you say or hear mass since you came into England?
he answers no, when he did, with this mental reservation, I did it not to
tell you. O strange device to mock men, and God; this is a degree beyond
Beelzehubs invention, never the like heard of before in any age Be ashamed
hereof, even ye firstborn of Satan, ye Jesuits, unless ye will take
upon you to be tutors to your own father.

Quest. 102. What is here commanded?

Answ. As much as in us lies, to preserve the good name of our neighbor, and
our onwe good name, stopping our ears against false reports, and suppressing
them, and always, whatsoever comes of it speaking the truth.

Explan. First, we must: by all lawful means maintain our own credit, and a
good name: for, proximus quisque sibi, every man is next to himself, and he
that will use that care which he ought, to the preserving of his neighbors
good name, does begin with looking to his own. Yet, I say, that we must do it
by lawful means, because there be some that do ambire famam, too earnestly
secke after credit and offend hereby.

It is unlawfully therefore sought.

Math. 6. Unlawful means of fame.
First, by hypocrisy, as the Pharisees fought the praise of men, by pretending
exceeding great godliness, for which they are censured by the Lord, to have
their reward: so that if any seek fame, by making a most excellent show that
he may be seen, he may indeed get a name before men, but he shall lose it
before God.

Secondly, by flattery, as Absalon is noted to have flattered the people, using
all courtesy toward them, that so he might make a way to the Kingdom: such
are some courting Gallants now adays, that use all courtesy toward others,
having most proud hearts, and making most lowly shows, these and the like, get
the names of most kind Gentlemen, and lowly, when they are proud, and
insinuate themselves into men for advantage, by thus setting up their names
amongst them.

Luc. 6.26.
Thirdly, by the neglect of a man's duty, when he ought to oppose himself
against men's sins, winking at them, and forbearing to censure them, when his
office does require it, that he may thus have the report of an honest quiet
man. After this manner, to seek and to obtain a good name, and to be well
spoken of, is to be infamous and vile before God, who has threatened such,
saying; Woe is unto you, when all men speak well of you, for so did they to
the false Prophets.

Lawful means of fame.
The lawful means of getting and maintaining a good name, are,

Prou. 10.7.
1. To live well and righteously: for the memory of the just be blessed, but the
memorial of the wicked shall not. Whatsoever good parts a man has, yet if
there be any thing scandalous in him, Eccl 10.2.
it is a fly in a box of precious ointment, corrupting it all.

2. In all things thou must endeavor to glorify God: for, Such as honor me,
1 Samuel 2.30.
says the Lord, J will honor them: seek to maintain and advance Gods fame,
and thou shall be sure of a good name, though thou seem to be vile before
some Michel, as David in dancing before the Arc.

Math 7.2.
3. Thou must speak well, as much as thou can of other men: for it is just
with God as thou measurest unto others, so that it should be measured to thee
again.

4. If there be any other thing which is honest, which is just, Which is pure,
which is worthy of love, which is of good report, Phil. 4.8.
If there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things.

Our duty toward our neighbors good name.
Now for the credit and good name of our neighbor, that we may do our duty
aright toward the maintaining hereof.

1. We must congratulate with him for the good report that goes of him, as S.
Paul professes his joy, for the faith of the Romans, Romans 1.8.
which was published throughout the whole world; and likewise toward other
Churches and particular persons. And if we be not likewise affected to the good
report that goes of our neighbor, but do contrariwise repine at it, as though
something were hereby detracted from us, as is the manner of many, we are far
from maintaining his good name, as our duty requires.

2. We must speak of the good things in our neighbors, to their praise and
commendation: as the Christians at Lystra and Iconium, Act 16.2. 2 Cor. 8.
are said to have reported well of Timothy, as Paul commends the charity and
forwardness of those of Macedonia.

3. We must conceal and hide the infirmities of our neighbor, sparing to
speak of them to his disgrace: for, love covers all trespasses: and bear
one another burden, says the Apostle, Prou. 10.12. Gal. 6.2.
and so fulfill the Law of Christ. Little care of the neighbors good name is
in him, that is ready to set abroach his weaknesses

4 If any thing be done by our neighbor that may have a tolerable
construction, we must so construe it, and not in the worst sense. This was the
charity of the rest of Israel toward the Reubenites and Gadites, on the other
side Jordan, Ios. 12.
which had set up an Altar for a testimonial, they sent first unto them to
understand the thing, before that they begin to war upon them: and Joseph
willing to make the best construction that he could of Mary's being with
child, determined secretly to send her away.

5. Against all slanderous tales and reports against our neighbors credit, to
stop our ears, it is commended as a necessary property in such, as be
inhabitants of Gods holy mountain, not only not to slander, but not to receive
a false tale against his neighbor. And what love is there in such, Psalm. 15.3.
as be ready to hearken to backbiters, unless it may notoriously or evidently
appear to be no slander. Wherefore thou must not only not hearken to such,
but reprove them, be angry with them, and make them known, as most odious
persons, going about to rob thy neighbor of his principal jewel, more worth
then all his substance.

Whether a man may praise himself.
Whether may a man to preserve his own credit, and to get him a good name,
speak of such things, as are praiseworthy in himself, seeing it is
forbidden; Let another man praise thee, and not thine own lips.

This is to be judged of, according to the fountain from whence it proceeds,
if it comes from pride and self-love, out of a desire to be famous, and
highly thought of, as it is in most, it is to be condemned as pride it self,
which makes a man hateful to God and man: but if it comes from necessity,
because otherwise a man shall be unjustly in disgrace through slanderous
tongues, here is a time to seek to maintain his own good name: Thus did
Paul justify himself, and extol his own gifts and labors; or else because
otherwise some aspersion shall be cast upon Gods glory, something slanderous
laid upon his servant, being imputed to him, 1 Samuel 11.
as if Samuel had not stood forth to justify himself, and to publish his
upright dealing in his Judges Office: or lastly, because otherwise sometime
even such as are of excellent deserts might remain unknown, and be used as
enemies, when there is none else to make them known. Thus Obadiah tells
Elijah to his own praise, that he hid an hundred Prophets of the Lord, 1
King. 18.
fifty in a Cave, and fed them with bread and water: And Nehemiah speaks much
of his goodness toward the Jews, desiring the Lord to remember him in mercy.

Ios. 7.
Lastly, the duty here is, in all things to speak the truth, whatsoever
comes of it not be afraid of the faces of the greatest, standing for the
truth of the Gospel: not to fear any enmity of man in witnessing the truth
for the meanest: not for fear of death or other punishment, to deny the truth
of any fact, making us liable hereunto. For thus, as Iosuah said unto Achan,
thou give glory to God, whatsoever becomes of thee, otherwise thou
aduancest the Devil the father of lies. Thou art a follower of God, as one of
his dear Children; and though thou lose something here, yet thou shall be
rewarded an hundred fold: otherwise, as a bastard and impe of the Devil, thou
shall with him be adjudged to hellfire, Revel. 22.
as is the censure of liars.

Quest. 103. Which is the tenth and last Commanmandement?

Answ. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Quest. 104. What is here forbidden?

Answ. All first motions in the mind unto sin, springing from original sin,
though no consent be yielded unto them.

Explan. This Commandment as has been already said, is divided by the
Romanists into two, that the two foremost might be reckoned but one: But this,
as has been showed is their sophistry, and against all reason, there being
two so distinctly delivered of two arguments, the inward and outward worship of
God, here one and the same argument, evil motions and lusts of the mind, and
no full distinction in the matter, but only enumeration of diverse objects. Nay
to demonstrate that all this is but one commandment, compare Exodus 20.17. with
Deuteronomy 4.21. and you shall find the order of this enumeraion inuerted, in the
one the house first named, in the other the wife, which would never have been
done, if they had been two different commandments.

Thou shall not covet; that is, thou shall not have any first motions in thy
mind, against that love which thou owe unto thy neighbor, whereby the way
may be opened to sin against him in any kind, either through the desire of
pleasure, or profit, whether the profit be inheritance, his house or goods,
man, maid, cattle, which were alike bought, and sold in those times: all
beginnings of sin must be resisted, that the soul may be pure and fit for
Gods Spirit, to join it self unto. Now, the Lord passes on here, in
reckoning up particular evil motions against our neighbor, and says nothing
of motions against his own Majesty, not that men are not as apt herein to
sin against God, nether for that these motions are more excusable; but
because as more heinous in any common understanding, they are to be avoided
rather, being against him, from whom every good thing, and only good comes.

Psalm. 139.
The sin against this Law, I say, is, when ill motions of any kind are first in
the mind, whether against God, or against man, though no consent be yielded by
the minds approbation and liking well of, and thinking to put these motions in
execution; for as gross affections and desires make the soul impure in Gods
sight, so his peircing eyesight beholds it if there be any beginnings a far
off, and cannot abide them, according to the Psalmist.

Romans 7. Gal 5.17.
Here therefore comes to be censured original sin in us, derived from Adams
sin, viz. the leprosy of our corrupt nature, which is called lust, and
concupiscence, the flesh, etc. which is a want of original righteousness and
holiness and a pronnesse to all sin and wickedness.

This is daubed up with untempered mortar, by those of the Roman Church denying
it to be any sin but a disease only in nature, as the hereditary stone or
gout, whereas the Apostle plainly teaches even this to be sin, saying; I had
not known sin but by the Law, for I had not known lust, except the Law had
said, Romans 7.7.
Thou shall not lust, or covet, by which words it is evident that it is truly
a sin, and against this precept: to let pass that of David, Psalm. 51. Romans 4.
In sin was I conceived: they are made liable unto death that sinned not, as
Adam, that is having no sin but this original. Of this Argument he that
pleases, may see a large Tractate in my fourefold resolution.

Job. 14.3.
Again, I say, further motions unto sin, springing from original sin, that
is, from the flesh, are against this commandment, though no consent be
yielded, because if the root be naught, the branches must needs be naught
also; Who can draw a clean thing (says Job) out of that which is unclean?
there is not one. Springing from original sin, or the flesh in us, I say,
because some evil motions are suggested by the Devil, which are not our sins,
unless by consenting we make them so. Such motions had our Lord when he was
tempted, Math 4.
but we must learn of him to resist constantly, lest they by admitting,
Motions from Satan known how.
become our sins. These diabolical temptations are commonly known, either
because they are sudden and come into the mind without any object leading
hereunto: or, because they are often, yea, hundreths of times iterated,
without intermission, like Ordnances planted to batter down a wall, to the
infeebling of the faculties of mind and body, and weakening of the senses. 3.
Or, because they are motions to things horrible to nature, as to murders of
others, or of a man's self. Or, because they move to things unpleasing, tedious
and irksome: Or, lastly, because they are violent, and enforce almost to the
doing of that unto which it is moved. If at any time a man be tempted hereby,
to things pleasing to the flesh, as Paul was tempted, when he had that prick
in the flesh, the messenger of Satan, to buffet him: 2 Cor, 12 7.
And David, when he was stirred up to number the people, or if some outward
object be used as a mean to allure, as Euah was allured, by the sight of the
goodly fruit, they are not so easy to be distinguished from fleshly motions,
which always defile where they come, how lightly soever they pass away
again, though this be also denied by the Romanists, calling them, Leuicula
vitiola, queis renatus contaminari nequit; light pecadilloes wherewith the
regenerate cannot be defiled.

Lastly, I say, all first motions to include not only original corruption,
and first motions hence arising, without ioying in them; but much more, if
there be joy and delight, though there be no consent in the heart, to put them
in practice, it is a sin also here forbidden, such motions only, as are
joined with consent, being against other Commandments.

So that he, which is pleased in motions arising in the mind, to have such
house and goods of another man, or such a woman, being another man's wife, and
therefore breaks out in vain wishes, although he does not plot and devise in
his mind, how to attain them, he is a sinner in the highest degree against
this Commandment.

Mark 7.12. Verse 23.
If his thoughts wherein he is delighted be adulterous, he is guilty of
adultery; if murtherous, of murder, and is defiled hereby, according to that
saying of Christ; From within, even out of the heart of man, proceed evil
thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness,
wickedness etc. All these evil things come from within, and defile a man. All
which serves to help us to a sight of our own spiritual deformity, whosoever
is best amongst us, so that if the Lord should enter into judgment with us,
the holiest man were never able to abide it, seeing he has about him the
flesh, the root of bitterness, and often evil motions though he strives
against them, and some taking up the heart with delight, by their pleasing
insinuation. And thus the Law does the office rightly, to conclude all under
sin, that we might all depend only upon Gods mercy for pardon and salvation.

Quest. 105. What is here commanded?

Answ. To keep our very hearts and minds free from all evil motions and
thoughts, contrary to any of the Laws and Commandments of God.

Explan. The duty commanded here, is our through sanctification, not only in
deeds, but even in heart and thought also as the Apostle prays for the
Thessalonians; The very God of peace sanctify you throughout, 1 These. 5.23.
and I pray God that your spirit, and soul and body, may be kept blameless
unto the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. The parts of this are mortification,
putting off the old man which is corrupt through deceiuable lusts: and
vivification, Ephesians. 4.24.
which is, the putting on of the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness, John 3.5.
and true holiness. It is otherwise called Regeneration or a New birth without
which a man shall never see the Kingdom of Heaven.

Now of this new birth there be four degrees or parts.

1. The birth of a pure and holy mind hating sin, and loving the Law, Rom
7.16. Verse 22. Verse 15.
this was in David; Lord, how do I love thy Law, and all false ways I utterly
abhor, and in Paul, I consent to the Law that is good: and, I delight in the
Law of God concerning the inner man, and I hate the thing that I do.

2. Stirring and moving in holy duties, as a living man does the actions of the
living, which a dead carcass cannot do. Psalm. 34.12.
This stirring of the regenerate, is ceasing to do evil, and learning to do
well, doing the duties of pietye toward God, and of love toward man.

3. An earnest desire of food, whereby this new life may be maintained: 1 Pet.
2.2.
As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word that ye may grow
thereby.

2 Pet. 3 18.
A growing up toward man's estate, in knowledge and holiness, according to S.
Peter: Finally brethren grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ.

Now the Law shows all this to be done, but helps not to the doing, and so
leaves a man destitute of all comfort, that all conceit of righteousness in
man might be taken away, his frailty and weakness might be acknowledged, he
might despair of his own power and ability, that he might be set a work to
seek out of the Law, means of fulfilling the Law, and to become righteous
before God. And hitherto of the ten Commandments.

Of keeping the Law.
MY good child know this, that thou art not able to do these things of thy
self, nor to walk in the commandments of God, and to serve him, without his
especial grace, etc.

Very fitly in this public Catechism, after the setting down of the
particulars required by the Law, we are put in mind of our own weakness, and
disabilitie to perform those duties in any measure, and therefore we are sent
to seek from above, a supernatural assistance, which may fight with our
corruptions, and help our infirmities: not that we are thereby advanced in
this life, to a total and perfect correspondence to the Legal rigor of these
duties, but that we may know, that it is a greater strength, then our own
natural abilities, which works in us a sound and sincere, though imperfect,
obedience in this life, which is the Evangelical performance of Gods Law,
achieved partly by us in our weak endeauours through grace, and the rest by
supply for us by our Saviors perfect satisfaction unto the utmost of the Law,
as more distinctly appears in the Questions following.

Quest. 106. Is any man able to keep all these Commandments?

Answ. No man upon earth has, or can ever be able to keep them perfectly, Adam
only excepted in the state of innocence, and Christ, who was both God and man.

Explan. For clearing hereof, we will deduce these Theses, These. 1. Man at the
first able to keep the Law.
or positions; Man by his first creation, was able to keep the whole Law
without sinning: for he was made after Gods image, which, as is expressed by
the Apostle, is righteousness, and true holiness: Eccles. 7.31.
and God, says Solomon, made man righteous, his heart was full of divine
understanding, his will was altogether right, his affections holy, his power
absolute to persist, and continue such always.

These. 2. Man unable to keep the law.
Man, as his nature now is, cannot keep the Law of God, neither the whole, nor
any parcel thereof; but is altogether corrupt, his understanding darkened, his
will crooked, his affections impure, and his best strength, weakness toward
the running the race of Gods Commandments.

Job 14 4.
And when the best means are offered of being brought into the right way, he is
apt to turn them into his own corruption to the increasing thereof, even as
the spider turns all into poison. This corruption of nature is well set forth
by Job, Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? so that man's nature
now is filthiness it self: and so far gone is it herein, as Paul shows,
that speaking hereof in his own person, he says, Romans 7.18.
In me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing. The understanding is so
dark, as that, even like as a blind man, borne blind, 1. Cor. 2.14.
does not see any light, neither can he: the natural man perceives not the
things of God, neither can he. The will is so crooked, as that in all things it
is contrary to Gods will, according to that saying, Nitimur in vetitum semper
cupimusque negata? We are prone to that which is forbidden us, and we long most
for that which is denied us. See an example in the corrupt Jews, Ezech. 3.11.
unto whom the Lord sending Ezechiel, says, but they will not hear, neither
will they cease. The affections are so impure, as nothing is so good, but he is
apt to hate, and impeach it; nothing so vile, but he loves it, and is wedded
unto it: as is showed in the Jews, Ezech. 18.29.
saying, The way of the Lord is not equal, but of their own ways, they
thought most highly. The weakness of the whole man is such, as that he is not
able to think a good thought, 2. Cor. 3 5.
and as a dead carcass corrupts of it self, and stinketh more and more: so
a natural man increases in corruption, till that he becomes most vile, and
runs on to do things even against nature. And lastly, so apt is he to turn
the best means into corruption, as that Christ himself is made a stumbling
block, he that was given to raise us up to heaven, Sam. 1.
is made an occasion of stumbling and falling; the grace of God, which
appears for our salvation, is turned into wantonness.

Man assisted by Gods grace, and regenerate, These. 3. Man cannot perfectly
keep the law. 1 John 3 9.
cannot perfectly fulfill the Law, but fails still in many things. For though
a man be now spiritual, and guided by Gods Spirit, not to sin, as men
natural, according to Saint John: yet the flesh, the old man, corrupt nature
is not altogether expelled, but remaining for their humiliation, and the
exercise of grace in their spiritual combat, hinders them from doing
perfectly the thing they would, and swayeth them oftentimes to the thing they
would not. Even as a very dull scholar, being excellently taught, and much
labored upon by a most skilful Schoolmasters, yet through defects of his
nature, is imperfect in his learning, and erreth in exercises of learning,
sometime in against Orthography, sometime in false Latin, and sometime in
frigid invention, misplacing of words, and using improper words, until that in
continuance of time, he coming to perfect age, all these faults come to be
amended. So the scholar taught by Gods Spirit, shall at the last, namely, in
patria, come to perfection, and be without all error and sin: but through the
untowardness of his nature, cannot here in via do any exercise, but there be
faults escaping him.

1. John 1.8. James 3.1. Romans 7.21.
Hence it is, that Saint John says, If we say, that we have no sin, we deceive
our selves, and there is no truth in us: and Saint James; In many things we
sin all: and Paul acknowledged it in himself; When I would do good, evil
is present with me. So that both Pelagianisme is to be rejected, that teaches
man to be able, out of the strength of nature, to keep the Law, and
semipelagianisme (that is Popery) teaching, that the regenerate are able
perfectly to keep it, yea, to do more then it requires, which they call
works of supererrogation.

So many as are perfect, let us be thus minded?

Perfection two fold.
and this is perfection of degrees, whereby the law is kept without failing in
any thing: or, as it is opposed to hypocrisy, and this is perfection of parts,
whereby what is outwardly professed, is inwardly embraced; so that, as the
outward part makes a good show, the inward part is also right, and sincere.
And thus David, Josiah, and others are said to be perfect, and not otherwise:
and thus every regenerate man can, and does in some measure approve himself
for perfect, though amidst great weaknesses.

Quest. 107. What is the breach of the Law, and the punishment hereof?

Answ. It is firm, which if it be but once committed only, and that but in
thought, it makes the person committing it, subject to Gods eternal curse,
which is everlasting death, in hell fire, the torments whereof are unspeakable,
without any end or ease.

1. John. 3.4. Romans 7.
Explan. Next unto the consideration of man's weakness toward the Keeping of
the Law, comes to be considered the punishment due unto him therefore. And
here first I say, that the breach of the Law is sin: because sin, as Saint
John teaches, is a transgression of the Law: and without the Law, says Saint
Paul sin is dead. And this sin, though it be but one once only committed,
yea, but in thought, subiecteth the sinner to the eternal curse of God. For
that inbred corruption only, even before it breaks into action, makes all
men guilty of death, according to that; By the offense of one man, Romans 5.18.
James 2.10.
the faule came on all men to condemnation. But much more, if any man observe
the whole law, and yet fail in one point, he is guilty of all, as being
actually a sinner also. Now the punishment, which is here said to be death, is
otherwise called the curse: Deuteronomy. 27.26.
for, cursed is he, that confirms not all the words of the Law to do them.
It is called hell fire, damnation, the second death, utter darkness, the
worm that never dies, and fire that never goes out; the extremity being
such, as that it causes continual weeping, and gnashing of teeth for sorrow,
and no one drop of mercy is granted to ease any part of these torments: and all
this is not for some long time, but thousand thousands of years, and still as
far from end, as at the first beginning.

Quest. 108. Is it not injustice to appoint so great a punishment for every
sin, yea, even for the least?

Answ. It is very just and right, for the Lord to adiudge the very least sin
to hell fire: because his mark, which is perfect holiness, set upon man in his
creation, is removed, and a mark with the devils brand is made upon the soul
of the sinner: for which it is just, that the devil, and not God should now
have such a soul.

Mark. 7.23.
Explan The Lord, which is just in all the ways, and righteous in all his
works, cannot be unjust in punishing sin. Therefore this heavy censure
against the least sin cannot but be most just: and that this may more
plainly appear, we are not to consider of sin, as of an offense merely,
whereby a law is broken, but as of a blemish, whereby the soul is steined, and
so made unfit to be a citizen of heaven, where only holiness dwells, and none
unclean thing may enter. This blemish also is so great, as that it is said to
defile the whole man, and that with such filthiness, as is most loathsome. Now
this being the case of any sinner, is it not just with God to condemn him to
the place fit for him, and much more, because he prefers by sin, Satan's
bage, and cognizance before the Lords.

Sin worthy of hell fire.
Again, every sin is an offense against an infinite majesty, even the
smallest, as well as the greatest: for the same God, which has said. Thou shall
not commit adultery, has said also, James 2.11.
thou shall not kill. He that has said, thou shall not do ill, has also
said, thou shall not think ill. Now according to the greatness of the person
offended, the offense is to be estimated, if it be against a temporal King, it
is a temporal death, if against the eternal King, it is eternal death in
hell. For it is not with God, as with man, whose laws, if they be broken, yet
being of diverse sorts, only such, as concerns the Kings person, are reckoned
to be against his Majesty, others against this, or that subject only: but the
laws of God do all concern his royal person, and any breach is rebellion,
as Samuel called the sin of Saul sparing the Amalekites; 1. Sam. 15.23.
Rebellions is as the sin of witchcraft and therefore worthy of death and
damnation.

Quest. 109. If no man can perfectly keep the Law, wherefore then serves it?

The use of the Law.
Answ. Of excellent use notwithstanding is the law of God. 1. To humble us, in
regard of our miserable estate hereby discovered. 2. To bear rule of good life
unto us. 3. To be a Schoolmasters to bring us to Christ.

Explan. Seeing the end of the Law, now is not the perfect observing of it in
all things, without any fail, that the doer might so be counted worthy to
live, which is impossible: it is needful to be considered, to what end it
now serves.

Romans 7.9.
And the first is to beat down pride, and to humble the most holy and best men
living: For I was once alive, says the Apostle, without the Law, but when the
Commandment came, sin revived: and being more reformed by Gods grace, seeing
what by the Law he ought to do, and what through infirmity he did, Verse 24.
he cries out; O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? And as the Apostle, so every man that has his eyes open to see
into the glass of the Law, and thereby his miserable estate, sees himself so
wretched, sin being about him to defile him, the threatenings of the law
before him, the flesh behind, still putting him forward to sin, above him the
Lord ready to take vengeance on him, and under him hell fire, the bottomless
gulf ready to swallow him up with the mouth wide open: as that he cannot but
join in an holy despair with the Apostle, and condemn himself for a most
unworthy wretched sinner. And being thus humbled, shall he condemn the Law,
and cast off all care of obedience, because it requires so much more, then he
can any way perform? Nay, he will the more love it, and admire the perfection
of it, saying with the same holy Apostle; The Law is holy, Romans 7.12.22.
and the Commandment is just, and holy, and good; and I delight in the Law of
God concerning the inner man. Even as a student in any Art, to the perfection
whereof he cannot attain (such be the mysteries thereof,) yet he is the
more ravished with the love of it, and strives hard after the perfect knowledge
of it, and never cease. He says not with Esau, what is this birthright unto
me? because he is tied to an hard task hereby: but with Saint Paul, he
presses toward the mark, walking that way of good works, which God has
appointed, using for a rule this holy Law of God.

Romans 8.
And lastly, finding, that when he has done whatsoever he is able, he is an
unprofitable servant, worthy of Gods eternal displeasure, he is driven to
seek both means of satisfaction for his delinquencies and fails, and help
to do this hard task, unto which of himself he is so insufficient, and this
satisfaction and help is the Lord Jesus Christ alone; For that which was
impossible to the Law, in as much, as it was weak because of the flesh, God
sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin
condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us.

Gal. 3.24.
And thus do we see the third, and last end of the Law. viz. to be a
schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ: and this schoolmaster is both the
Ceremonial law, tutoring, and teaching by rudiments and figures, as little
children, those that were not come to full age under the Gospel, and to us
more principally the Moral Law, showing the great need, which we have of a
Savior, and driving us unto him, as our only refuge, to be made righteous,
according to that; The law was our Schoolmasters, to bring us unto Christ,
that we might be made righteous by faith.

Quest. 110 How may we be saved from our sins?

Answ. Only by the blood of Jesus Christ, laid hold upon by a true and lively
faith.

1. John 1.7.
Explan. Being brought to despair by the sight of our sins in the glass of
the Law, and of the horrible punishments due therefore: it is necessary that
we now look for a remedy against so great danger: as the cunning Surgeon,
when he has searched a festered soar to the bottom, applies himself to the
Cure. And our only remedy is the blood of Jesus Christ, according to that
comfortable speech, The blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses from all
sin. If all Angels and men should have done their uttermost, to deliver and
save one soul, it were altogether vain, they being all finite, the punishment
by sin deserved infinite, and therefore such, as could never be satisfied
for, by creatures finite, but in an infinite time. It pleased the Lord for this
cause, to send his only begotten Son into the world, that whosoever
belieueth in him should not perish, John 3 16.
but have life everlasting* And his blood does save from all sin. 1. By
expiation. 2. By sanctification. Expiation.
Expiation is the satisfying of Gods wrath due to sin, by bearing the heavy
burden thereof: and this did the Lord Jesus, Phil. 2.8.
when he abased himself, and became obedient to the death, even to the death
of the cross: when he redeemed us from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. 1.
John 3.16.
being made a curse for us, for it is written Cursed is every one that hangs
on the tree: when in love, he laid down his life for us. And thus we are by
his blood saved from sin and damnation hereby deserved, even as a condemned
person is saved, by some other man dying in his stead.

If it be demanded, whether Christ being the Son of God, could not have saved
us by some less suffering, than death, seeing whatsoever he endured, was of
infinite worth? I answer, that I take it not to be safe affirming or denying
this: for if we shall say, that he could not, we should limit his Almighty
power, if that he could, we should call in question his divine wisdom;
wherefore I say, that he could not so abundantly have manifested his love
toward us any other way, but by dying for us, and therefore let it suffice to
know, that he ha^h voluntarily, and of his own accord, suffered death, to
deliver us from death and damnation.

Sanctification.
Secondly, sanctification is the vertuall diffusing of his blood in our hearts,
and in every corner thereof, by the working of his holy Spirit, to the
cleansing of them from sin, so as that it has no more dominion over us; Romans
6.3.4.
For all we that are baptized into Christ, are baptized into his death. We
are buried then with him by baptism into his death, that as Christ was raised
from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in newnes of
life.

Romans 8.^. 2. Cor. 5.77.
And such as are in Christ, are described thus, Which walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit: Jf any be in Christ, he is a new creature, old things
are passed away, all things are become new. It is a vain thing therefore, for
any man to persuade himself of deliverance from sin and death, by Christ his
blood, unless his conscience be hereby purged from dead works of sin, in
newness of life to serve God. No price paid for the ransom of a flaue can set
him at liberty, if he still bears a slavish mind, that he will serve his old
master always: neither can any friend, though he will die for him that
deserves death, save him, if he will still desperately cast himself upon
mortal danger: nor yet can any water of Jordan cleanse from the foul leprosy,
if the precepts of the Prophet be not obeyed. No more can that man be any
better then a slave of the Devil, though Christ's precious blood has been paid
for ransom, if he will still live the servant of sin, and of the Devil:
neither can he be saved from death, though our dearest friend Christ has once
died for man, that still by sinning runs upon the danger of death*

Nor lastly can any be cleansed from the leprosy of sin, unless his precepts
be obeyed, who only can, and does direct rightly to use the streams of his
blood for this end and purpose. Oh mad men then, that hope for deliverance from
sin, but have sin ruling and reigning in them! How happens it, that being
so wise for things worldly and temporal, ye have no more understanding for
things spiritual and eternal? How is it that ye look for deliverance from
death by Christ's blood, when no power of this death is seen to mortify and
kill sin in you? What word have ye? What promise of God to build this
confidence upon? As verily as God is truth, ye have none at all from God.
Whence then is the ground of your hope? What do you build your comfort upon?
upon a shadow, upon nothing? Be ashamed in time of this your folly, flatter
not your selves in vain ye sinners, but lay hold upon salvation whilst it is
offered, being sanctified and washed by virtue of Christ his blood in your
hearts, so that all iniquity being expelled thence, it may by power of the same
blood be expiated, and never appear to your condemnation at the day of account.

Now as Christ his blood alone purges from sin, so it of (...) must be
applied by the sinner unto his own soul by the hand of faith. All the water of
all rivers will not make a man clean, unless with hands he be washed with
the water: no more will Christ his blood make clean the soul, unless with the
hand of faith it be applied unto it: For this cause, as the blood of Christ is
said to cleanse from all sin, so faith is said to purge the heart from sin,
and to justify a sinner. That precious blood purges, 1. John 3.3. Romans 3.28.
and justifies, as the cause material; faith, as the cause isntrumental.

Q. 111. How is faith first begun, and wrought in the heart.

Means of working Faith.
Answ. Ordinarily by the preaching of the Gospel of Christ, the holy spirit
inwardly opening the heart to believe those things that are outwardly preached
to the ear.

Romans 10.17.
Explan. Finding that Faith is the instrument of our justification and
salvation, it is necessary to consider, how, or by what means this instrument
is purchased, that if it be wanting, it may be sought here, if it be already
attained, the means and giver hereof may be magnified and honored. The
means therefore, I say, is the Gospel published and made known unto us,
which, the spirit opening the heart, it believes. For, Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God; and this word thus working faith, is
the Gospel; the Law drives to despair, the Gospel erecteth by hope, the Law
threatens and fills with fear; the Gospel promises and fills with
comfort, the Law shows our miserable estate, and what need we have of a
Savior: the Gospel shows a remedy against this misery, and points out
unto us our Savior. Then must be a kind of faith, or assent to believe the Law
also, but this is not the Faith, by which we are saved from the Law; but when
this is, and the Gospel is preached: even as a man at deaths door, through
extreme sickness, at the news of some sovereign remedy lifts up himself,
takes it, and is recovered. So the sinner, even dead by the Law, at the news
brought in the Gospel of a remedy, lifts up himself with hope, and by faith
takes it, and is recovered out of his danger. And being so sick of sin, and
weak, as that he cannot of himself do it, the holy spirit is ready, holding
up the hand, and opening the mouth of the soul to enable it to receive this
wholesome medicine: as in the case of Lydia, of who^ it is said, that, A certain
woman named Lydia, Acts 16.14.
a seller of purple, of the City of the Tbyatirians, which worshipped God,
heard, whose heart the Lord opened, that she atte^ded to such things as Paul
spoke.

Q^^st 112. How is faith increased?

Ans. Chiefly by prayer, reading preaching, and hearing of the word, and
receiving the Sacraments; for if these be well attended, we will not be wanting
in works of mercy and righteousness.

Exercises of Faith. Romans 10.14.
Explan Of Prayer, the Apostle speaks, as of a chief fruit and exercise of
Faith; for, How shall they call upon him, says he, in whom they have not
believed? So that, if there be faith, that sets a work presently to pray.
When the disciples believed, a chief care which they had, was to be taught to
pray; wherefore they come to Christ, saying; Lord, teach us to pray, as John
also taught his disciples. And great reason is there, Luke 11.1.
that faithful people should pray often, prayer being a proper work of faith,
even as to speak is proper unto man: whence it is, that the Kingly Prophet
says, I believed, and therefore I spoke, or prayed; as if he should say, I had
utterance, and therefore I uttered; for what difference betwixt the tongue of
man and beast, but in the speech? and what difference betwixt the believer and
the atheist, if he prays not.

1. Tim. 4.5.
Again, as faith purges man, so prayer purges all things, and makes them
pure unto the faithful; Every creature of God is sanctified by the word and
prayer. Prayer is a conuersing with God, and the most heavenly and sweetest
recreation of the soul believing: whence it is, that continual prayer and
thanksgiving is commended unto us; Pray continually, 1. These. 5 17.
and in all things give thanks: and for the faithful, says David, praise is
comely.

2. Of the exercises of the word of God, it is spoken, The Word of G d. 1. Pet
2.2.
as of the food and nourishment of the faithful soul; Desire, as newborn
babes, the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby. And again: Let
the word dwell plenteously in you, Col. 3.16.
even as good blood and juice in the body, to make it thrive and grow. It is a
pore weak constitution* that is not hungry, and takes no delight in the meat
and drink; and it is a poor weakly soul, never like to grow to any good,
that hungreth not after the Word, and receives it without appetite. The word
is the sinews and strength, the prop and stay of faith, it is the light, to
guide all the holy affections hereof, that they err not, and the heavenly
riches making it most precious. It must needs be a crazed weak house, that
has no repairing: and he must needs wander much, that wants light; and grow
poor, that spends daily, and has nothing coming in: so that faith that is
not repaired by reading, hearing, and meditation, is very ruinous, if it
wants this light, it will err, if something comes not in daily, out of this
treasury, it will be very poor and starued.

Lastly, for the Sacraments, these do more sensibly convey Gods promises to
our hearts, whilst we apply to us the outward washing of bodies, for the
inward clensing of souls and bodies, and whilst we feel, and taste the flesh
and blood of Christ, of which, in preaching, we hear with the ear, even as
Thomas was confirmed, when he f^lt the sides, and hands of Christ, crying out,
My Lord and my God.

Quest 113. What is Prayer?

Answ. It is a lifting up of the heart unto God only in the name of Jesus
Christ, according to his will, in full assurance of being heard and accepted at
his gracious hands.

Of Prayer.
Explan. In the short Catechism upon the declaring of our inhabilitie to obey
God without his special grace, there is very opportunely inferred, the means
to call for, and obtain this heavenly treasure of grace; namely, diligent
Prayer: and thereupon is the young Scholar in Christ's School bidden, to
repeat the Lords Prayer, as the direction and aim for asking of our heavenly
Father, all particular graces. Wherefore I here enter upon that part of
Catechism, which concerns prayer: and because that unless we know what
right prayer is, and what is the necessity of praying, and when, and where it
is to be made, we shall not be so disposed hereunto, as we ought; I have
thought good first to handle these things in general, and then to come nearer
to the pattern of prayer, prescribed by our Savior.

John 4.24.
First, I say, that prayer is a lifting up of the heart; because that if all
the best words in the world be spoken, without the lifting up of the heart, it
is no praying, but a saying of the words, which a Parret may be taught to do:
God is a spirit, and they which worship him, must worship him in spirit, and in
truth. Moses prayed thus, without the uttering of any words, and the Lord said,
Why cryest thou unto me; Exodus 14.15.
as though lifting up his heart, even when he used no voice, he had made a loud
crying sound in the Lords ears: according that old Distick.

Non vox, sed votum, non musica chordula, sed cor,
Non clamans, sed amans clamat in aure Dei.
Not shrillest voice, but silent vows:
Not strings sweet sounds, but heart that bows.
Not mounted cries, but flames of love:
Pierce through the ears of God above.
1. Sam. 1.20.
Such also was the prayer of Hannah, which prevailed: she spoke in her heart,
her lips only moved. But there is a time, when the voice also must be used,
as in the presence of others, that they may be edified, and join in prayer
also: and upon every other occasion of solemn praying, when the utterance
comes from the heart and spirit, though we be alone most private, the voice
is well used, if it be not Pharisaically to boast of our devotion in the ears
of others, near about us. For, Christ himself being retired and alone,
prays with words: Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.
Matthew 26.39. John 17.


And for his Disciples, whom he was to leave, he prays in many words, for
their custody, for their unity, and for the glorifying of God by them. The
heart lifted up therefore with words, or without words, is true prayer; but
words without an heart, are not so. In stead of ^^aving, this is prating, and a
great abuse. So do Laick unlearned Papists, saying many prayers upon Beads,
placing devotion in the labor of the lips, and scoring up by dozens
mumbled-vnknowne shredds of Latin; and many of our common people, in their
morning and evening devotion, being drowzie, or having minds taken up with
other business in the very time, do with their words beat the air in vain,
and deceive God of his duty.

Prayer to God alone.
I add further, that prayer is a lifting up of the heart to God alone: because
it is a part of his peculiar worship, and he is robbed, and his glory is taken,
and given to another, when prayers are made to any other, besides the Lord. It
helps not, that is said, men upon earth do pray one for another, as the
Apostle, Ephesians, and Thessalonians, to pray for him, and the sick are
directed by Saint James to pray the Elders of the Church to pray for them. For
though we have examples of requesting the living to pray for us, what one
example is there to do the like to the Saints in heaven? There is not one.
What direction is there in all the Scriptures? Verily none at all. Psalm 50.14.
Deuteronomy. 6 13.
And as for imploring of aid, Call upon me, says the Lord, in the time of
trouble; and, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve: but for calling upon any other, not a title in all the Bible to warrant
it.

Esaias 63.16.
Lastly, what hope is there of praying to any other? Surely none; for Abraham is
ignorant of us, and Israel does not know us, says the Prophet, no more (for
ought we can tell for certainty) does the blessed Virgin Mary. not the holy
Apostles, Peter, Paul, etc. A frantic, or at least an idle and addle part is
it then in any to pray to Saints or Angels, there being no wel-grounded hope of
good thus to be attained, and infinite danger at Gods hands, who will not
suffer, but be avenged, if his honor be given to any other. I say moreover,
that prayer is made in the name of Jesus Christ, to meet with that cavil of
Saint-worshippers: it is presumption, say they, that we will not offer to a
mortal Prince, to come immediately to him to make petition for any thing,
without the mediation of some Courtier, much more to press into Gods presence,
without the help of some Saint. O stupid ignorance! O affected blindness! Is
not Christ an help sufficient? I am sure Saint John thought him so, when he
comforted the faithful with these words: 1. John 2.2.
Jf any man sins, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the
righteous: and Saint Paul, when to the assurance of the faithful he wrote
thus; Romans 8.33.
It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea
rather which is risen again, who is at the right hand of God, and makes
request also for us Neither of them, nor any other holy Apostle once dreamt of
the mediation of Saints, or any other creature. Moreover, the Lord himself
does so often bid us use his mediation in praying to the Father, that they must
needs be very stupid, and dull of hearing, Job. 14.13.14.
or such as wilfully blindfold their eyes against the truth, which make any
question about any other help to prevail with God in our petitions.

James 4.3.
Furthermore I add, according to his will, because, if we follow our own
lusts in prayer, we may ask much, but shall little prevail Ye ask, but
receive not, says Saint James, because ye ask amiss, that ye might consume
it on your lusts. Wherefore, that we may speed of that which we ask in
prayer, it is necessary to frame all our petitions according to Gods will; we
must therefore have the knowledge of the Law; teaching us to prefer the
honor and glory of God before all other things; and for this cause chiefly to
pray for this, and that we may be instruments of honoring him, as the duties
there set down do require: and in the next place to pray for grace to do
those duties of love, which are required toward our neighbor for the pardon
of our errors and offenses, and strength of faith, whereby we may be justified
here from: and lastly, for temporal benefits, and deliverances in the time of
danger, as blessings promised to such as keep the Commandments: wherein,
because our daily fails are many, we must not be absolute, but with submission
of our desires to Gods will, saying every one of us with our Master, Not my
will but thy will be done, as who knows what is best for us. Whence it is
plain, that ignorant persons which know not Gods laws, cannot pray a right,
nor they which are without feeling of the word of Gods grace, and of right
affections toward his glory, but are only led with a sense of corporal and
outward wants and grieuances.

Iam. 1, 6.
Lastly, I say, with full assurance of being heard; for there must be no
wavering in prayer: He that wauereth, is like a wave of the Sea, tossed with
the wind, and carried away: neither let that man think that he shall receive
any thing of the Lord. It is believing, and fully assuring our selves of Gods
favor, which makes all things possible that we ask in prayer. This
assurance, as a lusty gale of wind, carries our prayers with full sail to
heaven, the desired haven: wavering and doubting like opposite uncertain
winds, carry them to some other place, and so they return without speeding.
Wherefore he that without doubting does not believe, that God is, and that he
is a rewarder of such as call upon him, cannot have any good success of his
prayers: neither can a wicked man pray aright, seeing his conscience is ready
to check him, and danteth him, in regard of sin that cleaves fast to him,
making his very prayers abominable to the Lord.

Quest. 114. What need is there that the faithful should pray, seeing they
are in Gods favor, who knows all their wants, has pardoned their sins,
and promised them all blessings?

Answ. By how much the more we are in Gods favor, so much the more need is
there that we should chearefully pray, both to pay the duty that we owe unto
the Lord, and to obtain the blessings promised, and to renew our assurance of
the pardon of sin daily interrupted through our great weakness.

The necessity of Prayer.
Explan. The Christian soul purified by Faith, needs not to be pressed, by
showing the necessity to this heavenly exercise; being continually either actu,
or habitu by present performance, or by general resolution lifted up in prayer
unto the fountain of all comfort: as David, who professes, that at midnight
he prayed unto the Lord. Yet because the full may not seem to have need to
beg, nor they that have all things already to ask any more, I have shortly set
down some reasons of the necessity of prayer, even in those which through
Faith have all things already.

Psalm. 50.14.
First, it is a duty which God requires of us all, as a tribute of the great
King of all: Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear, and deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me: That is, when thou want, pray; and when
thou art full, still pray, and give glory to God. ^. These. 5.17.
And again, Pray continually, and in all things give thanks. The best subjects
do most willingly pay the duties of their Prince, and the most faithful do
most duly perform this of prayer to Almighty God: he has little or no faith,
that is, little, or not at all in prayer. Yea, if any neglect to call upon God,
he does not so much as believe that God is a rewarder of such as call upon him,
or that he hears prayers any more then Baal did, when his Prophets prayed and
cried from morning till night, and had no answer: for he says in his heart as
Job shows, that God is in heaven on high, Job. 22.14. Chap. 21.15.
that the clouds hide him, and he cannot see: and again, What profit should
we have if we should pray unto him. So that faith is so far from cooling our
devotion in prayer, when we believe that God knows all our wants, that he
has pardoned our sins, and we are made partakers of his promises, as that it
sets us the more on fire, and increases our feruencie in prayer, as in a
chief duty toward the Author of all this our comfort; and it is only the
want of faith that makes men cold, dull, and backward in prayer.

Secondly, prayer is the reaching out of the hand of Faith unto the Lord, to
receive his blessings promised: although he promises to the faithful the
things of this life, and of that which is to come; yet he does not promise
unasked, to thrust them into their mouths, as it were, but if they reach forth
the hand to receive them.

That Beggar is worthy to go without his alms, even when dole is most
bountifully dealt to all, that will not offer himself to ask it, and put
forth the hand to receive it: So grace and mercy being offered from above, we
are worthy to be sent away without it, if we will not put forth the hand daily
by hearty prayer to receive it.

Thirdly, prayer is the applying and actual putting on of Christ Jesus, to
cover every part of our spiritual nakedness, to cure every wound of our
soul, and to strengthen every faculty of our mind. Now by sinning we are
subject daily to make our souls naked to Gods judgments, to wound and hurt
our souls, and to craze and infeeble our Spirits. If we have faith, we have
clothing medicines, cordialls, but without this exercise of faith by prayer,
we are without the use and benefit hereof. Wherefore let Prayer be held as a
most necessary exercise of the soul, and the most excellent of all other,
whereby it conuerseth, and has familiarity with God, as Moses had: yea, let me
be imprisoned with Peter; in the Whales belly in the bottom of the sea with
Jonah, forsaken of all men with Paul; or stoned to death with Steven; by prayer
I obtain the Lords presence, and by him more joy, as some of the Martyrs have
found by experience, then in the time of freedom from all sufferings, insomuch
that they have been grieved when they have been taken from the racks and
torments.

Quest. 115. I perceive by that which has been said, that it is necessary to
pray, as well in prosperity, as in adversity, what times therefore are
specially to be spent in prayer?

Answ. It is necessary, that every Christian make his prayers solemnly unto God
every morning and evening, sitting down and rising up from every meal: and at
all other times as the Spirit moves, or other occasions and necessities do
require, to have the heart lifted up in prayer.

The times of Prayer.
Explan. Seeing the necessity and excellency of prayer, the times follow to be
considered of, which are both general and special. Generally, we are
commanded to pray continually, and in all things to give thanks, that is, by
continual lifting up of the heart unto God, when we begin to awake, to sleep,
to read, to labor, when we walk abroad, come into the house, when we are in
safety, in danger, by land, by sea, etc. For that which some have fondly taken
upon them to perform in gross and outward manner, sequestring themselves from
all wordly employment, that they might spend their whole time in prayer, tying
themselves therefore to a great number of prayers, or to the rehearsal of the
same prayers many times over, to make up the number, counted sometime by little
stones, more lately by beads; this, I say, as it is actually and vocally used
by Monks and Heretics, comes too near the practice of ancient fond
heretics, called Euchitae, and robs a Christian of all opportunities of
doing other profitable and necessary duties to and for our brethren: yet is
there another kind of continual prayer well becoming a Christian, which is
performed in a spiritual manner, and is to be intermingled in all the moral
and civil actions of our life, without impeaching or interrupting them, namely
a perpetual disposition to lift up the heart unto God, and to bend and tend in
all our actions to the glorifying of his name. This, by the due exercise of
actual prayers in their times, becomes habitual, and extends it self to
all times, consecrating the whole course of our lives and endeauours unto
obedience and holiness.

The special times of Prayer; are both of public and private prayers, the one
subordinate, and such as is to give place unto the other.

To come to public prayers.
The times of public prayers, are the times in use in the Church of God
wherein we live, when it is requisite, that we come duly and reverently
together, even as of old, they came up to the Temple at Jerusalem, to worship,
from all parts. For, though now a days there be no such place of special
holiness, so that for having respect unto the place, we may have the more hope
of being heard in our prayers: yet it avails much to frequent the assemblies
of Gods people unto prayer. The prayers of many made together, are like unto
many coals of fire together, making the greater heat, as says S. Chrysostom.
When the Lord would set forth a most strong and powerful prayer, he joins
Noah, Ezech. 14.
Job and Daniel together, in his name. Wherefore, I would to God that all would
make more account of public prayers, to come betimes and duly unto them.
Peter and John went up to the Temple to pray, even since the time that in all
places God was to be prayed unto, and shall we prefer our prayers at home,
before prayers there?

Praying in company and alone.
The times of private prayers of every person daily to be made alone, and if
he lives in any society, with others also. For it is not sufficient that thou
prayest alone, and in secret, if thou live in a family, or society, where
more do usually come together to prayer; neither is it sufficient, that thou
prayest daily in such company, if praying in secret be omitted.

Math. 6.6.
It is to be feared that he which prays in company only, makes no better
prayers then the Pharisees, and shall lose his reward, seeing that to such as
pray in secret it is promised, that the Father will reward them openly: and on
the other side, if any man prays in secret, and neglects the joint praying
with others, it is to be feared, that he is left without Gods presence, to
vain speculations, seeing that he delights not to enjoy his presence in the
midst of two, or three gathered together in his name.

Exodus 29.39.
Wherefore it is necessary to pray daily in secret, morning and evening, and
likewise with company, if it may be according to the ancient rite of
sacrificing a Lamb in the morning, and a Lamb in the evening, every day
continually. For, every Christian family is a little Church, as the Apostle
intitleth some amongst the Christians, to whom he wrote, not that it is any
way fit, now we have allowance for public meetings, to meet in private
houses, for all religious exercises (for this is the way to faction, and
against the unity of Gods Church) but especially for the prayers daily used in
every such house, making it a Church, and Gods house, according to that; My
house shall be called the house of prayer: and therefore the Prophet speaks
of this as a note distinguishing Christian and Heathen families, when he
says; Ier. 10.25.
Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen, that know thee not, and upon the
families that call not upon thy name. Let all Governors of families think upon
this, to set up prayers in their houses, that they may be Gods houses, and not
houses divided from God, upon which he will pour out his wrath.

Prayer at going to meat. 1. Tim. 4.5.
Again, prayers are ordinarily to be used, when we receive any of Gods good
creatures for our sustenance. For by man's sin, the creatures become accursed
unto him, by prayer they are again sanctified, Every creature of God is
sanctified by the word and prayer. 1. Sam. 9.13.
When a feast was made in the land of Zuph, it is said, that the people would
not eat, until that Samuel came, and had blessed the feast: even as it is said
of the beasts, being gathered together to the waters in the wilderness, that
for fear of poison, they will not drink till the Unicorn has with his horn
stirred the waters. And after meat it is necessary to praise God, and so as we
are commanded, Whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, 1 Cor. 10.31.
we shall do all ^o the glory of God.

Praying in time of troublel Dan. 6.
Extraordinarily, we must pray oftener in the time of any extraordinary danger or
trouble, by sickness, persecution, battles and wars, famine and losses. Daniel
at this time, besides morning and evening, prayed also at noone-tide daily.
David in the like case prayed seven times a day, and at midnight. Christ
prayed three times together in his agony.

M^th. 27. Acts 2.
And the Disciples continued daily together in prayer. And in those times of
persecution the faithful are noted to have met to prayer, and to have
continued three, sometime six days together, without taking food until night.
These times of trouble are more specially times of prayer, to make praying our
practice night and day, and to procure others to pray with us, and for us.

Ioh. 4.^0.
For the place and gesture to be used in prayer, we know, that now there is no
difference of places, howsoever it has been in times past; for every where
God may be called upon in Spirit, and in truth: and for gesture, Come (says
the Prophet) let us fall down, and kneel before the Lord our maker. Not that
prayer is not auailable without kneeling, for Isaac walked in the fields, and
prayed; Jonah, lying in the whales belly, prayed, etc. But because all worship
both of body and soul is due to the Lord of all, and because prostration, or
kneeling is a means to b eed the more humility in the mind: therefore though
kneeling be not always necessary, yet it is to be preferred both in public
and private by all, that would yield unto God his due and entire worship: and
in all public prayers, it is the more duly and strictly to be used where the
orders of Church do expressly enjoin it, or the laudable custom of the
congregation commend it. To conclude the omission of decent and usual gesture
must needs be more or less scandalous, as arguing either coldness in devotion
or contempt of the Church, or discrepancie in opinion o^ in affection from the
rest of Gods people, with whom we seem to make but half conjunction, whilst
we deny the uniformity of our bodily humiliation. And thus much of the
general Introduction to Prayer.

Of the Lords Prayer.
Quest. 116. HOw, and according to what pattern, ought we to pray?

Answ. The Pattern and form of prayer for our direction, is the Lords Prayer.
Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread and
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, the power* and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Explan. Having hitherto made way to the Lords Prayer, following in the
Catechism, by considering some necessary questions: it follows now, that we
come more nearly to the prayer it self, which is our only absolute and
perfect pattern. Concerning this prayer, consider we some things generally,
and then particularly of the parts hereof.

Generally, who was the Author of this prayer.

The Author of this Prayer. Lu^. 11.1.
Answ. Christ Jesus our Lord, who with the Father and Spirit is God blessed for
ever. He having been himself, busied in prayer, was desired by his
Disciples, saying; Good master teach us to pray, as John also taught his
Disciples: and he said unto them. When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in
heaven, etc. Whence ir has the name, the Lords Prayer, as the Lords Day, the
Lords Supper, etc:

Salomons song, is called a Song of songs: so this may be a Prayer of Prayers,
excelling all other prayers. And, as the Lords Supper, because by him
instituted is of that reverend account, that whosoever eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation; so, whosoever uses the
Lords Prayer, being of divine Institution, unworthily, endangereth himself of
damnation hereby. The Author is the wisdom of the Father, and like unto
himself has made this Prayer, with admirable wisdom, drawing the whole
Scriptures into a short Epitome herein, and comprizing all our wants of every
kind in a few words, with all most needful directions about prayer, and
reasons moving in the offering up of Praoer. So that if all men should all
together have studied all their days, they could not possibly make a prayer of
such worth and excellency.

Math. 6.9.
Thirdly, consider the use of this prayer, which is both for the words, and the
matter and form. Some think, that it is only to be used, as a direction, by
which we may learn how and what to pray, and that the woe ds are not to be
used, because Christ says, After this manner pray ye. Others think it the
only prayer to be used at all times, and upon all occasions; because Christ
says, When ye pray say, Our Father, Luc. 11.2.
etc. But neither right, the truth is (that which makes a perfect consent
betwixt these two Evangelists, reporting what Christ said) viz. the use of this
Prayer is not only to direct for matter, or for words, but for both, say these
words when ye pray, or use this pattern for a direction, and frame all your
petitions accordingly

First, use the words of this pray, if thou know not, how otherwise,
according to it to express thy mind, and though thou know, yet use it, and
urge the Lord, as it were hereby to hear thee; for, as C^pria^ says. A
father will acknowledge the voice of his only son, and the Lord cannot but
acknowledge the voice and words of his son, being uttered by any of the
faithful. But take heed, lest in praying these words, the tongue run without
the heart, as it must needs do, in those that ceremoniously rehearse them,
making have to have done, even like unto a chlide saying his lesson, which he
has conned perfectly. Such may say the words of Gods dear Son, and yet go
away without any notice taken of them, because they pray not his words, which
is a harder matter to do. Wherefore, to pray these words rightly, thou must in
some convenient measure understand them, and have the mind taken up with them,
in the uttering the heart still conueying it self into the meaning of every
petition, which that it may be done, there must be used good deliberation in
him that prays.

Thus, if this prayer be said, it is well used alone, or added to other
prayers: like unto a wrastler, who having used his best skill and strength, to
overcome in his wrestling, yet finding the victory, getting to be very hard,
he re-inforceth himself at the last, with all his might, force and skill,
together, that he may carry away the prize: so the Christian man wrestling, as
Iaacob with God by prayer, in the end re-inforceth himself in this prayer,
that he may not depart unblessed. Two extremes are here to be taken heed of:
The one is, too much confidence in the words of this prayer often repeated, as
some Popes of Rome have granted great pardons to seven Paternosters, and as
many Aue Mary's, said over every day, or on some days, and in some places:
which is gross and superstitious: The other is, too much detracting from this
prayer, by accounting it no better, or not so worthy, as a man's own conceived
prayer, which is derogatorie and arrogant. Secondly, use this prayer, as a
form of direction, learning hereby what to ask, what first and chiefly, with
what affections and assurance.



Paul in his Epistles would not have used such variety of order and manner in
thanksgiuings, requests, and deprcations, for his spiritual children, for
himself, for the whole Church: nor would the primitive Christians, in their
joint prayer for the Apostles have been so bold as to premise this part of
thanksgiving, before their entreating of Gods assistance to the Apostolical
offices, as they did, when Peter and John being dismissed, and charged to
speak no more in the name of Jesus, they all together prayed unto the Lord.
Act. 4.24.
Wherefore though this order be generally to be followed, yet neither is it
always necessary, nor yet is it a swaruing from this direction, though some of
these petitions only be asked in our prayers, and others be omitted. But the
error is, when we go beyond the rules here given us, doting too much upon
worldly things, or having proud, unfaithful, or malicious hearts, we make our
prayers the labor of poluted lips.

Why does the Apostle say that we know not what to ask, Quest. Romans 8 26.
as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes request for us, with sighs,
which cannot be expressed: if this be a perfect direction teaching us all
things? Or, are we not rather to hold it a general direction only for matter,
and that to be true, which he says for words, we know them not aforehand,
we follow not any set form of speech, but as the spirit gives utterance at
the time of prayer. And so here comes to be enquired, what is to be thought
of set forms of prayer, and whether it be well to use them?



In public, for the ordinary service of God, it is needful there should be
set forms of prayer, because it is not certain, that every Minister of Gods
Word has the Spirit of Prayer in him to teach him: and if he had, there would
be danger through weaknesses of memory, of omitting many things needful to be
prayed for in the congregation, of excursions, and runnings out into clauses
impertinent, and idle, in so long prayers, and of tautologies, and repeating
the same things again and again, to the wearying of the congregation.

Numb. 10.35. Numb. 6.24.
And thus this heavenly service of Prayer, should be unequally performed,
according to the inequality of the ministers, some Churches having men able and
sufficient, some again very weak ones and deficient. For these causes, set
forms have been used anciently in the Church of God under the Law; Moses used
the same form of prayer, when the Arc removed, and when it stoodstill: by the
commandment of the Lord, he taught Aaron and his sons a form of blessing
the people.

Rom 16.24. 2 Cor 13.13.
David made many Psalms, which were forms of praise, and prayer to be used
publicly, as the 104 105.106.107. Psalms, the 90. Psalm, was a Psalm for
the Sabbath. Under the Gospel the first form of prayer is the Lords Prayer
the first form of blessing is that of Paul* The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
be with you all: or more fully, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of
God, and the Communion of the holy Ghost be with you all, Amen. And since it
has been the custom of Gods Church to pray in the congregation by set
prayers. If therefore these rules following be observed, I suppose it shall be
well.

Rules of prayer.
First, that all use the set forms of common prayer, appointed in public.

Secondly, if more special prayers are to be used before, or after the
preaching of the word (for which no set common form is, nor can well be
appointed) that every man endeavor himself hecrein, either with words
studied, and set before, or then iudiciously and reverently conceived, as by
the Spirit he is able.

Thirdly, that nouices, or such as have not the gift of well conceiving
prayers, use set forms of prayer, devised by others in private.

Fourthly, that such as use the prayers of others, labor to be moved with the
same spirit of the Authors, as if the words did flow from the Spirit in them.

Lastly, that no man stand here without indeauouring to go further, if he
can pray some set form, but strive to grow to more perfection in this heavenly
faculty, and to be able without the help of set words, to make known his
desires unto the Lord. If any man shall think as some do, that this is
presumption, without set words to come to God in Prayer, when as to a mortal
Prince we dare not, he is greatly deceived, and shows to have little
understanding of the faithful man's neerenesse unto God, and acquaintance with
Gods holy Spirit. For, will such as wait about the Kings person every day, and
talk continually with him, study set words aforehand, what to speak? they
will indeed think of the matter concerning which they would speak, but for
words they would not, especially, if they had always some eloquent person at
their elbow ready to prompt them, and to tell them what to say: in like manner,
faithful men do continually attend upon the Lord, and talk with him by
Prayer, and the most eloquent Spirit of God is always ready to prompt and
help them; wherefore, so that the matter to be spoken of be thought upon
before, it is no presumption to come without set words, in such, as by
experience do find some sufficiency by Gods gracs, to talk thus with their
heavenly King and Father?

Quest. What desire thou of God in this prayer?

Answ. I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father, who is the giver of all
goodness, to send his grace to me, and to all people, that we may worship him,
seeue him, and obey him, as we ought to do. And I pray unto God, that he will
send us all things that be needful both for soul and body, and that he would
be merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins, and that it will please him
to save* and defend us in all dangers ghostly and bodily, and that he will
keep us from all sin and wickedness, from our ghostly enemy, and from
everlasting death: And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore I say, Amen. So be it.

Explan. Here in brief are set down the most needful things contained in
the Lord Prayer with such plainness, as that even children may attain some
good understanding of the prayer hereby, which was the laudable intent of our
Church, in providing this wholesome milk for tender babes.

I shall not need therefore to add any explanation of these words of our
Catechism, (being so plain and evident of themselves) other then by poynting
at the parts of the Lords Prayer secretly diffused through this Answer. The
first parcel whereof compriseth, both the meaning of the Preface, that he unto
whom we pray, calling him, Father which art in heaven, is the Lord God of
heaven and earth, our common Father by faith, and heavenly, most glorious, and
full of majesty, from whom every good thing descends; and the meaning of the
first Petitions, that by our worshipping him, he may be glorified, and his
name hallowed, by our living as his loyal subjects, and faithfully serving
him, his kingdom may come, and by our readiness to obey him, in every thing,
his will may be done in earrh, as it is in heaven, and not only by such a^
readily obey, but by all people, his over ruling power compelling the
disobedient and stubborn.

The words next following are the interpretation of the rest of the petitions,
that he would give us all things needful both for soul and body, which is to
give us this day our daily bread, to forgive us our sins, is the next
petition: to save, and defend us from all dangers, etc. is, not to lead us into
temptation, but deliver us from evil, from all sin, and wickedness, from
our ghostly enemy, and the end and reward of being led hereby, everlasting
death.

The last clause, And all this I trust he will do, etc. serves to explain
the conclusion, for thine is the kingdom, etc. thou art a most gracious King,
full of mercy and goodness, in Jesus Christ, and this thy mercy and goodness
shall thus be more glorified, wherefore I trust and assure my self, that thou will do these, and in this confidence, I say, Amen,

Quest. 117. How many be the parts of this Prayer?

Answ. Three, the Preface; Our Father which art in Heaven: the Petitions;
Hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, etc. And the conclusion* For thine is
the kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

Eccles. 4.17. Exodus 3.
Explan. This Prayer being an absolute form of direction for us, has in it
all things needful, both for beginning, proceeding, and concluding: the
petitions are not nakedly set down without a preface, neither are they left
without a conclusion hemming them in on both sides, to show both the necessity
of preparation, when we address our selves to prayer, and of observation when
we have prayed. Preparation to prayer there must needs be, otherwise we shall
be ready to offer the sacrifice of fools, we shall draw near to the flaming
bush, with shoes on our feet, and tread on holy ground with unclean feet, and
compass the Lords Altar with unwashed hands. Observation there must be when
we have prayed, to give God the glory of our petitions granted otherwise we
shall deal deceitfully with God, and mock him; Gal. 6.7.
(which he will not hear) pretending his glory and kingdom, but the sequel
showing when we rest at the blessings received, that we intend our own ease
and pleasure.

Quest. 118. In the Preface, why do you call God Father?

Answ. Because he is ready as a loving Father, to hear me calling upon his
name, whence J learn with boldness. and confidence to come unto him in my
prayers.

Explan. Having showed the necessity of preparation unto prayer in general,
here follow the parts of this preparation in particular. And the first is, to
consider rightly, unto whom we pray, and with what faith and affiance. He,
unto whom, is called Father, teaching us both who can pray, and what faith is
required in praying. First, he only can pray aright, and as a true Christian,
that can call God Father by adoption and grace through Jesus Christ. It is not
sufficient; that he be thy Father by creation, for so is he the father of the
spirits now damned in hell: but he must also be thy Father by regeneration,
through the preaching of his word, casting thee into a new mold of righteousness
and holiness, according to his Image, Romans 8.25.
wherein man was first made. For we have received, says the Apostle, not the
spirit of bondage to fear again, but the Spirit of adoption whereby we cry,
Verse 16.
Abba, Father: And the same spir t bears witness with our spirits that we
are the children of God. So that there must be a Spirit in him, that will pray,
making him the child of God by adoption, 1 Ioh. 3.3.
purging him to become holy, as he is holy.

1 Ioh. 3.9.
Whence it follows, that a wicked man living in sin, cannot pray, seeing he,
which is borne of God, sins not, who only is endued with the Spirit of
Prayer. All his praying therefore is a vain beating of the air with a sound
of words, neither shall he speed any more then Esau of the blessing belonging
to the first borne, though he cried with strong cries and bitter. He may wish
indeed as Balaam, Let me dye the dea h of the righteous but he cannot pray, and
so is without fruit hereof, these wishes differing so far from faithful
prayer.

Differences betwixt praying and wishing.
1. Because wishes are sudden and inconsiderate, straightway ceasing as a ball
rebounding, when it is at the highest, it falls again; prayer is with
deliberation, and gives not over without speeding of the thing desired.

2. Wishes are without respect of the means and care of right or wrong, in
attaining the thing wished for: Prayer is with submission to the use of the
means, and care of prevailing by right only.

3. Wishes, are for the most part of things worldly, I would I had such an
house, such riches, etc. prayer, is chiefly for things spiritual, and
heavenly, one only petition of six being for things temporal.

4. Wishes are sometime for things spiritual and heavenly, but very inconstant
as Balaams wish, and that of Simon Magus pray unto God that none of these
things befall me: prayer perseuereth, as Iaacob wrestling hereby, will not
let God depart until that he yields to bless him.

Esa. 1.13. Prou. 15.8.
Furthermore, as a wicked man cannot pray, so his saying of prayers is an
abomination to the Lord. Of the wicked Jews Incense is abomination to me,
says the Lord: and The sacrifice of the wicked, says Solomon, is abomination
to the Lord. The King, or some noble person would disdain it much, to be
waited upon at the Table with Clownes all miry, and dirty, and the King of
heaven is no less offended, if any wallowing in the mire of sin, come to
give attendance upon him in prayer. Woe then to wicked persons, that will,
steal, whore, profane the Sabbath, drink, oppress, and kill, and yet come
and worship in the Lords House. This is so abominable, that even natural men,
and Pagans do abhor it in Christians. Penda an heathen king of the Mercians,
Hovvs Chron. page 67.
would not suffer any Christians, that lived contrary to their profession to
go vnpunnished: So the Turk does at this day. See then here the horrible
estate of wicked men, pray they ought, it being a common duty of all men, and
yet pray they cannot; yea, they sin, if they pray, such a maze or Labyrinth
does sin bring them into.

2 Secondly, from the person, unto whom we are directed to pray, we learn, if
we be such, as can rightly call him Father, to come with all boldness, and
confidence unto him. Father sometime, and most commonly sets forth, the
first person in Trinity: sometime, but very rarely, the second, as where the
prophet says, He shall call his name Emmanuell, Esa. 9.6.
the everlasting Father. And sometime the whole Trinity, as where the Apostle
comparatively says, Heb. 12.9.
Ought we not much more be subject to the Father of Spirits? We may therefore
pray unto the whole Trinity, but more properly unto the first person, God the
Father, in the name of God the Son, by the assistance of God the holy Ghost.
But though we come before so high a majesty, he is our Father, and does accept
us for his children, to our great encouragement not to be afraid, but to come
often, and with all filial boldness unto him: Luc. 11.1^^
If a son desires, says Christ; of any of you, that is a Father, for bread,
will he give him a stone? if he ask a Fish, will he give him a Serpent? If
ye then, which are evil. can give good gifts unto your Children, how much
more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Ghost, to them, that desire him?
What boldness did Iaacob use saying, I will not let thee go unless thou
bless me first? and Moses saying, rather blot me out of the book which thou
have written? and Abraham, dissuading the Lord from destroying Sodom, if
fifty, if forty, if thirty, if twenty, if but ten righteous were found there?
Children ire bold aand confident to ask of their loving Parents, and soae Gods
^ children to ask of him.

Quest. 119. Why do we say our Father, and not my Father?

Answ. Because J ought to pray for all other the children of God, as well as
for my self.

For whom we must pray.
Explan. As we are directed for the person unto whom, so also for the persons
for whom we ought to pray, and that is, not for our selves only, or some few
of our friends, but for all our brethren and Sisters by grace, that can call
God, as we do, Father. And these are to be distinguished into certain ranks or
orders.

1. We must pray for all such as are effectually called by the preaching of
the word, these are already our brethren, and fellow members of the same body
of Christ, they are of the household of faith, and their welfare ought as much
to affect us with joy as our own.

2. For all such, as God in his eternal secret counsel has appointed unto
life but are not yet called from their wanderings to be of one sheepe-fold,
under one shepherd the Lord Jesus Christ: we must pray for them, that God
would hasten their vocation, as Christ has given us example in his prayer for
his sheep; John 17.20.
I pray not for them only, which thou have given me, says Christ, but for
them also which shall believe in me through their word.

3. For Particular persons, of whom we have received benefit, under whose
government we live, or which be more dear or near in the flesh unto us.
Thus S. Paul promises that for the liberality toward the poor Saints at
Jerusalem there should be thanksgiving of many unto God, 2. Cor. 9.12. ^ Tim.
2.2.
and, Le prayers, says he, and suplications, and giving of thanks be mad for
all, for Kings, and for such as be set in authority. And such people, as with
whom he had special acquaintance, he professes, that he made often mention of
them in his prayers, and for the Jews, that were his kinsmen according to the
flesh, he shows his great earnestness in prayer, for their conversion.

4. For such, as whose necessity is more specially made known unto us, if they
be in danger of sickness, troubled in mind, distracted upon any dangerous
enterprise or journey, or in any distress. James 5.14.
If any be sick (says James) let him send for the Elders of the Church and
let them pray for him.

5. For men generally of all estates and conditions, that they may be saved;
for this is good and acceptable, says Paul, in the sight of God. 1. Tim. 2.3.
And likewise for men of all Countries and Nations: for this cause we
Englishmen must pray for Gods ancient people the Jews, for Turks, Heathen,
and seduced Papists, that they may come to the unity of Faith.

6. For our enemies, and those that hate us: Matthew. 5 44.
Pray for them that hurt you, and persecute yau, and love your enemies, says
the Lord: not that they may be blessed, and heartned to proceed in their enmity
and malice, but be overcome with our innocence, and requiting good for evil,
and so have their heart turned unto God.

Whom we must not pray for.
Now as there is some for whom we must pray, so there be others, for whom we may
not pray, but pray against.

1. The Devil, ours and Gods common enemy, we must pray against him, Romans
16.20.
that he may be confounded and trodden under our feet.

2. All known enemies of God: David has many Psalms of imprecations, and
praying against such: of this sort is Antichrist, which is an Adversary, 2.
These. 2.4.
and exalts himself against all that is called God. Such was Julian the
Apostata, against whom the Church prayed: 1. Sam. 16.1.
and Saul was declared to be such unto Samuel, for which cause he is rebuked
for mourning and praying for him.

3. We ought not to pray for the dead, whose estate is unchangeable, as Abraham
told the rich Glutton being in hell, that they which were there, could not come
hither.

Quest. 120. Why is there added in the preface, Which art in heaven?

Answ. Not for that I believe God to be in heaven only, for he is every where;
but because to be in heaven, is an argumeni of great glory, wherefore I
learn with all reverence and humility to pray unto him being our father most
glorious.

1. Eing. 8 27.
Expl. Here follows the third thing in the Preface for our direction, Which
art in heaven. This is not spoken circumscriptiue, as though God were contained
in the heavens; for the heaven of heavens are not able to contain him, or as
though, if the heavens were not, God cannot be as the inhabitants of the earth
cannot be, when the earth cease; for God was before all heavens, and earth,
and creatures. But God is said to be in heaven.

1. First, for his glory, which does most shine in the third heaven, it being
most manifested there to the holy Angels, and blessed Saints, by an immediate
vision and fruition; as also his glory, that is, the manifestation of his
Wisdom, power, etc. is by way rational deduction, argued from the lower
heavens, and the host of them, the ^unne, Moon and stars, according to the
Song of the holy King; The heavens declare the glory of the Lord, and the
firmament shows his handy work.

2. There is not only a natural, but also supernatural and extraordinary
demonstration of his glorious attributes of Justice, Mercy, Power and Wisdom,
which are manifested from heaven, as by the Prophets, who were immediately
inspired from heaven to declare them; and by Christ, who came from heaven; and
sometimes by the signs which the heavens bear, portending great alterations,
as before the destruction of Jerusalem, and the like: and lastly, by influences
coming from the heavens, most notably to destroy most notorious sinners, as
the old World, against which the windows of Heaven were opened to drown them:
and Sodom, against which fire and brimstone came thence to burn them up.

Thirdly, for his purity, and holiness, even as the heavens are pure, and not
obnoxious to corruption in such manner, as the inferior bodies are: yea, when
they shall at the last perish, and have an end, the years of the Lord, the same
pure, and holy God, shall last always, according to the Psalmist; Thou art the
same, and thy years shall not fail.

4. For his excellent maiesticall, Psalm. 101 2^.
and inaccessible brightness, even as the most shining heavenly creatures, the
Sun and Stars. And all this serves to breed in us humility, and reverence
in coming before the Lord, even as the sinful Publican, durst not look up to
heaven, but cried; Luke 18.
Lord be merciful to me a sinner, and as the poor Prodigal; Father, I am
not worthy to be called thy child: Luke 1.53.
for the proud the Lord dispiseth, the rich he sends empty away, that is
such, as acknowledge not themselves unworthy wretched sinners, Esaias 66.2.
and presume upon any thing in themselves: but the humble ones, that tremble at
his word, that do reverence before him, he will look, and have respect unto.
Which should make us so to temper our boldness with humility, and reverence in
praying to this our most glorious Father, that when we would be bold with him,
like sons, we incur not the blame of sauciness and irreuerence with the
Jews, and be challenged with that sharp saying; If J be a Father, where is
mine honor, Mal. 1.^.
if I be a Master, where is my fear, says the Lord of Hosts?

Quest. 121. How many be the Petitions of this prayer?

Answ. Six, whereof the three former concern the glory of God, the three
latter concern nur selves.

Explan. In handling the petitions of this prayer. 1. We are to consider of
them in general, and then in particular: Generally they be six, as many
concerning Gods glory, as our own necessities, and the first in order
concerning Gods glory, the last our selves.

The equal number teaching us, how gracious the Lord is toward us sinful
men, allowing us, if we come with one request for the advancement of his glory,
to come with another for our own benefit, if with three for him, with three
for our selves also. This is no small favor, when a mortal King will (...)
when do the like, happy would his subjects think themselves, and pray often,
and heartily for his health, and honor, if premising prayers for his welfare,
he would allow them to petion freely also for themselves, being ready to grant
their desires.

Happy then are we, that serve so good a King, but unworthy of this happiness,
since that ungratefully we seek not his honor, but the satisfying of our own
worldly lusts, he allows us to pray as much for our selves, as for himself,
three for our selves, and three for him, but we pray three for him, and
threescore for our selves, or nothing for him, and altogether for our selves,
thus requiting the Lord evil for good. Let every man be ashamed of this, and
desire as heartily the glorifying of Gods name, as his own necessary food and
raiment, as the welfare of his own soul.

The order of the petition.
The order of placing the petitions concerning Gods glory first, and then those
concerning our selves, teaches, 1. that God is absolutely to be respected, and
for himself, but man for Gods cause. He is the Sovereign Lord of all, and the
reverence of him ought to sway all; the greatest men are not so to be
reverenced simply for their power and greatness, but for him, Matthew. 10.28.
and in him; I will tell you (says Christ) whom ye shall fear, not him that
can kill the body, but him that can destroy body and soul in hell fire. And
this is the argument used by the Apostle, to persuade obedience to the higher
powers, Romans 13.1.
because there are no powers but of God, and the powers that are, are of God
Even as the rivers come from the sea, and run into the sea, so all men's
greatness, and that they are men, comes from God, and ends in God. If God
commands any thing, he is to be heard for his commands sake; if man
commands any thing, he is to be heard for Gods sake, which if it were so,
sin should not so much have the upper hand: but this is turned amongst the
men of this age, into the contrary, man is heard, and observed for himself,
God for man, a plain evidence, whereof is the obedience of the most unto great
persons and governors, and neglect of Gods poor Ministers armed only with the
Word, the Sword of the Spirit.

2. That the first, and maine thing by the Lord intended in creating all, is
his own glory, and whatsoever is good for man is subordinate unto this, and
only so far forth to be sought after, as it makes for Gods glory. The
heavens are made to show his glory, the earth, and seas are for his glory, al
men are made for his glory, yea, the vessels of wrath: for of him, for him, and
unto him are all things, to him be glory, for ever, Romans 11 36.
Amen. This made Moses to neglect his own soul, rather then God should be
dishonored, and Paul to lay open himself to the curse, that God might have
glory by the conversion of the Jews. And this will make every one, that is an
obedient subject to the King of heaven, with joy to bear any cross, so that
God may have glory, to account all loss, which is gotten with his dishonor.
For if the maine estate of any man be safe, he is the less troubled at small
losses; but much less if hundreths of pounds be daily added hereunto, and his
losses be but some few pence: no more ought we to be much troubled at our own
losses, or crosses, seeing the maine, Gods glory, is hereby greatly increased.

3. That the glory of the Lords name is so dear, as that he did not only make
it his mark in the creation, but in every particular duty done by man, he
sets it still, as his mark, as here in prayer, in giving the law, he
begins with his own majesty in the Gospel, at the very nativity of that
blessed one the Angels are heard lauding, and glorifying God. And in like
manner ought we to be affected to Gods glory in every duty seeking this
first, and chiefly, and not to be seen of men, as the Pharisees. For if a man
does fast, pray, hear the word, give alms, deal justly in some other respect
chiefly, he breaks this rule of Christ, he pleases not, whatsoever, or how
often soever his devotion be, he can have no thanks at Gods hands.

Quest. 122. Which be the three petitions concerning Gods glory?

Answ. The first is, Hallowed be thy name; the second, Thy Kingdom come; the
Third, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.

Quest. 123. In the first of these petitions, what do you desire?

Answ. That the holy name of God may be glorified in the use of his titles,
word and works.

Explan. In handling these petitions more particularly, I will observe, first,
the order; secondly, the sense; thirdly, the scope of every petition.

For the first; Hallowed be thy name; this is placed before, thy Kingdom come,
to teach us, that no man can be a true subject of Gods kingdom, unless that
in his heart he makes principal account of Gods glory. For then only may
thou hope to be accepted as a good subject under Gods kingdom, when thou first
desire; Hallowed be, not mine, but thy name.

The name of God.
When thou set up not thy self, thy pleasure, profit, or glory, to be
chiefly sought after, in professing the Christian religion, but the honoring
of Gods name: so that such as seek for advantage by their profession, 1. Tim.
6.6.
thinking; that gain is godliness, as was the manner of some, whom the Apostle
challenges, that under the color of religion, deceive, and inueagle others to
their own commodity, are not of Gods Kingdom, but are puffed up, knowing
nothing, doting in stead of going the right way, Verse 5.
or having any true wisdom.

2. For the sense of the words. By the name of the Lord, here we are to
understand that, whatsoever it is, whereby the Lord is made known unto us,
according to his most glorious attributes, wisdom, power, mercy, etc.

1. God is known by his name.
And this is first by his titles, God, Lord, Jehovah, Lord of hosts, the
Almighty, etc. for by these God has made himself known unto us, and th^se do
serve most properly to set forth God: for which cause, though for their office
sake, being Gods Vicegerents, some have been called Gods, and Lords, yet never
any man presumed thus to be called, as by his proper name, that we can read
of, amongst all Gods people, ^n the book of God, but Jesus Christ, who was
truly Emmanuel, God with us. Let no man therefore aspire after such names, but
leave them off rather, as too high for mortal man.

2. By his word. John 1. 2. Cor. 3.18.
Secondly, God is made known by his word, and therefore Christ has the title
of the word of God, being the fountain from whence the word of wisdom
sloweth, and he that knows the word written, knows God, his face being
visibly and gloriously reflected to our open faces there, as by a glass.
Thirdly, by his works, the heavens, the earth, the seas, 3. By his work^.
infinite number of creatures herein contained, which do also set forth God
unto us: For the invisible things of him, that is, Romans 1.20.
his eternal power, and Godhead, are seen by the creation of the world
considered in his works. And as these lasting works of God, do set him forth
unto us, so do his transient works, acts of judgment, mercy, providence and
goodness. Let thy name be hallowed, or sanctified.

1. This does first signify, To Sanctify, what.
the purifying of a thing which before was corrupt, and unholy, thus mystically
it was showed to Peter, that God had sanctified the Gentiles, when he being
invited to eat of the creatures appearing in the sheet, and refusing them, as
unclean, was the second time commanded: The things which God has sanctified,
Acts 10.15.
pollute thou not.

2. The separating of any thing common to an holy use, thus Aaron and his
sons are said to be sanctified, and their vestments, and vessels of the
Temple, and all things dedicate, and thus are the houses of God now a days to
be counted holy, and glebes, and tithes of the Church.

3. The acknowledging of a thing to be holy, and declaring it, by giving all
due observance, and respect hereunto, so that the holiness thereof may be made
more famous, and notable amongst all men: and thus principally do we pray,
hollowed be thy name, as it is holy, and glorious, make us to acknowledge it,
and to ascribe all honor, and glory unto it, whether we speak of thy titles,
behold thy creatures, and works of providence, or receive any of thy blessings,
or whether we be conversant in the exercises of thy Word and Sacraments, or of
any other divine ordinances.

And again, whereas thy name is used, as unholy by profane worldlings,
vindicate, and deliver it from such abuses, and make us to stand for the
maintenance of thy honor against such.

And lastly, provide for the preservation of the same, from being used as a
common thing, working in all thy people an holy consent to hallow it together,
abstaining from all common and base usage thereof.

1. The supplication.
3. For the scope of this petition, as every one of the other, it contains a
supplication, a deprecation, and a thanksgiving. The supplication is, that we
and all the people of God may glorify the holy name of God, in our affections
loving him with all our hearts, with all our souls, and with all our might,
fearing him above all, putting our trust only in him: in our devotion with pure
minds lifted up to him only to pray: and in our speeches, swearing rightly, and
reverently by his name, and never making mention of him, but wirh high
reueuerence: lastly, in all natural and civil actions, seeing, hearing,
eating, drinking, laboring, recreating, buying, selling, and conuersing, and
dealing one with another, doing these, not as men led by sense only, but by
religion, eating and drinking moderately, and with thanksgiving, seeing and
hearing of Gods works with understanding, and praising his power, his wisdom,
and his justice and mercy, laboring and working the thing that is good, as in
Gods presence, recreating with moderation, and not according to the sway of
voluptuous and vain minds, and in all our contracts and dealings, following
the rule of justice and equity, in the fear of this great God. And this in
brief is commanded by the Apostle, Whether ye eat or drink or whatsoever
ye do, 1. Cor. 10.31.
do all to the glory of God. And if in some of these things only we give
glory to God, and not in them all, we come short of that, which we are here
directed to strive after. We honor God with our lips, but our hearts are
far removed from him; whilst we perform works of devotion outwardly, but
have hearts void of this love, fear, and trust, and lives irregular, swaruing
from justice, temperance, and the fear of God, and tongues let loose to curse
and blaspheme God: or else we honor men more then God, whilst we follow
justice, temperance, and soberness, and speak reverently of Gods name amongst
men, but are cold, and seldom, or corrupt in our devotion. So that this one
short petition comprehends the three former Commandments of the Law, and
herein we crave, that we may be able to do, whatsoever we are therein directed
unto.

2. The deprecation.
The deprecation is against the sins in these Commandments forbidden,
contrary to the duties before spoken of, with an acknowledgement of our
transgressions, and weakness; through which we daily offend herein, sighing
after more perfection, and strength of grace. We acknowledge therefore here
our self-love, and love of the world, fear of men, and trust in arms of
flesh, our corrupt worshipping of God, our neglect of his worship, our errors
in speech to the dishonor of his name, cursings, swearings, periuries, neglect
of vows, and giving Gods honor to creatures, swearing by them: and our
errors in action, not being moved with divine meditations beholding Gods
works, being intemperate in meats and drinks, and not following that justice,
and fear of God in our dealings, that we ought to do, and for strength to
overcome all these our corruptions we pray.

3. The thanksgiving.
The thanksgiving is for these corruptions mortified, and purged, and for
contrary graces, revived, and settled to the praise of Gods name: when we find
to our comfort, that the Lord has set up in our hearts some measure of this
love, fear, trust, made us devout worshippers of God, and reformed in some
measure, the errors of our speeches, and actions: in which notwithstanding we
must take heed, that we do not glory and boast our selves, least we favor
of the proud Pharisie, but to give God only all the glory.

1. Tim. 2.1.
Likewise we praise God here for his grace in other men, by whom his name has
also glory, whilst they consent in things together with us, to the honoring
of God. For this is also commanded, as to pray for others, so to praise God for
others; I exhort, that first of all, prayers, and supplications, and giving of
thanks, be made for all men.

For this cause of old, they that were led by the Spirit of God, did praise his
name over the graves of Martyrs, for his grace given unto them, shining so much
to his glory (though since it has been turned into prayers for them being
dead, and to them) and it is an evident want of the Spirit of God, and of the
presence of the lying Spirit, to malign such, as seek thus to live to Gods
glory, and to discourage them, and to speak all manner of evil against them,
as is the manner of many now adays, seeking by their checkes and taunts, to
quench the sparks of zeal, which are kindling in the hearts of others,
especially of underlings. Out of your own mouths shall ye be judged, ye
evil and wicked servants, to the highest; seeing, with your mouths, ye speak
the words of Gods praise, for grace in others, and with the same mouths, ye
prick their sides, as with swords, to spill, if it were possible, all warmth
of grace out of them.

Now, all this is in the first petition: the supplication, we pray thee, let
thy name be hallowed: the deprecation, we pray thee, let not thy name be
unhallowed, or have dishonor done unto it: the thanksgiving, we thank thee
for disposing us to the magnifying, and giving glory to thy name, for thy grace
and goodness, and so let thy name be hallowed.

Quest. 124 In the second petition, what do you desire?

Answ. That the number of true belieuers may be daily increased, that Gods
Kingdom of grace may be enlarged, and his Kingdom of glory hastened.

Acts 2.23.
Explan. According to the method propounded, I consider first, the order of
this petition, it goes before this; Thy will be done, to teach us, that no man
can rightly do the will of God, and please him, unless he be of his Kingdom,
and delivered out of the Kingdom of darkness, by faith, and the Spirit of
Sanctification. He shall do his will indeed, as a vessel of wrath, being
ouer-ruled by his Almighty power, as the Devil does Gods secret will; but not
as a vessel of mercy out of a good heart to be accepted, as the Angels and
Saints in heaven. For when the wicked Jews had crucified the Lord Jesus, it is
said, that they had taken him, being delivered by the determinate counsel. and
foreknowledge of God* and against his disposing will, it is not possible, that
wicked men and wicked Angels should do any thing. But in this there is little
comfort, as to the gally-slaues of the Turks, being compelled to their task,
the comfort only is, when from the heart willingly and chearefully Gods will
is done, namely, his revealed will and Law.

To do Gods will. Heb. 11.6. Esaias 1.
Now for this it is necessary, that a man be first of this kingdom, Without
faith it is impossible to please God. All duties done by the unsanctified Jews
living in sin, are rejected as abominable. Their new Moons, their Sabbaths,
their incense, their sacrifices: without these a man cannot so much as think
any thing pleasing unto God; 2. Cor. 3.5.
even as they that yield allegiance to the Pope, or to the Turk, or any enemy
of our King, cannot please him, their lawful Sovereign, how officious soever
they be. So they in whom the power of darkness is not yet shaken off; but
are still through infidelity, and the love of sin, under the Prince of the
air, and not subjects of the kingoome of heaven, cannot please God, what
duties soever they seem to the world to perform with zeal and devotion.

This then serves, first, to show us the fountain of all our goodness, the
grace of God, the mercy of our heavenly King, who makes us able to serve him,
and crowns our service with glory, that for no service which we do, we
presume to challenge ought at his hands, as the merit of our work, but reject
this, as Popish arrogance, and acknowledge when we have done all that we can;
we are unprofitable servants, which is Christian simplicity.

2. Not to rest in any outward act or duty, which we do, but labor for true
faith, for hearts rightly seasoned, as hearts of the subjects of his kingdom,
otherwise it is lost labor whatsoever we do in vain are ye just, merciful,
or devout, unless the service of Satan be in heart renounced, unless there be
faith purging inwardly.

2. The Kingdom of God.
For the sense of the words: Thy kingdom, the object of this desire is first to
be considered, and then the act, let it come. Gods kingdom is the rule that
he does exercise over his creatures, and is general over all, and special
over the elect. Generally his kingdom does comprehend the whole world, with
all things therein, which he rules and governs by his providence, making one
to be for the preservation or punishment of the other, thus upholding things in
order ever since the first creation.

Psalm 48.2. Psalm. 93.1.
In this sense God is called by the Psalmist, the great King, and God is King,
be the Heathen never so impatient: and again, the Lord reigns, etc. and unto
his Firstborn, Christ, the Heathen are given for inheritance, Psalm. 2.
and the uttermost ends of the earth for a possession. Specially Gods Kingdom
is over the Church, howsoever dispersed into many places, yet making but one
Kingdom, and this Kingdom is partly in Heaven, partly upon earth, till the
last great day, when in Heaven only it shall flourish. That part of his
Kingdom, which is upon earth, is the whole multitude of all such people, as
outwardly embrace the Christian religion, though many be profane, or
hypocrites, and this part is called the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 13.
both in the Parable of the Sower, of the Draw-net, and of the Field, wherein
the envious man sowed tares, etc. Wicked men being for a time mixed amongst the
godly, but at the last day to be severed, and singled out, and left, the godly
only being taken: and this is Gods special outward Kingdom, which in
special manner he defend^th from Infidels, holding up the Scepter of his Word,
and giving them laws, whereby to be governed.

Now besides this, there is an inward spiritual Kingdom of God, which is over
all those, in whose hearts these laws are written to do them, and the holy
Spirit rules, and bears sway, and happy is that man, which is thus of his
Kingdom: for when Christ did highly extol John the Baptist, saying, that a
greater then he, was not borne of women, he affirms yet, that the least in
the Kingdom of Heaven, is greater then he, the least of those that are
inwardly called, greater then he, by his most excellent office, even as they
which do the will of God in Heaven, are more then mother, brethren, and
sisters of Christ, then Mary, as she was dignified to be his mother, according
to the flesh. That part of the Kingdom, which is really in Heaven, consists
of Angels and Saints, and is imperfect, till the last day, when in a more
special manner, the Kingdom shall be deliuerd up to God the Father, that he
may be all in all. 1. Cor. 15.24.
And thus much for the meaning of the object.

The act, Let it come. This is first of the general Kingdom, whereby the
world is most prouidently ruled, let it stand, let wickedness be punished, and
godliness rewarded.

1. The Kingdom of grace comes by four degrees.
Secondly, of the special Kingdom, the coming whereof is in four degrees. 1.
Let it be erected, where it is not, send thy word, send Laborers to work in
thy harvest, let thy Word sound to all parts of the earth, to the Jew, to the
Turk, to Infidels in all places, plant a Church there: this specially is the
praying for all men, unto which Saint Paul exhorts, that the Gospel may shine
amongst them, that it may shine to their hearts, who are yet in darkness.

2. Let it be confirmed and continued where it is, let it not be abolished by
persecution, corrupted by heresy, vanish by hypocrisy, or degenerate, and
grow into the contrary, by profaneness. 3. Let it be restored, where it is
decayed, or corrupted in doctrine, or manners, restore such as are fallen by
weakness, purge the errors of such as are seduced. 4. Let it be perfected,
and made complete, by hastening the marriage day, wherein the new Jerusalem may
be in all points as a Bride trimmed for her husband, which shall only be at
the last day, when death, and the Devil, and every enemy shall be destroyed,
and God alone shall absolutely reign over his people, guiding them in and out
everlastingly, and communicating his heavenly most glorious Kingdom unto them.

3. For the scope. The supplication is, 2. The scope of the words.
1. For Gods general Kingdom, not that it shall fail whilst the world
endures, bur because it is Gods will that we should pray for such things, as
make for his glory, we are directed to ask here, the exercising of Gods
sovereignty and dominion over the world, whereby his power, wisdom, and
goodness may appear to the sons of men, of the great creatures, the
irrational, the Heavens, Earth and Seas, being still contained in their proper
places, properties and operations; of the rational, the obstinate, and
rebellious being by his just judgment punished, and the godly by his mercy
rewarded, the rage of the enemies of good order, being restrained, and the
peaceable and righteous being encouraged. For, according to all this, Deuteronomy. 27.
they were taught of old, to pray, when a curse being annexed to every
Commandment broken, all the people were bidden to say, Amen.

2. For all good means and furtherances of his special kingdom, which is his
Church, and such are godly and righteous Magistrates, defending the faith,
diligent and zealous preachers, publishing the faith of Christ Jesus: for such
we pray, that many may be stirred up, and continued in all places. For
Preachers, Matthew. ^.38.
we have a special precept, Pray the Lord of the harvest, that he would send
forth Laborers into his harvest, and as we are to pray for the increase of
their number, so for their utterance, Ephesians. 6, 19.
and boldness in preaching the Gospel. And for such as be in authority, how
we are to pray, has been showed already, they are nursing Fathers and Mothers
of the Church, Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, Esaias 49 23.
and Queens shall be thy Nurses, says the Prophet. Let thy Kingdom come,
therefore is; Let godly Magistrates be encreasen, under whose government, thy
Church and people may flourish, and send many faithful Preachers, Deuteronomy. 33.8.
as Moses said of Leui; Let thy Thummim and thine Vrim be with thy holy ones.
Such integrity of life, and light of doctrine, that they may be as lights, set
upon an hill; giving light to such, as be in darkenesss of sin and ignorance.

3. For the defense of these from all dangers, whereby they may be interrupted
in their proceedings, that their lives may be continued, and their power
increased, to the comfort of the faithful. Thus it has bin the manner of good
Subjects, of old, to pray for their good Governors. Cushi coming to bring
word unto David of Absaloms death, prays, saying; The enemies of my Lord the
King, 2. Sam 12.32.
and all that rise against thee, to do thee hurt, be as that young man is. And
for Ministers, Smite through the loins of them that rise against him (says
Moses of Leui) and of them that hate him, Deuteronomy. 33.11.
that they rise not again. And Saint Paul, speaking of the Ministers of the
Gospel, says; Pray for us, that the Word of God may have free passage, and be
glorified, and that we may be delivered from unreasonable, 2. These. 3.1.2.
and evil men.

4. That many may be daily converted, by the Ministry of these faithful
servants of the Lord, and grace, virtue, and true religion confirmed and
increased in them. And first, and chiefly, that inferior Governors, which
have the private rule of others committed unto them, in the well ordering of
their families and jurisdictions, may help forward the work of grace, in
their children and servants. Thus Saint Paul professes often, that he prayed
for such people, as amongst whom the Word was preached, and wills all men to
do the like, when he bids, Pray, that the Gospel may have a free passage.

5. That the Kingdom of glory may be hastened, to the comfort of all the
faithful, all the works of the Devil being then dissolved, the flesh and
old man being quite abolished, and grace only ruling and governing us all; or
rather grace being perfected and swallowed up in glory. And this is the highest
pitch of our desire here, this being the height of Gods honor, the most full
establishment of his kingdom, and the perfection of his will. Wherefore the
Spirit, Revel. 22 17.20.
and the Bride both say thus Come, let thy Kingdom come, and the inspired
prophetical Divine says, Even so, that is, quickly, Come Lord Jesus.

2. The deprecation is against all impediments and lets of Gods Kingdom, and
these are either general or special. 2 The deprecation.
General hindrances of Gods Kingdom are, either in the Magistracy, or in the
Ministry.

1. In the Magistracy is an Anarchy, when any Country is without a King and
lawful Governor, by reason whereof, every man does what he thinks good, as
being under no Law of a Governor: such as was the estate of the Israelites,
immediately before Samuels time, as is twice noted; In those days there was
no King in Israel. ^udg. 18.1. 19.1
And this we are to pray against, as the most woeful condition of any people
that may be, there being hereby such a gappe opened to all licentiousness
and lewdness, as that another Nero. or Vit llius, may better be endured, then
this being without a Governor. At this time was that outrage done by Dan unto
Michah, and Idolatry so graffed amongst the Danites, as that God seems for
ever, to have blotted them out of his book of life, Revel. 7^.
when thousands of all other Tribes being sealed, Dan is passed over
unmentioned. Judges 19.
And at this time was that villainy done, for which the Tribe of Benjamin was
cut short, and almost brought to be no people. And our forefathers in this
I Will, have felt the terror and misery of such times, by the invasion of the
barbarous Picts to be greater, then when they have been ruled by Tyrants and
Strangers. If any therefore be unwilling to live under government, and long
after the liberty of an Anarchy, he does most palpably pray against himself in
this petition.

2. We pray against Tyranny, that is, an evil and wicked government, whereby
the truth is discountenanced, as in Ahab, time, who hated Michaiah; or
persecuted, as when Iezabel was Queen: or idolatry, or heresy is maintained
and commanded, as by Nebuchadnezzar; or lastly, whereby wickedness is rewarded
and favored, as by some Heathen Emperors of the Romans: Tiberius Caesar is
said, to have rewarded Nouellus Tricongius with a Pro-Consulship, for drinking
three pottles of wine at one draught. Against such Governors we pray, Munst.
Cos. page 720.
that, if God so please, no place may be troubled with them; if they be, that
their hearts may relent, and be turned.

3. We pray against evil laws, made against the proceedings of the Gospel,
and for the maintenance of men in sin, such was the law made by the Pharisees,
against the followers of Christ, John 9.22.
they ordained, that if any followed him, he should be cast out of the
synagogue, such was the Law of Darius that no man should pray unto any other
for thirty days, but unto himself only, Dan. 6. He^^. 3.
against which Daniel prays: and such was the decree of Ahashuerosh, made for
the destruction of all the Lords people in one day, against which they all
fasted and prayed. We pray therefore here against such laws of Infidel
Kingdoms, as forbid all coming of strangers in amongst them, to prevent the
rooting out of their idolatry, as amongst the people of Ch^n against the bloody
Inquisition in Popish Countries, tending to the prevention and rooting out of
all reformation for ever, and against any laws of Turks or Jews hindering
their conversion, that God would disanull them, and against all defects (if
there be any) in our laws, and neglect of the execution that the defects may
be supplied, and the execution of good laws better looked unto, for the
furtherance of Gods kingdom.

Hindrances of Gods kingdom in the ministry.
In the ministry there may be also many hindrances of this kingdom against
which we pray.

1. Ignorance and unaptness to teach: for even as the child without milk
perishes, and having too little languisheth: so the poor souls of men under
ignorant ministers, or such as be unapt to teach them, do perish and decay:
Hos. 4.6. 1 Timothy 3. 2 Timothy 2.15.
My people perish, says the Lord, for want of knowledge, and a Bishop, says
the Apostle, must be apt to teach, he must know to divide the word of truth a
right.

2. We pray against heresy in them, whereby the milk of the word, as with
poison, is corrupted and turned to the destruction of souls. Of this
hinderance S. Peter speaking, 2 Pet. 3.16.
says, that there be many hard places in the Scriptures, which the ignorant
and unstable pervert unto damnation. And like unto this are profane and vain
bablings, which by the Apostle are compared unto the Canker and Gangreene,
tending to the destruction of the body. Wherefore we pray, 2 Timothy 2.27.
that no such preachers may creep in or be suffered in the Church, as do
teach heretical opinions, vainly and profanely handle the holy Word, to the
disgrace thereof amongst the hearers.

3. We pray against idleness in Ministers, taking the fleece and fat of the
flock, but through laziness and carelesnes suffering the wandering to be out
of the way, the feeble without pasture, and the diseased, and weak without
cure, and exposing all to the rage of the devouring Wolf.

If he that has the keeping of a tower against the enemy committed unto him,
and a reward therefore, shall sleep and neglect his charge, he is worthy of
death by the Martial Law: and he that taking wages, and having any work
committed unto him, if through sloth he does it to halues, or to quarters, he
is worthy to be punished as a thief. So, and much more they which take charge
of souls, and wages therefore, a spiritual work in hand, and hire to do it,
and yet are sloathfull, and given so much to their ease, as that they labor
not in this work, by preaching, praying, exhortation; yea, and by good example
of life, shall answer as thieves and robbers, and undergo the utmost of Gods
Law.

We pray here, that if there be any such (O vtinam nusquam) they may be
diligent, or else speedily removed, and more painful and faithful placed in
their room.

4. We pray against wickedness in the life and conversation of Ministers: for
a Bishop must be unreprovable, Leui had both the Thummim and Vrim committed
unto him; 1 Timothy 32.
When wicked ministers are wicked livers, though they teach things good, and
the way right, yet such a cloud is cast over their doctrine, that it shines
very dimly, and few, or none see to follow after it: when like Images, showing
the way they are seen to stand still without motion, they are held as idols to
be teachers of lies, and what they show is not embraced.

Particular hindrances of Gods kingdom.
The particular hindrances of Gods kingdom are such, as be in every private
person in particular. These are first Infidelity and unbelief, whereby the
door of the heart is shut up against the Lord, that he cannot rule there as
King.

Heb. 4.2.
Where unbelief was, it is noted that Christ could do no great matters. Lydiu
had her heart opened, before that the power of godliness wrought in her; The
Jews are noted to have had the world without profit, because their hearing was
not mixed with faith.

Faith was the first thing which Satan undermined in our first parents to beat
down Gods kingdom, and it is the first thing, wherein Paul labors with King
Agrippa, to make him a member of Gods kingdom. As all things are possible to
faith, so it is impossible, that any good thing should be with unbelief. We
pray therefore here against this unbelief, that the Lord would open our hearts
to believe his word, and all the promises, and threatenings therein contained.

2. Impenitency, and hardness of heart, whereby the mind is without relenting
for sin, and rejoices rather herein, and as the hand by often handling of
hard things becomes daily more hard and insensible, so by sinning, the
conscience becomes more hard, and without sense or remorse for sin. Luc 3.
Wherefore when John would prepare the way for the Kingdom of Christ, he
preaches repentance, the putting away of this hardness in sinning, Esa. 66 2.
and when the Prophet Esaias would describe such a man as with whom the Lord does
dwell, to rule and reign in him, he says, that he must be humble, contrite
spirit, and tremble at his word. We pray then here, that the Lord would take
away the heart of stone out of us, Ezech. 11.19.
and give us an heart of flesh, as he has promised, so that the power of sin
may be shaken, we may tremble for sin past, and resolve upon newness of life
for the time to come, as good subjects of Gods kingdom.

3. Any one reigning sin, which is, when the soul is quiet in some private
secret sin, and does not strive earnestly against it: For let it be never so
small if there be a willing going on in it, it is a reigning sin, and God
cannot reign in that heart; Let not sin therefore says the Apostle, Romans
6.12.
reign in your mortal bodies.

Ephesians. 5.14.
He that promises to the enemy of the Land but one penny, or one egg toward
his maintenance to invade the country, is no good subject to his Prince, no
more, than he that promises horse, man, and armor: neither is he a good
subject of Gods kingdom, that rests, and without check, nesteth in lying,
in petty swearing, in vain talking, or evil thinking, and fights not
against these, Awake thou that sleep, stand up from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee life: if thou sleep in any sin, thou art without life, out
of the Kingdom of light.

4. Negligence in superiors toward inferiors in parents, masters, or the
wealthy toward the poor, children or servants, suffering them to sin, leaving
them untaught, forbearing to admonish them, and to further Gods kingdom in
them.

Leuit. 19.17.
For if it be a sin of neglect in any man to let his familiar friend to sin
unreproved: much more is it in such, as have some authority annexed unto their
persons, they sin against that Charge. Thou shall plainly rebuke thy
neighbor, and not suffer him to sin.

5. We pray therefore, that all governors of families may shake off negligence
toward their charges, and though it be painful unto them, labor to further
Gods Kingdom in their families, and that the rich in disposing the
liberalities to the poor, would not let pass good admonitions, but as feed
their bodies, so endeavor to season their souls with grace.

3. The thanksgiving.
3. The thanksgiving is, for the Lords exercising his Kingdom, in the right
ordering of the world, punishing the wicked, rewarding the godly, spreading the
glorious beams of his word, for bringing men hereby into the right way, for
enlarging his kingdom thus, for worthy magistrates, painful and faithful
ministers, religious neighbors, for faith, repentance hatred of all sin, and
care to do our duties wrought in us. Thus the Saints in heaven do sing
continually to the praise of the Lord, both for the destruction of the whore of
Babylon, Revel 18.
and for his kingdom in them.

And all this is in the second Petition properly comprehending the first
Commandment: Let thy kingdom come, outwardly thy power and providence being
exercised, and inwardly, grace being increased, and glory hastened. Let nothing
hinder the coming of thy kingdom, neither the devil, nor wicked men, neither
in the magistracy, ministry, nor people, neither infidelity, impenitency, any
reigning sin, or negligence.

Thy kingdom is come, we praise thee for it in our selves, and others, and all
over the world. Here also implicitly we acknowledge our opposite disposition
to Gods kingdom, and bewail it.

Quest. 105. In the third Petition, what do you desire?

Answ. That I my self, and all the people of God upon earth may as readily
obey Gods will, as the Angels, and Saints in heaven.

Explan. First, for the order of this Petition, it follows this; Thy kingdom
come. to show, that where Gods kingdom is set up, his will is endeavored
after, and preferred always, and not our own will His will is accounted holy,
and his way equal, our own will, and ways unholy, and unequal. There cannot
be a good Tree, but it will bring forth good fruit, there cannot be faith, but
it will appear by the works, neither can there be a good faithful subject
of Gods kingdom, but he will study in all things to do his will. He is
therefore wrapped up in infidelity, hardness of heart, and in sin, that
prefers his own will, and goes on in Rebellion against the Lord, what
Faith, and hope soever he pretends.

2. The sense of the words: GODS will is either secret, or revealed: according
to that of Moses; The secret things of the Lord, belong to the Lord, but the
revealed to us, and to our children.

The secret will of God is touching the number of those, that shall be saved,
the day of judgment, the time of the Jews conversion, the final confusion of
Antichrist, and particular estates of other men, the particular afflictions,
and crosses appointed for us, and the day of our death, and such like. In these
things we pray, that we may rest contented in the Lords good pleasure, when by
the event it shall be made known, what hard-ship soever he has appointed to
us.

The revealed will of God is, whatsoever is manifested in his word, to be his
will concerning both faith, and practice, we pray that it may be answerably
done, as it is required; Thy will, that is, not my will, thy will only, not
thine, and mine also, betwixt which two, there is no proportion, thy will both
for matter, and manner, and thy will, though contrary unto and against my will;
In earth, as it is in heaven, that is, say some of our bodies, and members, as
of our souls, and minds, of the worldly, and such as be not yet called, as of
those that are called, but this is forced without cause, the words having a
proper meaning with good sense. In earth therefore, is by us, that dwell in
this world, in the midst or many temptations, and prouocations unto sin,
let thy will be done, as by the inhabitants of heaven, that are free from all
temptations, and discouragements.

1. With such cheerfulness and readiness, as the Saints are set forth in heaven
to be continually rejoicing, and singing, and the Angels to have wings, through
their readiness flying, as it were, to do that, which the Lord appoints them.

2. With so perfect an heart, free from all hypocrisy, loving the Lord with
all our heart, and out of this love doing his will, as David, and Josiah, are
commended to have done.

3. In all things, not in some only, which we can most easily incline our
hearts unto, or in most, still cleaving to our own most beloved ways, but in
all things, to the utter denying of our selves as Zachary, and Elizabeth are
commended to have done. Luke 1.


4. Striving after that perfection of obedience, which the Angels and saints in
heaven yield, making it our mark that we continually aim at, and therefore
not looking back with Lots wife, Phil 3.
but pressing toward this with the holy Apostle Paul, earnestly desiring to
attain unto it.

5. With all constancy and perseverance, never being weary of well doing, or
fainting under the burden of crosses, and persecutions: for they stand
continually in the Lords presence, ready to execute his commands, and this was
holy Jobs praise; Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him.

To deny our own will. Supplicat. 1.
3. The scope of this Petition, 1. in the supplication, we desire grace to deny
our own wills and ways, for unless we be willing to deny that which is
pleasing to our corrupt natures, and desired by us, we do in vain desire,
that Gods will may be done by us, even as he which is in some pleasing by-way,
that he will not forsake, does in vain desire to go the right way; and as he
that has a Table-booke wherein many old things have been written heretofore,
which he will not consent to have blotted out, does in vain desire to have
some other thing anew written there. Wherefore Christ teaches us to deny our
selves, thet we may become his Disciples; Ezech. 18 Ephesians. 4.23.24.
Cast away all your transgressions, says the Prophet, Whereby you have
transgressed, and make you a new heart, and, Cast off the old man, says the
Apostle, which is corrupt, and put on the new man.

Here is no new heart, or new man according to Gods will granted, unless
first the old heart, the old man be put away. Our will is a blind guide,
leading us into the danger of our enemies, as Elishah led the Aramites. We
pray therefore, Lord make us to deny our own crooked wills, which until we
do, we cannot do thy most holy will.

2. We pray for understanding of the will of God: for without this how should
we do it? Give me understanding, Supplicat 2. Psalm. 119.34. Hos 4.6. Prou 1.
says David, and I will keep thy saw: Without knowledge my people perish
says the Lord, Get knowledge, and get understanding, says Wisdom in the
Proverbs. No servant can do the will of his master unless he knows it;
neither can he walk after the Spirit, and do the will of God, that is, not by
the spirit instructed to know all things in Gods will.

3. We pray for faith, whereby to believe, Supplicat. 3.
that the will of God revealed unto us, in his will, and to apply his gracious
promises to our own souls: for knowledge will not profit without faith,
without the Spirits teaching of us, as he taught Peter, when to his
commendation Christ says; Math. 16.16.
flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but the Spirit of my Father,
which is in heaven. Nay, to believe, is to do the will of God: for, this is the
will of the Father, says Christ, John 6.4.
that ye believe in him, whom he has sent.

4. We pray for power to obey the holy will, Supplicat. 4.
and commandments of the Lord: now this obedience is both active, and passive,
in doing, and suffering. Active obedience is both gederall and special.
General is our sanctification: for this is the will of God, says S. Paul,
even your sanctification, 1 These 4.3.
leading an holy, just, and good life; holy, by praying, reading, hearing of
the word and meditation, as it is commanded, 1 These. 5.27. Psalm. 1.
pray continually, and in all things give thanks, and Blessed is that man
which does meditate in the law of God, etc. just, Psalm. 15.
by righteous and equal dealing with all men; as he which shall dwell in the
Tabernacle of the most high, is vncorrupt in all his ways: good by
beneficence, and works of charity toward the poor, as warning is given to
rich men, to distribute, 1 Timothy 6.17.
and give unto the poor.

Special obedience is in works of our special callings, as we are Princes,
governors, or subjects, ministers or people, husband, 1 Cor. 7.10.
or wife, father or child, master or servant: of these it is commanded; Let
every man remain in that vocation wherein he is called And more particularly,
the King and magistrate are set for the praise of the good, and the punishment
of evil doers, Romans 13.
the people must be obedient to the magistrate. Ephesians. 6.
The father must bring up his child in the information and fear of the Lord,
children must obey their parents, and likewise for the rest. 1. Tim. 3. Coll.
3. Of this obedience there be five rules.

Rules of obeying Gods will, and man's. Ephesians. 6.1. Verse 7. Acts 4.
1. Obey Gods will absolutely, and for himself, obey man only in God, and for
God, therefore it is added: Children obey your parents in the Lord, and
Servants obey your masters, as serving the Lord. Esa. 29.13.
And when men command any thing against the will of God, the example of the
Apostles is to be followed, obeying God rather then man.

2. Obey God in the manner, as well as in the matter, which he commanded: for
he is wisest, and knows best what will please himself. Otherwise, in vain
do ye worship me says the Lord. And thou shall not make any graven Image to
worship the Lord by. Obey God in all the matter by him commanded, and not in
something of thine own invention, Esaias. 1.12.
as Saul and Peter, lest it be said; Who required these things at your hands?

Math. 12.
3. In doing the works of piety, let them give place, if necessity calls to a
work of charity, as to thy neighbors, house being on fire, his Ox or other
beast, being fallen into a pit upon the Sabbath day.

4. Let the works of thy private calling give place to works of a public
calling, and general, if thou be laboring upon the six days, the Lord
calling to his house, by appointing solemn meetings to his worship, thou must
leave thy work, Leuit. 23.
and attend upon the Lord there.

Thus feast of the Passover was kept upon the six days, the feast of
Tabernacles, of ^^^st fruits, purim, and when the Lord called to any fasting,
etc.

5. The works of a general common calling, must give place to the works of a
special undoubted calling being contrary, if a man at any time, has such: as
Abraham had to kill his own son, the man, whom the Prophet bad to smite, and
wound him, and the Prophet that was forbidden to eat bread in the place of
Ieroboams Idolatry.

1 Pet 2.15.
Passive obedience, is in bearing patiently according to Gods will, whatsoever
is his will to lay upon us; This is the will of GOD, says Peter, that by well
doing ye put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, speaking of subjection
to the Tyrants of those times, and to servants being wrongfully punished, he
propounds this comfort; If any man for conscience toward GOD indureth
wrongfully, Verse 19.
that is thank worthy.

If any man therefore grudgeth, and be impatient, he does against the will of
the LORD, Now that all our obedience may the better be accepted, it must have
these three properties.

1. Chearefulnes, and readiness, it is spoken of, as a thing taxed in Cain, that
in process of time, he came to do sacrifice, Obedience acceptable. Genesis 4. 2
Cor. 8. Iam. 1.
and God loves a cheerful giver, (says Paul) he loves one like to
himself, who readily bestowerh upon such as ask, vpbraiding no man. It is not
therefore sufficient to obey, either in doing or suffering, when we must
needs, and are pressed hereunto, but we must willingly and cheerfully obey,
even in bearing any cross, wherefore, He that will be my Disciple, says
Christ, Matthew. 10.
must take up his cross, and follow me.

2. Sincerity, which is heartily and from the Spirit, approving our selves to
God, and not affecting the applause and praise of men: for, thus our obedience
will be all lost labor, Esa. 1. Matthew. 6.
as that of the Jews and Pharisees.

3. Universality, which is in all and every particular thing: Marc. 6.
for Herod did many things, and yet was rejected, because he disobeyed in one
thing: but Job is approved, obediently professing his subjection to God, though
he should yet aggrauate his misery, and kill him.

2. The deprecation against all disobedience to the will of God: and this is
first rebellion, an obstinate offending against the known will of God: when
Saul offended thus, The deprecation. 1 Samuel 15. Psalm 19.
his sin is censured as rebellion. This made David so earnestly to pray
against this presumptuous sinning.

Deprecat 2.
2 We pray against prophannesse, which is a base estimation of holy duties, Heb
12.16.
making no more reckoning of the Word of God, then of Aesops Fables This is set
forth by Esau's example, who sold his birthright for one mess of pottage; and
is forbidden to all men. Under pain of being deprived of Gods blessing, when
we shall seek it with tears.

Deprecat. Esa. 29.13.
3. We pray against hypocrisy, whereby men draw near unto God with their
lips, but have their hearts estranged from him, doing duties, which the Lord
requires, but not with that uprightness. This makes God an Idol, and his
worship odious, it causes blasphemy against his holy Name, and ruin of many
souls, who seeing wickedesse under the cloak of religion, do stumble and
fall. Wherefore amongst all others, Christ gives warning unto his Disciples,
that they be not like unto the Pharisees.

Deprecat. 4. Romans 7. Iam. 1.14.
4 We pray against natural corruption, which hinders. that we cannot do the
good we should, and pricketh forward to the evils, which we should not: which
draws away to disobedience, and enticeth: we pray, that it may be mortified,
and not bear this sway in us.

Deprecat. 5.
5. We pray against weariness in well-doing, which is, when having for a time
heartily obeyed, a man faynteth, as in a long and tedious journey, either going
on more slackly, siting still and refusing to go further, or turning back
again. Against this it is commanded: Be not weary of well-doing, for we shall
reap in due time, if we faint not.

Deprecat. 6.
6. We pray against delight and pleasure taking in other men's sins, whereby
they are heartned: this is condemned in the Gentiles, who were given over of
God: and holy Lot, vpright-hearted David, and all the righteous have been
vexed at the heart to see the disobedience and sins of other men.

Deprecat 7. Heb. 12.9.
7. We pray against impatience, that makes a man murmur at crosses, and
discontent, that we may not so ungraciously offer that unto God, which we will
not do to our natural parents, whose corrections we suffer patiently.

Thirdly, the thanksgiving is for disobedience and sin in any measure
mortified, for the knowledge of Gods will, for faith, and desires in truth, to
obey the will of the Lord in all things all the days of our lives: and we
praise God for the readiness of other men herein, as Paul prayseth God for the
faith and obedience of the Romans, and of other Churches, Romans 1.8.
and the other Disciples glorified God, when of Peter they heard of Cornelius
and his friends, that God had given them repentance, Acts 11.18:
and to obey the Gospel. So that in this petition is properly comprehended the
tenth Commandment, forbidding all first motions to sin against the will of
God, and prescribing perfect conformity hereunto, as it is in the Angels, and
Saints in Heaven: and the fourth Commandment appointing unto us a Sabbath, as
it is in Heaven. Or rather this Petition may be said to comprehend all the
Commandments, the second the means of keeping them, and the first, the last
end of all our obedience to Gods will, viz. his glory. The supplication of this
petition is. Let thy will be done, making us able by thy grace, the
deprecation, let nothing hinder the doing of thy will, neither rebellion,
profaneness, nor hypocrisy; the thanksgiving, thy will is done, by thy
faithful people, we praise thy name for it, for the Faith, Repentance,
Patience, and other grace bestowed upon thine, and implicitly, we bewail our
untowardness, and backwardness to do Gods will, and humbly to acknowledge the
same.

Quest. 126. Which be the three Petitions, concerning our selves?

Answ. First, Give us this day our daily bread: the second, forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them, that trespass against us; the third, And lead
us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

Explan. After the petitions for Gods glory, here follow such, as more
immediately concern our own necessities, in handling of which, first consider
the order in general, they follow those which concern Gods kingdom, and
glory, to teach us, that if our care be first for Gods kingdom, and to honor
him in doing his will, we shall easily obtain all things needful for our
own comfort, otherwise, if we seek our selves first and chiefly, we may
endeavor after comforts for our selves, but all shall be in vain. According
to this is the promise made by Christ: Matthew. 5.33.
Seek first the kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof, and all other
things shall be cast upon you: and that saying of the Apostle. Godliness is
profitable to all things, 1 Timothy 4.8.
which has the promise of this life, and of that which is to come. There is
nothing more usual, than this, to encourage unto godliness, or to discourage
from disobedience, and wickedness; Deuteronomy. 28. Leuit. 26.
If thou shall diligently do that I command thee (says the Lord) thou shall
be blessed in all things, contrariwise, cursed shall thou be. Thus it is
promised by the Prophet, if the Sabbath be consecrated, Esaias 58.14.
as glorious unto the Lord, etc. I will cause thee to mount upon the high
places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy Father.

Hag. 16.
And on the contrary side; Ye have sown much, and bring in little (says
Haggay) ye eat, and have not enough, ye drink and are not filled, ye cloth
you, but are not warm, he that earneth wages, puts them into a broken bag,
because the house of the Lord lies waste. The want of this consideration,
makes men so eager, in seeking worldly profit, and so slack about the
advancing of Gods Kingdom, and building of his house, to the inevitable loss,
not only of the things sought after, by worldly minds; but of the soul
perishing in hell fire for ever.

Quest. 127. What pray you for in the first of these, which is the fourth
Petition of the Lords prayer?

Answ. We pray for all things necessary for this present life, and therefore we
ask but for bread, and for this day.

Ioh. 6.27.
Explan. To follow the method before used, in the three first petitions: The
special order of this petition, before that which is for the remission of
sins, is first to be considered, and because it is immediately after this
Petition: Thy will be done. It is placed before this; Forgive us our
Trespasses, etc. Not for that the things of this life are to be sought, before
those that concern the life to come: for against such surmises, the Lord has
plainly commanded; Seek not the food that perishes, but that which endures
unto eternal life, that is, in regard of your earnest care and study, for
spiritual food and salvation, even neglect seeking daily bread.

The reason of this order then is, to provide against our infirmity, whereby
we distrust God, for bread, food, raiment, and worldly deliverances, when we
profess, that we believe in him, for the remission of sin, and deliverance
from damnation. For the Lord Jesus being privy to this our weakness, to make
us to see, and to be ashamed of it, follows our own order, both secretly
taxing this our corruption, and discovering our little faith, even for maine
matters, concerning salvation, and also helping it, by beginning with things
temporal, wherein we have a sensible taste of Gods goodness, and ascending to
things spiritual, and out of all bodily sense

1. It shows, how much we prefer the food that perishes, We ask bread
before remission of sins, why?
that finding it to be true in our own hearts, we may be emptyed of these
immoderate worldly cares: much more, than other natural creatures, the Fowls
of the air, and the grass of the field, we having reason to lead us, which
they want: Math. 6.
for thus do the Heathen, which have no knowledge of the heavenly Father
caring for them.

2. It shows the deceitfulness of our hearts in regard of Faith, we thinking
we have a great measure hereof, but being proved liars, when we come to the
trial, by the smaller things of this life: for when the disciples were warned
of worldly cares, Why care ye for these things, Math. 10.
says the Lord, O ye of little faith: and when Peter, ready to sink, being
afraid for the waves of the Sea, cried out, Master, save me. The Lord rebukes
him saying, O thou of little faith, why did thou doubt? as if he should
have said, there is little faith indeed, if there be distrustful caring for
wordly things in time of want, or despair in time of danger. S. Paul
concludes on the contrary side, from faith making Christ ours, and peace with
God believed. Wherefore we rejoice in tribulation, Romans 5.1. Romans 5.32.
and having given us Christ, how should he not together with him give us all
things also? He that believes not that the King will give him sixepence, how
can he believe that he will give him an hundredth pounds? And if thou can not
through faith patiently wait the good pleasure of the Lord for things
temporal, which are of no value, in comparison of heavenly, how can thou
through faith depend upon him for heaven, and everlasting life?

3. The Lord provides here for the strengthening of our Faith touching things
eternal, by ascending from these his gifts below, wherein we taste of his
goodness daily. For whereas the Lord, notwithstanding our sins, gives us
the comforts of this life, for which we call upon him, he does hereby draw us
on to lift up our minds to the comfort of the remission of all our sins, and
of everlasting salvation. As David is drawn on in his confidence against the
uncircumcised Philistims, 2 Samuel 17 37.
because God had delivered him from the Lion and the Bear. The beggar that
coming daily to the door of the charitable Christian, finds relief; or if
he comes not, has it sent home unto him, does hereby assure himself of
this man's love and good will toward him: so when we find relief at the Lords
hands, especially craving it at his gate of mercy, in faith and assurance, we
may well be assured that he bears a favor toward us, and will not suffer us
to perish in our sins, we putting our trust in his mercy. So that as from
our weakness about the things of this life, we may see the weakness of our
faith, about the things of the life to come: so from Gods goodness toward us
here, we trusting in his mercy, we may also see and be confirmed touching
his goodness hereafter, putting our trust in the same his infinite mercy.

Again, consider in the order, that it follows immediately after this. Thy
will be done; because to have things necessary for our maintenance here is a
stay, and help unto us, the more cheerfully to do the will of God, and to
keep us from unlawful enterprises. Whence we are taught.

1. That it is not unlawful even for Christians to seek for the things of
this life in their due place and measure; neither is this seeking an
impeachment to our Christian profession, otherwise our Savior Christ would not
have appointed us to ask, Give us this day our daily bread. Wherefore as to
be over careful for things temporal, is heathinish dissidence, so to be
altogether negligent and secure, 1 Timothy 5.8.
is worse then heathenish infidelity, as the Apostle teaches.

2. The rule of our seeking things temporal must be not our own, but the will
of God; for after this we pray, Give us our daily bread, that is, according to
thy will and good pleasure, restraining us from all unlawful means of
getting, that by true, just, and equal dealing only we may seek these
things, not carking when thou would have us secure, not sparing, when thou
would have us to spend, not trusting to our own industry, 1 Pet. 5.7.
when thou would have us to cast our care upon thee. For whatsoever is thus
gotten is extreme loss, the loss of the most precious soul.

3. We learn, that they only use the goods of this world rightly, and seek
them rightly, that use them as furtherances to do the will of God, and make
this their mark which they shoot at in seeking after them, and not their own
pleasure, Iam 5.5.
or promotion in the world. They which seek riches to live hereupon in
pleasure, and to pamper themselves are accursed of God, and shall have a
terrible reckoning to make at the last day. Riches are used according to Gods
will. 1. By liberality toward the poor. 2. To pious uses for the glory of
God. 3. To necessary uses for the maintenance of our selves and families, and
to the benefit of the Commonwealth. For the sense of the words. By bread
here, some of the Fathers were wont to understand the body of Christ, and the
Papists the Sacrament of the Altar; and Erasmus says, By bread what understood.
that it is not likely that any worldly thing should be asked in so concise and
short a prayer. But this cannot be yielded to be true.

First, because this Prayer is a perfect pattern for our direction in all
things

Secondly, because our spiritual food is asked in the second petition the
coming of Gods Kingdom being the bestowing of his grace, and specially of
Christ the fountain of all grace upon us.

Thirdly, because the bread here asked, is but for this day which does imply,
a fading and wasting away, so as that we still have need every day of new
bread, which cannot be said of our food spiritual. By bread therefore in this
place, is to be understood both bread and all things necessary for our
sustenance, Leuit 26.26.
as the word Bread is used, where it is said, Man lives not by bread only,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God: and where the
Prophet threatens; The Lord of Hoasts will take away from Jerusalem, and from
Judah all the stay, and the strength, Isa 3.2.3.
all the stay of bread, and all the stay of water. And showing further what
this stay is, he reckons up all needful things for the well-being of a
Land: The strong man, the Judge, the Prophet, the Counselor, etc. Sometime
bread is properly understood, as where the Psalmist reckons up bread to
strengthen man, wine to cheer the heart, Psalm. 104 14
and oil to make the face to shine.

1 Cor. 3.21
Give, that is, sanctify all worldly comforts unto us, which by reason of
sin were and do stand still accursed ever since the fall of man, that they
may not be destruction and bane unto us in the using, as we deserve; for I
do not think that sin depriueth a man of all just title unto these things,
(for a civil right remains in wicked men to that they possess by Law) but
of comfort in using them, they being unclean and accursed unto them, neither
does this saying, All things are yours, conclude the contrary against sinners,
but expresses how all things consent together for the sanctification of the
faithful.

2 Give, that is, bestow, uphold, continue, and maintain that which thou have
given us; for all our labor is nothing toward the obtaining, and all our care
nothing toward the conseruing and keeping what we have, unless the Lord give
and preserve unto us.

3 Give, that is, bless, make prosperous and wholesome our meats and drinks
for the strengthening of our bodies, and for the cheering and refreshing of our
spirits; so as that our frail lives may be vpheld, and we enabled to serve
thee in the strength of thy blessing in our callings; for it is not any mere
natural virtue in us, that makes our meats nourishable, but Gods blessing,
for which it is also plain which was said before, Man lives not by bread
only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

This day, that is, we desire not such abundance for so long a time, as
whereby our dependence upon thee should be cut off, but to be content with
things necessary for the present, and to wait upon thee from day to day,
though in the morning we have not wherewithal to be sustained until the
evening, or in the evening until the next morning, though we see present
destruction before our eyes.

Daily bread: (...), bread for our substance, such as nature does require to
uphold it, no dainties or costly feasting, but necessary clothing and food,
whereby the substance of our bodies may be continued and confirmed, and not
pine and waste away through want.

2 These. 3.2.
Our daily bread: that is, not the bread, the clothes, the substance of
another, but such things honestly gotten by our labor through Gods blessing
upon us, according to the phrase of the Apostle, calling this a man's own
bread; We command and exhort them that are such, that they work with
quietness, and eat their own bread, that is, honestly gotten.

2. For the scope of this Petition, The supplication.
and first in the supplication: We pray for all things needful for us in this
present life, not being measured by our own will and desire, but by the will
of the Lord. These things are either general, or special. The things general
concerning us all, are;

1. Peace and tranquillity, through which small things become great, whereas by
discord even great things decay, and come to nothing. This is the maine end
which the Apostle propounds in praying for such as be in authority, that we
may live a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty. 1. Tim. 2.2.


2. Seasonable weather, for heat and cold, moisture and drought, in summer and
winter: that the Sun may shine, and the rain fall seasonably: that the
heavens may answer the earth, the earth may answer the corn and the wine,
and the corn and wine may answer us, as is the promise of God to such as he
favors.

3. Worthy and virtuous Governors of the Commonwealth, by whose care peace
may be maintained, and we may in quiet enjoy every man his own Vine and
Fig Tree; for upon such does the welfare of a Country much depend, as the
Prophet shows by the contrary, Esaias. 3.2 3.
threatening to increase the misery of the people, to take away the Judges,
Counselors and Captains.

4. Healthfulnesse, strength, and ability of the people, and the increase of
them to our mutual comfort, and the dismaying of the enemies; Psalm. 144.12.
for this David prays, That our sons may be as plants growing up in our
youth, and our daughters as the corner stones of the temple: and it is promised
to such as fear God, that five shall chase an hundredth, Leuit. 26.8.
and an hundred shall put ten thousand to flight.

5. Victory over our enemies that rise up against us; for it is likewise
promised, Deuteronomy. 28.
Your enemies shall come against you one way, and fly seven ways before you.

Genesis 3.19.
The special things which we pray for are, first, an honest disposition to
labor and take pains in our particular callings, to get and preserve such
things as are for our maintenance: otherwise we do not desire our own bread,
but bread pulled from the mouths of other men. Whether we be rich or poor
therefore, we must not be idle and unprofitable, neither use unlawful means
of getting, but according to the Lords appointment: In the sweat of thy brow
shall thou eat of the fruit of the earth, till thou return to it: for the
Apostle, a sound interpreter of the Scriptures, does thus apply it, saying,
This we warned you of, 2. These. 3.10.
that if there were any that would not work, the same should not eat. So that
he which will eat, must work, and take pains in his calling, and not live
idly whatsoever he be.

2. Good success through Gods blessing in our labors; for in vain does the
builder build the house, and the watchman watch the city, Psalm. 127.
unless the Lord build and keep it. We pray therefore, that when we plow and
sow the ground, that God would bless it, and give increase; and when we
attempt and go about any thing, that God would bring it to pass.

3. A charitable disposition in the rich, to relieve the poor impotent that
cannot help themselves, and such a disposition in our selves if we be rich:
for we pray not for mine, but for our daily bread, which is a mocking of God,
if having wherewith to relieve such as be in want, we deny so to do, as if a
man being present at any danger of his neighbor, from which he is able to
deliver him, should stand still and call to some other a far off to come and
help him.

4. The sanctification of the creatures, which is, when we are sanctified that
receive them, according to that of the Apostle; To the clean, all things are
clean; for without this there cannot be a comfortable use of them.

5. The blessing of God to make the creatures nourishable unto us; for they
have not wherewithal in themselves, neither have we wherewithal in our selves
to convert them to nourishment, our heat and organes of the body fitted for
this purpose, must have strength from the Lord, Psalm. 104.29.
who if he hides his face, we are troubled, and return to the dust.

6. Contentation and resting upon Gods providence in our greatest wants and
dangers; Whilst we have food and raiment, 1. Tim 68.
let us therewith be content for this is all which we pray for, and praying for
it, we are taught to depend upon God for the same, which we implicitly
profess by praying, yea, though we should be very destitute, that we know not
how to live to morrow, as the Widow of Sarepta, who notwithstanding imparted of
her meal to the Prophet, 1. Kings 17.10.
and believed that it should continue for her relief from day to day.

7. Humility and lowlines of mind, because we are al beggars, it is of alms
that we have any thing, we have nothing of our own, and without these things
given us of the Lord, we cannot be sustained: Even as the lamp, unless it be
from time to time supplied with new oil, must needs go out. What a shame
therefore is it for a man to he proud and insolent over others, seeing all are
fellow-beggars, as well the rich as the poor, the King as the slave. A proud
heart and a beggars purse we say do not well agree together. 1. Cor. 4.7.
We pray therefore that it may not be thus with us, but that we in all
humility may acknowledge, that we have nothing which we have not received,
and of our selves are poor and miserable.

The things prayed against.
The deprecation is against all hindrances to our bodily health and welfare,
yet not simply, but with submission to the will of the Lord, who knows to
bring light of darkness, and to turn hindrances to helps and furtherances,
even to our outward estate.

We pray therefore with submission.

1. Against unseasonable weather, immoderate raines, untimely heat or cold,
and droughts when we need moisture, against pestilent influences from any
star, or out of the earth by the vapors, or by the quaking and opening thereof.

2. Against improuident Magistrates and Governors, which bring on woe to a
land, Eccles. 10 16.
Woe unto thee O Land, when thy Prince is a child, and eats in the morning.

3. Against plague, pestilence, and famine, against all noisome and contagious
diseases, whereby thousands have in short time been taken away, so that the
living have not been able to bury the dead.

4. Against invasion of the enemies, bringing destruction, and making hauock of
all things, this being a time of such misery, as that no pestilence or famine
is comparable unto it, which made the Kingly Prophet to desire rather to fall
into the hands of the Lord.

5. Against civil wars, the people rising against the Prince, or one part of a
Kingdom against another: the misery of which we have seen France and the
Low Countries to taste of, and do read of the like in King John's days, in
Edward the second, and Richard the seconds days, etc. in England, but have not
felt it our selves, and we pray that we may never taste of it.

6. Against extreme poverty, and want of all things, tending to the famishing
of our bodies; for such as fear the Lord shall want no good thing, though the
Lions hunger, and be hunger bit.

7. Against all things that defile man, and make the creatures unclean and
accursed unto him.

8. Against an unhealthful constitution, turning our meats and drinks into il
humors, to the hazarding of our lives, and the decay of our bodily strength.

9. Against idleness and sloth, whereby time is spent unprofitably, or not to
so much, benefit of the Commonwealth as it might be, either through want of
bodily labor, to whom this belongs, or of study and care otherwise to do
good toward the preservation of the peace and welfare of the Country.

10. Against discontent, whatsoever our want is, that we may not do that
injury to the Lord, as to prescribe him a time when to help us, or else
murmr through want, as the Israelites in the wilderness.

11. Against trusting in any arm of flesh, what wealth or friend soever we
have; for they which do so, fall down flat, and it was the folly of the rich
man in the Gospel, Psalm. 20 8.
that he said unto his soul, Eat, drink, and be merry, Luke 12 16.
for thou have much goods laid up for many years.

12. Against Covetousness and worldly cares, carrying us on to the greedy
desiring of more, through the love of money. It is a spirit far differing
from that of Agur, of whom it is written for our learning, that he desired,
Pro. 30.9.13.
Give me not riches, lest I be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord?

13. Against hard-heartednesse and uncharitableness, whereby the hand is held
back from relieuing the needy, when with the tongue relief is desired for
them, as for our selves.

14. Against all unjust and unrighteous dealing: for bread gotten thus, is not
our own, and God is mocked, whom we pray to give us bread, but in the mean
season, we thus carue for our selves utterly against his will.

15. Against prodigality and wastefull spending the goods of this world upon
vanity; for must not the Lord needs be offended, if coming to beg things
necessary of him, and receiving, we like wanton untoward children, cast them
away again? No man but will have indignation at such a beggar, and rather let
him starve, then give him any thing again, as the Prodigal in the Parable.



Expressly to pray for any affliction, is to do contrary to the first
principles of nature, which teaches to pray for, Answ. To pray for affliction.
and to seek all things that are good, and to shun and pray against all
things that are evil, and tend to the destruction thereof: and therefore must
needs be unlawful, as it is unlawful voluntarily to hurt a man's own body,
under what pretense soever. For it is all one to pray for some hurt unto the
body, and to do it hurt, the tongue being the instrument in the one case, and
the hand in the other, in both a member of the body armed against the body.

1. Cor. 9.7.2. Cor. 7.11.
Secondly, this is without precedent or other warrant, except of superstitious
persons, who have whipped themselves almost to the death, or otherwise unduly
beaten down their bodies to prevail in the rash vow of chastity, even to the
infeebling of themselves, so that they have been unable to do the works of
their callings, and yet have not prevailed, being they had not the gift of
continency. Thirdly, conditionally, to pray for afflictions in the case of
rebellion of the flesh, if the Lord has appointed this to be the mean of our
mortification, and bringing to sanctification, and so to himself, it is
without doubt most lawful and Christian: for this is in effect, to ask
nothing but that which is good for us. Whereas Saint Paul says, I beat down
my body, and bring it in subjection, etc. And calling upon the Corinthians for
revenge upon themselves, he means not this unnatural violence offering to
the body, but denying of such things, as whereby the body is pampered to sin,
though otherwise lawful in themselves, which is the duty of us all. Whereas
Saint Augustine says; Aug. tom. 10. sermon. 181.
Etsi non candem cum martyribus passionem subimus, at si corpora castigemus,
etc. possumus candem cum illis vitam aeternam obtinere. Although we suffer not
the same passion together with the martyrs, yet if we chastise our bodies we
may attain the same life everlasting with them. He has no other meaning then
the Apostle, neither could approve of the violence used to the body, seeing the
Donatists seeking thus the glory of Martyrdom, are by him earnestly inueighed
against.

3. The Thanksgiving is for all and every of the benefits of this life both
general and special; for seasonable weather to praise God, for which was
made, Psalm. 65. for deliverance from the enemies and victory over them, for
which is the Song or Deborah and Barack, Judge. 5. for plenty of all things,
for which is Psalm. 114. Psalm. 104. etc. We also praise God for freeing us
from any evils, wherewith we have been bodily oppressed; from plague,
pestilence, famine, captivity, particular sicknesses, etc. for which the people
of Israel, Hezekiah, etc. may be examples unto us. This petition therefore
comprehends chiefly the eighth commandment, and in the branches: the fifth,
touching governors and superiors: the sixth, touching life and health: the
seventh, touching chastity, the exercise of filthy lust being a shortning of
the days, and a decay of the strength, and the ninth touching false witness,
through which it cannot be well with men for the bodily state. The deprecation
is, let nothing hinder, but that thou may give us our daily bread; the
supplication, Give us our daily bread; the thanksgiving, thou give us our
daily bread, for which we praise thee.

Quest. 128. What pray you for in the second of these petitions, which is the
fifth of the Lords Prayer?

Answ. That God would freely forgive us all our sins, and trespasses against
his laws, as we do from the heart forgive the offenses by men committed
against us.

Lament. 3.39. Esaias 59.1.2.
Explan. For the order of this petition, it follows, that wherein we crave the
good things of this life, which are needful for us, teaching, that the maine
hinderance of our prosperity, and the cause of adversity and misery is sin,
which till it be removed, hinders, that we cannot enjoy the good things we
desire, nor be free from the evil things which we decline. This in short is
taught by the Prophet Jeremy: Wherefore is the living man sorrowful, man
suffers for his sin: and by Esaias; The Lords hand is not shortened, nor his
ear heavy, but your sins do separate between your God and you. And nothing
is more usual then this in all the Sermons of the Prophets, and in all holy
records of examples, this being the principal drift of all, to set forth the
miseries of sinners, and ungodly men. If we have therefore prayed for food,
raiment, and other necessaries, but yet are destitute; the cause is, our sins
remain, we must humbly sue for the pardon of them, and to have Gods wrath
against us for them pacified; otherwise all our calling for daily bread is lost
labor.

2. For the sense of the words, trespasses, by Matthew called debts, by Luke
sins: for sins are debts, because we owe obedience, of which we fail by
sin, and because, as by debt a man is in danger of imprisonment; so by sin,
of being cast into the prison of hell. Forgive, that is, seeing we are not able
to pay the debts of our sins, being ten thousands of talents, accept of the
satisfaction made by the all-sufficient Lord Jesus, and for his sake let not our
debts be required at our hands, or any of them, for the least of which we are
never able to answer. Us; that is us, who are grievous sinners, and are for
ever forlorn without this mercy, us, that by faith do believe that our sins
are pardoned, helping us against doubting and infidelity, and confirming our
faith more; and us, who believe, continuing this thy grace to the end, whereby
we may daily have sin expiated and done away, as by our weakness we are
daily prone unto sin. Our sins, that is the infinite sins which proceed
properly and naturally from us, as from a most corrupt fountain, and are no
way to be imputed to thy majesty, as the Author hereof, or to fate or
constellation, or to the Devil only, though he seeks to bring us to sin,
James 1.14.
and so to destroy us: for, Every man is drawn away by his own concupiscence
and is enticed.

2. John 5.16.
Again, we say our sins emphatically, that is, with a sense of our own
misery, chiefly in regard of our sins, unto which we are most privy, and at
which we begin our grief and prayer for pardon: for, though we pray for the
pardon of other men's sins also, according to that precept. If any man sees
his brother sin a sin not unto death, let him ask, and he shall give him
life. Yet chiefly we find and feel sin in our selves most heinous, and that
we are of all sinners the chief, knowing more amiss in our selves, then in
others, and therefore we principally crave mercy for the pardon of our own
sins. As we forgive them that trespass against us. 2. Tim. 1.15.
This is the condition upon which we desire mercy at the Lords hands: to
understand the meaning three questions arise.



Sol.
By offering some injury or wrong unto us, in regard of our life, Trespasses
against us.
goods, or good name, whereby they became trespassers. First, in the want of
love which they owe unto us. Secondly, in the loss and hurt which we do
hereby sustain, which they are bound to recompense.



Sol.
By forgiving the first, the breach of that love wherein they were tied unto us,
not bearing any malice or grudge against them therefore, nor seeking any
revenge, nor taking opportunity to be revenged though it be offered. We forgive
also by forgiving the second, viz. the wrong that is done unto us, not
requiring any satisfaction at their hands, and by forgiving a debt which they
owe unto us, not requiring any payment, in the case of extreme poverty. But
the first is all the forgiveness which the Lord requires at our hands, out of
this case, and we do well, remitting the malice, though we exact
satisfaction, where there is ability; so that a trespasser may be forgiven, and
yet lawful satisfaction required, and a debt may be forgiven, and yet the
condition here set down not performed, viz. if the mind be not reconciled,
but continues still offended.



Sol.
It is not sufficient, for so man might be able to forgive sins, which is
blasphemy to affirm. Men therefore can only forgive the trespass against
him, the trespasser remains still obliged to Gods eternal wrath, unless by
humiliation and repentance before God his wrath be turned away. So that man
may for his part forgive trespasses, and yet they may be retained still before
the Lord: and on the contrary side, though man will not forgive, through the
hardness of his heart, the trespass may be forgiven before the Lord, the
trespass being acknowledged, and pardon craved; or if there be ability,
satisfaction offered, and the heart being turned, through a purpose of not
offending any more.

3. For the scope of the Petition in the supplication, What we pray for.
we pray for the forgiveness of our sins, and whatsoever tends hereunto,
and to make us just and righteous in the presence of God.

Wherefore, we crave first the knowledge of our sins, that we may understand
the infinite number of our offenses, and our woeful case in regard of them:
for, without this knowledge, the tongue may pray for the pardon of sin, but
the heart cannot. He that knows not himself to be sick, cannot seek for
remedy to cure his sickness; neither can he seek to fortify himself against
the enemy, that knows not the danger wherein he stands: no more can a
sinner seek remedy against his sins, if he be ignorant of them. The
Church of Laodicea is censured for saying, that she was rich and wanted
nothing, when as the holy Ghost testifies, saying, Revel. 3.17.
Thou know not that thou art poor, wretched, miserable, blind, and naked.
And many poor, and miserable souls, through ignorance not seeing this, say,
forgive us our trespasses, but cannot pray it, because they know not, that they
have any such need of forgiveness.

Prou. 28.13.
Secondly, we crave grace to acknowledge our sin: For, He that confesses,
and forsakes his sins, shall have mercy; but he that hides them, shall not
prosper All men that know their sins do not confess them; or if they do,
they will not confess and put away their beloved special sin, but rather
seek to justify themselves in them, because all men are sinners, and in many
things we offend all. But such crave not the pardon of their sins so, as that
they may be in hope to speed, the confession and putting away of all sin
only have a ground to build comfort upon. When there was sin in the
congregation of Israel specially noted, Joshua 7.10.
but in one Achan; Joshua could not be heard, without removing it first, much
less can that man be heard to have his sins forgiven, that loves any one
sin, though it be most secret and small, and labors not to put it away
from him.



viz. when our mind is inwardly troubled, and we cannot by our selves find any
ease or comfort, confessing them unto the Lord: James 5 16.
In this sense Saint James wills us to acknowledge our faults one unto
another. But to do this upon absolute necessity, as if there were no salvation
without it, and to perform it, not upon particular grieuance of conscience,
but for formality, at a certain time in the year, which the Papists call, the
time of Shrift, and to confess before the Priest al our particular sins, with
the circumstances, is superstitious, and avails not, but to make way for more
licentiousness, as experience teaches, and to establish the Popes Hierarchy
over the world, and to the increase of his revenues by buying pardons. Thirdly,
we crave grace to be truly humbled for sin, that in the sense of Gods curse
due for it, Romans 7.14. Matthew 11.28.
we may cry out with the Apostle, Miserable man that I am who shall deliver
me from the body of this death? Come unto me (says the Lord) all ye that are
weary and laden, and I will refresh you. If any man therefore comes to ask
forgiveness of his sins, and is not humbled for them, but is without a
contrite spirit to offer in sacrifice unto God, he cannot pray to speed, but is
still in his sins.

Romans 4.25.
Fourthly, we crave justification, through the death and bloudshedding of Jesus
Christ, who was delivered to death for our sins, and rose again for our
justification: that the Lord would not therefore require our sins at our
hands, either holding us guilty, or punishing us therefore in this world, or
in the world to come, but that the sacrifice of Christ may be a perfect
atonement for us, and his precious blood effectual to cleanse us from all
sin. Now of this justification there are two degrees, the first, whereby of
sinners we are made righteous, in the very act of our conversion: the second,
whereby our daily infirmities and fails are done away, and we are still
notwithstanding them reputed righteous. The first we pray for and desire to be
confirmed in it, through Gods grace, that our estate may be comfortable: the
second we pray for, as we have need to preserve our peace and comfort, when
we view our estate before God. Even as a bankrupt debtor finding great favor
with his creditors to forgive his great debts, and being ready still daily
through his extreme want to run upon the score again, is a daily suitor for
mercy unto them, to continue this their favor in forgiving all.

Fifthly, we pray for love and charity toward our neighbors, through which
we may be ready to forgive them their trespasses against us: for our heart
naturally is a corrupt fountain, and we are implacable when we are offended,
especially if it be spitefully done against us, or by an enemy. Wherefore we
pray, that when wrongs are done unto us, we may consider, how much, and often
we have offended the Lord, to what grief of his holy Spirit, and with what
hateful hearts, preferring Satan and his service before the service of the
heavenly Majesty: that as we would notwithstanding have all this forgiven unto
us, we may frame our minds to forgive the greatest offenses against us, he
which has done them acknowledging his fault. Thus Christ being asked, Should I
forgive my brother, if he sins against me seven times in a day? Matthew 18.21.
answers, If he turns again, and says, it repents me, I say not until
seven times, but until seventy times seven times. And for this cause he
brings his Parable of the Lord, forgiving ten thousand of talents to his
servant; but finding him with rigor to exact the hundredth pence due unto him
from his fellow-seruant, showing hereby how vain all our prayers are for the
pardon of our sins against God, if we refuse to forgive the sins of our
fellow-seruants against us. Let no man therefore deceive himself, by keeping
malice, and seeking revenge upon men for wrong done unto him, but through love
let him forgive all: for if there be not this love toward his brother, there
is no love toward God, and then it is sure, that God bears no love toward
him, his love of God being an inseparable reflection of the sun shine of Gods
love upon him: even as a blind man may assuredly know, that the Sun does not
shine upon him, because he feels no warmth thereby in his body.

What we pray against.
2. The deprecation is against all things that may shut up Gods mercy and
compassion toward us, and make us remain still bound in our sins: which are,

1 Cor. 2.14.
First, Blindness of mind, and ignorance of our inward estate, which is
through ignorance of the Law. For this hinders so much the pardon of sin, as
that it is a certain sign of a natural man, still in his sins, according to
that saying, The natural man perceives not the things of God, neither indeed
can he. This blindness hinders so much, as being out of the way from coming
to the ways end, for the way to forgiveness of sins is noted to be
perceiving with the eye, and understanding with the heart in the charge given
to Esaias: Make the heart of this people fat, etc. lest they see with their eyes,
Esaias 6.10.
and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert, and
he heal them.

Romans 2.4.
Secondly, hardness of heart, that cannot repent by acknowledging sin,
sorrowing for sin, entreating grace, and by resolving against every sin:
for such hardened persons are so far from mercy, as that they heap up wrath
to themselves against the day of wrath.

2. Kings 6.
Thirdly, despair of Gods mercy and goodness, which drives from God to the
Devil, our sins making us without all hope, as Cain, who said, My punishment
is greater then I can bear. We pray therefore, that though with the one eye
we see our sins infinite and most heinous, yet that with the other we may
see Gods mercy infinite, far above all our sins, that howsoever we are
urged by Satan, we may be kept from despair, as Elishaes servant having his
eyes opened to see the fiery chariots and horses round about him, and his
master, when the bands of the Aramites drew near against them. Now to be kept
from despair, it is necessary that we pray and strive to be kept.

Stepps unto despair.
First, from notorious sins most chiefly, as murder, apostasy, adultery, and
theft, from such as from a steep downehill, Cains and Judas fell headlong
into the valley of desperation.

Secondly, from wicked company, which like a violent stream does force men so,
as that they cannot withstand, as Peter was carried far thereby.

Ephesians. 6.
Thirdly, from the neglect of Gods worship, whereby we loose our spiritual
armature, and are laid naked to our potent foes.

Fourthly, from the love and immoderate affection to the things of this world,
which having the heart, if they fail, our heart fails also, and a wide gap
is opened to despair.

And if any of these have been, through which we are falling to despair, we
pray that we may yet be supported by such helps, as are most effectual,
they being ever near unto us.

Helps against despair. Esaias 1.18.
These are first, promises of mercy, how heinous soever our sins have been,
Though your sins were as crimson, they shall be made white as snow; though
they were red as scarlet, they shall be as wool.

Secondly, examples of mercy showed to Murder, to Adultery in David, to
Apostacy in Peter to Idolatry in Manasseh, to Theft in the Thief upon the
Cross, to Blasphemy in Paul, and much iniquity and impurity to Mary having
many foul Devils together in her.

Thirdly, the indignity offered unto God by despair, seeing we refuse to
trust him upon his most faithful word, and the inevitable destruction of our
own souls hereby, unto former most heinous sins, this being added to make a
man out of measure sinful. Wherefore we pray, that in this case we may keep
our eyes fastened upon Gods promises, reuolue in our minds, and always think
upon examples of mercy, and consider that as long as we despair not, we are
not shut out from mercy; but hereby we are gone for ever, and that worthily,
seeing we offer that unto him, which we will not unto a man making faith unto
us.

Psalm. 50.11.
Fourthly, we pray against presumption, which is the promising of happiness to
a man's self upon false grounds, either because God is infinitely merciful, and
will not have any to perish whom he has made, neither is so severe as they
preach of him. Which is the presumption spoken of by the Psalmist: These things
thou did, and whilst I held my peace, thou thoughtest that I was like unto
thee: or because his own life is not so bad, as that the Lord can therefore
justly condemn him to death, but rather for his good deeds, is bound to give
him eternal life, Luke 18 11.
as the Pharisie vaunteth himself, saying, O Lord I thank thee that J am not
as other men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican, I
fast twice in the week, etc. or because the Lord has promised, Ezech. 18.
that at what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin from the
bottom of his heart, he will put all his wickedness out of his remembrance;
whereupon he does willingly yet go on in sin, presuming that he will
notwithstanding provide well enough afterward in his old age, or extreme
sickness for his soul, by repenting him then of all. For this is a most vain
hope, life being most uncertain, man's power to turn to God being mere
weakness, and sin getting stronger hold upon him, the longer he lives
therein, and making him more unfit every day to repent, according to that
saying:

Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit.

He that for repentance thinks this day too soon,
Will much more think the same till life be done.
Wherefore we pray here, that by none of these deceitful baits we may be
allured to live in sin, that we may not presume upon our own righteousness,
but reject it as a menstruous cloth, nor make a God of all mercy to our selves,
when as he is also most just and severe against sinners, least with thousands
we thus perish for ever, when we little fear it.

Fifthly, malice and thirsting after revenge, when injury has been offered
unto us. From this we desire to be preserved, and that we may the rather, we
are to consider:

First, how much the Lord has forgiven us for Christ his sake.

Secondly, that both the Lord Jesus, and all holy men have forgiven and prayed
for their enemies, and the Devil only is an implacable adversary.

1. Pet. 2 2.
Thirdly, that the way of grace is thus stopped up against us, and consequently
the way of glory: for unless we be converted, and become as little children,
we cannot be saved; unless as newborn babes, laying aside maliciousness,
we desire the sincere milk of the Word, we cannot grow in grace thereby.

3. The thanksgiving is for illumination to see our sins, sanctification to
turn from sin, justification to deliver us by the death of Christ from all
sin: for blindness spiritual expelled, for hard hearts mollified, and for
the extremes and bars of grace, despair and presumption removed: for love
abounding, where offenses against us a bound, and for malice banished and
purged out of us. Psalm. 32.
Blessed is the man whose sin is covered, and to whom the Lord imputes not
sin.

He therefore that is made partaker of this, cannot but bless God again,
yea, all the Saints in heaven do ever without ceasing sing of this; Revel. 5.9.
Thou wast killed and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every
kindred, tongue people and nation, and have made us unto our God Kings and
Priests, and we shall reign upon the earth, etc.

The supplication therefore is, Forgive us our trespasses: Let none of our
sins ever come in remembrance against us, but be washed away in the blood of
Christ: the deprecation, let nothing hinder, but that thou may forgive our
trespasses: the thanksgiving, thou have turned our hearts, and forgiven our
trespasses, we praise thee therefore, and this alike concerns the whole law.

Quest. 129. What pray you for in the third of these, which is the sixth
petition of the Lords Prayer?

Answ. That the Lord would not suffer us to be carried away by the temptations
of the world, the flesh or the devil to the committing of sin, but that he
would deliver us from the evil of all temptatious, both sin, and damnation.

Explan. For the order of this petition, it is added unto the former made for
our souls good, so that there be two petitions for our souls, and but one for
our bodies, teaching us, that our care for our estate spiritual before God
ought to be double to our care for things temporal, and of this world. And
good reason, because the soul lives for ever, the body but a short time, the
things of the soul are permanent, and lasting ever to the comfort of it, the
things of the body are slitting, and fade soon away. Lastly, the soul is most
excellent, and of more worth, then the whole world, the body is base, even as
the dust of the earth, from whence it was taken, and unto which it shall
return again. So that they do foulely forget themselves, which care
altogether for the body, and take little or no care for the soul, when it is
poor, miserable, and naked, as is the manner of most men.

2. This petition is immediately subioyned after the other, craving the pardon
of sin, to teach us, that this is not the only care of Christians, to seek
to have sin pardoned, but they ought as earnestly to strive against sin,
and to resist it for the time to come: according to the warning given by
Christ; Go thy way, sin no more, least a worse thing befall thee. He that
seeks for the pardon of his sins, and not to subdue and mortify them, is
like unto a prodigal spend-thrift, who is no whit the richer, though he
receives much; for in like manner, though he talks often of the pardon of
sin, and prays for it, he is destitute, and miserable through sin, his
prayers not being heard, but turned into sin.

3. After that we have prayed for the pardon of sin, we pray against
temptations, tending to sin, being hereby taught, that a Christian man's life
is a continual warfare, and when one enemy is overcome, and vanquished, he
must provide to encounter with another. Wherefore Saint Paul speaking of this
estate says, We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, and against worldly governors, etc. Ephesians. 6,
12.
Even as they which are besieged in a Town, or Castle, into which the enemy
attempts the entry, have not sufficiently defended themselves, if some times
they have beaten back their enemies scaling their walls, or making breaches
to come upon them, but they must continually provide to do the like, if they
will save their hold. So in the spiritual warfare, the enemies must be
continually watched against, and resisted, otherwise we shall be taken, and
spoiled of our souls. If any man finds no such need of preparing to resist,
he is dangerously sick of a spiritual Lethargy, some enchanting Circe has him
at his pleasure, he is sure enough for coming to his heavenly country. Let
all men therefore awake, and seeing their danger, keep watch and ward over
their souls.

2. For the meaning of the words. Temptations of diverse sorts.
Temptation is either that whereby God tries man, searching and prying into
his heart, to see whether it be upright, as David prays; Try me (O Lord)
and prove me, and thou shall find none iniquity in me: or giving him some
hard commandment, as unto Abraham to kill his son, and to the young man in
the Gospel, to sell all that he had, and to give it to the poor: or sending
him some grievous affliction, which James calls temptation, James 1.2.
willing us to count it exceeding joy, when we fall into sundry temptations.

Psalm. 95.
2. Temptation is that, whereby man tempts God, of which the Psalmist
complains, they tempted in a proved me, and saw my works, that is, by
murmuring, and refusing to believe, and to rest upon Gods providence, without
seeing evident present signs of his power and goodness: and thus whosoever
says in his heart, God regards not, or God cannot, or will not help in the
time of necessity, tempts God.

Matthew. 4.7.
Again, there is another tempting of God, by aduenturing upon apparent danger
without warrant, according to which, Satan tempting Christ to cast himself
down from the pinnacle of the Temple, he answers; Thou shall not tempt the
Lord thy God.

3. Temptation is that, whereby man tempts man, seeking to circumuent him,
Matthew. 22.18.
by trying him with politic devises; thus the Pharisees are said to have
tempted Christ: for, Why tempt ye (...), ye hypicrites, says the Lord?

4 Temptation is that, whereby man tempts himself, his corrupt heart
alluring, and drawing him on to sin, according to that of James; James 1.14.
Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and
i^^^i^^d.

Genes 3 Matthew. 4.
5. Temptation is that, whereby the devil tempts man, and provoke him to
sin, as he did Euah in Paradise, and attempted against the Lord Christ. For
these two last temptations of the flesh, and devil, we desire here to be
delivered: from the third we pray to be kept in the fourth petition: from the
second in the second petition: from the first we do not pray to be kept, but
rather that the Lord would try us, and use all means which he sees best to
further our sanctification; Land us not, thus we pray, because that howsoever
the devil tempts, and the flesh tempts, without being set aworke by the
Lord, yet if he be pleased, not to lead us into temptation, we shall be safe
from danger. Now the Lord is said to lead into temptation.

To lead into temptation, what.
1. By forsaking, and withdrawing his grace, without which, as a lame man going
with stiltes, falls, if they be taken from him, so every man falls, and is
unable to stand, in the day of temptation.

2. By leaving a man to his own lusts, by which, as by a violent stream
running down a steep hill, he is carried quite away.

3. By delivering over to Satan for the punishment of former notorious sins,
who hardens more and more, in all wickedness, as he did Pharaoh, and King
Saul; But deliver us: that is, withdraw not thy grace from us, for the time to
come, leave us not to our own lusts, neither deliver us over to satan to be
hardened, as thou might justly do, for our sins: but when satan, and our
own lusts conspire our destruction, stand by us, that our faith may not fail,
as Christ promised to his Disciples, saying, Satan has desired to win now you,
but I have prayed, that your faith may not fail. From evil: evil is twofold,
of sin, and of punishment usually called, Malum culpa, and malum poena. From
both these we pray to be delivered.

3. For the scope of the petition, because it is negative, it is first to be
considered in the deprecation, which is: 1. Against spiritual desertion, or
forsaking of Gods Spirit, What we pray against.
which if it be gone, all power to stand, and all spiritual comfort is gone
also. It is in us the new life; and spirit of the soul, Gods fire sent from
heaven, to heat us with good affections, to inlighten us with true
understanding, and to overcome whatsoever corruptions it meets withal in us,
according to which the Apostle warns, quench not the Spirit. 1. These. 5.19.
Woeful is their estate, that are thus forsaken; as we pray therefore against
it, so let us provide, by willing entertaining the motions of the Spirit and
avoiding all unkind usage thereof, that we may never be forsaken, or left
without the sweet consort and company of it. 2. We pray against solicitations
to sin either by the devil, world, or flesh, that satan may be chained up, and
not let loose against us, that the flesh may be nourished, and not continue so
rebellious in the evil motions thereof, and that we may avoid the outward
flattering objects in the world, and company of wicked men alluring unto sin.
Against which things, seeing that we pray, what mock gods are those, that are
careless of offering themselves into temptations, and prouocations to sin?
yea, delight so to do, by frequenting wicked company, and giving advantage to
Satan, whilst they please themselves in deceitefull objects of sin.

3. We pray against sin, even when we are most solicited, and tempted unto
it, because it cannot be, but we ust needs meet with temptations, as long as
we have eyes, and hearts, and ears in this world. We pray therefore, that
though we be tempted, yet we may not be overcome, and made slaves to sin, as
they are, which commit sin, according to the Apostle to the Romans; Romans 6.16.
He that commits a sin, is the servant of sin. To be preserved from
sin, use these remedies, with thy eyes ever behold God present, with thy
ears ever hear that terrible voice sounding, Arise ye dead, and come to
judgment, with thy hands be ever exercising that which is good, in thy heart,
ever hide the Word of God, and with thy feet stand in the courts of Gods house.

4. Against grievous afflictions long continuing to make us despair of Gods
mercy, or hearing our prayers: for these are the most forcible temptations in
the world, and therefore need of strong faith is there, still to trust in God,
and patiently to endure, that they may be turned of temptations to sin, into
purgations of sin, that grace may more abound through means of them. And
otherwise we do not pray against them, least we should be found such, as
would follow Christ, but whilst we resist the cross, rather go from him, then
take up the cross and follow him, as he has commanded.

5. We pray against sudden death, which is a great evil, and therefore
threatened against wicked worldlings, of whom David says; Psalm. 73.19.
How suddenly are they perished, destroyed, and horribly consumed: yet we do
not simply pray against sudden death, out of a carnal desire of licentiousnes,
but that we may have space to set our house in order, to testify our faith to
the comfort of the Church, and to repent of our renewed trespasses, into which
we daily fall, though we strive against them. The fiery Serpents in the
wilderness destroyed the Israelites suddenly, and so did the Angel suddenly
in one night destroy 185000. of the Assyrians, and all this was done in anger
for sin: likewise the men of Bethshemesh perished, and Vzzah, and the old
World, and Sodom, al being smitten in great indignation. On the contrary side,
it is a favor usually done to such, as fear God, to give them time at their
death, as to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Aaron, and to all, whose deaths are
described. Which I speak not as censuring those, that die suddenly, but those
that find fault with praying against this uncomfortable departure. For
whatsoever is ordinarily a sign of Gods anger, and barreth his ordinary
manifestation of his greatest love in this life is to be prayed against: but
such is sudden death, ergo, it is to be prayed against.

6. We pray against obduration, and hardening in sin, through a custom of
sinning, or through some notorious sins, for which the Lord usually gives men
over to sin, with a reprobate mind for a punishment, as he did the Gentiles,
of whom the Apostle testifies, Romans 1.24. Verse 26. Versse 28.
He gave them up to their own hearts lusts: and again, God gave them up for
this cause to vile affections: and again, God delivered them up to a reprobate
mind. We pray therefore, that of all punishments the Lord would not lay this
upon us, or turn us into Satan's hands, so that he should take us, and work
his cursed will in us at his pleasure, which is the very entrance of hell, and
most terrible to the soul enlightened, as experience shows. If any set light
by such a punishment, let him know, that he is blinded by the god of this
world, and led as the Aramites by Elisha, into the midst of devils in the
bottomless pit.

7. We pray against eternal death and damnation, the greatest evil of all
other, in regard of which, all torments here are but flea-bites, and to be
despised. We desire therefore, that whatsoever our deserts be, by reason of
sin, yet that the Lord would not punish us accordingly, but lay all the burden
of these too intolerable, upon the shoulders of our blessed Savior, who has
submitted himself unto death, and all possible humiliation of dolours and
terrors by the apprehension even of Gods heavy wrath and indignation for us,
that we might escape.

2. The supplication is for such things as are best for us, What we pray for.
preserving us from sin and damnation, the first whereof is the spirit of
grace, for which we have David's example, Psalm. 51.
Establish me with thy free spirit. This grace is threefold: First, light of
understanding of the holy Scriptures, whereby we are made able to use them, as
the sword of the spirit against our spiritual enemies. We pray therefore,
Ephesians. 6.17.
that when we are tempted, we may be able to handle this weapon as our Lord
did, cutting off the weapons used against for sin. 2. Stedfastnes of faith,
whereby as by a shield, the fiery darts of the Devil are repressed and kept
from hurting us, which also is of virtue to purify the heart.

3. Patience in bearing any cross or affliction, whereby we are tempted at
any time, that in stead of sin, the issue thereof may be hope, according to
that of Paul, Tribulation brings forth patience, Romans 5.3.
patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed; because
the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts.

2. We pray for the helping hand of the Lord, to turn evil into good unto us,
according to the experience of former times. Romans 8.28.
We know that all things work together for the best of those that love God,
that are called of his purpose. That in the midst of temptation we may have
the comfort of the Apostle, unto whom, praying against temptations, it was
answered; My grace is sufficient for thee, 2. Cor. 11.10.
for my power is made perfect through weakness For though we be tempted, and
evil be intended against us; yet the Lord, who can raise light out of
darkness, can turn this very evil into good unto us, whether it be
distraction of mind, sickness of body, privation of any member, or sin it
self. And this he does:

Evil turned into good, how.
First, by humiliation, and casting us down under, and for these things, as
Nebuchadnezzar the proudest, and Saul the bloudiest persecutor; yea, when
through the abundance of revelation he was ready to be exalted above
measure, he has a check hereby given unto him to keep him down.

Secondly, by alienating and estranging our affections from the world and
worldly things, whilst the Lord does hereby mingle wormwood and gall, as it
were, with them, even as nurses do toward their children to weane them from
the dugge.

Psalm. 119.71.
Thirdly, by framing to more careful obedience for the time to come, as David
acknowledges; It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn
thy statutes: even as scholars that have been beaten for their faults, or spent
their time passed negligently, are afterward the more careful and industrious.

1. Cor. 11 28.
Fourthly, evil is turned to our good by prevention, the Lord punishing us in
this world, that we may escape in the world to come, as the Apostle teaches
to the Corinthians.

3. We pray for everlasting life, that God for his mercies sake would bestow
this good of all goods upon us, in regard of which, all the things of this
world are but as a mess of pottage, as dross, and dung: Heb. 12 16. Phil. 3.8.
other things being common to the Reprobate, and to Gods peculiar people, this
is the right of the first borne; other things bringing a little joy with much
sorrow, this infinite joy, free from all sorrow: other things being temporal,
and momentary, this eternal and everlasting.

3. The thanksgiving is for Gods spirit of grace, making us in any measure to
resist sin, and purging us thereof, for the good arising to us by
temptations, for deliverance from the punishments by our sins deserved, and
for part given us in the inheritance immortal and most glorious. So that,
Lead us not into temptation, is as much as if more expresely the deprecation,
and to evil ensuing thereupon, the supplication, Give grace that we may not
be prevailed against, but have power to resist all temptations, and be finally
crowned with glory; the thanksgiving, thou have not led us into temptation, but
assured us of final deliverance from hell and death; blessed be thy name
therefore.

Quest. 130. Wherefore serves the Conclusion, For thine is the Kingdom, etc?

Answ. It is added as a reason of all the Petitions to strengthen our faith,
that God being both able and willing does grant all our requests made unto him
in the name of Christ, and therefore in the end we put to a note of confidence,
and say, Amen.

Explan. Here we have also to be observed the order, the sense, and the scope
of this conclusion.

1. For the order, it follows all the Petitions, and contains a kind of
promise to give glory to God, and to be thankful, our requests being granted;
whence we learn, that it is necessary to observe the Lords dealing toward
us, when we have called upon his name, how graciously he hears and helps
us, that out of a special apprehension of his former mercies, we may build
assured confidence of future, and be duly thankful to his holy name. Thus
David kept a Register of the Lords dealing toward him, and is confident
against the Giant Goliath, and for thankfulness it is required as much as
prayer. Psalm. 50.14.
Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear and deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me: thou shall remember this as thy duty, having received
deliverance, to note it, and to be thankful. Pray continually and in all
things give thanks: thus did Moses, 1. These. 5.17.
Deborah, Barak, Samson, and all the faithful. The not observing of Gods
mercies granted at our request, blunts the edge of our zeal this way, and
causes, that the Lord has none but a formal thanksgiving at our hands, which
is abominable: it makes us without confidence and feruency, triuiall and idle
in our prayers, even as an idiote or senseles man, that has not reason to
know, note, and acknowledge his benefactors, and such as do for him.

2. For the sense of the words. Thine is the Kingdom, that is both general
over the world, and special over the Church and chosen, neither is there any
kingdom, but is ruled by thee, as by the supreme constitutor, and appointer
thereof, and in this faith do we pray unto thee, submitting our selves, as thy
subjects and liege people. The power; that is, the Almighty power, whereby thou
art able to do all things whatsoever thy people ask and beg of thee, there is
nothing out of thy power, neither life nor death, things present, nor things to
come, no power can withstand thee, either of men or Devils, but thou art able
to do for us, mauger them all; we are without all power and might in our
selves to help our selves, we know not what to do, but our eyes wait upon
thee. And the glory: that is, thou do so moderate thy Kingdom and power,
doing good to all thy people, that thou art the most glorious King, and most
excellent, not strange to thy subjects suing unto thee, but loving and ready to
accept of them, and to grant their suites, thou shall make thy glory to shine
more and more by being beneficial unto us, thy faith and religion shall be
more esteemed and reverenced, and this will be the end of all that thou do
for us, thine eternal praise; yea, we give thee glory in confidence of thy
goodness, and promise due thankfulness, and intend this in our desires above
all things.

Amen: we verily believe that it shall be so, and again, with all feruency
beg, O Lord let it be so; wherefore let us not be deceived of our hope, but
do thou subscribe to our desires, and say, So be it.

3. For the scope, The reasons c^ntained in the conclusion.
it contains sundry most strong reasons for the propping of our faith and
assurance in our prayers.

2 Samuel 24.
First, from the Kingdom of God. A good King, loving and kind to his subjects,
is easy to be entreated of them, and is delighted with their life and welfare:
but thou art the best King of all; we thy subjects who do crave nothing but
things needful for us, and tending to our welfare: therefore thou will be
entreated. And the strength of the reason lies in the first part, that a good
King tendreth the good of his people, which we shall find to be true in all
good Kings and Rulers, in David, who desired, when the plague raged amongst his
people. Let thy hand, Lord, be against me, and against my fathers house,
these sheep what have they done? And in Samuel, being unkindly rejected by the
people; yet being in their danger, desired to pray for them: God forbid, says
he, 1. Sam. 12.
that I should sin against the Lord, and cease praying for you. Yea, some
Heathen Kings have excelled herein, as Vespasian, who was so delighted in doing
good unto his people, as that if he had let slip any day, without doing some
special good for some man he would say, O socii, per didimus diem, O fellows,
we have lost a day. This disposition therefore to do good, must needs be
much more in the best King of Kings at all times.

Secondly, from the power of God we have this reason. A King that wants no
power to do good unto his subjects, if he be good, will assuredly do for them
in all their necessities: but thou, O Lord, art such a powerful King, nothing
can hinder, or resist thy good pleasure. Therefore thou will do these things
for us. Every part of this reason is evident, for nothing but ability can
hinder a merciful Lord from doing for his humble servants, he being Parens
patriae, the father of the country, Matthew. 6.
and a father, being so ready as the Lord shows to do good unto his children
when they ask of him: and as for this King, his power is infinite, he does
whatsoever it pleases him in heaven and earth; he is all-sufficient to defend
Abraham in strange countries, Jacob in Padam Aram, David in the wilderness,
and Jonah in the whales belly: wherefore we may build assured confidence of his
mercy.

Psalm 19.
Thirdly, from the glory of God we have this reason. He that being a great King
regarding his glory above al things, will readily do whatsoever may redound to
his honor and glory: but thou (O God) art thus regardfull of thy glory, it
being above all things tendered by thee: therefore we doubt not but thou will
grant these things, of which thou shall have so much glory. The strength of
this reason lies in the second part, that God does principally regard his
glory, and that by granting our requests, he shall have glory. The first is
plain, both by the most excellent works of creation, redemption etc. which
serve to manifest his glory, according to that of the Psalmist. The heavens
declare the glory of God, etc. and according to that of the Apostle, who
speaking of Predestination and redemption, Ephesians. 1.6.
says, that it was, to the praise of the glory of his grace. And it is plain
also by his dealings, honoring such as honor him, and bringing down such as
take honor to themselves, that he only may be exalted in that day. Again,
that God has glory by granting our requests, appears; for that our first and
chief request is, that God may be glorified, and our desire is, by being
heard in all our requests, to have matter of praising and magnifying his holy
name.

Fourthly, from the eternity of these things, for ever and ever, we may reason
thus. A most glorious and excellent King, out of whose power nothing is, who
remains such for ever, is ever alike graciously disposed to his subjects: but
God is a most glorious King and powerful for ever, in all times and ages
alike, and has heretofore heard the requests of such as faithfully have called
upon his name: therefore he is still likewise ready to do for us, granting all
our petitions. The first part of this reason is plain, because that he to whom
no change is incident, the case being always alike, cannot be changeable in
his grace and favor. The second part is also evident, for God is he Revel.
1.8. Heb. 13.8.
which is, which was, and which is to come; yea Jesus Christ is the same
yesterday and to day, and for ever.

Now for his grace in times past, and readiness to hear the prayers of such as
have faithfully called upon him, no age has been without large testimony.
Jacob prayed in his distress, and was heard, so that of a man naked and
destitute, he was made rich, and had great droues of cattle. Iehosaphat
prayed, and had victory over his enemies, when he knew not what to do; sundry
diseased, possessed and blind persons both in body and soul prayed, and were
healed, and had their sins pardoned, wherefore we need not to doubt, but
that we also are heard in our desires.

Fifthly, from our confidence, expressed in the last word Amen, we may reason
thus. The Lord will grant unto us, whatsoever we believe shall be granted, when
we ask: but we believe when we ask these Petitions; for we say Amen in heart,
verily we are persuaded that it shall be so; therefore they are granted.

Mark 9.23.
The first part of this reason, it is the saying of our Lord, Whatsoever ye
ask if ye believe, it shall be done unto you: for the second, if we
dissemble not, but have our heart going with our tongue, we do believe, and
therefore are the more confident to speed of our desires.

But more especially of these reasons, The first has reference to the second
Petition, the second to the third, the third to the first, the fourth to the
fourth and fifth, the fifth to the last Petition. From hence arise these two
conclusions.

First, that they which learn aright to pray are most happy and blessed, they
build good speed and success in all their designs upon the surest foundation
in the world, the Kingdom, power, glory, eternity and fidelity of the Lord:
and therefore, as these shall not fail, so shall not their labors in prayer
and supplication. In any attempt without this there is none assurance; the
builder, watchman, seeds-man, build, watch, and cast seed upon the ground in
vain, in vain are barnes pulled down, and made greater, and fruits and goods
heaped up without profit, only he that makes faithful prayers does it not in
vain. Let every man then apply himself to this exercise, and learn to do it
aright, by the perusing and due consideration of these, and the like
meditations.

Secondly, as the first beginning of all things is from God, so their end also
is in him, to set forth his Kingdom, power, and glory for ever, and therefore
it shall be our wisdom in all things always to respect God, to come to him,
to walk with him, as Enoch did; and with David say in all things, Not unto us
O Lord, not unto us* but unto thy name we give the glory. If we aim at any
other thing, we shall be disappointed, if we go from God, and have not him in
our ways, whither we will or not, we shall be brought unto him; hills and
mountains laid upon us, shall not cover us, but we must inpure his angry
presence, and as from a most severe Judge receive our just doom: Go ye
cursed into hell fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, and even by this
will he have glory.

Of the Sacraments.
Quest. 131. THe benefits being showed, which we are to crave at Gods hands by
Prayer, what further means have we for the better assuring to our souls the
promises of all spiritual blessings in Christ?

Answ. The Sacraments of the new Testament, which are the pledges of the
Covenant between God and his people.

Explan. In prayer there being implied our wants and desires, and the temporal
and spiritual benefits mentioned, which we are in faith and feruency, to
beg at the hand of our heavenly father; in the next place, it is a great
comfort to consider, how God has condescended to our weakness, in affording
a kind of palpable object to the hand of our faith by outward elements, making
a sensible assurance of those most spiritual graces and dignities, which by
prayer we shoot at, as at a mark set a far off, and more insensibly and
abstractly perceived. Prayer indeed gives wings to the soul, and makes it
mount up to heaven, and there converse, as in a glorious City, but not so
known and familiar to us by native acquaintance: but the Sacraments bring
heaven down to us here on earth, and represent unto us more domestically
spiritual graces, clothed in tractable elements. In prayer we see God, yet at
a distance, and through the prospectiue glass of faith: but in the Sacraments
we handle him, as it were immediately, yet so, that our outward senses tarry
not at home, as dull scholars in the school of nature only, but travel up to
the highest mount of spiritual meditation, and therein the language of faith
(the true Teach-man of the Christian soul) have enter-course with that, which
natural elements cannot reach unto, but as they are elevated by supernatural
signification. O the unspeakable goodness of our God, who vouchsafes thus to
draw us to him by the cords of man, and to stoop down to us in conversation,
and communicating himself under the habit of external Sacraments. It was not
enough for him to make a covenant with the soul of man upon spiritual
conditions, but he would also give our bodily senses a part to act, and an
object to work upon. The blessed and blessing Covenant of grace made with us
in the Charter of the Gospel, has the broad seal of Heaven set unto it, for
the more sensible confirmation. As the Counselors and Governors of Darius his
Kingdom, Dan. 6.
desired the King to seal the writing, being assured that so it should be
firm and unchangeable: so the Christian soul having obtained this mercy to
have the promise of grace made in the Word, sealed by the Sacraments, is more
ascertained, that it shall remain unchangeable, as the laws of the Medes and
Persians, that altar not.

Quest. How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church?

Answ. Two only, as generally necessary to salvation, that is to say, Baptism
and the Supper of the Lord.

Explan. Having supplied some questions, and answers betwixt the Lords prayer
and the Sacraments, which may serve as an introduction to the Sacraments, it
remains now to proceed to the handling of the Sacraments, according to the
pattern of the Catechism propounded, first, in general, touching the number
and nature of Sacraments, then in special and particular of either of them.

The Papists make seven Sacraments, Baptism, the Eucharist, Penance,
Ordination, Matrimony, Confirmation, and Extreme Unction. Their reasons are
chiefly, because in Ierom s translation, some of these are styled Sacram^nta,
and because seven is a sacred number, both in the old and new Testament; there
are seven Angels, seven Trumpets, seven Vials, seven Thunders, etc. Therefore
say they, there are seven Sacraments.

August sermon. de sanct. 19. Ieron. ad occanum.
But how weak a reasoning this is, who sees not? for, admit that so many things
as are named Sacraments, are Sacraments indeed; and then we shall have not seven
only, but seventeen Sacraments, seeing so many things more are called
Sacraments. Tertullian calls the helm, wherewith Elishah recovered the axe
out of the water, Sacramentum ligni, The Sacrament of the wood; the whole state
of the Christian faith, he calls, The Sacrament of the Christian Religion.
Augustine has in many places, Sacramentum Crucis, The Sacrament of the Cross.
Jerome calls martyrdom a Sacrament, etc. Wherefore all Sacraments by the
ancients so called, are not properly Sacraments, but some signifying, or
memorable mysteries, Sacraments, of which there be many.

Again, for the number of seven Angels, etc It is too childish to be insisted
upon, as a ground of proof. I intend not here to handle at large the
controversies concerning the number, forms, and power of the Sacraments, I
will only for the confining the number of them, set down the conditions
requirable in a Sacrament of the new Testament properly so called. It must
have, first, for the original cause, Christ instituting: secondly, for the
matter and form a visible sign or element, and audible form of words. So
Saint Augustine; ^^^ced et verbum ad elementum and fit sacramentum where is to
be understood, that, as this word, so also this outward element, and kind of
action must be prescribed by God, not invented by man. Thirdly, for the end and
benefit of it, it is a seal of saving graces. And lastly, for the extent of
it, it must be common and necessary to all Christians, of what degree soever at
one time or other. Now of the five latter reckoned by the Church of Rome for
Sacraments, Matrimony has none of all these conditions. It is Gods ordinance
but in, and by nature, not grace: Christ prescribed no visible sign, or
formal words for it, nor made it a seal of righteousness, nor imposed it upon
all, but only in danger of incontinency. Penance has no elementary sign or
form of words prescribed by our Savior. Confirmation has no set prescript of
words: so likewise Extreme unction, which also was but temporary. As for
Ordination to the Ministry, we find in the new Testament both institution and
express form of a sacred Ceremonious action and words, with necessary
perpetuity in the Church to the worlds end. In which respects it does well be
seem the name of a Sacrament; and so is it styled by judicious Calvin:
Jmpositio manuum, Call ^nstit. li. 4. cap. 19. sec. 31.
quam in veris legitimisque ordinationibus Sacramentum esse con^edo. I grant
Imposition of hands in true and due ordinations to be a Sacrament. But when we
define a Sacrament strictly, and confine it to the conditions aboue-said, we
exclude this, as being not universal, but peculiar to one estate of men. So
also Calvin: Instit. lib 4. cap. 14 sect 20.
As I mislike not that imposition of hands should be called a Sacrament, so I
do not account it among the ordinary sacraments: that is (as he expounds
himself there) among those quae in vsum totius Ecclesiae sunt instituta,
appointed to be used by every member of the Christian Church.

For these and other such causes, the ancientest and most learned of the
Fathers of the Church acknowledged two only Sacraments. Cyprian says, Tunc
demum plane sanctificari and esse filii Dei possunt, Ciprian. lib 2. Epist 2.
ad Stephan.

Alex. Hal. Par. 4 Qu. 24.
Aug. de doct. Christ. lib 3. cap. 9.


si vtroque sacramento naseantur. Then may men be thoroughly sanctified, and
become the sons of God, if they be borne again of both the Sacraments.
Augustine says, Quaedam pauca pro multis, eademque factu facillima intellectis
augustissima, and obseruatione castissima, dominus and Apostolica tradidit
disciplina sicut est baptismi sacramentum, and celebratio corporis, and
sanguinis Domini: The Lord and the doctrine of the Apostles have delivered some
few things instead of many, and those most easy to be done, most divine to be
understood, most pure in observation, to wit, the sacrament of Baptism, and of
the body and blood of the Lord. The like has Justin Martyr, Tertullian,
Ambrose, Cyril, Alexandrinus, and some School Doctors: For Alexander Hales
says, that the Sacrament of Confirmation neither did the Lord institute, nor
the Apostles, but it was afterward instituted in the Council of Melda. And
Durandus says, that Matrimony, to speak strictly, and properly, is no
Sacrament.

John 3.5.
I conclude then, that the Doctrine of our Church is true, There be two
Sacraments of the new Testament only, generally necessary to salvation that
is, for all people of what condition soever, which desire to be saved. For we
do not with the Church of Rome, hold for Sacraments, properly so called, those
rites and institutions which are pecular to some kind of people only, as
aforesaid: but that these only are properly Sacraments which do generally
belong to all, and also without which there is (now under the Gospel, no
salvation ordinarily to be attained. Even as the Lord himself has taught,
saying, Unless a man be borne again of water, and of the holy Ghost, he shall
never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Yet we do not teach them so
absolutely and simply necessary, as that without them, it is absolutely
altogether impossible to be saved: for God is above al his ordinances, and he
can save without means of Sacraments, as well as he preserved Israel in the
Wilderness without bread, nay, saved them without the Sacrament of
Circumcision. Therefore, in setting down that rule by all to be followed unto
salvation, He that belieueth and is baptized, shall be saved and he that will
not believe, Mark 16.16.
shall be damned: he says not, he that is not baptized, shall be damned: for
sometimes a man may necessarily be prevented by death, as many infants are, and
sometime through the delay of Parents without any fault on their part, for
which God forbid that we should judge them out of the case of salvation. It is
indeed a sinful neglect in Parents, (considering this to be the only
ordinary way to salvation) to hazard their children of the deprivation hereof,
and therefore well is it provided, that all careful diligence should be used
about it, especially where there appears to be danger of death in the
child, and I doubt not but all good Christian people that submit themselves to
go the ordinary way to heaven which God has appointed, will use this
diligence, as for others that will find out a new way, God be merciful unto
them. Now these two Sacraments are baptism and the Supper of the Lord,
baptism to regenerate and breed a new life, the Lords Supper to strengthen,
and to maintain it.

Quest. What meanest thou by this word Sacrament?

Answ. I mean an outward visible sign of an inward, and spiritual grace
given unto us, ordained by Christ, as a means whereby we receive the same, and
as a pledge to assure us thereof,

Explan. After the number of Sacraments, about which there is most
controversy, the definition of a Sacrament follows, setting forth the nature
of it. It is an outward visible sign, etc. This is common to all Sacraments,
to Circumcision, the Passover, and to such as in more large sense are called
Sacraments, as to Marriage and all Legal Ceremonies, the brazen Serpent, the
Rock flowing out waters, and the red Sea divided, for in them all is the
outward sign, and an inward invisible grace set forth hereby.

Secondly, Ordained by Christ, this is the difference betwixt all other
Sacraments and these of the new Testament, some were ordained by the mediation
of men, as all the Sacraments that were in the Church under the Law, some for
other uses ordained, and great graces under them signified, as Matrimony, the
anointing of the sick for a time; and some were ordained Sacraments by
Christ, purposely to signify and confirm the maine grace unto us, and these
are Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.

Thirdly, As a means whereby we receive the same, etc. These are ends of the
Sacraments, they are a means to convey grace unto the power of Gods ordinance,
we not only hearing with the ear, the powerful and comfortable word of God
preached, but also more nearly seeing, and more palpably feeling, and tasting
in these signs the sweetness of Gods grace to our comfort, every outward
sense being a mean to convey the outward object to the inward understanding,
and every thing being done that is requisite to make a perfect covenant
between God and us. Even as a bargain of sale of any possession being made
betwixt one man and another, if the covenants be not only drawn, but also
sealed and delivered before witnesses, is a perfect bargain, and the
conueyance of the estate is fully made; so is it in the word and Sacraments for
grace and the state of glory to come, by sealing and delivering, it is fully
conveyed unto us in the Sacraments, the covenants being before drawn in the
Word.

R^th. 4.
And thus the Sacraments are both a means to receive grace, and a pledge to
assure us hereof: as he which of old did draw off his shoe and give it unto
his neighbor, did hereby assure him of his inheritance, and as in all ages,
he which gives a pledge of special note to his neighbor, does hereby assure
him of the thing promised; so the Lord, by giving unto us the outward signs of
the Sacraments, does as it were by pledges, make us sure of his grace, we
being no intruders, but such as he does offer them unto, of which we shall
speak afterward

Quest. How many parts be there of a Sacrament?

Answ. Two, the outward visible sign, and the inward spiritual grace.

Explan. This may be gathered from the definition of a Sacrament, and is
inserted here to make way unto the particular consideration of each Sacrament,
which are known only then when we know their parts, the outward sign by
Christ ordained, and the inward grace signified; for, put any other than the
right outward sign (out of the case of necessiity) and it is no right
Sacrament of Christ; for wine, put water, and the Sacrament is marred; for
water, put an hot iron, or sand, as some Heretics have done, or unto it
cream, honey, oil and spittle, as the Popish Priests do, and the Sacrament
is clogged and embased with the admixture of dross. But if any such corruption
be, the person being faithful that receives the Sacrament, and ignorant how
the wine is mixed, or in his infancy how the water has been blended, it
shall stand in force unto him, if the right form of the institution has been
used, in baptism, in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; in the
Lords Supper. Take, eat, this is my body, etc. because it it is Gods pledge,
though some things be over added.

Again, make a change of the outward sign into the inward grace, and it
cease to be a Sacrament, as by that doctrine of Transubstantiation in the
Lords Supper: for if the sign be changed into the thing signified, that is a
Sacrament no more than an Angel in gold is a pledge for the payment of an
Angel.

Quest. What is the outward sign in Baptism?

Answ. Water, wherein the party baptized is dipped or sprinkled, with in the
name of the Father, of the son, and of the holy Ghost.

Math. 3.13.
Explan. After the general consideration of the Sacraments, follows the
special of either Sacrament apart. And first of Baptism, and of the first
part, which is the outward The outward part of Baptism is water, which ought
to be pure and clean, fittest to wash the body from all filthiness; for
which cause John the Baptist baptized in the river of Jordan, and unto his
Baptism Christ himself came thither. Neither was this any thing rashly and
unadvisedly taken up, but long before mistically appointed by the Lord: If any
uncleanness had come unto a man by touching the dead, by the leprosy, etc.
they were commanded to wash in pure water, and so were judged clean.

1 Cor. 10. 2 King. 5.
All the Israelites are said to have been baptized in the sea. Naaman the
leprous Syrian was bidden to go and wash in Jordan, and be clean. A blind
man was bidden by Christ to go and wash in the poole of Siloam, and recovered
sight.

All which things serve to set forth the natural faculty, and honorable
antiquity of water, being used to cleanse from filthiness; and the like is not
to be found of any thing else for this purpose. Which serves to confute the
error of them that have presumed to use some other outward sign in Baptism,
as of one Seleucus and Hermias Galatians, of whom Augustine speaks out of
Philaster, that they would baptize with branding with an hot Iron, abusing that
place of Christ, Ye shall be baptized with the holy Ghost, and with fire.

2. Wherein the party baptized is dipped or sprinkled with it: For of old they
were wont in hot countries to dip the party to be baptized, being all naked
into the water., and so he was washed all over, and thus did John baptize,
making choice for this purpose of the river Jordan: but in colder Countries,
experience teaching how dangerous it is for Infants to be diued into the cold
water in winter time, sprinkling water upon the face has been used, part of
the body being thus washed for the whole, and yet no presumption can be noted
herein, for differing from the first ordination.

First, because it is dangerous to weak Infants to do otherwise, which the
Lord would have to be avoided, saying, I will have mercy and not Sacrifice,
that is, when the observing of any ordinance of mine in the strictness, is
against the good of my Creature, and to the indangering thereof, I would
rather, that regard should be had to the good of the Creature, then to this
strictness.

Ios. 1.
For this cause Circumcision commanded to be the eighth day, was deferred whilst
the people of Israel were traveling in the wilderness forty years, and
though upon the Saboth, Math. 12
a rest from working was required, yet works of necessity for the safeguard of
man and beast were allowed.

Secondly, the virtue of the Sacrament is not measured by the quantity or
universal transfusion of the outward sign, which our Savior teaches, when
unto Peter, desiring to be washed, hands, and head, and all parts, he
answers, Ioh. 13 10.
He that is washed, needs not saving to wash his feet only, but is clean
every whit. In which words howsoever he also teaches another thing; yet
withal, he corrects it as an error to think it more auailable simply to be
washed all over, than on one part of the body only. Some have used to dippe
the party to be baptized thrice in the water, in remembrance of the three days
wherein Christ lay in the grave, and for this threefold immersion have stood
both Tertullian and Ciprian: but because no such itteration of baptizing is
commanded in the institution, we have it but single.

3. In the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: for
according to these words the ministers of the Gospel are to baptize, this
being their charge, Math. 28.19.
Go teach all nations baptizing them in the name of the Father, of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost so that to add or to take away from this form of words
is cursed presumption, as being adding or taking away from Gods strict and
express word. From whence we may g^ther how presumptuous those Roman
Catholics are that say, that the name of our Lady may also be added in
baptism, as Dionysius a Carthusian, Theophronius and Eutychius have been
reported to use this form of baptizing, I baptize thee into the death of Jesus
Christ, no mention being made of the Farher, Son or holy Ghost. Eusebius. lib. 4.
cap. 11. Hist.
And Valentinus an Heretic of old, to have baptized in the name of the
unknown God, and of the truth, the mother of all.

Now such baptismes are no baptismes, and those that were out of the right
form baptized, had need to be baptized again: but according to the right
form, he that is once baptized ought not to be baptized again, whatsoever the
person baptizing be, or whatsoever sin the party baptized has since fallen
into. And the reason is, because Baptism is a sign of regeneration, or the
new birth, which can be but once unto one man: seeing that a man being once
born cannot enter into his mothers womb, and be borne again. This prepostrously
applied made some of the Ancients, though erroniously to defer their
Baptism, fearing that if after Baptism, they should be overtaken with sin,
they could not be forgiven, because that in Baptism only there is remission
of sins, which may not in any case be again iterated. Whereas in truth,
though the act of baptising be transient and but once performed, yet the power
and comfort of it diffuseth it self through all our life, and is renewed and
reapplyed by repentance after grievous lapses of the faithful.

Quest. What is the inward or spiritual grace?

Answ. A death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness, for being by
nature borne in sin, and the children of wrath, we are hereby made the
children of grace.

Explan. That Baptism may be perfect, there must not only be the outward
part, water, and the form of words used; but the inward part also
mortification and dying of sin, and regeneration and living of
righteousness, The outward alone is no more available, than the rock flowing
waters in the wilderness, to save the rebellious people from perishing, before
that they came in Canaan; then Elishas staff to revive the Shunamites child,
when he himself was absent.

1 Pet. 3.21.
Unto true Baptism therefore must concur a death unto sin, in him that is
dipped, and a new birth unto righteousness, otherwise his baptism is vain,
even as it had been in vain for Noah, when he had built the Arc, not to have
entered into it in time: for unto this answers, Saint Peter, Baptism, the
figure that now is, when it is not the washing away of the filth of the flesh,
but the stipulation of a good conscience. For let a man be never so rightly
baptized, yet if he be not borne again, says our Savior Christ, that is, if
sin be not killed in him, that grace may live, he shall never enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

The death unto sin is signified by the dipping or sprinckling with water, it
being necessary* that as by water the filthiness of the flesh is washed and done
away, so by the virtue of Christ's blood, the filthiness of the soul should be
washed away: and it should be purged from sin; and that as he which comes
to washing disliketh and accompteth that filthiness which is to be washed, and
not any part of his body growing to him: so should he that is baptized, account
his sins filthiness, and dead and no living part of his soul: and that as
he which is washed, enters into the water and is covered therewith, that he
may be made clean; so he that is baptized, should enter into the grave with
sin, and be buried, that as dead bodies, his sins may decay, and be abolished
more and more.

The new birth unto righteousness is signified, by the taking up out of the
water, the soul being lifted up out of the puddle of sin, and cleansed
herefrom, becoming a pure and new soul, as it were, in the understanding, the
will, the affections, and in all the desires and thoughts; even as a child
being newborn into the world, and cleansed from that corruption which he
brings with him, is as it were a new creature, and cries after the means of
sustentation of his new life.

Again, it is signified by his taking into the congregation of Christians, he
now conuersing, laboring, and in all things and duties of holiness suting
himself unto them; even as the leaprous person being made clean comes to
live again in the congregation, from which he was before separated.

Jn the name of the Father, etc. whose faithful servant and soldiour he is
thus admitted to be, he was before the slave of sin, and servant of the Devil;
but he has now changed for a new service of him, into whose name he has
been baptized. Wherefore he whosoever he be, that after baptizing,
commits sin, is liable, notwithstanding his baptism, to damnation.



Baptism, as it is an act done by the batizer, without any any relation to the
disposition of the person to be baptized, beng of ripe years and
understanding, has no force to salvation, by virtue of Christ's ordination, but
if that person be by faith within the covenant of grace, then it does convey
grace unto him.

Luke 3.7.
This is plain from the Doctrine of John Baptist, who reproved those that came
to his baptism, without repentance and inward sanctification, whereby it might
become effectual to save them from the wrath to come. For had the very work
wrought been auailable, John had been worthy of blame for such a censure and
sharp reproof of them, calling them a generation of Vipers, whereby they
might thus be discouraged, whereas otherwise, by coming and being baptized,
they should have received grace, and been saved, notwithstanding their
impieties and hypocrisy.

It is not therefore the act done that prevails, but the right disposition of
the person Baptized, neither shall this Sacrament become thus an idle ceremony,
but an excellent and effectual institution to purge and confirm the faithful.

Wherefore, let us renounce that opinion that holds the Sacrament of
Baptism, by the very act of administration, of such virtue, as that original
sin remains not any longer in such as are baptized.

True it is that where Baptism is perfect, and unto the outward is joined the
inward part, the sting of sin is plucked out, both in regard of the guilt and
of the punishment: but for the utter abolition of sin, this is not till
death, though the power thereof be broken so, as that it reigns not in us, it
remaining still as a rebellious head to exercise us to the last gasp,

Quest. What is required in persons to be Baptized?

Answ. Repentance, whereby they forsake sin, and faith, to believe the
promise made unto them in this Sacrament.

Explan. Having considered Baptism both in the outward and inward part, it
remains that we show the virtues necessarily required in every man, that his
Baptism may be complete, and that this Sacrament may not be abused to the
indangering of the soul, but rightly used, to the salvation thereof. Now to
this end there must be repentance and Faith: Repentance is here briefly said to
be a forsaking of sin, as wherein the chief power thereof consists,
according to the description hereof made by John the Baptist, who having
exhorted those that come to his Baptism, to Repentance, upon enquiry made by
them, what then they should do, answers to the people, He that has two
coats, let him part with him that has none: Luk 3.10.11.12. etc.
To the Publicans, Require no more then that which is appointed unto you: And
to the Soldiers, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any man falsely, and be
content with your wages; which is in effect, forsake your special sins,
uncharitableness, extortion, violence and mutening.

Quest. 132. Wherein stands true Repenrance?

Answ. In three things: 1. In a knowledge and acknowledgment of our sins
past: 2. In godly sorrow, and grief of heart for them: 3. In a constant
purpose to forsake all sin, and to lead a new life for all time to come.

Explan. Repentance is a word both in English, Latin, and Greek of that
signification that it implies, a new course begun upon a better
after-consideration, and it is set forth by every one of these three things in
the Scriptu^es.

1. It is an acknowledgement of sin: for, He that confesses and forsakes
his sins, shall have mercy. Prou. 28.13.
And when the Prophet would teach the people a right form of repentance, he
teaches them to say thus, We lie down in our confusion, Ier. 3 25.
and our shame covers us; for we have sinned against the Lord our God, we and
our Fathers from our youth up, even unto this day, etc. Now that there may be
this acknowledgemet, there must needs be a knowledge and consideration had of
sin, seeing no man will confess as a loathsome burden what he knows not,
and finds not to be dangerous being concealed and hidden, as sin is, when
it is not confessed. The Prodigal son would never have come to confess unto
his Father, Father I have sinned against heaven and against thee, unless he
had first had a sense of his misery: neither will the blind and ignorant
person (that sees not by the glass of the Law his foul sins and misery, by
reason of the curse due to him therefore, come to confess them to God the
Father.

2. Repentance is godly sorrow for sin, such as was in David, Psalm. 51.17.
who bewailing his sins, says, The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit:
a contrite and a broken heart (O God) thou will not despise. Math. ^4.
Wherefore, Blessed are they that mourn (says the Lord) for they shall be
comforted, that is, They that truly repent them of their sins, weeping and
mourning for them, according to the direction given by Joel, Joel 2.12.
Turn you unto me with all your heart, with fasting, with weeping, and with
mourning. He that mourns not for his sins, makes his repentance the labor
of his lips, when he confesses them, and so does add unto his sins
abomination, in stead of taking the right way for their expiation: Whereas
godly sorrow is said to cause repentance and so seems to be no par thereof,
it is to be understood, that repentance is there more strictly taken for the
forsaking of sin, as appears by the description of it, following; 2 Cor.
7.11.
For behold this thing that ye have been godly sorry, what care it has
wrought in you, what clearing of your selves, what indignation, what fear, how
great desire, what zeal, what punishment: that is, how penitent it has made
you is manifest by your care to forsake sin, your fear of falling again,
your clearing and purging of your hearts from sin, etc.

3. And thus we are come to that which is thirdly called repentance the
forsaking of all sin, and leading a new life And every one of these may well
be said to be repentance, because they are so necessarily linked unto one
another, as that by whom the one is rightly performed, the other are performed
also. He that forsakes his sins, must needs first have a knowledge of his
horrible estate by sin, be stricken with sorrow, and humbly come unto God to
confess and crave pardon; otherwise his heart will tell him, that it avails
little to depart from sin for the time to come.

Again, he that sees how odious his sins are, and confesses them, must
needs have grief of heart therefore, and he knows that all this will little
avail, if with the dog he shall reeturne to his vomit, and with the swine to
the wallowing in the mire. If it be said, Cain repented then, and Ahab, and
Judas, seeing they confessed, or sorrowed out of the sight of their sins: I
answer, it is true, they repented indeed in some sort, but they erred in that
the fear of punishment, and the sight of fearful judgments hanging over
their heads caused this sorrow and confession in them; whereas in such as are
true penitents, confession and sorrow arises from the sight of the duty which
we ought to have done, and of the many bonds of Gods favor toward us,
whereby we were bound to have done it, all which notwithstanding we have
neglected it, and have done the contrary, thus requiting our good Lord evil
for good, cleaving to sin and Satan, his and our utter enemies, when he has
dealt so bountifully with us, that we should follow and serve him. For the
sorrow and confeision that ariueth from hence are never ended in desperation,
but in reformation and amendment of life, that our gracious Lord may not be
offended any more.

Acts 2.37. Acts 16.3^.
Now that this repentance is necessary, that our baptism may become effectual,
is plain from the teaching of John the first baptizer as has been already
showed, and from the practice of the Christian Church of God, when the Gospel
began first to be preached abroad in the world. Peter exhorts not to
Baptism, until that they were pricked in their hearts, and cried out, Men and
brethren, what shall we do? And the Iaylor first trembled, and asked, Sirs,
what must I do to be saved? before that he was baptized. And it were indeed a
prepostrous course, for a man of years and understanding, to be baptized
before repentance, as before covenants made for a master to give his
cognizance, to retain any into his service, or to seal him a lease or grant
of any thing, before some duty or service done. For Baptism is Gods
cognizance, and without repentance there are no covenants made: It is Gods
seal set to the greatest grant in the world, but without all service or duty,
where repentance is wanting.

Wherefore repentance is necessary in all such as would have their baptism
effectual to confirm Gods mercy unto them: and there must be a general
turning from sin in these that come to be baptized, so after baptism there
is a daily practice of repentance by confession, contrition and reformation.
For even after Baptism we are still subject to sin, though we strive and
fight against sin, daily the flesh leading us captive to the law of sin: to
be delivered from which, we must make a daily practice of Repentance, but the
seal of Baptism is no more to be iterated. Even as a servant being once bored
through the ear by his Master, without iterating this, remained his servant
for ever; but if he offended, was chastised and reformed often: so he that is
once truly baptized, remains Gods servant for ever; but because he does
often offend, he must be chastized and reformed by Repentance.

Quest. 135. What is Faith.

Ans. It is a certain persuasion of the heart, wrought by the spirit of God,
grounded upon his promises, that all my sins are forgiven me in Christ Jesus.

Heb. 11.1.
Explan, Having spoken of Repentance, one thing necessarily required, that
Baptism may be complete, it remains that we speak now of Faith, which is
alike required. This I say, is a certain persuasion for the assurance, that
they have, which are faithful, unto whom Faith is an evidence in their hands,
as Saint Paul calls it. Faith is the ground of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen. It is a certain knowledge, whereby a man knows
that he has any thing which is made most sure unto him: for which cause it is
also commonly called knowledge, Esa 53.11. Ioh. 17. 1 John 23.
By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many. And, this is life
eternal to know thee, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. And again,
Hereby we are sure that we know him, if we keep his Commandments. It is
such a certainty, as that it makes things to come present, according to that,
Romans 8 30. John. 6.47.
Those whom he has justified, he has glorified: And he that believes in me,
has everlasting life. Wherefore Faith expels doubting and uncertainty, in
whomsoever it is: for which cause when Peter doubted, he is checked, as having
little or no Faith, Why did thou doubt, O thou of little Faith.

Romans 10.14, Ephesians. 3.17.
The heart is the proper seat of Faith; for, with the heart man believes unto
justification: and Christ is said to dwell in the heart by faith. If it be
therefore but an imagination of the brain, or an outward profession of faith
in word, it is but a shadow and no true grace of faith, wrought by the spirit
of God; for it is supernatural and divine, not flesh and blood, but the spirit
of God is the author of it, according to that of Christ unto Peter, Flesh and
blood has not revealed it unto thee, Math. 1^.6.
but my Father which is in heaven, viz by his spirit. Of Lydia converted to the
faith, it is said, Her heart the Lord opened, Act. 16.14.
that she attended unto the things that Paul spoke. To the same tends that
speech of our Savior Christ. John 6. Ioh. 3.
No man comes unto me unless the Father draw him; and the wind blows
where it lists, so is every man that is borne of the spirit, etc. ground on
upon his promises. For, as without a word of institution there is no Sacrament,
so without a word of promise, there is no faith.

John 6.40.
And as faith is not without a promise, so it is not without a promise made unto
me, viz. fulfilling the condition with which every promise of God is made. For
it is not sufficient because the Lord has promised, He that believes in the
Son shall have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day:
that a man hold this, and through Christ, believe the acomplishment of this
unto himself: but he must by faith apply it lawfully, fulfilling the condition
which the Lord requires: and the condition is to be baptized to true
repentance, Romans 6.
dying unto sin, as Christ died, and rising up to newness of life, as Christ
was raised up unto the glory of the Father: for the words of the promise are,
He that is baptized and believes, shall be saved: which baptism is only
expounded then to be, when sin is dead and buried, and grace, which is
newness, Prou 28.13.
lives.

The condition is, to confess and forsake all my sins, to deny my self, to
walk after the spirit, and not after the flesh. Romans 8.1.
If then I do thus, and lay hold upon the promise, I believe it law-fully and
the mercy promised is sure unto me, otherwise my faith is vain, and the
promise is to me of none effect.

Object.
If it be so, then Faith can never make a man sure of his saluaition, because it
may be that although he does now walk after the spirit in newness of life,
yet he may fall from this again.

Sol.
A man cannot be so sure, as that he may now grow secure and remiss in going
forward in that new life which he has begun; for he must always work out
his salvation with fear and trembling, not be high minded but fear, serve the
Lord with fear, Romans 12. Psalm. 2. Math. 16. John 17.
and rejoice before him with trembling: but he that believes so as has been
said, is so sure, as that the gates of hell shall not prevail against him,
Christ's prayer shall be stronger to keep him at one with God, than all
contrary powers to set enmity again between God and him: Romans 11.29. John
13.1.
for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance: and his own he
loved, unto the end he loved them. And this is a reason rendered by S. John, 1
John 2.19. John 17.20.
why some that were before counted faithful, turned Heretics: They were not
of us, for if they had been of us, they had continued with us. Whatsoever is,
or can be said to weaken the force of these grounds, presumptuously fights
against that most cofortable and euidee^t Prayer of Christ, Psalm. 32.1.
I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall believe in my name
through their word. So that who-soeuer does rightly believe in Christ, he has
Christ on his side, by the merit of his prayer uniting him unto himself, so
that he is made a member of his body, no more to be rent or pulled from him.

Romans 3.28.
That all my sins are forgiven me in Christ Jesus, for this is the maine
thing assured unto me by faith, and wherein the happiness of man consists,
according to that, Blessed is the man whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose
sin is covered. Wherefore it is said, that by faith we are justified, that
is, of sinners are made just and righteous; not only by that purifying quality
that is in faith, but in regard of Gods acceptance, when we by faith cloth our
selves with the garments of our elder brother Christ, being accounted such as
he is, all our sins being passed over.

And this is that which makes true faith so excellent, as that being endued
heerewith, the Lord vouchsafes to seal covenants by his Sacrament unto us.
Whatsoever faith we have else, it is general historical and imperfect, if
we believe that there is a God, that the Scriptures are his word, that the
promises and threanings are true, yea, though we had faith to remove
mountains, only then is faith perfect and full, when it does lawfully apply
the merits of Christ's sufferings unto the soul for the forgiveness of all the
sins.

Quest. Why then are infants baptized, when as by reason of their tender age,
they cannot perform them?

Answ. Yes, they do perform them by their sureties, who promise and vow them
both in their names, which when they come to age themselves are bound to
perform.

Acts 8.37.
Explan. Having showed what repentance and faith is, and how necessary unto
baptism repentance is, faith being also of the like necessity, according to
the institution: He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, and
according to the practice of the Church unto the Eunuch: If thou beleeuest,
says Philip, thou may, and when any came to be baptized, it was wont to be
asked, What beleeuest thou? and the person answered, I believe in God the
Father Almighty, etc.

It remains now to give resolution touching the baptism of infants in whom
there cannot be faith and repentance actually.

Because faith and repentance are necessary to salvation, it becomes
questionable whether infants ought to be baptized, and some have altogether
denied it, affirming, that if any have been baptized in their infancy, they
ought to be rebaptized when they came to understanding, as the Anabaptists in
Germany; and some giddy-headed seperatists in England, El^is and his faction.
But that the children of believing parents may, and ought to be baptized, it
is plain.



If doubt be made of the first part of this reason, it is proved thus. Where
there is the like reason, and none but the same hindrances, it may be sealed
alike: but in these children there is the same reason, and only the same
hindrances: the same reason, because they are the children of Gods people
likewise, only the same hindrances, because they want understanding alike:
therefore the seal is as well to be applied unto the children of Christians,
as unto theirs.

Acts. 2 39.
Secondly, from the estate of infants, the promises belong to them, as well as
unto their Parents: (says Peter) is made to you, and your children: Theirs is
the kingdom of heaven, says our Savior Christ. As the Parents are holy, so
they are holy; 1. Cor. 7.14.
so Now they are holy, says Paul to the Corinthians.

Now unto those that are wholly partakers of the promises of God, and of the
Kingdom of Heaven, the sign and seal of God is not to be denied but
children of believing parents are such even in their infancy, therefore the
seal or sign of baptism may not be denied.

2 Cor. 1.16. Acts 16.5. Verse 33.
Thirdly, from the practice of the Apostles, and first teachers of the Gospel*
S. Paul the Apostle baptized the household of Stephanas and Lydia, and her
household: and the Iaylor was baptized, with all that belonged unto him.

And when little children were brought unto Christ, some disliking it were
reproved, and the bringers of them encouraged: neither has there been any
time since, wherein they have been refused, but since the springing up of the
many headed Hydra of Anabaptisme.

Indeed, none but men of years have been admitted to this Sacrament, when
their Parents had not before been baptized, and that commonly at one time of
the year, being able to give account of their faith. But for those, whose
parents had received the faith before, they were counted worthy of this holy
sign in their Infancy.

Whereas the Institution of Baptism may be objected, and that no mention is
made of any particulars that were baptized by the Apostles in their Infancy. I
answer, that Christ in giving order to his Disciples to go teach and baptize,
does only prescribe for men of years and discretion, who were not to be
baptized without teaching going before, and it is a good reason only against
the baptizing of their children, who were not instructed, and baptized before,
themselves.

Again, it is no marvel, though Baptism was used unto children also, that no
particular mention is made hereof, seeing it suffices upon the conversion of
any, to set down, he was baptized, and his household: For who can be so
ignorant, and not out of this general to conclude in particular that their
children being part of their household were baptized also.

1. Cor 7 14.
For further resolution of the doubt, why Infants are baptized, seeing they
cannot believe and repent, that which is set down in the Catechism, is, that
they perform them by their Sureties, etc. that is, their Sureties standing in
their Parents stead do publicly profess both these, so as they are supposed
in them to be performed, and through them in their Children. For there is so
near a Relation of the Child unto the Parents, that what the state of the
Parents is, such is the estate of the child reputed to be, until that it
comes to reason and discretion; nay, the young child is taken for a very
party or limb of the Parent: whereunto gives testimony that which has been
already said, otherwise your children were unclean, but now are they holy:
that is, the Parents, or one of them being made holy by believing.

Luke 19.9.
For this cause, when Abraham was appointed the circumcision, it was for him
and all the males belonging unto him; and when Zacheus entertained Gods grace,
and was made partaker of salvation, it is said, This day is salvation come, not
to this man, but to this household. And the state of this man is not to be
measured by the fruits, which he does outwardly bring forth, but by his
incorporation through Baptism into the visible Church, whereby he becomes a
member of it, and the Children which he begets, are likewise members of the
same. So that howsoever children do want actual faith, and repentance, yet
such as present them to the Church, sustaining their Parents persons, are
supposed not to want them, and in their Parents they are to be reckoned such as
have them, because of their near conjunction unto their Parents, whose bowels
as it were they be, and by Baptism, remission of sins, and eternal life is
sealed unto them, as well as unto their Parents; even as an Estate or
Conueyance in law is made sure unto a child together with the father, by some
ceremony used unto it, when it understands not what is done.

Ez^k. 18.18.10.
Again, it is further added, which they themselves when they come of age are
bound to perform. Because that, howsoever in their infancy before they do
good or evil, their parents estate is reckoned theirs as has been said, yet
in their elder age they are taken as distinct persons, subsisting by
themselves, and standing or falling to themselves: if therefore in this due
time they do not actually believe and repent, their Baptism is made frustrate
and vain unto them. For then comes the time of which the Prophet speaks.
If a righteous man beget a son that is a thief, or a shedder of blood, etc.
he shall die the death. Verse 20.
The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of
the wicked shall be upon himself. Wherefore it stands every man in hand now
to look to himself, seeing that, how holy Parents so ever he has, and how
soever religious his beginning has been, yet if these things be wanting, he
is altogether in his sins, and unclean. If he dies before, we are to
account him holy, and undoubtedly in Gods favor.



Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. Are Laymen, are women the
teachers of Nations? We read that our Savior himself baptized not, but his
Disciples did, which is to be taken exclusiuely, that none baptized but they,
namely his Apostles, and other of the seventy Disciples, who were called to the
Ministerial function.

If it be said that private persons circumcised of old, yea even Zipporah a
woman, circumsised her son, and the Master of every family killed the
Passover in his private house, and distributed it unto his family, whence it
may seem to be lawful even for private persons now adays to administer the
Sacraments. I answer, that when Circumcision, and the Passover were first
ordained, there were no Priests specially appointed, but the eldest man of
every family was a Priest unto God, and did both sacrifice, and perform all
other Priestly duties: but after that the Tribe of Leui was taken, these things
were done by them, and not by any of other Tribes. Now, under the Gospel
Christ has ordained some from the beginning to preach and administer the
Sacraments, and therefore it is a confusion, and disorder for others to do
those. Whence it appears, that our Communion Book does very iudiciously
explain, that in time of necessity or danger, private Baptism is to be
performed by a lawful Minister; least Midwiues or others should intrude into
this function.

Quest. Why was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ordained?

Answ. For a continual remembrance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ,
and of the benefits which we receive thereby.

Explan. After Baptism, the Sacrament of Initiation, follows the Lords
Supper, the Sacrament of Consolidation: for as the one brings the soul into
the society of the faithful, so does the other feed it, and comfort it with
heavenly comforts.

Math. 26.
Now considering that both the Sacraments are Seals, it is worthily propounded
for a question, why this particular Sacrament of the Lords Supper was ordained?
and it is answered for a continual remembrance. For this is intimated by the
Lord, to be the proper end of this Institution, when he says, Do this in
remembrance of me. 1. Cor. 11.26.
For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, says the Apostle,
ye show the Lords death till he comes. And this remembrance is so
effectual, as that before whomsoever it is made, it is as if Christ were
visibly crucified in their sight; Gal. 3 1.
for to this purpose, says Saint Paul to the Galathians, to whom Christ Jesus
was plainly described before your eyes, and amongst you crucified.

In Baptism there is also a remembrance of Christ's death in that, as the
water flows, so did his blood in streams run out; but this is not the
particular end of Baptism, to represent Christ crucified, but as he is
vertually in us, clensing our souls, and making us to dye, and to be buried
unto sin: besides Baptism does not so fully set before our eyes Christ's
grievous passions, as does the Lords Supper, wherein are to be remembered all
things about his sufferings.

The Bread and Wine are first prepared, the one by threshing, grinding, and
baking in the fiery oven, the other by cutting down, casting them into the
Wine Press, and treading with the feet of men: Again, when there is thus made
a loaf of bread, it is divided and broken, that it may become food; and when
wine is thus made, it is powered out to be drunk, and (which is a principal
Analogy) the corn and grape out of which they are made, are the mere fruits
of Gods blessing, and not of man's labor: and lastly, this threshing, and
grinding, and treading of these creatures are by man, for whose sustenance they
serve, and when they are made ready, can afford no comfort to such as have
them, but by Gods effectual blessing, according to that, Deuteronomy. 8.3.
Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God. So we are to remember here, that Christ is the Son of Gods
love toward us, sent from Heaven, according to Gods eternal purpose, for our
comfort and salvation, not through any labor or seeking of ours, 2. Cor. 3.5.
seeing we were all enemies ever since the trangression, and dead in sin, so
as that we could not so much as think a good thought.

2. We must remember, that Christ was threshed with many strokes of
affliction, ground in the milne of sorrows, and baken in the hot oven of Gods
wrath, when through the feruency hereof, his sweat ran down from him like
drops of blood, Luke 22.44.
that he was cut down and trodden in the wine press of Gods wrath due to us
for sin.

3. That his body was broken, and his blood shed out of his hands, feet, and
sides, that he might be unto us bread indeed, and drink indeed.

4. That all these sufferings came unto him from man, for whose comfort he was
sent from heaven, sin being the cause, and sharpening the Spear and Nails
against him, and men's hands being instruments thus to torture and torment him.

Lastly, we must remember, that as Gods mercy sent him, so his blessing must
cause that we may live by him, otherwise we are still subject to perish in our
sins, that we may always lift up our hearts unto him for this blessing.

It follows, whereof this remembrance is, Of the sacrifice of the death of
Christ. The old Sacraments and Sacrifices did prefigure this, as the Lamb
slain every morning, and every evening, the red Cow, the Scape-Goate, the
Paschall Lamb, and all the blood shed in Sacrificing, which made, that the
blood might not be eaten, because Christ's blood remains ever, to speak
better things in Gods ears, then the blood of Abel.

Heb. 13.8.
Now, as it was in those Sacraments prefigured, so in this it is remembered as a
thing past, because that Christ Jesus yesterday and to day, is the same also
for ever. And the death of Christ is truly a Sacrifice, the Altar was the
Cross, the Priest, Christ himself, the creature offered, was his humane
nature, the blood shed, his precious blood, and the fat fuming up, the sweet
perfume of his rich merits. Of this, much is spoken to the Hebrews, Heb. 7.27.
Heb 9.12.
He did once offer up himself, and, by his own blood he entered once into the
holy place, and obtained eternal redemption for us. Moreover, such as the use
of sacrificing has been, such is the use of this sacrifice of Christ's death.
The use of sacrificing was fourefolde.

1. To expiate and do away sin; for if any man had sinned, he was appointed
to bring a sacrifice therefore.

2. To sanctify those that were outwardly defiled by any uncleanness, as when
any had been infected with the leprosy.

3. When a man had touched a dead body; they were likewise used to sanctify
assemblies and solemn meetings, as when all Israel were met at the feast that
Solomon made, and when Jobs children met together to feast.

1 Samuel 13.8.
4. To prosper all weighty attempts that are undertaken, as when the battle was
by Saul entered into against the Philistims, he did sacrifice after that he had
tarried seven days for Samuel, who intended to have been there to do
sacrifice himself.

And of the same use, and effectual to these uses, is the sacrifice of Christ's
death.

1 Ioh. 1.6.
First, to expiate sin; for, It is the blood of Jesus Christ that cleanses
from all sin.

Ephesians. 2.13.11.
Secondly, To sanctify such as, before were unclean, for Ye that were far
off, says the Apostle, are made near by the blood of Christ: for he is our
peace who has made of both one and has broken down the stop of partition
wall: that is, whereas in times past some were unclean, as the Gentiles, and
separated from Israel, now they are sanctified and made all one people.

And the same is expressed by the sheet let down from heaven before Peter,
wherein were creatures both clean and unclean, but it was showed, that by
Christ, not only meats, but people of all sorts, were then sanctified.

Thirdly, all meetings and feastings are sanctified only by him, he having
borne the curse for us; and therefore when two or three are gathered together
in his name, God is in the midst of them, as in an holy assembly.

Act 20.7.
Fourthly, by virtue of this sacrifice only, can we look to be prospered in our
weighty attempts, this being the standard, that, as Constantines cross, makes
all the enemies to yield before it, and the viands and weapons, Act. 2.
wherewith the Disciples sought to be furnished in all their dangerous voyages,
and the precious cordial that put spirit and magnanimity into the Church, so
as that it flourished in the midst of Persequutors and Tyrants.

Whence it appears to be a fiction and no truth, that the Lord did allow the
Israelites of old to sacrifice, only that they might be kept from offering
sacrifices to Devils, as the Heathen.

Again, how absurd it is to hold the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to be a
Sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead, seeing it is only a
remembrance of a Sacrifice, neither is there any living creature slain, as
must needs be, that there may be a Sacrifice; and yet so impudent have some
been, as that they not only affirm it to be a Sacrifice, but more available
than the very Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, as the Queen Mother of
Francis the second of France, complained by Letters unto the Pope, that it was
preached. It will be answered that this Friar was too bold so to preach, and
that the Pope would not bear him out in it: But surely no magnifyer of the
Mass durst have sung so high a note, but in a Church where the true
remembrance of Christ's death is so obscured and falsified by the bastard Mass,
and perverted from the true Sacramental representation and inward application
by Faith, into a carnal and theatricall ostentation, in crucifyxes and other
pictures supersticiously adored. Did our Savior, trow we, speak to the
painters and engrauers, when he said do this in remembrance of me?

1 Cor 11.28. Math. 12.
It follows in the answer, And of the benefits that we receive thereby, for
as the danger is great, to abuse this ordinance of the Lord, or to contemn it
(the one eating and drinking his own damnation, the other provoking the master
of this feast to anger and revenge) so the benefit is great to use it rightly;
whatsoever good is purchased unto us by the precious blood of Christ, being
remembered hereby to our unspeakable comfort; to speak more largely of which
benefits, there will be place afterward.

Quest. What is the outward sign or part of the Lords supper?

Answ. Bread and wine, which the Lord has commanded to be received.

Explan. Having considered the end of the institution of the Lords supper (the
Author and instituter being supposed to be known to all Christians, viz. the
Lord Jesus the same night that he was betrayed) it follows here of the
outward and visible part of bread and wine. In the handling of which, diverse
questions do arise.





The bread only has been long used to the Laity in the Church of Rome, under
this pretense, that it is Christ's very body, and so must needs have blood in
it, and for the avoiding of inconveniences, if the cup should be used also,
seeing that some of Christ's precious blood might be thus spilt upon the
ground, or hang upon men's beards. Wherefore this has been also established by
the Council of Trent, and for some, referred unto the Pope, who through much
instance granted the use of the cup also to them. Oh sacrilege, whereby both
Christ is robbed of his authority, and his ordinance debased, Christ himself
having commanded, Eat, Drink ye all of this, it must be referred to the
Pope, and he must first allow, or else it cannot be lawful: And why, forsooth
should he not afford our Saviors whole allowance to other Christians, as well
as to the Bohemians? Must all the rest of the Christian world be cut short of
half of their spiritual banquet? What fault have they committed, that they
must be debarred of the fruit of the vine? Surely Christ our Master was not so
provident as his ouerwise Vicar, to foresee the grand inconveniences of his
sacred primitive institution.

2 Cor. 1^
If they tell us that the Supper was first instituted amongst Clericks only (for
the Disciples only were present) we answer, this is a silly shift, for by the
like reason the Laics should have neither cup nor bread: but they had both
also appointed unto them, as well unto the Clericks, for to the Corinthians,
Saint Paul teaches in general the use of both, and applies the ordination
both of bread and wine to the whole congregation of the Faithful.

Besides, it is a weak reason that is used, viz. that the bread after the
words of consecration is transubstantiated, and turned into the very body of
Christ, and therefore is not without blood. For this transubstantiation is mere
commentum humanum, a mere fiction of man, and so absurd, as that if there were
not many other strong reasons, at large set down by learned writers in this
controversy (which I purposely omit) these few reasons following do
sufficiently show the vanity of this contention, or rather circumuention.

John 6, 63.
First, because that, grant it were the very body of Christ, his flesh and
bones, what would this avail our souls? the Lord himself having taught us,
that the flesh profits nothing, speaking of his own flesh, if they should
eat it with their teeth: for all things that are eaten, as they defile not, so
they sanctify not the man, seeing they go down into the belly, Mark 7, 16.
and are cast out into the draught.

See therefore (ye Romanists) what is it that ye strive for? What is it, that
your grave Council of holy Fathers, under your graund Captain, Innocent the
third, in the Council of Laterane, after long deliberation so wisely
determined? Do ye not pursue a dead dog, or seek a flea in the wilderness to
use the words of David to Saul.

Secondly, if it were Christ's very body, he must not once only have suffered,
but 10000. times, even so often as he is received, seeing his body is broken and
torn with the teeth, and his blood is poured out: yea the faithful, such as
from crucifying to themselves, the Lord of Life, which is so abhorring from all
good Divinity, Heb. 10.17.
as that for such it teaches that there is no more sacrifice for sin, but a
fearful looking for of judgment and fire that shall devour the adversaries.

Consider this also (ye Popish Priests) what an odious estate ye seek to bring
your selves into, whilst you seek to have Christ's body really present in the
Sacrament? Are you fo blind as that if you see this, you do not see your
selves also to be his bloody executioners and butchers.

Thirdly, if Christ's body be really in the Sacrament, it must needs either
long since have an end, or else the Lord must daily create him new bodies, and
a thousand bodies at once, seeing that he is so often eaten up, and in so many
places at the same time: If it be said that the same body can be in many places
at once, and that it is not wasted and spent though it be often eaten, through
Gods miraculous working: I answer, that this is contrary to all, not only
natural, but also enlightened reason, seeing that no quantity can be eaten,
and by eating consumed (as the bread and wine in the Sacrament are) but it is
wasted and spent. I grant that God can indeed miraculously feed men with
bread and meat, and yet cause that a greater quantity shall remain, as when
five thousand were fed with a few loaves, etc. but here the bread was not
consumed in eating, as it is in the Lords Supper: again, a body cannot be in
many places at once, but being a continued quantity, it must fill the
interuallum also, betwixt one place and another, though through miracle not
visibly, yet so, as that it may be felt, and hinder the passage of other
bodies, otherwise the body must be turned into a Spirit, that has not flesh
and bones, and the nature thereof must cease to be: for though mysteries in
Divinity be above Philosophical reason; yet they are not clean contrary unto
it as this is, if there be such a mystery.

But we learn to detest these and the like, as foul prophanations of the
Lords ordinance, and to hold the truth according to Christ's appointment.





First, in the preparation; the corn whereof the bread is made is threshed,
etc. as has been already showed, in speaking of the remembrance.

Ioh. 1.82.
Secondly, in the use, the bread and wine are taken, fed upon, and inwardly in
the stomach digested: so the body and blood of Christ is taken and enters into
the stomach of the soul by Faith.

Psalm. 104.14.15.
Thrdly, in the virtue, bread and wine being given to such as are ready to
famish, through want of food, does revive them, they strengthen the heart of
man, and make him cheerful and merry, according to that in the Psalms, He
brings bread forth out of the earth, and wine that makes glad the heart of
man: so the body and blood of Christ being received by the faithful soul,
that is even hungerstarued for want of food, does revive and put life into it:
for, He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has everlasting life,
says the Lord, Ioh. 6.47.
it strengthens unto a Christian course, for without me, says the LORD
also, ye can do nothing, and it gives joy and gladness: The Christians
after Christ's ascension continued together, breaking of bread, with gladness and
singlenes of heart. Act. 2.46.


Genesis 14.18.
Secondly, bread and wine were appointed, that by Christ might be fulfilled what
before was begun by Melchisedech, after whose order he is: for he brought
forth bread and wine unto Abraham, Ephesians. 2.
and as the partition wall betwixt Abraham's feed and us is by him broken
down, so the unity of ceremony was hereby established, all others being but
more varieties to express the same thing, but this specially of bread and wine
continuing in use, even unto the time of this Supper, one part of the bread in
the Passover being kept, hid under a napkin, and a cup of wine to be
distributed after the feast with thanksgiving.

Act 15.10.
Thirdly, bread and wine were appointed, because they were things common and
always at hand; and so in this Sacramental seal, we need not to say, who
shall ascend to Heaven to fetch Christ from thence? And as they are common, so
they be few and cheap, and not like the ceremonies of the Law, which were a
costly and burdensome yoke that the forefathers were not able to bear: for
such was it fit, that in fulness of time should be appointed unto sons, Gal. 3.
and heirs, and not to be kept any longer under the rudiments of the Law, as
under tutors and governors.





Now all men, I suppose, do yield herein for most circumstances, of the place,
in an upper chamber, of the persons, a few disciples men only in the time of
the night, after supper: but it is questioned about the leaven, water, and
sitting, though little reason to make question about these.

1 Cor. 11.17
First, if we confider that they are no where precisely expressed, though they
may be gathered from the place where the institution is described, nay, which
is more, where the Apostle repeateth the institution, though he remembers the
time, the night wherein he was betrayed, the persons, his Disciples, yet he
speaks not of leauened bread, or water mixed with wine, nor yet of sitting.

Secondly, if it be considered, that as the standing at the Passover, the
night, etc. were taken up occasionally, not purposely as Sacramental: so was
the leauened bread, this kind of bread being at hand, and sitting, or rather
leaning down along, which is employed in the word (...), Luc. 22.14. and (...),
Matthew. 26.20. that gesture being the position of the body at that time.

Thirdly, if it be considered, that as the night season, the persons and
place, are without any intended signification, so is the leauened bread and
sitting.

If it be said, sitting does set forth our Communion with Christ; I answer,
take heed of inuenting this or the like significations, which are beyond the
word, least thou be such an one, as adds unto the word of God, and least
herein thou rashly censure all those Churches, wherein standing, walking, or
kneeling is used. Indeed some circumstances there be, which are not only
expressed, but commanded also, as Sacramental, and these are always
necessary in the Lords Supper.

First the giving of thanks, whence it is called (...), the Eucharist, or
Thanksgiving, for when he had given thanks, it is said that he brake the
bread.

Acts 2.23.
Secondly, the taking of the bread and of the cup, whereby may be signified, how
the Lord took his dear Son, and set him apart to be crucified, and slain
for the sins of the world, even from the beginning of the world: for, he was
not by the Jews taken and slain, as being by them ouer-powred, but he was
delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God: he was the
Lamb of God slain from the beginning of the world.

Thirdly, the breaking of the bread, whereby is set forth the Lords submitting
of himself to the death of the Cross, where he was pierced hands, feet, and
side, so that the blood ran out abundantly from him.

Fourthly, the distributing of the Bread and of the Wine to his Disciples,
whereby is set forth how Christ is given by the Father unto all faithful
Christians, to nourish their souls unto eternal life, according to that of
the Apostle: Having given unto us Christ Jesus, how shall he not together with
him give us all things also?

Math. 26.26. Verse 27.
Fifthly, the form of words in delivering the bread and wine: Take, eat this
is my body, do this in remembrance of me. Drink ye all of this. This is my
blood of the new Testament which is shed for many for the remission of sins.
Which words are not the same precisely recorded by every Evangelist, but yet
so, as that the record of any one does set forth the signification, the use,
and the end of this Sacrament. So that if a form of words be used according
to these, it is rightly done, and according to rule; as in our Church: Eat
this in remembrance that Christ died for you, etc. the precise words as they
are recorded by Saint Paul, being placed immediately before.

Now that these things, besides that they are expressed, are commanded, is to
be noted from the command given to the Disciples, Do this in remembrance, that
is, not as some interpret it, make this my body, but do in all these things as
ye have seen me do, give thanks, take, break, distribute, and say
according to this form.

As for other things, yea even for gesture, they may be as shall seem best
unto the particular Churches of God, which have power to appoint any most lowly
and reverent gesture, such as kneeling, seeing, that even in praising God we
are invited by the Kingly Prophet. O come, let us worship and fall down, and
kneel before the Lord our maker, and the people of Israel in Egypt, hearing
the good news of Gods appearing to Moses, to deliver them, bowed themselves
and worshipped: so that as well in receiving a benefit, as in asking, this
lowly casting down of the body, does well become us. The chief objection
here against, (for all else are frivolous) is that kneeling was brought in for
adoration of the bread transubstantiated: for answer unto which; first I say,
that it is indeed to be granted, that they kneeled unto the supposed body of
Christ, but it is to be proved, that hence it began first, otherwise it is as
good an argument, they kneeled in praying with their heads, therefore we ought
not to kneel in our prayers; they came to the Mass at Easter, therefore we
ought not to come then to the Communion, but at some other time, etc. What
superstitious Idolaters have done in the service of their idols, marreth not
what we do like them, the fault not being in the thing, or gesture used, but in
the end, their kneeling being to an Idol, ours to the God of heaven, giving his
Son to our hearts by faith.

Quest. 132. What is the inward part or thing signified?

Answ. The body and blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed aken and
received of the faithful in the Lords Supper.

Explan. The inward part of the Lords Supper, is the body and blood of
Christ, which are present to all the faithful. In handling whereof, three
questions.

1 Cor. 10.16.
First, how is the Lords body and blood there? for, that he is received by the
faithful, is plain, both because he says, This is my body, and my body is
meat indeed, and my blood drink indeed: and from the doctrine of the Apostle,
The cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, John 6.47.
is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? But how is his body there to
be communicated?

Lutherans teach: but only in a spiritual and Sacramental manner faith
making him present unto the worthy receiver: even as hereby we possess
everlasting life, according to that, He that believes in me, has everlasting
life: For as Faith is an eye unto which things to come are present; so it is an
hand holding them, a mouth feeding upon them, and a stomach receiving them,
and uniting them unto the person that believes.

If it be said then, the Sacrament is vain, seeing by faith Christ may be
received without it, and he is not outwardly any whit the more present with his
body. I answer, God forbid; for it is Gods ordinance to help our faith, an
outward means to convey unto us inward grace, and sanctification his seal to
confirm our faith in his gracious promises. As when the King bestows any
thing upon a subject, he is assured hereof by his mere donation, and giving it
unto him, but yet he appoynteth unto him to take the state thereof, a means
of writing and sealing to ratify what he has granted, for more assurance,
which writings and seal, though they contain not the estate about them or in
them, that is, the house or ground in quantity, yet they convey them unto him:
so though the body of Christ be in heaven, and being given unto us by the
Father, is made ours through faith, yet it has pleased him for more assurance
to appoint the Sacrament, hereby to convey this rich possession unto us, and to
write and seal to our hearts that Christ is ours, by his holy body sanctifying
our bodies and souls, and by his blood cleansing us from all our sins,
though this body be not in or about the bread really, in the quantity as it
was heretofore upon earth. And of like nature were the ancient Sacraments
appointed to the Fathers, unto which, though Christ was not really and
corporally annexed, yet unto the receivers they were Christ through faith: 1.
Cor. 10.1. John 1.29.
for, the Rock was Christ, Christ was the Lamb



Answ.
Yes: the Scripture speaks of two other ways or means. 1. Gal 3.27.
He is received by Baptism: for He that is baptized into Christ, has put on
Christ. 2. He is received by the preaching of the Word, whether by himself,
when he came amongst his own, John 1.12.
and to such as received him, he gave power to be the sons of God: Math.
10.40.
or by his Disciples: for, He that receives you, says Christ, receives me:
that is, the doctrine which he and they taught, being entertained into
believing hearts, and their persons being welcome unto them. By the word he is
received, as by the draught of a conueyance, and Articles of agreement by the
Sacraments, as by seals put heereunto, Baptism being properly the seal of a
new life, which is the beginning of everlasting life, we being dead, and buried
unto sin, the Lords Supper, the seal of the comforts and strength that we
grow unto in this life, as by most wholesome meats and drinks, till that in
the life to come, we shall be continually feasted with him, he being meat,
and drink, and clothing, and wealth, and all in all unto us evermore.



So often as ye drink this cup, do it in remembrance of me. Whereupon the
Apostle infers, So often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show
the Lords death till he come: 1. Cor. 11.26.
construing this precept to last till the coming of Christ to judgment, at
the end of this world.

And the reason hereof is: first, because that howsoever our new life is begun
at once, as is represented in Baptism, yet it continues from year to year,
and must have often means to sustain it: and therefore, though circumcision
was but once, the Passover was once every year.

Secondly, because that although we are in Baptism regenerate, and become new
creatures; yet the flesh still dwelling in us, rebelleth: so as that we are
subject to sin daily, against which, as the blood of Christ is continually by
faith to be applied to purge us, so the Sacrament whereby his death and
bloodshed is represented, is often to be used for the more comfortable
remembrance hereof; even as to shadow it out before it was, the high Priest
entered into the holy of holies with blood once every year. Now precisely set
down how often the Lords Supper is to be received, we cannot, because it is
left indefinite.

Acts 10 7. Acts 2.46.
The practice of the Primitive Church was every Lords day, or first day of the
week, and at the first daily, as their dangers were great, by reason of the
persecution every day. Wherefore in the Canons, carrying the name of the
Apostles, it was commanded, that all which came to hear the Word, being
Communicants, should receive the Communion: Et siquis non communicate,
excommunicatur, vt ecclesiae turbator, Can. 10.
and ordinum violator; If any man does not communicate, let him be
excommunicated, as a troubler of the Church, and a breaker of order. And
hereunto do the ancient Fathers assent. But this often receiving was in regard
of the times, such as at the first institution, the shepherd being smitten,
and the sheep scattered. Since in the peace of the Church, the Communion has
been three or four times in the year, and specially at Easter, as succeeding
the Passover. If it be said, once in the year is sufficient as the Passover
was but once. I answer, the Passover required a long time, even seven days
for the celebration thereof, and if it had been often, Exodus 12.19.
it would have been too heavy a burden unto the people, it is not so with the
Lords Supper.

Again, this is the proper time of the right Passover, the Lords supper; in
times past, besides the Paschall Lamb, and unleavened bread once in the year,
there being many other remembrances of Christ in action, viz. the many
sacrifices, now we have only the Lords Supper, often to be used to the same
purpose.

Quest. What are the benefits whereof we are partakers thereby?

Answ. The strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the body and blood of
Christ, as our bodies are by the bread and wine.

Mouns. du Plessis.
Explan. Considering the solemn ordination of the Lords Supper in a time of so
great need, when the bridegroom was now to be taken away from the children of
the marriage chamber, and they should mourn; it is worth the considering, how
great the benefit hereof is: and hereof it will not be amiss a little to delay
the Reader, in showing the extrauagancies of the Church of Rome, in extolling
the supposed sacrifice hereof If it be used, that is, if the mass be used upon
Saint Gregory's days, it delivers souls out of Purgatory: if upon S.
Rochell^ day, from the plague: if upon S. Antonies, it saves Cattle: if upon
Sigismun^s, it cures the Ague: if upon S. Anthonies of Padua it restores
things lost: if upon Saint Apollonius, it cures the toothache: if upon S.
Lucies day, it clears the eyes: if upon the holy Spirits day, it gives a
goodly husband or wife, as a learned writer has gathered together of late, and
set these their fooleries upon the stage.

Another has noted, 1. that they teach it to be available, as for the living,
so for the dead: 2. to be carried about the Church: 3. to be carried about the
streets: 4. to be carried into the fields, that the corn and grass may grow:
5. to be carried to the wars for the obtaining of victory: 6. before the Pope
when he goes forth: 7. at the coming of Kings into cities: And which might
more be added, to houses on fire, and to waters ouerflowing, as Clement the
fifth cast it into the River Tyber, to assuage the swelling thereof.

Thus do these men, as led with the spirit of lying, triflingly deal with this
blessed Sacrament, and seeking too highly to extol it, make their use of it
vain and ridiculous: and when as every good Christian should follow his master
Christ, they differ altogether from him He commanded, Do this in remembrance
of me, they in remembrance of the dead. Christ took it, and gave thanks, they
breath upon it. Christ brake it, they hang it up in a pyxe: Christ gave it to
his Disciples, they most commonly eat up all alone, and so it is no communion
(properly so called) of the faithful together; Christ took bread, and gave
bread; they take bread, and give flesh: Christ gave it to confirm faith, they
to redeem departed souls: Christ gave it to be eaten, they to be adored:
Christ spoke plainly in a known tongue, they in Latin, which is not by the
vulgar understood. Not to ask them therefore (which is but lost labor) what
the benefit is, we say, that it is the strengthening and refreshing of the
soul. More distinctly, whatsoever benefit redoundeth to the corporal life
from the Bread and Wine, the like redoundeth here-from to the worthy receiver,
by virtue of Christ's body and blood, as before has been particularly declared.
This made them in the Primitive Church to seek so earnestly after it, that
though Christ in body was now absent from doing these good offices unto them,
yet they might be supplied by this visible sign of his continual presence to
the worlds end.

Special benefits of the Communion.
Again, yet more distinctly, we have hereby communion with Christ, and through
him with the Father, we becoming flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones,
as the bread and wine being eaten and incorporated into us.

2. Strength of faith, it being as it were an hand, a mouth, and stomach, with
these signs receiving Christ, as has been said.

3. All other graces and blessings, which together are thereby conveyed unto us,
this being the conduict through which we receive Christ, and all things also,
as he is heir of all.

4. Communion with one another, and with all the faithful in all ages, we
beco^ming by Christ one body, though diversely dispersed in the world, as many
corns and grapes are brought together to make one loaf of bread, and one cup
of wine.

All which benefits are so great, as that it should set a most sharp edge upon
the desires of all men unto this heavenly duty, that even for love and earnest
desire of these benefits, we may gape after them, as the thirsty ground for
rain, and never through neglect deprive our selves of such comforts, when by
Gods Minister they are offered.

Qu^st. What is required of them which come to the Lord Supper?

Answ. To examine themselves, whether they repent them truly of their former
sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new life, have a lively Faith in Gods
mercy through Jesus Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his death, and be
in charity with all men.

Explan. The benefit of this Sacrament being so great, it is necessary to know
how every man may dispose himself hereunto, that he may be made partaker of
this benefit; for this is certain, that all obtain it not that eat this
supper, seeing there is an unworthy, as well as a worthy receiving, and the
unworthy eat and drink their own damnation. For the worthy and right
receiving, therefore a rule is here set down of things to be done before, and
in the act of receiving. Before there must be an examination: in the time of
receiving, a remembrance or meditation, to stir up thankfulness for Gods
great mercy herein expressed. The distinct consideration of which, because it
is so necessary, I have here subioyned in some distinct questions, and answers.

Quest. 134. What is required in those that come to the Lords Supper?

Answ. To be rightly disposed, both before, and at the receiving hereof.

Quest. 135. What ought a man to do before his coming?

Answ. To examine himself for his faith in Christ.

1. C r 1^.^8.
Explan. Let a man examine himself, says Saint Paul, and so let him eat of
this bread, and drink of this cup: for he that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks his own damnation: where you see, that under pain of
damnation, a man must prepare himself to the Lords Table, and that he is an
unworthy receiver, that prepares not by fore-examination. Such was the man
that came unto the feast without a wedding garment, of whom it is said. Bind
him hand and foot, Matthew. 22.12.
and cast him into utter darkness: Such pulls upon himself, 1. Cor. 11.
as the Corinthians, sundry plagues and sickness, and untimely death. And
verily, though there were no such danger, great reason there is, that every man
coming to this Sacrament, should prepare himself.

1. Because every man is most unfit and unworthy to come thus familiarly to
communicate with the Lord of glory, as when the Lord was to descend to give
the Law, they were unfit without a three days preparation, to hear him
speaking unto them. We are herein to imitate the most curious women, when they
came to any honorable place, or meeting, they spend much time in decking
themselves, and putting on all their ornaments, and behold themselves in the
glass very diligently, that nothing may be amiss or unseemly. In like
manner, seeing we are to come into the presence of the highest estate of the
whole world, and to the Communion of his most honorable Saints, we cannot use
too much curiosity in decking our hearts, and looking out diligently in the
glass of the Law, our blemishes by sin, that we may reform them. For we come
not only to this meeting, as ordinary guests, but as the spouse of the great
King of heaven, of whom it is expected, that she should exceed in ornaments,
according to that, She is all glorious within, Psalm. 45.13.
her clothing is of broydred gold. Indeed if we were every day such, this
special decking and preparing were not needful, but alas, we do all daily in
many things offend, and so have upon us stains and spots, and are so raggedly
clothed, as that our filthy nakedness does appear, and who dares come so into
the feasting room of so great a majesty?

2. Because of the great grace and favor of God herein toward us, inuiting
us, unto whom he is not tied by any bond of friendship or desert that might
move him to use this respect toward us, no more then the Father of the
prodigal son, to take him home with him, and with such joy to feast him.

When Haman was invited by Queen Hester to a feast, which he took as a
special favor toward him, how did it rejoice him, how duly and early
sitting himself in the best manner, as he thought, did he repair thither?
How much more should we be glad of Gods inuiting us, and with all diligence,
against the time make us ready to come to this heavenly banquet.

Galat 3.1.
3. Because of the great benefit which we behold here, and receive, Christ being
crucified, as it were before our eyes, by whom we conquer sin and Satan, and
have entrance into heaven, the way being thus made open unto us. If a rich dole
be dealt amongst the poor, al will make them ready to come unto it, and if
there be any thing that may make them to be sent empty away, they will use
diligence to remove it: if the Physician has any receite, which a man being
prepared, and taking, shall undoubtedly have his health confirmed, and his life
prolonged, he will speedily with all care use this preparatiue: But here is a
most rich dole dealt out to every one, a sovereign most excellent receipt for
the soul, making it undoubtedly to live for ever: Oh let every man then
dispose himself so, as that he may not be sent empty away, and prepare
himself so, as that this receipt may kindly work upon him, for his
preservation to everlasting life.

Ephesians 3.27.
Now the thing wherewith we are to be decked, and by which the only
preparation is made, is faith in Jesus Christ, of which it has been already
spoken: Faith apparrelieth the soul with rich clothing, the wedding garment,
for such as are baptized into Christ have put on Christ, their nakedness is
all hidden, and none appears, even as when Aaron had on the clothing of the
high Priest, he appeared a most goodly person: Faith behangeth the soul with
most rich jewels and pearls of inestimable worth, Matthew 13 45.
of which the Merchant that sees the value, will give all that he has for
one. Of this it is said, Prou. 3 15.
It is more precious then pearls, and all things that thou can desire, are
not to be compared unto her. Faith is the hand of the soul, reaching out unto
Christ; for as the woman touched him and was healed of her bloody issue, so the
faithful touch him, handle and receive him, to the healing of al their
spiritual all diseases. Faith is the mouth of the soul feeding upon Christ;
for when the Lord had taught, that his body must be eaten, and that he which
eats, has everlasting life, he affirms the same of the belieuer. He that
belieueth in me, John ^.47.
has everlasting life. Faith is the digesting faculty of the stomach of the
soul, working so effectually, that Christ becomes here by our nourishment,
and we are flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 53.^
and bone of his bones, as the Apostle teaches.

Romans 5.1. Heb 11.13. Heb. 11.5.
Lastly, whatsoever may be more desired, a person pleasing unto God, an eye to
see God, feet to come unto God, faith gives all: for being justified by
faith, we have peace with God: by faith the ancient Fathers saw the promises a
far off: that is, Christ, and by faith Enoch, as with feet walked with God.

He therefore that examining his own heart, finds faith, needs not to
fear to stand in doubt, he is hereby made worthy of this blessed Sacrament.

Quest. 136. How may a man know whether he has this faith or no?

Answ. By two special fruits thereof, Repentance for all his sins, and Love
toward his neighbor.

Explan. The heart of man which is deceitful above measure, does deceive him
in nothing more, then in falsely persuading him that he has true and right
faith: for if a man puts his trust in Gods mercy through Jesus Christ to be
saved, it tells him that this faith, never suffering him to come to a true
trial, whether this trust be the faith that instifieth before God, or no.

Wherefore, that we might not be herein beguiled, the Lord has set forth this
faith to be lively: so that as a man living may be known from a man dead by
breath and motion; so he that lists to take pains in the trial of his
faith, may know the true justifying and saving from all counterfeits, and false
faiths.

James 2.20.
It breaths and moves by Repentance and Love, which who so finds not in
himself, he is a vain man, his faith is dead and unprofitable, even as a
dead tree, as Saint ^ame^ teaches: For, that the faith is vain which is
without these, is plain from many evidences.

First, from the comparing of Paul and James together, who seem to speak one
against the other, Paul saying, that we are justified by faith without the
works of the Law, James, that we are justified by works, and not by faith
only, both bringing for example the father of the faithful Abraham.

From whence we may reason thus:

Such as was Abraham's faith, such ought the faith of every man to be, that he
may be justified and saved: But Abraham's faith was a living faith, expressing
it self by the leaving of his Idolatrous Country, when God called him, and by
sacrificing his son Isaac in admirable obedience, when God commanded, that
is, by forsaking sin, though most dear, and performing obedience, even in
that which was hardest. Therefore such must our faith also be.

Prou. 28.13.
Secondly, faith that does not thus live, appears to be vain, because it is
a building without a foundation, the only foundation of faith being Gods
promises, which belong not to any but such as have and do by true repentance
turn from sin: For you shall find none other promise of God, but such as
this: He that confesses and forsakes his sins, shall have mercy, and this:
Whenever a sinner does repent him of his sin from the bottom of his heart,
I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance. Now such as is the ground
whereupon any man's faith is built, such is his faith, if the ground be none,
his faith is vain, but the ground of his faith that continues in sin
without repentance is none, God having made no promise unto him, therefore his
faith is vain. If he shall say, but I mean to repent before my death: Ah
strange delusion of Satan; thou art content then in the mean season to be
without faith, and without interest in the merits of Christ, to be under the
dominion of the Devil, and in a Reprobate estate. A thousand to one when thou
intendest to repent, thy God, the Prince of the air that rules in the
Children of disobedience, will not suffer thee, and it shall be just with God,
for so gross neglect of his grace, to give thee over effectually unto him, to
be finally hardened unto damnation.

Thirdly, faith that is not living, is vain, because the true faith does
establish the Law, but this disannulleth it, seeing it looks for salvation,
and yet does contrary to the Law by living in sin.

1. Cor. 13.
Lastly, faith must express it self, as by repentance, so also by love,
otherwise it is vain; for, if J have all faith, says the Apostle, and have
not love, it is vain: and faith works by love, and God is love: wherefore
the true faithful man must needs have love, and he that is without it, is
without God, and does utterly deceive his own soul.

1 Cor. 12.13.
Again, by the true faith we are made members one of another, according to
that of the Apostle: By one spirit we are all baptized into one body, and if
members one of another, we must needs be likewise affected, being knit
together by the bond of love.

Quest. 137. Wherein stands true Christian Love?

Answ. Jn affection, when it is the same toward our neighbor, that it is
toward our selves, void of malice, hatred and envy, and desirous of our
neighbors good, as of our own; and in action, when we are ready to do good
unto others, as unto ourselves, and to keep away hurt as from ourselves.

1. Cor. 13.13.
Explan. Having already spoken of repentance (the first whereby faith that is
living, manifests it self) viz. in the Tractate of baptism: we have now
left only to consider of love, which is highly commended above all other
special graces, as being the fulfilling of the Law, the seasoning of all
duties in Gods service and the principal amongst the chief graces: for there
be these three, says the Apostle, Faith Hope and Love, and the chief of
these is Love. And this Love is both in affection and in action.

First, in affection, where the heart is malicious or envious, there can be no
love: For what love was there in Cain toward Abel, what love in Esau toward
Jacob, or in Joseph's brethren toward him? So in whomsoever these vild
affections rest, there is no love. Publicans may be friendly to Publicans, and
sinners unto sinners, but if our love be none other, it is natural and
corrupt, and not the love by which faith lives, seeing this directs to love
our enemies, and those that hate us. If there be malice and envy in us, we are
altogether indisposed to the word by which faith comes: for the right
disposition hereunto, is as Saint Peter shows, to lay aside all
maliciousness, 1. Pet 2.2 1. John ^.15.
and dissimulation, and envy. And whosoever hates his brother is a manslayer.
Wherefore they which are thus can have no faith, but they come before the Lord
with hands full of blood, and all iniquity.

Romans 12.15.
Again, love desires the good and welfare of a man's neighbor as well as his
own; it makes a man live affected to his neighbor as unto himself, and so
to rejoice with them that rejoice, and to weep with them that weep.

1 John 3.18. Verse 17.
Lastly, it is not faint, and contained with^n the desire of the heart, but
breaks forth into action, doing good unto others, as unto our selves, and
keeping away hurt, as from our selves. My little Children (says John) let us
love not in word, nor in tongue, but indeed, and in truth. Whosoever has this
worlds goods, and shuts up his compassion toward his brother, how dwells
the love of God in him? Iame^ 1.27
It is a vain Religion, that is in word, the pure Religion and undefiled
before God, even the Father, is this, to visit the fatherles and widows in
their adversity, and to keep a man's self unspotted of the world. The deeds
of love shall bear all the weight at the last day. Matthew 25.
J was hungry, and ye fed me, etc. where these are wanting, the Lord says, Go
ye cursed into hell fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. In brief
therefore to give you a view of perfect love by the parts thereof.

2. Cor. 13.5.
The first is gentleness, and not without just cause to be moved to anger.
Secondly, patience and long suffering, when just cause of anger is offered.
Thirdly, goodness not admit-tinking envy, or the like against any enemy, but
loving him. Fourthly, tenderness, and being affected with grief, at the sight
of other men's miseries. Fifthly, freedom from evil thing against thy
neighbor, interpreting all things to the best, if it may be. Sixthly,
yielding, rather then contend, from some thing of a man's own right, as Abraham
did to Lot. Seauenthly, humbleness of mind seeking reconciliation, where
offenses have bin. Eighthly, bountifulnes toward the poor. Ninthly, care to
save a neighbor from hurt or hindrance in his cattle, corn, or any danger
toward him. Tenthly, abstinence from private revenge, in speech, or in deed.

Quest. 138. What shall he do, that after examination finds not these things
in himself?

Answ. He may not keep away from the Lords supper, for this were a provoking
of God to wrath: neither can he come unto it, without offending the Lord in a
higher degree.

Matthew. 22.
Explan. It is not enough that a man examine himself, but he must by
examination, find true faith living by love, and repentance in him: and if he
finds it not, he must not then think that he shall do well enough by
abstaining, as is the manner of the most; but it lies upon him as a duty
required at his hands, the neglect of which provoke the Lord to wrath, as we
may see by the parable in those that refused to come, and excused themselves
when they were bidden to the feast: The Lord of the feast is wroth against
them, and sends forth his warriors to destroy them.

And as this is a great offense, so it is much greater to come vnpreparedly;
for such a man is without a wedding garment, and commanded to be bound hand and
foot, and to be cast into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth, so that either way there is nothing but judgment with out mercy.

If if be demanded here, whether it be not a sin in the Minister, to admit
such to the holy Communion?

Matthew. 7.6.
I answer, if any be evidently known to be such, and will not promise amendment,
he that receives him, gives that which is holy to dogs, and casts pearls
before Swine If otherwise there be a show of penitency, man, that cannot see
into the heart, may admit of him. If it should seem, that without difference
the wicked as well as the godly are to be admitted to this holy Supper,
without difference putting, seeing that Judas was admitted by the Lord.

I answer, that it is most probable, that Judas was gone out before seeing
Matthew and Mark do speak of his going out immediately after the sop, before
the holy Supper began, unto whom consents John, Chap. 13.30. Secondly, if it
be granted, that he was present, yet this example proves nothing to this
purpose; for Judas was not yet detected, his treason was only in his heart,
not in action, that followed afterward. Moreover, how can the minister give the
Lords body to him, that is appointed by the Lord to be given over to Satan; for
as it was with the incestuous person against the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.5.
so is it with every notorious scandalous liver, he is, until repentance to
be put from the communion of Gods people. Thus we see what a maze or labyrinth
sin does bring men into; in danger they are by coming, and in danger by not
coming to the Lords Table.

Quest. 139. What may a man do then in this case?

Answ. He must humbly sue unto God for the pardon of all his sins, to strike
his hard heart, that he may melt into tears for them, and constantly cleave to
his commandments; and if there be any dissension, he must go, and be
reconciled to his brother.

Explan. So gracious is our good God, as that when we are brought into
desperate straights, and wildred so by sin, as that we know not which way to
get out, he holds forth the thread of his mercy, by the help of which we
may come into the right way again. Like unto Ahashuerosh his scepter stretched
out toward his beloved Hester, when she was entangled with danger: even so is
the Lords Scepter ever held out unto us, that in the name of his Son we may
come unto him, though we be most wretched sinners. Ask, says he, and you
shall have, seek and you shall find, knock, and it shall be opened unto you.
This is the gate, or scale of Heaven which Jacob saw, hither we may come,
being thus beset with sin, and find mercy to be delivered, and made welcome
to the Lords Table.

If it be said, but can I being thus in my sins pray to be heard, seeing
that God hears not sinners, and the sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to
the Lord?

I answer, was not the Publican likewise in his sins? and yet he prayed, and
was heard and justified, and did not the Thief upon the Cross likewise? So
that wicked men praying out of a desire to be made repentant, and to be
brought to amendment, grieuing that they are so hard-hearted, and without
faith, are heard in their prayers; neither is this against the places before
alleged; for the wicked whom God will not hear, are such as delight in sin,
and are without all care of amendment, resolute in sinning.

Quest. 140. What ought a man to do at the Lords Supper?

Answ. He ought thankefully by seeing and receiving the outward signs, to
remember the inward graces of God toward him.

Quest. 141. What are these graces?

Answ. First, the Lords giving of his Son Jesus to death for us, set forth by
the Ministers taking of the bread and wine, breaking and pouring out, and
offering it to us all. Secondly, our near union unto Christ, and how we have
all our spiritual food from him, set forth by our taking, eating, and inward
digesting the bread and wine that becomes nourishment unto us. Thirdly, the
near union that God has made by Christ betwixt all the faithful, set forth
by the same bread being made of many grains of corn, and by the same wine
being made of many grapes.

Expl. I shall not need largely here to entreat of these meditations which has
been done already; only the Communicant that comes to the Lords Table is to
be aduert^sed, that by no means he be there an idle beholder of things done,
but a profitable ponderer of all circumstances, to stir him up to greatest
thankfulness unto God for so great benefits. In which, that he may be
helped, let him first herein consider Gods admirable love, in giving his Son
to death for his sins, his holy body to be broken, and his pure blood to be
shed: for without Gods giving of his Son to the cursed death of the Cross,
all the power of the Scribes, Pharisees and high Priests was not able to do
it. Wherefore he says, I lay down my life for my sheep, and no man takes it
from me, but J lay it down of my self. Even as if a man being condemned to
die, another most loving friend should lay down his life, and suffer for him;
Oh how thankfully were this love to be remembered, and with what praises to be
celebrated, as being unmatchable by any love that ever has been seen amongst
men: for a dear friend, there has been in many ages one amongst many Kingdoms
of the Latins, one amongst many of the Grecians, that have offered to die for
their friends; but for their enemies never any. Lord, therefore should the
soul of every Christian say, I offer again unto thee mine own self, soul and
body to serve thee, and my old nature to be killed and slain with all the
concupiscences thereof, though never so dear unto me, for thou have offered
thy dear son for me, and unto me without any desert of mine, and for this
cause art most worthy of all honor, and thanksgiving.

Secondly, let the Communicant consider of Gods admirable love in uniting him
so near unto his Son, and through his son unto himself, and in feeding
him from heaven with such comforts, without which his soul must needs be
hungerstarued, and perish.

John 17.21.
This was Christ's prayer unto the Father, that we might be one with him, that
they may all be one, as thou, O Father art in me, and I in thee, that they may
be also one in us: and this did he my stically in this Sacrament shadow out
unto us. When David was offered the Kings Daughter, and to be the Kings Son
in Law, Who am I, said he, that I should be Son in Law to a King? and, who am
I, should the Communicant say, that I should be made one with the King of
Heaven? Most unspeakable (O Lord) is thy love toward me, that thou should
have such respect to so poor a worm, to raise me out of the dust, to sit with
thy Christ, Romans 8.1^.
of so great dignity, to be so joined unto him, that I should be made coheire
with him of the heavenly Kingdom? How can I do less then put away all
baseness of mind, whereby I cleave to the world and the flesh, and be like
minded to my dear Savior (to whom I am joined in fellowship, though most
unworthy) being holy as he is holy.

It is also to be considered, how our souls are fed here even as the
Israelites with Manna from heaven, in the wilderness, where they must
otherwise have perished: and as David flying from Saul, by Abimelech, with the
hazard of his own life; so God spared not his son, but gave him, as bread
from heaven unto us, without which we must needs have perished for ever, and
in our greatest need, that we might have strength to fly away from the danger
of Satan enraged against us, he spared not, though with the hazard of his life
to give us the true Shewbread. Oh how should my heart be affected toward
thee, O Lord, therefore, and resolved to abide always with thee, vowing with
David to Abiathar, He that seeks my life, shall seek thy life also, those
that are thy enemies shall be mine, and as if they hated me.

Thirdly, let the Communicant consider of the near union that the Lord has
made by Christ betwixt all his Saints, into the which he is also received,
that faithfully partaketh of the Lords Supper: which should effectually
suppress all exorbitant affections, and work an holy love in him, as toward
members of the same body.

Quest. 142. What is to be done after the receiving?

Answ. We must meditate of the Covenant of new obedience with the Lord renewed
by this Sacrament, that we may be more careful to perform this obedience, and
to flee sin and vice all the days of our life.

Explan. The receiving of the Lords Supper is not a transient holy duty, as it
is by most men used (who put some holiness upon them for the time, afterward
returning as the dog to the vomit, and as the swine to the wallowing in the
mire) but it is a sealing of covenants betwixt God and his people, and the
grace of God for the pardon of all our sins; and our dutifulness to God, in
forsaking all our old sins, and living according to his holy laws: For as
God does hereby give himself unto us to become our God, and gracious Father;
so we give our selves unto God, to become his people, and obedient children.

There be these two parties in all covenants, otherwise they cannot stand,
something assured and given, and something taken and received therefore: So
betwixt Princes and Subjects; the Prince gives and assures his care in
ruling, and providing well for the good of the Subject, he receives tribute,
custom and obedience: so betwixt masters and servants, betwixt sellers and
buyers, lenders and borrowers.

In like manner in this Covenant God for his part assures, and gives himself
to be our gracious God, forgiving all our trespasses, and on our part, he must
receive tribute, subjection and obedience, otherwise the bond is forfeit, and
if it has bin so once, twice, or often, and the forfeit has not yet been
taken, take heed of the next time, for if thou still remain unreformed, not
better keeping covenants, having renewed them so many times, there is no hope
for thee to be dealt withal, but as with a desperate person, that thou
should suddenly be delivered to some infernal spirit, the Tailor, and so be
imprisoned in Hell, whence thou can never come out again.

If thou have therefore neglected to pay God the duties of praise and prayer,
of obedience, and performance of holy duties, both public and private, now be
negligent no longer, but be rather officious, redeeming the time with double
diligence; if thou have loved and lived in sin, and disobedience, keep
covenants by fear of offending any more hereafter, and if thou have no way
answered that love, which the Lord tieth thee unto toward thy neighbor for
his own sake, but have hated such as have showed any enmity against thee; for
offenses have been unadvisedly provoked, and through an immoderate love of thy
self, and of the world, have denied food unto the hungry, and have sought to
beguile thy neighbor; learn of Christ to be meek and gentle, in holiness,
follow Paul as he follows Christ, and for bounty, imitate Zacheus converted,
giving liberally to the poor, and satisfying where thou have done wrong to any
man: for thus, and thus only may thou have comfort of the Lords Supper, and
shall in his good time sit down in the Kingdom of Heaven, and be feasted with
Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, for ever and ever.

(...).

An Appendix to the Catechism.
FOrasmuch as the holy Scriptures are the ground and foundation of all divine
Teaching; and it avails not a little for setting men in the Truth, to
understand rightly both which be the Books of holy Scripture, and how we may
be assured, that they are the Word of God, and by whom, and how this Word is
to be preached, and heard, for our further building up in grace, I have thought
it expedient here to annexe these short Questions and Answers following.

Quest. 143. What is the Word of God?

Answ. Whatsoever is contained in the books of the old and new Testament, and
not any other books or writings whatsoever.

Quest. 144. How many, and which are these Books?

The Books of Canonical Scripture.
Answ. The Books of the Old Testament are twenty and seven, Genesis, Exodus,
Leuiticus, Numbers, Deuteronomie, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, the first and second of
Samuel, the first and second of the Kings, the first and second of the
Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Ester, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song
of Songs, Esaias, Jeremiah, with his Lamentation, Ezechiel, Daniel, and the Book
of the twelve small Prophets. The Books of the New Testament are twenty and
six, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, the Acts of the Apostles, the Epistle of
Paul to the Romans, the first and second to the Corinthians, to the
Galathians, Ephesians, Philippians, Collossians, the first and second to the
Thessalonians, the first and second to Timothy, to Titus, to the Hebrews, the
Epistle of James, the first and second of Peter, the first, second, and third
of John, the Epistle of Jude, and the Revelation of John.

Quest. 145. Are not the other Books called Apocryphal, part of the Word of
God also, as Esdras, Tobit, Iudeth, etc.

Answ. They are not books properly called Canonical but are annexed to the
word, as being full of good instructions and histories, declaring Gods
wonderful providence over his people Israel.

Explan. Diverse have been and are the errors of men about Gods Word, some
denying diverse parts of the Old and New Testament to be his Word: and some
Canonizing other writings also.

Concerning the first, some detestable Heretics have received none for the
word of God, but the fine Books of Moses as the Sadduces; some none but the
New Testament, as the Manich^es, and Marcion: some have rejected the Book of
Psalms, as the Nicholaitans, and Anabaptists: some the book of Job, as some
Rabbis; and some Daniel as Porphyrius: some have rejected the Gospel of Luke,
as Cerdon, some all but Mark, as Cerinthus; some the Gospel of John, as the
Alog^; some all Paul's works, as the Ebionites, etc.

Concerning the second, some have made the Apocryphal Books of equal
authority with the fore recited Scriptures, as the Papists, and others have
more boldly long since obtruded for Canonical, the fatherless brood of other
books unto these, as the third and fourth of Eldras, and Appendix of Job, a
Preface to the Lamentation, the third and fourth of the Macchabees, a Book
called (...), the Book of Enoch, the Gospel of Thomas and of Matthias, the
acts of Peter. And in the year 1120 a certain new Gospel, called Euangelium
aeternum, the eternal Gospel, was found out, being full of blasphemies: but
all these and the like are damnable presumptions, plainly forbidden by the
Lord, saying; Deuteronomy 4.2.
Ye shall not put ought unto the word that I command you, neither shall ye take
ought therefrom: and grievously threatened, Reu. 22.18 19.
If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues
that are written in this Book; and if any man shall diminish any thing, God
shall take away his part out of the Book of life.

Now that the Books first above named are all Canonical Scriptures, and part
of the word of God, Epist. Tom. 3.
has been acknowledged in all ages, by the Christian Church

Jerome writing to Paulinus of the study of the holy Scriptures, does both
reckon up all these books in particular, and adioyneth to every one of them a
several pithy commendation. And unto Leta he prescribes an order of reading
them with most safety and profit.

As for the other Books, Epist. Tom. 1.
which our Church adioyneth to the volume of the inspired Scriptures, they are
both entertained, and in part publicly read in our Churches, not as authentike
Principles, whereon to ground any doctrine, but as wholesome precepts of
morality, and declarations of the estate of the Church in those times, very
profitable for devotion, and heavenly meditation.

Quest. 146. What special proof is there, making manifest that those Books
of Scripture are the word of God?

Answ. The antiquity of those books, some of them being before all other books
sundry times oppugned, and sought to be burnt up by persecutors, and yet
wonderfully preserved, and by miracles from heaven confirmed, is a manifest
proof, that they came from heaven, and are not of man's invention.

That the ^oly Scriptures are Gods word.
Explan. Amongst all arguments there is none of that force in the conscience of
man; that this is of being taken from the divinity of the holy Scriptures. For
let it appear that they are of God, and what heart dares do any other but
yield unto them? Now, that they are of God, may be plainly proved by sundry
reasons.

First, by their Antiquity; for the first and most ancient writings in the
world concerning Religion, must needs be Gods, but these are the first and most
ancient; therefore must needs be Gods.

1. That the most ancient are Gods Scriptures, is plain; because otherwise
either some other Instructor must have been before God: or else God, the Ruler
of the whole world, must have been without any thing recorded, whereby the
world ought to be ruled, till that man had invented something to govern man
by; both which are most absurd.

That the holy Scriptures are most ancient, appears by the most ancient
humane writers. Orpheus, the first of all, writes of the two Tables delivered
to Moses. Whence he says, that he learned what he knew of God. Linus wrote of
the Tower of Babylon described by Moses, etc. making plain hereby that the
Books of Moses were long before any of their writings, and so the most ancient
in the world. Hence it is that Tacianus affirms that it appears out of
Berosus a Caldee Writer, Tatiani Oration aduersus gentes, Moses fuit Baccho
antiquior and plurimis diis gentium Clem. Alexandr.
out of the writings of the Phoenicians and Annals of the Egyptians, that
Moses wrote long before Orpheus, Linus, Amphyon, Homer, or the most ancient
Ethnickes. Now the Books of Moses are in effect the whole Scriptures, all that
follows tending only to the further explanation hereof. Wherefore the
Scriptures are most ancient, and consequently the undoubted word of God.

2. This is further proved by the preservation of the Scriptures in all ages,
other ancient Books being perished either in part or in whole, but the holy
Scriptures, though more oppugned then any by persecutors, who have sought to
blot out the memory of them, yet are wholly preserved without diminution or
corruption of any part of them. Had they been of man, certainly it would have
happened unto them as unto many other humane writings, which are most ancient:
which, if they have not perished, yet they have been falsified: yea, one
complains, that he himself yet living to see it, Fratribus rogantibus, vt
scriberem Epistolas, scripsi, has Apostoli, Diaboli Zizanijs alia eximentes,
alia ad^icientes, Dionysius Areo^ page
repleuerunt. The Brethren requesting I wrote Epistles, these the Apostles of
the Devil have filled with tares, adding some things, and taking away
othersome. Now the holy Scriptures have been singularly preserved herein, in
the hands of the Jews, who have misliked some things, and forbidden them to be
read, as Daniel, because he speaks so plainly of the Messiah: in the hands of
the heathen, as when at the request of Ptolomee they were translated by the
Septuagint, and in the hands of Heretics, who have corrupted Fathers and
Councels, yet never durst, but have been restrained from heaven, from
corrupting the Scriptures.

3. This is further proved by the miracles which have been wrought to confirm
the Scriptures to be of God, the Author of all true miracles: of this sort are
the miracles wought by Moses, by the Prophets, by Christ, and by his Disciples.
For all these miracles do plainly testify of them, that they were sent of
God; and if they were of God, then the word by them set forth is the word of
God.

4. The same is proved by the prophesies contained in the Scriptures, some
being of things to come to pass many hundreds of years after, as that the
seed of the woman should break the serpents head, that Abraham's posterity
should be numberless, that they should be strangers 400. years, that Josiah
should burn the bones of Baals Priests where Jeroboam did sacrifice, that the
people of Israel should be in captivity 70. years, that Cyrus expressly
forenamed, should give them leave to return and diversely honor them, etc.
From hence we may reason thus: Those Scriptures which in their revelations
exceed all the understanding of all creatures, are undoubtedly his who is above
all creatures, that is Gods: but such are the holy Scriptures, as appears by
these and the like Prophesies. Ergo, etc. for no created understanding can of
it self reach to things to come, to say certainly thus it shall be: some may
conjecture, or being appointed as instruments of execution may declare what
themselves shall perform, as the Devil did to Saul, but God only has made
it so proper to himself to foretell independently, absolutely, and infallibly
what shall come afterward, as that it may well be said, Let them tell what
shall come, let them do good or evil, and say that they be Gods.

5. The same is further proved by the Argument handled in the Scriptures, which
is altogether grave and holy, tending to the setting forth of all virtue, and
against all vice, whereas (as Iustine Martyr has observed) the writers of the
Heathen gods and religion, Justin Martyr.
were either ridiculous Poets, which derive the beginning of all from the
waters, and handle the quarrels, and filthy loves of the gods: or Philosophers
more ridiculous: for that the very chief of them were uncertain of the
beginning of things. Now such as the writing is, such must needs be the Author
from whom it first comes; true it is, that he which is unholy may write
things holy and good, but then they come not from him, but first from some
other fountain: therefore the most holy, who is God, must needs be the Author
of the holy Scriptures.

6. This is proved by the testimony of Heathen men themselves. The Law of Moses
against Images, Numa Pompilius the chief religious Emperor amongst the
heathen Romans approved of. Numenius a Pythagorean; Philosopher says of Plato,
that he was none other but Moses speaking in the Atticke tongue. Eusebius. de
prepar. Euang.
The Oracle of Apollo, confessed, that the Christians only had the truth, and
acknowledged the true God, says Eusebius. Tribellius Pollio writing of Moses,
says, that he was the only man familiar with God. Cornelius Tacitus
confesses the truth of that History in Exodus, telling how Pharaoh after many
plagues, let the children of Israel go, though he thrust in some absurd
fabulous lies concerning the Jews. Procopius testifies of Joshua, that for
fear of him the Phoenicians left their country. Linus and Homer write of the
Creation of the world in six days. Ovid of the general deluge, as also of
the Giants rearing of mountains up to heaven, which is an allusion to the
Tower of Babell. Abidenus, Sybilla and Hestiaeus of the long lives of the
Ancients. Epolemus of Abraham, and how he fought for Lot. Plato confesses,
that he learned the most excellent precepts of wisdom of the barbarous,
(meaning Moses and the Prophets.) Now whence comes this consent of men of
contrary minds to the truth of the Scriptures? Verily, from Gods providence,
that no man might deny that, which by the light of nature is acknowledged of
natural man, viz the truth and Divinity of the Scriptures.

7. The same is proved by the single drift of the Scriptures, which is only, to
give all glory to God, nothing to man, seeing that the faults of the best are
ingenuously and without flattery set down; neither is any man's favor affected
or sought for in any of these books, which cannot be said of any humane
writings.

8. The same is proved by the consent of all the books of holy Scripture,
though written by diverse men at sundry times. Never was the like to be found
touching men's writings, but even the same Author has been oftentimes noted to
differ from himself. Wherefore the Writers of the holy Scriptures were
undoubtedly guided by one spirit of truth, and what they wrote came from this
spirit which is God. If any differences seem to be in these holy writings,
this is, through the weakness of our conceit and misunderstanding, and not
indeed.

Quest. 147. Having this Word of God written, is it not sufficient for our
salvation without any other help, even as to have a Book of Statutes,
suffices to be kept from the danger of the Law, to those that will?

Answ. It is not sufficient, but it must also be set forth by preaching, that
the hard places may be rightly understood, we may be kept from errors, and
have our dull hearts stirred up to embrace the holy precepts hereof.

Explan. Many there be who acknowledge the Scriptures to be Gods word; but do
not so much regard the preaching of this word, prosuming upon their own
ability, to make a good use of it in private by reading, for their edification,
and salvation. And some color of reason there is also for this, seeing that
the word serves to acquaint us with the will and law of God, as a statute
book, with the Laws of the land; and knowing these Laws, if we will not
obey, all preaching cannot bring us to obedience, or do us more good. But this
is a deceitful color. First, because a Statute book is not like unto Gods
book, that being humane, and the penalty sensible, this divine and spiritual;
and not understood by a natural man: so that a man may read much here, but
remain still as destitute of understanding, Acts 8.
as the Eunuch who asked, How can I understand without an Interpreter?

Secondly, because preaching is the mean by which God has wrought in all
ages, and will principally and most powerfully work by this ordinarily for our
salvation.

1. Cor. 1.18. 1 Pet. 2, 2.
Thirdly, because no man can receive the word to his comfort, unless he
reverence and esteem of the preaching thereof, seeing that the word it self
does so highly commend and urge to attend to preaching.

Fourthly, because the Lord, who only can give light by his word, does direct
such as be in darkness, to the Preachers of his word, Saul to Ananias, Cornelius
to Peter, the Eunuch to Philip etc. refusing otherwise to give them any light.

Lastly, because men are naturally dull and backward to that which is good,
when they know it, so that reading only they are still frozen in their sins: it
is necessary, that by the exhortation of preaching they should be stirred up,
and by the zeal and heat of others be warmed and become agile and cheerful
to do accordingly.

In all things we say for comfort, Two are better then one: and why should it
not be so in this also? A man reading alone is forgetful, and lets it flip
soon out of his mind which he reads: a faithful Minister of Gods word
preaches unto him, and brings continually to his remembrance; he is like a
stick lying by a firebrand ready to go out; the Minister stirs up the fire,
and lays the sticks together, he has bread by him, but is feeble, because he
cannot break it in pieces to eat some of it, the Minister breaks it unto him
for his comfort.

I conclude therefore, that it is necessary to exercise the hearing of this
Word preached, besides the private reading thereof, and he that having the
means, contemns them, wandreth still in sin and blindness.

Quest. 148. What is the preaching of the Word of God?

Ans. It is properly the expounding of some part thereof, the teaching hence
the duties to be followed, and the sins to be avoided, and exhorting to do
accordingly.

Nehem. 8.9.
Explan. Some there be, that move as much trouble about preaching, as others
that deny the necessity hereof, and content themselves only with reading: some
affirming the bare reading of the Scriptures to be preaching; some talking
hereof one neighbor to another, and some the reading of Homilies or Sermons.
But the preaching of the word to speak properly is more then all these, as may
appear both by the practice in the days of Nehemiah, when it is said, that
the Priest stood upon a place higher then the people, and read the Law of God
plainly, and expounding the sense gave the understanding of the Scriptures.
And also in the new Testament, where after the Lecture of the Law and the
Prophets, it is said, that the Rulers of the Synagogue sent to Paul, and those
with him, saying, Act. 13 15.
Men and brethren if there be in you any word of exhortation unto the people,
speak. From hence arises plainly this description of Preaching, to be an
expounding, etc. as in the Answer.

Now for reading the Scriptures (though in a large sense it be a kind of
preaching, because that the truth is hereby set forth, and the Gospel, and
means of salvation made known to him that reads, or hears it read; yet it
is properly no more preaching, then reading is an Oration; neither is he that
does thus any more a Preacher, then such an one, an Orator. For when the
question is made, whether reading be preaching? it is not meant, whether by
reading is not the truth set forth, and may not saving grace be wrought in the
hearers? but whether reading be the preaching practiced by the Ministers of
Gods word under the old and new Testament, which is so much commended for the
lively operation, being Gods special and greatest ordinary power to salvation;
and whether the reading be that which we have charge to intend, when we are
bidden, go preach the Gospel? For unless they strive to make their reading
such a preaching, they question about nothing, if to make it such a preaching
they strive against the stream, the whole current of examples recorded in the
Word, being against them: yea, that special place, which they think a most
sure ground for them. Moses has of old such as preach him, when he is read in
their Synagogues every Sabbath day, Acts 15.26.
does plainly rebuke their negligence, seeing that it may well be hence
gathered, that at all times upon the Sabbath, when the Priests read Moses, they
expounded and gave light unto the people by teaching, as in Nehemiahs days.
Much more might be said for the confute of such gross opinions; but because I
propounded to be brief in all things, thus much shall suffice briefly for
this.

Let us all lay aside partiality, whereby we are carried to favor our selves,
and seek our own ease, and this corrupt fountain of such troubled opinions
being dammed up, I doubt not but we shall with one consent endeavor to preach
in another manner, then by reading and familiar talking, applying our selves to
the right understanding of the Scriptures, that we may give the right sense,
after the sense, find out sound and profitable doctrines, strengthened with
good reason, conuincing the judgment, and after the doctrines, frame some
forcible exhortations, to bring and bow the affections to the light set up in
the understanding, that Gods people may have more grace, and his holy name more
glory.

Quest. 149. Who may preach the Word of God?

Answ. Only such as are outwardly sent of God ordinarily, and when
extraordinary necessity does require, all such men as are inwardly stirred up,
and enabled by the spirit of God.

Who may preach.
Explan. Having showed what the preaching is, it follows what Preachers are,
viz. either in times ordinary or extraordinary; ordinarily we are to account
him as a fit Preacher, who is outwardly sent of God, and none other, that is,
in a Country where the Gospel is maintained by the higher powers, and an order
for the sending forth of preachers is established, he is a lawful preacher of
the word, that is, sent forth according to this order, and if any preach being
not thus sent, they are intruders and not laborers, sent into the Lords
harvest. And this I say for the satisfaction of the people, that they may have
a sure ground to rest upon against al cauils of those, that would make the^
believe, that the licensed Preachers of the Church of England are no lawful
Preachers either because they which make them had not ordination at the first
from such as could lawfully give it, which is the cavil of the Papists, or
because some forsooth misliked ceremonies are used in their ordination, which
is the dotage of the Brownists: For admit that Bishops and other Ministers of
the Gospel should fail, so that there were none to give orders, or that all
were so corrupt, as that they would not to any that embraced the truth, what
should there never then be any more lawful Ministers of the Gospel? God
forbid: for so the Lord should be tied necessarily to outward means of sending
forth Preachers, and if he wanted vnder-meanes, his Harvest should be
unprovided of Laborers. But the Church of England; God be thanked, needs not
to fly to this refuge. We can, and do prove our Ordination and succession of
Bishops Canonically invested, and continuing the offspring of our inferior
Ministry without interruption, mauger the barking of lewd Romanists against
our Church, whose very Popes have been many of them mere open intruders.
Secondly, for the reformed Sectaries; what other then decent and commendable
ceremony can their pure wisdoms carp at in our Ordination.

Again, admit that some errors should creep into the ordination of Ministers,
what shall the Ministers be disabled hereby, and become no lawful Ministers?
God forbid: for thus the maine virtue of such as take orders, should depend
upon some outward circumstance, making them, if it be right; marring them, if
otherwise; and the people that know not the circumstances of every man's
ordination, should be held in doubt, whether they be Gods lawful Ministers,
and to be heard, or not.

Romans 10.
Wherefore I say, that he is a lawful Preacher, that is outwardly called and
sent, provided always that he preach the truth, and no heresies which are
errors stiffely defended, contrary to the plain evidence of the Scriptures,
and if he does preach heresy, which thou think may be so proved by some
fa^re fetched Argument, yet this makes not him to cease from being a lawful
Preacher; yea, though he maintains heresy plainly against the word in a
Church, where the truth is by the higher powers maintained, he is still a
lawful Preacher, until that by public authority he be inhibited. And the
reason of all this is, because such as are outwardly sent by the Ministry of
Christ's Vicegerents, the Apostles successors, who ordain them, are sent by
Christ: and if thus sent, who shall say they are unlawful Preachers? and if
not thus ordinarily sent, who shall say that they are lawful, seeing it is
written, How shall they preach, unless they be sent? And if they be thus sent
of God, they must likewise be inhibited, before they cease to be lawful.

1. Tim. 5.22.
Preachers indeed may be unworthy, and unworthily sent and continued, but if
through remissness or covetousness any send them so, they make themselves
partakers of their sins, and bring a double woe upon their own heads: and if
any go being such, though sent, they make the sacrifices of the Lord to be an
abomination to the people, and with Elies sons, shall have judgments, making
the ears of those that hear it to tingle. 1, ^a^. 2 17.
Wherefore be circumspect (ye reverend Fathers) in ordaining, and if any
degenerate after their ordination, exercise your authority by suspending, and,
without speedy reformation, by turning them out of the Ministry.





Quest. 150. What is required to the right hearing of the Word?

Answ. To prepare a man's self by prayer, and holy meditation, and by emptying
the heart of corrupt affections, to attend diligently and reverently at the
preaching of the Word, and laying it up in the heart to do accordingly all the
days of his life.

To hear the word rightly.
Explan. Take heed how you hear, was often in the mouth of our Savior, and
must be always in the ears of such as will hear well; otherwise as the Lord
says of speaking good words, Matthew. 7.
Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven,
so not every one that hears shall be saved, but he that hears rightly, and
as he ought to hear. Now for this there must be preparation before, diligence
in hearing, and care afterward.

1. For preparation, the Lord shows the necessity hereof, when he
requires, that the people should be sanctified three days together, before
that they should hear the Law, and the wise man, Eccles 4.17.
who bids, Take heed unto thy feet, when thou enterest into the house of the
Lord, and be readier to hear, then to offer the sacrifice of fools: so that
such as come vnpreparedly, come foolishly to hear, and are so polluted, as
that the Lord cannot take pleasure in their hearing. That a man may therefore
come prepared, it is necessary that he be humbled for his sins, purge his
heart of sinful affections, pray for a right disposition, and meditate upon
the excellency of the Word, and his own need hereof.

He that does not before hearing call himself to account for his sins, to
be humbled and to crave mercy in the pardon of them, is like unto an ill
debtor, who being engaged in ten thousand talents to his creditor, and an
execution out against him, does notwithstanding come boldly into his presence,
without seeking by the mediation of friends to make some composition and
agreement beforehand: what the rashness and danger of such is, all men know.
So likewise is it the act of him that comes to hear the Word of GOD, not
having sought reconciliation aforehand by humiliation and prayer, either
public, or private.

He that comes to hear, not having purged out sinful and vile affections,
is like unto the sick man, that would have some comfortable receipt without
purging; or unto the wounded man, that would have lenitiues applied to his
corrupt sore, without corsiues, which is the way to greater danger: so he that
comes to hear, not having purged his heart of malice, envy, lust,
worldliness, etc. is far from taking the right way to cure his soul; for he
puts it further into deadly danger. Wherefore Saint Peter warns to lay
aside all maliciousness, 1. Pet. ^1.2.
all guile, all dissimulation and envy, and as newborn babes to desire the
sincere milk of the Word: as who should say, ye are unfit to ^eare, unless as
newborn babes ye be purged so, as that ye be without any of these vile
affections: Even as a dead fly that lies hid in a box of precious ointment,
corrupts it all; so corrupt affections, though deeply hidden in the heart,
make the service done unto God naught worth.

John. 4.10.
Prayer is as Jacobs* Ladder set up to heaven, by which the soul ascends, and
fetches down Gods blessing, it is the knocking, seeking, and asking that ever
prevails, it obtains water of life, though there be nothing to draw it
with, as Christ told the Woman of Samaria, saying; If thou had asked, I would
have given thee of the water of life. Wherefore when the Word is to be
preached, Pray for me (says Paul) that utterance may be given unto me, and
that I may open my mouth boldly to utter the secret of the Gospel: So let
every hearer pray, Ephesians 6.19.
that the Preacher may have utterance, and his own heart an open door of
entrance.

Lastly, to consider the excellency of the Word, and our own necessity,
stirs up an hungring and thirsting deesire after the Word, breeds an
appetite, and makes us fit to digest this food, and to turn it into wholesome
nourishment to our souls. For so excellent is the Word (being a light sent
from Heaven to inlighten us in our darkness, a sword to defend us, a precious
treasure to enrich us, food to nourish us, a sweet savor to perfume us, salt
to season us, and a girdle to strengthen us) as that if we cast our eyes
hereupon, we shall undoubtedly long after it: But look we withal upon our
own necessity and spiritual poverty, by reason of the darkness of our
vnderstandeng weakness to resist our enemy, want of all good things, poverty
and nakedness, and then shall we have a long ng affection unto it indeed,
gaping after it, as the thirsty ground does after the rain.

2. For diligence in hearing, where this preparation is made, that will
certainly follow; for a man shall not need to bid him that is hungry and in
want, to hasten to a feast, or to come so often as he may, or to apply
himself to feeding, when he comes there: for he comes with such a
stomach, as that he will surely do so: In like manner, he that comes
rightly prepared to hear the Word of GOD, will neglect no time when he may
come, nor lose his part of that spiritual food when he is there.

Esaias 6.9.
He will therefore first apply his heart to understand, for to hear and not to
understand, is to neglect, he will not suffer either the bewitching pleasures,
or enchanting profits of the world to steal away his heart, but labor so to
see, as that he may perceive, so to hear as that he may understand, seeing the
contrary is a grievous judgment of men given over of the Lord for sin.

2. He does reverence the Ordinance of GOD, being rightly composed in gesture,
but above all, inwardly affected in heart: for he trembles at the word, he is
pricked inwardly at the preaching, Esaias 66.2. Acts 2.
he expresses sorrow at the hearing of the grieuousnesse of his sins, and
joy at the hearing of comforts: laughing, wanton looks, vain prating, and an
impudent countenance, Ezra 10.1.
as most abominable things, are far from him.

3. He does persevere in his attention unto the end, not when he hears this
new Preacher, or that, but whosoever he be that preaches the truth, not
sometime hearkening, sometime sleeping, not lightly departing when he thinks
that he has heard enough, but with due regard continuing to the end, always
remembering that exhortation, Gal. 6.9.
Let us not be weary of well-doing, for in due time we shall reap if we
faint not.

Colos. 3.16.
Lastly, for care after the hearing of the Word, the good and profitable hearer
has the word dwelling in him plenteously, like a good Apprentice to the trade
of Christianity, he lets not pass the precepts of the word so soon as he
has heard them, but does carefully apply them afterward. Colos 3.1^.
This care after hearing is first by recounting in the mind from point to
point, the things which have bin taught, which is like unto the husbandmans
covering of his corn, when he has cast it into the ground; or the chewing of
the cud after that the beast has fed, J have hid thy word in my heart, Psalm.
119.11.
that I might not sin against thee, says David, and he that does not so,
like an idle husbandman, leaves his seed to the devouring of the fowls, and
to the parching sun, as the beast that ch^weth not the cud, is unclean:
wherefore he that will get most profit by hearing, must again consider the
text, the sense of the words, the notes, reasons, grounds, and illustrations
hereof, and how for use every thing is to be applied to himself.

Deuteronomy. 6.
Secondly, the good hearer will confer and talk of that which he has heard,
to help others, children and servants, and neighbors of less understanding,
and to help himself if his memory be imperfect, by conferring with men more
able, if there be any doubt by repairing to the Preacher, and of him seeking
resolution. For thou shall talk of this Law, says the Lord, to thy children,
when thou sit down, and when thou risest up: and when the men of Boerea
were doubtful, they are commended for examining the doctrines preached by the
Scriptures. Acts 17.1^.
Even as the wayfaring man having received directions for the way, but in going
forward grows doubtful, he will ask and inquire again, that he may be the
more sure, and the more comfortably go forward: so he that has heard the
word, and thereby directions for his pilgrimage, shall meet with doubts, and
for his more assurance must therefore enquire again.

Psalm. 119.36.
Thirdly, the good hearer prays after that he has heard, that the word which
he has heard may be effectual unto him for his salvation, that now he has
learned what is good and acceptable in the sight of God, he may have an heart
yielding unto it in all things, according to that of the Prophet, Incline my
heart unto thy Law, and not unto covetousness.

Lastly, the good hearer in all things labors to do according to that which
he has learned, according to that of James, Be ye doers of the Word and not
hearers only, deceiving your own selves. He does the Word by believing, and
embracing by faith the most comfortable promises of the Gospel, he does it by
love and hearty affection toward God, and toward man for Gods cause, he does
it by obedience, framing himself according to the rule of this love, he does
it by fighting and striving against all rebellion, and he does it by growing
daily more and more like unto it, until that he be cast anew, as it were, in
the mould of this Word. This, and all other spiritual graces he grant unto us,
and multiply in us, who is the Author of that holy Word, and the end of the
same. To him be all glory world without end. Amen.

FINIS.
A Prayer to be used before the reading of Books of piety, or Instruction.
O God that art the Father of lights, enlighten my darkened understanding, that
I may see into the wonders contained in the Law. Dispell in me the dark and
misty clouds of ignorance, expel the love of darkness, and repel the
rebellious law of sin. Sanctify my wit, that I may be apt to conceive,
strengthen my memory, that I may be able to retain, and rectify my will, that
I may obediently submit my self to thy good will in all things. Thou which art
the great Master Builder of thine own house, settle me as one of thy living
stones upon the right foundation, Jesus Christ; in whom I may daily grow up,
till that all the building coupled together grows to an holy temple in the
Lord. And this I crave in the name of thy dear Son, my most blessed Savior
and redeemer. Amen.

A Prayer to be used every Morning in a private Family.
MOst gracious God, and merciful Father, it is by thy good providence that we
are brought so safely through the deadly dangers of another night to see the
light of this day to our comfort, and much more has thy goodness extended it
self toward us in that together with the light natural, the bright beams of
thy grace have shone upon us in Jesus Christ in our Election, Creation,
Redemption, Sanctification, and Glorification. We have nothing to present thy
Majesty withal for this unspeakable mercy only, as is our bounden duty, and
thy commandment, we sacrifice the calves of lips by humble and hearty
thanksgiving. We cannot sufficiently prize, nor worthily praise thy goodness,
being herein unmeasurable, that when we are sinful, and rebellious against
thee, and provoke thee night and day, yet passing by all our sins, as if thou
saw them not thou still wagest us with new favors, and bindest us with
cords of love, when thou might strain upon us snares, fire, and brimstone,
storm, and tempest, the deserved portion of such wicked ones as we are. O
stir up our dull hearts by this undeserved love, that we may inwardly relent
for offending so good a God, and be more affected with hearty love toward so
loving a father, and we humbly entreat thee for thy Christ's sake, to pardon
our former gross ingratitude, and all other our sins: Wash us (O Lord) with
his blood, and we shall be clean, purge us, and we shall be whiter then
Snow. Remove our sins from us, as far as the East is from the West, cast
them behind thy back into the bottom of the sea, that they may never rise up
in judgment against us, to shame us here, or to condemn us hereafter. Work
in us true humiliation for all our sins, let us cast down our selves under
thy mighty hand, that thou may lift us up. A contrite heart is a sacrifice
unto thee, which thou will not despise; give us this, that we may offer it
unto thee: open our eyes to see the precious body of our dear Savior wounded
and bleeding, his heart heavy and sorrowing, and his soul in bitter agony
departing for our sins, that we may wail and weep every family apart,
seeing him whom we have pierced. And let us abhor all sin for the time to
come, as a new crucifying of the Lord of life, yea, our most private and dear
sins that we have loved, as our lives. Let not the deceitfulness of our
hearts so far misleade us, as that we should willingly be entangled with
any one sin, seeing that he which keeps the Law, and yet is faulty in one
point, is guilty of all. And because we have many enemies that labor to keep
us the bondslaues of sin, put away security and carelessness from us, let us
always watch and prepare to fight against them. Arm us with the whole armor
of thy Spirit, the shield of Faith, the Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Girdle
of Verity, and with thy Word, the Sword of the Spirit: that howsoever we be
assaulted, we may not be overcome, but resisting the Devil, put him to flight,
and obtain the Crown, that eternal glory, which is set before us. Bless,
and sanctify us this day that we may serve thee better then heretofore we have
done. Enable us to the works of our Callings, both with bodily strength and
inward grace and direct us so, as that we may undertake nothing but in thy
fear. Let the continual remembrance of thy presence be as a bit and a bridle
to curb us in from following our inordinate affections: that we being in all
things ordered by thee, may enjoy thy blessing to the prospering of our
endeavors, to the glory of thy name, and to our perpetual encouragement in
this holy service of praising and praying unto thee, Let all our bodily labors
be seasoned with spiritual meditations, though our works be earthly, let our
hearts be heavenly, set upon things above where Christ Jesus sits at the
right hand of God. If through thy blessing riches increase, let us not set our
hearts thereon; if for our punishment they decrease, let us not be discouraged
hereby. The more we have, make us the more thankful, and watchful, that we be
not deceived: the less we have, make us the poorer in spirit, that we may
inherit the kingdom of heaven. Grant these things unto us (O merciful Father)
and unto thy whole Church, and to every part and member thereof, as all our and
their cases are particularly known unto thy heavenly wisdom, far beyond that
which we are able to describe, and that for the alone merits and worthiness of
Jesus Christ our most blessed Mediator and Advocate, in whose maine we further
praise thee, and pray, as himself has taught us. Our Father, which art, etc.

A Prayer to be used every Evening in a private family.
O Lord, in whom we live, move and have our being, we desire to offer up our
evening sacrifice of praise unto thee for this day. But how should we come
unto thee to be heard and accepted, being of uncircumcised lips. So great,
we confess, are our sins, and such is our unworthiness by reason of them,
as that, if we should excuse our selves, our consciences would accuse, and our
own hearts condemn us. Our nature is vile and rebellious, hindering us from
the good which we ought to do, and inclining us to the evil which we ought to
leave undone. Our understandings are darkened, our wills are crooked, our
thoughts, unclean, and our affections perverse, loving darkness more then the
light, because our deeds are evil In our whole man we have served sin, our
ears and eyes have been as windows to let in sin, our mouths have bin
fountains of the salt water of sin, our hands have been hooks to pull unto us
sin, our feet have been as wheels running down along in the ways of sin,
and our breasts have been as chests fast locking up sin. Neither have we
sought to be delivered out of this bondage, but daily have we thrust our selves
further into it, for so much as we have not shunned, but rather sought
occasions and prouocations unto sin. And through a daily custom of sinning,
it is so come to pass, as that we are insensible and without feeling of the
heavy weight and burden of sin, it presses not our hearts, it does not
inwardly grieve us, we cannot sacrifice broken hearts and contrite spirits unto
thee, therefore miserable creatures that we are, who shall deliver us from the
body of this death? We have none in heaven, O Lord but thee, neither have we
any in earth but thee alone, and thou art our Father from everlasting. Good
Father do thou therefore deliver us, through thy all-sufficient grace sanctify
us, and through thy infinite mercy in Jesus Christ, save us from all our
sins. Turn us unto thee, so shall we be turned, turn the light of thy
countenance toward us, so shall we be filled with joy and gladness, more then
when corn, and wine, and oil are increased. Inlighten our understandings to
see more clearly into thy will, rectify our wills, that they may be in all
things conformable to thy most holy will, sanctify our affections, that we
may love that which thou command, and hate that which thou forbiddest,
strengthen our memories, that we may retain all good things; settle our
judgments, that we may not be wavering but firm in the truth, and dispose us
so altogether both in soul and body, as that in all our parts, powers, and
faculties we may serve thee in new obedience, as those that are borne anew of
the holy Ghost. Strengthen our weak faith, that we may certainly believe thy
gracious promises of life and salvation, that being assured of these best
things, and that thou have given thy dear Son Christ unto us, we may trust
in thee for all other things also. Inflame us with love of thy Majesty, who
have done so great things for us: And because we cannot better express our
love toward thee, then by the love of our neighbor, who is after thy image,
work in us the love of our neighbor, yea even of those that be our enemies
and hate us. Send down from heaven the fire of zeal for thy glory into us, so
that with all earnestness we may seek to advance it, let us not esteem of
our own lives in regard of thy glory, knowing that such as honor and glorify
thee, thou will honor them. Give us sincerity, that in all things we may
stand before thee, and be upright. Cast us down with true humility, that in
Jesus Christ thou may lift us up, make us poor in spirit, that thou may
enrich us with the heavenly inheritance. Temper us with patience in adversity,
whatsoever thy holy hand shall at any time lay upon us. Teach us to be meek and
gentle, according to the example of our Savior, that we may find rest unto our
souls. Make us temperate and sober in the use of thy good creatures, holy as
thou art holy, heavenly, as our hope is in heaven, innocent and harmless, in
the midst of this crooked generation, and fruitful in all good works, to the
glory of thy Name. Expel and drive out of us whatsoever is an enemy to thy
saving graces, blindness, and ignorance, infidelity and hardness of heart,
hatred and envy, cool and lukewarm affections, hypocrisy and dissimulation,
pride and ambition, impatience and discontent, harshnes and intemperance,
profaneness and worldliness, deceit and oppression, with all other cursed
fruits of the wicked flesh, which hinder us that we cannot do those things
which we would, and as a violent stream carry us captive to the Law of sin.
Unto this we are altogether unable of our selves, we know not what to do, but
our eyes are toward thee. Let the eyes of thy compassion be therefore opened
unto us, behold our weakness, and put to thy helping hand to support us; draw
us, and so shall we come unto thee. Sanctify all means for our help and
furtherance, thy Word, Sacraments, Prayer, Meditations, Conference, and the
like; especially let thy love renewed upon us this day, stir us up to such an
answerable measure of true thankfulness, as that hereby we may be whetted, and
have such a new edge set upon our desires, as that we may go through all
hindrances, and with all readiness perform our duty unto thee. And
forasmuch, as the night now approaches, wherein we are to enter into our beds,
as into our graves, and there is no power in us to rise any more or to save us
from death and destruction: O blessed God, be thou our protector and Savior.
Bestow such a competent measure of refreshing by quiet sleep upon us, and so
safeguard and defend us, as that being preserved safe by thy providence, and
comforted by thy blessing, we may rise to morrow more able and willing to
serve thee in our vocations. And these graces we crave as for our selves, so
for thy whole Church, and for every part and member thereof, especially for
these Churches, under the government of our Kings Majesty, for his royal
person, and for all estates and degrees under him. Lord, look not upon the
crying sins of these miserable times, bring us speedily home unto thee by
true repentance and amendment of life, and for thine own glories sake, still
let the true religion flourish amongst us, and confound all plots and devices
to the contrary. Be pitiful to all our afflicted brethren, be merciful to all
our kindred, and more special acquaintance, knitting us all together by the
firmest band of the Christian faith, til being thus coupled together we grow up
to a perfect temple in the Lord, and that only for the merits of Jesus thy
dearly beloved Son, and our infinitely loving Savior, and Redeemer. Amen.

A Prayer for the Sabbath, before public meeting.
O Eternal God, who have commanded a double Sacrifice to be offered every
morning and evening upon the Sabbath day, we thy unworthy servants here humbled
in thy presence, in obedience to thy commandment, according to our bounde^
duty, desire to offer this double Sacrifice of prayer in thy house, the house
of Prayer. And we account it no small part of our happiness, that we may thus
freely, thus often, come into thy holy presence, for in thy presence is fulness
of joy, and pleasures for evermore. Blessed be thy name (O Lord) that we are
yet continued in the Land of the Living, and that with our life we have
spiritual light, without which, our life were more terrible then death, and
that when we have abused and walked unworthy of the light, loving darkness,
and living therein, this glorious light is still continued to enlighten our
darkness, and to guide our feet in the way of peace. Good Lord sanctify us,
and dispose us now aright, seeing by thy providence we are this day to assemble
and meet together in thy house, that the beams of this light may shine amongst
us. Forgive us all our sins, purge, and wash us with the blood of Jesus
Christ, that even as the Israelites being washed and sanctified, saw thy glory
upon the mount, so we may be fit to come into the same presence of glory.
Dispell in us the thick clouds of natural dullness, that ouer-spread the eye
of our mind, so that the light, though most clear, cannot break forth unto
us: remove that hardness of heart, which makes us insensible, and without
feeling, either of thy most grievous threatenings, or of thy gracious promises:
suppress in us all inordinate affections of anger, malice, hatred, and envy;
empty us of pride, worldliness, vanity and profaneness, that as newborn
babes we may desire the sincere milk of thy word, to grow thereby. Put into us
due consideration, that we may take heed to our feet when we enter into thy
house, and not offer the Sacrifice of fools. Thus dispose us (O Lord) to thy
public service; and because a little leaven leaueneth the whole lump, thy
Sabbaths are defiled by vanity, and worldly employment, even when we are gone
from thy house, (merciful Father) restrain us here-from, help us to
consecrate this day, as glorious unto thee: and to be sober in eating and
drinking, holy in conference, and talking, heavenly in meditation, seeking in
all things the best edification of our selves and others. Open our hands to the
necessities of our poor brethren, and our hearts to have compassion upon such
as suffer, and be in misery. That in all we may be to the praise of thy name,
keeping a most holy rest, and in thy good time come to rest with thee in thy
holy mountain, when every day shall be a Sabbath, and time of unspeakable
delight unto us for ever and ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.
Amen.

A Prayer for the Sabbath, after public meting.
MOst gracious God, the fountain of all goodness, we desire with thankful
hearts to acknowledge, that as at all times, so especially this day, even
streams of thy grace have flowed unto us to refresh us, when we were dry.
Thou have led us to thy house, thou have set thy door open unto us, thou have
heard our prayers and supplications made for our selves, and for the rest of
thy Church Militant upon earth: suffer them not (O Lord) to return empty unto
us, though coming from polluted lips, and hearts full of many imperfections.
Receive them as sweetened with the precious incense of thy Son our Saviors
passion, and perpetual intercession. Thou have fed us there with Manna from
heaven, by the ministry of thy holy word: thou have vouchsafed thy presence
unto us, filling us with joy and gladness, thou have given us to believe, to
abhor sin, and embrace thy grace, though we are ashamed of our inconstancy,
and too little profiting, in regard of the means of so long a time. O Lord,
suffer not this to be as an untimely birth in us, or as the grass upon the
house top, that never comes to perfection, but work in us constancy and
perseverance, that where any grace is begun, it may be continued and perfited
in the day of the Lord, and where it is not begun, it may be in thy good time.
Open our eyes still more and more to see those things, that concern the peace
and welfare of our souls, that we may folfow after them. Give us grace to
consider the vanity of this world, and of all worldly things, and that the
whole duty of man is to fear God and to keep his commandments, and incline
our hearts unto these, and not unto covetousness. Let us not be forgetful
hearers of thy Word, but careful doers of thy will; let thy Word dwell
plenteously in us, that as the Scepter of thy Kingdom it may sway us; as
immortal seed, it may fructify in us; as a sword, it may cut up sin, and as
a pillar of fire, it may guide us in the night of this world, till we come to
the heavenly Canaan. Forgive the infirmities of this day, our irreuerence in
thy worship, our vanity, worldlines, and neglect of so precious time. Let not
these things hinder, but that thy word may become the sweet savor of life
unto us, but that we may be made hereby fruitful in all good works, to the
honor of thy most blessed name, through Jesus Christ our only Mediator and
Advocate. Amen.

A Prayer to be used in the time of sickness.
MOst gracious God, who only smitest, and art able to heal again, breakest,
and art able to bind up again, behold with the eye of compassion me thy
poor servant, justly broken and smitten with thy rod for my transgressions;
behold, I say, how I lie at the gate of thy mercy, waiting till thy charitable
hand be stretched out to help, and comfort me: I am a wretched sinner, I
confess, O Lord, and whatsoever punishment thou do inflict upon me, I
deserve ten thousand times more at thy revenging hands, if thou should
enter into judgment with me. In my prosperity I have waxed wanton, like a full
fed heifer, lifting up my heel against thee; I have given my strength unto
sin, and not unto thy service; and although thy word has been sounded in
mine ears, threatening heavy punishments for my sins, yet I flattered my
self in my heart, saying, I shall never be moved. But have mercy upon me,
most merciful Father, for Jesus Christ his sake, remember not these my
abusings of thy mercies against me, but let there be an healing of my
transgressions and sins. Open mine eyes to see how greatly I have offended, in
omitting duties commanded, in committing evils forbidden against thee, and
against my brethren, that all my sorrow may be turned into sorrow for sin,
that the issue hereof may be repentance unto salvation, never to be repented
of. And (good Father) be pleased upon my unfeigned humiliation, and turning
unto thee, in mercy to turn unto me again, speaking peace unto my mourning
soul, saying by thy spirit that I shall be comforted. And the cause of all
misery, sin, being removed out of thy sight, let my punishment be removed
also. Remember my frailty, O Lord, how that my strength is not the strength of
stones, or of iron, that I be not tempted beyond that I shall be enabled to
bear. Temper my bitter cup with such faith, patience, and wisdom, as that I
may wisely, patiently, and with due submission drink of the same, to thy
glory, mine own comfort, and the good example of others. When I am weakest,
be thou strongest by thy grace in me, and let my prayers in the name of thy
dear son prevail, as the wrestlings of Jacob, for a blessing in the midst
of these grievous troubles. Set the the glory of thy Saints before mine eyes
always, that I may the better bear these momentany afflictions, which are not
to be compared unto that inestimable joy. Make me steadfastly to behold the Lord
Jesus heavy unto the death, wounded, bleeding and dying an accursed death, when
he was altogether without fault or blame, that I may not be despairingly cast
down, seeing that I suffer justly for my sins. Give me a due consideration of
thy wonderful love manifested in afflictions, to thy children, that I may
rejoice in tribulation, seeing that I am punished in this world for my
amendment, that I may escape the intolerable judgments of the world to come.
Turn mine eyes downward, to see how thy holiest servants, Job, David and
Daniel, with infinite others, have more deeply tasted of this cup of
adversity, that I may not grieve to be sorted with them, who are now in
Paradise: with these and the like heavenly meditations so fill my mind, O Lord,
that I may bear my infirmities. And defer not, but make have to work my
deliverance, according to thy promise to those that trust in thee. I believe, O
Lord, help mine unbelief, let it not hinder the working of this gracious
work, the freeing me out of this grief and misery. Once again let me have
some respit from my pain that I may praise thee in the land of the living, and
if through thy mercy I shall be restored to health and strength, so sanctify
this affliction, as that I may say, it is good for me that I have been
afflicted, for that I am hereby taught to keep thy commandments. And here I
do promise and vow my self, O God unto thee, if thou shall vouchsafe this
mercy, a perpetual sacrifice in soul and body, to serve thee in new obedience
for all time to come. If in thy divine counsel thou have determined this to be
the end of my frail life here: O Lord into thy hands I commend my spirit,
preserve me to thy Kingdom, to the very last gasp; let not Satan come near
unto me, set a guard of thy holy Angels about me, and so assist me with thy
grace, that both in life and in death, unto the end and in the end, I may
glorify thee, that my troubles in my bed of sickness may end in perpetual
rest in Abraham's bosom, and my grievous pangs, in everlasting joy, and
heavenly singing to thee, O King, and to the Lamb that sits upon the throne,
who with the holy Ghost ever lives and reigns one God world without end. Amen.

Grace before Meat.
O Lord, bless unto our use thy creatures at this time provided for our
sustenance, that being preserved hereby and comforted, we may do thee more
laudable service unto thy glory, who art the Author of all good unto us,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Or this.
O God, who has justly cursed the earth, and all things therein for the sin
of man, pardon our sins, turn away thy curse, and vouchsafe thy blessing
upon these thy gifts, which we are now to receive: that we using them with
temperance and thankfulness may obtain by them refreshing, and be enabled by
them to thy service, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Grace after Meat.
Continual praise be unto thee, O Lord, who do continually provide so
graciously for the feeding of our feeble bodies. Lead us hereby to a taste of
our spiritual food; so that by the help of both we may grow up in thy
service, both in body and soul, till at the last we attain thy heavenly
Kingdom, and be for ever glorified both in soul and body, through Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Or this.
Merciful Father, who never ceasest to do good unto us, though we never cease
offending thee, and now more especially have renewed thy bounty in feeding us
with thy blessings. Let not the common fruition of thy benefits make us
commonly, or lightly to esteem of them, neither when we are fed, let us wax
wanton against thee, abusing our strength to the service of sin. But let thy
perseverance in goodness, work in us perseverance in all dutiful obedience to
our lives end, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

FINIS.

