(...) A Catalogue of those Authors, out of whom any thing is taken in the
following Expositions.
AMbrosius. Artopaeus. Augustinus. Anselmus. Athanasius. Aretius. Adam Sasbout.
Alcasar. Ambros. Compsae. Abbot. Andreas* Alphonsus. Arethas. Abbas Ioachim.
Basilius magnus. Beda. Brightman. Beza. Bernard. Blasius Viegas. Baronius.
Bibliander. Bullinger. Bellarmine. Beard. Brocardus. Chrysostomus. Clemens
Alexand. Cicillus Alexand. Caietan. Caelius. Clemens. 1. Chitreus. Collado.
Catharinus. Dydimus. Dionysius. Dent. Epiphanius. Eusebius. Erasmus. Forbs.
Franciscus Breus. Fox. Fulke. Faber Stapul. Franc. Lambert. Gregorius Magnus.
Glossa Ordin. Glos. Interlin. Graeca Scholia. Gagnaeus. Giffard. Gorran.
Grasserus. Hieronymus. Haimo. Herodotus. Hugo. Irenaeus. Josephus. Joan.
Leonard. Illiricus. Iunius. Luther. Lioy. Lyranus. Lorinus. Methodius.
Marlorat. Mason. Nicephorus. Napier. Osiander. Oecumenius. Origin Orosius.
Petrus Aureolus. Pareus. Petrus Damascen. Piscator. Petrus du Moulin. Pirkins.
Primasius. Pannonius. Prosper Aquitan. Ribera. Rupertus. Richard. de Sancto
Victore. Ruffinus. Syrus Interpres. Strabo. Sebastianus Meyer. Sixtus Senensis.
Scaliger. Sabellicus. Suarez. Sleiden. Surius. Thomas Aquinas. Tertullian.
Ticonius. Tremelius. Tossanus. Turrianus. Vict. Zeger. Viterbiensis. Victor
Vticensis. Victor Antioch. Whitaker.
TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY, CHARLES by the grace of God, of great Britain,
France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Grace, Mercy and Peace in
Christ Jesus.
DRead Sovereign, for so much as J have now a long time devoted my self by
writing to do some service to this Church, whereof the great God of Heaven
has made your Majesty, under his Son Christ, supreme Head and Governor; J
have thought it my duty (now that by the Divine assistance J have finished this
difficult Work, which is the first that J have put forth since your Majesty's
auspicious coming to the Crown) to present it to your Royal hands, as being
the best way that J have to express my unfeigned hearty love and affection, and
exceeding great joy for the happy Inauguration of another very David again for
courage, after such a Solomon for wisdom; of another Iosuah after Moses; after
a Writer, a Fighter of the Lords battles: Only J pray, that he who alone
moderateth the wars, would likewise grant Victories to our Iosuah and to his
Forces and Confederates, that no idolatrous Amorites may be able to stand
before him, but now that their wickedness is come to such an height, they may
be confounded and dissipated. This must be their end, as the Fountain of all
profound wisdom did long ago reveal unto John, neither can it be long
before they come to this end, as the following expositions upon John I hope
will make plain to every intelligent Reader. The Revelation, the expounding of
which, is the chief part of this Work, was a Book, into the mysteries
whereof your Majesty's Father of blessed memory delighted much to search, as
appears by that most worthy Monument which he has left to all posterities
hereupon; and I doubt not, but your Majesty being Inheritor not only of your
Fathers Dominions, but also of his Virtues, is likewise affected with such holy
Studies, being indeed as a furtherance of courage and resolution, so of true
blessedness, as is peculiarly by the Spirit pronounced upon this Book,
saying, Revel. 1.3.
Blessed is he that reads and they that hear the words of this Book. The
distractions of Kings, I grant, are great, by reason of their manifold most
important affairs, yet it is the constitution of the King of Kings that they
should have his Word before them, Deuteronomy. 17.18.
and be reading therein all the days of their lives, that they might learn to
fear God, and not have their hearts lifted up above their brethren. The mark
at which he would have them to aim, is the fear of God and humility, amidst
so many and great temptations to pride and contempt; the means to help to
these glorious ornaments is daily reading. My hope therefore is, that my
service tendered in this kind, though by the meanest amongst many, will not be
vnacecptable to your Royal Majesty, but that notwithstanding the great and
diverse present distractions, there shall be some times spared to meditate upon
these Expositions. That speech of Chrysostom was notable to secular men,
Chrysostom. conc de Lazaro.
making their continual worldly imploiments a Supersedeas to the reading of
the Scriptures. What say thou (O man) that thou have no leisure by reason of
thy worldly businesses to read the Word of God, the more thy distractions are,
the more need have thou to read, that amidst the tossings of these tempestuous
waves, thou may enjoy the perpetual comforts and directions of the
Scriptures. Theodosius the second, Theodos. 2.
though his distractions could not but be great through the amplitude of his
Dominions, yet spared so much time in his private Closet to the Word of God,
that he wrote the new Testament over with his own hand: and Alphonsus,
Alphonsus.
King of Spain and Naples, is said to have read the Bible with the ordinary
gloss fourteen times over. Which things J mention not (most Gracious
Sovereign) but only to add fuel to your fire and oil unto your flame: that
the zeal which your Majesty is well known to have unto the Word of God and to
the truth therein set forth, may be yet increased till it comes to be
doubled, as the spirit of Elijah was upon Elishah. For what service is there,
that we, the Ministers of Christ's Gospel can do comparable to this of
seeking the through Sanctification of the Lords Anointed over us, and of
polishing the rich Diamonds of grace upon his Crown, that they be more and
more resplendent and shining? The bent of our Prayers both public and private
is daily this way, and therefore let my Lord, the King, pardon the zeal of his
servants, if when they can get any opportunity, their exhortations bend this
way also. We read of Gods blessings upon the people of Israel under David,
Solomon, and Josiah, and generally how in the days of all the godly Kings and
Governors that have been, the Graces shining in them have been so
acceptable, as that the Lord has delighted to do good to the whole Kingdom
for their sakes. Your Majesty is the very breath of our nosthrils and the light
of our eyes, that great Tree mentioned in Daniel, under which we your Subjects,
as beasts and birds do shroud our selves and make our nests, being alone worth
10000. of us. It is therefore the height of our ambition in our inward desires
and outward endeavors, that your Majesty may be upright hearted and valiant as
David, wise as Solomon, and of ardent zeal like unto Josiah. And to this end
do we press, as into the Court of Heaven by our Prayers, so into your
Majesty's Court with Exhortations, Treatises, Discourses, and Expositions, not
passing for any toil and labor, any carping and cauilling of censorious
Critikes, or any enmity of Sycophants, so that what we do may be cordial to
him, to behold whose virtues increase with his years our eyes and hearts are
all fixed. The times are dangerous, and the enemies of the truth have of late
years greatly prevailed, and still they unite their forces like Gebal, and
Ammon, and Amaleck, and these of Tire: but God, who is the patron of the truth,
has showed that he will put an end to these troubles, and one day these
incendiaries of wars shall have a battle, wherein they shall fight their
last, even in Harmageddon. Jn the mean season yet, were J a Daniel, though to
speak before so great a King as Nebuchadnezzar, or a Joseph, though to speak
before a King as renowned as Pharaoh, J would not only present the explication
of these dark mysteries, but give counsel also what is to be done by your
Royal Majesty, who by the Grace of God are the most potent and chief
Defender of the truth at this day in Christendom. But J am a child in
understanding, neither have J the spirit to be able to give counsel in State
affairs. Only J pray God, from whom is the spirit of such deep
understanding, to inspire your Majesty's noble Counselors, that they may give
the Counsel, and your Royal Heart, that you may accept of it, whether it
tends to the animaduersion against sin and all notorious sinful persons,
and to the discountenancing of them, to the embracing with love and favor of
the most godly and zealous for the truth, or to a more strict proceeding for
the disabling, if not for the rooting out of those whose cause is common with
the enemies that threaten danger and ruin to us all. And touching my present
work, my humble suit unto your Majesty is, that you would accept of it, at
your vacant times peruse it, and suffer it to pass under your Royal
Patronage, though not for his sake that publishes it, being indeed unworthy of
such a favor, yet for the sakes of those Worthies, with whom he comes
accompanied, even almost all the most famous Instruments that God has ever
used to give light to these obscurities. My desire and first purpose was to
have presented together to your Majesty's view the whole new Testament,
expounded and handled in this manner in all the passages that most need
exposition, a Work of that sort that I know not any yet that has labored in
it, but as I conceive such as may be of great use and benefit to all that are
studious of the holy Scriptures, and herein by the Grace of God J have
proceeded so far that I want not much to the perfecting thereof. But for so
much as partly through my bodily infirmities, and partly through my many weekly
anocaments in my pastoral charge, I must be a long time in doing a little in
this, wherein so many Authors must be perused; I have made bold to come with
this Model that I have ready till the whole shall be finished, which if it may
be acceptable, shall be altogether then at your Majesty's service. Jn the mean
season, craving pardon for this my presumption, I do out of a true and most
affectionate desire, commend your Majesty to the Grace, Blessing, and
Protection of the Highest, beseeching him to make you as happy as any of your
Progenitors in a truly Religious and fruitful Queen, wise Counselors,
learned and holy Ministers, loyal and obedient Commons, and in victorious
proceedings for the defense of the distressed Gospel, and after this life
ended (to which may it long be) in the participation of an incorruptible Crown
of glory.

Your Majesty's most humbly devoted, John Mayer.

THE EPISTLE TO the READER.
COurteous Reader, it is about four years since I promised, as my first work
done in this kind should be accepted, to put out something of like nature upon
other mystical and dark places of the holy Scriptures. Now I cannot but
acknowledge my self herein a debtor unto thee for thy good acceptance, both
of that, and of some other Books of mine also, and therefore as my weakness
would give me leave, and the manifold distractions of sicknesses, remouings,
worldly incombrances, and ministerial Offices lying upon me permit, I have
prepared another part of the intended Treasury which thou here see. Not as
happily is expected, upon the Epistles of Saint Paul which are next in order, but
upon the seven smaller and more neglected Epistles and the Revelation. For I
observed that faith without relying upon works for justification, is not so
needful to be pressed now adays, which is a chief thing insisted upon in
the Epistles of Saint Paul, but true love and works flowing here-from, together
with an holy and unblameable life, to stir up unto which, if we speak of the
first, the Epistles of Saint John are excellent; of the second, the Epistle of
Saint James; and if of the third, those of Saint Peter. Again, there are few
that have written upon these Epistles in comparison of the other, and therefore
for a supply of this defect, I thought it would be more acceptable, seeing I
cannot do all together, to do some thing first hereupon. Lastly, because of
all the Books of Scripture, the Revelation is least understood, and therefore
is least read and meditated upon, and yet most necessary comforts in these
tumultuous times are to be fetchted here-from, as singularly pointing at them,
and a final deliverance of the Church of God from all her troubles, my
special aim in anticipating the proper time of it has been, that thou
may not be longer left without the knowledge of this common place of
comfort, but be stayed and stablished in an assured expectation of a joyful
and blessed end, through the certain and speedy downfall of the Romish
Antichrist, and the universal prevailing of the truth that then shall be, and
the great triumphs that shall be made amongst the faithful in all places
therefore. In this Work I have not persisted barely to explicate the
difficulties of the Texts undertaken, laying only together what I find in my
Authors, and briefly concluding upon my Exposition embraced. But in the seven
Catholic Epistles which are handled according to the method of my former
work, I have supplied, which was there wanting: First, a Preface to each
Epistle. Secondly, an Analysis of each Chapter. Thirdly, choice Latin
sentences opposed in the margin. Fourthly, a confutation of those Expositions
which I follow not. Fifthly, a paraphrasticall Exposition of the verses coming
between Text and Text, wherein there is some, but less obscurity. Sixthly,
some short Annotations at the end of every Text. Touching the Revelation,
because after the three former Chapters it is all most obscure: Hicronim.
Epist. ad Paulim.
for according to Jerome, Quot verba sunt tot sunt mysteria, there are as many
mysteries as words; I have therefore altered my order before used, handling it
thorowout by Questions, as Augustine sometime did many parts of the Scriptures.
Augustine.
And because, if I should here have brought in my Authors speaking, the work
would have grown too great, the mysteries to be expounded being so many, and
the Expositors so many, I have spared this labor, and only showed the
diversity of their expositions, so proceeding to examine and determine about
every question. And whereas in my determinations I have sometimes gone from
such Authors, as many of good judgment and zeal do approve of, and sometimes
from all, venting mien own (...), as Mr. Fox dis his, Fox.
I must entreat the friendly Reader to pardon me in so doing. For I hold it
vain for any man to write upon any place of Scripture, if he propounds to
himself to square all his Expositions according to that which some other have
done before him, Ansel.
as Anselme is a strict follower of Augustine in all things, and Gorran of
Thomas Aquinas; Gorran.
though Anselme be for this useful, because he has collected his expositions
out of diverse works of Saint Augustine, and fitted them so to the Epistles
which he has written upon, that he has thereout made a just Comment upon
them. The liberty taken by that Greek Expositor, Oecumen.
Oecumenius likes me better, who though he follows Chrysostom much, yet
he spares not oftentimes to frame a different sense of his own, as the
Latin Interpreter, Marlorat, has also done. It is a true saying, Marlorai.
Bernardus non vidit omnia. No man, how intelligent soever, but may be weak
sighted in some things, and therefore the Lord has appointed by his Apostle, 1
Cor. 14.29.
that when some Prophets have spoken, others should judge, and after their
prophesyings ended, if God has revealed any different matter to them, to
speak also. Now though we have no Revelations in these times, yet being by
our calling Lights of the world, Mat. 5.14.
the Spirit leaves not such as study and pray with assiduity without
illuminations, by the benefit whereof diverse in diverse ages have given great
light to many obscurities, many yet remaining insufficiently cleared, that
still in these times there might not be wanting doubts, about the dissoluing
whereof we might be exercised. And it is not to be condemned in us (though
much inferior to the Worthies that have gone before us) if having, beside the
assistance of the same Spirit of Light, the help of their labors, and of more
experience by reason of the time wherein we live, we in all modesty refusing
some of their Expositions, deliver something new and of our own, so that we
have always respect to the analogy of Faith, and the consent of the holy
Scriptures, as Saint August. Cum diuinos libros legi nus in tanta multitudine
verorum intellectuum qui e paucis v^rois eruunter and sanitate Cat^olicae fid^^
muniuntur, id p^tissimum deligamus quod certum apparuerit, eumsentisse quem
legimus: si aute^ hoc latet, id certe, quod circumstantia Scripturae non
impedit and cum sana fide concordat. Six ex circumstantia Scripturae discuti
nequit, saltem id solum, quod sacra fides praescribit. Etsi enim voluntas
scripteris incerta sit, tamen sana fidei congruam non inutile est eruisse
sententiam.
Augustine excellently directs saying, When we read the Books of God,
amongst so great a multitude of true Expositions, which go upon few words, and
are warrantable by the soundness of the Catholic Faith, let us choose that
Exposition chiefly which shall certainly appear to be his meaning that wrote
it. But if there be no such certainty, then that which the circumstance of the
place hinders not, and which agrees with sound faith, but if from the
circumstance of the place it cannot be discussed, then that only which the
sacred Faith prescribes. For though the meaning of the Writer be uncertain,
yet it is not unprofitable to frame an Exposition agreeable to sound faith. For
mine own part, I am so conscious to my self of mine own weakness and want
of judgment, that howsoever, that which I have written seems to me most
probable of all other Expositions in these dark and doubtful passages, yet I
force it not upon any man, but now that I have adventured it to the public
view, I do in all humility submit all to the judgment of the learned, craving
(for the good success of that which is here done, and for the seasonable and
most sufficient perfecting of that which is further to be done in this kind)
the help of thy most fervent and faithful prayers.

The Texts handled in this BOOK.
TExt 1. James 1. Verse. 9, 10. Let the brother of low degree rejoice in his
exaltation, but the rich in his humiliation, because as the flower, etc. page
6. Text 2. Chap. 1. Verse. 13, 14. Let no man say being tempted, I am tempted of
God, for God cannot be tempted of evil, and he tempts no man, etc. page 9.
Text 3. Chap. 1. Verse. 18. Of his own will begat he us with the Word of truth,
that we might be a cetaine first fruits of his creatures, etc. page 15. Text 4.
Chap. 2. Verse. 1, 2. Have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of
glory with respect of persons. For if there come into your Synagogue, etc. page
23. Text 5. Chap. 2. Verse. 14. What profits it (my brethren) if one says
that he has faith, but has no works, can that faith save him? etc. page 27.
Text 6. Chap. 3. Verse. 1. Be not many Masters, knowing that we shall receive
the greater condemnation, etc. page 34. Text 7. Chap. 3. Verse. 2. If any man
offends not in word, the same is a perfect man, able to bridle also the whole
body, etc. page 36. Text 8. Chap. 3. Verse. 14. If ye have bitter envying and
strife in your hearts, glory not, nor lie against the truth. page 43. Text 9.
Chap. 4. Verse. 1, 2, 3. Whence are wars and fightings amongst you, are they not
even hence from your pleasures that war in your members? etc. page 46. Text
10. Chap. 4. Verse. 4. Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the
amity of this world is the enmity of God? or think ye, that the Scripture
says in vain, the spirit that dwells in us lusts unto envy? page 49. Text
11. Chap. 5. Verse. 14. Is any man sick amongst you? let him send for the Elders
of the Church, and let them pray for him, anointing him with oil. page 55.
Text 12. Chap. 5. Verse. 19. If any man has erred from the truth and one
turns him, let him that has turned him know, that he saves a soul, etc.
page 63. Text 13. 1 Peter 1. Verse. 1. To the strangers scattered through Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithinia, Elect, according to the foreknowledge
of God the Father, etc. page 69. Text 14. Chap. 1. Verse. 10, 11. Concerning
which salvation the Prophets enquired and searched, who prophesied of the grace
given unto us, etc. page 72. Text 15. Chap. 2. Verse. 6. Behold, I put in Zion a
chief corner stone, elect and precious, and he that believes in him shall not
be ashamed, etc. page 79. Text 16. Chap. 2. Verse. 13. Be ye subject to every
humane ordinance for the Lord, whether to the King as to the chief, or to the
Rulers, etc. page 92. Text. 17. Chap. 3. Verse. 3. Whose apparel let it not be
any outward thing of the broidring of the hair, or of putting gold about, or
the ornaments of apparel, etc. page 97. Text 18. Chap. 3 Verse. 13. And who
will hurt you if ye be followers of that which is good: but if ye suffer for
righteousness, ye are blessed, etc. page 102. Text 19. Chap. 3. Verse. 18.
Being put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the spirit, wherein he went
and preached to the spirits in prison, etc. page 106. Text 20. Chap. 4. Verse.
1, 2. Christ therefore having suffered in the flesh for us, put upon you the
same mind also, etc. page 117. Text. 21. Chap. 4. Verse. 12. Estrange not your
selves from the fiery trial which is amongst you to prove you. page 121. Text.
22. Chap. 5. Verse. 13. The Church that is at Babylon saluteth you, greet ye one
another with a kiss, etc. page 127. Text 23. 2 Peter 1. Verse. 4, 5. Whereby
are given to us exceeding great and precious promises, that by them ye might be
partakers of the divine nature. page 131 Text 24. Chap. 1. Verse. 19. We have a
more sure word of prophecy, to which ye do well that ye take heed. page
139. Text 25. Chap. 2. Verse. 1. Which shall bring in Heresies that destroy,
denying the Lord that bought them, etc. page 145. Text 26. Chap. 2. Verse. 11.
The Angels being greater both in might and power, bear not blasphemous
judgment against them, etc. page 150. Text 27. Chap. 2. Verse. 20. For if
escaping the filthiness of the world in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, etc. page 152. Text 28. 2 Pet. 3. Verse. 5. They are willingly
ignorant of this, that the Heavens were of old, and the earth set out of the
waters, and by the waters, etc. page 155. Text 29. Chap. 3. Verse. 8. I would
not have this one thing hidden from you, that 1000 years is with the Lord as
one day, and one day as a 1000. years, etc. page 161. Text 30. Chap. 3. Verse.
15. And count the long suffering of our Lord salvation, as our beloved brother
Paul has written to you, etc. page 168. Text 31. 1 John 1. Verse. 1. That which
was from the beginning, which we have heard and seen, etc. p. 156 Text 32.
Chap. 2. Verse. 2. He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only,
but for the whole world. verse. 7. I write no new Commandment, etc. p. 182.
Text 33. Chap. 2. Verse. 12. I write unto you (children) because your sins are
forgiven you through his name. Verse. 13. I write to you fathers, etc. p. 186.
Text 34. Chap. 2. Verse. 18. Little children, it is the last hour, and as ye
have heard that Antichrist comes, there are now also many Antichrists, etc.
page 189. Text 35. Chap. 3. Verse. 1. For this the world knows us not, because
it knows not him. Beloved, now ye are the sons of God, etc. page 198. Text
36. Chap. 3. Verse. 5. Ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins,
who so abides in him sins not, etc. page 200. Text 37. Chap. 3. Verse. 21.
If our heart condemn us not, we have boldness toward God, etc. page 203.
Text 38. Chap. 4. Verse. 2. Every spirit that confesses Jesus Christ to have
come in the flesh is of God, etc. page 206. Text 39. Chap. 4. Verse. 8. He that
loves not, knows not God, for God is love, etc. page 208. Text 40. Chap. 5.
Verse. 2. Hereby we know that we love the children of God when we love God,
etc. page 212. Text 41. Chap. 5. Verse. 6. This is he that came by water and
blood, even Jesus Christ, etc. page 214. Text 42. Chap. 5. Verse. 16. If any man
sees his brother sin a sin unto death, let him ask, and he shall give
life, etc. page 217. Text. 43. 2 John 1. The Elder to the Elect Lady p. 224.
Text 44. Jude Verse. 4. For certain men are crept in, which of old were
proscribed to judgment. p. 232. Text 45. Verse. 8. Likewise also these dreamers
do defile the flesh, they set light by authority, and blaspheme glories, etc.
page 236. Text 46. Verse. 14. Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of them,
saying, Behold the Lord comes with thousands of his Saints, etc. page 241.
THE CATHOLIC EPISTLE OF THE Apostle JAMES.
THis Epistle together with the six following, have gone under the name of
Catholic Epistles amongst the Greeks, and of Canonical amongst the Latins a
long time; but upon what reason it is uncertain, says Pareus. Pareus in Iac.
Epist. Lyra, Oecum. Gorran.
The reason which is yielded by Lyra, Oecumenius and Gorran, that they have the
name of Catholic from the universality of those, to whom they are directed,
either to all the Jews dispersed into all countries, or to all Christian
people in all Countries of the world; whereas Saint Paul's Epistles are directed
to particular Countries, seems unto him to be no good reason, because so the
Epistle to the Hebrews being written to all the Jews wheresoever, should have
been entitled Catholic likewise; and the two latter Epistles of Saint John,
being to particular persons, could not by this reason be called Catholic. And
touching the name canonical, it is more disliked by Beza also, Beza.
because not these seven Epistles, but all the rest are canonical alike. But
the reason of the name Catholic seems to me to be good, notwithstanding the
exceptions alleged: for the Epistle to the Hebrews happily was sent to
Jerusalem, the proper place of the Hebrews, where they still offered their
Sacrifices, as seems by the Argument of the Epistle; and therefore might not
so well be entitled Catholic, but only The Epistle to the Hebrews; as that
to the Romans, The Epistle to the Romans: but this of James is named to the
Jews scattered in all parts. And touching the two latter Epistles of Saint
John, although they are directed to particular persons, yet the Argument of
them is Catholic or Universal, alike concerning all Christians; and not
particular, as the Arguments of the Epistles of Paul for the most part of every
of them are. For although, even in them general duties concerning all are set
forth, yet each of them is principally directed to particular points, to
dispute of which, particular occasion was ministered by the Christians of that
place, to which the Epistle was sent.

This Epistle in order is the first, not because James is to be preferred
before Peter, who was the first ^^d chief of the Apostles, Gorran.
if there were any such; but, as some have well noted, because this Epistle is
to all Jews in all Countries, who were the first people of God, and had the
Gospel first preached unto them; whereas the other of the Catholic Epistles,
are to the Gentiles that believed in all parts of the world. Wherefore Jerome
sets them in this order also, Hieron. prolog.
though the Latins, respecting the dignity of Peter, placed his Epistles
first. Pareus.
Pareus holds, that they should rather be put in another order, first, 1
Peter, and then James, because Peter wrote that Epistle first, and then James
following Peter in the same, after both which Paul wrote to the Hebrews.
Howsoever, this matter needs no great dispute, seeing order in the placing of
the Books of holy Scripture is not so precisely observed: yet in reason,
seeing Saint James his Epistle is nominatim to the twelve Tribes, but Saint
Peter's is not so, and his second Epistle is to all Christians; if any
preference be given to an Epistle in the placing thereof in respect of them to
whom it is written, this of James should be first, and then those of Peter
together, it being never used to separate the Epistles of one and the same
Author, but to place them together. This Epistle is said to be of the Apostle
James, and so it is entitled by Beza both in Greek and Latin, Eusebius. Eccl.
^ist. lib. 3. cap. 25. Hieren Epist. 41. ad Paulin. Cypr. lib. ad Nouat. Aug.
Epist. 29.
and both Eusebius and Jerome do testify, that this Epistle was counted
Apostolical in their times. Cyprian also cites it, as Apostolical, and
Augustine and Concilium Mileuitan, Can. 7. Pareus also subscribeth to this. Yet
some think it was written by James, surnamed Iustus, or Oblias, that is, Mute,
who according to Epiphanius, was called the Brother of our Lord, because he
was the son of Joseph by a former Wife, Epiphan. in Haeres.
Antidicomarianorum.
and he was one of the 70. sent forth by our Lord, being afterward
constituted Bishop of Jerusalem. To this Luther subscribeth, Luther.
and the Lutherans following him, who do not therefore hold it to be
canonical Scripture. But for as much as it has anciently been received as
Canonical and Apostolical, not only by the forenamed Authors, but also by
Origin, Athanasius, Orig. Hom. i^ Ios. Athan. in Synops. Epiph. lib. 3. haer.
76, Isid. Hisp. lib. 6. Etymol. cap. 1. Niceph. lib. 2. hist. cap. 46. Damasc.
lib. 4. de fide, cap. 11.
Epiphanius, Isidorus Hispalensis, Nicephorus, and Damascen; and the very
directing of it to all parts after an Apostolical manner, does argue it to be
written, not by a Bishop of any particular place, but by an Apostle, who was
sent unto all, I hold it, without doubt, to be the Epistle of the Apostle
James, and consequently Canonical, as the Epistles of other Apostles are. If
it be demanded, which James wrote it, for there were two of that name, James
the son of Zebedeus, and brother of John, and James the son of Alpheus, a
Kinsman of our Lord, and therefore called his Brother also, as James Oblias
before spoken of was? I answer with Pareus and others, that the consideration
of the time when it was written argues, that the first of these, James the
brother of John cannot be the Author of it, but James the son of Alpheus,
otherwise called James the lesser: Act. 12.
for the elder James was slain by Herod before the dispersion of the Jews the
second year of Claudius, Sucton. in Claud. cap. 25.
who did afterward cast the Jews and Christians out of the City, and then in
the time of their dispersion was this Epistle written unto them, as appears
by the superscription thereof. Enseb. lib. 2 c. 22. Hieron. in Catal.
If it be objected, that Eusebius and Jerome both do report, that it was
anciently doubted of, whether it be Canonical or no: I answer, that they did
only mention such a thing, but they did not doubt hereof themselves. If it be
further objected, that he does not call himself an Apostle, but the servant of
Jesus Christ, I answer, that Paul in some of his Epistles in ituleth himself
likewise, the name of an Apostle being omitted; and neither John nor Jude write
themselves Apostles, but only Peter. Lastly, if it be objected, that here is
something delivered contrary to that of Saint Paul, touching justification not
by says only but by works, and anointing with Oil is mentioned, which none
of the other Apostles speaks of: I answer, that I have already showed upon
Romans 3. that the seeming contrariety betwixt Saint Paul and Saint James is
nothing, they being rightly understood; and touching the anointing with Oil,
it shall be considered in the proper place. As for any thing else objected, it
is not worth the naming, and therefore I come directly to the Epistle it self,
wherein after a salutation, he comfort them, as the present occasion of
their distressed estate did require; and having called their troubles herein
temptations, he takes occasion to speak also of inward temptations tending
unto evil, verse. 13. proving that they come not from God, one special reason
of which is, that every good and perfect gift is from him, verse. 17. and to
prove this, he does instance in the great gift and grace of our regeneration,
which is of God by his Word, verse. 18. and therefore infers a readiness to
hear this Word, removing the ill effects that through men's own corruption
follow of hearing, wrath and speaking in wrath, verse 19. etc. and setting
down the right use and end of hearing, verse 22. etc. And lastly, to drive all
men from speaking in wrath, he shows the vanity of his religion that does so,
verse 26. and to persuade to love and pure affections in hearing, the contrary
to which he had commanded to lay apart, verse 21. he commends charity,
whereby our love is most declared, and of which it is said, Give alms of that
ye have, Luke 11.47.
and all things shall be clean unto you: and purity from the inquinations of
the world, to which a man is subject by ouerualuing the things thereof, verse
27. How the other Chapters of this Epistle do cohere, each one with the former
and in it self, shall be showed, as we come to the expounding of them in
order.

CHAP. I.
THe former words of this Chapter have little difficulty in them, and therefore
I will run them over briefly. Verse. 1.
Verse 1. The twelve Tribes unto which he writes, said to be scattered
abroad, or in dispersion, are the believers of every Tribe, now expelled from
Jerusalem by CLAUDIUS CAESAR, as has been already touched. But it is to be
understood, that ten of the twelve Tribes were still in that banishment under
Salmanasar King of Assyria: for we read not of the return of any, 2 Kings 17.
but of the two Tribes and an half in the days of Exra and Nehemiah, or at
any time since, and therefore it is likely that the Apostle had respect to that
dispersion also, if happily his Epistle should come to any of their hands.
Verse 2. he comfort them in their troubles, first, by resolving them what
these troubles are, viz. the trial of your faith, verse. 3. Secondly, by
showing the effect of this trial, patience. Thirdly, the benefit of this
patience, perfection, when a man being tried is found to have patience indeed.
Fourthly, how we may be so wise, as for the good that is in trouble, being
considered, to use such constant patience, verse 5. Ask wisdom of God.
Fifthly, by showing what vain and inconstant things riches are, for which there
is no cause but to joy, notwithstanding the loss of them, verse. 10, 11.
Sixthly, by propounding the Crown of life, as the reward of troubles bein-borne
patiently, verse. 12. Touching the first of these, temptations are the trial of
our Faith, whether we will believe in God when he seems to neglect us or to
be against us. Touching the second and third, Verse 3, 4.
trying of a man works patience, if he has faith, because then he quietly
bears the Cross laid upon him, which to do is Patience, and this patient
bearing with constancy is the next thing to be looked unto, which who so does,
never being weary, is a perfect wise man, and wants not the spiritual
wisdom to see into the benefit of temptations. Verse. 5.
And for the fourth, the words are plain and easy, there must be no wavering
through unbelief in our seeking unto God, but we must firmly believe, that
God is, and that he can supply all our wants: he that doubts of this is a
wavering minded man, who is unconstant in all his ways, and therefore such
constant holding on in time of temptation cannot be expected at his hands.
Touching the fifth, there is some more difficulty in the words, and therefore I
will set down the diversity of Expositions hereupon.

JAMES Chapter I. Verse 9, 10. Let the brother of low degree rejoice in his
exaltation. But the rich in his humiliation, because, as the flower of the
grass, he passes away.


Tho. Aquin. in Iac. Gorran.
HEre is showed the manner of perfect patience, namely, when a poor dejected
man glories not only inwardly and in himself, but outwardly in respect of
others through the hope that he has of future exaltation: for it is promised,
that he which humbles himself, shall be exalted. That which follows of the
rich man glorying in his humiliatio^ is expounded by the Gloss, as spoken
ironically, Let him rejoice in his humiliation and fall to come, for his pride,
and love of worldly riches. Or else it may be understood of a voluntary
humiliation in doing duty to the poor through humility.

Oecum. in Iac.
The Apostle having showed who is fluctuating like the Sea in his prayers, now
teaches how a man may be stable and steady, viz. if being poor, that is,
dejected in a sense of his own spiritual poverty, he perseuereth in this his
humiliation, which indeed will produce all good unto him. By the rich he
means the proud and supercilious, to whom he ascribes humility, because
whilst he exalts himself, he is in a low and base estate; his meaning is,
that he should be confounded herein, though he would not use the word, left
he should seem too harsh.

The Apostle does not here, as some think, enter upon a new argument touching
the rich and the poor, but repeateth in other words what he propounded before,
verse. 2. about rejoicing in temptations, adding some new reasons, after that of
faithful prayer brought in, as it were by a parenthesis. He that is under
temptations is humbled by the Lord, and this the Lords humbling of him is
joined with exaltation in his favor to be his son, and an inheritour of his
heavenly kingdom, which none adversity can deprive him of. Let the poor
therefore, that is, the dejected rejoice in this his spiritual exaltation by
adoption and grace, as Paul did, Romans 8.35.

Pareus in Jac.
Let the rich man, etc. I do not think with some that this is an exhortation
of the rich to humility, for that is done afterward Chap. 5. But the rich here
is he that is not humbled by reason of his prosperous estate: in willing him to
rejoice in his humiliation, he means, that he should prepare himself and be
ready to suffer for Christ, when he should be called thereunto, and herein
seek matter of true joy, that in mind he was humbled to bear Christ's cross,
and to follow him, whenever it should come, and in that he had a
fellow-feeling of the miseries of others in their sufferings. And that they who
were for the present in prosperity, might be the rather moved to this
humiliation, he shows their fleeting estate and condition, even like the
flower of the field. The poor here is the poor in spirit, whose exaltation
is, that his is the kingdom of heaven, Math. 5. The rich made low, is he that
suffers the loss of his goods, being made herein like unto Christ, who being
of heavenly glory became poor, and abased himself; and his followers we are
when we show patience in the loss of worldly wealth, Vt a terrenis depressio
est ad Deum exaltatio, ita ad diuitias exaltatio est a Deo depressio. Pugnant
ex opposito Coelum, terra, paupertas, diuitiae: aeterna, caduca: Deus, mundus:
exaltatio ad mandum, exaltatio ad Deum: depressio a mundo, depressio a Deo.
rejoicing in this conformity unto him. For to be depressed in the world is to
be exalted to Godward, and to be exalted in the world is to be depressed to
Godward. For these are contraries, heaven and earth, poverty and riches,
eternal and fading, God and the world, exaltation to God, exaltation to the
world, depression from the world, depression from God; if thou love the
earth, thou losest heaven; if riches, the poverty of Christ; if fading things,
eternal; if exaltation to the world, exaltation to God.

Mayer. 1 Cor. 4.17.
Though the Expositours alleged differ in words, yet the sense rendered by them
all is almost one and the same. By the poor I understand with Pareus and
Piscator, a man under affliction, according to that which was spoken before,
verse. 2. he is bidden to rejoice in his exaltation, that is, the glory to come:
for the momentany afflictions of this life do work unto us a surpassing
weight of glory. The rich must joy in his humiliation, that is, according to
Piscator, if he has an humble mind in the midst of his riches, whereby he
makes himself equal to the poor. For, contrary to the manner of the world,
he ascribes exaltation to the poor, and humiliation to the rich, who has
good cause yet to humble himself by reason of the vanity of his riches, being
like unto the flower of the field. That of Oecumen. followed by Faber, applying
it to the poor in spirit, does not agree so well here, because poor is
opposed to rich, which is meant of worldly riches, and therefore the poor here
is one poor and brought low in the world.

This would be noted, Note.
that we may not be carried on according to the manner of the world; to be
overwhelmed with sorrow in time of adversity, and never to be so merry as when
worldly wealth flows in, as though happiness consisted in these things. For
this is a mere delusion. The only true and solid joy is in the future
exaltation in heaven, the way unto which is by poeurty and crosses in this
world, and in an humble mind here in the midst of worldly wealth.

CHAP. I. VERSE. 13.14. Let no man being tempted, say, I am tempted of God: for
God cannot be tempted of evil, and he tempts no man. 14 But every one is
tempted, being drawn away by his own concupiscence, and enticed. 15. Then
lust having conceived brings forth sin, but sin perfected breeds death.


Tho. Aqui. in Jacob. Gorran.
Having spoken hitherto of external temptations, now he speaks of internal,
that is, evil cogitations suggested to the mind, whereby a man is enticed and
drawn to evil, these come not from God, but from our spiritual enemies. God
indeed is said to tempt Abraham, Genes. 22. Deuteronomy. 12.
and likewise to tempt the people of Israel: but it is to be understood that
there is a twofold temptation, the one of trial, the other of deceit; by the
first God tempts, that men may be more purified, as the gold being tried in
the fire; but not by the other. The Devil tempts thus, that he may deceive
us, the flesh that it may allure us, and the world that it may draw us away.
Concupiscence within a man as original tinder, Romans 7. Gal. 5.
otherwise called the law of the members, and the flesh lusting against the
spirit, that tempts by drawing away from good, and enticing to evil, for by
these two words are set forth the two terms, the term from which, and the
term unto which; the right way from which, and the wrong way unto which; Aug.
Peccatum est, spreto incommutabili bono, commutabili bono adhaerere.
or the immutable good from which, and the mutable good unto which. Ob. The
devil tempts sometimes, and therefore not concupiscence only. Sol. Although
the devil tempts, yet he can do nothing if concupiscence were not, even as
wood is not kindled by blowing, unless there be fire.

Concupiscence when it has conceived brings forth sin, etc.] The degrees
of temptation are here noted out; first, there is delight alluring; secondly,
consent conceiving; thirdly, work performing; fourthly, custom perfecting.
Lust conceiueth by the devil, who is (as it were) the father, and lust the
mother; this conception is by the consent of the will, or by delight. Brings
forth sin, that is, into act, Psalm. 7. It is perfected by custom, and then
death comes, that is, it becomes guilty of eternal damnation, Romans 6.
for the wages of sin is death. But why is death assigned only to custom? does
not sin delighted in, or consented unto, and acted, bring forth death also?
Answ. Yes doubtless, but it is most properly said thus of custom in sin,
because in such there appear no signs of life, and there is little hope of
his return, but in such as sometime fall into sin there are signs of life,
though more in the consenter, verse. 17.
fewer in the acter of sin. Every best gift, and every perfect gift. This
is added further, to prove that no evil temptation is from God, because good
only comes from him; which he shows, first from the copiousnesse of his
gifts; secondly, from his immutable goodness; thirdly, from his liberality
toward us, in begetting us; fourthly, from their own judgment. Touching the
degrees here set forth, the good are temporal gifts, the better natural, the
best gracious. The best gift of grace, and the perfect gift of glory. The
first is called a thing given, because it is in the way; the other a gift
without end in our Country. The father of lights, that is, the author of all
graces, which are the lights of the souls.

Occum. in Iac.
By temptation here understand that which arises from a man's own sins and
intemperance, whereby trouble is brought upon him, and fluctuation of the
mind; now when trouble is brought thus upon a man, it is not a temptation from
God, but from his own concupiscence.

Mayer. August. de verbis Domini. Est temptatio inducens peccatum, qua Deus
nominem tentat, est and tentatio probans fidem, qua tentare Deus hominem
dignatur.
Pareus, Faber, Piscator, Gagneus, and all others, that I have seen, follow
Tho. Aquinas, understanding here that inward temptation that is to evil, of
which it seemed good to the Apostle to speak, because he had commended
temptations before. For of outward temptations of trouble coming upon a man by
his own default it cannot be meant, as Oecum. would have it, because it is
temptation to evil, of which it is spoken here, as is expressed, when it is
added, God is not tempted of evil, and the sequel of this temptation is
plainly said to be sin, not outward trouble in the world.

If it be demanded, in what sense God is said to be vntemptible of evil,
Pareus.
the Latins read it intentator malorum. Pareus and some others, take it both
actiuely and passiuely, but because the active immediately follows, He
tempts no man, I think that it is to be understood passiuely only. The
meaning is, that our malice cannot stir up evil in him, neither does he tempt
any man to evil; as Occum. has noted, was the saying of an Heathen, Numen and
De^s neque, ips^ molestias habet, neque alijs exhibel. 2 Samuel 24.
God the divine Majesty neither is himself troubled, nor brings troubles
upon others. Ob. He hardened Pharaohs heart, and who^ he will he hardens;
and he moved David to number the people. Sol. With Pareus I say, that God does
not by tempting make any man evil, but upon such as are already evil he
sends the judgment of being hardened to the doing of more evil, that he
may in the end receive the greater damnation. Read more touching this point
upon Romans 9. and August. de bone perseuerantiae and Epist. 146. ad Consentium.

2 If it be demanded what concupiscence is, and whether it be not a sin,
because he seems here to make it but the cause of sin, and how temptation
is ascribed only to concupiscence, when as the devil also tempts, and so
does the world too? I answer to the first, that concupiscence is generally
agreed upon to be that original inclination unto evil, which we draw from the
loins of our first Parents. To the second, that (S. Paul himself being the
teacher) it is sin, Romans 7.
and such a sin as is condemned in the tenth Commandment, though Popish
Writers mince it, and say that it is not truly and properly sin, but the
cause of sin, and by the Apostle Paul called sin therefore figuratively and
improperly. But I have spoken of this before in the proper place. To the third
Aquinas has answered well already, wherein it is generally consented, that
lust is the next and immediate cause of sin always, other tempters work but
by our lust. The devil could not have prevailed against Eve, had she not been
drawn by her own desire, and stirred up, when she looked upon the forbidden
fruit. Faber adds, Faber.
that the Apostle speaks of men void of all grace, and living only by sense,
like the brute beast, whom to carry away to sin lust alone is sufficient, for
so much as the soul lies dead as it were in such, and so they are carried any
whither by sense, even as a dead Mariner in a ship tossed by the waves of the
Sea.

3 If it be demanded in what manner lust works unto sin, and whether death be
not due till sin is perfected by custom, because he says, sin being
perfected brings forth death. I answer that it works by a false persuasion
and delight, as the fish is drawn by the bait, and therefore the word (...),
taken from a bait is used, he is drawn away from good by thinking it not good,
and having in him a kind of averseness therefrom, and allured to evil
through the sweet and good apprehended to be therein.

Touching death, Tho. Aquin.
the issue of sin being perfected, Tho. Aquinas has answered it well
already, that sin perfected is said to bring forth death, because there is
not that likelihood of being converted and turned from sin in such as are
grown to a custom of sinning, as in these that have sometime sinned only:
Ier. 13.23.
yea the Prophet speaks of it as impossible, Can a Blackmore put away his
blackness, or a Leopard his spots? so they that have accustomed to do evil
cannot learn to do well. Pareus.
Pareus says, that it is said so because that even in the judgment of men
sin coming into act deserves death. Faber.
Faber, because it is not deadly, if in the conception it be disliked and
withstood. Popish Writers gather from hence, that lust is no sin, and that
the first motions unto sin are not sin, and that motions unto sin with
some consent are not mortal sins, that is, worthy of death, but venial. But
that lust is sin is plain; first, because the Law says, Thou shall not
lust: secondly, because S. Paul calls it sin, Romans 7.12. thirdly, because
it is the cause of sin, and by the Law of God, not only sin, but the cause
and the degrees of it are forbidden. Secondly, that the first motions are sin
is plain also, because they draw a man from good, and entice him to evil, and
so are the material and efficient cause of sin, and censured therefore by
Saint Paul, as sin, Romans 7.8, 17. And therefore thirdly, much more motions
with some consent are sin, and worthy of death, seeing this is the wages of
every sin, yea, Romans 5.13.
even of the mother of sin, Lust, before that it breaks forth into act.

4 If it be demanded, what is meant by every good gift, and by every perfect
gift? It is to be understood, that there are two different words used to
express these gifts, (...), and then (...), in the Latin translation, datum
and donum, and for good there it is read every best gift, which also pleases
Beza best. I do not find any distinction to be made amongst Expositors
betwixt these two, but only in Thomas Aquinas, Beza, Piscat. Tho Aquin.
Gorran. Faber.
which has been already set down. Most hold, that spiritual gifts only are
meant here, which alone are truly good and perfect; and this is most agreeable
to the scope of the place, which is, to teach that no evil is suggested to the
mind by God. For he that is the Author of all good and grace unto us, cannot
be the Author of evil also. Pareus.
Pareus understands all other good things of this life also, and so the
infinite goodness of God is yet more set forth. The gifts of grace, according
to some, are said to be perfect, because they tend to the perfecting of the
new man; but I think rather, that the word (...) is turned into (...), to show
Gods unchangeableness in his gifts, and (...) into (...), to show that his
gifts are altogether good for us, and not evil or hurtful any way, as the
gifts of men are. The Father of Lights. God is said to be Light, Faber.
and so is the Son, and so is the holy Ghost, and according to this we
confess him in the Church to be Light of Light, and here the Father of Lights;
not because he begets these Lights, but amongst the Lights he is Father,
August. de speculo.
and an effect of this light is grace seasoning the hearts of the faithful. He
may also be said to be the Father of Lights, Deus omnipotens cursus temporis
dici nocti: que alternatione apud te nequaquam variatur, hoc vere est (...),
so. per conuers. solis and reciprocat. a tropico in tropicum: hoc autem in d^o
non fit, quia^ pud cum nulla nox est, dies autem perpetua, quia lux est ind
fi^^e^s. Aug. l. b. 1. de Ciuit. dei.
with reference to the Sun, Moon, and Stars, by the influence whereof the
earth is made fruitful. With whom there is no mutation or shadow of change.
This S. Augustine has notably expounded, saying, Almighty God is no whit
varied toward thee, by the change of the course of the time, of the night and
of the day. There is indeed a shadow of change in the Sun, when it returns
from tropicke to tropicke, but it is not so with God, who is a neuer-failing
light, and in whom is no darkness: for in alluding to the Sun moving between
the Tropicks, no doubt but the Apostle uses the word (...). And this serves
to answer an objection, But God may vary, though now all good comes from him.
Sol. No, there is no variation or shadow of changing in him. Augustine
elsewhere turns (...) into (...) a moment, saying, that there is not any
change in God not for a moment of time. If such places of Scripture be
objected, as wherein God is said to repent, and not to do what he had
threatened. It is answered, that herein change is attributed unto him per (...),
in regard of the event; and in threatening, and not doing accordingly, he
changed not, because his threatenings are always conditional. If it be said
further, that he altered the service sometime constituted by him in the time of
Moses:

Ans. It was constituted but till the coming of the Messiah, as is plain,
Dan. 9.24.

Note that God is not the author of evil to any man, Note.
but he is unto himself the author thereof. God is all good and only good, and
therefore it stands not with his goodness to suggest evil unto any man. He
indeed made man with all his powers and faculties, who is now evil, but by his
creation he was good: Eccl. 7.29.
For God made man righteous, but he has sought unto himself many inventions.
Nothing is more obuious amongst men, than to impute their sinful and wicked
disposition unto God; the Manichees attributed it to the evil matter of which
they were made; Hom. Odys lib. 1.
and Homer brings in Jupiter complaining of the malice of old being in man's
nature; but this is a blasphemous assertion, and to be abhorred amongst
Christians.

Note again, Note.
that man is drawn to sin by being deceived, like the silly fish or bird, he
thinks that profitable or pleasing, which indeed is not so. Wherefore every
one must labor to be wise, that he may judge of things aright, and this very
consideration should pull us back from sin, that the thing which we are
running to is not that which it seems to be. In the green grass of sin,
where we think to sleep sweetly for a time, and then to rise again, there
lies lurking a fell venomous Serpent that will sting us to death; under the
Sugar of sin there is deadly poison.

Note again to our comfort, Note.
that there is no enemy that can prevail to hurt us by temptation without, if
we by our own lust be not hurtful to our selves within. And the deadly hurt
of sin comes in first by ill motions conceived and delighted in in the
mind, so that give way to these, and sin will follow, and death after sin.
It is in vain to hatch the Cockatrice egg, and then to say, I will keep it
from hurting me; if thou would not be hurt by sin, do not hatch and
conceive it by evil thoughts and imaginations, Mark. 7.21.

Lastly note, that God, Note.
as he is not Author of evil to any man, so he is the Author of all good to
every man. None are born gracious, but his grace is a light lighted at the
great light, the Father of Lights; and this is the comfort of all such as are
truly enlightened by him, that their light being derived from his and so the
same with it, though by infinite degrees more imperfect, is immutable and never
fading till it brings them to everlasting light. Ioh 4.
He that drinks of this water shall never thirst again, but it shall be a
river of water flowing out of his belly to everlasting life.

CHAP. 1. VERSE. 18. Of his own will begat he us by the Word of truth, that we
might be a certain first fruits of his creatures. 19. Wherefore (my beloved
brethren) let every one be swift to hear, etc.

Lest any man should think that the good which comes from God unto us is for
our merits, this is added, Tho. Aquin. i^. Jacob.
Of his own will begat he us by the Word of truth: so Titus 2. for the Word is
as the seed, Mat. 13. That we should be the beginning of the creatures; that
is, in the recreation or regeneration, as it is said of Behemoth in Job, that
he was the beginning of the creatures, Job 40.
viz. of Creation. We that are regenerate, are the beginning of the creation of
all things again in glory, for hereafter the whole creation shall be restored
to the glorious liberty of the sons of God. Or we are said to be the
beginning of the creatures, Romans 8.
in respect of the principality over the creatures; restored in the regenerate,
which was lost by Adam in his fall. But ye know, my beloved brethren. This is
the conclusion of all, they of their own knowledge knew God to be the Author
of all good. But let every man be swift to hear, that is, that he may know how
to carry himself in temptations outward or inward, whereof it has been
spoken hitherto, let him with all readiness attend to the Word of God, whereby
he is begotten unto God, and not only hear it, but do it, as it follows.
Slow to speak, slow to wrath. Here he remoueth the impediments; first the
outward: in Pythagoras his School, silence was enjoined for five year; so he
that will hear profitably must hear in silence; Cato. Jmpedit ira animum ne
possit cernere verum.
then the inward, as Cato says, anger hinders the mind that it cannot see
the truth. Anger here may be taken both for zeal, for a man must not hastily
through zeal be moved, but maturely and upon due consideration: and for a
desire of revenge, unto which a man must be slow, that is, no way prone. The
anger of man does not work the righteousness of God: More is understood here
than is spoken, for he that is angry with his brother unadvisedly, Mat. 5.22.
is culpable of judgment. And he pitcheth particularly upon righteousness,
because in anger there is a pretense of righteousness; or else in general it
is meant of righteousness, to breed which in us the word is preached amongst
us, verse. 26. If any man seems to be religious, not refraining his tongue,
but deceiving his heart, etc. Having hitherto pressed to do the Word which we
hear, he returns now again to the tongue; by the intemperate speech
whereof, our faith and good works, to which we are provoked by hearing, are
hindered, that they cannot come to perfection, and therefore he impugneth the
licentiousness of the tongue again. The word religious is taken from
religatio, a binding again to God by receiving his Instructions, from whom he
was before divided: or a binding again together to hold good instructions, as
a vessel is bound together by hoopes that it may hold wine that was loose
before. Not refraining his tongue, that is, by discreet taciturnity; for the
tongue being set in a watery place has most need of binding: but deceiving his
own heart, whilst he thinks that he shall not be punished for his licentious
tongue, or else whilst his heart and tongue are divided, he thinking one thing
and speaking another. Such religion is vain and unprofitable. The pure
religion and undefiled, Pure by the intention of the heart, undefiled by the
execution of the work; or pure internally in a man's self, undefiled
externally in regard of others: before God and the Father, that is, the Son
and the Father: to visit the fatherless, etc. that is, to be charitable to the
poor, one particular being put for the general; and to keep a man's self
unspotted of the world, that is, by not loving the world, for the world is
called, Mundus pure quasi non mundus, not pure but defiling those that love it.

That which Thom. Aquin. according to the vulgar Latin, Mayer.
reads, initium quoddam creaturarum, is in the Greek, (...), the first
fruits, which were most holy, and the chief part for estimation of the crop;
this is rendered by other words in 1 Pet. 1.3. He has begotten us of his great
mercy, to a lively hope and inheritance incorruptible, etc. v. 9. that which he
reads, according to the vulgar Latin, but y^^ know, is not in the Greek at
all, but (...), wherefore. This Text and the words following to the end of this
Chapter, are now easy to be understood by the exposition already set down.



we might be a certain first fruits of his creatures, the first exposition of
Thom. Aquinas, applying it to the renouation of the creatures to come, may well
agree unto it: yet some by the creatures understanding rather, Pareus.
the rest of the Jews and Gentiles not yet converted, expound the first fruits
of his creatures thus: By begetting us he has taken us as his own peculiar
people from amongst others yet left in their unbelief, even as the first
fruits were that little quantity of corn which being taken from out of the
whole crop, were thenceforth accounted more holy than the rest. For so the
Greeks expound (...). Faber.
Some expound it, the first fruits of the spiritual creature, that is, the
first to whom the word of God has come for our regeneration when as a world of
people are yet behind, and this did serve notably to stir up to newness of
life, and this I assent to as most genuine.

Verse. 19. Pareus. Faber. Piscator.
wherefore let every man be swift to hear, etc. it is plain, and therefore
agreed upon by almost all, seeing that by the word God does beget us, let every
man be ready to hear this good word. If by the word, whereby we are begotten,
the Son of God were meant, as Oecumen. expounds it, this inference would
not come in so fitly: if with Thom. Aquinas you refer these words to the
temptations before spoken of, the coherence will be further fetched, but yet
good: but I subscribe to the other rather.

Slow to speak, slow to wrath, here is both silence enjoined in hearing the
word of God, that being sown in the heart in silence and meekness, it may
take rooting in us, and also refraining from the office of teaching others,
till that we be thoroughly taught our selves, and are plainly by the Spirit of
God stirred up to this office. And because nothing does make a man so unfit to
speak in Gods cause, as anger and the distemper of the mind by heat, he that
teaches must refrain from anger and use patience, for the anger of man does
not work the righteousness of God, that is, the righteousness of this new
and spiritual life. Faber.
Thus some. And this is in effect the same with that of Thom. Aquinas, but more
full. Oecumen.
Some expound swiftness to hear, of hearing to do, Pareus. Oecumen.
but this is brought in afterward, verse. 22. And some apply slownesse to
speak, to speaking of any thing which a man hears taught, before that he
does well understand it, for thus he may soon fall into error and draw in
others with him also; and slownesse to wrath, to a man's being angry with such
as do not in every point consent with him, or being angry at such
reprehensions as whereby he is justly taxed. For the anger of man does not
work the righteousness of God; that is, says the same Author, does not
persuade or move men so, as that thereby they are won unto God, or else it is
sin, for all unadvised anger is such. And all this indeed is most genuine
also.

verse. 21. etc. of receiving the word with meekness, here is further
expressed, what was meant by slow to speak: when a man in silence and
meekness of spirit hears the Word of God, and not only taking heed of anger,
but of all filthiness also, applies himself unto the hearing of the Word:
the like unto this is 1 Pet. 2.1, 2.

v. 26, 27. Some expound the word (...), a knowledge of the secrets of the Law,
Oecumen.
and an exact observing thereof. Now if any man thinks himself to be such,
and refraineth not his tongue from speaking against his Neighbor, his Religion
is vain, for the Law not only tieth the tongue from speaking against a man's
Neigbbour, but commands mercy to be showed even to an enemy in his necessity;
if thine enemies beast be fallen under his burden, thou shall help to lift
him up again. Deceiving his own heart, that is, his conscience, whilst he
thinks himself religious and is not. But the word (...) here used, comes
indeed from worship, and comprehends both (...), and (...), Pareus.
as Pareus has noted, and therefore the worship of Angels is called (...), and
will worship (...), Col. 2.18, 23. But the Latin translation, which Th.
follows, is religio, and the word is usually in English rendered Religion;
whereupon the annotation before going is not impertinent.

Now the unruly tongue is one principal thing to discover an heart void of
true Religion, because out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks,
and men are apt to think it the lightest offense to lash out with the tongue,
and therefore the Apostle makes this in special a note of vain religion,
having all reference to what was said before, verse. 19. But deceiving his own
heart, that is, as Thomas Aquinas has already taught, by thinking that this
shall be passed over without being counted any such great fault. Touching the
duty of mercy here opposed unto the licentiousness of the tongue, whereunto is
joined, to keep a man's self unspotted of the world, I assent unto Oecumenius,
that true Religion is not only not in tongue to be grievous unto others, but to
be helpful indeed to them in distress; and because when the distressed are
commended to our charity, in the Word of God, they are set forth under the name
of widows and fatherless, these are mentioned here, all charity in general
being meant. By the world some understand the flesh, Faber. Stap. Pareus.
to keep a man's self unspotted of which, is, not to bring forth the fruits of
the flesh, a Catalogue of which fruits is Gal. 5.17. for of those that bring
forth such fruits the world does consist, but I rather prefer that of Thomas
Aquinas touching the love of the world, wherewith he that is spotted knows
none other excellency but in riches and honors here, and therefore behaueth
himself accordingly, showing all respect to the worldly great ones, and
neglecting the best Christians who are poor: against which something follows
immediately, chap. 2. Now it is said to be undefiled before God, God being here
opposed unto man, that is, not in the account of man, who may be deceived, but
of God, whom none can deceive. Whereas no mention is made of faith in Jesus
Christ, it is to be understood, that he speaks according to the necessity of
those to whom he wrote, who in all likelihood did bear themselves altogether
upon faith, not regarding to show forth the power of Religion in the works of
mercy and holiness, as appears also further in the next Chapter; which, to
put us out of doubt herein, is also begun with a mention of the Faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Note, Note.
that the very remembrance of our Christian calling should stir us up
mightily unto holiness, seeing we are of Gods own good will graciously made
a certain first fruits unto God, that is, consecrated and set apart from
others that be not Christians, unto him. To pollute our selves now therefore
will be taken far more hainously, even as if a common person should have laid
violent hands upon Gods first fruits or offerings. For this was horribly
punished even in the Priests sons, 1 Samuel 2.

Note again, Note.
that the Doctrines of Christianity, together with the grounds whereupon they
are soundly founded, are not so easily and soon apprehended, as that a man may
by and by broach unto others what he hears or reads, and with eagerness
pursue such new undigested tenants: but great deliberation is herein to be
used. Be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath.

Note again, Note.
that it is most necessary for a Teacher to be Master of his passions, and to
use meekness in instructing others, as also he is exhorted, 2 Timothy 2.24.
because the anger of man does not work the righteousness of God. He that is
hasty and passionate shall not be able to teach others with profit: for they
will rather take that which comes from him, as proceeding of spleen and
hatred than of love, and so it shall fall to the ground without any good effect
of turning them to righteousness, which God is wont to work by the due and
right teaching of his Word.

Note also from the Doctrine about the true and vain Religion, Note.
that how little soever men make account of unadvised speeches in their anger,
yet they do indeed ouerturne all their Religion; hereby alone, if there were
nothing else, it becomes vain and unprofitable unto them: see Mat. 5.22, etc.

Note again, that works of mercy are so necessary, Note.
that without them no man can prove his Religion to be true and good: this is
the pure Religion before God, howsoever one void of works may seem so before
men. That only is a lively faith that is accompanied with works.

Note lastly, that the world is a defiling thing, Note.
a man cannot esteem of and love the riches and honors thereof, but there
will be some aspersion upon him hereby, 1 Ioh. 2.15. The truly pure religious
man is he that is mortified to the world, Gal. 6.14.
and the world unto him.

CHAP. II.
Having (Chapter 1. Verse 27.) spoken of the offices of love and kindnesses in
visiting the fatherless and widows, and of keeping a man's self unspotted of
the world (which is by an ouer-esteeme of worldly things, drawing the heart
through covetousness after them, whereby all such love and kindness is
extinct, and it comes to pass that after the manner of the world, the rich
only in this world are had in honor) he now comes more fully to explain
himself, what he meant by such as are spotted of the world, and to show some
reason of being rather kind and loving to the poor, intermixing some rebukes
for being harsh toward them. The covetous worldling is spotted of the world,
who has the faith of Jesus Christ in respect of persons, from which he
dehorteth, verse 1. and then explaineth what this respect of persons impugned
by him is, verse 2, 3, 4. and reasons against it, verse. 5, etc.

First, verse 5.

Secondly, verse 6, 7.

Thirdly, verse 8, 9. which he proves, verse 10, 11. and then concludes from
this argument taken from the Law, the judgment of which cannot be escaped by
those that are so void of mercy, and are lead only by worldly respects, from
which yet the merciful are free, verse 12, 13.

The rest of the Chapter is spent in reproving and confuting those that bear
themselves upon faith, not regarding to do works of mercy, wherein he does
resume that which he began this Chapter withal, Have not the faith of our
Lord Jesus, etc. and the last of the first chapter, to visit the fatherless,
etc. And so here is a new argument, to prove that it cannot be pure Religion
and acceptable to God, that is void of the works of mercy. So that this whole
Chapter consists of two parts: a Dehortation with an explanation and
arguments added to move the more effectually, verse 1, etc. and a reprehension
with arguments to convince the vanity of that Religion which is barren of
charitable deeds, verse 14, etc. the particular Analyzing of which is most
easy.

JAMES Chapter 2. Verse 1, 2. Have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Lord of glory, with respect of persons. Verse 2. For if there come into your
Synagogue a man with a gold ring, etc. Verse 3. And ye have respect to him that
wears the gay clothing, etc.


THe maine doubt of this place is, Mayer.
whether it be unlawful to have any respect of persons by giving more
reverence to one than to another in regard of his wealth or outward dignity,
because this seems to make against all such respect, as being partial and
unreasonable. Tho. Aquin. August. Greg. Glosordin.
Thomas Aquinas handles this question, and clears it by the ordinary gloss;
and Austin and Gregory, for both they and all sound Expositors speak to the
same effect, and that is, simply to give outward respect to the richer and to
the more noble in this world, as God has differenced them by outward dignity,
wealth, or office which they bear, is not a sin, but may and ought to be
done: for it is commanded, Honor father and mother, Ephesians. 6.1. 1 Pet. 2.17.
Romans 13.
Honor the King, and Give honor to whom honor belongs; and servants are
commanded to reverence their Masters, and the younger to rise up before the
gray headed. A great rich man is in the office of a great Steward, wherein he
may do good to many, and therefore in ciuility may be reverenced by the poor,
and by all men may so be preferred as his place is. But if out of an interior
estimation of such a man in the heart, thinking him to be better, because he is
richer, and the poor more vile and worse, because they are outwardly more
base; if in this mind, he with the gold Ring and the gay clothes be honored,
and he that goes in poor clothing be debased, this is a sinful accepting of
persons, and such as ought not to be amongst Christians. Muckish earth-wormes
indeed, that know not wherein true worth stands, are wont to measure their
esteem of men by these things, thinking him a most excellent and happy man
that has the wealth and dignities of this world: but he that has his eyes
opened, esteems in his mind only virtuous men, and thinks the vicious
most base, though in ciuility, as he is bound, he gives outward reverence to
him as his place does require. Again, to reverence the rich that are vicious
for their riches, and to show all contempt toward the virtuous poor, is a
great sin, because by those that do so, riches are preferred before virtue,
which is plain injustice, Hieron. Dives impius gerit imaginem mundi, pauper
pius imaginem Christi.
since virtue is a thousand degrees beyond riches, it is to honor the Image of
the world before the Image of Christ: for the vicious rich man bears the
Image of the world, the virtuous poor man, the Image of Christ. And both these
faults in reuerencing the rich may easily be gathered from the words. For to
signify that he means the inward esteem of the mind, he says, verse 3.
ye have respect (...) to him that wears gay clothing, and say unto him, etc.
not simply say unto him, Come sit here, but out of a mind esteeming better of
him for his wealth. And for the other, namely preferring riches before virtue;
it is plain, that he taxes this, verse 5, 6, 7. There is a natural order, as
Pareus observes, Pareus.
whereby in nature some men are reverenced above others, as Parents by their
children, the aged by the young; and a civil order, whereby Superiors in
place and dignity, as Kings, Magistrates, etc. are reverenced, all which is
according to godliness. Thus to respect a person is, as Augustine has it,
August. Accipere personam^st exhibitio honoris seruato gradu dignitatis and
offi^^j. Greg. Hominem, non quia homo est, sed propt^r aliquid, quod c^rca
ipsum est honorare.
but the exhibition of honor to him, according to the degree of his dignity
and office: and as Gregory has it, to honor a man, not because he is a man,
but for something which is about him requiring honor, as his place and
dignity. But this is no reason inwardly in the mind to account him better, and
therefore to do so is sin; and to respect persons in judgment, by being
moved for some outward thing in the person to give a wrong judgment, without
looking to the equity of the cause, which should alone bear sway, is a sinful
respect also, Leuit. 19.15. Prou. 6.35. Having thus resolved the maine doubt, I
come now to consider the words and the doubts herein.

Have not the faith of our Lord Jesus in respect of persons: Verse 1. Tho.
Aquin.
that is, according to some, think not that the Lord Jesus does glory in the
acception of persons, Glos. Ordin.
or that the faith of Christ is to be distinguished, as though the rich only
were faithful and not the poor, or as the word persona sounds, quasi per se
vna, do not reverence him alone as a God, as though he were so singular, as
there were none but he. Pareus.
But some expound it, do not think that Faith can stand with the acception of
persons, because this is a sin; and some, have not Faith in Christ with some
confidence and hope to receive benefit from men, for the true Faith is to rest
and rely upon Christ only. Of all these, I prefer that as most genuine, that
expounds it of making more account of some than of others in outward
respects, as if not Faith, but worldly things did most dignifie a man; for it
is not said, with respect of persons; but, in respect of persons: place not the
dignity of those that come into your assemblies in outward pomp and bravery,
esteeming one the more because he has this, and another the less when he
wants it; for this were to hold, that the worth and dignity of Faith stands
in these base and outward things, and so to vilify and disgrace it, which
indeed alone is most excellent, and makes the true believer to excel all
others, though outwardly he be most poor and mean.

If there come into your Synagogue, for so it is in the Greek, Verse. 2.
the place of their meetings to the public worship and service of God being
hereby set forth: for even hither, not only Christians, but others came
sometime for curiosity; and if any such as was rich and gorgeously apparelled
came, it seems that they were wont to fawn upon them, and to the scandal of
their Religion, in their sight to use poor Christians most basely, and
therefore he does so sharply reprove them here.

Are ye not partial in your selves, Verse. 4.
and become Judges of evil thoughts? that is, according to some that read it,
Tho. Aquin. Gorran.
Do ye not judge in your selves? Is not this your own corrupt judgment, and
so a judgment proceeding from evil cogitations, and not of God? Others read
it passinely, Are ye not judged? Oecumen. Pareus.
that is, are ye not convict in your own consciences, as guilty of cuill and
unjust imaginations? and this I prefer, because as Beza confesses, (...) is
a passive Aorist, and is no where taken actiuely.

If ye fulfill the royal Law, Verse. 8.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Tho. Aquin. Gorran. Faber.
Some understand the Evangelical Law set forth, Mat. 22.37. which is called
royal, because taught by Christ our Lord and King: it makes us a royal
Priesthood, and is most excellent, and [as thy selfe] that is, freely, and not
for any hope of remuneration, rejoicing in his good as in thine own. Some take
it as an answer to something which they might allege in their own defense,
Pareus. Oecumen.
but though thou do herein blame us, yet we keep the Law.

Answ. Admit ye do, yet this one matter of respecting persons will condemn
you, because he is a transgressor of the Law that fails in one point: and by
the royal Law they understand the Decalogue given by God the King of all.
Some, to keep the royal Law, Faber.
say, is to have a true faith that works by love, for hereby the Law is
fulfilled. Now faith respects not outward things, and therefore the accepter
of persons not walking by charity, sins against this Law; and in a point of
charity, to sin against the Law, is to be a transgressour of the Law, because
all the Lawstandeth in this one thing, viz. love, and so he is judged as doing
nothing, according to the Law, that wants love: thus also Beda and Augustine.
Touching the royal Law here spoken of, Beda. August.
it is clearly the Decalogue given, Exodus 20. thus abbreuiated, Deuteronomy. 6.5. for
proceeding to speak further hereof, he instanceth the command against murder
and adultery, it is royal, because from the King of Kings. Touching the
coherence, that of Pareus is not amiss, that he does meet with them in a
confidence which they might happily have yet, that notwithstanding their
respecting of persons, they kept the Law. For this is against the Law of love,
Leu. 19.15. if a man loves his neighbor as himself, he puts not any such
difference, but in his inward esteem every one is unto him as himself, in
whom there is no difference. And as for the aggravating of this sin, as a
transgression of the whole Law, I assent unto Austin and Beda.

As they which shall be judged by the Law of liberty. Verse. 12.
Some understand the same Law of the Decalogue, holding, that it is called a
Law of liberty, Pareu. Faber.
because it has liberty over all to condemn them: but this is forced. Most
therefore understand better the Law of faith, because when we come to believe
we are set free from the censure of the Law, Ioh. 8.32. Romans 8.1. and so the
meaning is, say and do so in your carriage toward other, as they that when
the time of judgment comes, shall be dealt withal in love and mercy; going
therefore according to the rule of mercy in your dealing with the poor
Christian, not despising him, but rather comforting and releeuing him, which
indeed is the chief thing aimed at in all this Discourse, that about
preferring rich men, being brought in but by the way, do aggrauate the sin
of neglecting the poor the more.

Here follows the reason of all; Verse 13.
There shall be judgment without mercy to him that shows not mercy, and
mercy rejoices against judgment. The first part of the sentence is plain;
touching the second, Mercy rejoices against judgment, that is, the merciful
man shall securely and with joy appear before the Lord at the Day of
Judgment; for so much as when the unmerciful shall be adjudged to hell fire,
he shall be received into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 25.

Note, that Faith only, and not outward things, Note.
makes men excellent; and therefore the poorest man that has grace, is more
to be esteemed than the greatest being void of grace, because the poor man
thus qualified, not the other, is the heir of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Note again, that to live in any one sin, Note.
does frustrate all that is done well: for he that fails in one point is
guilty of transgressing the Law.

Note thirdly, that love is so necessary, Note.
as that nothing done without it is acceptable, and therefore those sins
which are contrary to the love of our neighbor, are chiefly to be avoided.

Lastly note, Note.
in what a secure and comfortable estate the faithful merciful man is; he
shall be without terror when the most terrible time of the last judgment
comes, neither can any think of that time but with horror and fear, except
he be merciful to the poor and needy.

CHAP. 2. VERSE. 14. What profits is (my brethren) if one says, that he has
faith, but has not works, can that faith save him, etc.


From hence to the end of the Chapter, Mayer.
there is only one point handled against those, that bearing themselves upon
their faith, neglected the works of mercy; to persuade unto which, Saint James
has here undertaken. The maine question here, is what he means, when he
denies that a man is justified by faith only, and affirms justification by
works. Because Saint Paul speaking of justification says, That it is by faith
without the works of the Law. Romans 3.28.
Oecumenius considering these propositions of these two Apostles, seeming to
be so contrary, Oecumen. in Iac. 2.
and yet that Abraham is brought for example by them both, says, the word
Faith is taken two ways: first, for a simple consent unto the thing preached
that it is true. Secondly, for a consent joined with the assecution thereof out
of an affection, and with obedience: of the first of these James affirms,
that a man is not justified hereby. But Paul speaking of the other, ascribes
justification unto it. The word Works is also to be understood two ways, for
there are works before Baptism, and works after: he that dies immediately
after Baptism, dies justified by his Faith without works, because he had no
time to do any; but he that lives and has time to do, is not justified
without good works: which is to be understood, not as though good works had a
part in the act of our justification, but because they cannot but necessarily
follow as fruits and effects in whomsoever there is a saving and justifying
Faith. Touching Abraham, whom Paul says, was justified by Faith, but James by
works; both are truly said of him, and do indeed agree in one. He believed
that he should be the Father of many Nations, he believed Gods promise
touching his seed, and this was counted unto him for righteousness: and when
he came to the work here spoken of, viz. the offering of his son, he did
not fall from this Faith, for he believed that God was able to raise him from
the dead again. All the Ancients generally, as Oecumenius intimates, speak
to the same effect about justification by Faith without works, viz. when there
is no time after a man's conversion to the Faith to do works, he being
prevented by death, as I have also partly showed in speaking upon Romans 3.28.
How Popish Writers understand it, I have also there declared. In short
therefore, to resolve this place, Oecumenius has rightly showed, that one
Faith is spoken of here, and another there; and that indeed the work of
Abraham in offering his son, wherein it is instanced here, is the same with
his Faith spoken of there; his work is his working Faith, or Faith made
evident by his work, by a Synecdoche, or a Metonymy of the effect, as Pareus
resolves it. Pareus in Iac.
That by work a working Faith is understood, is plain from the words
following. Verse. 21. Thou see that faith wrought together, etc. Verse. 22. The
Scripture says, That Abraham believed God, this believing being attributed to
his work of offering up his son, v. 24. after Abraham's believing mentioned
before, he concludes, ye see then that a man is justified by Works, making
Faith and Work all one. And this is in a manner all one with the common
solution; Faith without Works truly justifies before God, that is, makes a
sinner just by the imputed righteousness of Christ Jesus: but Works make a
man's Faith evident and conspicuous to the world; it being hereby proved, that a
man is a true believer, and so accepted for just and righteous before God.

Ob. Hypocrites have good works, and therefore it seems,

Sol. Their works are not truly good, Sol.
for such are the proper effects of Faith, but because they are the same which
the faithful do, and it is hidden from man oftentimes who is an Hypocrite; if
we shall judge one to be faithful, because he does good works, we may be
deceived. Yet good works do manifest the truly faithful, because such a one
is not without good works, though he that has good works in our thinking is
not always faithful; but God sees accuratly of what sort every man's work
is. He that desires to read more about justification by Faith and Works, may
have recourse to Romans 3.28.

Touching the particular passages here, verse 18. Verse. 18.
But some man may say, thou have faith and I have works, show we thy faith by
thy works, etc. Here such as trust to bare Faith are confuted by the bringing
in of two speaking together, the one seeming to himself to be faithful, the
other manifested to be such by his works. But, that is, but I will oppose
thee by this prosopopeia; Admit that a man truly faithful challenges thee
thus; Thou say that thou have Faith, but how do thou prove it, having no
works? I can prove my Faith by my works: here the conscience of him that
wants works must needs be convinced.

Thou beleeuest that there is one God, Verse 19.
thou do well; the Devils believe also and tremble. To believe this, though
it be an Article of our Faith, and likewise to believe and hold aright the
other Articles, does not make one a true believer, though to believe this be to
do well, because here is not all required to a saving Faith, Faith what.
which is to believe to the having of the affection moved to all due obedience
unto him, in whom it is believed for love, as Oecumenius has partly touched
already, and as Augustine sometime speaks; Faith with charity is a Christian
faith, August. Fides cum charitate est fides Christiana, fides sine charitate
est fides daemonis.
Faith without charity is a faith of Devils, that is, Faith inclining the
heart to obey the Law of God, the substance whereof stands in love. Pareus,
and others of our Writers generally teach, that a saving Faith is to believe,
with application to a man's own soul in particular. This, I confess, is true,
if we speak of that Faith which is grown to more perfection, Job 19.25.
such as was in Job, saying, I know that my Redeemer lives, Gal. 2.20.
etc. and in Paul, saying, I live by the Faith of the Son of God who has died
for me. But the Faith necessary to salvation commended unto us in the holy
Scriptures, is a believing with love and affection joined hereunto. Such was
the Faith of the Samaritans said to be, Ioh. 4.42. Such a Faith Philip told the
Eunuch if he had, he might be baptized, Act. 8.37. and such was Abraham's Faith,
Romans 4.21. And this is such a Faith as none but the Elect can have, the Devil
cannot have it, for he believes with an auersation; the wicked cannot have it,
for there is the like auersenesse in them also, or at the least a deadness of
affection, for their Faith works not by love, of which they are void. Here is
also a certainty without wandering or doubring, which is set forth as a property
of true Faith: for it is without all doubting assented to, Iam. 1.5.
that Jesus is the Savior of the world, and that whosoever rightly believes
on him shall have everlasting life. But as for certainty of a man's own
particular estate in grace, I suppose that is not so of the Esse of Faith, as
the he should be said to have no Faith who is not able for the present to
apply Gods promises without doubting unto himself: for then woeful were the
case of many true Christians, who in time of temptation find many fears and
perplexities in themselves: in so much that they are ready to say with David,
they are cast out of Gods presence; though afterward they see their weakness,
and recover their hold again. Besides this, particular assurance is a thing
that is to increase daily as men grow up in Christ: and therefore no marvel if
in those that are yet children in the Faith it be not so strong as it should
be. Certainly, true love is an inseparable companion and fruit of a true Faith:
and then who can deny it to be a lively Faith, wherewith true love concurreth,
though such assurance touching a man's own particular estate be not yet
atrained unto.

Thou see, that Faith wrought together with his works, Verse. 22.
etc. that is, for so much as I have spoken of his justification by his work,
I would not have it understood but with reference to his Faith, whereby he
brought forth this work; so that Faith as the cause, and work as the effect,
did perfectly justify him, so that his work was in no part cause of his
justification, as though his justice stood herein, but hereby his Faith was
perfected, because without it his Faith could not have been a perfect and
living Faith, as it is not in any other man. Even as he that from his heart,
without any dissimulation, assenteth to any thing that is just and equal, is
in that instant honest and just; but this assent of his is perfected by his
act, when he does accordingly.

And the Scripture was fulfilled saying, Verse. 23.
that Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness; that
is, by this fact he showed that he believed, and in his believing, whereby he
did it, stood his justice, and not in the doing of this thing: nothing can be
plainer for justification by Faith; and to declare, that what is attributed to
work in Abraham, is meant of a working Faith, as has been touched already.

Touching the conclusion, Verse. 24.
v. 24. it must not be understood, but according to the Premises, that when a
man brings forth the fruit of Faith, he is justified, and not when he does
barely believe, not being able to show his Faith by any such fruits. Verse. 26.
And to this also do the last words, v. 26. agree, as the body without a spirit
is dead, so is Faith without works. Faith only justifies not; because being
alone without Works it is dead and unprofitable, as a Carcass without a soul.

Note, Note.
that to believe only in Christ does not avail unto salvation, but when with
the apprehension of the love of God toward a man in Christ, which is the
greatest love that ever was, does concur the love of our Neighbor for his
sake; for this is a lively and working Faith, the other Faith only. And
therefore this hearty love, uttering it self in the acts of mercy, is most
necessary unto salvation; not because salvation is hereby merited, but because
the life and soul of a true Faith lies herein. So that they are wonderfully
deceived, that think to be saved by believing only, having their hearts
hardened in sin in the mean season, and having no regard to do good works:
and we are unjustly taxed by the Papists, as crying down good works, when we
teach justification by a true and lively Faith, and deny it to be in part by
Works. For we press unto good works as much as they, but that we do it upon
a true ground, holding, that it is no lively Faith that wants Works; they
upon a false, holding, that Works, together with Faith, do justify; or, that
Faith makes a man just, but Works more just; that of justification by Works
in part, being a presumptuous enlargement of that which of old was taught
touching Abraham, who believed God, and this was counted to him for
righteousness: this being made more just, a wicked invention of their own
brains, without all ground in the holy Scriptures.

Note again, Note.
that a man may believe the Articles of the Christian Faith, and hold much
truth in fundamamentall points, and yet be in no better estate than the Devil;
so that it makes nothing for the credit of the Jesuits, that in many points
they hold the truth, for so much as their practices are deuillish and damnable,
and it may be said likewise of the whole rabble of Papals seduced by them.

CHAP. III.
Howsoever there may seem to be no coherence betwixt this Chapter and those
that went before, yet if we look back to Chapter 1.19. and Verse 25. it will
appear that it cohereth very well. For having there fallen upon an Argument
concerning speech and the abuse of the tongue, unto which he ioineth an
exhortation to do the Word, and not to hear it only; and specially by
emptying out all maliciousness and filthiness, and putting on meekness and
exercising mercy toward the poor, and not contempt; he keeps as we may
well observe, within these bounds thorowout the residue of his Epistle. First,
more largely treating upon that of using the poor contemptuously, and upon
works of mercy, chap. 2. Secondly, in a like large manner returning to speak
of the misgouernment of the tongue, chap. 3. after which, thirdly, in the same
Chapter he also resumeth his exhortation unto meekness and against
maliciousnese, verse. 13. unto the end of the Chapter. Fourthly, he returns to
speak against filthiness also, against which he had given a touch, chap.
1.21. and this he does, chap. 4. mixing his reproof of this together with
that other of malice and envy, whence strife arises, a certain Argument of
pride, and therefore he touches upon that also, verse. 6. Touching the residue
of that Chapter, we shall see more when we come to the handling of it. Here
then are two points, first, against the abuse of the tongue; seconly, against
strife and contention arising from the want of meekness in the heart, which
strife does also utter it self by railing and cursed speaking. Touching the
first, he reproves it first more obscurely, verse. 1. then plainly, verse. 2,
etc.

JAMES Chapter 3. Verse 1. My brothren, be not many masters, knowing that we
shall receive the greater damnation. Verse. 2. For in many things we slip or
stumble all.


THere were many Jews in the days of the Apostles, who went, Tho Aquinas.
Gorrans. Glos.lord.
before they were well instructed in the doctrine of Faith, from Jerusalem to
Antioch, preaching the necessity of circumcision, and other errors. Against
these he opposes this speech, Be not many masters; that is, because the
knowledge requifite in a Teacher is but of few, be not ye, that are unlearned
and ignorant, Masters and Teachers; neither by ye many by your divisions
through ignorance, into many opinions; for it is not a thing reprehensible,
that there by many Masters, which are sufficient and teach all one truth,
because thus they do altogether perform but the office of one Master, Christ,
as he calls himself, Mat. 2^. Such shall receive the greater damnation,
because it is a greater sin to set forth false doctrine, than for a man's own
particular to hold it, though he shall also perish for so doing. In many things
we offend all; that is, we that teach the Truth only, have yet our frailties
and sins; and therefore no need, that we should rush further in by usurping
such an high Office, unto which sufficient skill is wanting; he speaks thus
of himself, together with them, that he might the more freely reprove them in
this fault.

This speech is directed against rash judging of the speeches and deeds of
oaths, Pareus. Piscator.
alike unto which is Luke 6.37. Now it is an usual Catachresis in any Language
to call such supercilious persons, as will take upon them to censure and to
speak evil of others, Masters. Be not many; that is, let there be no such,
the speech being framed according to the occasion; because there were many
faulty this way, he bids, Be not many Masters: He says, We shall receive
the greater damnation for thus judging others, because the evil in our selves
is aggrauated hereby before God; and as it is just with him, he will provide
that we shall have the like measure meeted unto us again, and he numbreth
himself amongst them, lest he should seem guilty of that which he taxes, if
he should speak of others only, exempting himself. In many things we offend
all; that is, hereby we should be stayed from judging of others, because in
judging we condemn our selves, who are many ways offenders also, Ioh. 8. Gal.
6.1.

Object. By this reason none can censure the faults of others.

Solu. It follows only, Sol.
that none can rightly do thus without a calling, wherein he that judges,
stands as Gods Deputy to censure for him, for thus he judges not, but God
judges by him, Secondly, having a calling, he ought not to be swaied by
corrupt affections in censuring others in spleen and hatred, orbeing proud
over poor Malefactors, as though there were nothing worthy of censure in
himself, but out of a conscience of his own guiltiness before God, censure
with mercy and clemency.

Faber, Mayer. Faber. Gagneus. Beda. Luther. August. Ne sitis multi magistri,
i. dissentientes a doctima vnici Magistri Christi. Beza. Iunius.
and Gagneus, and Saint Augustine also, and Beda follow the first exposition,
and Luther likewise. See August. prolog. in lib. 1. retract. Be not many
Masters, says he, dissenting from the Doctrine of Christ our onelyl Master.
Beza, and Iunius, and others, follow the newer exposition. For my own part, I
see no reason to go from the old received interpretation. That which Pareus
obiecteth against it, that thus understood, it should be against a multiplicity
of Doctors, which is rather commended, Numb. 11.29. Mat. 9.38. is answered
already, that he impugneth not a multiplicity of able Teachers, but of
intruders into this Office without sufficiency. That indeed, which some
Sophisters turn it to, that there ought not to be many censurers in
Ecclesiastical matters, but one, viz. the Pope of Rome, is absurd. It may
agree well unto Teachers, both by the method here used, this being one of the
greatest abuses of the tongue, to usurp a teaching Office; to the reprehending
whereof he returns now again, and in regard of other places, from which we
may gather, that this usurpation was then usual, and taxed likewise by other
instruments of God, as Act. 15.1. 1 Timothy 1.7. But if it should be taken for
judging, as Luke 6.37. the name of Masters would not so well agree, and it
should rather have been said, Be none of you Masters: it being a thing utterly
unlawful in this sense.

Note, Note.
that it is a most dangerous thing to aspire to the Office of a Teacher, when a
man is not sufficiently grounded in knowledge and learning. Romans 10.15.
For this is not the office of every one, but of such as are called and
singularly enabled unto it. If any rashly intrude themselves, their
condemnation shall be the greater, because hereby ambition is added to their
other sins, as in Saul and Vzziah, sacrificing; being thus puffed up, 1 Timothy
3.6.
they fall into the condemnation of the Devil.

Note again, Note.
that if God should mark straightly the doings of the best, all must needs be
found sinners, and that in many things, and so liable to his judgments;
wherefore we had need to be circumspect and wary against sin, being assured,
that when we have done the best that we can, we shall still have sins enough to
answer for; and therefore in our greatest circumspection and best doing we
ought to acknowledge our imperfections, and because sins have been in the
very best, it will not be safe for us shrouding our selves under any example to
adventure upon any sin.

CHAP. 3. VER. 2. If any offends not in word, the same is a perfect man, able
to bridle also the whole body, etc.


This is not spoken to teach, Pareus.
that any are so perfect, that they are without out sin, but rather on the
contrary side, to convince all of sin: for having affirmed immediately before,
that all of us sin in many things, what better proof can there be hereof,
than to instance in the sinfulness of the tongue, so little a member? for if a
man having a whole body to govern well, cannot so much as govern this little
member, but that hereby he sins so much, how can he be counted perfect and
without all sin? He is far also from instifying hereby, such as steal,
murder, or commit adultery, if they can well govern their tongues: for his
only drift is to show by the sins of the tongue, that all sin in many
things, If any sin not in word, he is a perfect man, is no more therefore,
but as if he should have said, hereby it appears, that none are so perfect,
but that they sin in many things, because if but this one way of sinning,
viz. in speech, be considered, there is not one but is guilty; for to prove a
general unruliness of the tongue tends his whole discourse here.

So the tongue is a little member, and boasts great things. Verse 5.
As the bridle in the horses mouth, and a little rudder in the hand of the
governor of a ship; so the tongue but little in comparison of the body,
boasts great things; in the Greek (...), does magnifically lift up it self,
says Beza, is a word that is no where else used in the holy Scriptures, and it
may have reference both to good and evil, according to the examples of good
going before, and of evil following after these words, The tongue is a world
of wickedness, that is, Verse 6.
because it has in it all manner of vices, as the world has all kinds of
things. Sets on fire the whole course of nature, that is, the whole course
of this life, that is infected with it, and is set on fire of hell, that is, of
the devil, who as he is a liar and slanderer, so he corrupts the tongues of
men unto the like.

The whole nature of beasts and birds, etc. that is, Verse 7.
some of every kind are tamed by man, yea Lions, and Bears, and Panthers, Non
vniuersaliter de singulis generum, sed restricte de generibus singulorum
intelligendum.
etc. have been brought to dance, to follow men upon a line, and to make
letters, as Pliny writes. Fishes are brought to take meat at their Masters
hands, and Serpents have been tamed so, that their keepers could handle them,
and make them without hurt to twine themselves about their necks.

That he might deter them from the desire of prelation to teach in the Church
of God, Th. Aquinas. Gorran.
he shows the incuitable offenses of speaking, so that he is a rare man that
offends not, Eccl. 19. There is no man that offends not with his tongue: of
such offending at large it is not spoken here, but of offending in teaching, of
which a man may beware, or of offending in a more heinous manner by lying,
railing and slandering, according to the gloss. Now, that there are some
perfect-men, though but few, that offend not thus, he shows by two
similitudes, of a bridle guiding an horse, and of a rudder guiding a ship. His
reason is this, he that can turn about and guide his whole body to a good
work, is perfect: but he that can govern his tongue well can do thus; Ergo,
the minor is proved, because he can put a bridle upon it.

The tongue being little, Verse 5.
exalts great things, that is, either the souls of men to great rewards, or
to great punishments, Behold how much wood a little fire kindles. Having
hitherto spoken of the virtues of the tongue; now he speaks of the vices. It
is called a fire, because it enflameth others; a world of wickedness, because
hereby we sin against God, blaspheming; against our Neighbor by railing,
etc. and against our selves by vain boasting.

All are said to be tamed by man, Verse. 7. Pliny. Marcellinus.
because some of all kinds. Pliny tells of an huge Aspe in India, that came
daily out of his hole to receive meat at a man's table. Marcellinus tells of a
Tygre that was made tame, and sent from India to Anastasius. Or according to
the Gloss, this may be understood metaphorically, by beasts, men that are
thieves and murderers; by Birds, instable persons; and by Serpents, such as
are cunning to hurt, for these may be converted sooner than the tongue tamed.

Having showed that he which is able to order his tongue aright, Faber. Stapul.
in teaching nothing but the truth, is a perfect man; he descends to the
showing of the tongues unruliness, that Teachers may be the more wary in
speaking. And this he does by comparisons from horses, and ships, and fire,
etc. yet this little member, he says, boasts of great things, especially in
such as do arrogate unto themselves the skill of teaching, and are ambitious
of the name of Masters. It is a fire, and the people gathered together as a
thick wood, etc.

He that can govern the tongue, Oecumen. in Iac.
may well be said to be able to govern the whole body, because the tongue is
more voluble, but the body heavy, and so longer in turning about. And if it
should be said, Why, what mastery is it to rule the tongue, which is but a
little thing? a thing that is little can do but little hurt; he adds these
similitudes of a Bridle, and of a little Rudder, and of a little fire, and so
forth: for as these (though they be little) are of great force, so is the
tongue to do much good or hurt. And as by the Bridle and Rudder the horse and
ship are guided, so the tongue is to be guided by right reason to that which is
good. It is a world of wickedness, that is, according to some, a multitude of
wickednesses, as the word World is sometime used; according to others, the
ornament of wickedness, as the word (...) signifies, ornatus, because hereby
oratoricall cloquence is used to entice unto sin. It sets on fire the
wheel of hell, according to some translations, so that hell fire is hereby
rolled upon us, as upon Dives, whose torment was in his tongue especially,
which he had abused to vain speaking, and to the tasting of dainties so much:
or if it be read according to most, (the wheel of nature) (...), the meaning
is, that all our whole life is corrupted and made lugubrous hereby; Can no man
tame the tongue? This surely is the right reading with an interrogation, and
not, the tongue can no man tame, for then in vain does he afterward say,
these things ought not to be so (my brethren.) All that is said therefore is no
more but thus much in effect: As ships are directed, so should the tongue be,
neither is this an hard thing, seeing all things are tamed by man, and can none
then rule their tongue? it is not so.

By the conferring of these expositions together, Mayer.
we may the better now conceive the meaning of these words.

Touching the first, Verse. 2.
verse 2. I assent to them that deny perfection unto the best in this world,
and expound this as an argument against it, because none can rule the tongue
so, as not to offend some way hereby; Tho. Aquin. Oecumen.
and to this also Tho. Aquinas and Gorran consent, and it is the inference of
Oecumenius, though the two former turn the sense of the place another way, as
Faber does, to Teachers. But he began plainly in the former words, In many
things we offend all, to entreat of the general case of all, whom he proves
here to be sinners, according to Pareus. The argument lies thus; Pareus.
Every one that is not perfect is a sinner: but none are perfect, so as not to
fall in any thing, Ergo, etc. the Minor is proved by the consideration of the
ill that is in every man's tongue. He that cannot govern his tongue so, as not
at any time to offend hereby, is not perfect, (for the only perfect man is he
that offends not in speech, seeing such an one in ouercomming an harder
labor is doubtless able to overcome the lesser in governing the whole body,
which is not so voluble as the tongue) but no man can thus govern his tongue,
Ergo, etc. the Minor of this is proved in the words following, verse 7, 8, etc.

Touching the next words, Verse. 3.
Behold, we put bits into horses mouths, etc. the word of attention (...), is
diversely read; the vulgar translation reads it, Beda.
(...), but if. Beda, But even as, and he expounds it with a supplement thus;
if we govern the horse and the ship by so small a thing as a Bridle and Rudder,
then ought we much more to have the bridle of reason in our mouths. But the
most approved reading is (...), Gagneus.
Behold. For the sense, Gagneus seems to me to come nearest unto the right,
that a comparison is here made betwixt the tongue, and a Bit, and Rudder, small
things, yet of great force: and therefore though the tongue be small, it is not
to be neglected for the danger that may be therein. For verse 2. having
affirmed, that he which offends not in speech is a perfect man, and can
bridle the whole body: the next words wherein a comparison is taken from a
Bridle, follow most fitly, if they be thus understood; as the bridle is to the
horse to guide and to rule him, so is the tongue to the whole body. Now the
Bridle being rightly used, guides the horse to go well, and to do good
service to his Rider; and so the tongue being rightly ordered, carries the
whole man on in a right way of glorifying God, and promoting the salvation of
others, Piscator.
as Piscator speaks; for a good heart is the fountain of the right ordering
of the tongue indeed. But if the tongue be ungoverned, it carries the whole
man on to destruction, even as the reins being laid loose upon the horses
neeke, he runs and carries his rider with him into mischief; and
therefore he applies the similitude accordingly: so the tongue being a little
member boasts great things, Verse. 5. Faber.
(...). Faber reads it magnifactrix, a doer of great things; the vulgar, Beda.
exalts great things. Beda, exulteth of great things. But seeing the word is
compounded of (...), great, and that which makes it up into a verb, is
seldom or never any where else found, and so uncertain how it should be
rendered; I rather hold with Faber, that the doing of great matters is meant;
and thus it agrees best to the similitudes going before, and following after:
as the Bridle has a great work in the horse, and a small Rudder in the ship;
so has the tongue in man, which is also further declared by the similitude of
a little fire. Pareus agrees, that the word (...) may be taken in a good or
evil sense. But both he and Tho. Aquinas and Piscator will have the
similitudes of the Bridle, etc. to be understood in a good sense only, and
this that follows of a little fire etc. in an ill sense, unto both which
these words the tongue being a little member (...), has equal reference, so
that, they say, it lifts up it self sometime to much good, according to the
former similitudes; sometime to much evil, according to the latter. But the
foregoing similitudes may be applied both ways, as I have showed, and so it
will be more full.

Touching these words, The tongue is a fire, a world of wickedness, Verse. 6
etc. they are easy to be understood, as the fire, though it be but little,
inflameth and burns down great buildings, so the tongue brings the whole
man to destruction, for hell fire is the ^^ward of a wicked tongue, and
oft-times the intemperate tongue kindles a fire, as it were in the body, which
appears by the eyes sparkling, when a man speaks furiously, and the voice
overmuch extended in this kind pierces to the inward parts, to the breaking
of something there, whereupon bleeding to death ensues; Naucler. sol, 36^.
as in Scylla the Roman Dictatour, from whom through the overmuch extention of
his voice, the blood gushed out, and he died. For the world of wickedness:
wherefore the tongue is called so, see Pareus, and Thomas; the second mentioned
by Oecumenius is too curious, though Beza has also the same note. And for the
rest of the words, they are sufficiently explained already. Whereas Oecumenius
reads these words, The tongue can no man tame, interrogatiuely, he does
herein differ from all others, neither is that reading probable, for the scope
of S. James here, is to show that the tongue is more unruly than any thing.
Whereas he obiecteth, if it should be read positiuely, it were in vain for any
man to strive to govern his tongue; I answer, that it follows not, no more
tha^ that it is in vain to strive to be righteous, because it is said, Eccl.
7.20.
There is no man righteous: for as in this case yet every good man will strive
to be as righteous as possibly he can, being assured thus to be accepted,
according to that he has; so he will strive to govern his tongue, at least
refraining from the evil here taxed, cursing, and railing, etc. though he
cannot keep free from idle speeches, and such like smaller offenses.

Whereas he impugneth ill speeches against our neighbor, Verse. 11.
out of this consideration, that we bless God with our tongues, comparing
blessing to sweet water, and cursing to bitter, which cannot both come out of
one fountain; Tho. Aquinas. Faber.
Tho. Aquinas and Faber infer, and that rightly, that the blessing of those
that bless God, when their mouths are full of cursings against men, and
railings, and corrupt talking, is no blessing, but a sin also in them, even
as sweet water and bitter being mingled together is made all bitter, there
being more force in the bitter to turn the sweet into the same taste with it
self, than in the sweet to turn the taste of the bitter, because bitter is an
extreme, and sweet the medium of the taste.

Note of what great necessity it is to have a sp^ciall care of the governing of
the tongue: Note.
for as a man is in this respect, so is he accounted of before God. Words are
not wind, as the common saying is, but fire and deadly poison, if they be
evil, to the destruction of the whole man. They come out of the heart, Mark.
7. and defile indeed, Matthew. 12.37.

Note again, Note.
that an evil tongue works from fire to fire, from hell and the devil to
the kindling of heat, and fury, and contention here, and to the bringing of a
man to suffer in hell fire hereafter. The lewd tongued person is upon a wheel
turned by the devil, till he be brought to the same destruction with himself.
He is more savage than the wildest and sauagest beasts, which may be tamed, but
he is vnreclaimably barbarous.

Lastly note, Note.
that the best speeches which an ill tongued man can use, are all corrupted and
distasteful before God, by means of his ill language at other times, which is
as bitter water to the making of all his water bitter, to the turning of him
into a bramble, upon which no Figs grow. Let railers, and swearers, and
cursers, and filthy speakers, consider of this and tremble.

CHAP. 3. VERSE. 14, etc. But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your
heart, glory not, neither lie against the truth, etc.


In the 13. verse, he returns to speak of meekness again, Mayer.
as I have already noted in my general Analysis, and that very fitly, because,
according to Pareus, Pareus.
it is so good a means to restrain the tongue from the offenses before
condemned: the contrary unto which bitter envying, etc. here named, are the
very fountain of all irregularity, and of all the evil of the tongue, which
if they be in them, he bids them not to glory in the Christian profession,
as though they were wise and good Christians, for so they should lie against
the truth, seeing they are the blots and spots of Christianity, Glos. ord.
that are thus tainted. Some expound bitter envying (...), of zeal toward God
made bitter by contentious words with our neighbor, but the first is better;
Tho. Aquinas.
and lying against the truth they expound, either of lying against Christ who
is the truth, or of doing contrary to that which was promised in Baptism, viz.
to forsake the pomp of the world, which is not done by those that are proud of
their good works. But the first is most genuine and simple, for it is a false
and lying righteousness, Icrom. Vera iustitia habet compassionem, falsa
indignationem. Verse 17.
according to Ierom, wherein there is envy and anger: for true justice has
compassion, but false has indignation.

Verse 17. The wisdom that is from above is first chaste, then peaceable,
etc. He runs upon the word Wise and Wisdom from the 13 verse hitherto,
because he had spoken of Masters, verse. 1. that is, Teachers, which if any
desire to be, he shows them verse. 13. the necessity of being Teachers in
their conversation: for as Bernard says, Bern. Efficacior est vox operis, quam
sermonis, nec sufficit doctori ostendere sed etiam facere.
The voice of the work is more efficacious than of the speech, neither is it
sufficient for a teacher to show, but to do. He began also Chap. 1.5. with
wisdom, showing of whom it is to be asked, and whence it comes, verse 17.
viz. from above. To prove therefore that the contentious and envious are not
wise by this wisdom, he sets down the properties thereof, having before,
verse 15. affirmed, that it is not from above, but earthly, carnal, and
deuillish. Pareus.
The true wisdom is first chaste, that is, in the fear of God doing any
thing, or modest, and without arrogance, 3. gentle, (...), that is, not rough
in taking such things as are spoken in the worst sense, but in the best. 4.
Easy to be entreated, or gently entreating, for (...) may be taken either
actiuely or passiuely, it is to be persuaded easily to the best, or apt to
persuade others with good speeches. 5 Full of mercy, that is, not so much in
deeds of charity, for these are not the subject of this discourse, but toward
those that have erred, and are out of the way, for the wise pity them, and do
mercifully seek to bring them to rights again. 6 And of good fruits, that is,
of all sorts both of humanity and love. 7 Without partiality, (...), without
sinister judging of the speeches and deeds of others. 8 Without hypocrisy, not
making a show of one thing, and being another* one in speech, and another in
heart, to get applause of the world after the machiauillian policy. Verse. 18.
And to persuade unto all this, he shows verse 18. that to be thus peaceable
and loving, tends to everlasting life, which is the fruit of righteousness,
as the corn of the harvest is the fruit that comes of the Husbandmans
industry in tilling and sowing the ground, and therefore not the merit of
righteousness, but of Gods blessing, as the corn is. And this I take it is
the true sense of this place, and therefore I spare to add more expositions.
Th. Aquinas.
Only I will show how Tho. Aquinas applies these eight to the eight
beatitudes, Matthew. 5. and as being opposed against seven deadly sins. First,
the pure in heart are chaste. 2. peaceable. 3. the poor are gentle. 4. the
meek are easy to be persuaded. 5. they that hunger after righteousness
consent unto good. 6. the merciful are full of good fruits. 7. the mourners
judge not others. 8. they that suffer persecution are void of hypocrisy. The
7. sins are incontinency, pride, gluttony, anger, envy, covetousness, and
murder.

Note that there are two sorts of wisdom, Note.
the one earthly, sensual, and deuillish; the other godly, which is from
above. The wisdom of the contentious and wrangler, is of the first sort, and
therefore little cause is there for any man to glory in it. But he that is
meek and quiet spirited, and that does good, though he may be counted simple
amongst men, is truly wise indeed. For the true wisdom stands in deeds and
in power to temper a man's self in a Christian manner.

Note again, Note.
that as there is no Corn to be had at harvest without sowing, so there is no
happiness to be had in Heaven without sowing. And as it is not every seed, nor
every kind of sowing, that will bring forth Corn; so it is not any sowing,
but by righteousness, and that in peace, that will fructify unto eternal
life; they that by well-doing seek immortality, are recompensed with
everlasting life, Romans 2.7, 8.
if they continue patiently so to do; but the contentious, and unrighteous,
with wrath and indignation.

CHAP. IIII.
HEre Saint James, according to his manner, returns to speak against
filthiness, impugned also, chap. 1. verse. 21. not giving over yet the pursuit
of malice and envy, but taxing them together likewise, so arising to pride,
verse. 6. the fountain of these evil affections, annexing exhortations to
repentance and humility and unity, meeting with them, that for want of
consideration bear themselves upon their own power to go and to do any
thing at this time and that, and speak accordingly, as though they were not
under God and at his dispose, verse. 13. Under whose hand he had before
exhorted them to submit themselves, verse. 7. So that, as Pareus notes, Pareus.
here is nothing more done, but the argument of the tongue prosecuted, from the
well-springs of the unruliness and wickedness whereof, malice, envy, lust,
pride and ignorance, he disswadeth by other reasons; concluding, that being
thus informed, if hereafter they should not do better, their sin would prove
much greater.

JAMES Chapter 4. Verse 1, 2, 3. Whence are wars and fightings amongst you?
are they not even hence, from your pleasures, that war in your members? Verse.
2. Ye lust and have not, ye kill, etc.


BY Wars here understand their private contentions, Pareus in Iac. 4.
or their bringing of one another before heathen Judges, touched 1 Cor. 6. but
rather the first, because they are said to be amongst them. By pleasures
understand lusts, 1 Pet. 2.11.
as Peter speaking to the same purpose renders it, abstain from fleshly lusts
that war against the soul. They are called pleasures, because they are sweet
and pleasant to a corrupt mind, and a man's own pleasure is respected herein.
The members, wherein they war, are the faculties of the mind corrupted,
which be members of the old man. Verse. 2.
Ye lust and have not; that is, though covetous men get riches, yet they are
rather a curse than a blessing unto them, neither have they them but for a
punishment often times. Ye kill, or rather ye envy, for (...) is put for (...),
according to Beza, by the fault of the Scribe. Because ye ask not; that is, ye
do not seek to obtain by prayer to God, which is the right way to attain
his blessing, but by your own wicked ways of striving and envying. Verse. 3.
Verse. 3. Ye ask and receive not: this is added, because some worldlings do
pray after a sort, but their prayers prevail not, because they pray for such
things, as whereby their fleshly lusts may be satisfied, and not with any
regard to be more enabled to do good and to glorify God. Mayer. Piscator.
Piscator agrees almost in all with Pareus, showing that the Syriacke for
pleasures reads lusts. Verse. 3.
Only he expounds these words, that ye may spend it upon your lusts, of such
lusts that be in adulterers and whores, whom he names, verse. 4. and here
makes way unto it. Others read lusts for pleasures: Tho. Aquinas. G^rran.
and whereas he says, ye lust, ye kill, ye war, verse. 2. they expound the
first, as having reference to a man's goods through covetousness; the second,
to his person by hatred; the third, a fruit of the two former. That which
follows, ye ask to spend it upon your lusts, they expound either of a
preposterous love to worldly things, or of an asking of superfluities: in other
things they differ not. Some expound pleasures of dainty meats, or costly
buildings, Oecum^n. v. 1.
etc. wherein they took pleasure: and these words, ye kill, of killing the
soul, if it be so read, reading it rather, ye envy, as Pareus and Piscator do.

To come now to the resolving of the doubts of this place.

wars and fightings, it is clear, as all agree, that wars properly are not
meant, for Christians were not then permitted to have weapons or armor, but
private wranglings and strifes.

pleasures, Pareus has also cleared it sufficiently, and the members, wherein
they fight, are the inward faculties of the mind, acting the part of
contention by the tongue, hands, feet, and the other members of the body.

ye kill, but by some, ye envy; Oecumenius and Gagneus both affirm, Gagneus.
that there are some Greek Copies, wherein it is (...), which if it be so, I
could easily assent to the pretended fault of the Scribe, otherwise to read
it, ye kill may well stand as Thomas Aquinas has expounded it, ye kill by
hating.

Pareus.

viz. if they would seek them, not by evil lusting after them in a worldly
manner, but by right prayer unto God.

Mat. 7. Ask and you shall have, Faber in ^ac. 4. Spiritus s^^^^enus Orat
rup^d Deum (...), ^^^es autem carnis malus.
but rather an exposition thereof, if ye ask rightly, that is, with a
spiritual and heavenly mind. To which purpose one speaks notably; The
Spirit of Faith is a good Orator before God, but the sense of the flesh an ill
one. He that has this Spirit, is mortified together with Christ, and so does
not fight, strive, and envy, but what he needs he asks in the Spirit of
Faith, and receives as much as is sufficient for his spiritual life. Now the
mind that is spiritual, does not ask worldly things for the love which it
has to abound herein to live the more deliciously to the pampering of the
body, but for necessary uses, that a man may live to glorify God, and to do
good herewith. They which do otherwise, shall not speed, though they ask and
beg most importunately. To spend upon their pleasures, then is, not only for
necessity, or that they may have wherewithal to do deeds of charity, but that
they may have superfluity and so maintain themselves, according to the pompous
manner of this world, which who so has, being a worldling and without grace,
rusheth into fleshly pleasures properly so called, as the Sodomites, whose
state is described to be such, Ezech. 16.49.
as that they had fullness of bread. And thus I assent unto Piscator, that
these kind of pleasures are principally meant here, though I see all others
go another way, expounding the words following of adulterers and adulteresses
by the spiritual adultery.

Note that the original of all troubles and stirs in the world are the
worldly and evil affections of men, Note.
which are ingendered through an ouer-great pleasure taken in worldly things,
that we may not suffer our minds to be taken up with such delight herein, but
acknowledging their vanity, be mortified in this regard, so shall we be free
from the hellish affections of envy and hatred, with which whosoever is tainted
can have no comfort to Godward, seeing he is a carnal man, and so in the way
of perdition.

Note again, Note.
what great deceit there is in worldly pleasures: though they fawn upon us,
and there appears nothing but delight, yet they work our own members
against our souls, for hereby they fight against them; and therefore let no
man, that loves his soul, be bewitched with them, or let them have place in
him, no more than he will receive a deadly enemy into his house or bedchamber.

Note lastly, Note.
that the only sure way to obtain what we need for this life, is to pray for
it, and that with a sincere heavenly end, and not a carnal; they that by
tugging and striving, by wrangling and coveting seek it, have it not, either
being frustrated of their desire by a just judgment, or being without the use
of it, because they are mancipated to the world, and so have no comfort
thereof, but only toil, care, and sorrow, according to that saying, Inopem me
copia fecit.

CHAP. 4. VER. 4. Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not, that the amity
of the world is the enmity of God, etc. Verse. 5. or think ye, that the
Scripture says in vain, the spirit that dwells in us lusts unto envy, etc.


Mayer.
All Expositors almost agree in the sense of these words, except it be about the
place of Scripture alleged. Ye adulterers, this they expound by spiritual
adultery, as I have already touched, though I see no reason but that he may
mean this vice properly, according to Piscator, because he speaks so much
of pleasure, as well as of bitter envying and strife, for they altogether war
against the soul, though I grant indeed, that his maine scope here is to
impugn a maleuolous and spleenaticke disposition, yet there is nothing to
hinder, but that they which were so sensual might be libidinous; and therefore
it was not impertinent, but tended to the aggravating of their sin, 2 Pet.
2.14.
the more to call them adulterers and adulteresses, as Saint Peter taxes
corrupt professors to have eyes full of adultery; and as we may gather from
thence and Saint Iudes Epistle, it was an usual blemish of such kind of
persons. But he proceeds no further here, but only names them by this vice,
and then goes forward in his argument against being so worldly minded, the
amity of the world is the enmity of God. Oecumenius yields a good reason of
this, Oecumen.
because that he, which is so intent to the world, must needs neglect God and
godliness; and to neglect or remisly to carry a man's self toward any, is to
hate him, for this is a fruit of hatred: Th. Aquinas. Pareus.
so that the love of the world here is to love it in excess, or to love the
corruption that bears sway here, which is understood also by the world, 1
Ioh. 2.15. for this is an enemy to God, and makes him Gods enemy, that is
infected with it.

Touching the place alleged, Verse. 5.
because there is no such sentence to be found, diverse have coniectured
diversely: some that it is alluded to Numb. 11.29. where Moses says to Joshua,
Iuninus paral.
Enuiest thou for my sake, some unto Genesis 6.5. All the imaginations of man's
heart are only evil continually, as Pareus reports; and some, that these
words are to be referred to those that went before, Th. Aquinas. Gorr^n.
the amity of the world is the enmity of God; for by the words following he
proves this, the spirit that dwells in us, lusts unto envy. For this is as
much in effect as if he had said, is an enemy to Gods Spirit, for as much as
the Spirit of God is against envying; but our own spirit, which is worldly, is
carried to envy. And then the Scripture alleged is brought to this purpose, as
if he had said; Think ye that the holy Scripture does in vain dissuade from
the love of the world, for in this kind it speaks, Deuteronomy. 7.3. Thou shall
make no leagues with them, and Romans 12.2. Be not conformed to this world.
Faber. Stap. Gagneus.
Some refer this saying to Exodus 20. I the Lord thy God am a ielous God, the
Spirit of God that dwells in you, enuieth that ye should be joined to any
other but unto himself, seeing he does offer more grace than any other unto
us; as it follows, but he gives more grace, etc. the world gives nothing of
worth, but takes away, but God gives his holy Spirit and Son unto us here,
Piscator.
and life everlasting hereafter. Some understanding the Spirit of God that
dwells in us also, do yet refer it unto Numb. 11.29. reading it
interrogatiuely, does it lust unto envy? as if he should say it does not, for
it did not in Moses, when Eldad and Medad prophesied in the Host, Pareus.
for he forbad it unto Ioshuah, or else unto Exodus 25.8. chapter 29.45. Ier. 7.3. I
will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel, rendering the sense thus, the
spirit that is often said to dwell in us, lusts against, that is, hareth and
carries us against envy; Of all these expositions it is hard to say, which is
to be preferred, and the place must needs be confessed to be most intricate.
But that exposition, whereby it is said, that the Spirit of God is here meant,
though it be most commonly embraced, seems to me to be most improbable,
because he, that is, God, who offers more grace, verse. 6. is opposed to the
spirit here spoken of, for an aduersatiue particle but is used, as if he should
have spoken of two contraries; thus is our spirit inclined, but God prescribes
otherwise. Again, it were a strange speech to say, that the spirit lusts to
envy, if the meaning were, is jealous, as Faber renders it, seeing envy is the
corruption so much in this Epistle impugned, and therefore, if he would have
spoken a word, which should carry a good sense, he would have chosen some
other, and not have used this, which was never yet taken but in an ill sense.
And to expound (...) by (...), as Pareus does, unto by against is as strange,
neither do the next words currantly follow any of both these expositions, for
so it should rather have been therefore, or for he gives more grace, I
prefer therefore that exposition which interprets the spirit that dwells
in us, of that spirit which all men have in common, the spirit of natural
life; for every man that lives, lives by a spirit, which is the soul; for
when this departs out of the body, the spirit is said to go to God that gave
it, Eccl. 12.^.
and this is called the spirit of the world, and as it is now corrupt, since
the fall of Adam, is opposed to Gods Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.12. By the spirit then
dwelling in us, I understand our natural corruption, which is usually set
forth by the name of a spirit; as for example, that corruption, whereby we are
unfaithful and do not believe, is called The spirit of bondage, Romans 8.15.
That, whereby men have been carried away to idolatry, is called The spirit of
whoredom, Hos. 4.12. That, whereby men are blinded to go on in sin, without
looking at the danger, is called The spirit of a deep sleep, Esaias 29.10. And
this corruption is said to dwell in us, even when we are regenerate, Romans 7.20.
And in regard that it is an infection in the soul and spirit, sometime a man
infected herewith, is called (...), 1 Cor. 2.14. natural from (...),
signifying the soul; and because he is carried hereby to carnal things, and
it utters it self by the fleshly members of the body, sometime he is called
(...), carnal, as 1 Cor. 3.41. And if we understand by the spirit dwelling in
us this corruption, we shall easily find out the Scripture, where thus much in
effect is set forth, though not in the same words, viz. Gal. 5.17. for there is
showed, how the flesh lusts against the spirit, and unto what this lusting
tends, when he enumerateth the particular fruits thereof, and amongst the
rest envy and strife. And being thus understood, all things agree here most
notably. For it is as if he should have said, Hereby it appears, that to be
linked unto the world, by being like affected, as the men of the world are, is
to be shaken off from God, as being in enmity with him, because the corruption
whereby the world is carried, as by their spirit, here therefore called The
spirit dwelling in us, lusts unto envy, fighting and striving to be most
eminent, and in highest place: but God inclines the contrary way, viz. to
humility by promising grace to the humble, and threatening the proud, that out
of their pride break out into such unchristian brabbles and stirs. This
sentence, He resists the proud and gives grace to the humble, is taken out
of Proverbs 3.34. where though the words be a little different in the Hebrew,
yet according to the Septuagints, they are the very same here alleged.

Resist the Devil and he will fly from you; Verse 7.
this resistance is made by Faith, 1 Pet. 5.8. and by other parts of the
spiritual Armature, Ephesians. 6.12. But it is not to be thought, that he will
for ever be gone, when he is thus resisted, for he will return again and make
new assaults, but he must always be thus resisted, Verse. 8.
and so we shall prevail against him. Draw near to God; this is, by
reformation of our hearts and lives, as is immediately expressed, and by
lamenting our sins past, verse. 9.

Speak not one against another, Verse. 11.
he that speaks against a brother and judges him, speaks against the Law,
etc. Having exhorted to a course of reconciliation to God, he now entreats of
unity amongst themselves, and forbearing one to detract from another, or to
impeach another wrongfully. He that does thus, Leu. 19.16.
speaks against the Law, because in the Law it is forbidden to go about as a
Talebearer against a man's neighbor, and in carrying himself herein, as
contemptuous of the Law he takes upon him, as it were, as a Judge over the
Law, so far is he from submitting to the obedience thereof, whereas indeed
there is but one Judge, namely God, whose Office, whilst he thus usurps, he
may justly fear a future condemnation by him. And in this exposition all
Interpreters generally do agree.

Note, Note.
that to be wedded to our own wills and ways is to be at enmity with God, for
so much as our ways and Gods ways are diametrically contrary the one to the
other; our spirit, as the spirit of the world generally does, carries us to
envy and all evil affections, but God would feign draw us to humility.
Wherefore let us renounce our own wills and lusts, and hearken to the Lord,
that we may have his love, and not continue in enmity with him, the heat of
whose anger all the world is not able to bear.

Note again, Note.
that there is no pacification to be had with God, without reformation from
our evil ways. We must draw near unto him, that he may draw near unto us,
as the Prodigal did, Luke 15. For God is every where (says Augustine) and
therefore we draw near unto him, not by places, August. Deus vbique est, cui
non locis, sed moribus appr^pinquamus.
but by manners. We must be humble, and weep, and lament for our sins,
whereas we have before laughed and been merry in committing them.

Note again, that to be converted to the Lord, Note.
is to resist the Devil, with whom a man is as long as he remains in his
sins: neither is he such a formidable enemy, that we should fear for his
great power to encounter with him; for being resisted, he flies away.

Note lastly, Note.
that how poor and contemptible soever any Neighbor is, yet we are to fear
to speak against him, and to vilify and disgrace him, because this is to
usurp not over a poor man, and one neglected by us, but over the Law, as if
we were Gods; that God the great Judge of all will never endure, seeing the Law
comes from him, and he will be revenged upon all contempt offered against
his own Law.

Touching that which follows in this Chapter, verse. 13, Verse. 13. Th. Aquma.
it agrees well to the matter in hand, which is against the eager seeking
after worldly things with envying and much strife. For if the shortness and
uncertainty of this life were considered, it would cool our heat this way,
seeing it is most vain to trouble our selves so much about that which we
cannot not tell whether we shall enjoy a day longer or no. And therefore this
rebuke is fitly added here, that they did behave themselves so, as if they had
the power of their own lives, the frailty of this life being notably set
forth, and now that they know to do well, Gregor. Vbi maius est donum
s^ientiae, ibi transgressor maiori subiacet ^uq^e.
if they do it not, he says, it is sin, that is, the greater sin and more
damnable, according to Gregory. who says, Where greater knowledge is given,
there the offender is subject to a greater punishment, because knowledge is by
him contemned, Luke 12. Ioh. 15.22.

CHAP. V.
Having spoken against wrangling and quarrelling about worldly things in the
former Chapter, persuading to humility and to mortification to the world;
considering how that we are in Gods hand from day to day, being of a most
frail and uncertain life: Here by a new argument taken from the dangers
hanging over their heads he terrifieth the rich worldlings, that by any
oppression and wronging of the poor seek to enrich themselves, regarding
nothing, but like sensual belly-gods, to live in pleasure and to pamper their
bodies, unto verse. 7. where he exhorts the poor to patience, whatsoever they
suffer in this world by the hands of oppressors, unto verse. 1^. where because
men in misery are wont to fall a cursing and swearing, he gives a caveat
against this, showing the right way of comfort, verse. 13. viz. to fly to
prayer and confession of our sins to such as be of great power in the Court
of Heaven, unto verse. 17. and to prove that there are such, he instanceth in
the example of Elias, and so concludes with this notice giving them, that if
any were a means of the conversion of another that was our of the way, he
should be reputed the savior of his soul, verse. 20. that the Presbyters might
the more earnestly pray for sinful men in the time of their misery, that they
may be converted and forgiven, when they should crave their help herein, as
before he directed, verse. 14.

All things here are easy to be understood, but only verse. 9. where he bids
them (...), Grudge not, in our translation, Ne ingemiscatis, in the vulgar
Latin; that is, sigh not being streightened by these oppressions, the meaning
is, Th. Aquinas.
do not murmr as they that think themselves unjustly dealt withal, never
looking at the just Judge, who will soon rectify all wrongs done, for the
Judge is at hand. Pareus.
But some apply it rather to such as do wrong and so cause sighings, but the
first is more kindly, and agrees better with the persons here comforted, who
are the oppressed by manifold injuries.

JAMES Chapter 5. Verse 14. Is any man sick amongst you? let him send for the
Elders of the Church, and let them pray for him, anointing him with oil in the
Name of the Lord, etc.


Unto other afflictions by oppressions and persecutions, Mayer.
here is adjoined something concerning afflictions by some great and grievous
sickness, for it is nto to be understood, that upon every affliction by
sickness this course should be taken. The doubts occurring here are; First,
who be the Elders of the Church here mentioned. Secondly, whether it be still
necessary to anoint the sick with oil. Thirdly, what confession of sins is
required, and to whom it ought to be made.

Touching the first, Tho. Aquinas.
Presbyters (says Tho. Aquin. and Gorran, and other Papals) are such as have
power to minister a Sacrament, as being in holy orders, and amongst them the
grauest and holiest, and therefore they are set forth by a name, signifying
Elders; for such as are young, and not so learned and sufficient, are not to be
sent to, lest the cause being opened unto them, the Patient receive some
hurtful counsel: For the worthiness of the person, say they, avails much
to make this Sacrament of anointing the more effectual; seeing it is
administered with Prayer, and so, the more worthy he is that prays, of the
more force shall his Prayers be to do the sick Patient good.

Touching the second, Per istam sanctis. vnctionem, and pijssimam suam
miscricordiam indulgeat tibi Deus quicquid peccati per visum, auditum, etc.
Quest. 3.
using these words: By this most holy anointing, and by his most godly mercy,
God forgive thee whatsoever offense thou have committed by seeing, hearing,
smelling, touching, or tasting. Then they anoint the reins, as the seat of
lust; and the feet, as having a progressiue force. And being thus used, they
hold it effectual to deliver the soul from sin, and the body from sickness.

Touching the third, they likewise teach, that it is necessary to salvation for
a man to confess his sins to the Priest, that at his hands he may receive
absolution: and it was decreed in the Lateran Council, Council. Lateran. ca^.
an. 1321.
that this should be done once every year by all that have attained to years
of discretion, and then they ought to confess all their sins, and especially
before the coming to the Eucharist. Hitherto popish Writers.

Moses to govern the people. And the same name is continued in the new
Testament, of such as were set up to govern in Christian Congregations,
whereof there were diverse in every Congregation, who were joined to those that
had the dispensation of the Word and Sacraments committed unto them. Calvin. 1 Timothy 5.17. Flacius Illir.
And this they gather from 1 Timothy 5.17. where it is said, The Elders that rule
well, are worthy of double honor, especially such as labor in the Word and
Doctrine. Howsoever this order of governing by other Elders joined with
Ministers, was broken off long ago through the pride of Priests, who desired
to have all Church-gouernment in their hands only, as Calvin says Ambrose
complains. But the word Presbyteri, Elders, and Priests, are promiscuously
used amongst the Fathers every where in their writings; so that howsoever it
was at the first, in the days of the most ancient Fathers that have written,
there were no Elders of the Church known but Priests. As amongst the Jews the
Governors were called Elders; so amongst the Romans Senators had their name a
senectute, because they were commonly wise and ancient men. By Elders here that
must be sent for in the time of sickness, I understand the Ministers of Gods
word, whereof there were commonly two in a congregation at the least.

with oil, the ground of this was the Apostles anointing of the sick, and so
healing them, mentioned Mark. 6.13. neither was this a gift common to all
Elders, but to some, for all had not the gift of healing. 1 Cor. 12.30.


This anointing held as long as those extraordinary gifts, but then it was not
used any more till that Innocent 1. instituted it anew an. 402. as Sigebertus
reports. After that it was again used, not only by Priests unto the sick,
but by all other Christians, as the words of the same Innocent are; It is
lawful, Innocent. epist. 1. ad Decentium cap. 8.
not only for the Priests, but for all Christians, to anoint with the Chrisme
made by the Bishop. Alcuinus also teaches the same, de divine. officijs cap.
40. ann. 750. And Beda, who also thought that it was to be applied to the weak
in faith, Beda in Luc. 9.
as well as to the weak in body. If it be demanded then whether we by omitting
this Ceremony about the sick do not transgress against an Apostolical
ordinance, or whether the practice of the Church of Rome is not rather herein
to be commended? I answer, that seeing it was to heal the sick immediately, as
other signs and wonders were then done by an extraordinary power of the
spirit, for the confirmation of the Gospel amongst unbelievers, and this
virtue ceased long ago; it were but a vain thing for us to use this anointing
still, being now but a bare Ceremony without operation. And for the practice of
the Church of Rome at this day, their anointing is far differing from that in
the Apostles days. For first, common oil was then used, but now oil
consecrated by the Bishop, with breathing upon it, mumbling over it, and
exorcising, being saluted nine times with the bending of the knee, and with
saying thrice, Aue sanctum Oleum, thrice Aue sanctum Chrisma, and thrice Aue
sanctum Balsamum. 2. Then the parts affected only were anointed, the dumb had
oil put into his mouth, the deaf into his ears, Gregor. Turon. Franc. hist.
lib. 6. cap. 7.
etc. as Gregor. Turonensis reports: but now the eyes, the ears, the
nostrils, the mouth, and the hands are anointed, etc. 3. Then anointing was
used to cure the bodily disease, of which they that were sick, were presently
healed: but now it is used, when men are ready to depart out of this life,
without any such effect. 4. If anointing were anciently applied for a
spiritual good, it was but for a sign only, it being held, that all the good
came by prayer unto the sick, as Victor Victor Antioch. in Mark. 6. Oleum quod
in sancta unction adhibetur, and Dei misericordiam, and m^rbi sanationem, and
cordis illuminationem denotat. Dici tame^ potest, orationem hec omnia efficere,
oleum autem little omnium quae siunt externum tantum symbolum esse.
Antiochenus speaks. The oil that is used sets forth both the mercy of
God, the healing of the disease, and the illumination of the mind: yet it is
prayer that does all these, and the anointing is but an outward symbol hereof
only.

But now anointing is used for the remission of sins, and to procure
happiness to him that is ready to depart out of this life; yet there is some
difference amongst them that hold this. Lombard says, that only venial
sins are done away by Extreme Unction. Bellarmine Bell. li. 1. de extrem.
unction, cap. 8.
that the remainders even of mortal sins, which are unknown, are hereby
remitted. Now, although the forgiving of sins is here mentioned, yet it is
not attributed to the anointing, but because sin is the cause of all
sufferings, and sin remaining, there is no hope of being healed, therefore as
our Savior Christ, when he would comfort the palsy man, in respect of the
healing of his disease, he bids him, Be of good comfort, thy sins are
forgiven thee; so here to show that they should be healed, he says, If he has
committed sin, it shall be forgiven him. And this is obtained by hearty and
penitent prayer, which now we ought to make our refuge, without this vain
Ceremony so long ago justly left, but resumed again, as superstition began to
invade the Christian world. Our only means of help now is with the leprous
man to pray, Lord if thou will thou can make me clean, though in S. James
his time, whilst a miraculous sanation did follow anointing in the name of the
Lord, it was well appointed to be used. And if any scruple shall arise, as
Bellarmine obiecteth, then during that time no Christians died of any
sickness, if all were healed that were anointed, and this was used unto all
according to the direction of this place: I answer, by the like reason none
should have died all the time that Christ went about doing of miracles, and
healing every disease. It is therefore to be understood, that God by his
providence disposed it so, as that all did not fly to these means, but such
only as he had appointed to be healed; or such Elders as had the gift of
healing went not but only to them, and at such times as by his spirit they
were directed to go.

Perkins, Perk. de monst. problem. sub titulo Confess. sacrament. Pareus in Iac.
5. Faber. Stapul.
the Ancients counseled confessing to the Priest, as a commodious and
profitable mean to reap comfort. And Pareus coming to set down the true
meaning of this place, says; The Apostle having commanded the sick to send
for the Elders, and to pour out into their bosom their necessities and
sins, not that they might absolve them, but pray for them, he does extend
this doctrine now to all the faithful, commanding them to confess one unto
another, and to pray for one another, as their present case and necessity did
require. He grants also, that it may be understood more restrainedly of
confessing how we have iniuried one another, for pacification, when offense
has been given, but he prefers rather the other. Lyra, and Beda, and
others, Lyra. Beda.
teach out of this place a necessity of confessing to the Priest, by whose
hands as men were wont to offer their sacrifices, so by them now they should
seek to be commended in prayer. Tho. Aquinas says, Tho. Aquinas.
that under the old Testament it was sufficient to confess to God only; but
now since God became man, confession must be made both to God, and to man, who
is Gods Vicar in spiritual things. And this is intimated, when Christ bids
the leprous man go show himself to the Priest, Luke 17.
because sin is the leprosy of the soul; and when he gave to Peter the
keys of the kingdom of heaven, and to the rest of the Apostles, and said,
Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted. But that neither this place, nor any
other in all the holy Scriptures was thought anciently to impose any such
necessity of confessing to the Priest, is plain, because in the Greek Church
confession having been formerly in use, Histor. tripart. lib. 9. cap. 35.
was abolished an. 396. for whoredom, which a certain Deacon committed with a
Noble woman, under the color of this private confession. And since that time
it was never used again in the Greek Churches unto this day. Neither was it
any where required, till about an. 800. at what time Alcuinus is the first that
makes mention of it, as necessary. And Cubilonense Council. 2. cap. 32. And
Council. Moguntin. cap. 26. in the time of Gregory 4. the one requiring a full
confession, the other a pure confession to be made by the sick. But it was
first decreed Council. Lateran. about an. 1200. in the time of Pope Innocent 3.
And now confessions are made otherwise than in times past, viz. that the Priest
having taken them may absolve the offenders, and direct them to a course of
satisfaction for their sins. To conclude this point, it is certain, that the
Popish auricular confession is not directed to here, and diverse of them
confess, that it is uncertain by what authority it is required that men should
thus confess. In the Glos. de paenit. did. 5. c. 1. Melius dicitur, eam
institutam suisse a quadam vniuersalis Ecclesiae traditione potius quam ex noui
vel vet. testamenti authoritate.
Gloss it is said, It is better to hold that it was instituted rather out of
the tradition of the Church, than by the authority of the old or new Testament.
Scotus in Sent. 4. distinct. 17. says, that either it was ordained by Christ
giving order hereabout to the Apostles, or else it was appointed by the
Apostles without all Scripture, only by word of mouth. Rhenanus Rhenan. in
Tertull. de poenit. Clancularia confessio quantum con^cimus, nata est ex ista
exomologes. per vitroneam hominum pietatem. Nec cnim vsquam pr^ceptam olim
legim^^.
says, that this private confession did arise (as far as we can conjecture)
out of that voluntary confession which godly men were wont to make of their
own accord, for it is no where prescribed that we can read of. Caietan
likewise denies it to be of Christ, and so to be necessary, John 24. yet it
seems to me, that in the time of sickness it is good and profitable for the
sick to confess his sins freely to the Minister of Gods word, that by him,
as by Gods instrument appointed to speak comfort unto him, in respect of the
remission of his sins, he may be comforted and confirmed in this regard, and
that being well acquainted with his case, he may the better stir him up to
repentance, and the more effectually commend his case unto God in his prayers.
For, confess your sins one unto another, me thinks, may be better expounded
thus, men unto men, that is, to the Elders, who are of your selves, and are
appointed for your comfort both corporal and spiritual: for of such he had
spoken before, and it is most to the purpose to interpret this as spoken de
issdem, as directing the sick not only to send for them, but to confess unto
them also, that knowing what sins in particular trouble their consciences,
they may herein pray to God for them, and obtain pardon. For, expound it of
other common Christians, and this absurdity will follow, that they which are
less able to advise and to comfort a distressed soul, should have the sores
thereof opened unto them, they to whom it properly belongs to apply medicines
being neglected.

Again, they who are most ready to confess their sins to Gods Ministers,
are the most penitent, whose consciences are troubled herewith. Others that are
never pressed with the burden of their sins, either say nothing in this
kind at all, or else their confessions be very general and sleighty; so that
the practice of such as are best affected, who no doubt are moved hereunto by
the spirit of God, shows, that it is of God to confess a man's sins to his
servants in the time of sickness, and therefore he does enable them
accordingly to minister comfort to such as from a true penitent heart do thus,
saying, Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted.

Confess thy sins then first and chiefly to God, and confess in time of
sickness one unto another, that is, the private Christian unto the faithful
Minister of God, and pray one for another, that is, the Minister for the
private man, being in extremity through sickness, being assured, that as Eliah
by prayer prevailed mightily for the common good, so a godly Minister shall
prevail for the relief and comfort of him that is in distress. One reckons
up nine effects of fervent prayer. Gorran in Iac. 5.
1. It dissolueth bands, Act. 12. 2. It puts to flight the devil, Matthew.
17. 3. It delivers from death, Dan. 13. Susanna prayed, and was delivered. 4.
It preuenteth temptation, Matthew. 26. Watch and pray, that ye enter not, etc. 5.
It overcomes the adverse powers, Exodus 17. Moses lifting up his hands, Isra^^
prevailed. 6. It purifieth the heart, August. Orationibus mundamur, lectionibus
instruimur. 7. It pacifieth Gods anger, Exodus 32. 8. It presents our desires
(...) God, Quasi quaedam persona ad Deum intrat, August. 9. Heals the sick.

Note, Note.
that the time of sickness is specially a time of prayer, Psalm. 50.14. thou
must pray much, and desire the prayers of others for thee. All physic, and
diet, and warmth, is nothing without prayer, pray therefore continually, 1
These. 5.17. but specially in the time of sickness.

Note again, Note.
that the Minister is a principal man to be sought to in sickness, he
therefore is with all speed to be sent for, and if there be more near, send
for two or three, that together they may pray for thee. Matthew. 18.
For, when two of you shall consent together about any thing upon earth, says
Christ to his Apostles, it shall be done in heaven. Consider what wonders Elias
did by praying, and doubt not but that the men of God shall prevail as well
for thee in thine extremity, if it may be for Gods glory, that thou may be
delivered, otherwise thou must resolve that to be sick still, and to die too,
if God will have it so, is most for Gods glory, as that man's being blind, John
9. and Lazarus his dying, Job. 11. and therefore rest contented.

Note lastly, Note.
that sin is the cause of sickness, and confequently of all sufferings,
except they be merely for trialls, as Jobs sufferings were, Lament. 3.27. 1
King. 8.
for when he would show that healing shall follow upon faithful prayer, he
does it with this addition, and if he has committed sin, it shall be
forgiven him, and till sin be done away, there is no expectation of being
healed. Wherefore the chief thing to be intended in sickness, is to be
delivered from sin, which is not but by true repentance; to the furthering
whereof it avails much to confess to the Physician of the soul. If any be
healed of their sickness, but not of their sin, it is but a repriuing for a
time, that they may come under some greater judgment, according to that, John
5.14.
Go thy way, sin no more, lest a worse thing befall thee.

CHAP. 5. VERSE. 19. If any man has erred from the truth, and one turns him,
let him that has turned him know, that he saves a soul from death, etc.


There is some question about the cohering of these words with the former, and
some about the sense. Mayer.
Touching the coherence: Some say, Tho. Aquin. Gorran.
that having before exhorted to pray for others in the time of sickness, that
they may be healed; here is intimated a further duty to be done, viz. not only
to be sollicitous for a brothers bodily safety, but chiefly for the safety of
his soul, by endeavoring to convert him. Pareus. Piscator.
Some without any coherence speak of it, as a proposition of a new duty. I
subscribe to the coherence, there being nothing in this Epistle, but delivered
in a method, as I have showed in my Analysis.

Touching the sense: Pareus. The. Aquinas. Faber. Occumen.
Some by erring from the truth understand only erring in matter of doctrine,
in points concerning the foundation, and some both in doctrine and manners;
neither do I see any reason why they should be severed, because either way the
soul is endangered. Any error in manners, that is, walking in the way of any
sin, in dangereth the soul; for the wages of sin is death, and he that
fails in one point, Romans 6.23. James 2.10.
is guilty of all the law. And to err in matter of doctrine, if it be in the
foundation is deadly. The Galathians erring thus, Gal. 1.6.
are spoken of as departed to another Gospel, when they erred only in the
point of justification by works. If any man erred in the matter of
circumcision, using it now under the Gospel, Gal 5.1. 2 These. 2.11.
he is pronounced to be such as that Christ shall not profit him. And to
believe lies is set forth as the way of destruction, to which disobedient
persons are in judgment given over. John 17.17.
It is the truth that sanctifies and saves, and therefore errout must needs
corrupt and destroy. But every error does not bring a man into this danger:
for he that holds the foundation shall be saved, though he builds hay or
stubble. 1 Cor. 3.12.
And to err in a point fundamental destroys not, where there is a mind
willing to learn the truth, but yet for want of means or time, the perfect
knowledge hereof is not attained unto, as was the case of the Apostles, Acts
1.6.
who thought, till the resurrection of Christ, that by the exercising of
outward regal power, he would save his people, and confound his enemies.

Touching the words following, He saves a soul from death, Parens.
and hides a multitude of sins: Some apply both these to the person
converted; the first in respect of God, he saves him from death, to which God
would have adjudged him for ever, if he had continued still in his sin: and
the second in respect of men, who now that he is turned, absolve him from all
his sins, and make account of him, as if he had not erred at all. And all
this he does that conuerteth another, not by the merit of any thing that he can
do, but because under God he is an instrument of bringing him into the right
way, which is the way to escape death, Faber Stapul.
and the danger of sin. Some apply the first of these to him that erred, and
the other to him by whose means he is converted; or both alike unto him that
is converted, or that conuerteth: for God does so accept of this so excellent a
work, as that he will therefore save him that conuerteth also. Beda.
And therefore some read it, animam suam, his own soul. I subscribe unto the
first, that by the soul saved, is to be understood, the soul of him that
erred only, for this is most agreeable to the speech, the subject whereof (as
being before in the way of death) is the sinner whom one conuerteth, not the
conuerter, who is commonly supposed to be in the state of salvation before.
And he hides his sins, according to the phrase borrowed, Prou. 10.12.
because when a man is converted, all his former sins are hidden under the
covert of his new life, The. Aquinas.
he is now before God, as if he had no sin, Psalm. 32.1. And to this also
Pareus assenteth, that the convert has no sin imputed unto him, now that by
his conversion he is in Christ. Before men I cannot see how it should so much
avail to have ones sins hidden, as to mention that to set forth hereby the
excellency of this work of conversion.

Note, Note.
that a man in error, or in sin, is out of the way of life, and in the way
of death: yea, he that is deceived only with error in fundamentals, is in a
damnable estate, though his life be otherwise unblameable, and full of good
works. Let the seduced Papist then consider this, and tremble to go on in his
errors.

Note again, Note.
that although there be sin even in those that are converted, yet no sin
appears, all is covered, and cast behind Gods back, he looks now only
upon the study and care which they have to do his will, this coming between
his sight and their old sins, whereas the impenitent and unconverted is full
of sin, blemishing and deforming him in the sight of God, so that he is all
ugly and vile in his eyes, as any loathsome leaper is in ours; which should make
a wicked man out of love with himself, and to turn from this estate, seeing
howsoever he thinks that he has but such or such a sin to answer for, the
truth is, that he has a multitude of sins, Faber, pelagus peccatorum.
yea, a sea of sins, as one speaks.

Note lastly, Note.
because Prou. 10.12. from whence this is taken, it is said, Love covers a
multitude of sins, that in love we ought to endeavor all that possibly we
can, one to convert another from sin. The excellency of the work here
mentioned should prick us forward to this most Christian duty, and the love
of our brother should constrain us unto it, 1 Cor. 13.
seeing if we be without love, we are without all substance.

THE FIRST CATHOLIC EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLE PETER.
THis Epistle is held by some to have been written before that of James, as by
Pareus: Baron. Annal. tom. 1.
and Baronius says, that it was written at Rome An. Dom. 45. when Mark was
there with him, whose salutations he sends. And his second Epistle an. 68.
when Peter was now near unto his end, as is intimated 2 Pet. 1.14. If this
were written so soon, it was before all the Epistles of Paul, the first
written of which was the first to the Thessalonians, which came forth an. 52.
Others think that these Epistles were put out according to their order, as
Lyra, James writing first, Lyra.
and then Peter, Augustine speaks of all these smaller Epistles, as written
after Paul's Epistles, wherein Faith justifying without Works, had been so
much set forth; upon which some gathered, that good works were not necessary
to salvation: August. tem. 4. de fid. and opere. c. 14.
and therefore both James, Peter, John, and Jude, do mightily urge Works,
affirming Faith without Works to be unprofitable. Thus I have related what I
find touching the time of this Epistle, and the rest, but as I said before
upon that of James. This dispute is not much material, but either because
James his Epistle was first written; or because to the Jews, who were Gods
first people, it is placed first. And this of Peter after, because to such, as
being Gentiles became first Jews, and then were converted to the faith of
Christ, Hugo Card.
as Hugo Cardinalis coniectureth; and after Peter's, the Epistles of John,
because they were written to the Gentiles converted to Christianity. Touching
this, it was never doubted of to be Canonical, yea, it has been always
accounted a most excellent Epistle, and worthy to be written in letters of
gold: for Boniface the Bishop of Rome, Baron. ^om. 9. annal.
that was a Martyr, as Baronius faith, desired by his Letters of Eadburga an
Abbess, and kinswoman to the King of Kent, to send him the Epistles of Peter,
written in letters of gold.

The maine scope of this Epistle is to comfort, and to confirm in sufferings
for the Gospels sake. And therefore after the scattered Christians named, to
whom he writes verse 1. he comfort them first by setting forth their
estate, Elect according to the foreknowledge of God, etc. verse. 2, 3, 4, 5.2.
the benefit of afflictions, the praise of God, and the salvation of their
souls, verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. And confirms them touching this salvation to be
attained in a Christian profession, from the ancient prophesies set forth in
the holy Scriptures, wherein thus much is declared, verse. 10, 11, 12. Making
use of this consolation to stir up to holiness and righteousness, verse. 13,
14, 15, 16, 17. Which that it might be the more effectual, there is a
commemoration made, by what a price we are redeemed to this excellent estate,
verse. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. And what is the instrument of our being begotten
again hereunto, viz. the word of God, which is not as flesh, which fades like
grass, but endures for ever, verse. 23, 24, 25. And having spoken of this
being borne again, he urges them, as now borne babes to desire the milk of
the Word, etc. Chap. 2. Wherein, as in the rest, how things cohere together, we
shall see when we come to handle them in order.

CHAP. I.
1 PETER Chapter 1. Verse 1. To the strangers scattered through Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia, and Bythinia. Verse. 2 Elect according to the fore knowledge
of God the Father, in the sanctification of the spirit, unto obedience and
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, etc.


THe Countries here mentioned are all toward the East, and are large, Luther
in 1 Pet. 1.
being now under the Dominion of the Turk. Pontus is a great Country near to
the Sea. Cappadocia is next unto it, for their borders join together. Galatia
is seated behind these. Asia and Bythinia before. Strangers he calls the
Christians there, because although they were Gentiles inhabiting in those
parts, yet they were strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel by their
original, and in this respect are said to be strangers, though being
converted, they joined with the Jews that were Christians, and became one
people, According to the foreknowledge of God the Father. This is the cause of
our election, Gods preordaining of us, and not any free will in us. In the
sanctification of the spirit, that is that we might be holy and spiritual,
which holiness flowing from election is the only true holiness: opposed here
to the many kinds of external sanctification, which the Jews had unto the
obedience and sprinkling, etc. that is, then have we part in this
sanctification, and are truly Saints, when we obey the word of Christ in
believing in his name, being thus sprinkled with his blood: for this which is
here spoken in other words, is no more but what S. Paul says, We are saved by
faith, for this makes us obedient and subject unto Christ. So that to obey the
word of God, to be subject to Christ, to be sprinkled with his blood, and to
believe, is all one. The phrase of sprinkling is borrowed from Psalm. 51. being
an allusion to the sprinkling of the Tabernacle, Exodus 24.
and of all the people with the blood of Goats used by Moses.

The questions of this place are first touching the Countries mentioned. Mayer.
Asia, by Asia being meant Asia the lesser, Th. Aquinas.
according to Tho. Aquinas; for both Asia the lesser, and all the other here
named, lie in Asia the greater, Acts 2. Pontus, Asia, and Cappadocia, are
named, as out of which there were some present, when Peter preached after the
coming down of the Holy Ghost: and it is likely that Galatia and Bythinia
yielded him some hearers also, though there for breuities sake omitted. It is
likely, that by them being at that Sermon converted, other neighbor places
came to understand of the Gospel; and because this our Apostle was the
beginner of so good a work amongst them, he wrote unto them now altogether, to
instruct, confirm, and comfort them more.

strangers; Some will have them to be such as were Proselytes first, Glos. ord.
Lorinus. Tho. Aquinas. Faber Stapul.
and after by the hearing of the Gospel converted to the Christian Religion.
Some, both Jews scattered in these Countries, because verse 18. mention is
made of vain conversation, according to the tradition of their fathers,
because the Jews were led much by traditions; and Gentiles embracing the
faith, Beza, Piscator.
because chapter 2.9, 10. they are said to be called out of darkness into light,
and to be made a people of no people; and some Jews only. But the reason of
Luther seems best unto me, that they are called strangers, Acts 2.10.
because no Israelites, as we read of Roman strangers, such as dwelt in
Rome, but were no Citizens of Rome. And it is most probable, that they had
been Proselytes in times past, and so such as for religions sake dwelt at
Jerusalem, but being turned Christians when persecution was raised, Acts 8. the
whole Church being scattered, it is likely that they were dispersed into these
Countries. Aug. tractat. de sobrietate.
Augustine speaking of these Epistles, says that Peter wrote two Epistles to
the Gentiles. Fabers reason, that by strangers both Jews and Gentiles are to
be understood, is weak, seeing a vain conversation used by tradition of
Fathers, may as well agree to the Gentiles, as to Pharisaicall Jews, Hieron.
descript. cc^^s. A^hanas. Syno^si Oecum.
and the other place, chap. 2.9, 10. does certainly set forth Gentiles, neither
are the Jews any where called strangers; yet some understand the converted
Jews only.

Touching these words, In the sanctification of the spirit, Oecumen. in 1 Pet.
and sprinkling of Christ's blood; Some refer all this, according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father in the sanctification of the spirit, etc. unto
Peter an Apostle, holding that the other words, To the elect strangers in
Pontus, etc. came in by a Parenthesis. And he called himself an Apostle,
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, to show that though in time
he were after the Prophets, yet in Gods decree he was not. And he says that he
was an Apostle, in the sanctification of the spirit, that is, to segregate the
believing amongst the Gentiles from other heathen people by the spirit,
sanctifying them to the obedience of the Gospel, and to the purging of their
sins by his blood, and to the making of them willing to have their blood shed
for his sake, which is also intimated here. And whereas we read it Pontus and
Galatia, he reads Galatia of Pontus, holding that it is so set forth to
distinguish this Galatia from that in France. Hitherto Oecumenius. But I follow
rather the common stream, referring these words unto the elect strangers.

Note, Note.
that we have not attained to the Christian profession by the liberty of our
own will, but it is of God, who did long before even from eternity know us,
and appoint that his holy Gospel should be professed amongst us.

Note again, Note.
that holiness and obedience unto God are most necessary for all Christian
people, neither do any come to the sprinkling of Christ's blood, but in
holiness and righteousness. The true Christian is elect in the sanctification
of the spirit, etc. and therefore it is as vain for profane men to look to
be blessed by the Gospel, as for Esau to look for the blessing of his Father
Isaac, when he had profanely contemned his birthright. As for the Verses
following unto the 10. they are easy to be understood. Verse. 3. he calls the
hope unto which we are begotten, a lively hope, because we do not hope for
things that perish, which are dead things, as it were, Tho. Aquin^
but for everlasting life, and our hope is lively, and not as presumption,
where the life and power of grace is wanting; and the life that we hope to rise
unto is by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, for his arising again gives us
this hope, that we shall rise also, verse. 8. He calls their joy wherewith
they rejoice unspeakable and glorious. Aug. tract. 86. in Johan.
Augustine mentioning this place, reads it, quem cum videritis exultabitis
gandio memorabili and honorato; and the vulgar Latin, With joy unspeakable and
glorified, which the word (...) will well bear. Thomas Aquinas follows
Augustine in the future tense; but if it be in the present, as the word is, or
in the future, it is all one, for that joy which shall be unspeakably glorious
is now begun in the faithful before they see it.

CHAP. 1. VER. 10, 11, 12. Concerning which salvation the Prophets enquired and
searched, who prophesied of the grace given unto us. Verse. 11. Searching what,
or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ that was in them, did signify, etc.


Because he had spoken of the salvation of the soul, Oecumen. in 1 Pet. 1.
a thing not heard of almost in times past, he brings in the Prophets, that
long ago made search about it. Daniel for his inquiring was called a man of
desires. They searched, what time, that is, the time to come at the end of the
world, and what manner of time, that is, the time after many captiuities,
wherein they might be fit to receive the mystery of the Gospel. The Spirit
signified the Passions of Christ, by Esaias 53. and Jeremy 11. and the glory to
follow, Hos. 6. We shall rise again the third day, and live in his sight. And
these things, he says, were revealed unto them, not for themselves, but for
us, that they might not set light by them or neglect them being now preached.
For if the Prophets took pains to search into them and to set them forth, not
for their own, but for the benefit of posterity, it were a most unworthy part
for posterity to neglect their labors herein. The which things the Angels
desire to behold, that is, before they were accomplished, they desired to see
them fulfilled, and therefore rejoiced and fung at their accomplishment, Glory
to God on high, etc.

The doubts of this place are first, Mayer.
Whether the Prophets attained to the foreknowledge of things to come by
searching or studying, because, he says, they searched into these things, and
so prophesied of them.

Answ. It was by inspiration doubtless, Daniel did, Dan. 10.11. and Esdras,
and the faithful assembled, Acts 1. There is also a search by comparing
Scriptures together and by arguing, Note.
Dan. 9. This commends studying and praying to be enlightened in the
mysteries of salvation to those that desire to know them. Chrysostom
affirms, that where diligence is wanting in man, Chrysostom. Hom. 31. in Genesis
God will not from above inlighten the mind in the knowledge of his truth.

Secondly, What is meant by the grace revealed unto them,

Ans. It was the grace of the redemption of man by Christ, verse. 11.

Thirdly, What is meant by the spirit speaking in the Prophets of Christ's
Passions and following glory, what, and what manner of time?

Ans. Some say, Glos. Ord.
That by the Spirit of Christ the Angels that came and declared things to the
Prophets are set forth. Some, either the Angels or the holy Ghost. Beda. Hugo.
But the truest and most generally received is, that the holy Ghost is here
meant, who is peculiarly called the Spirit of Christ, Oecumen. Tho. Aquin. etc.
because he dwelt in him, as he was Man, and proceeded from him, as God.
Oecumenius shows the Trinity here, the Spirit of Christ; here Christ is set
forth to be God, and the third person of the Trinity, the Spirit, is mentioned;
and verse. 12. where he is said to be sent from Heaven, the Father is set
forth. Touching the places where Christ's Passions are spoken of, look back to
Occumenius, and there are many more which are easy to be found out. For both
Christ urged the Jews to read Moses, Ioh. 5.39. Luke 24.25.
speaking of him, and instructed the two Disciples going to Emmaus, out of
Moses and the Prophets: see 1 Cor. 15.4. Act. 3.24. Act. 10.43. Romans 1.1.
Touching the time when Christ should come, all the Prophets that prophesied of
Christ understood it not, either when it should be, or in what manner of state
the common wealth of the Jews should then be, whether in peace or war, in
liberty or captivity: some knew it as it seems, Dan. 9.24. Iaacob, Genesis
49.10. Esa. 2.4. Mic. 4.1. and others by searching and disceptation might
attain to the knowledge of it also. Lib. 3. Generat. Adae, c 8. Genesis 3.
Arias Montanus says, that the first occasion of this search was the Promise,
that the feed of the woman should break the Serpents head. Therefore Eve
called her first sons name Cain, Possession; supposing that he was the seed
which should bring this benefit into the possession of posterity: but the next,
Abel, Vanity, as unfit for such a work: and thus Seth was named, and Noe, and
Abram, and Shem, etc. all having names that imply an expectation of some
notable thing expected by them.

Note. The. Aquinas prolog. in Psalm.
Note that it is to be rejected as an herefie, that of Theodorus Mapsuestiensis,
condemned in the Constantinopolitan Council, that nothing is expressly spoken
of Christ in the old Testament: for there are all things long ago set forth,
and nothing more is in the new Testament but what is grounded upon the old.

verse. 12. Verse. 12.
To whom it was revealed, that they ministered those things not unto
themselves, etc. The Syriacke Interpreter reads it thus, And was revealed
unto the^ every thing that they searched. Didym. de Spi. Sanct.
And Didymus reads it, Wherein it was revealed. But the right reading
followed by all others is this. And that they understood that the Prophesies
which they set forth touching Christ, should not take effect in their days,
but long after, is plain Hab. 2.3. Esaias 2.4. Ezech. 12.22, 27. Esaias 28.10, 13.
Mich. 4.1, etc. Touching the holy Ghost said to be sent from Heaven, this was
certainly done at the Feast of Pentecost, and does notably serve to express
the unity of the Spirit, by which the Prophets anciently, and the Apostles more
lately spoke.

desire to look into these things. The Latin translation is, in quem, into
whom, as if it were meant, that the Angels desired to look into the Holy
Ghost, mentioned before. But all Greek Expositors read it, (...), into which
things: so also the Syriacke, and Cyril Alexand. and Ephrem, Didymus and
Ireneus. The things that they desire to look into then, are the mysteries of
our salvation, to behold which, they stoop down as it were, for the same word
(...) is used, that Ioh. 20.5. of the Disciple, Iam. 1.25.
that came and stooped to look into that part of the Sepulcher where Jesus was
laid. Cyril. Alexand. sermon. de eo quod verbum caro fit.
These Mysteries the very Angels are said to desire to look into, partly for
the delight that they take herein, according to Cyril Alexan. and partly
because when the Incarnation, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ were
acted, such things touching our salvation were made manifest unto them, as they
did not so fully understand before, Ephesians. 3.10. 1 Timothy 3.16. and herewith they
desired to be acquainted, that they might declare them unto men, Beza annot.
the phrase used to express their intent, looking into these things, being an
allusion to the Cherubins placed in the Arc so as that they did always look
toward the mercy seat. Exodus 25.20. Origin. Hom. ^1. in Number.
Origin says, That they desired to look into these things, and to set them
forth for our salvation, lest they should come short of men, which might turn
to their judgment. Some think, that by the Angels are meant the evil angels,
as Didymus shows, and Clemens Alexan. but they reject it. Some say, That the
Angels desire to see Christ in their nature, Philip. Solitarius
as he has taken upon him the nature of man, that their nature might be adored
by us in him, as ours is now by them; not that they can hope that ever it shall
be thus, but to express the great benefit redounding to man by Christ's
Incarnation.

I subscribe to that which expounds these words, of the Angels delighting to
look into these mysteries, even as a man loves to look upon that again and
again which does greatly delight him, and into these things they desire to
look, the rather to declare them unto men, as Gabriel to Mary, and many Angels
to the Shepherds.

It is most gross negligence therefore in men not to regard to know these
mysteries, when as both Prophets and Angels, Note.
for our sakes, have been so intent about them, and taken so much pleasure to
search, and find out, and know them.

Greg. Moral. 18. cap. 28. Bed. Tom vlt. qu. 9. Isidor. lib. 1. sententiarum.
Tho. Aquinas. Glos. ordin. Beda. Th. Aquinas. Sophron. Orat. 1. de natiu. Chri.
There are many, that following the Latin translation, apply it to the Spirit
of God, saying, That they desire to behold him, not that they behold him not,
but because their delight is such in beholding him, as that it is always
fresh, and as it were then beginning, there being herein no satiety. Some also
expound it of Christ, whom the Angels desire to behold, and to look upon his
glory; as he is man, upon his birth and place where he was borne. The residue
of this Chapter has nothing difficult in it, but that having spoken of those
to whom he writes, as Gentiles, verse. 14. living before in ignorance, he
says, Verse. 18.
verse. 18. that they were redeemed from their vain conversation delivered unto
them by tradition of their fathers, as if they were Jews, to whom he writes,
who were known to have been led by such traditions. Some, as I have already
noted, Lyra. Lorinus.
think that this Epistle was written both to Jews and Gentiles converted, and
therefore by these traditions understand both the traditions of the Jews,
overthrowing Gods Laws, Titleman. Caietan. Beza.
and the idolatries of the Gentiles. Some understand only the idolatries of
the Gentiles, which were delivered and taught from father to son; of such it
is spoken, Ezech. 20.18. And Onesimus, Surius 16. Febru.
the servant of Philemon, as Surius reports, answering one that questioned
with him, about the price wherewith he was bought, spoke in these words, That
the vain conversation from which he was redeemed, was Adultery, Covetousness,
Witchcraft, Arrogance, Backbiting, Dissembling, Anger, Drunkenness, and
Idolatry the mother of all vices. And this indeed must needs be the right
meaning, seeing that from all wickedness we are redeemed by the blood of
Christ, which it was the more hard to be deliucred from, because this
wickedness had been so long rooted and grounded, being delivered for many
ages from generation to generation.

Note that they which are delivered from their sins by Christ, Note.
are turned from that which they have been nuzled up in, and their fathers
before, though they had used to live in that vain manner from the first father
upon earth, Adam. That any corruption has been ancient, is no plea amongst
such as come to have part in the blood of Christ.

Note. Traditions.
He does also glance at traditions of the fathers here, after which to live, is
but to use a vain conversation, and such as they must be turned from that will
be saved, of such traditions read Mat. 15. and such be the traditions of the
Church of Rome, many of them tending to the overthrow of Gods truth. We embrace
such as are agreeable hereunto, as touching the Lords Day, the baptizing of
Infants, the communion of either sex, and in the public place, etc. but
others, whereof that Church is full, being some absurd and superstitious, and
some impious, we do utterly reject.

Whereas it is said, Verse 20.
that he was foreknowne from the beginning of the world, it is to be
understood, because it was foreknowne that there would be sin, from which
that we might be redeemed, the shedding of this Lambs blood was necessary,
otherwise this should not have been preordained: Verse. 22.
purifying your souls in the obedience of the truth by the spirit. In the
Greek it is, making your selves chaste. Here is the fruit of a true and lively
Faith, they in whom it is are sanctified in their hearts, which is when they
endeavor, and by endeavoring attain to have chaste and pure minds, the Word of
God descending into them, and not being outwardly received only; a like place
unto this is 1 Ioh. 3.3. He that has this hope purges himself; and this is
done by the Spirit, a fruit whereof is to be holy and pure, Gal. 5.19. And this
is the only way to become chaste in deed, for which it is labored in vain
by abstinence, as both Jerome and Bernard do testify of themselves; he that
would be chaste indeed must have a chaste heart, made so by the Spirit
entering in by the Word. Luther.
Luther expounds the spirit here of the heart, saying, That the soul is
purified by the obedience of the spirit, when the heart becomes obedient unto
the truth. The collection made here by Lorinus, that our free will does
cooperate together with faith to our justification, is false: for he does not
teach, what is to be done for our justification, but for the exorning of our
holy and excellent condition, Verse. 25.
to which we that believe have attained. The Word of God is said to be the
seed of our regeneration, because it enters into the heart, Luth. in 1 (...).
and lying there makes one a new man, so that he has other thoughts and
desires now, neither is it changed as man's seed is, Tho. Aquinas. Basil. Epist.
79. Lyrinens. Dogma Christianae relig. his sequitur profectuum leges, vt annis
consolidetur, tempore dilatetur, aetate sublimetur, incorruptum tamen,
illibatumque mane^t.
but remains the same for ever, changing us that are regenerate hereby, and
therefore it is said to endure for ever, that is, in the effect thereof,
because he that is regenerate hereby remains such for ever, never being
again corrupted. A speech like unto this is Psalm. 118.89. Psalm. 148.6. Mat.
24.35. The seed of the Word grows yet and is augmented in the heart, as Basil
observes, as the seed sown in the ground. It follows, says Lyrinensis,
these Laws of increase. It is consolidated in years, dilated in time,
sublimated in age, and yet remains incorrupt.

CHAP. II.
IN this Chapter he commends unto them the Word of God, whereby he had before
showed that they were begotten, viz. the Word, wherein Christ is set forth as
the foundation, upon whom we must build unto eternal life, exhorting to a
conversation worthy of the estate into which we are brought hereby. So that
here is, First, an exhortation to the right receiving of the Word of God, verse.
1, 2. enforced from the good taste therein, verse. 3. and from this
consideration, that it is the way to the Lord, who is as a most precious corner
stone, and by the Word we are built upon him, and so become a most excellent
people, from verse. 4. to verse. 11. Secondly, an exhortation to walk worthy of
this estate by flying from evil, verse. 11. and doing of good, verse. 12. the
particular parts whereof are set down: First, subjection to Governors in the
Commonwealth, verse. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Secondly, subjection to masters, from
verse. 18. to the end of the Chapter. After which, follows the subjection of
wives to their own husbands, chap. 3.

1 PETER Chapter 2. Verse 6. Behold, I put in Sion a chief corner stone, elect
and precious, and he that believes in him shall not be ashamed. Verse. 7. To
you that believe it is precious, etc.


THe Scripture from whence this is taken, Mayer.
is Esaias 28.16. from which it varieth not, but that there it is said, Lib. 2.
paral. 15.
He that believes shall not make haste: here, shall not be ashamed. But these
words being well considered, the difference is nothing, as Iunius shows, for
to make haste, according to the Prophet, is to prevent Christ with his faith,
by trusting to the works of the Law, and to that which a man can do, and this
is the very way to shame and confusion; and so the Apostle here alters the
word by way of interpretation, as if he should have said, Shall by making
haste thus to become righteous of himself be put to shame. This place of Esaias
is alleged once before, Romans 9.33. where there is an other difference, for
whereas the Prophet has it, Behold, I put in Sion a corner stone of probation,
precious, and a stone of foundation; there it is, a stone to stumble at and a
rock of offense. But Iunius reconcileth this also, saying, That Christ is a
stone of probation, when as he being preached, some believe, but some are
hardened, and so it is proved who are Elect and who Reprobate; and in this
proof making, they that are hardened stumble against this stone through their
own malice and fall, and therefore the same Prophet elsewhere uses these very
words, Esa. 8.14.
A stone of stumbling and a rock of offense. That which follows, verse. 8.
for which thing they were set, is not so to be understood, Oecumen. in 1 Pet. 2.
as if God had set some in such an estate, as that they cannot but perish, for
there is no cause of condemnation from him, who would that all should be
saved, 1 Timothy 2.
but they make themselves vessels of wrath, being set to stumble by the liberty
of their own corrupt will. For the will of man is so free, that it cannot be
compelled, and therefore he cannot complain of God, that he has set him in
that estate, which he has brought himself into by his own works. Hitherto
Oecumenius, whom Gagneus and Salmeron follow, and some others. But Beza
rejects this, Beza annot^ in (...). 2.
that God should not be said to have set them, but they themselves, for that
God does it, is plain, Romans 9.17. Pro. 16.4. Luke 2.34. Jude v. 4. He therefore
from the beginning decreed to reject some, it being always provided, that
betwixt the decree and the excution thereof, sins should come between, for
which the wicked shall be justly damned. And this, I take it, is the soundest
construction, it is by a secret judgment of God upon them for their sins,
that they are offended and hardened at the preaching of the Gospel to their
condemnation. But I have entreated more at large already upon this argument in
my second book, Romans 9.11.

Many for unto which they were set, Syriacus. Faber, Stapul. Lyra. Tho. Aquin.
etc.
read it, in which, in quo positi sunt, and expound it either of Christ,
called the corner Stone, in whom every one is set, so as that he might have
been saved, but through their own fault they prove reprobates, as Catharinus,
or both sorts, both the faithful and unbelievers are set in him, the one to
salvation, the other to damnation, according to that of Simeon. Luke 2.34.
Syriac. Oecumen. Duos parietes qui pa^ernam domum absoluunt, hoc est, gentiles
and Iudaeos suo contactu connectit, dum and inutiles horum immolationes tollit,
and gentilium daem^niacam superstitionem in pietatem traducit. Verse. 9.
He is appointed for the rising and fall again of many in Israel, as Arias
Montanus. Some following this reading, expound it of the Word, wherein they
say, all were set, that is, appointed to hear and obey it. But the first
reading [vnto which] is most agreeable to the Greek, and to sense, and
therefore is also preferred by Beda, and Lucas Burgensis. And Christ is set
forth as a corner stone here, because in him two peoples, Jews and Gentiles
are coupled together and became one, the unprofitable sacrifices of the one
being taken away, and the deuillish superstition of the other being traduced
into godly piety.

But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, etc.
this is taken out of Exodus 19.5, 6. but that there it is a kingdom of priests,
but according to the Septuagint, whom the Apostles commonly follow, it is as
here, a royal Priesthood. Oecumenius observes, Oecumen.
that he having spoken against such as through unbelief stumble at this stone,
now he prayseth the faithful. A chosen generation, the whole congregation of
the faithful is called, as the nation of the Jews is said to be elect, Romans
11.2. because they are chosen out of the rest of the world to profess the
Gospel, and to be a peculiar Church unto God. A royal Priesthood, or Kings
and Priests, Revel. 1.6. they are called, Am^rose.
because Christ with the Father and the Holy Ghost reigns in them, exempting
them from all other dominion, but only such as is to be obeyed in him and for
him: Didym^s.
and because they are members of Christ, a Priest after the order of
Melchisedicke, and do offer spiritual sacrifices of prayers unto God: the same
phrase of holy Priesthood is used before, ver. 5. Some restrain it unto
Priests under the Gospel only, Hugo. Tho. Anglicus.
the congregation being called so, because there are such therein, that offer
the sacrifice of Christ's Body, and have the Keys as their Scepter, and receive
Tithes as their tribute, Isider.
and a shaven crown as a crown. And this Priesthood, they say, is called
kingly, because more excellent than that under the Law. But seeing it is said
of all faithful persons in general, and they under the old Testament are
called a Kingdom of Priests also; this exposition is but a deprauation of the
place, and therefore to be rejected. All the Fathers also understood it as we
do. Some again, Raban. in Exo. 19 August, de ciuit. Dei, p. 10. c. 6. Greg.
Hom. 12. in Ezech. Lactant. Epiphan. b^^r. 49. and 79.
because all Christians are called Kings and Priests, will have no difference,
holding that all, yea even women, are Priests alike, as the Heretics called
Pepuziani and Collyridiani. But it is to be understood, that all are called
Priests only in a spiritual sense, because they offer the sacrifices of praise
and prayer; but there are some, to whom this office more peculiarly belongs,
that are externally by their orders segregated from the rest, whose calling is
to tend upon these sacrifices, not only in private as others, but in public,
and to serve about holy things, the Word and Sacraments. If any therefore shall
presume, under the pretense of being a Priests as well as others to minister
these things, 1 Chronicles. 26. 1 Samuel 13.14.
with Vzziah he is to be resisted, as going beyond his bounds, and he may well
look for a judgment to be sent from God upon him, as upon Vzziah by leprosy,
and upon Saul to the loss of his Kingdom.

This place is worth the noting, Note.
both for the credit of those that are now in the office of Priests unto God,
whom the profane sort think to vilify by this name: for it is the greatest
dignity of the Christian profession, herein the houour of it stands, that
true Christians are Priests and Kings, these being coupled together, as
dignities of the highest rank and much alike: and for the name given unto the
faithful, Kings and Priests, the remembrance hereof should work a kingly and
priestly mind in every one of us, to rule over our affections, and to offer up
a pure conscience and conversation daily unto God, as Leo Sermon. 3. anniuers.
d^e sue as sump^r. N^^il t^m r^giant, quamsubditum d^o a ninu^ corpor^ su^ esse
rectorem, (...) nihil sace^dotah, quam vou^^e domino consei^ntiam puram, and
immac^lat^s pietatis ^ostias dealtari cordis offerre.
Leo excellently teaches: Nothing is so kingly, as when a mind subject unto
God rules the body; nothing is so priestly as to vow unto God a pure
conscience, and to offer the immaculate sacrifices of piety upon the altar of
the heart.

Again, Note.
let all keep within the bounds of their Priest hood, not presuming to do the
public office of a Priest without a particular calling, because they are said
to be Priests, no more than they will take upon them as Kings, because they are
said to be Kings.

CHAP. 2. VER. 13. Be ye subject to every humane ordinance for the Lord:
whether to the King as chief, Verse. 14. or to Rulers, as being sent forth by
him, etc.


This other part of the Chapter being an exhortation to an holy and inoffensiue
life, M^y^r.
beginning verse. 11. has nothing almost of any difficulty. But that here
beginning with particular duties, he commands subjection to every humane
creature: (...). Beza rejects this reading as absurd, and follows the
other, every humane ordinance. But I see no reason why this reading being most
proper should be rejected, seeing it may also have a good exposition thus, Be
subject to every man that is in the place of authority, as verse. 17. Honor all
men, where such a supply must needs be understood, for to expound honoring
thereof, doing the offices of love, is to confound things distinguished: for he
says, Honor all men, meaning Superiors, Oecumen. Beza. Faber Sta^.
love brotherly love, meaning equals. Honor the King, as Superior to all
others. Yet I confess, that both Oecumenius, and Faber, and Beza, and all
generally by all men understand all indefinitely, to the poorest and meanest
amongst whom an honor is due for that Image of God which he bears, for so
says Faber. Honor in a poor man Christ humble, by doing good unto Christ's
poor; in a rich man honor God, who is rich in beneficence toward all; in a
Lord and Ruler honor God the Lord of all; in the mighty honor God likewise
that is Almighty; and so in all others having reference still to God only, and
not unto carnal things, for so thou should become a respecter of persons.
Let the Reader consider and follow whether exposition he pleases, but the
authority of so grave and many Expositors cannot sway me to think, that by all
men are meant any other than Rulers and Governors, seeing there is no place to
second it being taken otherwise; and there is one place whereby it seems that
honor is not due to all, no more than fear and tribute is, Romans 13.7. Render
to all men their dues, tribute to whom tribute, fear to whom fear, honor to
whom honor is due. Now the Apostle sets down this duty of subjection to
Magistrates first and chiefly, as some have noted; Didymus. Oecumen. Chrysostom:
in Titum. August. Epist. 5.
left Christians, hearing of the liberty of their condition, should refuse to
obey, and to prevent envy in the Heathen, who were apt to have a sinister
conceit of Christians in this regard, ever since one Judas of Galelee arose and
drew away many, Act. 5. Joseph. antiqu. ib. 18. c. 1, 2.
holding that Governors were not to be obeyed, nor tribute to be paid, and for
as much as most of the Apostles were Galileans, they were the rather apt to
cherish this opinion against them and their followers, Romans 13. Jude Epist.
and therefore Saint Paul is earnest in commending duty and obedience also, and
Jude impugneth such as despise government, most sharply censuring them.

Wherefore the Anabaptists are hence to be condemned, who deny Magistracy in a
Christian state, and that obedience is due to any such, because Christians are
a free kind of people and not subject unto men: for here, and Romans 13.
subjection is expressly commanded, neither was there ever any state well
governed without Magistrates: read Judge. 19.20, etc. Touching this subjection,
how far it extends, and how the Laws of Governors bind, I have already
treated, Romans 13.

As free, and not having liberty, as a cloak of evil. Verse. 16.
This may seem to be contradictory to that which went before touching
subjection; Chrysostom.
but Chrysostom resolves it thus, as I find in Oecumenius: Oecumen.
Obey Governors as free, that is, as believing him that has made you free and
commanded you to be subject unto them. Or else, as Oecumenius himself has it,
Be subject as free, that is, not having a mind ill affected toward
Governors, for the envious or malicious mind is a slavish mind; seeing evil
lusts and affections ruling in a man make him a slave, and not to be subject to
Superiors; for to obey them freely and willingly, the mind not going against
it, is to obey them, as free; but to obey them by compulsion is to obey as
slaves, though they that do so may pretend a liberty by their Christian
profession. Luther.
Luther expounds it, as not abusing your Christian liberty to
licentiousness, to live now as ye list in rebelling against Princes, and
contemning their Laws, but freely and willingly obey them, as if there were
nothing to compel you thereunto: for the true Christian does so willingly
perform the things of the Law, as that it is said, 1 Timothy 1.9.
The Law is not given unto him, but to the wicked. And this is to the same
effect with that of Oecumenius, and most genuine.

But committed it to him that judges justly. Verse. 23.
The vulgar Latin has it, but d liuered to him that judged him unjustly, as
if it were spoken of his willing going to the death, whereunto he was unjustly
condemned by Pilat at the instigation of the Jews. There is another reading
also mentioned by some: He delivered those that judged him unjustly; Th.
Aqu^nas. Gorra^. Lorin.
that is, either to punishment, that they might be corrected; or else by
praying for them, that the sin might not be laid to their charge. But
amongst all the Greeks it is read as we read it, Tract. 21. in Joh.
and it is thus cited by Augustine and by Fulgentius ad Trasim, cap. 11. and so
the Syriake Translator reads it, and it is supplied by some thus, Vatablus.
Caietan.
He commended the cause or vengeance to him that judges justly, which he
seems also to speak of, Ioh. 8.50. And he committed it to him, when so
patiently he bare the wrongs that were offered unto him, resting in this, that
God knew that he was innocent, Luther.
howsoever they traduced him, being assured, that suffering thus unjustly, it
would redound to his greater glory, and to their confusion, if they repented
not. It is not meant that he called for revenge against them, for he prayed
that they might be forgiven, and rebuked his Disciples, when they would have
had fire called for from Heaven, but only that he referred quietly the matter
to the Lord; in regard of whose superin tendency over all things that are
offered unto us, we should likewise be patient and refer the matter to him,
who will one day rectify every thing amiss.

One expounds it, he committed himself to God, (...) He^^^^
who judges justly, and so for our sins appointed him to those sufferings,
and looked not at the instruments, wicked men, who in spite and malice offered
these things unto him.

Note, Note.
that the liberty which Christ has brought unto his, is not a liberty from
lawful government; they which under the color of Religion disobey the lawful
Magistrates, or from whom subjection to them is forced, in stead of liberty
have nothing but a cloak of maliciousness.

Again, Note.
note a most effectual reason to persuade every one to suffer patiently any
injury, viz. because Christ suffered patiently when he was railed upon,
diversely abused, and crucified. Luther. Cur t^itaque malis te non affici
pateris, cum totus minisi p^ccatum est
If he that had no sin did bear such horrible indignities, much more we
that are all sin, should bear the injuries offered unto us.

CHAP. III.
IN this Chapter the Apostle proceeds to other oeconomicall duties, showing
how Wives should carry themselves toward their Husbands, and in how modest a
manner they should go^ attired, unto verse. 7. and then how Husbands are to
ca^^y themselves toward their Wives, verse. 7. after which he inlargeth
himself, exhorting all to such virtues as do generally conduce unto peace and
unity, from the eighth verse unto the eighteenth, where again the ground of
unity is first laid, verse. 8. Secondly, we are exhorted to one particular
point, viz. not to require ill language with ill language, but to bless those
that curse us, verse. 9. Thirdly, here is an argument to persuade unto this,
drawn from Psalm 34.13. a man must necessarily restrain his tongue that he
may be blessed, verse. 10, 11. Fourthly, another reason is used, because in
praying for those that rail upon us, we shall obtain suour of the Lord,
whereas, if we should do otherwise, he would be against us, verse. 12.
Fifthly, he argues from the blessedness of those that have this patience
when they are wronged, verse. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Sixthly, he does again reason
from the example of Christ, because he had something more to deliver concerning
him, viz. How be having wrongfully suffered death, was raised again, there
being in the remembrance of that his death, a Sacrament of Baptism in the
Church, setting forth the inestimable benefit coming by his bloodshed: even
as by the Arc Noah and his family were saved, so the faithful being now saved
by his blood besprinkling the conscience in Baptism, in the confidence whereof
we pray and prevail now that Christ is risen and ascended up to the right hand
of God, from verse. 18, to the end of the Chapter.

1 PETER Chapter 3. Verse. 3. Whose apparel let it not be any outward thing
of the broidring of the hair, or of putting gold about, or the ornament of
apparel put on. Verse. 4. But the hidden man of the heart, etc.


IN setting forth the carriage of the Wife toward the Husband, Luther in 1
Pes. 3.
here the Apostle argues from the good, that will thereby redound unto the
man, verse. 2. He that by the Word is not brought to believe, may without the
Word be thus won; that is, for so much as women are no Preachers in Word,
they ought to preach yet by a good example, and when the Husband by the Wives
modest, and humble, and honest carriage of her self is won to the Faith, he
is said to be won without the Word. Whereas outward ornaments are forbidden
unto women, it may seem that this was not observed by Hester, nor by Judith,
for they decked themselves in goodly apparel: but it is to be understood that
they delighted not in these things, they arrayed themselves thus only for
necessities sake, and so should all faithful women; they should prefer the
going without such ornaments, and when they use them, do it without taking
delight therein, only to please their Husbands: but whatsoever dress they use
outwardly, let them be sure to put on the inward array of modesty and humility,
and when women are admonished about their apparel, men are to understand that
such curiosity about their hair and apparel is much more forbidden to them.

Other Expositors speak almost to the same effect with Luther, upon that of
women's winning men without the word; Mayer.
we shall not need to dwell on it, having been sufficiently explained already.
The maine question of this place is, whether it be altogether unlawful for
women to use such ornaments of hair, and gold put about, and of costly
apparel, because it seems here to be expressly forbidden? Some write so upon
this subject, as if the reward of it were damnation. Cypr. lib. 3. c. 3. l.
Cyprian says, Women that are clad with silk and purple, Serico and purpara
ind^^ae Christum induere nequ^^n^: aur^, margaritis and monilibas ornatae
ornamenta cords and pectoris perdiderunt.
cannot be clothed with Christ; and they which are adorned with gold and
precious stones, have lost the ornaments of the heart.

Again he says, that it is the property of an harlot to deck her self thus,
bringing in the example of Thamar, and of the Whore in the Revelation, adding,
that superfluous adorning of the body is worse than adultery, because there the
chastity only, here nature it self is adulterated. Tert. leg. 3. Habit^s
muherum dupl^^em circumfert speciem, cultum and ornatit, cultum mundam
mulieorem vocant, ornatam immundum muliebrem conuemt dici, illum in auro,
gemmis, and vestibus deputari, istum in cura capilli and cutis, and carum
partium corporis, quae oculos trahunt, alteri ambitionis trimen intendi, alteri
prostitutionis. Genesis 24. Prou. 31.22. Romans 14.17. Ruth. 3.3. Aug. Episi. 199.
ad Ediciam.
Tertullian says, that in the habit of women there are two things pretended,
cleanliness and comeliness; the one in the care of the hair and the skin,
the other in gold, and precious stones, and costly apparel; this they call the
adorning, but it may rather be termed the impure making of a woman, the fault
of ambition being in this, and of prostitution in the other.

But that the wearing of costly apparel, and consequently of broided hair and
gold, is not simply unlawful for Christian women, appears by Hester and
Judith before named; and Abraham sent such ornaments to be put upon Rebecca;
and the virtuous woman is described to be clothed with silk and purple.
Again it is said, that the kingdom of God stands not in meat and drink,
nor other outward things, but in righteousness, etc. Ruth also is said to have
washed her self, to have anointed her, and put on good raiment. And Augustine
faith, that a woman may sin if she wears meaner apparel than her husband
is willing withal. It is therefore to be understood, that women ought not to
wear such costly apparel, and other ornamants here mentioned, in pride, or to
allure other men unto them, but for distinctions sake according to their
husbands place and calling, and to please them, and that they may take the more
delight in them, and not be drawn to go after strange women, and according to
the custom of the place and Country wherein they live. Neither is Cyprian or
Tertullian so sharp against these things, but only in the case of pride and
vanity, and when they deck themselves to please adulterers, Tho. Aquinas. Aug.
Epist. 73. Ne affectent vestitus placere sed moribus.
as Tho. Aquinas has rightly observed. Augustine says, that women should
please their husbands, not so much with apparel and dresses, as with good
manners and conditions. The scope therefore of the Apostle here is not to beat
down all womanly ornaments, or these here named, but to teach, wherein both
women's and men's adorning chiefly stands, viz. in grace and virtue. But all
painting of faces, and coloring of hair, and wearing of other hair, is by
all condemned, as the perverting of nature, and may not under any pretext of
pleasing the husband be used, Cyprian. de habitu mulierum. Nazianzen. Carm.
contra mulieres. And by the same reason much more is costly apparel, and
curiosity about hair condemned in men. Gregory says, Greg. Hom. 6. in Euang.
pensate quae culpa fit, hoetiam viros appetere, a quo. pash^^ Ecclesiae and
feemmas prohib^^. Clem. Alex. 3. p^^ dag. cap. 3. Hieron. de vi^^. Pauli
eremitae.
weigh what a fault this is, that men should affect that which the Pastor of
the Church had a care to forbid unto women. Clemens Alexandrius calls such
effeminate persons, such as cut themselves with an illiberall and whorish
cutting, Illiberali and meritriceo se tonsu tondentes. Ierom says, Ye weaue
gold in your coats, but hell fire shall devour you being clad in gold. As I
said before of women, so it is not to be doubted, but that men according to
their place and degree may have more costly habits. The high Priest had costly
clothing appointed him to wear in the execution of his Office: and Solomon
had royal apparel, which is not discommended by our Savior Christ, when he
makes mention thereof. And it has been a thing accordingly used by great
persons every where, and is used at this day: for apparel if it be costly,
makes a man in authority to be the more reverenced of the common sort, but
being base and poor, it makes him contemptible as Pholopaemen, of whom
Plutarch writes. But every one is to take heed of abusing his apparel to
pride and vanity, Euag. l. 5. cap. 13.
as Justinius junior the Emperor godlily advised Tiberius his successor, when
the Imperial habit being by him resigned, was to be put upon him; Let not the
glory of this garment deceive thee, nor the illustrious adorning of these
things to the eye lead thee to error, whereby I my self having been
deceived, have become subject to most grievous punishments. Behold God, who
has done good unto thee, has given thee this habit, and not I; honor him,
that thou may also be honored of him.

Touching Husbands, verse. 7. he says, Verse. 7.
Dwell with them according to knowledge; giving honor to the Wife as to the
weaker vessel, etc. Here arise two questions.

Quest. 1. What it is for a man to dwell with his wife according to knowledge?

Ans. Oecumenius, Oecumen. (...). Beda. (...). Ord. Faber Stapul.
with whom others agree, says, that this is both in wisely bearing with the
woman, and not too rigidly exacting a reason of all her doings, if she has bin
more liberal in giving to the poor; and in going in unto her, not out of the
violence of lust, but according to reason, for the obtaining of issue in the
fear of God. (...). Beda. (...).
Some add also, knowing what God would have them do, and being able to
instruct his wife in things pertaining to God. ^u^^er. (...).
Some will have this dwelling with them according to knowledge, to be by
governing of them, not in a mad-braine manner, as their passions carry them;
but if there be any fault in the wise, in discretion and reason bearing with
it, and seeking by good persuasions and reasons to reform it.

Quest. 2. What it is to give honor to her as to the weaker vessel?

Answ. This is also expounded according to the first, by some of giving her
honor by abstaining from the marriage duty at certain times, and not at all
times rushing into it, as bruit beasts, who are carried only by lust: for
sometimes the woman does desire that the man should reframe, when as it is fit
that he should yield so much respect unto her as to forbear; and sometime for
fasting and prayer it is requisite, for which cause it is added, ^o^^us.
That your prayers be not hinared. And hereupon some have commended abstinence
from the marriage bed all the time of Lent, applying to the approving of this
exposition that of S. Paul, These. 4.4.
That every one of you may know how to possess his vessel in holiness and
honor. And thus all that were for the first exposition understand this. But
others interpret giving honor to the woman of using her as fellow, and not as
a servant; for as wives ought to obey their husbands, so husbands ought to give
a kind of honor to their wives, not carrying themselves insolently toward
them, when they are worthy of blame, whereby they may think that they are
contemned, but by reason persuading them, seeing otherwise there will be
nothing but strife and brawling, in which case no acceptable prayers can be
offered up unto God. And this seems to be the most genuine exposition,
because he adds something of a parity betwixt a married couple in respect of
the best things, as heirs together of the grace of life, so that, as wives
ought, according to that which was taught before, to obey and reverence their
husbands; so husbands ought to give respect to their wives, they being in some
respect equal one unto another. This honoring of the wife is by forbearing to
deal with her by checkes and stripes as with a servant; and likewise by
putting her to any base office, which does not sure with the condition of such
an husband, and by loving and respective terms to speak unto her, and in
place preferring her, and for food and apparel maintaining her according to
his degree and quality: and for his understanding, the use of that is in wisely
admonishing her of such things as be amiss, that by the force of reason being
convinced she may reform the^. That there should be such a mutual striving
betwixt man and wife, in reuerencing and respecting each other, the word
likewise does imply, Likewise ye husbands dwell, etc. that is, as I have
hitherto exhorted women to imitate Sarah in reuerencing their husbands; so do
ye give honor to them also, because howsoever they are subject unto you, yet
there is an honor and respect from you again due unto them.

Note, Note,
that a woman is not so much set forth by apparel as by virtue, and every wise
man will esteem better of her that is modest, and does her duty well toward
her husband, than of her that is outwardly most gorgeous and beautiful. So
that if any woman does desire to win the heart of her husband, and if he be
out of the way, to convert him into the right way, let her not attempt it by
such means as may make her seem outwardly more beautiful, but by such
Matron-like virtue as is required in a Christian woman.

Note again, that he is a fool and no wise man, Note.
that uses his wise as his underling, or servant. A wise man will give that
honor to his wife, as whereby her affection may be drawn more toward him,
to do her duty the more cheerfully. She is his vessel, but she is tender and
weak, therefore that she may be the more commodious for him, he must not be
harsh toward her, nor proudly dominere over her, but he must entreat her
gently as she is able to bear. To use the comparison of Luther here, I^^^^r
as a man uses any instrument for any purpose, as his knifeto cut withal, to
the end that he may keep it sharp he will not dash it against hard stones. He
then that beats and misuseth his wife, as his choleric passions sway him,
is a fool, and wants the reason of a man whereby to govern a woman, and
there is such a bar put in the way of his prayers, that they are hindered from
ever coming up and prevailing before the Lord.

Lastly note, (...)
that it is the man's duty to dwell together with his wife, and not having a
wife to keep abroad, and to company with other women, nor having married a
wife to live separate any long time from her, but for a certain space only as
the necessity of his affairs does require, and that by mutual consent, as 1
Cor. 7.5.

CHAP. 3. VERSE. 13. And who will hurt you, if ye be followers of that which is
good? Verse. 14 But if ye suffer for righteousness, ye are blessed, fear not
their fear, etc. Verse. 15 Being ready always for apology to every one that
asks you, etc.


(...) in (...)
Because none can do any thing against any man without God, who will never do
any ill to such as live righteously, he moves this question, Who will hurt
you, that is, no hurt can be done unto you; and if it shall seem an hurt which
is offered to the godly, even for religions sake, ye must know, that this is a
matter of blessedness, and if it were an hurt, God would not suffer it to be
thus. Fear nothing therefore that persecutors can do against you, but
sanctify the Lord in your hearts, that is, by separating from the wickedness
wherewith they are polluted. And be ready, that is, be so studied in the faith
which ye profess, that ye may have in a readiness a sufficient reason hereof
to be rendered, when ye are required thereunto, because in this case, if a man
should come to speak vnpreparedly, he might happily by making a weak answer
wrong his most just cause; but when with holiness of life, a sound answer to
confirm the truth concurreth, the adversary is put to shame, and oft-times
brought to glorify God by an happy conversion thus wrought in him. The Lord
bids that we should not take thought what to answer, when we are brought
before Rulers and Governors, but it is to be understood that that was in the
case of suffering; this is in the case of Apology concerning the Christian
doctrine.

Who can hurt you, Tho. Aquinas in 1 Pet. 3.
either man or devil, for none can pull him back from good unto evil that is
resolutely bent to do well, and if they do any hurt to such a one, they
benefit him more than they hurt him, by the exercise of his patience. Fear not
their fear, that is, such things as in them may seem to be able to strike
terror into the mind, as their outward greatness, and power to punish, they
be the words of Esa. 8.12. Sanctify the Lord in your hearts, that is, holding
fast the faith of the Lord Jesus, and both in word and suffering for the
Gospel, being ready to make apology by word, when any out of a desire to
learn do ask you; otherwise to speak of the mysteries of salvation, is but
to cast Pearls before Swine: and by suffering most notably do we show our
hope, when we expose our selves to any torments for the joy that we hope
afterward to possess.

He that suffers in his body, Luther in 1 Pet. 3.
or by the loss of goods for the Gospel, is not hurt, because these outward
things are nothing worth in comparison of the reward to come. Fear not, though
they make themselves terrible unto you, but sanctify the Lord in your hearts,
that is, whatsoever befalls you, whether to the outward sense it be grievous
or pleasant, acknowledge that it comes justly upon you, and that it is good,
and for which ye ought to give God thanks, for he that is impatient, and
murmureth under sufferings, prophaneth God, but the patient and thankful
sanctify give glory to him. See an example of one sanctifying God in his
heart, Psalm. 144. and Dan. 3. And be ready to make answer, that is, be so
acquainted with the word of God, as that thou may be able by plain sentences
our of it to justify the truth, and yet do it with meekness and fear, not
imitating the adversary in railing speeches, and considering, that when thou
art best provided with sentences of Scripture, thy memory may either fail
thee, or the devil by art and cunning brought to elude thy places, may as it
were, wrest thy weapon out of thy hand; in fear and reverence depend upon God,
who must put into thy mouth what to say at that time. Wherefore it is necessary
that every one get by heart some plain sentences of Scripture, whereupon our
faith is founded, and not rest upon the Church, thinking it sufficient to
believe as the Church believes, or by humane reason to defend the doctrine of
our faith, as the Papists teach to justify their shutting up of the Scriptures
from the reading of the lay people. But this was a notable cunning of the
devil to make a way for their Priests to teach any thing, though never so
gross, when the people being ignorant of the Scriptures, could nor contradict
them herein, and to make the Priests themselves to neglect the reading of the
Scriptures, which by the liberty of the Scriptures they should have been enforced
to read diligently, lest some of the Laity should oppose them in their errors.

Because it is an usual thing for the godly to suffer at the hands of the
wicked, Mayer.
it may seem a paradox which is here delivered. No man will hurt you, if ye be
followers of that which is good. But it has been well resolved, that the hard
measure offered to Christians by persecutors, is no hurt unto them. Chrysostom
in that Homily entitled, Corysost Hom. Nemo laeditur, nisi a seipso.
Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso, (...), has notably declared the truth of this,
willing Olympias his friend, to whom he sent it, to read it over daily, and if
he could to run it by heart. Losses, says he, poverty, reproaches, bands,
banishments, or servitude, or any other thing that we count evil, cannot hurt
us, because they touch not the Orthodox opinion concerning God, or virtue, or
the soul, the seat of these, unto which they are an ornament and true good.
They only are hurt that do hurt, and not they which seem to be hurt, unless
they will hurt themselves, through their impotency of mind and impatie^ce.
Nulla nocebit tibi aduers^^ as, si n^lla dom^netur in teiniquitas, Psalm. 139.2.
Aug. Sermon. 107. de diuersis. Tu noli tib^ essemalus, libert te Deus a te.
Quando ^nim Deus gratia and misericordia sua de malo fa^at te, bonam, vn^e te
liberat, nisi a terpso homine ma^^, omnino (frat^es mei^ hoc ve^^m, io^^^erin
est, bec sixum, si Deus te liberauit a teipso, homine malo, nibi^ tibi noc^bit,
quasquis suerit in te alius homo malus.
It is a true saying, None adversity will hurt thee, if none iniquity reigns
in thee. And that of S. August. of that prayer of David, Lord deliver me from
the evil man. Be not thou evil to thy self, let God deliver thee from thy
self, for when God by his grace and mercy, of evil makes thee good, whence
does he deliver thee, but from thy self an evil man? And if God has
delivered thee from thy self being evil, nothing shall hurt thee, whatsoever
another evil man does unto thee.

Touching the place alleged out of Esaias 8.11, 13. it has been sufficiently
resolved already, as concerning the not fearing of their fear, and for
sanctifying the Lord in our hearts, Luther has spoken fully. It is the same in
effect with that, Matthew. 10.28. Fear not him that can kill the body, and then
can go no further, but fear him that can destroy body and soul in hell fire.
Fear not their fear, is, fear not them that can kill the body, sanctify the
Lord in your hearts, is, fear him that can destroy body and soul in hell
fire, let the dread and fear of him be so in you, as that ye may not be
overmuch troubled with any other fear. For the best may have some fear of
men, as Paraphrasicald, Iusium qu^^quid acciderit non conus^at. Met^s tangi
potes^ sed non perturba^i, Prou. 12.21. Hugo.
Joseph had of Archelaus, but he fears not man overmuch, according to the
paraphrase. No accident can make the just man sad, he may be touched with
fear, but not troubled, as the Lord has said, Let not your hearts be
troubled, neither fear ye, John 14.1, 27.

Touching the apology which we must be ready to make to every one, that
asks; some think that it was meant of the dispersion of the Jews, which
were Christians, if any did question with them about this judgment upon them:
or else, that it is meant of all that come to baptism, it being required that
they should be able to give account of their faith. But it is plainly meant of
that defense of the truth, which every one should be able to make, when by the
adversaries of the truth they were required hereunto, whenever they should
see that their apology, and the opening of the mysteries of Christianity might
do good. Otherwise that rule is to be followed, Matthew. 7.
Cast not pearls before swine, etc. and as we are to use patience in
suffering, so we are to defend our cause with meekness, not with v^le and
insolent speeches against our opposers, because we have the truth on our side.
This is the common course generally to be followed, every one to labor to be
furnished at the least with some general arguments to confirm the truth,
though the Apostles being extraordinary persons needed not to make any such
preparation. Chrysostom. Hom. 24. in Matthew. Matthew. 10.19.
And thus Chrysostom reconcileth this with that of our Savior, Take no
thought what to say, this is spoken, says he, to show what the virtue of the
spirit was in those extraordinary times, not that we should not do what we can
to arm our selves against the combat, when as even out of the case of danger,
even the most eloquent and wise being unprepared, become speechless in
disputation.

Note, Note.
that the only sure way to b^^reseured from all that might hurt us, is to live
innocently, and not to hurt others by word or deed, no not being provoked: for
if any shall offer to do any thing in this case against us, they hurt
themselves, and not us, and further our blessedness.

Note again, Note.
that a man may be vilely entreated outwardly, beaten, imprisoned, and
tormented, and yet not hurt hereby, as all that suffer wrongfully being
patient, and therefore no outward sufferings should move us, they are things
not to be feared by a Christian, Quid homo hominem timeat in sinu Dei positus,
says Augustine.

Note lastly, Note.
that it concerns every one, be he learned or unlearned, to read and study
upon the holy Scriptures, that he may not be to seek in his answers about the
doctrine of faith, Hom. 16. in Johan.
when he is required thereunto. Chrysostom does sharply reprove Christians,
that labor not for knowledge, that they may understand the reason of the
Christian faith, alleging, how Artificers will fight in the defense of their
profession, and the Gentiles will argue strongly for their superstition, and
against the Christian religion: and yet he says, that many Christians are so
ignorant, that they cannot give an answer what the Trinity is, what the
resurrection, or why Christ was incarnate at such a time? And lastly, he
refuteth that tenent, that a simple soul is blessed, that is, one that is
ignorant, and knows nothing. Oh how contrary to this is the teaching of the
Papists at this day, who commend ignorance, and speak against reading of the
Scriptures, as most dangerous?

CHAP. 3. VERSE. 18, 19, etc. Being put to death in the flesh, but quickened in
the spirit. Verse. 19 Wherein he went and preached to the spirits in prison,
which had sometime been disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God
waited in the days of Noah, etc.


As Christ was both God and man, so he dyed as man, Occumen. in 1 Pet. 3.
and as God rose again to deliver us from death and corruption. For he was
raised by the power of his deity, to show that we shall rise again, raising up
the bodies of many that were dead also, for our further confirmation herein. In
which he went, etc. Here is showed how the benefit of his passion extended to
the unjust not only living, but dead long before, because he had said, He
suffered, the just for the unjust. Wherein, therefore is as much as for which
cause, that there might redound benefit from him to such as were dead long
before, as well as to the living, namely to so many as lived well, and would
have been ready to embrace the faith of Christ, if he had come amongst them,
he went and preached to them, that they might be deliuerd by him. And that it
might appear, that there have been always means of coming to faith and
obedience, so that the condemnation of the unfaithful is just, he makes
mention of Noah, who was long ago, even almost from the beginning, by whom
they might have been converted. And having spoken of the Arc, and those that
were in it saved by the waters, he applies it unto Baptism: for as the waters
then drowned the wicked world, but those that fled into the Arc were
preserved; so by baptism the wicked and unbelieving devils are drowned, but
the faithful are saved; and as water washes away the filthiness of the flesh,
so baptism cleanses the soul in a mystical and wonderful manner, and it is
called the interrogation of a good conscience toward God, because they only
which apply their minds to an holy life, are wont to make questions, and to
seek unto God, by what means they may be saved, and so understanding that
baptism is the means, they have recourse thereunto.

Christ is said to have died once, it being implied, Th. Aquinas. Gorran. Glos.
Ordin.
that he shall die no more, against those heretics, that held, that he
suffered in the air for the devils, after that he had done suffering here upon
earth, and to rouse up the secure from sin, because, if now after that Christ
has suffered they live in sin, there will be no more redemption for them,
Mortificatos car ne, vtuificatos autem spirtus.
seeing Christ dies no more. That he might offer us up unto God being
quickened in the spirit, that is, either the holy Ghost, or our spirit, because
the true Christian dies to the flesh, but lives to the spirit. In which he
went, that is, in a spiritual manner, by internal inspiration, even before
that he was incarnate, preaching by Noah, and by his Angels, whom he used as
his M^nisters to declare his will in those times. To those that were in prison,
that is, of the flesh of sin and error, according to that Ps. 141. Take my
soul out of prison; in one translation therefore it is, To them that were shut
up in the flesh. When they expected Gods patience, that is, thinking that God
would still with patience bear with them. They were saved by the water,
because the water lifted up the Arc; and eight persons are mentioned as
alluding to him that should rise again the eighth day, and to the time of the
general resurrection, which some think shall be upon the same day. Baptism
is like unto the Arc, and so is tribulation, through which a Christian must
go in diverse things. First, The Arc was made of boords hallowed, so the
Church consists of persons afflicted. Secondly, The Arc was of incorruptible
wood, so are Christians such as will not be corrupted. Thirdly, They that were
saved in the Arc, were saved by Noah, signifying rest, so the Church is saved
by Christ. Fourthly, Out of the Arc none were saved, so neither out of the
Church. Fifthly, The waters being increased, the Arc was borne up higher, so
the Church grew greater by tribulations. But the Baptism that saves is not
any Baptism, for there is no such thing in the Jews baptizings, or in John's
baptism, or in that of heretics, in which there is only water, but not the
spirit: but the baptism used in the true Church, wherein the Minister
demands, whether he believes and renounceth the devil, etc. exacting a pure
conscience in him that comes to be baptized, which good conscience tends to
God, and he that coming with such a conscience is baptized, Iuther in 1 Peter
3.
is saved by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, that is, exemplariter, rising
from sin to virtue, as he rose again, Romans 6. Christ is said to be put to
death in the flesh, when the man Christ died upon the Cross, his natural
faculties ceasing, he not living by meat, and drink, and rest any more, as is
usual amongst men that are living here. And he was quickened in the spirit,
that is, was raised up again to a spiritual life, wherein he lives for ever
both in soul and body. And living this life now he preaches not vocally, as
he did, but spiritually, when his Apostles and other Ministers preach, being
spiritually present with them unto the end of the world. The spirits, unto
which he is said to preach, are they that were sometime disobedient in the
days of Noah, not that they precisely are meant, but such as they were: for
when he preaches in wardly to men's hearts and spirits now, he may well be
said to preach to the spirits in prison, because some are such as they, that
now are in prison, were, so that they are in the number of rebellious spirits,
to whom it is daily preached. Here is therefore a Synecdoche, whereby the part
is put for the whole. The eight persons preserved, are said to be saved by the
water, because when all others perished in the water, they were borne in the
Arc upon the waters, and escaped drowning. So likewise by Baptism, whatsoever
is carnal and natural is destroyed, and we are made spiritual, when we are
hereby received into the Church, as into the Arc, depending upon Christ by
faith. But it is nothing outward in baptism that saves us, but the covenant
whereupon a good conscience does comfortably rest, being able to say, This thou
have promised Lord unto me, and therefore wilt perform it. By the resurrection
of Christ, that is, it being by faith apprehended not only that Christ died
for us, but that he rose again to make his death effectual unto us.

Luther acknowledges this place to be so obscure, Mayer
as that he is not fully satisfied about the sense of it, but prefers this,
as seeming to him the best that yet could be found out. Caietan says, that
Christ went and preached to the spirits in hell, and that not unfruitfully. But
this is worthily rejected by Luther, because there is no coming out of that
place. Gagneus
And Gagneus a Papist also derideth it, asking who told him of any that were
there converted: He also confesses, that he cannot attain to any satisfying
resolution of this place. Some, he says, expound it of Christ's coming once
before his coming in the flesh, even in Noah's time to preach, whilst the Arc
was in building: but as they disobeying, and not flying into the Arc, were
drowned; so now that Christ has come in the flesh, if any obey not to fly to
the Sacrament of Baptism, they cannot but perish. The Greeks read that
(...), the spirits in hell, which we read in prison, holding, that he went to
preach unto them, not to save them, but to vpbraid them with their infidelity
and sins, notwithstanding the long warning which they had by Noah. Beda.
Beda is altogether for preaching to men in this world, and therefore reads
it either in prison, that is, to such as were shut up in the body, as in a
prison, or in the flesh, that is, such as were greatly oppressed with fleshly
desires. But to examine and determine in order the doubts or this place; first,
what is meant by being put to death, or mortified in the flesh, and quickened
in the spirit? The old Latin translation followed by Tho. Aquinas, and Gorra^
reads it, Mortificatos carne, etc. as I have showed already, and it is
expounded by them accordingly of our being mortified and quickened. But the
Latin translation has been amended according to the Greek, as Lorinus
acknowledges, being by the fault of the Writer corrupted, according to
Gagneus, and Augustine. Ierom and Cyprian, and Ruffin. follow this reading, He
being quickened, etc. But it being agreed about this reading, yet there is a
question what is meant by Christ's being quickened in the spirit. (...). An
answer to certain objections against Christ's descent.
Some contend, that his soul was preserved alive, when he was bodily dead, and
that nothing else is meant. And one takes great pains in alleging other
places of Scripture, where to quicken does signify to keep alive, as Luke
17.33. Luke 9.24. Mark 8.33. John 12.25. Exodus 1.22. 1 Samuel 27.9, etc. And the
Syrian Interpreter, who reads these words here, Gecumen. August. The. Aquin.
Euther.
He died in body, but lived in spirit. Some would have his divine power meant,
quickening others that were dead, who came out of their graves. Some understand
his reviving again to a spiritual life after his bodily death, the quickening
spirit coming again into his dead body. Some lastly understand his divinity
wherein he lived, ^^^d ras. (...).
and always lives, because the Godhead is a spirit, expounding his being
quickened in the spirit, of his being restored to life by the power of his
divinity. Beda cites Athanasius, taking the spirit here for the holy Ghost,
Athanesues.
as if it were meant, that he was quickened in the faithful, his members in
the spirit coming into them. I subscribe to that of Augustine and Luther, as
seeming to me most genuine, he died the natural death, but lived again the
spiritual life in soul and body. For although the word here used (...), be
often put for preserved alive, yet here it being opposed to (...), it agrees
better to understand it of that which is opposite to being put to death, that
is, being raised to life again in the spirit, that is, by the power of the
Deity, his very body is now become spiritual, as ours shall also be. And thus
it agrees excellently with that which went before, that we should patiently
suffer any wrongs, because as the Lord Jesus did not, so neither shall we lose
any thing, no not though we should be put to death, for we shall but exchange,
as Christ did, a natural life for a spiritual and heavenly which is for ever.

Clemens Alexandrinus Strom. 6. Athanasius Epist. ad Ep^ctet. Epiphan. Haeres.
77. Cyrillus Alex. in Johan. cap. 36. lib. 12. Hillar. in Psalm. 118. Ieronym.
in cap. 54. Esa. Ambros. in Romans 10. Justin. in tryphon. Irenaeus lib. 3. cap.
23. And the last of these two alleges a place out of Esaias, the former of
Jeremy, in these words, The holy Lord of Israel was mindful of his dead which
slept in the earth, and descended to preach salvation to them, that he might
save them. Which words are not now extant any where, but are thought by
Irenaeus through the hatred of Christianity to have been put out by the Jews:
yet they that agree in the general of Christ his descent, do greatly differ
about the effect thereof. Some holding that he saved all that were in hell
before by his preaching, as Hilary, and Hermes in his book entitled Pastor;
but the disobedient in Noah's time are named only, because they were the
greatest number that perished together. This is mentioned and rejected as an
heresy by Augustine, August. lib. de Hares. cap. 79.
and that worthily, because so contrary to the holy Scriptures, Esa. 66.24.
Matthew. 18.8. Luke 16.26. Some aga^ne hold, that he saved only those that were
worthy, who led a good life, and would have believed, if he had before come
amongst them, but vpbraided the rest by their disobedience and infidelity, as
Occum. Gregory Nazianzen, etc. or that there were some penitent amongst them
that were drowned by the flood, whom he had saved, as Lyra teaches. And it is
a thing generally held amongst the Papists, that there were in Limbo patrum the
souls of the faithful, who died before Christ's incarnation, who were by his
descent delivered. Some again, and they be the Divines of our side, which
teach a descent of Christ's soul, hold, that he went down to vpbraid the
incredulous in Noah's time, and such like, with their infidelity, showing them
what he had suffered for the salvation of the faithful, of the benefit whereof
they were altogether deprived through their own default, to their greater
terror. Touching the distinction which is made of Christ's preaching, as if it
had been partly to such as were appointed to life, when it is spoken only of
the disobedient in prison; it is a plain wresting of the place: and therefore
Lorinus himself a Jesuit calls it in question, how it can stand. Touching
the penitency supposed to have been in some that were drowned, it is a mere
conjecture without all ground, and if any such were, they went not with the
rest doubtless to this prison, but to Abraham's bosom; or as the thief upon
the cross to Paradise. Touching the last, it seems to be implied in an
article of our Church, determined in a Synod Synod. Angl. Quemadmodum Christus
pro nobis mortuus est and sep^ltus, i^a ^tiam cred^ndus est ad inferos
dese^nd^sse. Nam corpu^^ sque ad resurrect^o^^m in sepulchro iacu^, spiritus ab
illo commissas cum spiritibus, qui in carcere vel inser^o detinebantur, fuit,
illisque praedican^t, quemadmodum ^^statur Petrilocus.
assembled in King Edwards days An. 1552. Artic. 3. Even as Christ died for
us, and was buried; so he is also to be believed to have gone down into hell,
for his body lay in the grave to the time of his resurrection, but his spirit,
that went out of him, was with the spirits in hell, or in prison, and preached
unto them, as Peter testifies.

Secondly, Some hold, that Christ's preaching in a spiritual manner by Noah is
meant; herein Thomas Aquinas follows Augustine. August. epist. 99.
In this also join Beda, Hugo, Carthusianus, Beza, etc.

Luther.
Some understand his preaching by the Apostles, to whom he sent the holy Ghost,
Hessil^u^.
and herein they went and preached to the Gentiles being in the prison of the
flesh, who are described as bound in chains, Psalm. 106. Esa. 42.49. And to
show that of old they were bound with the chains of infidelity, he mentions
the imprisoned in the days of Noah, and they are called spirits, to intimate
the immortality of the soul.

Francis. Turria.


A^ias Montan Caluanstu. lib. 2. cap. 16.. 9.
as in a prison for the time. And yet there is another interpretation of
Calvin, by his going and preaching, understanding his making them to feel the
power of his passion, who died long ago, and yet remained in their souls,
expecting the Lord Jesus; and he says, that it should not be read in prison,
but in a watchtower, in specula, as the word (...) signifies.

For my own part I subscribe to those, that hold this to be the most obscure
place in all the Epistles; for no Exposition that has hitherto been given
does so fully satisfy, but that some exceptions will lie there against. That
of Arias Montanus falls of it self, because they in the Arc were obedient,
whereas this preaching was to the disobedient. 2. That of Purgatory is a mere
fiction, there being no such place in rerum natura. 3. That of Calvin, applying
it in part to the souls of the faithful seems to be improbable, because
these were the disobedient, and it is not only said, that he preached, but
went and preached, intimating a local motion, and not only a vertuall
penetration. 4. To expound it of his preaching by Noah, is to pervert the order
of the Text, according to which this his going must be after his inclining
again, and why should he call the men living at that time spirits, which is a
word no where used to set forth living men by, but either Angels good or bad,
or souls departed. 5. Much less can the Gentiles be understood by the
spirits in prison, amongst whom the Apostles came, because they were such as
lived in the days of Noah, not men of like quality, but those very men. 6. The
Popish Limbus is but an imaginary place, and to hold that any being in hell
were delivered again, seems to be contrary to the holy Scriptures, as has
been already showed. There remains then only that of his descending to
triumph over the Devils, and to vpbraid the damned spirits with their
infidelity and impenitency, showing how justly they were for ever therefore
shut up in that place of torment; and because they of the old world were the
most noted for their great multitude that went down thither together; he
mentions them, but in them understands all other then damned spirits also.
And this is the most probable of all other expositions, and most consonant with
the rest of the holy Scriptures. For this is one part of Christ's preaching to
convince the impenitent, as justly and certainly reprobate and damned, as
appears, Mat. 11.21. Mat. 12.41, etc.

Verse 21.
but the request of a good conscience unto God by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ? What others have said has been already set down. Piscator. Scholia.
Piscator to this speaks most fully and excellently: Baptism stands not so
much in the outward washing of the body, as in the remission of sins by the
blood of Christ, which is the washing of the soul and conscience, which being
by faith apprehended, the conscience becomes good; and so the faithful in
the confidence hereof boldly questioneth with God about his favor reconciled
unto him by Christ's death, and testified by his resurrection; saying, Has not
Christ reconciled thy favor unto us by his death to endure for ever? Certainly
it is so, for his resurrection does testify it, seeing that unless he had
made a perfect expiation of our sins by his death, and reconciled thy favor
unto us, he could not have risen again to life and heavenly glory. So that
these words, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, have not reference to the
word saves, but to the request of a good conscience, for this arises from
Christ his resurrection. August. contra Faustum, cap. 12. Beda. Gagneus.
Angustine and Beda say the same with Thomas Aquinas, and Gagneus also, setting
it forth more fully thus: The word (...), signifies a stipulation or promise
conceived in words, whereby he that is baptized couenanteth to believe and do
as he is in baptism required, Act. 8.
as the Eunuch answered Philip. And this believing, and renouncing of sin and
Satan, saves, and not the washing with water, by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ; that is, because his Resurrection is our justification, who by rising
again destroyed death and went up into Heaven, that we might have a place
there. Here growth a great question whether Baptism, which is outward, has
any effect to the saving of the soul, or whether all the virtue lies not in
Faith, and internal grace sanctifying the soul and conscience. But Christ
has cut off all this question by saying, He that believes, and is baptized,
shall be saved; thus joining them together, so that it is unlawful for any to
sever them. Baptism is then perfect and salutiferous when the conscience is
baptized, there being an inward working of the Spirit to the purifying of the
heart by Faith, as water is outwardly used.

Thomas Aquinas has already set down five things wherein the Arc does serve
fitly to set forth Baptism. August. lib. de vnitate Eccl. s. cap. 5. Gagneus.
Augustine has an Allegory in the pitching within and without, holding that
this sets forth charity. Gagneus says, that as the waters lifted up the
Arc, and so they within were saved, in like manner Baptism lifting us up from
the earth to Heaven, in an heavenly conversation, saves us; and as the Arc,
though it were tossed with tempests, yet could not be drowned, so the Church is
saved through many afflictions, neither can it be overthrown.

He that will, may gather other notes of similitude also out of Pererius, and
Pagnan. in Isagoge ad Scripturas. Perer. lib. 10. in Genesis disp. 11.
Touching the saving of those eight by the water, it is meant of their
corporal deliverance, for it is a question whether all their souls were saved
or no, it seems Chams was not. By the water is expounded, by some from the
water, by others in the water, as per is usually taken, as a Ship is said to be
safe going in the water, and this I take to be the best.

Of the Angels powers and virtues subjected unto Christ, Verse. 22.
enough has been spoken already, upon Ephesians. 1.21.

Note, Note.
that he which suffers unjustly does not finally suffer; for Christ suffering
thus, suffered in respect of the outward man, his enemies could not touch his
spiritual estate, but that herein he lived still, and was the more highly
exalted, and so shall we his members be.

Note again, Note.
that Baptism which is outward, is not like the Arc, to save all that come
unto it, but every one that is of discretion must have an inward work wrought
in him, that from a good and sanctified heart he may ask mercy of God through
Jesus Christ, who is risen again and ascended into Heaven, there presenting
the prayers of such before his Father. Therefore he that believes not, Mark.
16.16. 1 Ioh. 3.3. Verse 9.
says Christ, shall be damned though he be baptized, and he that has this
hope purges himself, and he that is borne of God sins not.

CHAP. IIII.
THE Apostle having in the former Chapter propounded Christ's example,
proceeds here to press it unto them, that as he suffered in the flesh, so
they being his members, should approve themselves to suffer in the flesh by the
mortifying of their corruptions, and as he was quickened in the Spirit, leading
a new spiritual life, verse. 1, 2. First, prosecuting that of suffering by the
consideration of what they had formerly been, and what some still were, for
which they should give account, verse. 3, 4, 5. and how the dead, of whom he
spoke before, were not saved, but by being judged in the flesh, verse. 6.
Secondly, he that sets forth that which might move them to a new life, the
end of all is at hand, verse. 7. and wherein it consists, viz. in being wise,
and sober, and praying, and loving, and hospitable, etc. from verse. 7. to verse.
12. where he returns to speak of suffering again, being properly understood
by being persecuted and railed upon as Christ was; touching which, first he
comfort them with the glory and joy after this to come, verse. 13, 14.
Secondly, he gives a caveat against doing ill, whereby a man comes to
suffer, verse. 15. Thirdly, whereas they might be troubled in thinking that the
estate of the wicked was better, for so much as they were not so subject to
sufferings, he shows that the time of the Christians suffering was now, but
theirs should be hereafter when it would be much more terrible, verse. 17, 18.
Lastly, that they might be without all trouble of mind about their
sufferings, he directs them to God, to whom they ought wholly to commit
themselves in suffering as to a faithful Creator, verse. 19.

1 PETER Chapter 4. Verse 1, 2, 3, etc. Christ therefore having suffered in the
flesh for us, put upon you the same mind also, for he that has suffered in
the flesh has ceased from sin, etc.


FRom Christ's suffering death, as he was man, Oecumen. in 1 Pet. 4.
and led a natural life here, he argues, that we ought to suffer that death,
which is unto sin for him that we might live unto righteousness; and if we
be dead unto sin or to the world, there will be in us a cessation from sin.
2 Timothy 2.
To suffer in the flesh therefore is to be dead unto sin, as Saint Paul
elsewhere expresses it, to be dead with Christ.

Some of the ancient Fathers have expounded this of the Gospel preached to the
dead, of the dead unto sin, Verse. 6.
holding that men are said to be dead two ways: first, in sin; secondly,
unto sin and to the world, by being made conformable to Christ in his death;
and these last, by receiving the Gospel are stirred up to condemn themselves
for their former carnal living, which they do when they lead a new life.

To suffer for Christ here, Tho. Aquin. Gorran. Isidor.
is either to subdue carnal concupiscence by taming the flesh, or else by
exposing the body to martyrdom for righteousness. It is, according to Isidor,
to suffer in the whole man, as Christ suffered in the whole man, both exterior
and interior; the inner is the soul, wherein we suffer by contrition; the
outward is the body, wherein we suffer by macerating it, and by suffering both
these ways, we cease from all sins both carnal and spiritual.

For this cause it was preached to the dead; Verse 6.
that is, either ye ought not for this cause to regard the blasphemies of the
wicked, or else for the avoiding of the danger of the Day of Judgment, it was
preached to such as are spiritually dead, that judging themselves for such
things as they have carnally done, they might escape Gods judgment and live,
as 1 Cor. 11.31.

To take the six former verses of this Chapter together, Mayer.
wherein an exhortation is set forth from Christ's death considered, as I have
showed in the Analysis; Here are three doubts, 1. What is meant by our
suffering in the flesh, Verse 1.
whereupon follows a cessation from sin. I answer with Oecumenius, that the
suffering of death in the body cannot be meant, though he who is set for
example suffered death when he suffered in the flesh: for verse. 2. he speaks
of the residue of his time in the flesh being spent, according to the will of
God. Wherefore to suffer in the flesh here is to be mortified to sin, Luther.
in 1 Pet. 4.
which to follow, it is a life unto us naturally. For as Luther says, there
were two ends of CHRIST his suffering, as he was man, which is meant by his
suffering in the flesh; first, to satisfy for our sins; secondly, to give us
example, both of suffering persecution, and of suffering by being mortified
unto sin, as unto lust, or hatred and envy: for if these inordinacies be
subdued in us, then we cease from seeking how to satisfy our carnal lusts,
and from attempting revenge in word or deed. It is true, we are justified by
Faith when we first believe, and then the Spirit of Sanctification enters into
us, but we must be more holy and righteous daily, as he that had his wounds
bound up by the Samaritan was stayed from bleeding and being endangered any
further thereby, but yet they were not altogether healed till after some time.
Romans 6.6, 7.
Saint Paul has a place to the same effect with this; Our old man is crucified
together with him, that the body of sin may be destroyed, that we may not
serve sin any longer. To meditate upon Christ's Passion is a most effectual
means to make us to be thus mortified to sin, and willingly to bear our
adversities. Some understand these words, Ieron. contr. Jouin. August. de fide
and op^re^^. 10. etc. 1 Cor. 5.2^^.
He which has suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin, either of Christ or
of the Christian; he has ceased from sin both because he never did any, and
as he is said to have been made sin, that is, a sacrifice for sin, for he
is now no sacrifice any more: but all prefer the other, as it is indeed the
most genuine, the mortified Christian cease from sin, so that it does no
more rule and reign in him.

Lasciviousness, Verse. ^
Lusts, excess of Wine, Reuellings, Banquetings, etc. wherein he says, they
lived before. Lyra
Lyranus by Lasciviousness understands all external acts in the matter of
venery, and by Lusts the internal desires of a lustful mind, and indeed by
Lasciviousness is meant not only adultery, but that wantonness which is
ingesture and apparel and words. The lusts here spoken of are defined by the
Pontificians to be only lust with consent, denying lust simply to be sin;
but of this enough before, Romans 7. (...), expounded the excess of Wine,
signifies properly those boilings up, which break into pustules and red
tumors. The next word is (...), eatings after the meal ended. Some say, it is
so called because of the dead sleep following after, called (...). Some,
because of the pipe which is commonly present at such feastings. Some, from
streets and rows of houses together, which are called (...), where they inuit
one another. The next word is (...), drinkings, because as Lyra notes, there
be other ways and means to drunkenness besides by Wine.

For this cause it was preached to the dead, Verse. 6.
that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, and live according to
God in the Spirit. That of Thomas Aquinas and Occumenius, which is followed
also by Luther, that by the dead are meant the dead in sin, cannot stand,
because the Particle (...) were then redundant; it being hereby intimated, that
the Gospel was preached to others besides the now living, and by the quick
and the dead, verse. 5. are no such dead meant, according to which it is fit
that this should be expounded. Beza.
Beza therefore holds it most easy to give the sense of these words, that as
the Gospel was preached to the living, so it had been preached to them that
died long ago, and so is no new doctrine. The spirits of the dead cannot be
meant, because of the distinction following, according to man and according to
God, that is the natural and the spiritual man. And to this do I subscribe:
and so of the words following this is the meaning; As now they to whom the
Gospel is preached, are required to die unto sin and to live unto
righteousness, so were they like wise required then, to be judged according to
man, that is, to be mortified as they were natural men, for he that is judged
or condemned, is judged to die, and to live according to God, that is, Piscator.
to be renewed unto holiness. Piscator expounds it of those in Noah's time
before spoken of, Chap. 3. of whom he says, some when they saw the judgment
of God coming upon them, repented and were saved, and so they were judged
according to man, that is, perished in their corporal life, but were received
to everlasting life. Aug^^pist 99.
Augustine understands by the dead, the dead in sin and infidelity, as
Thomas Aquinas does, saying, that upon their conversion they are judged
according to men in the flesh, because they are persecuted and spoken against,
but they are even hereby furthered in their spiritual life, and this is
followed without much difference by Beda, Vatablus, Arias Montanus, and Huge.
Bellarmine, Valentia and Suarez hold, that by the dead, are meant the spirits
in prison before spoken of, as Oecumenius does: and Lorinus says, that it is a
most plain place to confirm Christ's local descent into hell, but I cannot
see how it may be thus taken, unless it be yielded, that they in hell were
converted and saved by his preaching there, because he says, that they might
be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the
Spirit: which cannot be expounded of any thing else but of the conversion of a
sinner. But that any are converted and saved out of Hell, abhors from all
sound Divinity.

Note, Note.
that there is a conformity betwixt Christians and their pattern, Verse. 1.
Christ: as he suffered in the flesh, so ceasing to be any more in this world
after the manner of men; so true Christians suffer by mortification unto sin,
which springs from the flesh, but that being once mortified, there is in them
a cessation from all their former wickedness. Howsoever they may still fall
out of infirmity, yet the course of their life is not intemperate and riotous
as it was before, they trade not in sin. They therefore that live a wicked
life still, though they are called Christians, yet they have no communion with
Christ, because they suffer not with him.

Note again, that such as are conformable to Christ by being dead unto sin,
shall have enemies even for this, Note.
and shall be railed upon by those that still remain in the flesh; but such
enemies of theirs and railers need none other sign of reprobation, as shall
appear when the Day of judgment comes.

Note lastly, Note.
that the only means to escape judgment at the last day, is by the preaching
of the Gospel, to be brought to that, that we are judged according to the
flesh, and quickened according to the Spirit; that is, truly converted and
brought to live an holy and righteous life: others in whom there is no such
effect, can look for nothing but a most terrible sentence to be denounced
against them, when Christ shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

CHAP. 4. VER. 12. My brethren, estrange not your selves from the fiery trial
which is amongst you to prove you, as if some strange thing had happened unto
you.


The vulgar Latin reads it, Nolite peregrinari in feruore. Do not play the
strangers by reason of the fervent heat. Our English translation, Think not
strange of the fiery trial: in Greek it is, (...).

There is little difficulty in any thing, Mayer. Verse. 7.
before we come at these words, verse. 7. The end of all is at hand, is
commonly expounded of the end of this world, from whence it is usual with the
holy Apostles to raise a motive to watchfulness. Only Oecumenius expounds it
of Christ, The end of all is come; Oecumen.
that is, Christ, the end of all the Prophets, and therefore after his example
we ought to aspire after perfection. But the first is most genuine. Verse 8.
Verse. 8. Love covers a multitude of sins, this he also expounds of the
sins of him that loves, God being made hereby propitious and merciful to
him, so that none of his sins are laid to his charge, and herein he is
followed by Gorran and other popish Writers, that would have love the cause of
our justification. But it is plain from the place from whence these words are
taken, that it is meant of his sins, (...) 10.12.
to whom love is showed; Hatred stirs up strife, but love covers all
sins: Chrysostom. Hom. 4. All. ap^st.
and therefore Chrysostom expounds it thus, as hatred will find matter
against a man when there is none, so love passes over and winketh at, and will
not see many faults, in whom they are, though against our selves, and excuses,
Hern. Epist. 7. ^^^emie^tiae au^^^. ^a quae non (...) s^^^cantar.
as much as may be, the sins of others. So also Bernard, Love covers many
sins, but enmity suspecteth even those that are not.

Touching the present, verse. 12. all Expositors generally agree, that the fire
here spoken of sets forth adversity and trouble in this world, which comes
upon the Christian for his professions sake. And the Syriacke Interpreter does
not mention any fire at all, but, think not strange of the tentatiers that are
amongst you. And it is no new phrase to express afflictions by fire. Esa. 48.
Psalm. 16. Psalm 65. 1 Pet. 1.
Esaias speaks of the furnace of poverty. David says, That the Lord tried him
with fire, and we have passed through fire and water; and Peter speaks to the
same effect before, that your faith might be found more precious than gold
which is tried in the fire. But for the reading of the words there is some
difference, Tertulan Scorp. c. 12. No expaueseata vsitonem Fulg. ad Frasim. c.
30. Cypri. Epist. 56.
whereof somewhat has been said already. Tertullian reads it, Be not afraid
of the burning. And Fulgentius not much differing, Nolite expauescere in
feruorem, Cyprian reads it, Do not wonder at the burning which happens unto
you: and Ierom not much differing, Wonder not in the burning. Hieren. in cap.
4. Amos.
And as there be diversities of readings, so there is in rendering the sense.
But the most generally received is, Wonder not, or think not strange of the
fire of tribulation, as though it were a thing not compatible with the state of
a Christian: for it is rather a strange thing that a Christian should be
without tribulation, and argues a bastard, Lyto. Hugo.
Heb. 12.9. Some expound it of estranging themselves from the faith and love of
Christ, for the fire of tribulation. Turrian.
One expounds it of the fire of lust, wherewith if a Christian be burned, he
ought not to think strange of it. It seems to me, that estranging of a man's
self from persecution for the Christian profession, is meant, being taken with
so much fear thereof, as that he will rather forsake Christ than endure it.
And aptly fire is named, because so many of Gods servants have been committed
to the fire and burnt for Religion.

Touching the residue of the Chapter, there is some difficulty in verse. 14.
Verse 14.
Because the Spirit of glory and of God rests upon you, word for word, as
Beza reads it, That of glory and that Spirit of God rests upon you. Quod
s^^^norit, gloria, and virtutis Der, and qui est c^us (...) super (...),
re^^^^scit. Cyprian. Epist. 5^
The Latin translation has it, That which is of glory, and honor, and virtue
of God, and which is his Spirit rests upon you. Some again read it, The
glory and Spirit of God. Cyprian has another reading, The name of the Majesty
and virtue of the Lord rests upon you. The Syriacke, The glorious Spirit of
God rests upon you. Of all these, that doubtless is to be preferred which
is first, as being most agreeable to the Greek. The meaning is, that if any
man suffers for Christ, not being terrified or shrinking through fear, it is
by Gods Spirit in him, that he is made thus courageous and confident, which is
the Spirit of glory, so called in respect of the glory that is in thus
suffering; as it is a base and ignoble thing to be timorous and daunted at
sufferings for the Lord, and the end shall be glory in Heaven to those that
suffer: again, it is called the Spirit of God, that is, of the love of God,
there being no such great love to be showed unto the Lord as by suffering for
him. There be not two spirits then here spoken of, but one and the same
diversely called to set forth the excellency thereof the more.

In setting down in what case there is no comfort in suffering he names,
Verse. 1^.
as a busy body in other men's matters, (...), an ouerseer of other men's
matters, so as to be ready rigidly to censure and reprove them having no
calling so to do: for hereby ofttimes convention arises, and he that is thus
ouer-busie and meddling, smarteth for his labor.

Because the time is that judgment should begin at Gods house. Verse 1^.
Here may seem to be some difficulty, what is meant by Gods house and by the
judgment spoken of, and in that it is further added, Oecumen. Basil. mag.
if the righteous scarely be saved, etc. But Oecumenius alone may resolve these
things for all: By Gods house are meant the faithful, who are the familiars,
as it were, of God; by judgment is not to be understood condemnation, but an
examining and trying by troubles in this world. Now it is usual amongst men to
be most offended with a man's nearest and dearest friend when he sins
against him, and so God begins first to show his anger against the faithful
during this life, which is the season for it, as the word (...) signifies. In
many places it is spoken almost to the same effect, as Amos 3.2. Esaias 29.1.
Ezech. 9.6. Ierem. 25.29. Pro. 11.31. and there be many examples of those, that
being near unto the Lord, have had judgment unto the death, and that for none
of the greatest offenses, as Vzzah, Josiah, the Prophet that came to Jeroboam,
and the men of Bethshemesh, and the subjects of David, and some amongst the
Corinthians, who are said for their disorderly coming to the Communion to have
fallen asleep. 1 Cor. 11.
But that they were not destroyed in soul also appears, because he adds,
ye are judged here, that ye may not perish with the world. If God be so severe
against his own, offending, much more will he be terrible to the wicked his
enemies.

Hieron. contr. Pelag. Iusius est quis meo, quod slo^ et multis virtutibus; vix
saluatur in (...), quod in quibusdam Dei misericordia indiget: saluaretur axtem
facile, si ^^hil in se haberet maculae.
Touching the righteous being scarcely saved, Jerome says well, That none is
perfectly righteous; but the faithful that are so called are scarcely saved,
because there be some faults in them still; they are said to be righteous,
because they flourish with many virtues, but shall scarcely be saved, because
in many things they need Gods mercy. And Oecumenius says, that the righteous
are saved with much difficulty, in regard of the violence wherewith the
Kingdom of Heaven must be taken, and the sufferings to which they are exposed
for Religions sake, which are sufficient, if God did not strengthen them
greatly with his grace, to beat them from their Christian profession to their
everlasting destruction. In a word, the meaning is, if the most holy and best
must pass through such sharp temporal judgments before that they can be
delivered from eternal destruction, the wicked and negligent doubtless shall
rue it when the great Day of reckoning comes.

Note, Note.
that it ought to be our daily meditation that this world and this life is
frail and transitory, that we may intend virtue the more earnestly, that will
avail us when this life shall be ended.

Note again, Note.
that we ought to have a care of preserving one another from sin, which is by
a loving and mild carriage of our selves toward others, for thus many
offenses are prevented in our brethren, and so covered, and therefore we must
not see all that we see in others, but in love wink at many things, so far
forth as not to be provoked hereby, not to forbear to reprove them, for this
is always necessary, Leu. 19.17.

Note moreover, Note.
that there is a fire through which the faithful must go, but it is in this
world by persecution and adversities, not in purgatory, which is imagined to be
afterward. And seeing the fire of afflictions is no strange matter, but
ordinary to the godly, we ought not to be affected with fear and terror, as
at some strange and unwonted accident, but rather with joy, which argues an
excellent Spirit, even that of God to be in us.

Lastly note, Note.
that the punishments which have been and are inflicted upon the faithful,
do certainly argue the general judgment and condemnation of the wicked at
the last Day: for it agrees not with reason that holy men should be so
severely dealt withal for sinning once, and that in lesser matters; and that
ungodly profane wretches, who make a trade of sin, should pass on for ever
without judgment. There shall be a judgment therefore doubtless, when all
evil doers shall be paid home to the full for all their wickednesses. Neither
is it so easy to be saved from condemnation then, that all may hope well, for
even the best are in much hazard, and do with great difficulty and striving
obtain everlasting life in the end. Let all wicked and careless persons
think upon this and tremble.

CHAP. V.
THe Apostle having finished his discourse about afflictions, now comes to
exhort both the elders and younger to the most necessary duties of their
several conditions. The elders he exhorts to feed Christ's Flock, verse. 1.
the younger to be obedient unto them, verse. 5. and all of them to be humble and
to fly pride, verse. 6, etc. and then concludes the Epistle with praising of
God and salutations. There is nothing in this Chapter almost that requires
exposition, but it has been already set forth. Touching Elders, see Text 11.
Iam. 5. and whereas Peter calls himself an Elder together with them, note,
that he was not their Prince and Lord over them, as the Pope of Rome,
pretending to be his successor, takes upon him to be; and therefore this
Bishop anciently was styled by Ireneus, but Presbyter, an Elder. Touching the
lording it over Gods heritage, verse. 3. I have also declared what kind of
dominion is to be avoided by all Gods people that be in authority, Text 106. in
Mat. 20. the word translated heritage, is (...), from whence comes the word
Clergy, appropriated by a long custom of speech to ecclesiast call persons
only, but the Lords Lot, all the faithful are indeed meant hereby, amongst
whom, because Ecclesiastical persons are the principal, this name has been
chiefly given to them, and the name of Laity to others for distinctions sake.
Touching the submitting one to another, see chap. 2.13, 17. where a like speech
is used. It is meant here by humility and lowliness of mind, wherein every
one is to be subject to another by thinking meanly of himself, as the word
humility immediately following does declare. And the rest of v. 5. and v. 6, 7,
8, 9. is almost the same word for word with Iam. 4.6, 7. Only whereas he
bids the younger to be subject to the elders, Verse. 5.
verse. 5. there is some question, whether by the younger, inferior persons are
to be understood, or the younger in years: Beda. Hugo. Carthus.
some seem to hold, that inferior persons are meant, as Beda, Hugo,
Carthusianus, and Titlemannu^, and Caietan plainly affirms it. Others by
younger, understand the younger in years, as Luther, and Beza. Luther. Beza.
I prefer the first, because the word Elders, to which the younger are here
opposed, sets forth such as are superior in order, and therefore it agrees
best to understand it of those that be of an inferior rank, amongst whom all
younger persons are included, as Saint Paul shows, Gal. 4.1. and so the word
(...) is used, Luke 22.26.

1 PETER Chapter 5. Verse 13. The Church that is at Babylon saluteth you. Verse.
14. Greet ye one another with a kiss of charity.


BY Babylon here, all the Ancients generally, Mayer, Luther, Faber.
and Luther and Faber understand Rome, so called because of the idolatrous
confusion that was then there, and cruelty that was used against the faithful
in that City; and this allegorical Exposition follow all popish Writers, of
whom Lorinus has made a Catalogue to the number of 26. But Beza, and Piscator,
Beza. Piscator.
and other newer Writers, understand Babylon in Chaldea, where Peter was when
he wrote this Epistle, holding, that it cannot be proved that he was ever at
Rome, and if he had meant the Church at Rome, he had no reason to conceal the
name; and Luther says, that he knows not, whether by Babylon here Rome be
meant or no. It seems the more probable, that Rome is not meant, but Babylon
properly understood, because Peter was the Apostle of the circumcision, and
therefore according to his Office, might well be in those parts where many
Jews were. But because it has been the common received opinion of the Church
through so many ages, I subscribe rather to the allegorical exposition, that
Rome is meant here. For Peter was sent to preach unto the Gentiles also, Act.
10. and so might well be at Rome, though there be no certain proof hereof in
sacred Story, but rather a probability that he was not there. What if the Lord
would guide this blessed Apostle, who was the first and chief in setting forth
divine Mysteries, to name Rome Babylon, to give the more light to that which
should afterward be prophesied of Rome under this name in the Revelation? The
Roman Catholics contend the rather for this exposition of the name, that it
may appear that Peter was at Rome: But be it so, yet by their own choice Rome
is called Babylon in the phrase of Gods Spirit, and then Babylon is Rome, which
is so infamous in the Revelation, and that not heathen Rome, as they pretend,
thinking thus to salve all again; but popish Rome, as I have showed more at
large there. His son Marcus, who is said to have saluted them, was Mark the
Evangelist, called his son, because he begat him by the Gospel, as Paul
calls Timotheus his son. Piscator speaks of him as his natural son;
but Oecumenius confuteth that opinion, as having too weak a ground, viz. Act.
12. where it is said, that Peter came to the house of Mary, the mother of John,
whose surname was Mark, that is, say some, to his own house, where his wife
and children were. But if this had been meant, there could have been no
reason to speak by a periphrasis, but directly and plainly.

Touching the saluting of one another with a kiss of charity, enough has
been spoken, 1 Cor. 16.20. Touching the Messenger that carried this Epistle,
Siluanus, it is thought by many that he was the same who is called Silas, Act.
15.22. and whose name is prefixed with the name of Timotheus before some of
Paul's Epistles.

THE SECOND EPISTLE CATHOLIC OF THE Apostle PETER.
TOuching the Author of this Epistle, it is not to be doubted but as it bears
the name of Peter the Apostle of Christ, so it was written by him to the same
persons to whom he wrote the first. And to confirm this the more, he says,
That he was present with the Lord in the holy Mount when his glory appeared,
verse. 18. for hereby Gregory the great confuteth those that doubted whether it
were written by Peter or no. Hierom, Eusebius, Greg. Hom. 18. in Ezech. Eusebius.
l. 2. c. 40. Hieron. de viris illustribus.
and Nicephorus do all show that it has sometime been doubted of, but indeed
there was never any reason to doubt of it, and therefore it has been received
by all orthodox Writers for canonical; and for Saint Peter's undoubted Epistle,
no man ever rejecting it, though some have sometime doubted of it. It was
written according to Baronius, as I have showed before upon the first Epistle,
three and twenty years after the first and the same year that Peter suffered
martyrdom. The Argument is a commendation of a godly and virtuous life unto
them, lest by his former Epistle they should gather that it suffices only to
believe, and an admonition to take heed of false Teachers, especially, as some
think, being occasioned by the followers of Simon, and some by the Gnostickes,
though that be more improbable, seeing Carpocrates the Author of that heresy,
or Basilides were not in the Apostles days. It seems that he had some
revelation touching his martyrdom shortly to come, whereupon he touches, and
therefore he was the more careful to leave this Epistle as a further Memento
to all the faithful. In his first Epistle he sought to arm the faithful
with comfort and patience against such as troubled them; here he terrifieth the
troublers of the Church, with threatenings of such judgments as God of old has
executed against the wicked. He begins in the first Chapter with
salutations, commemorating the great grace of God in Jesus Christ toward the
faithful, unto verse. 5. to the faith in whom he exhorts to join all
Christian virtues, verse. 5, 6. yielding some reason, how that thus their faith
shall appear to be a true faith indeed, and their knowledge of Christ shall
not be without benefit in the end, whereas otherwise it will prove but vain
and fruitless, verse. 8, 9, 10, 11. And then making some Apology for his
remembering them of these things who knew them so well already, verse. 12, 13. he
confirms both by testimony from Heaven, of which he was an eare-witnesse,
Mat. 17. that salvation is to be looked for in Christ, verse. 16, 17, 18. and by
the testimony of the Prophets, exhorting them to be conversant in their
writings for their further illumination and confirmation, verse. 19. Teaching
the infallibility of their prophesies, verse. 20, 21.

2 PETER Chapter 1. Verse 4, 5, 6. Whereby are given to us exceeding great and
precious promises, that by them ye might be partakers of the divine nature,
having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust. And besides
this giving all diligence, add to your faith, virtue, etc.


WHereby, that is, by the coming of which Lord Jesus, Occu^en. in 2 Pet. 1.
Exceeding great promises are given unto us, that is, many excellent gifts of
grace, whereby we might be made partakers of the divine nature being lifted up
to life and godliness: and therefore we ought so to carry our selves, as that
we may join virtue to faith, and by virtue go forward to the increase of
piety, till we come to the perfect good of all, viz. charity. We are made
partakers of the divine nature by the coming of our Lord and God, Jesus Christ
in the flesh, for hereby the first fruits of our nature are sanctified, and if
the first fruits be holy, the whole lump is also holy, such as all they are,
from amongst whom the first fruits are taken. And he calls it the corruption
of the world, from which we are hereby escaped, because the lust whereby we
are tempted consists of corruptible things, and is conversant about worldly
things, which are subject to corruption. Then follow the degrees of perfection;
First, faith. Secondly, virtue, which stands in good works. Thirdly, knowledge
of the mysteries of God, which is not but to those, that by being exercised in
good works get ready and quick senses. Fourthly, temperance, which is
necessary for him that has knowledge, lest he be puffed up hereby. Fifthly,
patience, because a man cannot be temperate without it. Sixthly, brotherly love
after godliness, which makes way unto it. Lastly, charity, which is the
perfection of all.

This word [Whereby] is read either by whom, viz. Christ; Th. Aqu^nas in 2
Pe^er 1.
or by which in the singular number, viz. knowledge; or by which in the
plural, viz. gifts. The most excellent promises said to be given us, are
eternal life given by hope here, and in deed hereafter, and it is set forth in
the plural number, because of the multiplicity of those joys, and he calls
them precious, because they are bought with a price. That by them, that is, by
the grace and peace before spoken of, or by those gifts ye might be partakers
of the divine nature, that is, participating of grace in this life, and of
glory in the life to come. Of this fellowship with God the Father, and the
Son, it is spoken of 1 John 1.3. That which is added of escaping the
corruption which is in the world, is a condition required in the faithful, who
expect the foresaid glory, and he calls it corruption in the world, to set
forth not only the lust of the eyes, but also the lust of the flesh, and the
pride of life, as 1 John 2.15.

But ye bringing in all care in your faith minister virtue, etc. Here are
eight things spoken of, as so many steps to heaven, as there were eight steps
up to the Temple, Ezech. 48. the three first respect good, the next three
evil, the two last respect love. Faith moves and directs, virtue executes,
and knowledge chooses and rectifieth. The evil is either of fault to be
avoided by abstinence, or of punishment to be borne by patience, or in either
kind in others by godliness releeuing them. Love is either of our neighbor,
or of God. To faith he bids join virtue in doing, for a figure of which,
Andrew, Virtue, John 1.
is said to be the brother of Peter, that is, of Faith. And because a man
cannot do well without discretion, he bids add knowledge. Bernard says,
discretion is not so much a virtue, Bernard. Discretio non tam est virtus, qua
auriga virtutis.
as the Waggoner of virtue, without which virtue is vice, Romans 12. our
reasonable serving of God is spoken of, and unto the spirit of fortitude is
joined the spirit of counsel, Esa. 11. Now, because knowledge avails not
without abstinence from evil, he bids to join abstinence from carnal
pleasures; and because he that abstaineth from the pleasures of the world,
will the better endure the miseries of the world, patience comes next; and
because patience is nourished by godliness toward those that are in misery,
and because a man may use piety toward the miserable out of fear, or in some
other respect, he adds brotherly love; and because brotherly love ought to be
founded in the love of God, he adds, as the perfection of all, charity.
Luther not much differing, says, Mayer. Lut^er. Quidest Deinatura? aeterna
veritas, ius^tia, sapien^ia, vita p^rpetua, pa^, gaudium, and v^lupta^, and
quicquid boni pot^st nominari. Qui consors sit naturae Dei, haec omnia
assiquitur, ^t vinat ^eterne, perpetuamque habeat pacem, voluptatem and
laetitiam, iustus, sanctus, purus, omnia potens contra satanam, peccatum and
mortem.
that by these excellent promises whereunto it is attained by faith, is meant
the glorious and happy estate to come, which yet by faith we begin to possess
now so many as do by Gods power live the life of grace. And thus we come to be
partakers of the divine nature, that is, of truth, righteousness, wisdom,
everlasting life, peace, joy, and whatsoever desirable thing can be named, for
this is the divine nature, and of all these the faithful do partake: yet so
only, that they fly the lusts of the world. Wherefore in the next place he
exhorts to add to faith virtue, etc. that is, a virtuous and holy life in
good works. 3. Knowledge, how to use the body by neither too much cockering it,
nor wronging and hurting of it, as some in the affectation of sanctity have
done: for though God hates sin which is in the flesh, yet he would not have
the body destroyed therefore, but only, that the lust should be resisted.
Again, knowledge is when a man has regard to honesty, and modesty in all his
conversation outwardly. 4. Temperance is not only about meats and drinks, but
in all things both of speech and deed a moderating of a man's self according to
reason. 5. Patience, because though a Christian be never so circumspect and
moffensiue in his life, yet the world will hate and persecute him. 6.
Godliness, that is, whatsoever we do or suffer, not to respect our own glory
herein, but the glory of God, doing and suffering all for Gods sake. 7. Love
and charity, he says, are to be understood, the one of the faithful, the
other more largely, even of enemies and haters. Piscator.
Piscator also agrees with Luther touching the divine nature, of which we are
made partakers, when by grace we partake of heavenly wisdom, and holiness,
and happiness: for this is to partake of the divine nature as much as we are
capable. Only in speaking of wisdom, he says, it is about the carrying of
our selves toward others, so that we may win them; and temperance, he says,
is about meats and drinks, by the intemperate use whereof offense is given; by
godliness, he understands the worshipping of God by prayer, Beza annot.
etc. Beza also says the same, that to be partakers of the divine nature, is
to be partakers of those qualities which Gods spirit works in us, wherein in
his image consists, and thus much is expressed in the words following, having
escaped corruption in the world through lust, where corruption is opposed to
life, and lust to glory before spoken of. But touching brotherly love and
charity, he understands the one of the inward affection, the other of the
outward expression by deeds. Having thus set down the diversity of
expositions, I come briefly to the rendering of the sense of all. Whereby,
(...), has plainly reference to the all things before spoken of, verse. 3.
which are given unto us both for life and godliness: for amongst these are set
forth the great and precious promises, of which we are made partakers, when as
by these means we attain to faith, and so we partake of the divine nature,
that is, of holiness and righteousness, whereby we avoid the corruption of
the world by lust, as is added to express what he means by partaking of the
divine nature. For we partake of the corrupt nature of man fallen, as long as
we follow that evil lust that is in us; but when through the spirit we are so
sanctified in believing that we avoid this corruption, and live holily and
righteously, we partake of the nature of God, Ephesians. 4.24.
seeing the old man is now put off, and the new man is put on, that is, Christ
Jesus, who is also God: from whence Ambrose argues against those that denied
Christ to be God, A^bros. lib. de inca^^at c. 8.
for how else could he make us partakers of the nature of God, if he himself
had it not? Seruetus.
Seruetus gathered from hence, that there is a transfusion of the divine nature
into man: but erroneously, Athan. crat. 2. contra Arrian.
for as Athanasius teaches, we partake of the divine nature only by his grace
through the spirit, without the division of the divine essence, but Christ is
begotten of the Father, and so consubstantiall with him. Osiander has ^rred
also as much, teaching that we are justified by that righteousness, whereby
Christ is essentially righteous, not as man but as God. But Peter says not,
that we are partakers of the divine nature by the inhabitation of essential
justice, but by the great and precious promises, which when we hear we
believe, and so attain to the things promised, the sum and substance of all
which is Christ. It may rather be gathered from hence, that our justification
is a permanent gift as nature is, as Lorinus also grants, according to which
the regenerate is called a new creature, and therefore continues to the end.

Touching the exhortation inferred hereupon, Verse. 5.
verse. 5. it tends to show, that the faithful now that they are in the state
of grace ought not to be secure, as if nothing more were required at their
hands, but to believe: but they must use all diligence, and have a care to
shine in all Christian complements of practice, for the order of which, that of
Tho. Aquinas, followed also by Burges in his chain of graces, likes me best.
After the radical and mother grace, faith named, he first commends such
graces as concern the doing of good; secondly, such as concern evil; first,
of sin to be avoided; secondly, of punishment to be borne. Only with
Piscator I think that godliness is to be understood of the exercise of godly
duties, und withal of a godly mind, referring all our grace to Gods glory,
and brotherly love of the love of the faithful, and charity of the love of
all, even enemies and persecutors. For whatsoever good we do, and whatsoever
evil we avoid, if godliness and love be not adjoined, it is nothing worth.
Without godliness it will be unsanctified, 1 Timothy 4.
for all things are sanctified by the word and prayer, and through the want of
respect to Gods glory, Matthew. 25.
it may be pharisaicall through vain glory, and if love be wanting, there is
but a lamp without oil, nothing but a sounding brass and tinkling cymball. 1
Cor. 13.


Note, Note.
that the condition of the faithful is most high and honorable, even a
partaking of the divine nature, as Mordecay was made partaker of royal
dignity, which is, when our nature is changed, and of corrupt and impure, we
become holy and righteous, for this is Gods nature. So that there is nothing in
the world so much to be ioyed in, or to be aspired so much after, as to be
holy; and nothing so much to be shunned, as corruption: for if we be of the
same nature with God, we shall also with him live, and be blessed, and happy
for ever.

Note again, Note.
that heaven and happiness is not so easily attained unto, as the world
thinks, only by believing, but great care and diligence must be used, that
the whole life may be virtuous, that knowledge in the mysteries of God may be
attained, etc. He must wear not one grace, but this whole chain of graces,
that would be adorned for God, and be received into his kingdom: for if there
be but one, even the last grace of love wanting, all the rest are nothing
worth, and the soul is but basely set forth yet.

CHAP. 1. VERSE. 10. Wherefore (Brethren) give rather all diligence to make your
election and calling firm, for doing these things ye shall never fall.


From the words which I have already expounded unto these there is nothing
difficult, Mayer.
Verse. 9.
saving that verse. 9. he says, that such an one is blind, and forgets his
washing of old from his sins. Luther.
But that may be understood thus, as Luther has it, he cannot see the way to
go one right step toward the kingdom of heaven, and does as if he forgot his
baptism received formerly for the remission of his sins, at what time there
was a vow made of new obedience, so that if he had a due remembrance of these
things, he could not but do better. That sins are washed away in baptism is
plain, because we are invited upon this to be baptized, Acts 2.38. And S. Paul
speaking of those that have been washed, 1 Cor. 6.11.
varieth the phrase and says, Ye have been washed, August. contra epist.
Pelag. c. 13. Dicimus, baptisma dare indulgentiam omnium peccatorum, and
auferre crimina, non radere.
ye have been sanctified and justified. And hereunto Augustine agrees saying,
In baptism all our sins are pardoned and taken away, not pared only.
Hereupon the Papists infer inherent righteousness, and an utter abolishing
of original sin in baptism: but that this is false appears plainly from
many places, Romans 7.17. Gal. 5.17. Colos. 3.5. We are washed indeed from the
sin that we brought into the world with us, so as that it shall not be laid
unto our charge, but it remains still as a root of evil, as long as we live,
seeing otherwise all persons regenerate by baptism should live without
actually offending, for so much as there were nothing to tempt to sin, if
this lust were quite rooted out and gone, James 1.13.

Touching the present Text. Verse. 10.
Is not our election and calling sure without our endeavor?

I answer also with Luther, Luther.
that in respect of God it is firm and stable, but it is not sure to us, but
by endeavoring constantly and continually in good works. The foundation of God
indeed remains sure, but our faith will be but little sure, if we be not
careful to lead a life worthy the faith and profession whereunto we are
called. And therefore they are deceived, that say, so they have true faith they
care not in what a small measure they have it, and how little it be: for to get
as strong a faith as may be will be little enough, seeing (as has been showed
in the former Epistle) even the faithful shall scarcely be saved.

But it is further demanded here;

Indeed the Papists teach so, Lorinus.
and therefore they read this place thus, Give all diligence to make your
calling and election sure by your good works. And Lorinus finds great fault
with Caietan and Gagneus, and others of that side, that they follow rather this
reading with us, wherein the mention of good works is left out, as it is also
in the Greek. But he needed not to have been so hot, for though these words
were in, as Robertus Stephanus alleges three Greek Copies wherein they were,
(...), etc. yet it makes nothing for the proof of our justification in part
by works, but only declares that a man cannot have a firm and sure faith
without good works, the want of them causing a want of solid argument to
assure that we do truly and rightly believe. And thus only and none otherwise
do our good works make sure our calling and election, when we carefully attend
unto them. Touching the question of justification by works, and of the merit
of works, I have spoken already upon Romans 3.28. and Iam. 2. For that point of
the necessity of good works unto salvation, which Lorinus infers here, there
is no man that I know that will contend with him about it. For we hold and
teach, that good works are necessary for every one that would be saved, and
that he has but a vain faith that is void of good works; yet they are not
necessary, as the meritorious cause of our salvation, but as the next words
verse. 11. do declare, Verse. 11.
as the way and a plain and wide open way to heaven: for so he says, Thus a
way shall be abundantly ministered unto you to enter, Ephesians. 2.10.
etc. See also Ephesians. 2.10.

But yet a third question remains,

Lorinus gathers from hence, Lo^^n^^.
that a man cannot be certain, because such as are called and elected, are
bidden to make their election sure, which they should not be, if by faith,
which is wrought in a man's calling, he were sure already. But this is a mere
cavil of a man wilfully blindfolding his eyes against the light. It is true
indeed, that a man is not sure so soon as he is effectually called to believe:
for there is a weaker faith, and a stronger faith: faith in the very first
beginning gives some assurance, but this assurance is confirmed more in time
by goods works. Though he which is converted at the first does believe, yet
being so newly come out of a sinful estate, he cannot but be full of doubtings
and fears, through which his belief may yet be called unbelief, as he that
came to Christ for his child spoke of himself, Lord I believe, help mine
unbelief. And in this case it is that Peter bids to use all diligence to
make our calling and election sure. Or rather, because he that seems to be
called and elected, may happily be outwardly called only: he wills us to
approve our calling by a virtuous and holy life, that so we may be sure,
whereas otherwise we should be deceived. The true collection to be made from
hence is, that a man may be sure and certain of his salvation, and that he
ought not to rest till he has attained unto it, by applying himself with all
his power to live so as becomes his Christian and holy calling. For otherwise
it were a vain precept to endeavor to become sure, if this were not to be
attained unto. I grant, that the law indeed requires that which man cannot
attain to, touching doing, and yet not in vain, because hereby we are
continually remembered what man was by creation, and now finding it to be
otherwise with him, hereby occasion is given, the same charge still lying upon
him, to seek out to another, that is, Christ, in and through whom he may
attain to the perfect fulfilling of the Law. But the precept of the Gospel
which is to believe, and to be strengthened in the faith through godly living,
so that we may become sure of our salvation, is not such a thing, but that it
may be fulfilled, being the last refuge left for man fallen now to recover life
again, or else it were a vain charge; even as a man that is no way able to
pay his debts, if he be bidden to build a Church, or to deliver up such an
house and ground to his Creditor, which he has not, and so he shall be exempt
from going to prison, should be but vainly conditioned withal: but being
bidden to go of his errand an hundred miles, he bearing his charges by the way
also, and so all shall be forgiven him (as there is no reasonable man, that
has a mind to forgive his debtor upon some condition, but will set such a
condition as he can perform) he can perform what is enjoined him. But of this
point of a certain assurance of salvation to be attained by faith, I have
written already at large upon Romans 8.38.

Note, Note.
that a wicked man loses all the benefit of his baptism and Christian
profession: he has indeed been once washed from his sins by baptism, but
all that benefit is now as a thing quite gone and forgotten, and he has lost
his way to heaven.

Note again, that faith whereby we are justified and saved, Note.
is more certain or uncertain, as our care to lead a godly life is more or
less. Only the godly Christian that from his heart-root desires and labors
to live in the fear of God, and to be always doing of good, can be sure that
he is elected. All others may justly fear a reprobation. The consideration of
this election breeds much anxiety in many, who are much troubled about it, in
searching whether they be elected or no. But they begin at the wrong end: if
any man would be sure in this regard, let him go to work as S. Peter here
teaches, live godlily and holily, for otherwise to search about it, is but to
enter in a Labyrinth or Maze, without ever finding an end.

CHAP. 1. VERSE. 19. And we have a more sure word of prophecy, to which ye do
well, that ye take heed, as to a light shining in a dark place, until the
day be light, and the day star arise in your hearts; etc.

He says, Oecumen. in 2 Pet. 1.
that we have the word of prophecy the more sure, not because there was any
prophecy before of this voice that came from heaven, but because by that voice
coming from the Father we are confirmed, touching those things that were
prophesied of the Son by the Prophets long ago, and do without question
conclude, that all their prophesying is most certain and stable. But this
prophesying, he says, was then a light shining in a dark or nasty place, till
the Sunbeams came by Christ to inlighten the world, and this is the days
growing light through that knowledge which we attain unto under the Gospel.
And if any man shall say, But why did not the Prophets expound and make more
plain what they prophesied, for so a great light might have been given long
before; he adds, they prophesied as they were moved by the Spirit of God,
neither were there prophesies of any private interpretation; so that, howsoever
they understood what they prophesied, yet they were not to explain their
prophesies to others, seeing that the Spirit moved them not to this, but to
leave them dark for others to study upon them, till the time of light should
come.

There is nothing of difficulty betwixt the former Text and this; Mayer.
for when Peter speaks of his departure hence, and of the Lords forewarning
him hereof, he means that forewarning, John 21.19. and his being present to
see Christ's glory, and to hear the voice of the Father from Heaven was Matthew.
17.

Touching the present Text, Luther.
Luther says, that the prophecy is called firmer, because we have no such
Prophets now, as were then. Faber Stapul.
Faber by firmer understands most firm, and takes it not as spoken
comparatively preferring old prophesies for certainty, before the present
preaching of the Apostles, than which nothing can be more certain. Or else he
calls it firmer in respect of the knowledge what was meant thereby, by the
illumination of the holy Ghost, the Apostles had not a coniecturall prophecy;
as others that conceived erroneously thereof, but more firm, because they were
sure, that thus understood it was true. The. Aquinas and Gorran say, Tho. Aquin
Gorran.
that the prophecy touching Christ of old by David, Psalm. 2. Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee, is said to be more firm in respect of
the Jews, who believed the Prophets rather than the Apostles. Beza also
consents with this, Beza.
but rather would have the comparatiue here used, taken for the superlatiue,
most firm. So likewise Beda, and Gagneus, and Lyra, and Augustine also. The
authority of the old Prophets was such, Aug. sermon. 27. de verb. apost. ca. 4.
Quis nostrum non miretur, certiorem Propheticum sermonem dici, quam vox de
Coelo. Certiorem dixit, non meliorem, non veriorem. Quid est ergo certiorem, in
quo magis confirmetur auditor? Quare hoc? Quoniam sunt homines infideles, qui
sic detrahunt Christo, vt dicant, eum magicis artibus fecisse quae fecit.
Possent ergo infideles etiam istam vocem delatam de Coelo per coniecturas
humanas, and illicitas curiositates ad magicam artem refer. Sed Prophetae
ante fuere. Si ergo magicis artibus fecit vt coleretur, nunquid magus erat
antequam natus?
as that it had been a long time received for certain, and great reverence
was given thereunto, both by Jews and Gentiles, ever since the translation of
the old Testament by the 72, at the appointment of Ptolomee Philadelphus King
of Egypt.

And to this exposition, as the most genuine, do I subscribe. For if Peter had
meant a most firm prophecy, he would have spoken in the superlatiue, not in
the comparatiue degree; and to say that there are no such Prophets under the
new Testament, as were under the old, is without all ground, seeing they had
the same spirit. Lastly, this is not spoken against those that erroneously
interpreted the Prophets, but for further confirmation of those that would not
so readily receive any thing lately done or said, because they suspected fraud,
whom he therefore refers to the Prophets, not only in this particular
uttered by the voice from Heaven, but in all other things concerning the
Messiah.

Touching the words following, the words translated in a dark place, are,
(...), in a squalide filthy place, such as this world is by reason of the great
corruption in it. Oecumen.
Oecumenius seems to understand it as spoken with reference to former times.
And it is one exposition brought by Faber, Faber Stapul.
that the old Law is a shadow and figure darkly setting forth the mysteries of
Christ, until the day of the new Law by the coming of Christ waxes light,
and the day star of the Sun of righteousness, that is, the Gospel arise
in their hearts, they being converted unto it: and thus Luther, Beza, Piscator,
etc. understand it also. Faber has also another exposition, whereby the day of
judgment, or the great light, after that time, to those that are glorified, is
understood by the day waxing light, and the day star arising, for then we
shall know as we are known, and all the light of Prophets and Apostles here is
but like a Candle in a dark place, in comparison of that most glorious light.
Thus S. August. sermon. 237. de temp. In die ambulamus comparat. infidelium,
comparat. vero illius diei, in qua resurgent mortui, adhuc nox sumus.
Augustine understands it, as it seems by these words of his: We walk in
the day in respect of Infidels: but in respect of that day, when the dead shall
rise, we are yet night: and so he reconcileth Paul and Peter, whereas Romans
13.12. he says, The night is past, and the day is come. But Peter here
speaks of the day, as to come. And in another place he says further, Aug.
Tract. 35. in Johan. Tunc praesenti tali die lucernae non erunt necessariae,
non legetur nobis Propheta, non aperietur codex Apostoli, non requiretur
testimonium Iohannis, non ipso indigebimus Euangelio. Omnes Scripturae
tollentur de medio, quae nobis in huins saeculi nocte tanquam lucernae
accendebantur. Tho. Aquin.
in speaking of the discovering of all things at the day of judgment, when that
day comes light shall not be needful; the Prophets shall not be read, nor
the book of the Apostles opened; the testimony of John shall not be required;
we shall not need the Gospel, all Scriptures shall be taken away, which as
lights have been set up in the night of this world. To this exposition
subscribeth Prosper and Tho. Aquinas, Gorran and Gagneus, and many more. Yet
Tho. Aquinas distinguishes betwixt the day waxing light, and the day star
arising; understanding by the one, the open knowledge of Christ's divinity; by
the other, the open knowledge of his humanity: or by the one, the knowledge
which the Saints have before the judgment be past; by the other, that is, the
day waxing light, their knowledge afterward. This, howsoever it has great and
learned Authors, yet seeing this speech is directed to them that did not yet so
esteem of the Apostles, and rest in their testimony touching Christ, does not
agree so well, because they should grow to be more fully informed by the light
of the Gospel in time, and therefore I prefer rather the former exposition.
For so much as they did not yet give such certain credit to the Apostles, the
Gospel having not yet so fully enlightened them, he says, that they did well
to attend to the Prophets, till the day of Evangelical knowledge should come,
and the day star Christ should arise in their hearts by his holy spirit
inlightning them so, as that they should perfectly know these things.

Touching the next words, Knowing this first, Verse. 20.
that no prophecy of Scripture is of any private interpretation, etc. The
meaning is, now that ye have the Prophets and attend unto them, before ye
receive any interpretation that shall by false Prophets be offered unto you, as
their private fantasies lead them, ye must know, that no such prophecy is to
be received with such interpretation, but as it has pleased Gods spirit, from
whom prophesies come, to explain and make manifest the obscurities thereof,
because as the prophecy is not of man, but of the spirit of God; so that is
not to be received as the meaning thereof, which man deuiseth, but which the
same spirit moving the Apostles and apostolical men to expound it, declares
to be the meaning. The true interpretation, Luther.
as Luther has it, is that which is approved by other places of holy
Scripture, and that which cannot hence be proved is a private interpretation, how
ancient and how great a name soever he has that is the author of it. The
Papists oppose a private interpretation to the common exposition given by the
Church, wherein the Pope is the chief, and so would have none exposition
received, but what the Church of Rome (swayed by the Pope) is pleased to give.
But in contending thus for a public exposition, they make way for the private
fantasies of ignorant and sensual beasts, such as many Popes have been. A
private exposition is opposed to that of men holy and learned in the
Scriptures, and so able to make good thereby the exposition: brought by them.
If any wicked or profane man shall bring an interpretation, or though he be
well affected, if he be ignorant and wants judgment, it is to be rejected as
a private interpretation: that which is brought by the godly and learned, who
are called to the expounding of the Scriptures, being made evident by other
places of Scripture, is to be received. If it be objected thus, there can be no
certainty, seeing one brings one exposition, and another another. I answer,
that in fundamental points the godly and learned that prove their expositions
by the Scriptures, cannot differ; and if they should, a Council met together
to reconcile the difference, choosing one for president by a joint consent, the
assistance of the spirit being first craved, could not differ; and in the mean
season what exposition we are by the spirit directed unto, having by prayer
recommended our selves unto God, is to be embraced, so that we have evidence of
Scripture therefore. In points of less moment the differences shall not need
to trouble us, we may follow that which is most probable to us, seeing as
Augustine speaks herein, Quisque suo sensu abundat.

Note, Note.
what a time of light we live in now under the Gospel, so many as have heartily
embraced it. Before there was no more but (as it were) the light of a Candle in
a dark place, a small light was given in the mysteries of salvation by the Law
and the Prophets, able to inlighten but one Nation, as Theodoret speaks. But
now it is the clear daylight extending into all parts. And therefore it
behooves us to walk in the light, lest it turn to our greater condemnation,
John 3.19.

Note again, Note.
that whatsoever any man brings out of the Scriptures, is not truth and to be
embraced, but what is to be approved by the Scriptures; and therefore the new
Creed, and all the superstitious and idolatrous worship of the Church of Rome
is utterly to be rejected, as coming from false Prophets, and not from any
moved by the spirit of God, seeing it is altogether without ground in the holy
Scriptures, especially the chief point of the Popes head-ship and
infallibility, whereupon all the rest hangs.

CHAP. II.
Having in the end of the former Chapter given them a caveat against the
private interpretations of prophesies, he does here prosecute that argument,
foretelling how they should be assaulted with false Teachers, who would obtrude
unto them their own fantasies in stead of Gods truth. In speaking of whom he
sometimes shows their qualities and conditions, and sometime their most
fearful and horrible destruction. Their first property is to deny the Lord,
and to blaspheme the truth, verse 1, 2. The second covetousness, verse 3. The
third and fourth fleshlinesse, and contempt of government with those effects
which it produces, verse 10. which vices he repeateth again, verse 14.
having first aggrauated that of the contempt of government, and evil speaking,
from the contrary example of Angels, verse 11. And then setting them forth by
diverse comparisons taken from Balaam, and from wells and clouds without water,
he shows how vain they are in their own hopes, and promises unto others,
verse. 15, 16, etc. Their destruction is set forth to be such as shall come
suddenly upon them, verse 1, 3. which is illustrated by examples of the Angels
that fell, the old world Sodom, verse. 4, 5, 6. secondly, in regard of their
like deceiving condition, by the example of Balaam, verse. 15. and then
particularly showing by what judgment they shall perish, verse. 17. namely, in
utter darkness for ever, verse. 17. he aggrauateth their judgment the more in
regard of their apostasy, from the similitude of a dog, or swine, verse. 20,
21, 22.

2 PETER Chapter 2. Verse 1. Which shall bring in heresies that destroy,
denying the Lord that bought them, etc.


THese words were easy enough to be understood, Mayer.
but that the word heresies needs some explication, and how false Teachers,
who, he says, shall be damned, are called such as the Lord has bought. And
lastly, Verse. 4.
that passage of the Angels that sinned, being kept in chains of darkness
unto judgment.

Touching Heresies, it is a word coming of (...), signifying to choose, and
has been commonly taken for any sect of Philosophers which followed that
kind of discipline which each one chose unto it self. And this word is often
used without contumely, not only amongst profane Writers, but even in the holy
Scriptures, as where Paul says, that he worshipped God according to the most
exact sect of their religion; the word translated Sect, Act. 26.
is heresy: Again he says, according to that way which they call heresy I
worship God: Act. 24.
and by others we know, Act. 28.
that this sect or heresy is every where spoken against. But sometime it is
understood of a kind of doctrine contrary to the truth, which men have chosen
to follow and will not be here-from reclaimed, as here and Titus 3. Gal. 5. 1
Cor. 11. etc. if such doctrine be simply held, it is error; but if obstinately
cleaued unto, it is damnable heresy.

Denying the Lord that bought them; none are properly said to be bought by the
Lord, but the Elect; yet in a large sense, all to whom the Gospel comes are
said to be bought by him, yea all men, because the price by him paid is
sufficient to ransom all; neither is it by any defect therein that any perish,
but through their own wickedness and unbelief. If the question be, who these
false teachers are amongst Christians that deny the Lord, Lorinus tells you,
that they be the Lutheran and Caluinist Heretics, as well as the Arrians,
Manniches, Eutycheans and Nestorians of old, for in speaking things unworthy of
Christ, they do (says he) in effect deny him, when they teach, that he
despaired and suffered the pains of the damned, and that his redemption is
ineffectuall to Infants, because original sin is not taken away in them: and
lastly, by devising such doctrine, sacraments, and means of salvation, as are
contrary to that which was by him propounded.

But the Iesuice does greatly wrong both Luther and Calvin herein, for they
have no such doctrines, but they are his own imaginations. Only because as he
that is charged with theft, having nothing to say to clear himself, is wont
to call him a thief that impeacheth him; so the Papists being by us justly
charged by their doctrines to deny the Lord, they reply and say, That we do
so. Whereas indeed, their doctrine is a denying of such a Christ as is set
forth in the holy Scriptures. For he is our only Mediator and Advocate, and by
the merit of his death alone we are saved, and that which he has suffered does
fully satisfy for all our sins: but they teach more Mediators, the merit of
our own works, and that by our own sufferings here and in Purgatory, we must
satisfy in part for our sins. The Scriptures set forth such a Christ as is
Lord over all; but they do in effect subject him to the Pope, ascribing to him
power to make more Laws than Christ has made, and to dispense with his
ordinances as in the Lords Supper, when Christ has appointed to take the cup
as well as the Bread, the Cup shall be permitted only to such as the Pope
thinks fit. Ye your selves therefore (O ye popish Doctors) are here taxed to
deny the Lord Jesus, and to be the Authors of damnable heresies.

Verse. ^.
seeing there is redemption for man, they are thrust into hell without
redemption; and where this place of darkness is, in which they are said to be
chained? It is commonly agreed, though their sin be no where expressed, that
it was most probably pride, Tertul. lib. de patient. Basil. Homde inuidia.
Cyprian. de inuid. etc.
and aspiring to be like unto God in power and authority over all the
creatures, and being free from the empire of a Superior, as most Expositors
agree; and unto this some light is given in diverse places of holy Scripture, as
Esaias 14.11. Ezech. 28.12. Job 41.25. Luke 10.18. 1 Timothy 3.6. Now the sin of
the Angels is thought not to be so plainly declared, because God has not
provided for their restitution, but only for the restitution of man.
Athanasius tells of some, Athan. euaest 6. ad Antioch.
that held the sin of the Angels to be their refusing to worship Adam, being
by God commanded so to do: but this is a fiction, and ascribed to Mahumet by
Carthusianus, and to certain doting Jews by Galatinus. What sort of Angels
fell, and whether the rest were lead by one, diverse conjecture diversely. It is
most probable that some even of the highest ranks fell, because they are set
forth by such names, Ephesians. 6.12. and Lucifer is spoken of as a ringleader
unto them, Esa. 14.11. Revel. 1.2. As for the possibility of recovering, some
are of opinion, that sinning all in one instant, betwixt the time of their
sin and this punishment, Scotus. Gabriel. Salmeron. Nissen. Nemesius,
Damascen. Quod bominibus mors, hoc angelis lapsus fuit, post quem non est
paenitentiae locus, vt neque homini post mortem. Greg. 2. Mor. c. 3. Deus
apostatam spiritum ad paenitentiam nequaqua reuocat. Fulgent. de fide cap. 3.
August. Enchir. cap. 28. Greg. Mor. 4. c. 10. Isidor. de summo hono c. 12.
Prosp. lib. de dimid. temp. cap. 2.
there was a space of time wherein they might have repented if they would; as a
man that is in a dangerous way has power to return. But most are of the
contrary opinion, as Nissenus, Damascen, and Nemesius, whose saying it is, The
fall of the Angels was the same with death to men, after which there is no
place for repentance, as after death there is none for men.

And Gregory says, God calls not an apostat spirit to repentance: and with
them consent Isidorus, Fulgentius, Prosper, etc. yielding also some reason for
it; as the good Angels cannot fall because God vpholdeth them by his grace, so
the evil could not recover because grace is denied unto them. But why is grace
denied unto the Angels falling more than unto man? Saint Augustine answers,
because the Angels sinned without any suggestion moving them thereunto, but man
by the suggestion of the Serpent. Gregory, that the Angels were stronger, and
wiser, and perfecter than man, and therefore for them to fall it was more
odious. Proster and Isidorus, that man falling, all mankind was liable to
perdition; but though the Angels that fell be without redemption destroyed,
yet many stood still; and for a supply of them that fell, the Elect amongst men
are taken into their room.

Touching the place into which the Angels falling were thrust, the words are
(...), Thrusting them into hell, he delivered them to chains of darkness. The
vulgar Latin translation has it, rudentibus inferni detractos in tartarum
tradidit cruciandos; he delivered them to be tormented, being drawn down into
hell by the cable ropes of hell. And Th. Aquin. Tho. Aquinas.
following this, says, That by the cables of hell are set forth their attempts
in pride against God: for as by the cables the sails are hoised up and so they
are blown, and the ship is by this means carried on; so by those proud
attempts of theirs they were carried down to hell: Beda.
thus Beda also. But taking the words as they are in the Greek, here is not
set forth by what means they were cast into hell, but how fast they are kept
there, even as a prisoner that lies in a dungeon fast bound with fetters of
iron, so they are bound with chains of darkness, that is, they are kept in
the darknesse-of hellish misery as if they were bound with chains, being yet
to receive more exact torments at the Day of Judgment. Some, because darkness
is spoken of, think that the place wherein they are kept is some dungeon-like
dark pit within the bowels of the earth: but some, that it is this air, and
that there they are in darkness, that is, in misery; even as a man in a
burning Fever, Beda.
wheresoever he be laid is still tormented with the burning heat of his
disease. And most are of this opinion, for Jerome says, that hell is in this
air, Ieron. in Ephesians. 6.
and that it is the common opinion of all the Fathers, that the air is full of
evil spirits. And Augustine says, that the air is called hell, Aug. lib. 8.
de ciuic. c. 22.
because it is the inferior part of the world: so also Chrysostom. in 1 These.
Hom. 11. Tertul. Apoc. cap. 22. Theodoret. 4. de affect. Graec. Bern. ser. 72.
in Psalm. qui habitat. Luther.
Luther without mentioning any place says, That they are held with the chains
of obstinacy and desperation. Beza, Beza.
with the chains of misery. And it should seem, that whatsoever they shall be
hereafter, yet now they are not in any inner place of the earth, but here in
the lowest region of the air, because the Devil is called the prince of the
air; and as if the time were not yet come to be sent into the bottomless
pit, they expostulate with Christ, Why art thou come to torment us before the
time? and send us not, says the Legion, into the bottomless pit. I do
therefore (following the most received opinion) hold, that the evil Angels are
said to be kept in chains of darkness, not meaning that they are in the
bottomless pit, where is utter darkness, but of obstinacy and desperation,
which is a spiritual darkness, as to believe and to have comfort toward God
is to be in the light. But at the Day of Judgment they shall be sent into the
place appointed for them, where there is utter darkness, which is most
probably in the bowels of the earth, where also some of them are now kept for
the tormenting of the souls of the damned, which doubtless go thither
immediately after the departure out of their bodies.

Note, Note.
that heresies touching Christ are in effect a denying of him, and so tend to
the damnation of those that hold them, and therefore the heresies of popery
being such, let us take heed of them and fly from them, even as we would fly
damnation.

Note again, Note.
that the severity of God is such against sin, as that of what sort or
quality soever they be that sin, they shall not be spared: for none can be so
glorious and so great as the Angels, yet hell torments are the reward of them
sinning.

CHAP. 2. VER. 11. Whereas the Angels being greater both in might and power,
do not bear blasphemous judgment against them before the Lord.

Here is in short spoken the same that is more largely delivered by Jude,
Occumen. Jude Epist. v. 9.
so that by those words these may be expounded. They bear not, that is, they
offer not blasphemous speeches against the Devil, who was sometime a Prince
for reverence to that glory of which sometime he was partaker. And the Argument
here used, is a maiore. If the Devil, who is more worthy to be railed upon,
yet because he has been partaker of a certain glory, was herein forborne by
the good Angels, and by Michael for example, then much more should these
railers being but men, and the glories which they rail upon constituted by
God, forbear to prosecute them with calumnies and opprobrious words.

The Angels do not bear the execrable judgment that is against them; Th.
Aquinas in 2 Peter 2.
that is, the evil Angels, who are more able to bear punishments than feeble
and weak man, yet bear not the judgments of God against them, but do
execrate them by murmuring there-against, for which cause it is called the
execrable judgment; then much less will these sensual men, of whom he
speaks, be able to bear the judgments that will come upon them. Glos. Ordin.
Or else, according to the gloss, if the Devils only by suggestion stirring
up to the heresies, the blasphemy and contempt before spoken of, shall not be
able to bear the punishment, much less wicked men, that are the actors herein
in their own persons.

Most Expositors follow the same with Oecumenius, Mayer.
as Didymus, Gagneus, Salmeron, Turrianus, and Beza. But Luther follows the
other, and Gorran. There are also other expositions as that the Devils
blaspheme not God, Faber Stapul. Hugo. Clarius.
though they endure such intolerable torments, being pressed by the weight of
the punishment, so as that they dare not so to do. Or that they dare not,
Arias Montanus in Dan. 10.5.
though they be fallen from the obedidience of God, to give sentence against
the principles of the true Religion to refell them, as the false teachers
durst. I subscribe to the first, both because it is most agreeable to the
matter in hand, and the words before going, and most plainly illustrated by
that of Jude being spoken upon the same occasion. In the former verse he taxes
the false teachers for blaspheming of the Glories, that is, Gods Magistrates:
here to show the heinousness of the sin, he brings in the example of the
Angels, which are far more excellent, yet they give not blasphemous judgment
against such as have been Glories, though now they be fallen, remembering that
what is done is before the Lord, to whom all owe such reverence, as not to
break into railing one against another, much less against those that be of
emineney. So that when he says against them, he means not the Glories before
spoken, but others that had been Glories in heavenly places, and still retain
the title of Principalities, etc. Ephesians. 6.12. If it be expounded of the evil
Angels, there is not the like again to be found, where Angels set forth by a
kind of excellency are evil Angels, for when such are spoken of, there is
always annexed somewhat, whereby it may be gathered that they are such.
Again, being thus understood, the words would neither carry any good sense in
themselves, nor agree to that which went before. They bear not blasphemous
judgment against them: if he had meant their own judgment and condemnation,
he would have added against themselves, and not against them, and he would not
have called this judgment blasphemous, seeing it is the judgment wherewith
the Lord judges them. And touching the words before going, being against false
teachers, for their railing upon persons of eminency, to aggrauate which sin,
an argument is here taken from the Angels, there will be no correspondency
herein unto them, if by the Angels are to be understood evil Angels, and by
the blasphemous judgment their condemnation. For if it had been thus meant,
he would have said before, but these contemners of authority shall never be
able to bear the judgment due unto them therefore, for the very Angels, who
are of more power, bear not, etc. whereas no comparison is made betwixt
bearing of punishments, but betwixt the impudency of the one in railing, and
the modesty of the other in forbearing.

Touching the words following, verse. Verse. 12.
12. made to be taken and destroyed. False teachers are compared to bruit
beasts, because as they have nothing but nature in them, Beda.
for foods sake do adventure themselves into the snare or net, and so be taken
and killed; in like manner these in following their own corrupt affections are
taken of the Devil by their heresies, and afterward destroyed for ever. Verse.
15.
verse. 15. They are compared unto Balaam the son of Bosor, and the comparison
is most fit, both in respect of the signification of the words, Tho. Aquinas.
Balaam, a vain people; Bosor, carnal: and because as in him there was a
desire of promotion and riches, and a malicious mind against Gods people, so
is there in the Heretics here prophesied of, as is apparent in the papacy.

Note, Note.
that the very Angels being our leaders in their own example, a reverent
respect is to be given to men in eminent place though they be evil, neither
are they to be railed upon. For against this God sometime made a Law, Thou
shall not blaspheme the high Priest of thy people: wherefore Paul being charged
herewith, excused himself, saying, I knew not that he was the high Priest.

Note again, Note.
that it is no railing to be condemned, but a commendable painting out of
wicked men in their odious colors, that others may detest such vices,
rhetorically to declaime against them, calling them by names most odious in
speaking unto the people of God, who may be in danger by reason of them.

CHAP. 2. VER. 20. For if escaping the filthiness of the world in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, but being again entangled they
are overcome, the last things are become unto them worse than the first. Verse.
21. For it had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, than having known it to turn, etc.

There is nothing difficult from the words before expounded hitherto, Mayer.
but only that verse. Verse 18.
18. it is spoken of such as had escaped from these false teachers, yet by
their boasting words were brought back to error. But it is agreed amongst
Expositors, that this escaping was by the embracing of the truth, from which,
they being not so firmly grounded, they were again by deceit seduced to
error. Luther applies all, and that not unjustly, to the popish shauelings,
especially the Monks and Friars, who are properly painted out, when as v. 13.
they are said to feast with them, or as Luther has it, Verse. 13.
Devestro conuiuantur, They live plentifully upon yours, that is, upon that
which was given for the maintenance of the poor, upon it do they live in
idleness and pampering of their bodies. For these speak the swelling words of
vanity, extolling virginity, and speaking of the merit thereof, thus putting
down the Faith of Christ, and making way indeed to a life in all lust and
filthiness. Touching the present place, the difficulty is about a man's
escaping of the filthiness of the world, and being again entangled, whether
can any that are truly sanctified be corrupted again and damned. It is
commonly answered, That no true sanctification is here meant, but that which is
external in the knowledge and acknowledgement of the truth, viz. that by Faith
in Jesus Christ only we are justified and saved: for when as a man embraces
this doctrine and is baptized, he is said to have escaped the filthiness of
the world; but falling into error, whereby this true faith is overthrown, he
is again entangled. And in saying thus, Mat. 12.49.
Saint Peter alludeth unto that of our Savior Christ, where he speaks of the
danger of a man, out of whom the ill spirit is gone, but he afterward enters
again bringing with him seven spirits worse than himself. Saint Augustine
expounds it of those, Quaest Euang. lib. 1. cap. 8.
that from continency return to live after the manner of wordly men again.
But that is improbable, because there were not then any such orders of
continent persons, and to live after the manner of secular men, in a married
estate cannot, according to the Scripture phrase be understood by the
filthiness of the world. Rather because they, of whom he speaks, are set
forth, as to be Heretics in opinion, so to be corrupt and carnal in their
life and conversation; this their falling away in manners as well as in
doctrine is here described, when at the first embracing of the truth they lived
in temperance and continency, now being fallen into error they are withal of a
most scandalous and lewd life. Their latter end is said to be worse than their
beginning, to show as in the next words expressed, that their estate is now
much more damnable than if they had never heard or received the Gospel at all.

It had been better for them not to have known the way of truth, Verse. 21.
etc. that is, it had been a less sin in them, for neither of them is good,
Romans 2.5.
seeing they that sin without the Law, shall also perish without the Law.

Note, Note.
when the knowledge of our Lord Jesus is rightly said to be in any man, viz.
when sanctity and holiness of life is joined therewith: he that understands
the Doctrine of the Christian Religion, but is of a lewd life, knows not
Christ, a property of the knowledge of whom it is to depart from the
filthiness that the world of wicked people wallow in.

Note again, Note.
that with corruption in doctrine enters also corruption in manners; it is the
truth that sanctifies, error corrupts, as is evident both in Papists, and
Anabaptists, and Heretics of all sorts. How notorious have they been for
fleshly uncleannesses in all ages? And the reason is, because the Spirit of
grace accompanies the truth, but not error; an unclean spirit domineereth
where that is maintained.

Lastly note, Note.
that it stands every man in hand to take heed that he be not seduced, for
the case of such a man is far more dangerous, than of one that has
originally erred: for such are not lightly brought home by repentance, and they
are commonly most infest enemies to the truth, and therefore as a relapse into
a great sickness, so their case is most dangerous.

CHAP. III.
2 PETER Chapter 3. Verse 5. They are willingly ignorant of this, that the
Heavens were of old, and the earth set out of the water, and by the water, by
the Word of God. Verse. 6. Whereby the world that then was, being overwhelmed
with water, was destroyed. Verse. 7. But the heavens and the earth that now are,
are by the same word treasured up, being kept for the fire to the Day of
Judgment.


IN the History of the Creation it appears, Oecumen. in 2 Pet. 3.
how the Heavens and the Earth were set out of the waters: for God commanded
that a Firmament should be in the midst of the waters, that is, a more firm
existence of waters, and this he called Heaven: and when as the earth was
overwhelmed with waters, he likewise commanded the waters to gather together
that it might appear, and thus the earth was set out of the waters, the
material cause being hereby designed, and by the waters noting out the final;
and as the earth came out of the waters at Gods command, so likewise the
Heavens. For both are made out of the waters, the air called Heaven out of
their exhalation, and the earth out of their concretion. The earth therefore is
out of the water, because made out of it, and by the water, because hereby, as
by a kind of glue is as it were cemented and made to hang together, which
otherwise would dissolve and vanish into dust and air. And as the Heavens and
Earth had their beginning at the first from waters, so the force whereby under
God commanding, grows the concretion of the one, and the exhalation of the
other is fire. Wherefore, as from these two all things had their beginning, so
for sin they have been destroyed by water, and shall again be destroyed by
fire, as not only Christians teach, but also Hyraclitus Ephesius, and
Empedocles Etneus. The Heavens and the Earth, etc. that is, such things as are
useful for the sustentation of man's life, as Corn, Grass, Trees and Beasts,
etc. and not the substance of the Heavens and Earth. For man having grievously
sinned, the world is said to have been destroyed therefore by water, yet it
was not consumed: so having been replenished again, and both by Law and
Gospel men being dealt withal to walk in obedience to God, but yet few
profiting hereby, it is kept to be destroyed by fire; yet that as when a man
purges things in the fire to fine them, or builds his house anew by using
still the former materials, so when the Lord says, that he will make a new
Heaven and a new Earth, and that this world shall be burnt up with fire, it is
meant only that the vtensils hereof, which serve for a corporal life, shall be
consumed by fire, of which there shall be no further use: seeing we shall all
then be spiritual, and thus a new face of all things shall appear, in which
regard it is called a new Heaven and a new Earth, because those growing things
which would then be superfluous being taken away, whatsoever avails to the
adorning and beautifying of this world, and is needful to the incorruptible
life to come shall be added. That these outward things are corruptible and
subject to destruction, appears by their daily increasing and dying again.
The reason why the world made in an excellent manner at the first, has been
and shall be again destroyed, is the sin of man, whereby the creatures
become subject unto vanity: Whereby the world that then was, being overwhelmed
with water, perished. (...), that is, by which Heaven and Earth, for the
windows of Heaven were opened, and the fountains of the deep were broken up,
and so the world was drowned. Th. Aquinas in 2 Peter 3.
By the Heavens here is to be understood the air, for thus the Fowls are
called the Fowls of Heaven; they are said to have been of old, because they
were amongst the first of the creatures, and in another manner then now, that
is, calm and free from cold winds and tempests, and so was the earth more
plain and fertile, consisting out of the water, that is, by being discovered,
when at the Word of God the waters were gathered together, and by the water,
that is, as Beda has it, Beda.
because by the divine disposition it is all full of veins of water, even as a
man's body is full of blood, otherwise it could not stand but would be reduced
into dust, according to Philosophy, in regard of the great dryness thereof. Or
else the earth is said to be out of the waters, as the matter thereof, and by
the waters, because without water it could not be fruitful. By which, that is,
in which parts of air and earth the world that then was perished; that is, in
respect of the inhabitants, and the outward form of the air, which by reason
of the waters long occupying, the place thereof was made grosser, and the earth
more muddy, and the water thicker by reason of the long commixion of the earth
and water together. But the heavens and earth that now are, that is, not
differing in substance from that those were before, but in quality; are
reserved, that is, restored to their proper place and condition for the use of
the creatures. And the air is here still called the Heavens in the plural
number, in respect of the diverse Regions and Hemispheres thereof. These are to
be purged by fire.

This they are willingly ignorant of, that is, Luther in 2 Pet. 3.
though they cannot but know it, yet they wilfully shut their eyes against it:
for hereby they could not but learn the power of God supporting the world,
which would otherwise be overwhelmed with waters, and the justice of God
against sin destroying by water, plainly intimating another most fearful
destruction to come at the last day, seeing it is so plainly threatened as that
was. The Heaven and Earth that then were, stood out of the water and by the
water, that is, the Heaven out of the water, because it was made of water, and
the earth by the water, because it stands in the waters, by the Word and
command of God, or else it could not so do, but have long ago been drowned:
yet nevertheless, the world that then was perished, Verse. 6.
and so upon the sudden all things in Heaven and Earth shall perish by fire,
all being turned into a fiery flame and burnt to ashes, as then all things were
changed by the waters.

The exposition of this place is easy enough in all other things but only for
these words, the Heavens were of old, Mayer.
and the Earth set out of the waters and by the waters by the Word of God.
August. de Ciuit. Dei. l. 20. c. 18.
Many understand the participle (...) set out, as equally belonging to the
Heaven and the Earth, and so expound, out of the waters, and by the waters, of
them both, as you may see in the exposition of Oecumenius, Erasin. Beda.
and Luther; and Erasmus alleges Beda reading it thus, The Heavens were
constituted of old out of the water and by the water. But Thomas Aquinas
refers these words, Out of the water and by the water, only to the earth:
Beza.
and Beza making the distinction at these words, The Heavens were of old, and
then adding, and the Earth consisting out of the waters, etc. affirming, that
in the most ancient Copies consenting in one it is thus, and our new
Translation, That by the Word of God the Heauens-were of old, and then after a
point of distinction, and the Earth standing out of the waters, Piscator.
etc. Beza and Piscator, for by the waters, read in the waters, Gagneus.
as also 1 Pet. 3.20. Gagneus, a judicious, though a Popish writer, although he
be altogether against that reading of Erasmus, as being contrary to all Greek
Copies, yet he says, That the Greeks generally understood the matter out of
which the Heavens were made to be here intimated, and he says, that he verily
thinks nothing else to be meant hear, but that the Heavens and the Earth
were made of water; for (says he) if his drift touching the Heavens should be
only to teach that they were of old, Caietan.
who knows not that? Caietan says, That the Heavens and the Earth are said
to be out of the water, because these creatures which are of the air, and they
which live upon the earth also have their beginning from water: but this is
forced. I subscribe to Beza for the reading, as indeed none can deny it; but
with Gagneus and the Greeks I hold, that as the earth was set out of the
waters, and consists by the waters, because at the first no earth appeared,
but all was covered with water; but the waters being commanded to gather
together, the earth appeared, and it is by the waters as it were cemented and
conglutinated, as Oecumenius speaks, which is in short here expressed; so
because in the History of Genesis, to which this place has reference, the
making of the Heavens is so set forth as that we may easily gather how they are
out of the water and by the water, I cannot hold this to be also intimated
here. For the Firmament between the waters and the waters is called Heaven;
this was out of the waters, because before the division betwixt the waters
above and the waters beneath it appeared not; but after it came out betwixt
them both, and it is by the waters, because in the midst of them, by being as
much as in. So that when he says, The heavens were of old, it is to be
understood, constituted out of the teaters and by or in the waters; quod enim
subint elligitur non deest. Whereas it is objected by some, that though by the
Heaven the Air be understood, yet by Heavens in the plural number it is
never so taken. I answer, that it may well be set forth in the plural number
in respect of the diverse Regions, neither is there any word in the Hebrew
signifying Heaven, but in the plural number.

Touching the drift of the Apostle here thus mentioning the first original of
the Heavens and the Earth, it is very aptly and pertinently done; for as by the
power of God, and according to his Word, the Heavens and the Earth were made at
the first, and wonderfully separated from the waters, being no less
miraculously preserved in that estate, so by waters all things were drowned
again, and once more by the same divine appointment shall all things be
destroyed by fire: for he that by his Word has done these things already, how
shall it be doubted, but having said it, he will burn up the world with fire
also?

Touching the next words, verse. 6. whereby, Verse. 6.
Beza reads it wherefore; Luther, nevertheless; Piscator follows Beza. But
(...) does properly signify whereby, or by which things, and that exposition
pleases me best which refers it to the Heavens and the Earth, because from
Heaven above, and from the earth beneath the waters flowed, and the world of
creatures, both terrestrial and aeriall, were drowned and perished, even all
that were out of the Arc. For by the world cannot be meant the substance of
the Earth and Air; seeing this remained still, and so it shall after the next
and last destruction by fire, as Oecumenius has well set it forth, but read
more of this, Romans 8.19. For the words used are reserved for fire, being
treasured up by the same word. Verse. 7. Tho. Aquin.
Thomas Aquinas will have them meant of the restitution of all things to their
form again after that drowning by water till that they shall again be
destroyed by fire: Th. Aquinas.
but others understand them, as wicked men are said to treasure up unto
themselves wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2.4.
subjected unto Gods power until this time of burning shall come, which is the
most probable. Touching that fire destroying the wicked, mention is made in
some other places also, as 2 These. 1.7, 8. Psalm. 50.3. Psalm. 96.3. but there is
a question amongst Expositors, whether it shall be at the time of the
judgment, before or after. If at the judgment time, it should seem to be an
hinderance to the proceedings; if before, then the godly shall be yet mixed
together with the wicked, and feel the pain of burning, which is improbable;
and after it is not likely, because the wicked are immediately sent into hell
fire. Yet some of great note hold that it shall be after, August. Prosper.
Anselm.
as August. lib. 20. de Ciuit. c. 16. Prosper in dimid. temp. c. 19, 20. and
Ansel. in elucidat. etc. but the words imply, that it shall be before, reserved
to the fire unto the day of judgment, and 1 Cor. 3.11. it is set forth as the
case of every one, that he must pass through the fire, and 2 These. 1.7. the
Lord is said to come in flaming fire, so that the beginning of the judgment is
by fire; hereby the wicked shall be first destroyed, that is, burnt and
tormented: but he that could cause a flame of fire to be in the bush without
burning it, can and will provide that the godly, though in the midst of the
fire, shall feel no burning, for they shall at that instant be changed,
becoming of natural spiritual, so that a material fire shall not affect
them at all. Then there being in all likelihood some cessation of this burning,
the judgment shall succeed, after which the wicked shall go into everlasting
flames, and therefore, though they be said to be destroyed, yet they are not so
destroyed, but they remain still to endure further torment. Martin. Polon. in
Chron.
Martinus Polonus says, that the teaching of this burning of the world by
fire, was the cause that Nero so hotly persecuted the Christians, commanding
them to be burnt in the fire; and Paul the teacher of this, as guilty of
treason, by the Roman Laws, Minutius in Octauio.
to be beheaded. Minutius says, that this was commonly objected by the
Gentiles against the Christians, that they threatened burning and destruction to
the whole world. Aug. de Ciuit. Lact. l. 7. c. 18.
And yet many of themselves have written of this burning, as Augustine and
Lactantius show.

Note, Note.
that the destroying of the world by fire is no such strange thing, but that
they that do not willingly wink with their eyes may see, that as strange an
act has been already done in drowning the world; yea, in the very Creation
Gods power did appear to be so great, as that there is nothing but by his word
shall be brought to pass. And therefore let not us doubt, but assuredly expect
that horrible destruction threatened in his word by fire against all ungodly
persons.

Note again, that it is a sign of a wicked man, Note.
that is almost come to the state of a scorner, that he cares not for knowing
that which makes against him, that he may be reformed herein.

CHAP. 3. VER. 8. But I would not have this one thing hidden from you, that one
day is with the Lord as 1000. years, and 1000. years as one day. Verse. 9. not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, etc.

Here are sundry doubts, Mayer.
but yet Expositors are very brief upon all this passage unto verse 14. First,
in what sense one day is said to be with the Lord as 1000. years, and so on
the contrary side. Secondly, how he is said not to be willing that any should
perish, when as he destroys most men in hell fire, and of old did pass them
by to this end, for the glory of his justice. Thirdly, what heavens shall pass
away, and how at the last day, and whether the earth shall be consumed?
Fourthly, what new heavens and earth shall be, and for what use, because he
says, We expect a new heaven, and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness. To the first, I find that most of the Fathers anciently held,
that one day is said to be as 1000. years, and reciprocally 1000. years as
one day, because as in six days the world was in making, so it shall stand
6000. years. Ierom says, that both in the Psalm. 90.2. from whence this is
taken, and in this of Peter, Hieron. Epist 139. ad Cyprian. Ego arbitror ex
that therefore 1000. years are said to be as one day, because the world shall
endure so many thousand years as it was days in making, hoc Psalm. and ex
Epist. quae nomine Petri inscribitur 1000. annos, pro vna de solites appellari,
vtse. quia mundus in 6. diebus fabricatus 6000. tantu^ annorum ^redatur
subsistere, and postea venire septenarium numerum, and octonarium, in quo verus
exercetur Sabbatismus, and circumcisionis puritas redditur.
and afterward comes the number of seven and eight, wherein the true
Sabbath is exercised, and the purity of circumcision restored.

Justin. Martyr. lib. qu. ad gentes qu. 17. Ex plerisque Scripturae verbis
intelligere licet, verum pronunciare eos, qui 6000. annorum esse tempus nunc ab
orb condito tradunt.
Justin Martyr says, we may by many places of Scripture gather, that they say
truly, who deliver, that the time from the beginning of the world is 6000.
years.

Jren. lib. 5. aduers. haeres. cap. vlt. Lact. lib. 7. institut. cap 7.
Ireneus also says the same, and Lactantius (writing to the Philosopher)
speaks largely of it; and Hilary Can. 17. in Matthew. and Germanus Episcopus
Constantinopolitanus de Theoria ecclesiast. rerum. And as Christian Fathers, so
Heathen Writers have delivered the same, as Lactantius shows, both Hydaspes,
Mercurius, Tresmegistus, and the Sybills. And amongst the Hebrews there is a
most ancient tradition of Elias the Prophet, Talmud. ordine 4. Tract. 4. cui
titulus est sanedrin.
which is in their Talmud, in these words: The world shall be 6000. years, and
then it shall be destroyed, 2000. of inanity, 2000. of the Law, and 2000. of
the Messiah. But Ambrose oppugneth this opinion, because even in his time he
says, that 6000. years were expired: but he was deceived in the account by
following the Greeks, Ambros. lib. 7. in L^c.
as almost all Ecclesiastical Writers then did, and yet he did not follow the
Septuagints exactly: for by their account Christ was borne anno Mundi 5099. so
that in his time, living anno Domini 400. there remained yet 500. years to
come, according to the former reckoning. Lactantius also, who was for the 6000.
years before spoken of, was plainly hereby deceived, for he held that there
were not above 200. years from his time to the end of the world. For,
according to the Hebrew account, which is the truest, Christ was borne anno
Mundi 3962. so that, if the world shall be determined at the end of 6000.
years, 382. years are yet to come. But I find that most Expositors now a
days (both Protestant and Popish) do censure that opinion of 6000. years;
Aug. de Ciuit. lib. 20. cap. 7.
and Augustine also, though sometime he seems to speak for it, as where
about the 1000. years of Satan's being bound, he says, Mill anni duobus modis
intelligi possunt, aut qua in vltimis annis 1000. ista res agitur, i. sexto
annorum trillenario, tanquam sexta die, secutoro dein Sabbato, quod non habet
vesperam: aut 1000. annos pro omnibus huins saeculi annis pusuit. August, in
Psalm. 90. Nec attenderunt, quod dictum est, tanquam dies vnus, qui praeterijt,
non enim quando hoc dictum est, soli 1000. anni praeterieraut, and quod eos
debuit maxim admonere illud est, aut vigilia in nocte, neque enim fient de 6.
diebus aliquid very simile videntur opinari, propter 6. dies primos, quibus
Deus perfecit opera sua, sic etiam 6. vigilias, i. horas 18. possuntilli
opinationi coaptare.
this 1000. seems to me to be the last of the 6000. answering to the 6.
days, after which a Sabbath shall follow, that shall never have end. Yet upon
Psalm. 90. where he speaks of it purposely, he says. Some men presuming
upon the knowledge of times, have defined, that this world shall have an end in
6000. years, as it was made in 6. days, when as Christ said to his Disciples,
it is not for you to know the times and seasons. There is no ground here for
this opinion, for the comparison is not betwixt 6. days, and 6000. years, but
between a day that is past and 1000. years, yea, between a watch in the night
and 1000. years, unto which this conceit can no way be fitted.

It is a thing generally agreed upon by all, that these words of Peter seem to
prove that it is not such a long time before the day of Judgment, since it was
spoken of under the Gospel, as being at the doors: for though according to
man's account it be long, thus many hundred years being already past, yet
according to God it is a very short time, with whom 1000 years are but as one
day. I would not rashly affirm any thing in a matter so doubtful, but yet it
seems probable, especially considering the times computed in the Revelation,
that about the expiration of 6000. years from the Creation, the world shall
have an end.

voluntas signi, or voluntas bene-placiti, the one revealed, the other secret;
and by the first he would have all men come to repentance and be saved, not by
the second. But so there should be a contrariety betwixt the will of God
revealed and secret, which I think ought not to be admitted. There is therefore
another distinction, God is said to will any thing, Anthropopathos, after the
manner of men, as he is said to repent, to be grieved, or to be angry, because
he does as man is wont to do, when he repents, etc. so he is said to will
the salvation of all, because he affords unto them the means of salvation,
and does earnestly inuit them to repent and believe, that they may be saved,
and in this his willing he is serious and not deluding, though in the end he
damneth many, even as the Mariner seriously desires the saving of the goods in
his ship, and yet upon extremity casts them out into the Sea: and this his
willing is not vain but effectual, because by the setting forth thus of his
grace, such as are appointed unto life are converted and saved, the loving
kindness of the Lord moving them to repentance.

Ambros. Compsae Episc. in 2 Pet. cap. 3.
as that the very starry heavens shall be dissolved, and not the acrean heaven
only, because after mention made of the heavens, he speaks of the Elements,
that is, the air, etc. whereby it appears certainly, that the heavens here
are one thing, and the air another. Neither can the words which are used here,
and verse 10. and in sundry other places, without forcing be otherwise
expounded, as Heb. 1.11. Psalm. 90. Revel. 21. Esa. 65. and 51. The heavens
shall pass away as smoke, and Matthew. 5. Heaven and earth shall pass away.
And touching the earth likewise they hold, that it shall be burnt up and then
formed anew, as after these heavens dissolved there shall be a new heaven, and
because in vain there should be a new earth if there were none to inhabit it,
they hold that this new earth shall be inhabited by Infants dying before
Baptism, who have neither done any thing worthy of hell, nor received the
Faith of Christ that they might attain Heaven. Hitherto Ambros. Comps. who
says, that many were of the same mind, but yet acknowledges that there is
need of a revelation to know this, and that it is but a pious conjecture. But
Clement brings in this our Apostle Peter disputing with Simon Magus, Clem.
Recognit. 3.
and speaking almost to the same effect.

Simon. Tell me if this Heaven shall be dissolved as thou teach, why was it
made at the first?


Peter. It was made for this present life of men, that there might be a
distinction, lest men unworthy should see the Throne of God, which is to be
seen only by those that are pure in heart.


Simon. But if God be good, and the Heavens which he has made are good, how
shall it come to pass that a good God will dissolve them? but if he
dissolueth them as evil, how shall he seem to be good, who has made evil?


Peter. If the Heavens had been made for themselves, but not for another use,
it were true indeed that thou say; but they were made to hide from the sight
of mortal men the Throne of God, which yet must necessarily one day appear,
and then they must be dissolved for this end; as the shell of an Egg, though
it be curiously made, yet must be broken, that the form of the Chicken
within, for which it was made, might appear, and the Chicken come forth.


Hill. cant. 4. in Mat. and Enar. Psalm. 122. Coelum hoc quod visui nostro
subiacet, quod tanquam fumum solidatum firmamenti and naturam and nomen
accepit, praeteribit and non erit, seeds autem domini, coelum sc. in quo Deus
habitat, manet in aeternum.
Hilary also says, This Heaven which we see with our eyes, as a solid fume,
obtaining therefore the name and nature of a Firmament, shall pass away and be
no more; but the Seat of the Lord, that is, the Heaven in which God dwells,
remains for ever.

Of this opinion also Hieron. lib. 14. in Esa.
Jerome speaks, affirming that it was followed by many, and proved by this
place of Peter, and where by Paul it is said, 2. Cor. 4.18.
That those things that are seeue, are temporal; but those that are not seen,
eternal; He also says, that it was the opinion of some Philosophers. And
Eusebius. praeparat. Euang. li. 15. Aug. de Ciuit lib. 20. cap 24.
Eusebius, that it was the Doctrine of the Stoics, amongst whom the most
ancient Zeno, Cleanthes, and Chrysippus held, that all visible things, after a
long circuit of time, should be resolved into fire.

What others hold we may see in the Text before going; for Augustine, as
Oecumenius holds, that by the Heavens and Earth are meant only this
inferior world, consisting of the Earth and the Air, which were once before
destroyed by the Flood: and what others follow, either opinion I have declared
at large upon Romans 8.19. where I have showed, If the Heavens and the Earth
shall be destroyed, yet it shall not be to their abolition, but that they may
be restored to more splendour and glory, according to that passage, Romans 8.19
and seeing it is hereabout agreed amongst those that follow this opinion, there
needs to be no great difference about the particulars that shall be
destroyed, whether the starry or the aerean Heavens, or both. But upon further
consideration, I do now rather incline to the opinion of those, that hold that
this Earth and all the Heavens which we see shall be quite consumed; for they
shall be changed as a vesture which is not to be renewed unto better, but to be
utterly destroyed; neither if they should remain, can it be conceived to what
use, when there shall be no inhabitants. And so I come to the fourth doubt. To
what end these new Heavens and Earth shall serve when there shall be no
inhabitants remaining; for men which are good shall go into Heaven, the wicked
into Hell, the creatures shall be consumed with the fire? Verse. 13. It is said,
We look for a new Heaven and a new Earth wherein dwells righteousness, Beza.
that is, as Beza has it, either which are the habitation of the just, or an
immunity from injustice and iniquity, whereas the Heavens and the Earth that
now are, are stained with all manner of sin: or lastly, (...) may have
reference to us, in whom the righteousness of Christ dwells by Faith. This
last is too much strained, but the first is most genuine, the Author of all
holiness and righteousness dwells there, and none with him but his Saints
and holy Angels. These and all such shall dwell in this new Earth and Heavens,
and because he speaks of them in the present tense, wherein dwells
righteousness, and it is certain that the new heaven, the abode of God, and
of his Angels is now, it is probable, that the new earth is now also, but as
the one, so the other lies hid from our eyes, until the time shall come, when
these visible heavens and earth being done away they shall appear, being
rightly called a new heaven, and a new earth, because never appearing before.
Luther in 2 Pet. 3. Coelum and terra in vnum Paradisum cessura sunt, in qua
Deus habitabit and electicum eo. Aug. de Ciuit. lib. 20. cap. 16. Illa
conflagratione mundana elementorum corruptibilium qualitates, quae
corruptibilibus congruebant, ardendo penitus inter ibunt. Atque ipsa substantia
eas qualitates habebit, quae corporibus immortalibus mirabili mutatione
convenient, vt sc. mundus in melius innouatus apt accomodetur hominibus etiam
carne in melius in innouatis.
And if the heavens and the earth to come be such, elevated far above all
these heavens, which we see, it may easily be conceived, to what use the new
earth shall be, viz. together with the new heavens for the habitation of the
Saints, the one not being remote, but contiguous to the other, as shall be
useful for the incorruptible life to come, as Oecumenius has partly touched
before. And Augustine more fully says, By that burning of the world, the
qualities of the corruptible elements, which did agree with our corruptible
bodies, shall be quite consumed by burning, and the substance it self shall
have such qualities which shall agree with immortal bodies by a wonderful
change, that the world being renewed unto better, may fitly agree unto men being
renewed unto better in their bodies.

In these words that learned Father acknowledges such a condition of the earth
to come, as shall agree to immortal and incorruptible bodies, though he
seems to hold that this same earth shall be the new earth when it is thus
altered and changed, and therefore that the Saints shall have it for their
habitation. But because it is said, 1 These. 4.
that we shall be taken up and ever remain with the Lord, and the habitation
of the Saints is above, I think that this earth shall not be their habitation,
but rather a new Heaven and a new Earth above, which coming in stead of this
Earth and Heaven which we now see, Romans 8.
the whole creation is said to be restored to the glorious liberty of the
sons of God, because in the whole world that then shall be, there shall be no
generation and corruption, no vanity as now.

That conceit of those, that hold that Infants dying without Baptism shall
inhabit here, I leave to the Authors of it; the Pelagians, as Augustine
shows, Aug. de haer. c. 88. Ambros. de statu puer orum sine baptis. mort.
near unto which is that of Ambrose holding, that they shall enjoy an earthly
Paradise, followed by Catharinus, Albertus, and Pighius. For this is a mere
humane invention, without any ground in the Word of God, because they could not
conceive how otherwise this Earth should be inhabited.

Note hence, Note.
that it is never a whit the more improbable that the Lord will come to
judgment, because it has been so long a time since it has been spoken of,
as being at hand, and yet is not come, for 1000. years are but as a day, yea,
as a watch in the night, all this delay therefore is but as it were of a day or
two, and so that time is nevertheless to be expected to the terror of wicked
men that contemn it, and tremble not at the hearing of it.

Note again, that though the Lord damneth many to hell, Note.
yet he is not willing so to do, his desire is rather, that all should repent
and be saved, as he declares by sending the means amongst them.

Note lastly, Note.
how vain all these things are which we see, the time shall come when they
shall be made but fuel for the fire, and therefore let us not set our hearts
upon them, but be lifted up in our desires to those things above, and be just
and righteous in all our dealings, for so much as nothing but righteousness
shall inhabit there.

CHAP. 3. VERSE. 15. And count the long suffering of our Lord salvation, as our
beloved brother Paul has written unto you, as also in all his Epistles,
speaking in them of these things, wherein, or amongst which, some things are
hard to be understood, etc.

There is nothing betwixt this Text and that before going, M^y^r.
but an exhortation; Study to be found unspotted and unblameable before him in
peace: Verse. 14. Tho. Aquinas. Lyran.
the first of which some refer to outward pollutions of the body, the second
to the inward defilements of the mind: but I subscribe rather to those that
hold them to be synonima; two words used to express one and the same thing, a
freedom from all inquination of sin and unrighteousness, seeing the
righteous only shall inhabit the new Heaven and Earth. Th. Aquinas.
In peace, that is, having peace with God, he being reconciled unto you upon
your true conversion, so as that when this terrible time shall come, ye may
with comfort look up unto him, Romans 5.1. or else it may be understood of a
peaceable and quiet life, without taking part with those that contentiously
oppose the truth of Gods Word, as the scoffers before spoken of; for the true
Christian prefers peace and unity, and without any opposition does quietly
rest in the received doctrine of the Christian Religion, not having any hand in
making strife and brangles hereabout. Or lastly, a respect may here be had to
the time of the Lords coming, which should be full of tumult and trouble, the
wicked then running hither and thither, and being at their wits end, by reason
of that terrible burning, but such as lead an holy and blameless life shall
stand as in a time of peace without such terror, having a mind within them
resolved of Gods love and favor, and so that all the appearing terrors shall
turn to their comfort. According to all these acceptions I think is the right
understanding of the place.

Touching verse. 15. The long suffering of the Lord, is called salvation,
because it is a means of salvation, when by being yet spared from judgment
the sins is moved in this time to repentance, and so the more are saved; who
otherwise, if the world had been sooner destroyed, must needs have perished.
As our dear brother Paul has written to you. Here are three questions moved:
First, whether Peter does allege Paul to confirm his doctrine, or wherefore?
Secondly, what Epistle of Paul is meant? Thirdly, in what part of his Epistle
to them, Paul speaks to the same effect with Peter here? To the first
Occumenius answers, Oecumen.
that Peter being the chief of the Apostles, does allege Paul here in
humility, not that he needed the approbation of his consent. And indeed, both
great humility and love appears in this one passage, Paul having charged
Peter so much in some part of his writing with doing amiss, and being worthy
to be blamed, Gal. 2 11.
yet Peter not stomaking this gives him his due, that he was a man of great
wisdom. And indeed, as some rightly note, Tho. Aquin.
that Peter alleges Paul to confirm that which he had written, because being
called extraordinarily, there might be some question of his Apostleship; and
again, the truth being confirmed by more witnesses, has the more force in the
hearers. Luther.
Some doubt has been made, as Luther notes, in regard of this citing of
Paul, whether this Epistle be Peter's or no, but as he well concludes, there
is no reason to doubt of it, being so long ago without contradiction received
into the Canon, there being also so good reason of alleging Paul. To the
second, some hold that no particular Epistle is meant unto the Jews, Occumen.
Beda. Th. Glos. Ordin.
but his Epistles in general, in any of which, what is written of the last
Judgment and the state to come, is written to all Christian people. But
because his other Epistles are spoken of in the next verse, it seems plain
to me that the Epistle to the Hebrews in particular is meant, for Peter in
writing here to all the faithful includes also the Hebrews that believed,
intending their consolation and instruction, as being chiefly of his cure; for
the ministry of the Circumcision was committed to him, and therefore he
speaks here unto them as the chief, Beza.
pointing at the Epistle by Paul written to them, as Beza has also noted. And
so to the third, whereas Oecumenius and some others will have that place, Romans
2.4. meant here. I think rather with Beza, that Heb. 10.24. etc. is the place
here intended.

As also in all his Epistles, Verse. 16.
speaking of these things, in which things some are hard to be understood, etc.
Here also are diverse questions:

Paul speaks in all his Epistles. To this it is easily answered, that he
speaks of the judgment to come, and of Gods long suffering and the use to be
made hereof to be won to repentance, and a study of holiness: for the places
are easy to be found, wherein he speaks of all these things.

wherein, has reference whether to the Epistles, or to these things. Robertus
Stephanus says, that there are three copies, wherein it is (...), which if it
be so, the Epistles are plainly meant, and Beza approves of this, because if
the argument in hand be meant, Peter has spoken more mystically hereof then
Paul ever did. But the copies generally received, have (...), and therefore
without altering the word, I think that both Epistles and the contents of them
are meant, as also Beza first expounds it.

Paul write in such manner that he is hard to be understood, Th. Anglic.
and not rather plainly? Some think, that this was done because he would not
have the Heretics to understand his writings, but for such as were rightly
affected, he sent some Disciple or other to expound all things unto them, as
appears in some of his Epistles, where mention is made of them by whom they
were sent. Irenaeus li. 3. c. 7. Hieron. Epist. 50. Nissen. Tractat. in 1 Cor.
15. Chrysostom. Hom. 9. in 1 Cor.
Some say, that the profundity of the matters by him handled, is the cause why
they are so hard to be understood, and because through celerity of speech he
uses many Hyperbatons. Some, because he could not expound in the Greek
tongue, which he did not so well understand, such profound matters, and
therefore he uses certain peculiar idotismes and phrases of speech. But that
one reason yielded by our Savior Christ of his speaking darkly and by
Parables, seems to me to be a reason sufficient of all the obscure passages
both in Saint Paul's writings, Mat. 13.12.
and in the rest of the holy Scriptures, viz. that the wicked in hearing might
not understand this obscurity, being as a spiritual judgment against them to
their damnation, as is also intimated in this place, and that even hereby we
might be moved to crave the assistance of Gods holy Spirit, and the more
willingly resign our selves to be guided thereby in a spiritual and holy
life, which is the way to understand these mysteries. Other reasons may be
yielded, but this is the principal, and therefore I rest herein.

Paeul teaches justification by Faith without the works of the Law, to
understand this, as if no regard were to be had unto good works, when he
teaches election to be of Gods mere grace and mercy, to understand it so as
to cast away all care of being such as may have the comfort of election, and
when Christ affirms unto Peter, Upon this rock will I build my Church, etc.
to understand it as a ground of the Popes infallibity of judgments, so as that
whether he be good or bad, learned or unlearned, his dictates shall be
accounted as God Oracles; these, I say, and the like mis-vnderstandings for
their dangerous consequences are wrestings of the Scriptures unto damnation, in
stead of milk sucked blood being thus pressed herefrom, which nourishes not,
but destroys the soul.

places of the Scriptures, Keuel. 1.3.
no such infere^ce ought to be made, but rather the people are to be exhorted
in reading not to follow their own sense, and not once to incline to any
exposition contrary to faith and good manners, and therefore to read that
whereby they may understand the true faith and moral Laws, never grounding
any Tenent upon an obscure place, unless it be also plainly taught in some
other place of holy Scripture, which is the only approved way of interpreting
Scripture, as I have showed, 2 Pet. 1.19. That anciently all were exhorted to
read the Scriptures, I have showed upon Luke 16.19.

Note hence, Note.
that unity of Doctrine was amongst the Apostles, and it was the joy of one to
follow another in teaching the same things, holding, that by their vnanim
consent, the truth taught by them was the more confirmed, which makes against
those that love to be singular in their teaching, they take the very way to
Schisms and divisions.

Note again, Note.
that the Scriptures are not so easy, but that there is need of study and
help of learning to understand them rightly, and yet such as belong to God
shall understand them, how hard soever they be: according to that, Mat. 13.12.

Note lastly, Note.
that to be ignorant and ungrounded in Religion, is the cause of wresting the
Word of God to a man's own destruction, which was appointed for his salvation.
So that it stands every one in hand to get knowledge and to be steadfastly
resolved, and to take great heed in what sense he takes the Word of God in
any part thereof, seeing that if this sense prove a wresting of it, it tends
to damnation.

THE FIRST CATHOLIC EPISTLE OF THE Apostle JOHN.
THat this is the Epistle of John the Apostle it was never doubted by any. Aug.
tract. 7. in 1 Johan. Canonica est ista epistola, per omnes gentes recitatur,
erbis terrae autoritate retineturorbem terrarum ipsa aedificauit.
Saint Augustine has left this famous testimony of it. This Epistle is
canonical, it is recited amongst all nations, it is held canonical by the
authority of the whole world, and it has edified the whole world. But of the
other two Epistles there has been some doubt. Hieron. de Scrip. Eccles. in
Johan.
For as Jerome says, there was another John besides the Apostle, called by the
name of the Elder; Eus. l. 3. c. 25. Historiae. Cyprian. lib. 2. sentent.
Council. Carthag. c. 81. Tert. depraesae. 33 Dyonis. de Eccles. hyrarch. c. 3.
Hieron. Epist. 85. Epiphan. haer. 51.
and Eusebius cites Papias for two John's, saying, that Origin doubted of the
two latter Epistles. But that these two have been received for canonical
Scripture, and the Apostles writings appears by Cyprian who alleges the
second, and so does Tertullian and Ireneus. And Dionysius cites both second
and third, and so does Jerome. And Epiphanius makes mention of the Epistles of
John the Apostle, and not of one Epistle only, which he says, as John's
Gospel and the Revelation were imparted to us by the same gift of the holy
Ghost. Ambros in Ps. 30. Cum refugeret Apostolum se scribere, seniorem se
scripsi se. Beda comment. Sed nunc genesis Ecclesiae consensus habet, quod has
quoque Johannes Apost. scripsit.
Ambrose says, that John being now an old man wrote the Gospel and Epistles,
and therefore he wrote not himself Apostle, but the Elder. Dydimus wrote upon
John's three Epistles, and Beda having examined this doubt concludes, but now
the general consent of the Church is, that John wrote these Epistles also. And
therefore howsoever it has been formerly doubted, yet now there ought to be
no further question made hereabout, especially the phrases used in the other
two Epistles, being the same with these in the first; plainly declaring the
same Author, as will appear if we compare. 1 Ioh. 2.7. and 2 Ioh. 4. 1 Ioh.
2.23. and 2 Ioh. 5.9. 1 Ioh. 3.9. 3 Ioh. 11. 1 Ioh. 4.2, 3. 2 Ioh. 7. 1 Ioh.
5.2. 2 Ioh. 5.

Touching the time when this Epistle or the rest were written, I find no
certainty, Baron. tom. 1.
but that some hold it to have been written last of all, even after Iudes; and
some, according to the order in which it is placed. Lyra.
It is certain, that John lived longest of the Apostles to a very old age, and
therefore in those Epistles wherein he gives himself a title, he writes
himself The Elder, 1 Pet. 5.1.
not Apostle; as also Peter calls himself an Elder together with the Elders,
happily using this inscription, that his writings might have the more force,
coming from him now after so long a time of experience, he being the only
ancient living that had followed the Lord as an Apostle.

Touching those to whom this Epistle is written, here are none named, neither
does the Author name himself. But Augustine cites it as written to the
Parthians, August. 2. quest. Euang. cap. 39. Idac. de Trinit. pos. de indiculo
librorum. Aug.
and so does Idacius and Possidius. Higinus Papa also, Epist. 1. and John 2.
Epist. 1. ad Valor. cite it as written to the Parthians. If ever it were so
directed, those words are now lost; and indeed it is not likely, but that it
was directed after the manner of all Epistles, to some people, and most
probably to the Parthians, as Baronius contendeth (affirming, Baron. Tom. 1.
Annal.
that this title perished in the continuance of time) for John preached amongst
the Parthians. In that he names not himself herein, he does but as Paul to
the Hebrews, that his Epistle might the rather pass, he being then in
banishment in Pathmos, and it being not likely that any thing written from him
would have been suffered, if it had carried his name.

For the scope of this Epistle, it is to confirm the Divinity of Christ
against Ebion and Corinthus, and his humanity against Basilides; and to
instruct in the true love that ought to be in Christian people, even to the
suffering of death for Christ his sake, contrary to another error of Basilides,
Epiphan. Haer. 24
who held that Martyrdom was not to be undergone for Christ.

CHAP. I.
IN the first Chapter he begins with a periphrasis of Christ, much like to
that which he speaks of him in his Gospel, wherein he sets forth his
Divinity, in calling him The Word of Life, which was from the beginning; and
his humanity, in saying, which we have seen and handled, etc. verse. 1, 2, 3.
This Christ he shows, that he declared unto them for their spiritual joy and
comfort, to be attained hereby through the communion with God the Father,
which the true Christian has by him, verse. 3, 4. But lest they should be
mistaken about this Communion, he teaches that God is light, that is,
righteousness and holiness, and therefore he that walks in the light of a
godly life only has communion with him, and not he that walks in the
darkness of sin, verse. 5, 6, 7. Neither is it a thing indifferent whether we
have communion with him or no: for the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses such from
all sin. And lest when we endeavor to be holy, we should deprive our selves
of so great a benefit of Christ's blood through conceitednesse, by imagining,
that now we live not in gross sins, as others do, we are altogether free
from sin; he preuenteth this, by showing that so we should deceive our
selves, etc. verse. 8, 9, 10.

1 JOHN Chapter 1. Verse 1. That which was from the beginning, which we have
heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have beheld, and which our
hands have handled of the Word of Life, etc.


THe Jews and Greeks both did tax the Mystery of the Gospel as a nouelty,
Oecumen. in 1 Ioh. 1.
and therefore to approve the antiquity thereof, he begins with these words,
That which was from the beginning, that is, either before the Law, or before
the creation of all things, for Heavens and Earth and all were in the
beginning, the word Christ before the beginning. So that the word was does not
set forth a temporary existence, but the substance, foundation, and beginning
of all things that have a being, without which nothing can exist, as is further
declared in the Gospel of John. Which we have heard, that is, by the Law and
Prophets being spoken of before. Which we have seen and beheld, that is, when
Christ lived here in the flesh we saw him, and in seeing, admired him for those
admirable things that were in him. But he does not mean, that they saw that
which was from the beginning, for that is invisible, but his taking flesh,
Which we have handled, hereby either it is meant, that he was so familiarly
made known unto them, as that he was made as it were palpable, or else he
points at that handling of him by Thomas, who was bidden to put his hand to
his hands and side, and feel the print of the nails and spear, and not to be
incredulous but believing. After these things thus set forth, he makes a
reddition hereof again, verse. ^. not so plainly as we would do, but more
obscurely, to make us the more attentive, lest perceiving the matter at the
first looking into it, with ease we should become negligent; and divine
Mysteries being made manifest to profane ears should thus come to be abused,
as pearls being cast before swine.

This one Author has so well expounded all things here, Mayer.
as that I shall not need to add others, there being little difference in any
from this Exposition. Only because the sense is imperfect without some supply:
It is to be understood, that the Syriake reads it thus, Syrus interp. Lyra.
Vatabl.
We preach unto you that which was from the beginning. And Lyra, and Vatablus
understand, We declare unto you. But this supply comes in well enough, v. 3.
after that which we have seen and heard repeated again, because of the
Parenthesis coming between, That which he says was from the beginning, is
that word of life, which he declares here to be eternal, which was, is, and
shall be, for to be eternal includes all times. That which we have seen,
heard, looked upon, and handled, Faber Stapul. de hoc auditu, hoc visu, his
oculis, hoc tactu his mauib^s nequaqua^ haec incolligenda putem, sed potius de
spiritualibus, sic spiritu in^^s, qui eum receperunt, mentes eleuante ad
arcanorum diuinorum auditum, contuitum and contactum, quibus supra omnem sensum
agnouerunt, quod a principio erat verbum, etc. Pluris est onus oculatus testis,
quam auriti december. Lyra. Beda. Clem. Alexand.
some will not have by any means to be expounded of hearing, seeing or
handling with the bodily ears, eyes, and hands, but with the spiritual, the
Spirit of God lifting up those that heard and saw Christ to the hearing,
beholding, and teaching of divine secrets, so that above all sense they knew
and acknowledged that the word was from the beginning.

Of this Exposition also Oecum. makes mention, but I prefer the other,
seeing what is spoken here tends not so much to the declaring of what S.
John, and the rest of the Apostles saw spiritually, as corporally for the
confirming of others, seeing one eyewitness is more than ten that go by
hearsay. And this being bodily present with Christ, is used elsewhere as an
argument to prove that which is taught of him unto others, as Acts 4.20. John
3.11. John 15.27. Acts 1.21. chap. 10.40. 2 Pet. 1.16. Luke 1.2. That which he
says he heard and saw with others, some refer only to those things that
were done after Christ's resurrection, as Didymus shows, but there is no
reason of this restraint. Besides the hearing of Christ by the Prophets, they
heard of him also by John the Baptist, says Lyra, but chiefly the hearing of
himself is meant here according to Beda, and others. The word (...) added unto
this we have seen, signifies a more intent and diligent looking into a thing
to be able to judge the better of it, being duly considered. Which we have
handled. This with Oecumenius some think was done by Thomas only, who before
believed not his resurrection. Ambros. lib. 5. in Luc. Hieron. epist. de error.
Johan. Hierosolym. Athan. orat. contra Arrian. Ignat. epist. 10. Eusebius. Hist.
l. 3. c. 36. Theodoret. dial. 2, etc. Acts 2.
But many more hold, that all the Disciples did likewise feel him with their
hands, because they thought him to be a spirit, for to manifest that he was
not, the Lord called for something to eat, which needed not to have been
done, had they believed before. And this saying will indeed best agree with
that handling and feeling of the side and hands of Christ being thus
understood. Of the word of life is no more, but as if he had said, the word of
life, as when it is said I will power out of my Spirit, it is but as much as, I
will power out my spirit.

And the life was made manifest, Verse. 2.
etc. These words come in by a Parenthesis, being added to show how they came
to see and handle the word, viz. because lying hid before, now he appeared in
the flesh. As for the rest of the Chapter it is easy to be understood,
especially by the help of the Analysis before going. The eternal life, which
he declares is Christ, who must needs therefore be God. Verse. 3. That ye
might have fellowship with, that is, ye, which have not seen by knowing and
believing these things by our publishing of them, might enjoy together with us
the benefit hereof, that we altogether might enjoy God. Verse. 4. That your joy
may be full. Lorinus reads it, that our joy may be full; affirming it to be
so in the Greek Copy, but our Greek Copies have it, that your joy, etc. Full
joy is opposed here to the vain and empty joys in wordly things, from which
he seeks to draw their minds, that they might partake of the true joy. The
same phrase of speech is used by Christ unto his Disciples, John 15. John 16.
and 17. Verse. 5. God is light, that is, essentially, he is a pure act, and
perfect without any imperfection. Verse. 6. To walk in darkness, is to abide
in ignorance and sin. Verse. 7. We have fellowship one with another, that is,
with God the Father and Son, Faber. Caietan. Catharin. Lyra. Gloss. inter ^^n.
as it is best expounded by some, though others expound one with another, of
the faithful with the faithful, for the speech is of communion with God,
whereupon he concludes here. Verse. 9. God is faithful to forgive, this is
thus spoken, because God has appointed us in acknowledgement of our sins to
ask forgiveness, which he cannot do being faithful, unless he forgive
them upon our confession of them, as Cyprian well speaks, Cypr. de orat. dom.
Qu^orare nos pro debitis and peccatis monuit, paternam misericordiam pro misit,
and veniam secuturam. Suarez. Tom. 4. in 3. p. disp. 11. sect. 1. concl. 3.
he that has admonished us to pray for the pardon of our debts of sin, has
withal promised fatherly mercy and pardon to follow. But there must be
adjoined unto our confession of sin a forsaking of sin also, Pro. 28.13.

Popish Writers here distinguish betwixt faithful, and just to forgive,
referring the first to mortal sins, which because he has promised the
penitent to forgive them, he is said to be faithful to forgive them; the
second to venial sins, because he that is in the state of grace can ex
condigno, merit forgiveness of his venial sins, but this is a mere
delusion, seeing faithful and just of promise are all one.

Verse. 10. If we say that we have no sin, we make him a liar, the reason of
this is, because he has affirmed all to be sinners, Psalm. 14. Eccl. 7.20. Romans
5, etc. The Papists are miserably turmoiled here in maintaining the blessed
Virgin Mary to be without sin, and other of their Saints: but they say, that
it is to be understood of original sin, nor of actual, and yet in the
Virgin Mary they deny even original sin to have been assenting, that if
any shall say of her, that she has not sinned, he makes God a liar, but if he
shall say that she had no sin, he says truly, because she was sanctified in
the very conception. But for actual sins they teach her to have been
altogether free therefrom, though not other of their Saints, but only from
mortal sins, whereas none are indeed exempted from sin, but Christ only,
no not from such sins as need clensing by the blood of Christ, which I am
sure are mortal. Moreover, the places alleged speak of actual sins, which
men do, from which it is said, that there is not one free, Eccl. 7.20. And his
Word is not in us. Glos. interlin. Lyra.
Some by Word here understand Christ, but it is plainly meant of that word,
wherein all are affirmed to be sinners, they are clean gone from this, that
say they have no sin, they have it not in any part remaining in them for
their salvation, for denying it to be true in one thing, they cannot hold it to
be true in any thing, being tainted with heresy in one article of faith, they
hold none at all, as others teach. I would, that the Papists, who say thus
also, Clemens. Didymus. Caietan.
would consider, how by their own confession they are fallen from all true
faith, even by this one tenent, that a man can perfectly keep the law of God
without sinning in any thing.

Note, Note.
that the Gospel of Christ is no uncertain, but a most certain thing,
because it is testified by faithful witnesses, who were present to behold
Christ living here, and risen, and ascending up into heaven, and doing such
great miracles, and therefore let us without wavering or doubting believe it,
being fully resolved of the truth hereof.

Note again, Note.
that the true believer desires to bring others into the society of the same
faith, and is not content to believe alone.

Note also, Note.
the benefit of the society and communion with the faithful is most excellent,
extending even to God the Father and the Son, to the partaking of that
unspeakable joy which is in God, in comparison of which all worldly joys are
vain; neither has a man any true joy by having them.

Note lastly, Note.
that to be holy, and yet in humility to acknowledge our sins, is the only
sure way to have communion with God: the unholy, or proud, that stand upon
their own righteousness, are utterly excluded here from.

CHAP. II.
Having in the first Chapter brought all men to an acknowledgement that they
are sinners, lest that hereupon men should grow to desperate sinning, saying,
we will therefore sin, and then confess our sins, and so we shall be
forgiven, by way of prevention he begins this Chapter thus, These things I
write unto you that you sin not. And yet because this command is so hard,
that none can keep it, that we might not be utterly discouraged, when we
endeavor what possibly we can to fly from sin, he adds, If any man
sins, we have an Advocate, etc. in whom, if we believe we have remission of
all our sins. Now, lest we should again take heart to sin, if no more
belongs to it, but to believe in this our Advocate Jesus Christ, for the
expiation of our sins, he declares what it is truly to beseeue in, or to
know Christ, Verse. 3, 4. viz. to this our knowledge to join obedience to his
commandments. In the next place, that this argues one who knows Christ, he
proves, because to keep his commandments is to love him, as we must needs
do that know what he has suffered and done for us; neither can we have this
love of the Lord, unless we know him, for ignoti nulla cupido, we have no
love to that which we know not, Verse. 5.6, And then from the loving of the
Lord, he infers our loving of one another, wherein we cannot but be drawn
to follow him, if we love him, who has in love to us all suffered so much,
Verse. 6. enforcing it with a command, which is ancient, Verse. 7. and which has
more lately been renewed by the coming on of the light of the Gospel, because
there is a necessity of loving one another in all that walk in this light; they
are not in the light, but in darkness, that hate one another, Verse. 8, 9, 10,
11. And having thus endeavored to commend the love of Christ, and of one
another unto them, he seeks in the next place to fence the^ against that love
which would be dangerous unto them, viz. the love of the world, and the love of
heresy.

Touching the first, he prepares unto it by nominating all ages, young men,
fathers, and children, intimating, that this charge concerned all sorts, and
adaptating something particularly to each of them, whereby they might be fenced
against the love of the world, and doubling his compellation unto them to
enforce it the more, Verse. 12.13, 14. And then he does expressly dehort from
this love, Verse. 15, 16, 17.

Touching the second, V^. 18. he informs them of the danger of the times, in
respect of the many Antichrists, referring them to that which they themselves
knew, that he is a liar and Antichrist that denies the Son, because he also
denies the Father, Verse. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Then he exhorts to
perseverance in the true ancient doctrine, Verse. 24, 25, 26. and having showed
his confidence hereabout, he exhorts to the same again, Verse. 27, 28. and
from the consideration of the Lords righteousness, he makes way to return
again to the pressing of a righteous and holy life upon them, and the flying
of sin, because this argues one borne of God, Verse. 29.

1 JOHN Chapter 2. Verse 2. He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for
our sins only, but for the whole world. Verse. 7. I write no new commandment,
but an old commandment unto you. Verse. 8. Again, I write a new commandment,
which is true in you, and in him, that the darkness is past, etc.


CHrist is said to be our Advocate, Occumen. in 1 John 2.
that is, one that exhorts and moves the Father to forgive us our sins,
not that he has not power to forgive, for he professes elsewhere, that he
had power to forgive sins, saying, That ye may know that the son of man
has power to forgive sins, he said to the sick of the palsy, etc. But as
he is man, he is said to make intercession to the Father, for according to this
he says, that the son can do nothing of himself. For the whole world, this
is spoken to show that not only the Jews, but the Gentiles that believe also
attain remission of their sins by Christ, or that not only the present age,
but the age to come believing, has reconciliation with God the Father.

Hereby we know that we know him, Verse. 3.
etc. that is, that we are joined to him, and have society with him, as was
spoken Chap. 1. And his love is perfect in us, that is, whereby he is joined
unto us, we being by a godly life joined unto him, he is joined unto us also.

Touching the command of love, Verse. 7.
which he calls an old, and not a new commandment, the question may be, how
it may be said to be an old commandment to all that John wrote unto, seeing
he wrote both to Jews and Gentiles. To the Jews indeed it was of old
commanded, that they should love one another; but the Gentiles which lived not
under the law, seem not to have had this command anciently? It is to be
answered, that the law was written in man's heart from the beginning, and though
after the fall he was greatly corrupted, yet remained it written there still,
even in those that lived not under the written Law, whence it was, Romans 2.15.
that their conscience did either accuse or excuse them.

In that having denied it to be a new commandment, he yet by and by says,
that it is a new commandment, Verse 8.
verse. 8. that is, in respect of the love of our enemies, to love our neighbor
indeed was commanded of old, but that we should love our enemies no precept was
ever given before. And therefore when as there have been some that have loved
their friends so dearly, that they would die for them, as heathen Histories
do declare; yet there has not any ever been found, that loved his enemies,
that they make mention of.

As Oecumenius, Mayer. Th. Aquinas. G^rran.
so all other Expositours understand Christ his being a propitiatory sacrifice
for the sins of the whole word, but that they add also another way, whereby
he is said to be so, viz. in respect of the sufficiency of his merit, but I
think that the former exposition is more genuine; and so the words of Christ
himself may be a comment upon these, John 17.20.
I pray not for these only, but for all that shall believe in my name.

Touching the word propitiation, Exodus 25.17. Theodoret. Tho. Aquinas.
it is taken from the propitiatory appointed to be made; from whence the Lord
did answer them graciously that sought unto him, according to the signification
of the word; and so Christ is a propitiation by being a propitiatory sacrifice
for us, in whom the Lord is gracious unto us.

Touching our assurance that we know him, Verse. 3. Faber Stap.
I hold with Faber, that to know him here is by faith to rely upon him, as our
Advocate: for in whom soever this faith is, there is obedience to his
commandments, a true faith never goes alone, but has perfect charity
adjoined unto it, whereby we fulfill the law: Th. Aquinas.
for all the commandments are united in this one thing, charity; and therefore
speaking verse. 3. of keeping the commandments, he changes the word verse. 5.
and says, If any man keep his word, so that all the commandments are but one
word, charity.

Touching the old commandment, Verse. 7.
which was from the beginning, most consent with Oecum. that the command of
love is called old, because it was ingraffed in the nature of man from the
beginning, and the law anciently given by Moses commands love: yet there is
another exposition mentioned by some from the beginning, Tho. Aquin. Glos. ord.
Lo^n^s. Beza.
that is, from the beginning of the Gospel, or ever since I began to preach
unto you, for it is well known that John did always inculcate the doctrine of
love. But certainly the first is the truest exposition, otherwise the new
commandment which he speaks of verse. 8. must be of some later time, and to
have affirmed the doctrine of love to have bin of old from the beginning, in
that sense would not have been so to the purpose to meet with them, that
objected nouelty to the doctrine of the Gospel, which is his drift, in saying,
Dydimus. Carthus. Verse. 8.
that it was old, even from the beginning. Whereas he by and by again verse. 8.
affirms it to be a new commandment, he calls it so, because it was under
the Gospel renewed, being before through pharisaicall corruptions almost
blotted out: for they taught men to love their friends, but to hate their
enemies, but now we are plainly taught to love our enemies, Tho. Aquin.
and herein most Expositours agree. Tho. Aquinas makes this reason but one of
five, why it is called new; 1. because it renueth us spiritually; 2. because it
is a new law given by a new King; 3. because it brings to a new heaven, etc.
for his 4. is coincident with this of loving our enemies. Here is no weight of
reason in any of these, but in this only. The Greek Interpreters generally
hold, Graesi interpres.
that the commandment of love is said to be new, because of old we being
commanded to love our neighbors as our selves; by the new commandment of the
Gospel we are commanded to love them more than our selves, even to dye for
them, as Christ loved us to dye for us. Rupertus.
And thus Rupertus expounds it also. But we have seen the true sense
already.

Touching the name command, given to the word or doctrine of the Gospel, it
may seem to confound the Law and the Gospel together: but indeed it is not
so, every doctrine has the force of a command, but the command of the Law is
peremptory, do this or thou shall dye, the command of the Gospel is with
faith annexed, whereby we may be delivered.

Which is true in him and in you, the word which, Verse. 8.
here is of the neuter gender, and so cannot be referred to (...), the new
Commandment; but it is to be understood, the new Commandment is about that
which is true in him and in you, that is, in the Lord Christ, for his love was
wonderful toward us, and in the true believer, who walks in all things
according to this precept of love, seeing the darkness of his former corrupt
living is past, and the light of an holy life has succeeded.

Note, that when we endeavor to lead an holy life, Note.
if through humane frailty we sin, there is yet a means to be justified and
saved from our sins if we fly thereunto; that is, Christ Jesus, by his
mediation seeking reconciliation with God, but not by any other whatsoever; for
he is our Advocate and the propitiation for our sins, let the Papists show if
they can, that partly by any other a propitiation is made for us, or that we
have any other Advocate, and we will hearken unto them. If they cannot, but
only argue from humane reason, let us still be guided by Gods Word, and whilst
they without ground here do that which their blind reason persuades them,
let them take heed of a dangerous fall in the end. For that even those that are
dearest unto Christ, ought not in adoration to be made partners with him,
appears in that the Angels of God forbade it to Daniel and John, and Peter to
Coruelius.

Note again, that the wicked man, Note.
who makes a trade of sin, knows none Advocate to make a propitiation for
him with God, let him be of what Religion and belief he can be. His saying
that he believes in Christ Jesus will not save him, for only such as live in
obedience to Gods Commandments know the Advocate, and he shall profit such
only.

Note lastly, Note.
that to love one another has ever been Gods command, but chiefly it is
expected now under the Gospel. Thus did Christ, and thus do all they that
have passed out of the darkness of sin and ignorance into the light of true
faith and grace. The malicious, envious, and churlish man therefore is not in
the light of Christ, but still in the darkness and shadow of death.

CHAP. 2. VER. 12. I write unto you children, because your sins are forgiven
you through his name. Verse. 13. I write unto you fathers, because ye have
known him that was from the beginning, etc. Verse. 15. Love not the world, nor
the things of the world, etc. Verse. 16. All that is in the world, the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eyes and the pride of life, etc.


The doubts of this place are diverse: M^yer.
First, who are the children, fathers, and young men here spoken of? Secondly,
wherefore is this repetition made, but with some variation? Thirdly, to whether
words these 12, 13, 14. verses have reference to those that went before, or
that follow after? Fourthly, what is the love of the world and of the things of
the world? Fifthly, what is the lust of the heart, the lust of the eyes and the
pride of life?

I spare here to set down the exposition of any Authors together, because no
one writer has resolved all these doubts, but some have spoken upon some of
them, and some upon other some.



Hugo. Gagneus. Beza. Piscator.
Some understand the first word, little children, as common to all sorts of
Christians; and they by fathers, young men, and children, the distinctions of
Christians; two of which, fathers and young men, are again repeated to make
way to the following exhortation, which chiefly concerns such, seeing little
children are not yet come to the loving of the world. This exposition is the
more probable, because the word (...) is usual unto John here, as the common
appellation of them, unto whom he writes, verse. 1, 8, 28. But for so much as
it goes not here alone, but with other compellations, I do rather understand
it as spoken to nouices in Religion, as (...) is, verse. 14. For although little
children in years are not in any danger by the love of the world, yet little
children in this sense are in danger as well as fathers and young men, and
therefore had need that the charge should be repeated to them also. The old
Latin translation repeateth not, I write unto you Fathers, etc. the second
time, but omitteth it wholly, but it is in all ancient Greek Copies, and in
Augustines exposition upon this Epistle, August. Hicronym.
and in Ieromes exposition of Origens Prologue upon the Canticles. Touching the
diverse reasons alleged to the diverse ages, they are not thus particularly
rendered, because only little children in this spiritual sense have their
sins forgiven them, and fathers only have the knowledge of God, for the
knowledge which is attributed to fathers, verse. 13. is ascribed to little
children also, verse. 14. But because little children in grace are most weak
and apt to fall, he adapteth unto them this comfort of the forgiveness of
their sins in the name of Christ, whereinto they were lately baptized.
Catharin. Gagneus.
And because knowledge is with the ancient, he mentions this unto fathers,
and victory to those that be young and strong. And in speaking again of
children, he applies to them the knowledge of the father, because it is a
comfort to little children to know their father, to fly to him in all their
distresses.

Beza. Piscator, Oecumen.
I know that ye will not all receive this doctrine alike, and therefore I
address my self to speak unto you severally, as ye are little children, or
fathers, or young men, and so the benefits spoken of are understood, as
promises to Christians of each condition. But others expound them, as an
introduction to the exhortation following, verse. 15. as if he had said, Tho.
Aquin. Gorran.
I have hitherto admonished you to love one another, now let me give you
warning of the impediments that will hinder you from this love, viz. the love
of the world, ye little children ought not to do it, because it becomes
children to obey their Parents; now our heavenly Father forbids this, who
has forgiven you your sins, and therefore great reason is there that ye
should refrain from that which cannot stand with the love of him who has
showed so great love unto you. Again, ye fathers ought not to love the world,
because ye have known him that was from the beginning, whom the world hates;
ye know him by Faith being joined unto him, so that ye cannot love the world
which is against him. Lastly, ye young men ought not to love the world,
because ye have overcome that evil one, that is, the Devil, who is the God
of this world; whereas it is the part of one under his dominion to love the
world, not of one that has overcome him, for so he should again be overcome
by him. And to this exposition do I subscribe, because these words are plainly
rather an exordium to some thing afterward to be delivered, than a conclusion
of that which was before delivered.

Ioh. 3.16. Oecumen. Th. Aquinas. 2 Cor. 4.4.
to love the world therefore is to love, and by loving to be joined unto the
wicked, who are in diverse places said to be the world, and so the Devil is
called The God of this world. To love the things of the world, is to love
riches, and honors, and pleasures unto superfluity, not for necessity, for the
things of this world may be beloved and sought after, so far forth as they
are necessary for us; but to be overmuch affected unto these things, this is
sin.

Augustine. Tho. Aquin.
those things that are said to be in the world are such, as the world of wicked
men are affected withal. The lust of the flesh, this is the desire of any
thing that is delightful to the taste or the touch; and to the outward man, as
eating and drinking excessiuely, and whoring, and playing inordinately. And
though the heart lusts after these things, yet it is ascribed to the flesh,
because it is acted hereby. The lust of the eyes, that is, the desire of such
things as are goodly to the eye, as of gold and silver, garments, and fair
buildings. The pride of life; in Greek it is (...), the oftentation or
iactation, or boasting proudly of any worldly thing, being puffed up and made
vainglorious hereby, to be through pride so set upon estimation in the world,
as that a man will rather die than be any way disgraced. He that loves the
world thus, the love of the Father is said not to be in him, and here a reason
of it is rendered, because this lust is of the world, not of the father; that
is, of Gods enemy and opposite, so that he which is led hereby cannot love God.
Aug. Tract. 9. in Johan.
Saint Augustine reads these words thus; If any man loves the world, the
Spirit of the Father is not in him, but none else read it so. He also
illustrateth this place by the example of our first Parents: so likewise Beda
and Prosper, Beda. Prosper.
who says, That the lust of the flesh in them, was to taste of the forbidden
fruit; the lust of the eyes, to have their eyes opened, for hereby the Serpent
tempted them; and the pride of life, to be like unto God. Beda also shows
these three to have been used for the tempting of our Savior Christ, Mat. 4.
The three things here taxed, are Pleasure, Profit, and the rising of pride in
the heart; the first, tempting the voluptuous; the second, the covetous; the
third, the ambitious, as such as desire to be magnified.

Note, Note.
that there is great reason indeed why the love of God should be dear unto us,
neither should we be carried by any thing in this world against this love, for
this were wonderful ingratitude, seeing his benefits bestowed upon us are so
great, the forgiveness of our sins, the knowledge of hidden mysteries, and
spiritual strength to overcome our most deadly enemy, that works and
prevails by the world to reduce us into his bondage again. Let the
voluptuous therefore, the covetous and ambitious consider, of what base minds
they are to be allured by such vanities, wherein there is no true or enduring
comfort to be found, thus to lose comfort which would have been for ever unto
them in God.

CHAP. 2. VER. 18. Little children, it is the last hour, and as ye have heard,
that Antichrist comes, there are now also many Antichrists. Verse. 19. They
went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they
would have continued with us.


The Apostle having admonished against the love of the world, Th. Aquinas.
now gives warning against heresies, lest we should be seduced hereby, and
that by a fourefold reason.

First, because it is heresy contrary to Christ, making them Antichrists that
hold it; and hereby he shows that it is the last hour, that is, the sixth
age, or a time like to that of the Antichrist for the greatness of the
persecution, or in respect of every particular man's life.

Secondly, because Heretics are separate from the Church; They went out from
us to Iudaisme or Paganism, because they were not of us by election or
predestination: they were amongst us by the partaking of the same Sacraments,
but not by the communion of love. That they might be made manifest, that is,
that by their going out they might be discovered to be false brethren, and we
might be no longer deceived by them.

Thirdly, because they had an anointing whereby they knew all things, that is,
the holy Ghost, whereby they knew the malice and wickedness of these
Antichrists, and so were armed to withstand them; and he calls it an
anointing from the holy one, that is, from Christ, from whom, as an head, all
knowledge and grace is derived to us his members, Ioh. 1.14.

Fourthly, because the doctrine of Heretics is a lying doctrine, and the most
heinous lying of all, because it is to the denying of Christ. Now the Jews
properly denied Jesus to be the Christ, but all Christians that obey not his
precepts, doc indeed deny him, as Titus 1. They say, that they know God, but by
their deeds they deny him. And such an one is Antichrist, that is, an enemy to
Christ; and has not the Father neither, that is, propitious to him, or knows
not the Father, for if ye had known me (says Christ) ye had known my Father
also. John 14. Mayer. Oecumen.


The doubts of this place are: first, how it is said to be the last hour.
Oecumenius pitching first upon that of every particular man who has but a
short time to live here, Chrysostom.
yields afterward an other reason out of Chrysostom, because any time
divided into three parts, when the two former are past, that which remains is
called the last; and so two parts of the worlds age being past, which he
calls hours, he calls the time under the Gospel the last hour. And yet
he yields another reason why it is called the last hour, viz. because it is
the worst, by reason of the Devils being most busy with his temptations, and
stirring up troubles and persecutions against the Church more than in times
past. Others understand, when he says, Gagneus. Faber Stap.
now is the last hour, that the last times are now at hand wherein Christ will
come to judgment, because the Antichrist is to come toward the end of the
world, and when his forerunners are come, it is evident that it will not be
long before he comes. I subscribe to that of Chrysostom, the time of the
Gospel is the last hour, because the third and last part of the worlds age:
2000. years were before the Law, 2000. under the Law, and so if a like
proportion of time be to this last as was to the two former, Saint John might
well say in his time it was the last hour, though the world be not yet ended.
The words will not so well bear this interpretation, without wresting, the
last hour is at hand, or is like unto the last: for he says plainly, It is
the last hour, and repeateth it again, There are many Antichrists, whereby we
know that it is the last hour. As if he should say, The coming of Antichrist
argues the last hour; now are many Antichrists, that is, now he has begun
to enter upon the stage by his forerunners and to act his part, therefore now
is the last hour.

John 5.43. Chapter 7.18. Mat. 24.15. And Daniel long before, Chapter 7.11, 12.
described this Antichrist in his type; and Saint Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. after which
this Epistle was written. Now he speaks of him in the present tense, he
comes, both for the certainty, and because he was come then in his
forerunners, the many Antichrists of whom he speaks, in regard of whom Saint
Paul says, The mystery of iniquity now works. For they and he are all united
in the same wicked and lying spirit by which they are deceived, and deceive
others to their destruction. The Papists contend, that the Antichrist is but
one man yet to come, who shall reign but three years and an half immediately
before the day of judgment. But ours teach him to be a succession of men, who
are all as one, continuing from generation to generation, to do the same
Antichristian acts in the same place; even as each beast of the four spoken of
by Daniel served to set forth the succession of Kings in each Monarchy of the
Assyrians, Medes, Persians and Greeks. How true this our tenent is, and how
false the other, there will be a more fit place to show, Revel. 12.13, etc.

Now there are many Antichrists. To this it is generally agreed, that the
Heretics of those times were Antichrists, as Simon of Samaria, Ebion and
Cerinthus, and the Nicolaitans, for these, as enemies of Christ, some opposed
his humanity, and some his divinity, they sought by deceitful persuasions to
draw men away from the truth of the Christian Religion to error, as Antichrist
does, and therefore for the likeness of their conditions are called
Antichrists, as Judas was called a Devil, and Peter Satan. Thus Ireneus
calls the Valentinians, Marcionites and Arrians, Orig. in Mat. 24. Hieron.
li. de non pauendo Ambros. Epist. ad solitar. Chrysostom. 2. These. 2.
Antichrists; Origin, Jerome, Ambrose and Chrysostom, call all sorts of
Heretics Antichrists. The many Antichrists therefore in this place, are such
as by corrupting of the truth were enemies unto Christ, who was altogether for
the truth.

for if they had bin of us, they would have continued with us. Oecumen. Tho.
Aquin. Gorran. Faber Stap. etc.
I answer, that it is most plain here, that none can fall away so which are of
the number of the Elect, whom God has predestined unto life, as all
Expositors agree. They that fainedly join themselves unto the faithful, or
lightly without duly considering what they must suffer that follow Christ, or
what the doctrine of the Christian Religion is, and what purity and holiness of
life is hereby required, may and shall fall away, because though they be in the
number of the faithful, yet they are not truly faithful; sound and saving
grace was never wrought in them: so that when such do fall away, what show
soever they formerly made, it cannot be hence gathered, that a man may fall
even from true faith and grace, but rather that they never had any true faith,
for such fall not away, and it was Gods providence that they should be thus
discovered, that in them it might appear what shall become of all the rout of
Hypocrites and temporany Christians that go with others to the same duties,
but they want such good and faithful hearts whereby they should be thoroughly
affected to the earnest embracing of the Word, and to be reformed thereafter.
Here then is a ground for the certain perseverance of all the Saints, and
against that uncomfortable doctrine of their falling from grace to be damned.
It is certain, that they which are of us go not out from us, and who are
such, if not they that have true faith and repentance; for from hence we may
certainly reason to prove our election. But of the certainty of faith I have
said more already upon Romans 8.

The Jesuit is so troubled at this place, Lorinus.
making so plainly for the perseverance of the elect, and consequently of such
as are effectually called to the grace of the Gospel, as that he says, he
knows not what Saint John meant to speak thus, seeing neither comfort nor
profit could hence redound unto them to whom he wrote. And then he
contradicts him, saying, That there are many of them that are predestined
unto life that go out of the Church, and some that are in the Church and in
grace are Reprobates. What will not these men dare to say, that are of such
impudency to disgrace and gainsay what an Apostle of Christ has written, if
it makes against their conceits. But against this slander be it known, that
the going out of those that were not truly faithful, that it might appear,
that they were such, was mentioned to very good purpose, both for the comfort
of such as truly believe, and upon due consideration embrace the Gospel, and
for the credit of the truly faithful. For it is a great comfort to the true
Christian, to be assured that he shall keep his standing, and not be given
over, when he has embraced the truth, to such blindness, as that he should
afterward be led away after error, and of a Christian prove Antichristian: and
it makes much for the credit of the truly faithful, that no such are thus
mutable, but only some intruders that lurk amongst them for a time that were
never indeed of their number, and therefore might turn to any thing. And
lastly, this may serve to warn every man to take heed how he embraces the
Christian Religion, lest not being an hearty and serious professor of it, he be
in judgment given over to be an Antichrist, to his greater condemnation.



This anointing is the inward illumination of the holy Ghost: Gre. 5. Mor. c.
19. allocutio intimae inspirationis quae humanam mentem contingendo subleuat.
Iren. l. 4. c. 43. Chrysma doctrinae.
so Gregory says, says, that it is the allocution of internal inspiration,
which by touching does eleuate man's mind. Ireneus calls it the anointing of
doctrine. Some have wrested this place to prove the use of Chrisme in baptism,
whereas indeed it is not any external thing which he means here, but
internal, seeing by nothing external we attain to the knowledge of divine
mysteries, but by an inward illumination. Yet it cannot be denied, but that the
anointing of those that were baptized, Cypri. Epist. 70, 72. Tertul. l. de
resur. carnis.
is very ancient: for Cyprian makes mention of it, ascribing too much unto it;
and so does Tertullian, and Cyril Catech. 3. and Basil. de sp. s. cap. 28, etc.
But Justin Martyr makes no mention of it, whereby it appears that it was not
in his time. Athan. Orat. 2. contr. Arrian.
And Athanasius says plainly, that Christ was not anointed with oil, and
bestowed the spirit without any such Ceremony. Eusebius. lib. 1. Hist. cap. 4.
Platina de Syluestro.
Eusebius says, that Christians are no more anointed with types and figures,
but by the naked virtues themselves. And Platina says, that Syluester was the
first that instituted this anointing. Wherefore S. John doubtless does not
insinuate any such Ceremony here, but only the inward anointing to understand.

Touching the holy one, some with Tho. Aquinas hold him to be Christ, Beda.
Oecumen. Faber Stapul. Piscator.
as Beda; some the holy Ghost, as Oecumenius; and some both, as Carthusianus,
and Faber Stapulensis. I subscribe with Piscator unto the first, for of the
fullness of Christ we all receive of the holy Ghost, John 1.16. and he often
promised to send the holy Ghost, Ioh. 14.26.
that should instruct his in all things. Their knowing of all things was of all
fundamental points of faith, wherein these Antichrists did labor to seduce
them, as all agree, and not such a knowledge as unto which nothing more could
be added, 2 Pet 3.20.
for we are still to grow in knowledge and grace.

Who is a liar but he? Verse. 12.
Is there none other lie but this, or can he not truly be said to be
Antichrist, who does not plainly deny Jesus to be Christ?

Beda. Faber S^^^^
To the first Beda answers, that this lie is so great, that others are nothing
in comparison of it: but Faber better, if such an one be not a liar, who is a
liar, because to deny Jesus to be Christ is a most notorious lie.

To the second it is commonly answered, that it is chiefly spoken against the
Jews, who denied Jesus the son of Mary to be Christ; and against Simon, who
said that there was another Jesus, who descended from Heaven into Jordan, as
Oecumenius has it. Oecumen.
For this was a chief reason of S. John's writing both of this Epistle, and of
his Gospel, to declare that Jesus is the Christ, as he expressly speaks, John
20.31. But it cannot hence be collected, that none can be rightly said to be
Antichrist, but he that directly denies Jesus to be the Christ, and the Son
of God: for there is a denying of him even by those that in word acknowledge
him, they confess Christ, Tit. 1.26
but in their deeds they deny him. And I have already showed, that by the
consent of all the Fathers, any heretic or wicked person is an Antichrist.
Valentinus is condemned by Oecumenius for a notorious Antichrist, because he
said, that besides God the Father of Christ there is another Father, that
cannot be named. Cerinthus is held to have been Antichrist, because he taught
that Jesus began to be the Son of God in his baptism, not before, and that
afterward the Spirit went away from him again, and then he suffered death;
and they who have denied Christ to be God are also censured, as denying the
Son. And by the like reason the Pope denying such a Christ as is set forth in
the holy Scriptures, is Antichrist, for he denies him to be our only Mediator
and Advocate, he denies the merit of his passion to be such, as that hereby we
are perfectly saved from our sins, and the punishments thereof, seeing he
teaches a necessity of our satisfying for temporal punishments; he denies
his ordinance of his blessed Supper in both kinds, and he denies his body to
be a true humane body; for such a body is in one place at one time only, etc.

If the Antichrist should directly deny the Father and the Son, he were easy
enough to be known, neither could he possibly deceive so many Christian
people, as it is said that he shall, Reu. 13. He must therefore be only
covertly denying Christ, but openly making a profession of him.

Verse 2^.
and so on the contrary side?

It is commonly answered, that the Father and Son are Relatiues, and therefore
if the Son be denied, the Father is also denied, seeing he cannot be a Father,
unless he has Jesus to his Son, because he is the only begotten Son of
the Father. Again, the Father is denied, because he has testified from
Heaven, Mat. 3.
saying, This is my beloved Son: but to confess the Son, is to confess
the Father also, and the way to be accepted for his in the world to come. Mat.
10.
For, he that confesses me, says Christ, before men, him will I confess
before my Father which is in Heaven.

From this 23. verse to the end of this Chapter, there is nothing difficult
more. That which they heard from the beginning, is that which our Savior
Christ taught, that who so would attain to life should believe in him, Ioh.
17.3.
and that it is life eternal to know God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ,
verse. 24, 25. Now these things he says that he wrote unto them, because of
seducers, not that they needed any instruction herein, for so much as they had
the Spirit of God to teach them.

Note that such as err in the doctrine of faith are very Antichrists, Note.
and accordingly to be had in abomination, and to be avoided. Heresy is in
effect to deny God the Son, and so to deny the Father, and to overthrow all
religion and piety, that they which are tainted herewith shall have no more
benefit of the Christian religion than Pagans and Infidels. And therefore let
us hate Popery, as being most notorious heresy, not being deceived, because in
word they profess Christ, as we do.

Note again, Note.
that there are some in the Church which are not of the Church, and this is
manifested by their apostasy, and falling from the truth to error. So that if
any depart from the reformed Religion to Popery, we ought not to be troubled
at it, for they were never sound at the heart, otherwise they could not have
departed.

Note also, Note.
that the truly faithful are instructed by the Spirit of God, which as a sweet
ointment does so sweeten their minds with the truth, as that they can never be
corrupted, and come to an ill savor, through error and wickedness. Sin
they may, but be destitute of grace sufficient for their salvation they can
never be.

CHAP. III.
Having made some way in the last verse of the former Chapter, as I have
already showed, to return to the commendation of a righteous and holy course
of life; he does more at large prosecure that argument here, joining unto it a
commendation of brotherly love.

Touching righteousness and holiness, he stirs up unto it; first, from the
consideration of our estate, we are the children of God, and yet have greater
hopes, and therefore cannot but be pure, as he is pure, Verse. 1, 2, 3.
Secondly, from the consideration of that reference which we have unto Christ,
we are in him, but he has no sin; nay his coming into the world was to take
away sin, and therefore who so is in him sins not, Verse. 4, 5, 6. Thirdly,
from the consideration of the state of wicked and sinful men, they know not
Christ, they are of the devil, Verse. 6, 7, 8. Fourthly, from the consideration
of our new birth, by the seed of God, which being in us, keeps us from sin,
Verse. 9, 10.

Touching brotherly love, coupling the want of this with a sinful life, he
first shows, Verse. 10. Verse. 11. Verse. 12, 13. Verse. 14, 15.
that such as have no love are not of God; and then setting down the command
which we have to love, he dehorteth from enmity and hatred, instancing in
Cains hatred against Abel, and the worlds hatred, and showing the event both of
love, and of hatred. Then he exhorts to love, urging to love in deed after
the example of Christ, Verse. 16, 17, 18.
condemning other love, which extends not to the releeuing of the miserable,
to be no love. And that this exhortation to love indeed, Verse. 19, 20, 21, 22.
might take the more effect, he shows what confidence toward God such a man
may have to obtain whatsoever he desires, as doing his will herein, and that
which is pleasing unto him. Now, that he does his will and commandment he
proves, because his command is, that we believe in Christ, Verse. 23.
and love one another, which last is a plain evidence of the first; he
therefore that believes and loves, keeps his commandments, and so abides
in him; and how this may be known he immediately shows, even by the Spirit
which he has given us; Verse. 24.
and thus again he makes way to speak of diverse spirits in the Chapter
following.

1 JOHN Chapter 3. Verse 1. For this the world knows us not, because it
knows not him. Beloved, now we are the sons of God, but yet it is not made
manifest what we shall be, etc.


BEcause we are the Sons of God the world knows us not, Th. Aquinas in 1
John 3.
that is, by the knowledge of approbation; or as the Gloss has it, they know
not our dignity to love and respect us, but do esteem basely of us, and
afflict us, Because it knows not him, that is, believes not in him. It does
not appear, etc. that is, the great glory wherewith we shall be glorified
appears not, it is as a light hidden in a Pitcher, till it be broken; or as a
light within a man's hands, appearing only through his fingers. We know, that
when he shall appear, that is, by the certainty of faith, for faith does
assure us of things invisible: now we know our selves to be Gods children by
the virtues and miracles which by his spirit we are enabled to do. When he
shall appear, that is, at the day of judgment. We shall be like unto him,
that is, in the conformity of nature, of grace, and of glory. We shall see him
as he is, that is, in the very substance of his Deity, which is not granted to
any man living here.

The doubts of this place are, first, Mayer.
what is meant by the worlds not knowing of us, [For this] have reference?

I answer, that the world of wicked men, and unbelievers, are said not to know
us, that are accepted to be the children of God, because they do not see into
the excellency of this estate, to prize and to esteem of it. And for this they
know us not, because they know not Christ, it was hidden from them of what
excellency he was, which was the cause that they used him as base and
contemptible. For had they known him, they could not but have known his, so
much resembling him; as they that have known the father, if his son comes
in presence, which is very like him, they know him to be his son: and as he
that has well known a man, if he sees his picture, he knows whose picture
it is. And this is spoken to make us vndismaid at the contempt and ignominy
that shall be offered to us in the world, as a Prince laugheth at the railings
and ill usage of him by his own servants, whilst they know him not. Chrysostom.
Hom. 78. in Johan.
They know not (says Chrysostom) what manner of persons we are, that abuse
us, as namely, that we are Citizens of Heaven, reckoned to the Country above,
and fellows of the Cherubims. So also Wisd. 5.3, 4 5.

It appears not yet what we shall be? has not God set forth in his word the
unspeakable glory and felicity to come?

I answer with Thomas, that though it be set forth, yet the glorious and happy
estate of Gods children appears not now, but they live after a poor and
contemptible fashion, which is the cause that the world makes no reckoning of
this Sonne-ship.



To the first it is commonly answered, that we shall be like unto him in
heavenly glory, even as children do partake of the glory of their father, as
Oecumenius speaks, Oecumen. Scholia Graeca.
the mind being sanctified and enlightened, and the body being glorified as
the body of the Lord Jesus. Phil. 3 20. August.
To the second, some (as Thomas Aquinas) say, that we shall see his essence:
but others deny this, affirming that we shall see him only in his qualities,
being pure, as he is pure; and being just we shall behold him just, Oecumen.
Faber Stapul. Beza.
as Oecumenius. But I assent rather to those that expound this of seeing the
Lord Jesus Christ in his glory, and the majesty of God the Father: for now we
see only darkly, and as it were in a glass, as we are capable: but then being
present with him, we shall immediately behold his glory. And this very
beholding of him present does argue, that we shall be like unto him, because
this seeing of him is not granted to any, but to the children of God, who are
holy, as he is holy. For, Mat. 5. Esa. 26.10. according to the 70.
blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. And let the wicked be
taken away (says the Prophet) that they may not see the glory of God.

Note, Note.
that wicked men that make no reckoning of the state of grace, are so far
from being true Christians, that they know not what a Christian is, they know
not Christ: for did they but know, they would admire and be in love with this
condition, whereas now they despise it and vilipend the children of God, and
bear an hatred against them.

Note again, Note.
that the glory of the faithful shall be the highest degree of glory, like
unto that of God himself; we shall be present where the glory of his Majesty
does most appear. To hear of him, and to behold him in his Word and works,
must suffice us whilst we are in this world, and for such as lived then to see
God in the flesh, but the time shall come when we shall behold him immediately.
The present comfort in God and joy in the holy Ghost is nothing in comparison
of that comfort which we shall have.

CHAP. 3. VER. 5. Ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins, and
in him is no sin. Verse. 6. Whosoever abides in him, finneth not, etc.


Seeing Christ came into the world to destroy sin, Oecumen. in 1 John 3.
we that are borne of him and confirmed in the Faith of him, may not sin any
more. He that abides in him is said not to sin, because he never cease
from the exercise of virtue. He that does sin, is said to be of the Devil,
not he that has done sin, because when a man has repented him, he is no
longer of the Devil. The works of the Devil are sins, which God, having a
care of his, came into this world to destroy. To commit sin, verse. 9. is to
admit of sin in the mind and will; so the children of God cannot sin, that
is, will to sin in any thing. They commit not wickedness voluntarily and
purposely, or by yielding to corruption, till they be subdued and brought into
servitude hereby.

There is but little difference here amongst other Expositors from this of
Oecumenius. Mayer.
The Son of God was manifested, Tho. Aquinas. Tollit dimittendo sacta,
adiuuando ne fiant, and ducendo ad vitam, vbi omnino si^ri nequeunt.
says Thomas Aquinas, when he took flesh, to take away our sins; that is,
by forgiving them being committed, by helping us against sin that we commit it
not, and by bringing to such a life as where sin cannot be committed any
more, and therefore he is thrice said to be the Lamb of God that takes away
the sins of the world.

Faber Stapul.
Faber says, that he took away sin by destroying the seed of the Devil
sown in Adam at the beginning, and growing up in his offspring even until
Christ, who was without all sin, which if he had not done, none could have
remained in God. But he being a seed, contrary to the seed of the Devil,
destroyed it, which is darkness, and would have made otherwise, that we could
not have been in God, who is light. He also infers the sanctity of the
mother of Christ, affirming her to be without sin, or else she could not
have brought forth such seed contrary to the seed of the Devil. But by the
same reason her father and mother must have been without sin also, and
consequently, the Line of which she was descended. I hold with Faber, that
Christ's taking away of our sins here spoken of, is by the grace and virtue of
his Spirit, sanctifying us to lead an holy life: for by the coming of Christ,
the Spirit of grace is communicated more plentifully, the man Christ being as
it were the head of the spring where the Spirit rested, and we the channels into
which it flows; whereas in times past, though the faithful amongst the Jews
were not destitute of the Spirit, yet they being but a handful in comparison
of the rest of the world, the bestowing hereof was not so notable, and few
there were that were delivered from their sins. According to this sense it
agrees best with the words following, therefore they which are in Christ sin
not, seeing that in him there is no sin, yea he came into the world to take
away our sins. A like place unto this is Romans 8.3. And so I come to the
greater question arising both from hence and from the next words, wherein the
regenerate are said not to sin, neither can they sin. In what sense does
he thus often, so much pressing it also, speak of our immunity from sin,
seeing there is no man living that sins not? It is agreed by all, that the
regenerate sins not purposely, or by the sin of infidelity, or so far
forth as he is borne of God, Tho. Aquinas.
or he sins not unto the end, for all these expositions are mentioned by
Thomas Aquinas. It seems to me to be most plain, that trading in sin is
only meant here. The true faithful person lives not as the natural man does;
though he cannot but through humane frailty sin, yet his heart is against all
sin, and his life is such a continual practice of repentance, and the Spirit
of Christ does so sway and carry him, as that he falls not so often as the
natural man does, and he does daily wash and cleanse himself from sin by
the tears of true repentance, and that when there is no worldly shame or loss
to move him hereunto, Neither can I see but that the regenerate must needs be
of such an holy life, as not at any time to fall into any great sin, as of
adultery, murder, theft, drunkenness, or the like, although under the Law
most holy men have fallen, for the Spirit is now given in a greater measure
than it was in those days, and the force of corruption is more abated, as is
clear from sundry passages of holy Scripture.

Whereas verse. 8. it is said, Verse. 8.
that the Devil sins from the beginning, and the Son of God appeared that
he might dissolve the works of the devil, the meaning is, that he was ever
the Author of sin, by his temptations so prevailing amongst men, as that the
world has hitherto been full of sin: but now the Son of God coming, has
given a contrary Spirit into the hearts of his people, whereby they are
sanctified to lead an holy and new life. The Devil had them before, as it
were in the chains of sin, fast bound for stirring to forsake those
superstitious and riotous courses, but now these bands are loosed, and they are
set at liberty to walk in the ways of Gods Commandments, because free will,
which was lost in Adam, is restored in the regenerate by Christ, that we may
now strive against and resist evil temptations.

Note, that the most certain mark of a child of God, Note.
is to lead an holy life, and truly to endeavor to refrain from all sin,
out of an inward affectation of holiness, and the dislike and hatred of every
sin, be it never so pleasing or profitable to the outward man, and not in any
by-respect; and being overtaken with sin by infirmity, to be humbled
therefore, and to beg for mercy and pardon, and that toties, quoties. The
comfort of those that do thus is, that they are not now accounted sinners, but
are justified here-from, Luke 13.
as it is said of the poor Publican, that having knocked upon his breast, and
humbled himself, he went away justified. The penitent person sins not,
because he does daily that which is righteous, in calling himself to account
for his sins, and judging himself therefore; as Beda says, Beda in Luc. 10.
Seruos nos inutiles fatcamur, vt in sortem vtilium veniamus. Hieron. Vnica
iustitia nostra est iniustitiam fateri.
In confessing our selves to be unprofitable servants, we come to be
profitable: and Jerome, Our only righteousness is to confess our
unrighteousness. For whosoever does thus and bewaileth it daily in secret, cannot
but have his heart set against sin, and so sins not in will and desire.

CHAP. 3. VER. 21. If our heart condemn us not, we have boldness toward
God, and receive what we ask of him because we keep his Commandments, etc.


In commending brotherly love, Mayer. Verse. 14.
which he had often done before, he says, Hereby we know that we are
translated from death to life, if we love the brethren, verse. 14. By the love
of brethren all understand here the love of one another, which is usually
expressed by the word neighbors in the old Testament, but by the word brethren
in the new. Brotherly love is a sign of true grace, which is the beginning of
the spiritual life that is eternal, it is not the cause of life, as even the
Jesuit condescendeth. orinus.
Hereby a man may know that he is raised from the death of sin to the life
that is by grace, if he has true love in him, because all that are partakers
of this life have this love in them; and consequently, a man may know that
everlasting life is his, and not only have a probable conjecture hereof, as
popish writers teach. For to put it out of doubt, that we may know certainly,
he says, verse. 24. We know that he abides in us by the Spirit that he has
given us, Verse 19, 20, 21.
and in verse. 19, 20, 21. he argues from the heart and conscience of every
man, which upon this ground of actual love, coming to be quiet and free from
any accusation, argues most certainly that we are in his favor.

He that loves to the exercising of charitable actions keeps Gods
Commandments, which stand but in two things, the love of God and the love of
our neighbor. God is said to be greater than our conscience, that is, more
able to judge and condemn, because all things are most evident unto him; so
that if our conscience condemns us, he will condemn us much more.

And this is his commandment, Verse. 23. Oecumen.
that we believe in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. To believe in the name
of Christ here, says Oecumenius, is to give credit to his will; for by his
Name is set forth sometime his glory and sometime his will. Now his will
whereunto he would have us give credit, is that we should love one another. But
this exposition is forced: for having spoken of love hitherto, and how
necessary it is, because God has commanded it, he now goes somewhat higher,
and shows that in commanding us to believe in the Name of his Son, he
commands love also, seeing that love is inseparable from a lively faith.
Therefore he adds, This is his command, that we believe and love one
another, as if he should have said, For so much as I have spoken of the
Commandments of God, affirming that he which loves keeps the^; hereby it
plainly appears to be so, because that in commanding to believe in Christ, he
inioyneth us both to believe and to love, love being unto faith as the soul is
to the body, which is but a dead carcass if it be away. And so he comes
aptly to mention the Spirit given unto us in the next verse, whereby we know
that we are in God, that is, The. Aquin. Gorran. Beza.
this grace of the Spirit, love. And hereunto do others consent.

Note here, Note.
because he makes the keeping of Gods Commandments the ground of our
confidence to Godward, so as that we may pray with certain expectation to be
heard, that none but such as are of a godly life, and charitable to the poor,
can have any assurance of Gods favor. All wicked men and hard-hearted cannot
but have an accusing conscience if it be not cauterized, and therefore their
hope to Godward is vain, though they call and cry to him for mercy they shall
not prevail, Iam. 5.16. Mat. 7.22.

CHAP. IIII.
Having spoken in the last verse of the former Chapter of knowing by the
Spirit, because there is great deceit in spirits, he exhorts here not to
believe every spirit, but to try them whether they be of God or no, showing the
means of trial, v. 1, 2, 3. And that it might appear, that he had no
suspicion of their being deceived, he affirms them to be of God, and that he
with the rest of the Apostles were of God, whereby he proves again, that the
false Antichristian teachers who heard them not, were not led by the good
Spirit of God, but by an ill spirit of error, verse. 4, 5, 6. And considering,
that both they that heard and they that taught them were of God, he exhorts
them to mutual love, as they must needs do that are all of God, seeing God is
love, verse. 7, 8. which is proved both from a singular act of his love and the
time when he loved us, verse. 9, 10. And hereupon he exhorts again to love,
arguing from our love our being in God, though we have not seen him, verse. 12,
13. And then he reflecteth again upon that which he spoke of before, touching
the trial of spirits, by this, he that confesses that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh, is of God. This he says, that they, the Apostles were
eyewitnesses of, and that they which believe it, remain in God, verse. 14, 15.
whom again he affirms to be love, and so shows what confidence a man may
have, and how vo^d of fear he may be that has love, verse. 16, 17, 18. And
lastly, for a proof of our love of God he says, that this appears by the
love of our neighbor, whom having seen, if we love him not, we cannot love
God whom we have not seen, verse. 20, 21.

1 JOHN Chapter 4. Verse 2. Every Spirit that confesses Jesus Christ to have
come in the flesh, is of God. Verse. 3. Every spirit that confesses not, etc.
this is the spirit of Antichrist, which ye have heard that it comes, and it
is even now in the world.


BY the Spirit here the Doctrine is commonly understood: Mayer.
to confess that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is to teach rightly both
his humane and divine nature, Beza.
according to Beza; his humane, because he came in the flesh, and his divine,
because he came, implies one from whom he came, that is, the Father with whom
he was from the beginning. Oecumenius and Th. Aquinas expound confessing here
not only in word but in deed and in life, wherein this is confessed when a man
is mortified unto sin: but Beza more rightly understands it more
restrainedly of Doctrine only. Every one in this spiritual office of teaching,
that is sound in the doctrine touching Christ Jesus, is of God. The spirit here
is he that pretends the spirit, Piscator.
according to Piscator; and to confess that Jesus is come in the flesh, is to
teach truly touching the divinity and humanity, and touching the end of Christ's
coming into the world to deliver us from our sins, as the very name Jesus
does imply, so that in these few words is comprehended the whole Doctrine of
the Gospel.

The observation of Thomas Aquinas is witty: Tho. Aquinas.
to confess has in it a word con, signifying together, whereby is implied;
that it must be both in word and deed that Christ must be acknowledged, but
there may as well be use of this conioining word, to set forth the tongue and
the heart agreeing in one. He that confesses not, the vulgar Latin has it,
he that solueth Jesus, but all confess, that in the Greek it is as we read
it. This cannot be referred to the denying of Christ in deeds; for so even the
best do sometimes, because their life is not always in all things so squared
according to rule, but to deny Christ in Doctrine is the thing meant here. Now
he is not said to deny Christ thus only, that flatly denies Jesus the Son
of Mary to be the Son of God and the Savior of the world, but he which
denies the truth, and teaches falsely in any Article of faith, according to
Saint Augustine. Aug. ser. 31. de verb. Apostoli. Ea tenus omnis haereticus
Christum in carne venisse negat, quantum libet fateri videatur, quatenus
aliquid sentit, quod repugnans Chrisio esse conuincitur. Simon Magus. Menander.
Ebion. Cerinthus. Epiphan. Haeres. 30. Iren. lib. 1. c. 26.
For every Heretic, says he, denies Christ to have come in the flesh, though
in word he confesses it, when he holds any thing that is proved repugnant
unto Christ. And so this passage was very pertinent to those times, wherein
there were some that taught most wickedly concerning Christ. As Simon Magus and
Menander his Scholar, who taught himself to be God, and that to the old world
he appeared by the name of the Father, to the Jews by the name of the Son,
and to the Gentiles of the holy Ghost. Ebion, who taught that Christ was
begotten by the conjunction of Joseph and Mary. And Cerinthus, who taught
likewise that Christ came of Joseph and Mary, but he was at the first but
Jesus, and by the coming down of the holy Ghost in his baptism he became
Christ also, for he held God the holy Ghost to be Christ. Now he says, that
the spirit whereby they were led was the spirit of Antichrist, which should
come and then was come, that is, in his forerunners, who were led by the same
spirit of error, and did so nearly resemble him as I have already showed, 1
Ioh. 2.18.

Note, Note.
that the Pope of Rome is not hereby freed from being the Antichrist because he
does not flatly deny Christ: for no man in Saint John's time, against whom he
writes did so, but only they taught erroniously touching Christ, and hereupon
he concludes against them that Antichrist was then come. For as much then as
the Pope teaches things contrary to Christ, he does in effect deny Jesus
Christ to be come in the flesh, and so is Antichrist. For he denies him to be
an all-sufficient Savior, whilst he teaches satisfaction by acts of penance
and the merit of works, and to have had a true humane body, because he
teaches such a body as is in a thousand places at once.

CHAP. 4. VERSE. 8. He that loves not, knows not God; for God is love. Verse.
16. He that abides in love, abides in God, and God in him; for God is love,
etc.


From these words to the end of the Chapter the Apostle treats only of one
thing, Mayer.
viz. love, and therefore taking all together for one Text, the first doubt
occurring is, how God is said to be love? August. Quaestiune. de Trinit.
Saint Augustine says, because power is properly attributed to the Father,
wisdom to the Son, and love to the holy Ghost; therefore, as the Father is
said to be the Almighty, the Son is called the wisdom of the Father, and the
holy Ghost love. P. Lombard. 1 did. 32.
Hence the master of the sentences delivers it, that the holy Ghost is love
essentially, seeing it is the holy Ghost whereby we abide in God, and we are
said by love to abide in him. Tho. Aquin.
Tho. Aquin. says, that love is twofold: First, whereby we love elicitiuely
and formally,

Verse. 11. Th. Aquinas. Si tantus tantillos, iustus iniustos, creator
creaturas, and nos qui samus fra^res and pares and natura conformes debemus
in^^cem diligere. Verse 12.
that finding it impossible for us to love as we should, we might seek it of
him. Secondly, how does it follow from Gods loving of us that we ought to love
one another? This he resolves afterward, verse. 20. because we cannot
otherwise show our love to God, but by loving one another. Again, as Thomas
Aquinas has it; by his example who is our Father, we his children should be
drawn to love. If so great an one loved so little ones, the Creator the
creatures, the Just the unjust, we that are brethren, and equal, and of a like
nature, ought much more to love one another. The love of God is said to be
perfect in us, as perfection is opposed to fiction, it is in us indeed, neither
do we make show hereof only. And this true love he calls the spirit, Verse.
13.
We know that we abide in him by the spirit which he has given unto us,
because it is a principal gift of the spirit.

As he is, so we are in this world, and therefore we have boldness in the day
of judgment? Verse. 17. Oecumen.
To this Oecumenius may answer for all, that we are as Christ was in this
world, when by the mortification of the deeds of the flesh we represent Christ
dying for us, and by true brotherly love we come as near unto him as we can;
for who so does thus shall appear at the last day, not unto condemnation, but
unto life and salvation. Augustine expounds it of God, Augustine.
as he is, so we are in this world, if we love our enemies; and so does Beda.
Beda.
There needs no contention whether of these ways it be expounded, but that
being understood of Christ, is may seem to be put for was; but one says,
Catharinus.
that Christ is still in this world in memory and example, being always
propounded to the eyes of the faithful.

Verse. 18. Oecumen.
To this also Oecumenius answers, that there is a twofold fear, the first
initiall, when for fear of punishment a man comes unto God; the second
profiting, whereby a man out of the perfect love which he bears unto God
becomes sollicitous, lest in any thing he should fail of doing that which
ought to be done toward him, whom he most dearly loves; Psalm 19.10. August.
Ser. 214 de temp. lib 83. quaest. q. 36. Tanto minor sit timor, quanto patria,
quo tendimus propior: mayor enim timor debe^esse perigrinantium, minor
propinquantium, ^^^^us per^^^entium.
and this love when a man attaineth to, he is without all fear of punishment,
and so without the trouble that comes by this fear. And of this the Psalmist
speaks, affirming it to be pure. S. Augustine says, that no man whilst he
lives can be free from fear, because he cannot be free from sin, and so
has not yet perfect charity; but this fear is the less, by how much the
Country to which we are tending, is the nearer; for the fear of those that
are in their perigrination is the greater, the fear of those that draw nigh is
the lesser, but of those that come thy her none at all.

Touching the initiall fear before spoken of, he grants it to be necessary
to bring us into a right Christian estate, as the bristle makes way for the
Shoo-makers thread; and a burning hot iron (though for the present it makes
the wound and pain the greater) yet by drying up the putrified humor it
takes away all pain at the last. Tertul. in Scorpia^^, cap. 12.
Tertullian says, that the fear which is not in love, is worldly fear,
whereby a man is not afraid of death for Christ his sake. But the fear of
death is not here handled, but the fear which is in respect of the day of
judgment, of which he spoke in the words before going. And therefore I
subcribe to Augustine and Oecumenius, that no servile fear breeding anxiety
and trouble in the mind, is in perfect love, so that a man should be in fear
of damnation, for the more perfection of love a man attaineth to, the more free
he is from all such fear, being at peace with God. This fear is the less,
the more grace a man has attained unto, but at the day of judgment, when
charity shall be perfected, there shall be no such fear at all, but all
confidence and boldness, to which fear is here opposed. Fear of punishment
is in the beginning of grace, but after some proceedings made herein, this
works no more but the fear of offending God, because he is good and
gracious, so that there is no painfulnesse now any more in respect of the
punishments to come, but the trouble of the mind, that is, arises out of a
solicitude and carfulness about being in Gods favor, and continuing
therein, in respect of our own infirmities.

Verse. 20.
whom he sees not? To this it is commonly answered, that things seen and
present do affect us more than those that are absent and not seen, our
brother that is like unto us, continually with us, and subject to the same
affections and necessities, if he be not loved of us, in natural reason it
cannot be, that we should love God whom we see not. But yet by faith we may
apprehend so of him, as to love him more.

Note, Note.
how great the excellency of love is, in that God himself is said to be love,
it is thus spoken of him in respect of any other attribute of righteousness,
or wisdom, or power, but only of love that we might the more prize his
endless love toward us in giving his only Son to the death for us, and so
be the rather drawn to mutual love.

Note again, that the only way to have a quiet conscience, Note.
and not to be distracted with the fear and dread of Gods judgments, is to
have true and unfeigned love in us toward one another. For fear comes out of
the conscience of sin, from which we shall be free, if we have such love in us,
we shall not sin against the degree, the life, the chastity, the goods, or
the good name of our brother, which kind of sins are usually the original of
inward trouble and fear in the mind.

CHAP. V.
IN this Chapter the Apostle treats of faith, proving that the faithful love
the children of God, because they love God, and that they love God because they
keep his commandments, urging to believe in Christ because of the testimony
which God the Father has given unto him. The coherence of it with the former
is this. Having proved that he which loves God must needs love his brother, he
proceeds to confirm it further from the consideration of the nature of
faith. Hereby we are begotten of God, and therefore we cannot but love others,
that are begotten of him also, and the ground of this is our loving of God the
Father, both of us and them; for he that loves a man, loves his children also
for his sake, Verse. 1, 2. So that this is indeed a new argument, we cannot love
God, but we must love our brethren also, because they are the begotten of God,
this being the state of every faithful person. And having reasoned so much
about the love of God, he shows in the next place what this love is, viz. to
keep his commandments, Verse. 2, 3. and that it may not be thought hereupon,
that no man then can love God, he shows, that the faithful have the Spirit
whereby they are so inflamed with the love of God, as that this is their
continual study and care, and by the assistance of the same Spirit they
overcome the world, the chief enemy hindering them from keeping these
Commandments, v. 4, 5. Then because the object of faith is Christ Jesus, he
shows by what certain testimony he came, that we might undoubtedly believe,
pressing the same, verse. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. and then what benefit does redound to
the believer, even eternal life, verse. 11, 12. for which cause he says, that
he wrote unto them, resuming again the argument touching boldness before
used, chap. 4 17. For if Christ and by him life be ours, we cannot but with
confidence ask any thing at his hands, verse. 14, 15. wherefore he exhorts to
pray for them that sin, so that their sinning be not unto death, verse. 16.
yielding a reason of praying for such, verse. 17. and then affirming again the
immunity of Gods children from sin, and showing how all the world is under
sin, but the faithful in grace through the knowledge of God and of Jesus
Christ, he concludes with a dehortation from idolatry, verse, 19, 20, 21.

1 JOHN Chapter 5. Verse 2. Hereby we know that we love the children of God,
when we love God and keep his Commandments.


IT is a marvel, Mayer.
that the Apostle having reasoned before from our loving of one another to the
loving of God, does now reason from our loving of God to our loving of one
another. But certainly there may be areciprocall argument drawn both ways,
we cannot have true love toward one another, but in the love of God and
obedience to his Commandments, as Piscator notes, Piscator.
for there may be a wicked love and delight in one another; this appears to
be no true love, because we have no love of God in loving thus, seeing his
Commandments are transgressed. It was necessary therefore having spoken so
much of mutual love to insert this here, lest that should be taken for true
love and laudable before God, which is wicked and damnable. In the first verse
he speaks in the singular number, He that loves him that begets, Verse. 1.
loves him that is begotten of him. But here in the plural, whereupon many
have gathered, that by him which is begotten, Christ Jesus, the only begotten
Son of God is meant, touching the love of whom he speaks, because many that
outwardly embraced the Faith of Christ, Hilar 6. c Trin. August. lib de. fide,
^2. Beda.
did not in heart love him, but were enemies unto him. But many again on the
other side expound it of the regenerate, as Dydimus, Oecumenius, Glossa
ordmaria. etc.

But I assent rather to this latter, because of the sudden change of the
number, and an assumption, as it were, made out of the former verse, and
because every one that believes is said to be begotten of God, the same word
being used that is to express him which is begotten. Verse. 3.
In that his Commancements are said not to be grievous, it may seem that they
are possible to be kept in every thing: a speech agreeable to this is that of
our Savior Christ, My yoke is easy, Mat. 11 28.
and my burden light. But the next words scrue to explain these, Verse. 4.
Because every one that is borne of God overcomes the world. The true
faithful person delights in Gods Commandments, Rom 7.
though by reason of the flesh that he carries still about with him, he
cannot perfectly fulfill them. They are not grievous, because they do not
withold us from any thing profitable or truly pleasant unto us. August. de
natura and gr^t. c* 43. Quo^ odo est grave cum dilectionis est mandatum. Aut
en^m quisqua non diligit and grave est, aut diligit and grave esse non (...)
est. dug. de not. perfect. inssitae.
Saint Augustine speaks excellently, in showing that they are not grievous:
How should that be grievous, which is the Commandment of love: for either a
man does not love, and so it is grievous, or else he loves, and so it cannot
be grievous. Popish writers do hereupon insult over us, teaching that no man
can perfectly keep Gods Commandments, for if it be impossible, say they, for
the regenerate to keep them without sinning, how are they said not to be
grievous? Saint Augustine shall answer for us, it is the love and delight that
we take in them that makes them not grievous, seeing hereby we are not pressed
as with a burden, but cleuated as with wings, as the same Father also
speaks. For though we cannot do the thing that we delight in so exactly, yet
it is not grievous unto us. As Gregory speaks, Greg. lib. 5. in 1 Reg 12.
Quid grave non leuiter ^oll^rat qui amat? quicquid enim diligitur cum magna
deuotione por latur.
what grievous thing does not he lightly bear that loves? For whatsoever is
beloved, is borne with great devotion. Indeed, if for our imperfections and
failings in keeping Gods Commandments we should be judged, it must needs be
grievous, but seeing by Faith we are stated in him that has done all things
perfectly, and God does not behold us any more in our selves but in Christ,
whose perfect righteousness is ours; we become secure in respect of judgment,
and our delight stands firm in Gods Commandments. To the natural man the
Law is an heavy burden, but to the spiritual, such as all the faithful are,
it being spiritual, is a delight through the Spirit that is in them.

Note, Note.
that the love of God is not, but in him that keeps his Commandments; the
wicked man that tradeth daily in sin, whatsoever he boasts of his loving of
God, yet he has not one dram of true love in him.

Note again, Note.
that there is not that unpleasant life which the world imagines to the godly,
that make conscience of keeping Gods Laws, not daring to aberre here-from in
any thing; for Gods Commandments are not grievous unto them, as all Iaacobs
pains were not unto him for the love which he bare to Rachel, as the Brides
putting on of all her ornaments though it be some trouble, yet it is not
painful but delightful, and so for any man to lay off his old indecent
clothes, and to put on a fair new suit of apparel.

CHAP. 5. VER. 6. This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ,
etc. and the Spirit witnesses that the Spirit is the truth. Verse. 7. For there
are three that bear witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit,
and these three are one. Verse. 8. And there are three that bear witness in
earth, the Spirit, the Water and the Blood, and these three agree in one.


Having spoken of our regeneration and adoption to be the Oecumen. in 1 Ioh.
sons of God, here he proceeds to 5.
set forth the Author of it, Christ Jesus, and by what means it is effected,
namely by water and blood; and therefore to show this, he declares by what
means he, as he was man, came to be adopted, through whom we partake of the
same dignity, namely by water and blood. And indeed there was a threefold
testimony, Matthew. 3.
that he is the Son of God: First, in the time of his baptism by water.
Secondly, a little before his bloody passion, when that voice came again from
Heaven like thunder, John 13.
I have glorified my name, and will glorify it. Thirdly, after his death when
he arose again, which could not be but by a divine Spirit in him. In that
these three, the Water, the Blood, and the Spirit are said to agree in one, the
meaning is, that they agree in testifying the same thing, that Christ is the
Son of God, and that we by him are made so likewise; yet some Fathers think
that the Father testifying of him in his baptism is meant by the Spirit.

Concerning the Blood and Water, Mayer.
wherein the chiese difficulty of this place lies, I find no difference
almost in others from this of Oecumenius. Th. Aquinas,
Thomas Aquinas understands the Water of our Baptism, and the Blood set
forth hereby for the washing away of our sins, and so does the Gloss. Glos.
^rd. Beza.
Beza adds also, the Blood represented in the Lords Supper. But for so much
as the Water and Blood by which Christ came is spoken of, I rather assent to
Oecumenius. But for that which is added, It is the Spirit that witnesses, that
the Spirit is truth; I do not think that the Spirit here sets forth his
resurrection, but the Spirit descending at the feast of Pentecost, as he had
promised. When as the speech may seem to be strange, as we read it, according
to the Greek; the vulgar Latin renders it, The Spirit testifies that Christ
is truth: but for so much as here a word is plainly altered that ought not to
be, we must rather cleave to the original, and so the words will carry a good
sense, if we understand them as Faber does, Faber Stapul.
because the Spirit is truth, these last words serving to illustrate the
former, as if he should have said, It is the Spirit that gives restimony unto
Christ, and his testimony ought to be received, because the Spirit is truth.
For that which follows of the three that bear record in Heaven and the three
in earth, these things being thus premised, it has no difficulty in it. Beza
by the Spirit will have the vinifying virtue of the Spirit understood, showing
it self in the faithful, who are by Baptism ingraffed into Christ, but I
rest upon that which has been already delivered. The Water and Blood which
are said to be upon earth and the Spirit, Aug contr. Maxin inum, c. 22. Th.
Aquinas. Gorran. Gagneus.
are expounded by some, of the Water and Blood that flowed out of his side upon
the Cross, and of the water of his tears when he wept over Jerusalem, and of
the blood which he sweat in the Garden. Blood came from him at other times
also, testifying the truth of his humanity, as at his circumcision, and when
he was scourged, Mat. 27. By the Spirit, they understand the Spirit that he
gave up, when in his Passion he said, Father, into thy hands I commend my
Spirit. And so they make these three the witnesses of his humane nature, the
preceding three of his divine which does not seem improbable to me, but let
the Reader consider.

Touching the words following, Verse. 9.
wherein the divine testimony from heaven is further urged comparatively; by
the consent of all Expositors, the testimony of men there, is the testimony of
the Prophets, who spoke of the Messiah to come; if this be received, then much
more the Testimony immediately from Heaven ought to be received, it being
believed, that this is the Messiah who has already come. Or it may be an
allusion more particularly, as some will have it, to that Law of witnesses, at
the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall stand. For if humane
testimony must be believed, much more the divine.

He that believes, Verse. 10. Oecumen.
has the testimony in himself; that is, by being made the son of God, such
as he believes Christ to be; for it is by the Spirit of Christ that he
believes this.

Note, Note.
that if upon testimony we believe things, then there is great reason, that
without all doubting we should believe in Christ, touching whom there has
been so ample testimony, the Father from heaven pronouncing him to be his
dearly beloved Son, the Spirit by coming down and resting upon him, and
his own declaring of himself by signs and miracles; for hereby it plainly
appears, that he was the Son of God. Then the water and blood that flowed
from him, which could not come from a fantastical, but a true natural body,
and his giving up of the ghost, for hereby he is manifested to have been man.

If any be incredulous and do not believe, Note.
it is because they have no part in Christ: for had they interest in him, they
should then have him by his spirit dwelling in them, and so they could not but
turn witnesses of the same themselves. The unbelieving and doubtful herein
are guilty of an horrible sin, viz. making God a lier, which he cannot but
severely revenge.

CHAP. 5. VERSE. 16. If any man sees his brother sin a sin not unto death,
let him ask and he shall give life unto him, to those that sin not unto
death. There is a sin unto death, I do not say concerning that, that he
should ask, etc.


The sin which is unto death here spoken of, Oecumen. in 1 Job. 5.
is that sin from which there is no show of conversion, and to retain in the
mind injuries done: for the ways of those, that keep injuries done in their
minds, tend unto death, says Solomon; Prou. 12.
because such always keeping anger in their minds against their neighbors,
are never led with true penitencie, but sin impenitently. And lest some such
sin, as he speaks of, should be thought incident to the children of God,
he clears them, not only in respect of the sin, which is unto death, but
of that which is not unto death, saying, Verse. 18.
Every one that is borne of God sins not. But that none such should grow
secure, he immediately subioyneth, that this comes to pass, because he
keeps himself, so that if he should not daily have a great care of
himself, he should be subject to sinning. By the world, which is said, to lie
wholly in sin, Verse. 19.
the unconverted are to be understood, such as we sometime were, and like unto
whom still we are through aptness to sin; Verse. 20.
but that God has given us to understand, and so to avoid that which others
run unto.

This place, by the confession of Saint Augustine, Mayer.
is one of the hardest of all the Bible: August ser. 11. de verb d^ami.
and therefore diverse Expositors have expounded it diversely. Augustine
himself, after that he had delivered one exposition, S^ym. in ^onte cap 21.
Retract l 1 c. 19. Siquis in s^chrata mentis peru^rsita^e h^ne vitam sin^erit.
that the sin unto death, is the envying of our brothers grace, retracteth,
giving another, that it is the finishing of this life in the wicked
perverseness of his mind, and this is followed by many, Hieronym. in cap. 14.
Ierem. Glos. interlin. Lyranus, Magister sent. 2 sent. d. 43. And hereupon some
Popish writers infer prayers for the dead, that have not died in obstinacy,
but showing penitencie before their death. Lorin^^ in 1 Ioh. 5.16.
But this collection is worthily rejected by one of their own side, because it
is not spoken, as of sins done heretofore, but now in doing; and therefore
whilst a man lives. If any man sees his brother sinning, not has seen him
to have sinned.

Gl^ss. Cassianus Call. 1^. c 10. O^ig. H^^^. 12. i^ Ex^d.
a venial, that is, a smaller and lighter offense, such as idle words, vain
behavior, or wanton looks: and hereupon the Popish found the distinction of
mortal and venial sins, teaching that some grosser sins only deserve
death, and that lesser sins do not make the soul subject to death. Now
because it is absurd, the sin unto death being thus understood, to expound
this sentence, as the words run, the glosses say, that common persons are not
to pray for such, but the Priests only, to whose censure they are to be
referred. But this also is worthily rejected by one of their own side, Lorin^^
in 2 Ioh. 5.16.
because it is added, that he shall give life to those that sin not unto
death; whereby is intimated, that the sin to be prayed for, makes the sinner
subject to death also. And it is a poor shift to say, that the Priests might
pray for such as sinned unto death, but not the common people, seeing Saint
John enioyneth a vacation from prayer to all in this case. That there are some
sins not worthy of death, is also contrary to all true Divinity: See Iam.
2.10. Deuteronomy. 27. verse. last. Matthew. 5.19. Matthew. 12.36.

Beza. Piscator. Carth^s. Faber Stapul.
when the Spirit enlightening the mind to understand the truth, yet it is of
spite and malice impugned, as the Scribes and Pharisees, contrary to their
knowledge, did maliciously set themselves against Christ: when any commit this
sin, they say we are not to pray for it, Matt. 12.31, 32.
because our Savior Christ has pronounced, that it shall never be forgiven.
Hill. in Psalm. 140.
Near unto this exposition comes Hilary, expounding it of sin committed
out of certain knowledge and malice; and Chrysostom. Chrysan Psalm. 49.
And to this indeed do I subscribe, if a man sins out of infirmity, raise
him up by prayer and by good counsel; Gal. 6.1.
but he that is a brother, and maliciously leaves his Christian calling,
doing presumptuously contrary to his knowledge, deriding all admonitions and
scorning them, cast not holy things to such dogs, Matthew. 7.
neither admonish, nor pray for them any more.

Oecumenius, expounding it of such as are not led with any penitencie. But the
merely impenitent are not to be excluded from our prayers: for by praying, a
mollified heart may happily be obtained for them, as for Saul by Steuens
prayers: otherwise, no persecutors might have been prayed for, Matthew. 5.
which notwithstanding was usual, and is commanded.

Tertull. de Pudicitia, c. 2. and 19
but there is no ground for this in the holy Scriptures.

Anastas Nicenus quaest. 58. in Script. 1 Samuel 2.25.
If a man sin against God, who shall plead for him? But the contrary unto
this is plainly taught by Christ, saying, Every sin and blasphemy against the
Father and against the Son shall be forgiven.

Gagnous. Turrian.
but such as in time of persecution have been beaten from the faith, have
returned again; and seeing the end of excommunication is to bring the offender
home by repentance, I cannot see how such as are excommunicate may be reckoned
amongst those that are not to be prayed for.

There is a sin not unto death. The vulgar Latin has it, Verse. 17. Caictan.
Salmeron.
There is a sin unto death. But by Popish Writers themselves it is
acknowledged to be corrupted herein, though some, thinking that this being
granted, will make much against them, will by no means yield unto it. Yet all
ancient Writers, who have had occasion to mention this Text, read it according
to the Greek, as Tertullian, Ierom, Ambrose, and Pactanus; and later Writers,
as Varablus, Johannes Benedict^us, Clarius, etc. Touching him that is borne of
God, Verse. 15.
who is said not to sin, enough has been spoken of this already, 1 Ioh.
3.6, 7. etc. Some think that the sin unto death before spoken of only is
meant, Beda. Hug^. Gl^sserdin.
from which they are free. But according to Oecumenius and others I hold, that
other sins are meant also, whereby they sin not in heart and mind, which
is set against all sin. He that is borne of God keeps himself: In the
vulgar Latin it is, The generation of God keeps him; which howsoever it does
better point at the fountain of the divine virtue, by which we are preserved,
yet an alteration in the reading is not to be admitted. And being read, as in
the Greek, nothing is hereby ascribed to the liberty of a man's own will,
before grace comes; but only it is taught, that a man regenerated by the
Spirit that is in him, persisteth in a continual care of avoiding sin: for
in naming him one borne of God, he does plainly refer us to his new birth,
as the original of this godly care, and not to any thing naturally in him,
which is to be considered against those that from hence maintain free will.
The evil one touches him not; that is, the Devil, as the word here used is
commonly taken. He is said not to touch him, because though he may tempt him,
yet seeking thus to hurt him, he profits him; neither can he tempt him
without Gods permission for his good at the last.

The whole world lies in evil; Verse. 19.
that is, as Oecumenius has already expounded it, the unregenerate company,
such as the most are, are not only tempted, and at some times prevailed
against by Satan, but are wholly mancipated unto wickedness, and to do his
will. Verse. 20.
Christ is said to be eternal life, that is, the Author of eternal life to
those that believe in his name.

Babes keep your selves from Idolt. Verse 21. Da^^mas.
One moves a question, why S. John writing to those that were so well grounded
in the truth, adds this admonition: and answers, that this was added for
their sakes, that were not so grounded, but were newly turned from Heathen
idolatry, lest they should relapse again: and moreover, that false doctrines,
Beda. Hugo.
because they are fictions, are a kind of Idols: and so some others. But the
most received and best interpretation, is to understand Idols literally, as
Oecumenius does, and Lyranus, Glossa ordinaria, Caietan, etc. And so this
admonition is most aptly added, after Christ set forth, verse. 21. to be the
true God, therefore the Christian religion is to be adhered to; neither ought
we by any means to be drawn back to idolatry again, as most opposite unto
it. So that considering what has fallen out amongst Christians, since the
writing of this Epistle, it may justly be counted a prophetical admonition
needful for these times to take heed of Popery, as being, through the gross
idolatry thereof, nothing else but ^enued Gentilisme. But they dally with the
word, and say that it is an Idol that we are to take heed of, not an Image,
that is, a representation of some god that never was, not of any divine thing
that is. But the vulgar Latin, reading it simulachrum, overthrows this
distinction, and takes away the benefit of it. Epiphan. epist. ad Ichan.
Hier^s. Episc.
And so Epiphanius long ago conceived. For says he; Entering into a Church at
Anablatha to pray, I found there a cloth hanging upon the door, painted, as it
were, with the image of Christ, or of some Saint; which when I had seen in the
Church of Christ, against the authority of the Scriptures, I cut it in pieces,
and advised the keepers of that place, rather to wind up some dead body in
it. This Epistle was translated by Jerome, out of Greek into Latin, showing
what his judgment also was herein.

Note here, that according to these Ancients, the image of Christ set up in a
Church is against the holy Scriptures, and not images of heathen gods only.

Note that Christian love binds us, Note.
as to pray for the remission of our own sins, so for the remission of the
sins of others also, that by infirmity are at any time overtaken with sin.
And prayers in this kind made by the faithful shall be heard, that we may be
excited the more to desire the prayers of one another, and the more ready in
love to put in practice this duty.

Note again, Note.
that some kind of sinning is most dangerous, viz. to sin wilfully and
willingly, contemning all admonitions. As the case of Saul was woeful, when God
forbade Samuel to pray for him, so is the case of such, the benefit of the
prayers of the faithful is hereby taken away: Heb. 10.26.
If we sin willingly, after that we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sin.

THE SECOND CATHOLIC Epistle of St. JOHN.
TOuching the Author of this Epistle, I have spoken already in my Preface to
the first, proving it by manifold testimonies to be the Epistle of John the
Apostle, and so Canonical Scripture. I have also there showed the reason, why
he writes himself Elder, and not Apostle, or Servant of Jesus Christ, as
others have done. Oecumenius thinks, Oecumen.
that he had respect herein to their first receiving of the Gospel in those
parts by the Ministry of Paul, after whom he came to preach unto them, and
therefore not being the first there, he would not write himself Apostle, nor
Servant, because of the singular love of the Lord toward him, exempting him
from the fear of servitude. How these two Epistles, being directed to
particular persons, may bear the name of Catholic, I have also showed in my
Preface to the Epistle of Saint James. The argument of this Epistle is an
exhortation to love, and an admonition against heretics. To the exhortation
he makes way by congratulating the faith and obedience of her and of her
children, verse. 1, 2.3, 4. Then he exhorts to love, commending the precept
hereabout from the antiquity of it, verse. 5. and showing that the true love of
God consists in obedience, verse. 6. Then he inueigheth against deceivers,
giving warning against all familiarity with them, verse. 7, etc. to the 11. And
lastly, he concludes with the intimation of a purpose to see them shortly,
and with salutations, verse. 12, 13.

2 JOHN Verse 1. The Elder to the elect Lady and to her children.


THere is much difference amongst Expositors about these words, Mayer.
the elect Lady, who should be meant hereby. Clemens Alex. Athanas. in
Synopsi. Th. Aquinas.
Some will have Electa, (...), to be a proper name, or that her name was
Electa, and being a person of high quality she was called (...), Lady, as
amongst the Turks, he which is next unto the Emperor is called, as by a
particular name, Despotes, or Lord: And amongst the French, the next to the
King is absolutely called Monsieur; to others of his kindred is prefixed their
Christian name, Beza.
as Charles Monsieur, etc. Others will not by any means have Electa taken for
a proper name, but that she, to whom Saint John wrote, was both a Lady of
great worth, and of great zeal to the truth, in so much as that she
distributed much to poor Christians, and was every way of rare piety, which
did argue the true grace of God in her, for which cause he styles her an elect
Lady: If Electa had been her proper name, Oecumen.
it should have been placed before (...), not after. Some again expound it
either way. Lastly, some think that not any particular woman is here meant,
but the Church in Babylon, the praise whereof was the greater, Clemens Alex.
Hugo. Tho. Anglicus.
that being in so wicked a place, it cleaued so constantly to the truth. But
because there is no need to fly to any such mystical sense, and there is no
reason, the third Epistle being written to a particular man, to interpret this
otherwise than written to a particular woman; and lastly, because the children
of her sister are mentioned, verse. 13. I think with Beza, that this
allegorical Exposition is not to be received, but that which expounds it of
a particular woman; neither can there be any certainty whether her name be here
set down or no: but I do rather incline to think that one or both these
words be her proper name, both because it is not used any where in writing to a
particular person to omit his name; and if the word (...) be commonly
understood, I cannot see how any mortal man could give any such title to any,
seeing to know who are Elect is peculiar to God only; and lastly, because most
of the ancient Greek Expositors take it for a proper name.

In the residue of this Epistle if there be any difficulty, Verse. 7.
as verse. 7. where he is said to be the Antichrist that denied Christ to be
come in the flesh, it has been already handled, 1 Ioh. 2.22. and Chapter 4.1.
Besides this, there is but one doubt more touching these words, Verse. 10.
If any man comes unto you and brings not this Doctrine, receive him not to
house, neither bid him (God speed.) Verse. 11. Verse. 11.
For he that bids him (God speed) does partake of his evil works. By one
that brings not this Doctrine, it is commonly agreed that an impugner of the
truth is meant, living yet in the Christian Congregation, and pretending to be
a Christian, not a Jew or Gentile that was never converted, but has ever been
an open enemy to Christianity; for with such Saint Paul does allow feasting
together, 1 Cor. 10.27.
and when he forbids companying with wicked persons, 1 Cor. 5.11.
he explaineth himself to mean not any indifferently, but brethren that were
such. Otherwise all means of their conversion should be taken away. He is one
that has embraced the truth, but now is depraved with heresy, against
communion with whom the Apostle gives warning here. Beda. Gloss. Ordin.
Thus it is applied by Beda, and the ordinary gloss alleging also John's own
example to illustrate what he has here taught. Properemus hinc ne corruat
domus, in qua inimicus veritatis est. Polycarpe. Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. c. 13.
He coming into a Bath where Cerinthus the Heretic was, hastened out again,
saying, Properemus hinc, etc. Let us make haste hence, lest the house fall upon
us where the enemy of the truth is. And Polycarpe, the Disciple of John, when
Martian the Heretic came to salute him, called him the firstborn of the
Devil. We must also estrange our selves from obstinate Heretics when there is
no further hope of their conversion; those usual passages that are betwixt
neighbor and neighbor of entertainment and of salutation, must not be betwixt
us and Heretics, as we would not be counted companions with them in their
wickedness, Cypri. l. 1. Epist. 3. Tam long ab jis nos sinus separati quam
illi sunt ab Ecclesia profugi.
and smart accordingly. Cyprian is so strict in amplifying this point, as that
he would not have any Commerce, Feastings, or Colloquies betwixt Heretics and
true Christians, but that we should separate our selves as far from them as
they are fled from the Church. The word translated (God speed) is (...), in
which it is alluded to the saying of the Prophet Esaias, Esa. 57.21.
There is no peace unto the wicked; in the Septuagint it is (...), according to
Ireneus. Iren. lib. 1. c. 13.
Therefore (...) should not be said unto them. As enemies and rebels to our
King are by all good subjects avoided, so Heretics that are enemies to our
supreme King and Lord.

Note, Note.
that it is not a thing indifferent, but dangerous to the soul to have
communion, and to be in good terms with obstinate Heretics, and therefore all
are to be admonished to shake off this communion. For hereby, lo what apparent
hurt has ensued to very many in this Kingdom, to be reduced back again to
Babel, out of which they had escaped, besides the insensible hurt that is to
thousands by their too much familiarity with Papists.

THE THIRD EPISTLE of the Apostle JOHN.
IN this Epistle there is nothing difficult, saving that a question may be, who
this Gaius was, in the vulgar Latin called Gaius. We read of three of this
name; 1. Act. 19.29. where one Gaius a Macedonian, and Paul's companion in his
journey, is mentioned. 2. Act. 20 4. Gaius a Derbean, is said to accompany Paul
to Asia amongst others. 3. Romans 16.23. Gaius is said to be Paul's Oast, who as
all hold it most probable, was a Corinthian, and the very same Gaius whom Paul
baptized, 1 Cor. 1.14. and therefore Beza gathers, that Paul was at Corinth
when he wrote to the Romans. And to this Gaius it is thought that John wrote
this Epistle, Beda. Lyran. Gl^ss. O^din.
and his hospitality here commended makes it the more probable: for in some
Copies, both Greek and Latin, where Paul calls him his Oast, it is added,
and of the whole Church. Many hold him to have been a Bishop, Dor^theus in
Syno^s. Petrus de natal. l. 6. c. 100. Sedulan Romans
some of Ephesus next to Timothy, and some the first of the Thessalonians. But
Ignatius says, that Onesimus was the next to Timothy, Epist. ad Ephesians. But I
cannot see any probability that he was a Bishop, seeing nothing peculiar to
this office is here written, as doubtless there would have been if he had
been a Bishop, especially there being so just occasion in speaking against
Diotrephes. I hold therefore with Beda, that he was not one sufficient to
preach the Gospel, but that with his goods he supported those that did preach
it.

Touching Diotrephes, Verse. 9.
against whom he inueigheth, saying, That he wrote an Epistle to the Church,
but Diotrephes, that loves preeminence, receives us not; It is uncertain who
this man was, but most probable that he was an Arch-heretike, as Beda calls
him, Beda.
who by teaching new things, had rather usurp unto him the primacy of
knowledge, than humbly hearken to the old precepts of the Church which Saint
John preached. The name Diotrephes, signifying one nourished by Jupiter,
argues one of an high rank, for Homer calls Kings by a name not much
differing here-from, (...) Whereas in the Greek it is, S^ripsissem forsitan
Ecclesiae.
I wrote an Epistle, the vulgar Latin has it, I would happily have written, as
though being about to have commended the charity and hospitality of Gaius to
the Church, he were hindered, because he knew that Diotrephes would hinder the
reading of it. But according to the Greek, which is truest, if it be read, I
wrote, it is most likely that he meant his first Epistle, which Diotrephes, who
perhaps was Bishop where Gaius dwelt, would not suffer it to be read to the
Church there.

Who Demetrius was, Verse. 12.
here mentioned also, it is unknown, only he is a good example for all men in
place to imitate. He says, that the truth gave testimony to him, that is, they
were not words only that went of him, but indeed he performed what all men
reported of him. Learn we by the example of Diotrephes not to affect
preeminence, for this is the ground most commonly of damnable heresy: let that
rebuke given by Christ to Zebedeus his children, affecting superiority, be
always sounding in our ears to keep us humble and lowly. And by the example
of Demetrius, let us learn by well doing and not by making a good show, to lay
the foundation of a good name, especially so that they which are our ouer-seers
in the Lord, may give a good testimony unto us.

THE CATHOLIC EPISTLE OF THE Apostle IVDE.
THis Epistle is and has been received for canonical Scripture in all ages
since the Apostles days; no doubt being made, but that Judas, the Author of
it, was an Apostle. Luther in Jude.
Only Luther coniectureth, he was but a Disciple of the Apostles, because
verse. 17. he exhorts to remember the words of the Apostles. Perkins in Jude.
But one answers this well, that he lived after Peter and Paul, and writing
this Epistle when they were dead and gone, he might well put them in mind of
their writings, being of so great note and name, that to allege any thing
formerly taught by them, was likely to move the more. And in tracking Peter in
his 2. Epistle, Chapter 2. which is another thing objected, he does no more
than has been formerly done in the Books of Chronicles, setting forth many
things had before in Samuel, and Kings; and by the Evangelists, and especially
Mark, whose Gospel is almost nothing else but an abridgement of Matthew. This
Jude is called also Thaddeus, Mark. 3.18. and Lebbeus, Mat. 10.3. which two
words according to Rabanus, Rabanus.
signify one thing, viz. Cordis cultor, a purifier of his heart, or one that
husbandeth the heart. It is generally thought that he had all these names, but
in the Gospells is called Lebbeus, or Thaddeus, not Judas, because the
Evangelists had a desire to blot out the memory of Judas his treachery, by
leaving out the name from amongst the rest of the Apostles. But it seems to
me, that having diverse names, they were promiscuously used without any such
respect: for if they had had a desire that the name of Judas should have been
forgotten, they would not have put Judas Iscariot into the number as they do,
and this Author would not have written himself Judas, but Thaddeus or Lebbeus,
in the superscription of this Epistle. But happily because though others called
him Lebbeus or Thaddeus, he in modesty would not affix this name, signifying a
dresser of the heart, lest he should seem to arrogate to himself, according
to one. Th. Aquinas.
But he writes himself, Jude, the brother of James, that is, of James the
son of Alpheus, who is by many ancient Historians reported to have been the
first Bishop of Jerusalem, and for his most holy life, of wonderful reputation
even amongst the Jews themselves. And therefore many Expositors think, that
Jude here makes mention of him as being his brother, to purchase the more
credit to his Epistle. But if we observe the Lords sending forth of his twelve
Disciples by couples, we shall find that James the son of Alpheus, and
Thaddeus are coupled together; Mat. 10.3.
and with the other, Judas the traitor, Simon was coupled. To the end therefore
that he might distinguish himself from that Judas so infamous, he begins,
Judas the brother of James, as by Christ they had been formerly coupled.

Touching the Argument, all agree that there were certain filthy Heretics
sprung up in the Church, that under the color of Christian liberty did live in
a most sensual manner, and contemned the Magistrates authority, Epiphan.
Oecumen.
such as Epiphanius and Oecumenius name the Gnostickes, Nicolaitans,
Valentinians, and Marcionites, that rose out of the School of Simon. Against
these Jude here writes, describing their wickedness, and showing the
judgments that hang over their heads therefore. For Epiphanius having set
forth the filthiness of the Gnostikes (whose root, as it were, Simon was, but
that the Gnostikes were a fifth rank after him, Menander, Saturninus,
Basilides, and Nicolas coming between) thus says, The Spirit of God being
moved in the Apostle Judas about those things wrote thus; Whatsoever things
they know naturally, as bruit beasts, herein they corrupt themselves, etc.

Touching the parts of this Epistle, after a salutation, verse. 1, 2. he
declares the occasion of his writing, viz. the springing up of ungodly
heretics, lest they should be seduced by them, that they might rather oppose
them and stand for the truth, verse. 3, 4. touching which ungodly ones, First,
he lays open their vices, verse. 4 Secondly, he rehearses examples of the
like, and of the judgments befalling them, showing how near a similitude is
betwixt these and them, verse. 5, 6, 7, 8. Thirdly, making way by a contrary
example, he taxes other vices in them, verse. 9.10. Fourthly, he adds other
examples and similitudes, whereby he might yet aggrau^te their viciousness
the more, verse. 11, 12, 13. Fifthly, he applies Enochs prophecy against them,
verse. 14, 15. Sixthly, without using any further similitude, he taxes other
sins in them, verse. 16.

The rest of the Epistle is spent in exhortation; First, to remember the
predictions of the Apostles touching such men, verse. 17, 18, 19. Secondly, to
keep themselves in a pure and holy way to the end, verse. 20 21. Thirdly, to
deliver others from the great dangers wherein they were by reason of those
wicked ones before spoken of, verse. 22.23. so ascribing glory to God, that only
knew and was able to preserve them from infection, verse. 24, 25.

IVDE Verse 4. For certain men are crept in, which of old were proscribed unto
this judgment, etc.


THe only difference amongst Expositors here is, M^y^r.
to what time these words, proscribed o^ old, have reference. O^cumen in I^d.
Some refer them to the Apostles and to our Savior Christ, as if it were
meant that they were spoken of by them long before, both by Peter and Paul,
when they say that such seducers shall come in the last days, Ad. Sasboul.
and by Christ when he says, Many shall come in my name and deceive many. Some
refer these words to the Prophets, as if they had spoken of them and of their
condemnation long ago, for in this sense the word (...) is used, Romans 15.
Whatsoever was written before hand, was written for our learning; in Greek,
(...): and this does certainly pertain to the old Testament. So likewise Gal.
3.1. the same word is again used, Before whose eyes Christ Jesus has been
plainly prescribed, that is, written of before in the Prophets, according to
Jerome. (...). Heb. 1.
Likewise the word (...), intimates a thing not a little before done, but long
ago, as where it is said, Many ways and in diverse manners God spoke of old by
the Prophets. Lastly, Tho. A^^in^s. G^o^. ^^du^. Faber Stap. ^^^cator. Perk^^s.
the examples subioyned of the Israelites, Sodomites, and Angels falling, etc.
are all out of the old Testament, by which these Heretics seem to be
prefigured. Lastly, some refer these words to Gods preordaining of them from
eternity unto condemation, as if the names of all reprobate persons were
written in a book. And unto this last do ours generally subscribe. Gagneus.
One understands the words both ways, they were both spoken of before, and
from eternity appointed to this reprobate sense in which they do such filthy
and abominable things. And this being appointed of old by God to this
judgment, Bez^.
as one observes, is well interposed here to stay the minds of Christian
people, if they should be discouraged when they should see some of their own
profession to turn such monsters: for nothing came to pass herein, but what
in the divine providence was long ago appointed, the very names of all the
seducers being as it were from eternity set down in a book, and therefore
true Christians might be glad that they were thus laid open, that they might
the better beware of them. For mine own part, I do not see any such necessity
of expounding it of the prescience and eternal decree of reprobation, though I
do not doubt but that such a decree there is, as may be gathered from other
places. Romans 9. 1 Pet. 2.8. 1 Thessalonians 5 9.
For the words (...), may have a good construction, though we go no further
than to the Prophets and Apostles, yea he does almost plainly explicate
himself to mean thus, v. 14. and 17. And to the same effect it is spoken by
Peter, 2 Pet. 3.2.
Remember the words spoken before by the Prophets and Apostles, etc. and by
John, As ye have heard, Antichrist comes. 1 Ioh. 2.^8.
When by the Prophet Esaias it was written, that hearing they should hear and
not understand, etc. they were prescribed to this judgment of being hardened
in their infidelity and sins, that they might perish everlastingly, Mat.
13.^2. Act. ^^.25. Gr^^^^^ (...) Dyd^^rs. ^^^ss. T^^^o^^i. b^^^us (...) quan^^^
(...) vi^^ret ass^^^^ (...). Occu^^^^. ^u^^er. Faber S^^^^d. (...).
as both our Savior Christ speaks in effect, and S. Paul also, They turn
the grace of God into wantonness, that is, as all consent, by taking liberty
to follow fleshly lusts and pleasures, because of the grace of God in Jesus
Christ pardoning all our sins, and justifying us by Faith in his Name,
defending themselves in their silthinesse hereby, according to their name
Borborites, and denying the only Lord God and the Lord Jesus.

Some expound these words generally of denying the Lord, the teacher of
chastity and holiness, in their lives, which precepts whilst the Nicolaitans
and other impure heretics of those times followed not, but had their night
meetings, under a pretense of Religion, to go promiscuously together to the
committing of filthiness, they did in effect deny him. Others hold that their
heresy more particularly is here pointed at, denying Christ to have been
truly borne, to have truly suffered and risen again, and affirming that he
was not Christ, but patronimically having a name derived from the supreme
Christ, but not having the essence, Ep^^h^n^us.
as they of the School of Simon held. And this seems most probable, the
other too general. Touching the Lord here twice named, all that I have seen
expounding this place by the like in Peter, 1 Pet. 2.1.
understand only Christ Jesus as here meant, and therefore render the words
thus, Denying the only Lord who is God, and the Lord Jesus Christ: the vulgar
Latin leaves out God, and reads Lord in the first place, Tho. Aquin.
solum Dominatorem, the only Dominator, which Christ is expounded to be, by
reason of that general Lordship which he has over all things; and Lord in
the second place in respect of us that are Christians whom he has in mercy
redeemed to be his own. But I can see no reason why we should restrain this
of Jude by that of Peter, seeing although he takes many things here out of
Peter, yet by his Apostolical liberty he is free to enlarge that according to
truth, wherein he has spoken less. And seeing those filthy Heretics did not
only err in the true Doctrine touching God the Son our Redeemer, as has
been showed, but also touching God the Creator, by bringing in others that
made the celestial Orbs, and this inferior world, according to Epiphanius;
Epiphanius.
it will be more genuine and agreeable both to the words of the Text, and to
the History of those heresies, by the only Lord God to understand the Father,
the Son yet not being excluded, as neither is the holy Ghost, when he is
said to be the only Lord, but all others to whom this honor has been
ascribed to have been partners with him in that great work of Creation. The
word (...) is derived from binding, and signifies one that rules over things,
as if he had them tied with bands; and so if the word Lord first named be
applied to all things, the second to the faithful, they will most fitly agree.

Touching the examples here subioyned, Verse 5, 6. Perkins.
I would put you in mind knowing this once, etc. that is, knowing it and not
changing, so that being once known it is always known; the vulgar Latin
has it, I would admonish you once knowing all things, much differing from the
original. It seems to me, that the word once has reference to the second
time afterward named, and that the meaning is, I would put you in mind of the
great deliverance that was once wrought by the Lord for his people which ye
know. So that knowing this once, is as much as knowing this to have been once
done. But the second time he destroyed those that believed not, that is, as all
agree, afterward he destroyed even those for whom he had done such wonderful
things, partly by serpents, partly by plagues, and partly by the sword, and the
earths opening of the mouth.

Touching the Angels sinning, Verse. 6.
and being punished therefore, see 2 Pet. 2.4. only I will add thus much more
in way of expounding these words, The Angels that kept not their beginning;
this in the vulgar Latin is, their principality, (...), the word used
signifies both, Graec. Scholia, Oecumen. etc.
the Greek Scholia favors that of principality, saying, that they kept not
the dignity of their nature. Others, that after their beginning, Erasmus. Bezs.
they continued not such as they were created; for they were good, but became
evil: the Reader may follow either of these readings, for their beginning was
both holy, and full of power and glory. This they kept not when they sinned,
but left their habitation; Faber Stapi^.
Some expound this of the punishment of their sin, when they were cast out of
Heaven down to Hell. But seeing the punishment follows in the next words,
and hereby their sin is set forth, I rather subscribe to those that expound
it of the holy and heavenly course of life in which they were set by their
creation, which was, as it were, Oecumen.
a proper dwelling for them; or according to the sound of the words, that in
ambition they went out of the places assigned unto them, aspiring to the Throne
of the most High, Th. Aquinas.
and so this passage is an allusion to that of the Prophet, Esaias 14.13. For the
chains of darkness in which they are said to be kept, enough has been
spoken already in the place before referred unto, 2 Pet. 2.4.

Note, that heretics are under a spiritual judgment, Note.
which is a certain forerunner of the Eternal at the last day: they please
themselves indeed in their damnable errors, and sensual living; but blind
souls, they see not how little cause there is of taking pleasure, yea what
great cause of horror and fear unto them, as being now in the very suburbs
of hell.

Note again, that it is not without a secret providence, Note.
that heretics and sensual livers spring up in Christian Congregations, to
the great scandal of the Church: for such as have been guided by the Spirit
of God, have written long ago of them. Though some fall thus foully, yet the
estate of all is not fickle and uncertain; for these have been long ago
appointed unto this: it is not the case of any of the elect true-hearted
Christians to fall thus.

Note lastly, Note.
that there is one external black brand of Arch-heretickes, serving to
discover them to such as are not able to judge otherwise of them by their
doctrine, and that is, under a pretense of religion and zeal, to be wanton
and filthy in their lives. And such are most of the holy Orders in the Church
of Rome, and Popes themselves, as their Histories do abundantly declare. Happily
some of the common sort may be stricter in their lives, but their Ringleaders
are notoriously licentious.

VER. 8. Likewise also these dreamers do defile the flesh, they set light by
authority, and blaspheme glories. Verse. 9. Yet Michael the Arch-Angell, when
striving with the Devil, he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring
the judgment of blasphemy, etc.

In calling them Dreamers, Oecumen. in Iud.
he does wonderfully hide the obscoenitie of the thing, by the honesty of the
speech; their filthiness was so great, as that it was too much for any waking
to do so. The filthiness of the Barborites, so called from their sordid
baseness, is laid open by Epiphanius, in his book written purposely thereof,
called Pannarium. Neither did they only such filthy things, according to the
flesh; but waxed mad moreover against the Divine Nature, abrogating the
Domination and universal Empire thereof, as Ireneus writes. Or else by the
Domination or authority, which they are said to set light by or to vilify,
the ceremonies of Christ's mystery are meant, in the room of which they
brought in their own villainies. The glories which they are said to blaspheme,
are the old and new Testaments, for unto them both Paul attributes glory. 2
Cor. 3. 2 Col. 3. 3 Ioh.
Or else Ecclesiastical Dignities, against which they inueighed, as Saint John
says of Diotrephes, that he used railing speeches against them. The
Arch-Angell Michael conflict with the Devil about the body of Moses was this.
The sepulture of the body of Moses is said to have been committed to Michael;
herein the Devil hindered him, alleging, that Moses was guilty of murder,
for that he killed an Egyptian, and therefore ought not to have any such
honorable burial; but his body belonged unto him. Upon this his striving
with him, the Arch-Angell refrained himself from opprobrious speeches, and so
from the greater being in contention with the Devil, he argues to the greater
conviction of them in their railing. Moreover, there is another end also in
alleging this example, that hereby we might gather, how the Devil lies upon
the catch, after our departure out of this life, to hinder us from Heaven, if
he can object any wickedness against us, and how the good Angels of God stand
to defend us, if we be guiltless. Verse. 10.
Such things as they know not they rail against, etc. that is, the mystical
points of religion, but in those things wherein they have knowledge, that is,
in vile lusts, they do like bruit beasts defile themselves. Then he compares
them to Cain, Verse. 11.
because by their errors they killed men's souls, and by eating the seed of
generation, they destroyed bodies that might have been. And to Balaam, because
they did these things for gain. And lastly to Core, because, though unworthy,
they did with him arrogate to themselves the authority of teaching.

They set light by authority: that is, Tho. Aquin.
either of Princes or Prelates, whom they commonly disobey, through a desire to
advance themselves. And they blaspheme the Majesty of God; yet the Gloss, by
glories, understands either God, or the Angels, or Saints, who are blasphemed
by erroneous doctrine. Out of what Scriptures the story of Michael is taken,
it is uncertain, yet it is credible, when God by the ministry of his Angel
hid the body of Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.6.
lest the people of Israel finding it, should abuse it to idolatry, the Devil
strove with him to bring it to light.

In other passages here Thomas Aquinas differs not from Oecumenius, Mayer.
neither is there much difference more amongst other Expositors. Briefly
therefore these expositions being thus premised, to clear all doubts occurring
here; there is a manifest defect in the vulgar Latin, in that the word
dreamers is left out, Ad. Sasbout.
which Sasbout confesses ought to be supplied, and it is a very significant
word to express both the time when these wicked heretics were wont to meet,
viz. in the night, and of what nature their errors are, viz. but even like
unto dreams, wherein men are deluded diversely; but awaking, they see there was
no such thing as they imagined: For so erroneous tene^s are but the conceits of
foolish men in the night of their ignorance, whilst they are asleep in sin;
but if ever they come to be awakened, they vanish as nothing.

Pet. 2.10. But one there is that receives neither this nor any other
exposition before going, expounding it of any other besides God; not this,
because Simon the Captain of these filthy persons adored the Emperor Nero;
Ad. Sasbout.
therefore it cannot be meant, that they set light by the Magistracy: and to
apply it to the ceremonies in the Lords Supper is plainly forced; and lastly,
that Prelates in the Church are called glories, we do no where find. He
therefore expounds Domination or authority of God, against whom indeed they
did not plainly oppose themselves; but extenuated his worth, by teaching that
there were others that framed this world, and herein he follows Oecumenius
and the Greek Scholia. Oecumen. Graec. Scholia.
By glories, he understands Moses and the Prophets, in whom the divine
glory shone, to whom the Gnostikes were well known to be enemies. Against
this I have nothing to say, but that it seems very probable. Let the History
of these heretics be considered, and so let the Reader follow the most
probable.

Michael the Arch-angell, some hold that he is none other but Christ the
Prince of Angels: but this is worthily contradicted by a learned Writer of
ours, Perkins in Iud. 2 Pet. 2.11.
because Peter glancing at the same story names plain Angels; and when Christ
comes to judgment, he comes with the voice of an Arch-angell. And lastly,
it is said of the Arch-angell here, as of an inferior, that he durst not,
which agrees not unto the Lord Christ. The thing here related was taken out of
some book that then was, but now is lost, or else Jude had it by tradition.
The ground of this contention is laid down, Deuteronomy. 34. but all agree that
nothing can be certainly said touching this contention: that of Oecumenius,
which is also in the Greek Scholia, is of good use to comfort the godly that
are ready to depart out of this world; but the other of Thomas Aquinas is more
generally followed. It may hence be gathered, that some things are true which
go but by tradition; yet that traditions are necessary to be added to the
written Word of God, as the Romanists hence collect, cannot justly be inferred.
With Saint Jude we are ready to embrace traditions that consort with the Word
of God as this does; but such as savor of superstition so much impugned in the
Word, we utterly abhor.

If it be demanded, why Michael durst not use opprobrious speeches against the
Devil, when as holy men have not spared the notoriously wicked; but even Jude
himself speaks all the opprobries that may be against seducers; and Saint
Peter before him, and Saint Paul to Elymas, 2 Pet. 2. Act. 13. Esa. 57.3.
and Esaias to the Jews, calling them witches children, and children of the
adulterer and of the whore.

I answer, that the Devil, though he be fallen from his first glory, yet he is
a great Prince still, and therefore not to be railed upon: again, Ephesians. 6.12.
to rail upon any is to take a kind of revenge upon them, which no creature
may do, Romans 12.19.
for it does properly belong to the Lord only: when Prophets and Apostles have
done thus, it was God that spoke in them and by them by his Spirit, and when
such words are put into any Angels mouth, he may doubtless also utter them;
but of himself to do it, were to usurp upon Gods office of revenging, which
were arrogance in any creature.

Verse. 10.
this argues that by the Glories before going, Magistrates are not meant, nor
Prelates, for they knew such, but the Majesty of God, of whom all such wicked
wretches are ignorant. And his Majesty may well be expressed by Glories in the
plural number, because of his exceeding great glory, as because of his
exceeding great power he is called Elohim, or with reference to the three
persons in the Trinity. The mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God was
a thing hidden from them, and therefore they spoke so of him, as has been
already showed. In the things which are naturally known to all men, how the
Gnostikes defiled themselves by the abuse of the seed of generation not before
heard of in any age, I, as I find other Expositors refrain from relating it,
as being too abominable to be spoken, shall also pass it over in silence,
referring the reader to Epiphanius in his Pannarium to read of it there.

Cain, Verse. 11.
Balaam and Core. As Caine was full of envy and hatred against his brother, so
were these against the Orthodox, because their own works were so foul and
filthy, 1 Ioh. 3.12.
and theirs good: for herein Saint John has showed before that this comparison
stands. Some say, that they are compared to Cain, Ad. Sasbout.
because as he was a runnagate, so they not regarding the Scriptures, ran
after their own dreams; and some in other respects, Act. 8.
as has been showed. To Balaam they are likened for their being led by
worldly gain, as is manifest that Simon Magus was, 1 Pet. 2.15.
and is illustrated in Peter. To Core for their ambition in aspiring after the
highest dignity in the Church, as he and his companions did, debasing Moses and
Aaron: for that which follows, verse. 12, 13. if recourse be had to 2 Pet. 2.
it may easily be understood: only whereas they are compared to trees twice
dead, the meaning is, that being first dead by nature and quickened by grace
preached and outwardly embraced amongst them, they being now fallen here-from
were dead the second time. See 2 Pet. 2.20.

Note, Note.
that to be a railer, and to speak blasphemy, especially against domination,
is by no means tolerable. It is not for poor under creatures, such as we are,
as not to vnsheath the sword against any for revenge, so not so much as to bend
the bow of our tongues, or shoot out the Arrows of reproachful words. The
modesty of the Arch-angell toward the Devil, of whose amendment there was no
hope, ought to be our imitation toward our brethren though very wicked,
because yet happily God may give them repentance, whereas by railing they may be
more exasperated, and the malady of their sin will be in the more danger of
being increased.

Note again, Note.
that such as are misled by error are such infest enemies against the truth,
because they know it not; the Papists for the most part know not our Doctrines,
nor in what manner we worship and serve God, but being possessed with an opinion
that we overthrow good works, and that we beat down all Religion, they
become so virulent against us. God open their eyes that they may know the truth
amongst us professed, that they may cease to conuitiate it, and reform
according to the same.

Note lastly, Note.
that three things do manifestly work in Heretics, and hereby they may be
known commonly to be such; Envy, Couerousnesse, and Ambition, like to that of
Cain, Balaam, and Chore. And who sees not these in the Church of Rome? Envy
and hatred carries them to the murdering of thousands. Covetousness is the
plain ground of their manifold idolatries and superstitions: and it is
Ambition in the Pope and Roman Clergy, that cannot endure the superiority of
Emperors and Kings, nor a liberty in any either temporal persons or
Ecclesiastikes from that Sea.

IVDE VER. 14. But Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of them, saying,
Behold the Lord comes with thousands of his Saints. Verse. 15. To give
judgment against all, and to reprove all the ungodly of them, etc.

There is nothing hard to be understood here, but only in that mention is made
of the prophesying of Enoch, Mayer.
a question offers it self, whether there were any such Book of canonical
Scripture wherein this was contained; and if there were, whether it is to be
thought that any such books perished. And if there were no canonical Book of
Enochs, Fab. Stapul. Tertullian.
where had Jude this prophecy? One affirms out of Tertullian, that there was
such a book preserved by Noah in the Arc, but after the Apostles times it was
hidden by the Jews, because it contained too open a testimony of the unjust
condemning of the just one. Beza.
And another mentions a book of Enochs, concerning which they said, Tho.
Aquinas. Gloss. ordin. Beza.
that it contained 4082. lines. And some say, that there was an Apocryphal
book that went under the name of Enoch, but was not Enochs, containing in it
many incredible things. Some, if it be granted that this book was canonical,
hold that it might notwithstanding be lost: for many others have been lost
likewise, as The book of the wars of the Lord, mentioned Numb. 21.14. The
book of Iasher, Ios. 10.13. The book of Nathan, of Gad and Semeias, of Iddo,
Ahia, and Iehu, mentioned in the Chronicles, but yet so many have been
preserved, as that we need no more unto salvation. Perkins in Jude.
Some again will not yield by any means that there was ever any such book of
Enoch, that was canonical Scripture, neither that these books before
mentioned were canonical, affirming that the book of the wars was but a
civil Chronicle, and whatsoever was set forth in the other books, is all
contained in the books of Kings and Chronicles. For my own part, I think
that there was some such book of Enoch, to the certain knowledge whereof,
they that lived near the Apostles times might come by their relation, and if
of Enochs setting forth, Faber Stap.
it must needs be canonical and authentical, but yet is now Apocryphal, as
one speaks, because it is hid and we know not where it is; and it was
possible that this might befall such a sacred book, there being yet nothing in
it for substance, but what is in those that we have now. Enoch was a most holy
man, and most ancient, and therefore what is produced of his must needs be of
force. The number of canonical books was not then made up, and therefore
there might be a mis-carrying of some, Gagneus.
as one probably speaks, but now they shall continue preserved for the
perfecting of the Man of God, without the loss or corrupting of any to the
worlds end.

Thousands of his Saints are put for an innumerable company: the Lord comes
or has come, as in the Greek speaking after the manner of Prophets for the
certainty of the thing. This prophecy is said to be of them, because they
amongst other wicked ones were such as are taxed by it.

Having the person in admiration for gain, that is, Verse. 16.
foothing and flatteringly extolling the great and rich in this world, that
they might by this means insinuate themselves into them for their greater
worldly benefit. But others that they could not draw to their faction, of what
degree or estate soever amongst the sound Christians, they murmured and were
querulous against, as in the words before going.

Show mercy to some putting difference; Verse. 22. Beza.
the vulgar Latin reads it, reprove some as judged, and so Beza says, that
he found it in three Greek Copies: they which follow that expound it of those
that have openly separated themselves, Gagneus. Th. Aquinas. Faber Stap.
reprove them as being without hope of recovery, but set the judgments to come
before others, that being terrified herewith, as if they had already felt hell
fire, they may be converted and saved.

Some read it, reprove some whilst ye are judged, that is, Oecumen.
condemned and censured by them. Ours follow the first and best reading,
wherein the word putting difference is (...), being of the middle voice, and so
may be taken actiuely as well as passiuely, and according to this reading the
sense is plain: some must by gentler means be won from these Heretics,
and some by dealing more terribly with them, in propounding the horrible
judgments hanging over their heads, as their tractability or refractarinesse
did require.

Hating the very garment spotted with the flesh; Verse. 23. Beza.
a metaphorical speech taken from the ceremonial Law, intimating that they
should abhor from all tincture of this fleshly sinning: the vulgar Latin
has it, Hate the spotted coat which is carnal, Tho. Aquinas. Gorran.
the spotted coat being expounded, the flesh the coat of the soul, but
foolishly, as Beza rightly speaks.

THE REVELATION OF St. JOHN.
BEcause it has been questioned what John wrote this Book, and of what
authority it is, and also what the scope of it is, it will be necessary before
we enter upon the particular obscurities occurring herein to discuss these
things. And first touching the Author, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 25.
Pareus says out of Eusebius, that it was sometime held to be written by
Cerinthus the Heretic, for the maintenance of a fond opinion, that the
faithful should live here with Christ in all manner of pleasure a thousand
years. But the Greeks were never of that opinion, neither can it possibly
stand, seeing nothing is more plainly in this Book set forth than the eternity
of Christ, which was by Cerinthus impugned, holding that Christ was not before
the Virgin Mary. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 39.
The same Eusebius also writes of another John, a Divine, whose Monument was
seen at Ephesus, together with the Monument of John the Apostle, whom to have
been the Author of the two last Epistles of John and of the Revelation,
Dionysius Alexandrinus consents. But this title, The Divine, could not so
rightly be given to any as to John the Apostle and Evangelist, seeing he
excelled all others in writing of the Divinity of Christ. And therefore Arias
Montanus, to put it out of all doubt, that the Apostle John, and not any other,
was the Author of this Book, has prefixed this title, The Revelation of the
holy Apostle and Evangelist, John the Divine. For though this be not in the
title, yet so much in effect is in the Text, chap. 1. verse. 2. John which
witnessed the Word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ, and the things
which he saw. For this is plainly a Periphrasis of John the Apostle, seeing he
gave testimony to Christ by this name, Ioh. 1.
The Word, In the beginning was the Word, etc. and here speaking of his coming
to judgment, he sets him forth by the same name, Revel. 19.13. 1 Ioh. 1.
His name is the Word of God. And he begins this Epistle, with What we have
seen with our eyes and have beheld, etc. And in concluding the Gospel, he is
spoken of as a witness, and his writing as a testimony; This is the Disciple
witnessing these things, Ioh. 21.24.
and we know that his testimony is true. Again, the circumstance of the place
speaks plainly, that John the Apostle, and not any other was the Author of
this Book: for this John was banished for the Gospels sake into Pathmes by
Domitian the Emperor. Eusebius. 3. c. 18.
Wherefore by the consent of all the best Writers, the Author of this book was
John the Evangelist and Apostle: so says Justin Martyr, dial. cum Tryphone.
Iren. lib. 4. c. 37. Clemen. Alex. Pedagog. lib. 2. cap. 12. Orig. Hom. 7. in
Ios. Athanas. in Synopsi. Epiphan. Haeres. 51. Chrysostom. Hom. 5. in Psalm. 91.
Tertul. lib. 4. Contra Marcion. Cyprian. exhort. Martyrij cap. 8. Ambros. Psalm.
50. August. 39. in Johan. Hieron. Catal. Scriptorum illustrium, etc. Grasserus
comparing this book with Daniel says, that they are alike in their Authors:
for as Daniel, so John was a man greatly beloved of the Lord: If it be
demanded when he wrote this Book, Invita Joan.
Jerome answers, that he wrote it when Domitian moved the second persecution
after Nero, the fourteenth year of his reign. And with him agrees Ireneus a
most ancient Writer, Iren. l. 3. cap. 25.
saying, John wrote the Revelation almost in our time toward the end of
Domitians Empire. For John lived longer than any other Apostle, even to the
third year of Traian, which was 102. from the birth of Christ according to
Jerome, which was six years after he wrote this Book, which was written Anno
96. And for this cause it is placed after all other books of holy Scripture,
because it was written after them all in time, Revel. 22.
and is as it were the seal of them all, being fenced with a charge of adding
no more, as the first Books written by Moses were. Deuteronomy. 4.


Grasserus shows, that it was sometime refused for canonical amongst
Christians, as Daniel was amongst the Jews because of the obscurity, through
which it was thought little beneficial to the Church to be read. But as Daniel
was after the captivity received into the Canon, and afterward had Christ's
own testimony, Rab. Samuel prooemio in Comment. Dan.
Mat. 24.15. (though the Rabins do still dispute whether it ought to be
reckoned amongst the immediate works of the holy Ghost) so this revelation was
very anciently received into the Canon, witness the Council of Ancyra in the
appendix, which was before the Council of Nice, and the third Carthag.
Council, Can. 47. And good reason, seeing it was written by an inspired
Apostle, and is testified by the Author to be the Revelation of Jesus Christ.
Neither is there any doubt made of the authority of it at this day, no not
amongst the Lutherans themselves, though Luther sometime in translating the new
Testament left it out for the obscurity.

Justin Martyr, Ireneus Lugdunensis, Ieron. in vita Johan. Eus. l. 5. c. 25.
and Melito Sardensis, as testifies Jerome and Eusebius, yet we want their
books, but only that Ireneus has something touching it, lib. 5. cap. 21, 23,
25. and Augustine, lib. 20. de Ciuit. Dei, cap. 7. vsque ad 18. yet so many of
later times have written hereupon, as that one a popish Writer numbreth 100.
Alcasar.
But they of that side have rather written to bleare men's eyes from seeing the
truth, than to inlighen them herein. They generally refer the things here
foretold to the end of the world, when Antichrist shall come and tyrannize but
three years and a half, whereas the Author of this book testifies that
these things must shortly come to pass. Verse. 1.
The obscurity of the things here delivered has deterred men anciently from
writing upon it. For so Saint Augustine confesses, saying, In the Revelation
there are many obscure things that may exercise the mind of the Reader; Lib.
20. De ciuit. D^i, c. 17. Obscura multa leguntur vt mentem legentis ex^r^^al;
and pauca in co sunt, ex quorum manifestatione indagentur caetera cum labor,
maxim quia sic eadem multis modis repetit, vt alia atque alia dicere vidcatur,
cum aliter atque aliter haec ipsa dicere inu^stigatur. Epist. ad Paulin.
and there are few things in it by the manifestation whereof other things may
be found out with labor, chiefly because he does so repeat the same things
many ways, so as that he may seem to speak diverse things, when as indeed he
is found out to speak the same things diverse ways. And with him Jerome
consents, saying, The Revelation of John has as many Sacraments as words, in
every word many understandings lie hid. For this cause even they which have
written upon it, have generally acknowledged that they were a long time afraid
to adventure upon so difficult a work: but since experience in these latter
days does help much to enlighten these darknesses they have professed, that
they have with great assurance set forth their expositions, reaping rather more
comfort and support from hence than from any book of the holy Scriptures
besides. And for mine own part, I must needs confess, that almost twenty
years are now past since my entrance into the Ministry, before I durst
attempt any thing about so great a work. Amongst all the best Writers that I
have seen, it is generally agreed that the scope of this book is to set forth
both the estate of the Church of God then under the figure of those Churches in
Asia, and thenceforth to the end of the world. Only some do so understand all
things after the fourth Chapter, to be spoken of that which was to come, as
that they admit of no mixture of things past, whereas others understand in some
of the visions, a representation of some things past also, for the more orderly
proceeding to things to come. Again, some expound the Epistles to the seven
Churches, as Prophetical; others only as Historical, granting that in them
all are indeed admonishished whose case is alike. Lastly, some hold that every
succeeding vision almost sets forth a new thing to come; but others, that
the whole period of time to come, from the days wherein this book was written
with the most notable events, are comprehended in every vision, and so the same
things are again and again iterated under diverse similitudes, the former
setting them forth obscurely, the latter more plainly. But whether conjecture
be most probable, we shall see in the proper places as we shall come to them in
order.

Concerning the title of this book, with the singular commendation thereof in
the three former verses, there is no difference amongst Expositors. For all
agree, that the Apocalypse in Greek, or Revelation in English is an opening of
hidden things, such as all things to come are, and therefore though they be
but darkly revealed, yet not so darkly, but that we may by diligent search
understand them, else how is it a Revelation? Neither is it lost labor to take
great pains to understand what is here revealed, Verse. 3.
seeing they are pronounced blessed that read and hear, and keep that which
is here written. And whereas it is entitled, Verse. 1.
The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him; it is by all agreed,
that this title is put upon it for the honor of the work, and because it was
not John, but Jesus Christ that revealed these things by his Angel unto John,
and it is said to be given him of God in respect of his humanity. Lastly,
whereas it is added, The time is near, it is to be understood in respect of
God, to whom a thousand years are but as one day. That which follows, Verse.
4, 5, 6.
verse. 4, 5, etc. gives more occasion of question.

Why does John direct this book to the seven Churches in Asia, and not to all
Christian Churches in general,

To this one says; Fox.
That this happily is not done without a mystery, the number of seven being a
number of perfection, and so all Christian Churches wheresoever are saluted
under their name: or else because the Holy Ghost foresaw the power of Satan in
persecuting, to be first exercised against them as the event also declared. And
this exposition is followed by Brightman and some others. But because here is
not only the number of seven generally set down, but also a particular
enumeration of these seven by name, showing that these are principally and
first meant here, and others only by way of consequence or deduction, laboring
with the like vices, or endued with the like virtues: I rather subscribe to
Pareus, with whom also Gorran says the same, That this first vision does
directly concern those seven Churches only, the rest all in general. This
Asia was the lesser, a part of the greater Asia, in the seven principal Cities
whereof John had founded Churches, but being now banished, he is directed to
admonish the Bishops left behind him of their duty. And thus much shall suffice
to have spoken of these Churches here: whether they be typical, and how, shall
be considered in the proper place.

I hasten now to another question in this salutation, Which is, which was, and
which is to come, and by the seven Spirits and Jesus Christ? If the three
persons in the Trinity, why is eternity appropriated to the Father only? and
if the Spirit is but one, why is he called the seven Spirits? and why is Jesus
Christ the second person in the Trinity placed last, contrary to the order of
all other Scriptures?

It is agreed by all, Brightman tells of one Arethas, Brightman.
that by the first words, Which is, which was, and which is to come, understood
the three Persons of the Trinity, because the Father is elsewhere also set
forth by this name, Which is, Exodus 3.14. the Son by this name, Which was,
Ioh. 1.1. and the Holy Ghost by this name, Which is to come, Ioh. 16.8. but
this he disclaimeth, because there is such a distinct enumeration of the three
Persons, as that this must needs be understood of the nature of the Deity
ascribed only to the first Person, to set forth his constant and immutable
truth in his promises, under the Gospel, which is; under the Law, which was;
and at the end of the world, which is to come. Some refer this description to
Gods Essence only; but it is most probable that God has thus set forth
himself for our sakes, that we might have comfort in his certain
accomplishment of his promises, and therefore a word is used to set him forth
already coming, (...), not (...). And this truth, present, past, and to come,
is ascribed to the first Person only, as to the fountain and Author, respect
being had to the order of doing, but it is common to all three persons; only
because the Son and the Holy Ghost execute these things, it is not ascribed
here unto them. Again, touching the seven spirits the same Author says, that
the holy Ghost is thus called, respect being rather had unto the gifts of the
spirit in the Saints, than unto his nature: and thus he is said to stand before
the throne, not as inferior, but for orders sake here and elsewhere the Spirit
and the Son are spoken of, as ministering to the Father, because by them the
things here set forth are immediately executed.

Lastly, the Son is put in the last place, in regard of the large description
of him intended, as by whom we are made partakers of all benefits. Pareus
reckoning up diverse expositions of these words, which is, which was, and which
is to come: Pareus.
(some understanding them of the Son, which is one God with the Father, which
was in the beginning, and is come to judge all men; and some of the Father,
which is of himself, having his beginning from none, which was before all
time, and which is to come to judge the world: and some of the essence of the
Trinity, every Person being by this periphrasis understood) expounds them of
God the Father, though common to every hypostasis, as a periphrasis of his
eternity; which is now, was before all worlds, and shall be for ever and ever:
for so which is to come, is to be expounded, which shall be without any
mutation or shadow of change, and he observes the same description of the
Son, verse. 8. Touching the seven spirits, he shows, that some have taken
so great offense at this, that they have rejected this book for setting forth
seven spirits, when the Spirit of God is but one. Some again by the seven
spirits understand the seven Angels, that minister before the throne of God, as
Lyra, Andreas, Ribera, etc. for there are seven principal Angels to whom the
care of mankind is committed, of whom it is spoken, Tob. 12.15. I am the Angel
Raphael, one of the seven which are before the Lord: and Clem. Alex. says,
Lib. 6. Strom.
There are seven Angels who have the greatest power, by whom God provides for
all men. But this cannot stand, because he prays for grace from the seven
spirits, to give which, is a propriety of the godhead only, and therefore the
seven spirits are joined univocally with God the Father and the Son, as being
together with them the efficient cause of grace. By the seven spirits therefore
in this place, is to be understood the holy Ghost, according to the most common
exposition both of ancient and modern Divines: it is called seven spirits,
either for the multiplicity of graces, or reference being had to the seven
Churches; for which it is as sufficient as if there were seven spirits.
Touching Jesus Christ put in the last place, it is to be understood, that a
precise order is not observed in other places in speaking of the Trinity: for 2
Cor. 13.13. Jesus Christ is first named, and then God the Father. All other
expositors speak almost to the same effect, so that what has already been
said, may fully suffice for the resolving of all these doubts, without adding
more. Whereas there is a little difference in expounding that periphrasis of
God, which is, which was, and which is to come, understand both his eternity,
and his immutable constancy, and it will easily be reconciled: and so it will
be no small comfort unto us to consider, that God will be the same gracious God
unto his Church, that ever he has been, and is so far from delaying, as
that he is even now upon the point of coming to accomplish what he has
promised.

Quest. Why is Christ called a faithful witness, and the firstborn from the
dead? When as it is to him that all others give witness, and he is not the
first that arose from the dead: for Elisha raised one, and Lazarus was raised
up before, and many dead bodies of the Saints arose at the time of his passion.

Answ. The threefold office of Christ by the consent of all is here set forth:
the faithful witness his Prophetical, the firstborn from the dead his
Priestly, Prince of the kings of the earth his Kingly office: and he is called
the faithful witness, as the head and chief of all that with their blood
have sealed the truth: the same is said of him also, Ioh. 3.11. chap. 5.31, 32.
chap. 18.37. 1 Timothy 6.13. 1 Ioh. 5.7. He is said to be the firstborn from the
dead, because the chief and the Lord of all, who arose from the dead by his
own virtue, and shall raise up all at the last day. And of these offices, the
first thus set forth, serves to show the undoubted certainty of these things;
and the other may comfort us in respect of our resurrection, whereof his rising
again is a certain argument, when we shall be borne again to immortality
as we were first borne to corruption.

Quest. How are we made Kings and Priests unto God? Verse. 6.
and wherefore are these things commemdrated?

Answ. We are made Kings, Romans 8.16.
because assumed to be coheires with him of the kingdom of heaven; Romans 12 1.
and Priests, because we offer our selves up as a living sacrifice unto God
when we mortify our sins. Now this together with his love toward us, and
his washing away of our sins, are reckoned up as three effects of his
threefold office, giving us perpetual occasion of ascribing all glory and
praise unto him.

Quest. Why is mention made of his coming with the clouds, when they that
pierced him shall see him? Verse. 7.


Answ. For the comfort of the godly, and for the terror of the wicked; for
though he may seem for ever to be absent in the midst of so many miseries
endured by his Church, yet he shall come again to judge and reward every man
according to his works, at what time the cause of the Church shall be
vindicated, and his bloody and cruel enemies which have pierced him shall
weep and wail, and seek in vain to hide themselves from his angry and
terrible presence. And it is to be noted, that he says, He shall come with the
clouds, not in the clouds, to intimate his divine majesty, this being a part of
Gods glory in his going forth, Psalm. 97.2
Clouds and darkness are round about him.

Quest. Why is it again repeated, which is, which was, Verse. 8.
and which is to come, Alpha and Omega?

Answ. Ribera expounds this of the Trinity, as if these words were the
beginning of the vision: but by the consent of all others, it is spoken of
Christ to put it out of doubt, if any should question his coming to put his
enemies to confusion: for there is no doubt to be made hereof, because he is
the Lord Almighty; thus he was at the first, and thus he will be at the last.
That it is spoken of Christ, appears also verse. 11. and 17. and so it is
applied by Nazianzen, Orat. 35. Ambros. lib. 2. cap. 3. de fide; and Athanasius
in Matthew. 11.27. Whereas he adds, says the Lord, this is done after the
manner of a Prophet.

And hitherto of the proeme or entrance of this book: now follows the body
of it, which Pareus divides into seven visions: the first whereof, is from
verse. 9. of this Chapter to the end of the third, containing nothing
prophetical, but altogether doctrinall and historical. The other six visions
are altogether prophetical of things to come, but only in three places, where
the argument of the vision requires a repetition of some things past, as Chap.
12. where is a repetition of the first beginning of the Gospel, and Chap. 17.
where mention is made of five kings which had been before, and Chap. 20. the
beginning of the binding up of Satan for a thousand years, being begun five
and twenty years before at the destruction of Jerusalem, when the Jews had no
further power to hinder the proceedings of the Gospel. These six visions are
not a continued prophecy of things to come, which shall in such order succeed
one another, (for most of them do extend to the end of the world) but like
unto a Tragedy, wherein the fame things are diversely acted. For so what is
represented in the first vision here by one appearance, is represented again
and again in others by other appearances: the first setting things forth more
obscurely, the other more plainly; and this iteration is made for more
assurance, as Peter saw a sheet let down from heaven three times. And as in a
Tragedy in every scene there is music to give the more content, and to
delight the minds of the spectatours; so in these visions there is singing and
praising of God. These visions yet do not all of them set forth the whole
period of time to the end of the world, nor the same occurrences within the
compass of the same time, which one sets forth with another, but one some
most remarkable matters, and another others happening in that time. Four of
them are universal containing the whole time, the first, Chap. 4, 5, 6, 7. the
second, Chap. 8, 9, 10.11. the third, Chap. 12, 13, 14. and the sixth, Chap. 20,
21, 22. The other two are particular, because they serve to set forth only the
two last parts of the whole time, which is divided into sour. First containing
the time of the Churches wrestling, and flourishing under the persecutions of
heathen Emperors, till Constantine the great. The second, the time of reigning
and growing corrupt, till the arising of Antichrist. The third, the time of
Antichrists oppression, till the two witnesses. The fourth, the time of
Antichrists ruin and utter destruction. And these two last times only are
handled in the fourth and fifth of these Prophetical visions, the one setting
forth the destruction of Antichrist under seven vials, chap. 15, 16. and the
other by casting him into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, chap.
17, 18, 19. And thus he shows, that Nicolaus Collado before him understood
these visions; and S. Augustine gives an hint of it, when as he says, that S.
John does repeat the same things many ways, Lib. 20. de ci^. Dei, cap. 17.
as was touched before. The same method almost is set forth by Gorran; but
others take it for a continued prophecy to the end of the world, of things
orderly succeeding one another. For mine own part, having seriously
considered, that in these four universal visions it is still ended with the
end of all things, the everlasting torments of the wicked, and the joys of the
godly, which end is but one, so that it must needs be granted, that this is
diverse times repeated, I do not see how this method of Pareus can be excepted
against, or any other well justified, and therefore do suscribe hereunto, and
wish all others well to weigh it, and I doubt not but they shall find so great
light to be given into the ensuing Prophecy, as that they will acknowledge
much help to the understanding of many things, to be afforded even by this
method. Verse. 9.
I hasten now to the 9. verse.

Quest. What was this Patmos, and how came John thither?

Ans. It is one of the Cyclad Islands of the Aegean sea, Plin. l. 4. c. 12.
thirty thousand paces in compass, according to Pliny. Others contend to have
it an Island of the Icarian sea, as Strabo; Strab. l. 14.
others say it is the same which is now called Possidium, as Munster; but which
soever, it was a desolate place having but few inhabitants. How John came
there, is intimated here; Eusebius. l. 1. c. 34. Ieron. Catal.
and by Eusebius and Jerome expressed, he was banished thither by Domitian in
the fourteenth year of his Empire. Tertullian says, that he was first taken
by the Governor of Asia at Ephesus, Lib. de praescript.
and sent to Rome, where Domitian commanded him to be put into boiling oil,
in derision of the Christian name, which is taken from oil; but coming forth
again without any hurt, he was banished into this Island, from whence he was
released again under Nerua, and returned to Ephesus.

Quest. What means he, Verse. 10.
when he says, he was in the spirit upon the Lords day?

Answ. It is agreed by all, that hereby is meant, that he saw not the things
following with his bodily eyes, but being in a transe, the Spirit revealing
them to him, his soul being for the time taken out of his body, and carried
away with the Lord to behold them, as the old Prophets, and Peter and Paul
were. The Lords day.
The Lords day was the time wherein Christ arose from death, and therefore
observed amongst Christians for their holy assemblies, as the Sabbath was by
the Jews. And as the resurrection and appearings of Christ upon this day, so
this Revelation at the same time makes not a little for the honoring of this
day. Wherefore the Apostles appointed the assembling together upon this day, 1
Cor. 16. and it has been ever since observed accordingly. Only some will not
have it kept with strict resting, as the Jews were commanded of old; but only
with coming together to the worship of God, as Beza upon this place,
accounting it a bondage brought upon Christians, when strict resting was by
Constantine commanded, and by other Emperors after. But it may plainly be
gathered, both from Chrysostom and Augustine, that they held a cessation then
necessary from all worldly affairs of our callings. Augustine says, Sermon.
251. de temp.
Let us observe the Sabbath (my brethren) as it was appointed of old, from even
to even, and being sequestered from country labor and from all business, let
us attend upon divine worship only. Hem. 43. in 8 Cor. 16.
And Chrysostom. The Lords day is the root and beginning of our life, and
therein are unspeakable good things, it has rest and is free from businesses.
And indeed the one does necessarily imply the other, if divine worship must be
attended, worldly business must needs be laid aside. Otherwise it were not
only a change, but an abolition of the Sabbath, which is a rest. And it is to
be noted, that when Christ would make way to the abrogating of the old Sabbath,
he did not justify any works, but such as were of present necessity:
Whereas if he had meant, that the Christians afterward upon their Sabbaths
should have more liberty, he would doubtless have done or said something to
intimate that also. For that which follows, Verse. 11.
v. 11. I shall not need to say any thing, there being nothing but a
preparatiue to the vision, with the utterance of the same periphrasis of our
Savior Christ, which went before, and a particular nomination of the Churches
before mentioned, touching which it shall suffice here to know, that they were
the greatest Cities of Asia the lesser, wherein Saint John had labored in
planting the Gospel, and touching sundry of which we read expressly, that
Saint Paul preached there, as at Ephesus, Acts 19. to which place also he
wrote an Epistle, and Pergamus, which was otherwise called Troy; for Paul is
said to have been at Troas seven days, Acts 20.6. and Thiatyra where Lydda
dwelt, Acts 16.14. and Laodicea; for the Epistle to the Colossians is appointed
to be read to them of Laodicea, Col. 4 16.

Quest. Why are the Churches set forth by golden Candlestickes; Ve^^^ ^
for so the seven golden Candle-stickes are expounded in the last verse?

Answ. Candle-stickes they are called, because as lights stand upon
candle-stickes, to give light to all the room, so the light of truth is vpheld
in the Church, in that the truth only is there maintained and suffered to be
taught. In that they are said to be golden, it is alluded to the Candle-sticke
in the Tabernacle; and withal, it is set forth how precious the Church is in
Gods account. Whereas it is said; The seven Candle-stickes are seven Churches,
that is, signify them: Note that it is the common phrase of the Holy Ghost, to
call a thing signified by the name of the sign, which if it be so in all other
passages, why not, when he says, This is my body.

Quest. Verse. 13.
How is Christ said here to be like the son of man, and in the midst of the
Churches? Is he now in his humanity, wherein we believe, that he is in Heaven
at the right hand of God, upon earth also amongst the faithful? If not, how is
this a true representation?

Answ. Some have thought, that this is not Christ, Gorran.
but some man, or an Angel; but it is most plain, because he is said to have
been dead and alive again, that it was Christ Jesus. Neither does it hinder,
that he is said to be like the son of man: for so it is spoken of Christ,
Phil. 2.7.
that he was in shape like unto a man, that is, like one of us, not in
external appearance, but in substance of body; Heb. 2.15.
for he took flesh and blood. This phrase seems to be borrowed from Daniel
7.13. Touching his presence in the midst of the Churches: Fox.
Some understand it of his spiritual presence, whereby he does viuifie,
govern, and preserve his. Some foolishly conclude from hence the vbiquitie of
his humane nature; Brightman.
but one says well, that what was here exhibited to be seen, was not the
substance of Christ's body, but a figure taken up for the time, to represent
his person in the parts and garments described, befitting the condition of the
Church then; and therefore, as occasion serves, another figure and another is
afterward exhibited: of which mind it seems Ireneus was, Iren. l. 4. c. 37.
who says, The word of God has always, as it were, the lineaments of future
things, and did show unto men, as it were, the shape of the dispositions of God
the Father, teaching us hereby the things that are of God. Christ therefore,
both God and man, is here represented in the midst of the Churches, who though
he be not to be seen with bodily eyes, yet is always present in the midst of
his, to behold their carriage and doings, that they may walk circumspectly,
and to enlighten, sanctify and protect them, that they may be of good comfort
against all their enemies. And it was necessary, that he should be in the
shape of a man represented, because no type of God can be given.

Quest. What is set forth by the garments and parts of this figure here
appearing, Verse. 13, 14, 15, 16.
his long garment and girdle, his head, hairs, eyes, etc?

Answ. I will not mention all the significations, that I find amongst Writers
hereupon, but only the chief and most likely. Long garments were wont to be
worn by Kings and Priests, called (...), because they came down to the feet;
wherefore his Kingly and Priestly office are hereby signified, according to
most: Brightman.
but some understand also the long robes of his righteousness concerning the
faithful, but that agrees not here, where not the faithful, but Christ is
described. Others understand his humane nature, Gorran.
being taken and put, as it were, upon the Divinity: but what needs this,
when as his humane nature is intimated before? Like to the Son of man: His
golden girdle also is after the manner of the high Priest: for when as the
other Priests were girt with girdles, Exodus 23.39.
curiously wrought with the needle in diverse colors, Joseph. Antiq. l 3. c. 8.
the high Priest only had gold in his girdle; wherefore this tends further to
set him forth, as the high Priest of his Church. Pareus.
Some understand his diligence and strength, and because it was about his paps,
his love. Some apply this also to the Church, Brightman.
assumed as a Consort in this high office; some to chastity, etc. but
certainly here is nothing meant but his dignity. A phrase much like to this is
used of the Lord, Esa. 11.
Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faith the cinctarie of
his reins. Pareus.
His white head and hair signify his reverend antiquity, Chrisium vidit
conitie venerandum, prudentia suspiciendum, puritate innecuum, aetate aeternum.
wisdom and eternity. So God the Father is described, Dan. 7.9. Brightman.
Gorran.
Some understand by the head, the chief in Christian Congregations; by the
hairs, the rest: all are made white in the blood of Christ, as snow for the
simplicity, and as wool, because that is not so white of it self, but being
washed. Others, by the head, understand Christ the head of the Church; by the
hairs, the Saints; white as wool, for the heat of love; and as snow, for the
coldness of fear, etc. but seeing the person of Christ is here set forth, all
these things are (...), from the purpose: Pareus.
His flaming eyes set forth how terrible he is to his enemies; for so much as
the eyes seem to sparkle in furious anger, Dan. 10.6. His face was as
lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire. Gorran.
Some understand it of the inlightning and inflaming of us. Brightman.
Some of the clear eyesight of the Primitive Church. His feet like shining
brass, as if they burned in a furnace, set forth his great glory, shining
from top to toe: for when the Prophet would express the glory of the
Ministers of the Gospel, he speaks of their feet, How beautiful are the
feet of those that bring glad tidings of peace, etc. The like is Dan. 10.6.
This brass was a kind of brass, in color coming next unto gold, and in
price accordingly. Some will have it to be a kind of hard frankincense like
brass: Others, brass to be dug in mount Libanus. Pareus. Mason.
Some understand Christ's power, to stamp his enemies under his feet; but why
then are his feet set forth to be as it were burning in a furnace, which makes
more for the brightness of their splendor, than any thing else. Some
understand his humanity, which through the furnace of passions was advanced to
glory. Others apply it to an inferior rank of the faithful, Gorran.
which are not so perfectly purified; or to Christians, that shall suffer for
Christ toward the end of the world. Brightman.
Others apply it to the afflicted estate of the Church then in Smyrna and
Pergamus. His voice like as of many waters, Pareus.
shows further his terriblenesse to his enemies, as the voice of God is
described by thunder, Psalm. 29. and the marvelous operation of it, none being
able to restrain the sound of it. Brightman.
Some understand the voice of the Christian Religion sounding very loud, yet
nothing being distinctly perceived hereby, by the Infidels which counted it a
fond superstition. The seven stars in his right hand, Marlor.
are expounded by the Lord himself to be the seven Angels of the seven
Churches, that is, the chief Ministers; or as some will have it, the Ministry
in these seven Churches; whereby, as by stars, the people are enlightened, and
the will of God is, as it were, by Angels from Heaven declared. The Lord is
said to hold them in his right hand, to show how dear and in what account they
are with him. Hereto most consent, but Mr. Fox has a singular conceit here,
that by the Angels of the Churches are meant the Churches, because they only
are called to repentance. This does no whit arride me, because the Churches
and Angels are expressly distinguished by the type of Candle-stickes and
Stars. And who knows not, that the sin of the Congregation, against which
warning is not given by the Minister, is his sin, as Ezech. 3. and therefore
to call him to repentance, is to call them all, because he will no longer
suffer them to rest secure in their sins. Thomas Aquinas has elegantly and
briefly set forth here the analogy betwixt Angels and Ministers. Tho. Aquin.
in Apocal.
1. Ratione charitatis and sollicitudinis in diligendo. 2. Prudentiae in
eligendo. 3. Sanctitatis in viuendo. 4. Scientiae in cognoscendo. 5.
Informationis in instruendo. 6. Medicationis in curando. 7. Velocitatis in
discurrendo. 8. Officij in ministrando. 9. Deuotionis in contemplando. 10. Zeli
in suffragando. Pareus.
The sword with two edges going out of his mouth, is afterward expounded to
be that whereby he smites the Gentiles, Revel. 19.15.
and rules them with a rod of iron. So fierce and terrible is he to
unbelievers, as that with the very breath of his mouth he destroys them, as
with the sharpest sword. Ephe 6.17. Heb. 4.12.
Others commonly expound it of the Word of God, which is called the Sword of
the Spirit, and is said to be sharper than any two edged sword: but seeing all
this vision tends to the terror of Christ's enemies, I prefer the first
sense. His faces shining like the Sun, is understood by all of his exceeding
great glory, in respect of his humane nature now in Heaven, to which we shall
afterward be conformed: for so the Lord has promised, The just shall shine as
the Sun. Mat. 13. Verse. 43.
And all this glory and parts arguing power, greatness and majesty, are here
thus particularly described to procure reverence to the Author of the things
here contained, for though he were mean and base in this world, yet now he
does excel in glory.

Quest. Whereunto has this command of writing, Verse. 19.
the things which he had seen, which are and which shall be hereafter
relation, whether only to the Epistles or to the whole body of the Prophecy?

Answ. Some restrain them only to the Epistles, Brightman.
wherein are things to come set forth, as well as things then in being: but
this cannot be, because so a superfluous iteration should be made of a precept
already given, verse. 11. and howsoever some things which he had seen are there
mentioned, and some things to come, yet not all as he is here directed, nor in
that order, so that if these Epistles only had been meant, the divine man had
not fully done as was appointed him. Others therefore understand things past,
which John had seen under Neroes Empire and Domitians, Pareus.
and things present which now were exhibited to his sight, and things to come
which he should afterward see; and so they make the Revelation to consist of
three parts; the one setting forth things past from the beginning of the
Gospel; the other the present state of things when these visions were had; and
the third, the future to the end of the world. For mine own part, me thinks
it is plain that the things which he had seen were nothing but the present
type of the glory of Christ; The things which are, the present state of those
seven Churches, and the Lords will concerning them: The things to come, what
representations and passages prophetical of things to come he should
afterward see: for although the things to come be thus taken, yet this makes
not against the representing of some things past for more orderly proceeding,
and the full declaring of the whole matter together.

CHAP. II. and III.
THese Chapters contain nothing but Epistles to the seven Churches, wherein
are commended diverse good things, and a final reward is promised to such as
overcome, and sundry vices are taxed, and judgments threatened, or in a
prophetical manner foretold to come upon them therefore. Forbs. Brightman.
Some understand these Churches as typical, figuring out the several
conditions of the Church of God in diverse ages of the world. The Church of
Ephesus figureth out the state of the Church in the days of the Apostles and
Apostolic men living next after them, at what time there remained such a
presence of Christ, so painful, powerful, zealous, watchful, patient and
constant a ministry, that albeit the mystery of iniquity was then working, yet
they were so watchfully marked and mightily resisted that sought to bring in
error, that it was borne down and truth held the place: but yet so, as that by
some declining, a step was made to that next heavier degree in the Church of
Smyrna. The Church of Smyrna figureth out the state of the Church when
heretics got the upper hand, as in the days of the Arrians, and whereas he
comfort them without any threaning, he has respect unto his poor
persecuted people, whom only he takes for his Church, omitting the rest as
desperate: but he reproved the declining in the age before as curable and not
so heinous, but that yet he made reckoning of them as of his Church. Pergamus
sets forth that time wherein error had so much prevailed, that Antichrist
was in his Throne, maintaining idolatry and spiritual fornication: yet there
was a Church then that kept it self pure, though for want of strength and
courage she did not make such resistance here-against, being deceived by the
pretext of prophetical authority, as of Balaam. Thyatira sets forth the
time of the first discovering of Antichrist, when some zeal and love of the
truth began to be kindled in men's hearts, but yet in such a weak measure, as
that though they kept themselves from drinking of the cup of the Whore, yet
they had not courage enough to challenge and to oppose Antichrist. Sardis
sets forth the time of reformation, wherein neither Balaam nor Iezabel are
suffered any longer; but because it rested in the outward having of the Word
purely preached without any power in the heart, this Church is said to have a
name to be alive but is dead. Philadelphia sets forth those Churches now,
which though they are but of little strength, yet have quite put down Satan's
throne, and re-erected Christ's Throne; for which cause it is promised, that
they shall be established as a Pillar not to be removed any more. Laodicea
sets forth the Churches, that thinking they have sufficiently come out of
Babel, grow secure, being drawn after worldly riches and honors, and despise
poor Philadelphia and the rule of David's Key. Hitherto Forbs, and to the same
effect almost Brightman speaks, that under the type of these Churches, the
Churches of the Gentiles till the conversion of the Jews is set forth. The
three former typifie the three declinings of the Church at three noted times
succeeding one another: the three latter the returns of the Church to the
truth again, and to Thyatira is opposed to Ephesus, Sardis to Smyrna,
Philadelphia to Pergamus: the last, Laodicea has no compeere. And he does more
particularly determine ^^ese times. The first typified in Ephesus, extending to
Cons^^^tine the great; the second, typified in Smyrna, extending to Gratian,
anno 382. the third, in Pergamus, extending to ann. 1300. the fourth, in
Thyatira, extending to ann. 1520. the fifth, in Sardis, beginning in the time
of Martin Luther, whose Doctrine took effect anno 1527. but is not so
commended for that monster of vbiquity, devised for the maintenance of the
real presence in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; the sixth, in Philadelphia,
beginning about the same time, but a little after by the means of Zwinglius,
who taught rightly touching the holy Sacrament, and put all gainsayers to
silence; and this Church is the Heluetian, Sueuian, Geneuan, Belgian, French
and Scottish; the seventh, typified in Laodicea, is the Church of England,
beginning anno 1547. in the days of King Edward the sixth: for though the
Scottish Church were after, yet for so much as it is the same with the
Heluetian and Geneuan in doctrine and manner of government, and our Church of
England does plainly differ from these in the outward pomp and splendour of it,
and both the German, Heluetian, and English, persist in the form first settled
in each place, they may well be counted three distinct Churches, typified in
Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea. And to make this conjecture the more
probable, he scanneth the signification of each name and the site thereof.
Ephesus is said as it were (...), omission: for it was noted to be the farthest
gone in sin and idolatry of any other. The Ephesians were worshippers of the
Goddess Diana, and so set upon sinning, Tuscul. quaest. l. 5. Strabo.
that one Hermodorus was cast out from thence because he was a frugall man,
wherefore one writes of them for this, that they were worthy to die. So they
of the Gentiles, which were first converted, were found altogether overwhelmed
with sins and idolatries. And as Ephesus was the chief of all these Cities,
and stood nearer to the Sun, for the rest were more Northward; so it fitly
sets forth the first Church, which was the chief under the Gospel and
fullest of light. Smyrna has the name from sweet smelling myrrh, and stands
Northward from Ephesus three hundred and twenty furlongs, fifty figuring out
the next age wherein was less light, but as great zeal in suffering for the
truth, and more need to be comforted by being reputed as sweet smelling without
any taxation, because they suffered at the hands of Christians, which was most
grievous to be borne. Pergamus stands further Northward from Smyrna, than
Smyrna from Ephesus, viz. five hundred and forty furlongs, where the light is
much more diminished: it signifies the Tower of Troy, according to Hesychius,
a lofty and proud place. And such was the Church in the third space of time,
Antichrists throne being erected, and all things with darkness overwhelmed.
Thyatira stands from Pergamus Southward, but more to the East, about
fourscore English miles, according to Ptolomy, and so is nearer to the Sun.
It is called Thyatira, as it were (...), a Daughter: for so in the fourth space
light began to break out again, and piety as a Daughter newborn to grow.
Sardis stands more Southward than Pergamus, and signifies hypocritical, and
so fitly resembles the time of Martin Luther wherein more light brake out, but
not without the conjunction of some gross errors. Philadelphia is seated in a
dangerous place, and therefore is not so full of inhabitants, and signifies
brotherly love: this therefore may fitly typifie those Churches wherein love
and humility does most abound, and least humane strength and security. Laodicea
was a great and famous City builr by Antiochus, and called by the name of
Laodice his wife: it was rich and full of people, and had great dominion, and
accordingly called the Prince of people, giving them Laws; and therefore may
well typifie the Church of England. Hitherto Brightman. This conjecture, I
confess, sauoreth of much industry in searching into these holy mysteries, and
hereof good use may be made when any Church shall perceive how like she is in
her condition to any of these. But I cannot think that the intent of the Lord
was to propound these Churches as typical in respect of succeeding ages.
First, because John is bidden to write the things that are in this place, and
the things that shall be hereafter being distinct from the present, and not
confounded together, the one being plainly expressed, the other darkly shadowed
out under it. Secondly, because if the Church of Smyrna shall figure our the
second age, wherein Arianisme raged so much, all taxations could not have been
passed over in so much silence, but something should have been said to
intimate this monstrous blemish of those times, seeing the Arrians were
Christians, and so to be reckoned as of the Church. Thirdly, because the
Lutheran Church compared to Sardis, is bidden to remember what she had received
and heard, whereas they have not gone from that which they were first taught:
and it is said that there were some there worthy, whereas if their errors be
taxed, all holding the same, some could not have been preferred. Only
therefore thus far I yield with most Expositors, that there is no condition
of the Church at any time in any place, but the case hereof is set forth under
some one of these, and these Epistles were therefore thus directed that we
might learn by their example, for which cause it is so often repeated, He that
has an ear to hear let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.

The first Epistle. Chap. 2. ver. 1.
THese two Chapters contain seven Epistles, whereof four are in the second,
three in the third.

The first Epistle to Ephesus is set forth in seven verses; the reason why
Ephesus is first is, according to most, because it was the chief, being the
Metropolis of those parts.

Quest. Why is choice made of these two circumstances of holding the seven
stars in his right hand, and walking in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks, for the periphrasis of the Lord Jesus to this Church, and of some
other particulars to other Churches, for there is difference in his title in
every Epistle?

Answ. Many Expositors are silent about this question, only observing that
every title is as much as if he should have said, Thus says the Lord,
according to the ancient manner of the Prophets, to procure the more reverence
to that which is written, as coming from authority. But doubtless something
else is here intimated, or else he would not in every Epistle so purposely have
varied. Gorran. Brightman.
Some therefore say, that in every one something is chosen out of the former
descriptions, which does most fitly agree to the argument of the Epistle.
Wherefore to the Church of Ephesus he sets himself so forth, as that they
might be comforted in his protection in their sufferings for his sake, and not
for any fear shrink from their first love. And how graciously they have been
protected in Ephesus appears in the History of the Church, Act. 19. Paul and
Gaius, and Aristarchus never suffered any violence there that we read of,
though it were attempted; and John returned thither after his banishment, and
died in peace. If therefore we be at any time discouraged through persecution
for the Gospels sake, let us have recourse to this Epistle. The Lord is ever in
the midst of his golden Candlestickes, and holds the stars in his right
hand. Of the other particulars we shall see in their proper place.

Quest. But who is the Angel of this Church? was there but one Minister, or
more, that it is spoken in the singular number, to the Angel? Timothy is
mentioned to be the first Bishop of Ephesus, is it to be thought, that this
blame could be laid upon him?

Answ. All agree that it is not meant of any one, but of the whole body of the
ministry there: for that there were many, appears, Alcasar.
Act. 20.17. Some hold that Timothy was then the chief; but most, that Timothy
was martyred before that time, neither is it expressed in history, who was his
successor. And he is not here named, because the Lord had not so much respect
to any one, but to the whole body of the ministry.

Quest. Who were they that said they were Apostles, Verse. 2.
but being tried, were found to be otherwise?

Answ. They were the heretics of those times, that under this glorious title
of the Apostles of Christ, sought to draw men to their damnable heresies, as
Ebion, Cerinthus, etc. For that such were busy in the Church of Ephesus, may
be gathered from that which Saint Paul wrote to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.3.

Quest. How is it said, Thou have lost thy first love, Verse. 4.
when as he is commended verse. 3. to have labored, and not to have fainted?

Answ. Some understand these things as spoken of diverse times, Brightman.
that there was such patience and pains at the first planting of the Gospel
there, which continued all the while that John was amongst them; but now the
Ministers had not such love to the flock of Christ, with such diligence to
feed them; which also in part appears by history. For a young man committed
to the care of one, by John in his abscence, through his remissness fell to
robbing, for which he is by John challenged in an Epistle written to him.
Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 23. Now this man was a Bishop, though not there, yet of a
near adjoining place: which makes it probable, that the like remissness was
used in Ephesus also. Ambrose. Andreas. Pareus.
Others by love, understand charity in releeuing the poor, wherein there was a
coldness in the Bishop growing covetous, so that howsoever there were diverse
things in him commendable, yet he had this blemish dimming all his other
virtues. But I prefer the former, because diligence and care in feeding the
flock of Christ with wholesome doctrine, and keeping them from error is
commended to Saint Peter, Ioh. 21.16, 17.
as the greatest love unto Christ, and therefore to grow negligent herein, may
well be taxed, as a falling from the first love. If works of charity should
be meant, there would have been something else in the Epistle to intimate
them, whereas all make for love in caring for the flock. For he is bidden do
his first works, which what are they but labor and care before mentioned, and
the threatening to remove the Candlestick, agrees most fitly, as a punishment
in the right kind, to deprive them of light that were grown to make no better
use of it by enlightening with teaching the ignorant. Note, that what any have
been God regards not, if now they be declined and fallen from it, Ezech.
18.26.

Quest. What were the Nicolaitans here mentioned? Verse. 6.


Answ. They were a vile sect, taking their name from Nicolas one of the seven
Deacons, who held a community of women, and that to have to do with diverse
women was no sin; as both Ireneus and Theodoret do deliver. Iren. lib. 1. c.
27.
Some have thought that Nicolas being so holy a man, could not be the Anthour
of so foul a crime; but when as his jealousy over his wife was objected unto
him, because she was a fair woman, he to free himself from this suspicion,
brought her forth and set her in the midst, offering to depart with her to any
other man, which being done by him only in way of apology, was perverted, and
amongst many that opinion of community embraced, who were called upon this
occasion by his name, as Clemens Alexandrinus shows. Clem. Alexan. Strom.
lib. 3.
But this is to be thought rather his favorable conjecture touching Nicolas,
than truth; otherwise the Lord would have spared his name. That Nicolas was the
Author of this sect, teaches also Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 23. Epiphan. Haeres.
25. Niceph. lib. 3. cap. 15.

Quest. What is meant by the tree of life here promised, Verse. 7.
and why does he vary the promise to him that overcomes in every Epistle, and
what is it to overcome?

Answ. He that overcomes by the consent of all is he that in his spiritual
fight with the world, the flesh and the Devil is not made to languish or decay
in any virtuous course, but perseuereth and holds out unto the end. Gorran.
One notes many acceptions of this word, the tree of life. Sometime the holy
Scripture is called the tree of life, as Prou. 3. sometime patience, Prou. 11.
sometime devout preaching, Prou. 15. sometime Christ himself, and sometime the
chief felicity which is meant here, and it is said to be in the Paradise of
God, because in a place of delights, not as the world counts delights, but
according to God. And to the same effect almost speak others, the thing
promised here is Christ with that eternal happiness, which he brings with
him to all true believers, that hold out unto the end. The promise is the same
with that, He that endures to the end shall be saved, Matthew. 24.13. 2 Timothy
4.7. Ioh. 6.54.
and henceforth remains the crown of righteousness, which the righteous God
will bestow, etc. It is alluded unto the tree of life in Paradise, because as
that would have conferred immortality upon Adam if he had eaten of it, so he
that eats of Christ by faith, shall live for evermore; and this is the true
meaning of that. Touching the variation of the title of this reward promised in
every Epistle. One says, Gorran.
that there are seven vices against which we are to make spiritual war, and
to such as overcome every of these the blessedness to come is propounded in a
several title suitable. The first vice is gluttony and drunkenesse, the victory
over which is first propunded, because it is in vain to strive against any
other sin, unless this be subdued, which was showed in the combat of our
Savior Christ, his first temptation was in this kind. To the victory here to
eat of the tree of life is promised, which Adam could not, because he was this
way vicious: this is to be refreshed spiritually here and hereafter. The
second vice is fear of worldly miseries: to him that overcomes this, not
being driven from the faith hereby, it is promised, that he shall not be hurt
of the second death. The third is the love of pleasure: to him that overcomes
this, the hidden Manna is promised, divine consolation. The fourth is envy,
against which is opposed the ruling over nations. The fifth is lechery, against
which white garments are opposed. The sixth is pride, against which is opposed,
I will make him a pillar in the house of God, which is most comely. The seventh
is idleness, against which is opposed, I will give him to sit in my Throne.
Brightman.
Others either observe nothing upon this variety, or else apply all to the
several conditions of the Church in several ages; and so say, that as Adam in
Paradise was the first man, so in speaking of the first Church it is alluded to
him. But me thinks, that the eternal reward of their constancy should not be
so variously propounded for nothing: and touching the Churches in several
ages, although there be some likelihood in the first being so applied, yet in
the rest it fails. Wherefore I hold, that the observation of the several
vices, against which we have to fight, is not impertinent here, although happily
in the number and particularizing of them there may be overmuch curiosity. But
certainly eternal happiness does counteruaile all the pleasure and profit of
sin, and whatsoever detriment or danger may accrue through piety, shall fully
be made amends for thereby: and it does not a little help to understand this,
to propound it diverse ways. If then we be tempted any way, let us resist,
considering that thus we shall provide for our own welfare for ever, even in
those things wherein we are moved by temptation.

THe second Epistle is to the Church of Smyrna in four verses, The second
Epistle. Verse. 8.
viz. 8, 9, 10, 11. wherein nothing is taxed.

Quest. Who was the Angel in this Church, that it has so rare commendations?

Answ. The most probable opinion is, that Policarp the disciple of Saint John
was chief minister here. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3.
For both Ireneus and Eusebius agree, that he was by the Apostles constituted
Bishop in Smyrna, whereas all of them but John were dead before Domitians time.
And all things in the Epistle agree to him, a most holy man, there being
nothing reproved in him, and the exhortation to constancy, intimating his
persecution to come, (for he was most cruelly martyred under Antoninus Verus)
and the mentioning of the Jews: for by their instigation he was murdered.
Only it may be doubted, for so much as betwixt Domitians fourteen years
when this was revealed, and Antoninus Verus were threescore and seven years.
But this is again resolved by the consideration of Policarps confession of
himself, that he had served Christ fourscore and six years, as Eusebius
shows. This Smyrna is put second, because next to Ephesus.

Quest. 2. Why is the Lord here entitled, The first and the last, which was
dead, but is alive?

Answ. It is spoken for the comfort of him that was in danger of death for the
Gospel, Gorran.
according to the argument of this Epistle: for if life for ever followed
Christ's death, what need any member of Christ to fear death? Brightman.
Or else because in this Epistle he is said to be rich, and yet affliction and
poverty is mentioned; understand by this title Christ's majesty, by which he is
first; and his humiliation, whereby he was last; wherein this Angel is
comforted against the base esteem of the world, I know thy poverty, but thou
art rich.

Quest. 3. Who were they that called themselves Jews, Verse. 9.
and what was their blasphemy?

Answ. Some think that such are meant, Glossa ord.
as made a profession of Christ, and yet were enemies, than which there could
be no enemies more grievous. But others more rightly, Pareus. Brightman.
that they were Jews indeed, glorying in that name as the only people of God,
who stood so earnestly for the old ceremonies, and legal service, that they
hated most deadly all Christians: for we read in the Acts of the Apostles of
their fury, and seeking to stir up the people in all places against the
Christians, and in particular against Policarp, as has been already touched.
Their blasphemies were all the most opprobrious names that they could devise
against Christians; they called Christ a cousener, Impostorem, suspensum,
necromantum. Cruciarios, asinarios, sarmentarios, semassios, Apol. cap. vlt.
a crucified man, and a Negromancer: and Christians cruciaries, asinaries,
Sarmentaries, and Semassies, as Tertullian shows.

Quest. What is meant by the affliction which it is said they shall have for
ten days?

Answ. About this number of days there is great difference amongst Expositors.
Verse. 10.
Most hold, that some short time is hereby meant, Bullinger. Chitreus. Franc.
Lamb. Pareus.
but a certain number of days put for an uncertain. Beda. Haimo. Gorran.
Ribera. Rupertus.
Some say, that the number of ten is a number of perfection, containing in it
all other numbers, and therefore sets forth a long time. Some understand the
time of the reign of the ten persecuting Emperors. Brightman.
Some precisely but ten days. Lastly, some, the ten years of Traians
persecution, who raged all that time like a Devil, till that by Pliny the
second writing unto him of the innumerable company of Christians that were put
to death, a cessation was obtained. Yet one will have it referred to the ten
years of Dioclesians persecution, Fox.
for that lasted just ten years, according to Eusebius. For mine own part, I
prefer that exposition of the ten persecuting Emperors, every ones time
being his day, and their times are said to be but ten days, that is, but a
short time, to comfort the faithful in their sufferings, and because with the
Lord many years are but as a day. A long time cannot be meant, because this
would have greatly discomforted them, nor an uncertain time: for the comfort
of the faithful in their sufferings is that God limiteth the time of their
sufferings to the very day, beyond which they shall not pass. For Traians
time, they had their persecutions as sharply repeated over again after it: and
for Dioclesians, it were much that comfort should not be spoken to them
against any before: for though no persecution were so terrible, yet they were
all terrible enough to shake their faith, had they not been supported with
this comfort, that they should have but ten such brunts, and then be delivered.
Touching the different title given to the reward here promised, Verse. 12.
He shall not be hurt of the second death, this serves to arm them against
the fear of death bodily, according to the argument of the Epistle, and as
has been already touched.

THe third Epistle is to the Church of Pergamus, The third Epistle.
contained in six verses, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. wherein their constancy in
the faith is commended, and the following of the doctrine of Balaam condemned,
with an admonition to repent, under pain of being stricken with his sword, and
encouragement to overcome by the hidden Manna, and a white stone with a name
written thereon promised.

Quest. 1. Why is the Lord set forth here, Verse. 12.
as having a sharp two-edged sword?

Answ. Because as all agree, he is to deal with rebels against the truth, whom
he threateneth to cut off with the sword. One has a conceit upon the name
Pergamus, signifying the division of horns, Gorran.
because Heretics have two horns to push at the truth: one is the wresting of
the Scriptures, the other is their sophistry in arguing, against which a
two-edged sword is opposed.

Quest. 2. What is meant by Satan's throne, Verse. 13.
which he says was there, and who was Antipas his faithful Martyr?

Answ. I omit to speak any thing of the Angel of this Church, because I find
nothing said of him who it should be. Satan's throne, according to most, argues
the height of impiety and sin, and his dwelling, the continued course hereof,
and withal the outward eminency of this place: For the seat of the persecuting
Emperors is called afterward the throne of the dragon, Chap. 13.2. and of the
Devil and Satan, Chap. 12.9. so that it may hence be gathered, that Pergamus
was a royal city: and so it was indeed, for it was the seat of Attalus
Philometor a king, and after that of the Roman Proconsuls. Liu. Decad. 4. l. 7.
And most notoriously sinful this city was, for it was given to idolatry,
according to Arethas, more than any city in Asia. Antipas (as Arethas thinks)
was a Pastor of that Church, burnt to death in a brazen bull for the
profession of the Christian religion, whereby they could not yet be made to
shrink. But God still had a Church there, and why not then in the midst of
Popery? If it be objected, if there were any many years ago, it was
invisible, so as this Church was not; I answer, it might be so indeed, and yet
true, that there was such a Church, as in the days of Elias: but it was not so
invisible, but that the Antichrist of Rome could find them out in all ages to
put them to martyrdom.

Quest. 3. What is meant by holding the doctrine of Balaam? Verse. 14.
Thou have there such as hold the doctrine of Balaam?

Answ. Here is not only made mention of Balaam, but verse. 15. of the
Nicolaitans also, which whether it be a taxation of two vices, or of one
diversely expressed, some make question. But it is most likely by the manner of
speaking, Parous.
that it is only declared by this circumlo quution, wherein the wickedness of
the Nicolaitans did consist, which was before passed over in silence. After the
manner of Balaam, they were Authors to the Christians of eating things offered
to idols, and of fornication; for so the sequel of the History of Balaam does
declare, Number. 22.23, 24.
that he advised Balaak to set fair women to call the Hebrews to their
idolatrous feasts, and thence to luxury. For this does so necessarily append
upon the other, that Jerome has rightly said, Venture vino aestuans, cito
despumatin libidinem. Vicina sunt venture and genitalia, and pro vicinitate
membrorum sequitur confoederatio vitiorum. Verse. 17.
The belly boiling with wine, does soon sees over into lust: And again, The
belly and the genitals are near together, and therefore through the vicinitie
of members follows a confederation of vices.

Quest. 4. Why is eternal bliss here propounded under the name of hidden
Manna and a white stone, two names, or two ways, when as other Epistles
propound but one?

Answ. Most Expositors observe three ways of setting forth the reward here;
the hidden Manna, the white stone, and the name written in it, unknown to any
save to him that has it. But they may well come under two, because this name
is comprehended in the second. For the diverse rewards named more than in other
Epistles before going, the like course is used also in the three Epistles next
following; but I find nothing by Expositors observed hereupon, but only that
this is spoken according to the necessity of these Churches, being more
oppressed by the wicked adversaries, and so having more temptations, where
almost all were enemies. Whereunto if we add, that more is here spoken for the
amplifying of the benefit promised, we shall attain to the full reason of this
variety. More particularly, the reward is compared to hidden Manna, that is,
the pot of Manna kept in the Arc, for a monument of what God had done for the
Israelites in feeding them miraculously in the wilderness with Manna when other
food falled, and it is said to be hidden, because the people might not look
into the Arc to see it. Exodus 16.33. Heb. 9.4.
To this Manna it is alluded here, because as that was ministered unto the
people of Israel in the wilderness, and so they were preserved, when in man's
reason they must needs have perished for want of food: so the Christians in
Pergamus, Satan's throne being there, were miraculously fed with spiritual
comforts, and hereby strengthened to endure, so that the Christian name, which
a man would have thought should through the violence of the enemy have utterly
perished, still continued in that place. 1 Cor. 10.^. Ioh. 6.
For Manna sets forth Christ fed upon by faith, and therefore it is noted of
it, that this in the Arc was incorruptible, as Christ being fed upon
conferreth incorruption and immortality to the faithful: and as it is said to
be hidden, so it is a hidden kind of feeding from the eyes of the profane
world, to whom this spiritual food is a mystery; yea the people of God see it
not with their bodily eyes, but by faith, as they of old saw not the Manna. And
hitherto almost all Expositors are agreed, the consideration whereof is
singularly comfortable in the time of persecution, both in regard of the
unknown ways that God has to preserve his here, when man may think their
case most desperate, and also in regard of the immortality whereunto we are fed
and nourished with this mystical food. Touching the white stone, there is much
difference. Rupertus.
Some understand a most glorious body wherewith they shall be raised at the
last day, that overcome, but this were very improper by a stone to set forth a
body. Others understand the white stone wherewith the heathen were wont to note
the days of their victories being publicly engraven in tables, Sixth. Sen.
bibl. Pa rum, lib. 2.
that they might be distinguished from other days; for so they that overcome
in this spiritual fight shall be in nobled above others: but neither does this
so well satisfy, because this stone is given to one sensible, and has a name
in it, whereas that was set into a dead table as a mark only. Others
understand the white stone given in their Olympicke games, but that was not
given to the victor, Arethas.
but only diverse of them being drawn out by such as were to play there, they
two which had two stones with like Characters, were to play together. Pareus.
Brightman, etc.
Lastly, others understand the white stone given in judgment with the names of
such as were set free written in them, whereas they that were condemned had
their names set in black stones. Of this custom speaks Vlpianus in Demosth.
contra Timocratem, Scholiastes Aristophanis, and Ovid Metamor. lib. 15.

Mos erat antiquis atris, niueisque lapillis,
His damnare reos, illis absoluere culpa.
According to this custom it is here spoken for the comfort of the faithful,
who were hardly censured amongst wicked men, but absolved by the most just God.
And it is a comfort to all in the like case, we may say with the Apostle, Romans
8.33.
It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? The new name written in this
stone is by the consent of all, the name of the Son of God, whereas we are
of our selves servants and slaves. No man knows this name, but he which has
it. The joy of the absolution and blessing which the faithful shall receive at
the last Day is unspeakable, the wicked which are sent into damnation know it
not, but only such as enjoy it. And this adoption to be the Son of God is
known to him that has it by the Spirit here, though others cannot know it: so
that man's testimony is nothing, the inward testimony of the Spirit in a man's
own soul is all in all.

The fourth Epistle.
THe fourth Epistle is to the Church of Thyatira, in twelve verses, that is,
from the 18. to the end of this second Chapter, wherein their works done last
are commended above their first, the tolerating of Iezabel is taxed, and she
with her followers are threatened: but such as did not follow her are exhorted
to constancy, rule over Nations and the morning Star being propounded for
their reward.

Quest. Why is the Lord here set forth by this title, Ver. 18.
The Son of God, and which has his eyes as a flame of fire, and his feet
like unto fine brass?

Answ. He was before called The Son of man, but here the Son of God, that
he might be rightly conceived of as both God and man; and because as God he
knows all things, and is able both to punish and reward, as is afterward
showed that he will do. He is described by his flaming eyes and brazen feet in
special, that they might know that he was able to discern betwixt the seduced
by Iezabel, and the not seduced, as is afterward set forth, that he tries the
hearts and reins, for he was all shining light from top to toe, enlightening
the darkest corners.

Quest. 2. What was Iezabel, Verse. 20.
who said that she was a Prophetess, and seduced the people?

Answ. Touching their works more at the last than at the first, I find
nothing amongst Expositors, but it is likely that their constancy in suffering
for the truth was meant, which increased the more, the more it was tried. This
Iezabel some will have to be the wicked women that helped forward the heresy
of Montanus in Thyatira, under the color of prophefying, such as were Prisca,
Maximilla and Quintilla, Epiph. haer. 51.
as Epiphanius, who tells that ann. 125. the Cataphryges entered and took
this City, which was before prophesied of in this place, for so much as these
Iezabel-like women were the furtherers of that Heresy, and so all were
infected till anno 237. which was 172 years after, when by the mercy of God a
Church was again settled there and flourished. But this exposition agrees not,
because it was thus afterward, not now; and then also all were infected,
whereas now some only were drawn away. Andreas.
Others therefore understand the heresy of the Nicolaitans set forth by
another name, for they did both practice whordome and eat things sacrificed to
Idols: and this seems to me the most probable, that there was some woman of
note, who under the color of prophesying seduced people to this error, and is
called Iezabel, Brightman.
because in craft so like unto her to effect her own ends, as some cunning man
might be noted before by the name of Balaam to the Church of Pergamus, verse.
14. For it was an usual thing for Heretics to seek to further their heresies
by some subtle woman: so Simon Magus used his Helena, Carpocrates Marcellina,
Apelles Philumena, etc. And this variety in speaking of Balaam before, and of
Iezabel now, tends to the greater disgrace of this heresy, making it the
more odious for having such supporters. That conjecture that the Synagoue of
the Jews is meant here, Alcasar.
is but vain and without all ground.

Quest. 3. What is meant by casting her into a bed, Verse. 22.
and who are they that committed adultery with her, and who her children? verse.
23.

Answ. By the bed, is meant the bed of sickness, wherewith she should languish
and pine away. Brightman.
It is spoken according to the metaphor of a whore here taken up, Pareus.
whom loathsome diseases do oftentimes seize upon, and make her more miserable
than if she were presently slain. Those that commit adultery with her are the
chief vpholders of that Heresy, consenting together with her in subtle
inventions to the same purpose. Her children were the seduced by them, thus
laboring together to propagate their filthy heresy, though some understand
rather children properly so called; Pareus.
but the adulterers being expounded so as they are, I see no reason for this.
It is not therefore a less punishment which is threatened to Iezabel and her
lovers, than to her children, but rather a greater, because they should have a
longer lingering, and so a more miserable death. The seduced shall all perish,
but seducers shall be more punished for example that all may behold it and
fear.

Quest. 4. How is it said that hereby all the Churches shall know that I am the
searcher of the hearts and reins? Verse. 23.


Answ. The reason of this is plain, because Iezabel is said to be masked under
the Visour of a Prophetess, so that men could not discover her; but when the
Lord should thus make her a spectacle of his judgments, it should appear that
all her fair pretext was but dissimulation, and that she had a vile heart
colored over with sanctity. They then which are the Church of God ought to
make this use of Gods judgments upon the adversaries of the truth, to take
notice and to be confirmed hereby, that God abhorres the wickedness lying hid
in their hearts, with how good words soever they color over their heresy, and
whatsoever extraordinary thing they do for confirmation thereof. And generally
when any are thus discovered, we are to take notice of Gods omniscience, from
which no wickedness, though most secretly acted, can be hidden, no nor the
inwardest evil thoughts of the heart.

Quest. 5. Why is it promised to this Church peculiarly to reign over nations,
and to have the morning star, Verse. 26.
and what is meant by these things?

Answ. For the distinct title of the reward here set forth different from those
to other Churches, I find nothing amongst Expositors: but it is plainly
according to the argument of the Epistle wherein mention is made of Iezabel,
who was sometime a Queen and reigned over the people of God, exercising much
tyranny against them. Wherefore, as it was needful, they are comforted with a
promise of reigning and subduing all their enemies at the last when for a time
they had held out in their encounters with them, without shrinking away from
the truth for fear. Again, for the morning star, it fitly answers to
their not knowing of the depth of Satan as they call it, for which it is likely
they were counted shallow and weak of understanding, in that they could not
see into such a profound point of the liberty of Idolathites, etc. For though
they were in this regard for a time contemned, as void of that light which was
in others of Iezabels Sect, yet they should have a far brighter light
bestowed upon them, namely the morning Star, as a token of the true light
wherein they then were, when as the other indeed had no more light than could
come from Satan's dark dungeon. So that if there be any thing to discourage
those that be in the right, either of violence or derision, the comfort to
come will hearten and encourage against them all, because if they be reigned
over now by persecutors, they shall reign then over them; if they be insulted
over and disparaged, they shall be honored by being declared of a far more
excellent condition than their adversaries. For the meaning of these things, it
is not unusual to set forth our reigning in Heaven, by saying, They shall sit
upon twelve Thrones and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel: and the Saints shall
judge the world, from which here is no great variation, shall have power over
nations, which is further amplified by saying, and shall rule them with a rod
of iron, and break them in pieces like a Potters vessel; a speech taken out
of the second Psalm, to show that they shall partake of the same honor of
reigning with Christ, whose reign is there described, according to Bullenger,
and Pareus, etc. So that the word nations sets forth wicked enemies of the
truth, as of old the Gentiles or Nations always were. But even as Christ
overcame and rules over all, so shall the faithful reign with Christ, and as
a Potters vessel is not able to stand against a bar of iron, no more shall
they be able ever again to stand against Gods people, but shall irreparably be
crushed in pieces through the weight of Christ's anger, as an earthen vessel
being broken can never be made whole again, all which is a great glory unto
Christ, and because the godly shall coumunicate with him in all his glory, all
this is ascribed unto them also. Thus Jerome and Gregory understand this
passage, Psalm. 2. But others of the conversion of the Gentiles, as Chrysostom,
Augustine, Theodoretus, Beda, Euthym. and so they expound the rod of iron to be
a Scepter of equity, but this can by no means stand. Some also understand this
place of rule and dominion here over enemies of the truth, as Beda and
Primasius, but seeing the victory is not till the end, and this reward is not
given till the victory be obtained, it is plain that the reward to come in
Heaven must needs be meant.

Touching the morning Star, Primasius.
some understand hereby the resurrection of the body, because the night of this
world shall then have an end, and the Day of glory shall begin to appear.
Richard. de Sancto victore.
Some the glorification of the soul, because as the morning Star goes
before the Sun, so the soul shall be glorified before the whole man. Some
the light of understanding in spiritual things, Ioachim.
which is thus set forth, Bullinger.
2 Pet. 1.19. and should more and more increase in their hearts. Bullinger.
Some the glory of the world to come, which is compared to the glory of a
Star, Beda. Rupertus.
Dan. 12.1. And lastly, some understand Christ so styled, cap. 22.16. I am the
root and the stooke of David, the bright morning Star, he does therefore
promise to give them himself either as a foreteller of the resurrection and
life to come, which is done in his resurrection, for as much as it does
fore-demonstrate our resurrection, Greg. Moral. lib. 19. cap. 30.
even as the morning Star the rising of the Sun, as Gregory speaks: or
else he will give himself by communicating his glory to them. Of all these I
prefer that which is for light of understanding, Pareus.
as I have partly touched already, it agreeing most fitly with the precedents
for so much as they had not known the depth of Satan, and Iezzabel had
contended with them about the sense of the Scriptures, their knowledge should
be more clarified and they should attain unto perfect light, when as Saint
Peter says, The Day Star should arise in their hearts, that is, they should
not need the help of means any more, but should have a light in themselves,
in lightning them to see and know as they were seen and known: For the
communication of Christ's glory is set forth in their reigning, his
ressurrection was a thing past, and as for the resurrection of their bodies, or
the glorification of the soul, it is not likely that he would comfort them
with part of their happiness when he had already set forth their full
glorification.

THe fifth Epistle is to the Church of Sardis in six verses of the third
Chapter, The fifth Epistle. Chap. 3.
wherein their deadness is reproved and threatened, they are stirred up to
awake and be watchful, some few are commended and comforted with the promise
of white garments, and that the Lord will confess them before God and his
Angels.

Quest. 1. What is meant in that Christ is said to have the seven Spirits of
God, and the seven Stars, Verse. 1.
and what particular reason of mentioning these things here?

Answ. The seven Spirits are they that were spoken of Chap. 1.4. which stand
before the Throne of God, and the seven Stars the Ministers of the Churches,
as is also plain, Chap. 1.20. yet some by these Spirits understand the Angels
whom Christ has at his command: Pareus.
but so he should assume a title to himself not mentioned before, seeing the
seven Spirits there are the Holy Ghost, as has been already showed. For the
reason of remembering these particularly to this Church, it is rendered diversely.
Some say, that the Lord would hereby intimate his wisdom to discerue their
wickedness covered under the cloak of hypocrisy, because he had seven
Spirits and his power to punish it, Richard. de Sancto victore.
for he had the Stars in his power, Bullenger.
much more men that offended. Others say, that this is spoken to intimate that
he gives all spiritual life, that they being yet dead might be put in mind
to seek unto him therefore, and that he defends his faithful Ministers, so
as that they shall not need to fear the anger of man, that if they did revive
in their godly care, they might safely trust in Christ, who does continually
defend such. Viegas.
Others say, that it is spoken in opposition to their conceit of themselves,
for hypocrites are readiest to think that they are full of life when indeed
they are dead; and glory much in their life of understanding and in being
counted excellent, when indeed they want both: therefore the Lord assumeth all
life to himself, for he had the seven Spirits; and all light and glory, for
he had the seven Stars. Viegas.
Lastly, others say that it is spoken to show that the Stars and the Spirits
are joined together, so that he which will have the glory of Stars, must
first have the Spirit, that is, true sanctity. Of all these I prefer that of
Bullenger as most genuine, because it is adidem, whereas the rest go somewhat
from the true meaning of the things here mentioned. Let Hypocrites therefore
consider their vanity and danger, whilst they want the life of grace, Christ
takes no care of them to protect and defend them, but only of such as have
life and light, he holds the Spirits and Stars; if therefore thou will
have the comfort of his protection, seek for the Spirit of life at his hands
who only is able to bestow it.

Quest. How is the Angel of this Church said to be dead, Verse. 2.
and yet but bidden to awake, as being only asleep, and to strengthen what
was about to die?

Answ. Deadness here, by the consent of all, is deadness in sin: he had a
name to be alive, in that a great show of piety was made, but was dead indeed,
because void of truth and substance there was nothing but hypocrisy. And
because in Hypocrites there is no true love of Christ urging to solicitude
about the sanctity of others, negligence and remissness does usually accompany
hypocrisy, and so it seems to have done in the Angel of this Church, he
labored of two vices, hypocrisy, and neglect of his charge. Of the first he
is admonished, in that he is charged to be dead; and of the other, in that he
is excited to watch, and to strengthen those that were about to die, that is,
some of that Congregation which were yet alive, but in great danger of death
also by his bad example and neglect of his office.

Quest. 3. What is meant by saying, Verse. 4.
they have not defiled their garments; and by promising, they shall walk with
me in whites, and because they are worthy, whether is not here a ground for
man's merits?

Answ. I omit here to speak of these words, I have not found thy works full
before God, verse. 2. For no man is so simple to think that this is spoken
against imperfections and weaknesses, but against hypocrisy, for those works
are not full before God, which are not done in sincerity. Touching the question
propounded. By garments, Pareus.
some understand their souls and bodies, which are sometimes also set forth by
another metaphor of vessels, as 1 These. 4.4. Their souls were not defiled by
erroneous opinions, nor their bodies by fornication after the Nicolaitan
manner. Gorran.
Some understand only their bodies, the garments of their souls, or their
virtues and virtuous actions, which are not polluted, when vice is not mixed
with them. Lastly, some understand Christ Jesus and the Christian profession,
Bullinger.
for of Christ it is often spoken as of a garment, put ye on the Lord Jesus:
and if we consider the first use of garments, Romans 13. Ephesians. 4. Col. 3.
that it was to cover our nakedness, whereof we are ashamed; this metaphor
does most fitly agree unto Christ the only cover of all our sins and
blemishes. In this sense, they defile not their garments which fly
wickedness, the stain and shame of a Christian profession; and this I
subscribe unto, as the true sense. For though the body be sometime compared to
a garment, yet the soul is never: and if the body only should be meant, here
should be a justification of single external purity without the internal.
Touching the whites here promised, Gorran.
some understand it partly of a pure and good conscience here, and of the glory
to come hereafter. Bullinger. Pareus.
But for so much as the whiteness of a good conscience is already enjoyed, and
it is here spoken of whites yet to be given, I subscribe rather to them that
understand the glory to come, which is compared to the purest white, when some
glimps hereof were in Christ's garments at the time of his transfiguration.
Matthew. 7.
In that he says, they shall walk with me in whites, note their familiarity
with this great and glorious Lord to which they shall be received.

Quest. But how are they said to be worthy?

Answ. Bullinger.
To set forth their excellency above others for those graces which did shine in
them, not for any merit which they had: For when any speech is used, wherein
man's merit may come in question, the best are said to be unprofitable servants.
He speaks therefore as a Captain giving reward unto his soldier, and
saying, Thou art worthy; which is spoken to encourage him, not to set him on to
plead his merit, and to require it therefore. Would thou then be made
partaker of this grace? keep thy garments from defilement, fly whatsoever
might disparage thy Christian profession in word or deed.

Quest. 4. Verse. 5.
What is meant by the clothing with white garments again iterated to such as
overcome, and by the book of life, out of which he promises not to blot their
names; and that he adds, I will confess his name before my Father and before
his Angels?

Answ. About this there is little difference, but Pareus does most fully
resolve all these doubts. Here are three things promised: First, to be clothed
with white raiment, which is again iterated for the encouragement of all
others, besides those few of Sardis before commended: and that this glory might
be the more highly esteemed, he shows, Secondly, that it shall be eternal,
I will not blot his name out of the book of life, that is, he shall live thus
glorified for ever: and to set it yet forth the more he adds, Lastly, and I
will confess his name, etc. that is, this glory and bright shining shall be
accompanied with the praise of the Judge, declaring every man's virtues and
graces by name; which is no small accession of honor, especially being done
before God, and the assembly of all the holy Angels. So that here is but one
and the same reward before propounded, answerable to the virtue in some of
Sardis commended, but further amplified for the excellency thereof. Touching
the book of life, The Book of life.
and blotting out of it, read at large in my second part, Text. 20. Romans 9.3.

The sixth Epistle.
THe sixth Epistle is to the Church of Philadelphia in seven verses, viz. 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13, being altogether commendatory and consolatory against the
pretended Jews: the reward promised, is to be a pillar in the Temple of God,
and to have the Name of God, of the City of God, and of Christ Jesus written
upon him.

Quest. 1. What is meant by this description of Christ, Verse. 7.
He which is holy, he which is true, he which has the key of David, he which
opens, etc. and why is he thus propounded to this Church?

Answ. This description is taken out of the first Chapter, though not word for
word, yet in effect being the same which was there revealed; his pure white
head set forth his holiness and purity, verse. 14. He is said to be a faithful
witness, and therefore he which is true, verse. 5. and to have the key of hell
and of death, which differs not much from this of having the keys of David,
verse. 18. There is no difficulty in the two first epithets, but in that he is
said to have the key of David, etc. some understand the key of knowledge, which
is ascribed unto David, as a singular Prophet, Ric. de Sancto victore,
Rup^rtus, etc.
who had the knowledge of all points of divine learning, as appears in the
Psalms; wherefore it is called David's key, for the Prophets key, he being
named for them all. This howsoever it may seem to have some ground, because
our Lord speaks elsewhere of the key of knowledge: Matthew. 23.
yet because it is called David's key, to whom singularly so much knowledge is
no where ascribed, but rather to Solomon, and because the words following of
opening and shutting do not agree to knowledge, it cannot be received as the
true sense. Beda. Bullenger. Pareus. Brightman.
Others therefore by the key of David understand, the power of a King, such as
David was; and to set forth the same Kingly office in Christ, he is often
called by the name of David, the words seem to be borrowed from Es. 22.22.
which place makes it plain for power and authority, subiecting all things.
For thus the Lord Jesus rules over all, receiving into grace, and so to glory
whom he pleases, neither can all the Devils in hell hinder him, and shutting
out whom he will, and to such none can give entrance. And as he has the
keys, so he gives them to his ministers, not to have his power, but to become
his instruments to declare who are admitted, and who are shut out of the
kingdom of heaven, and to receive by baptism into the Church all the
faithful, and to shut out by excommunication the obstinate sinners, when he
says, To you I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, etc. Would thou
then not have the kingdom of heaven shut against thee, but opened unto thee?
seek it of Christ, who only opens and shuts, and thou shall not need to
regard the Pope, who takes upon him to be the keeper of this key: for if he
or any minister of God shut out such as to whom Christ opens, or
contrariwise, he shall be judged as a usurper, but the godly are no whit the
more shut out hereby. There are other expositions of this key, some
understanding it of Christ himself, who as he is sometimes said to be the
door, so here the key: some of Christ's Cross, and some of repentance: but for
so much as I do fully rest in the second exposition, I omit to examine these.

Touching this title particularly directed to Philadelphia, the contents of the
Epistle (an open door being therein mentioned) make the reason hereof so
plain, that I shall not need to speak further of it. He puts them hereby
in mind, that that beginning of publishing the Gospel, and opening the secrets
thereof amongst them was by his power, neither should any ever be able to put
it down again. That when they should consider their own small strength, and
the power of their adversaries persecuting the Gospel, they might not despair
of the proceedings thereof, but confidently expect the continuance of it to the
end of the world.

Quest. 2. Whether was this Church of Philadelphia without all fault, Verse. 8.
because here is no reproof, but altogether commendations, and what Church at
this day may most fitly be compared unto it?

Answ. To the first, Bullinger answers well, that a right and sound faith
does cover over and hide all infirmities in manners, without which it is not to
be doubted, but this Church was, yet not taxed, because not imputed: for there
is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus. The word Philadelphia
signifies brotherly love, the situation of this town was near the sea in the
country of the Lydians, and much subject to earthquakes, but the Christians
there were steadfast in the true faith.

Touching other Churches in these latter days hereby set forth, one constantly
holds, Brightman.
that by this Church is figured out the most reformed Churches of France,
Scotland, Belgia, Heluetia, Geneua, etc. which have but a little strength, and
are full of brotherly love. But on the contrary side, Viegas.
another gives vas an him of the society of the Jesuits figured out here, and
alleges to this purpose, a prophecy of Ioachim Abbas, who lived about ann.
1200. who says, Ioachim Abbac de Philadelphia.
The Church must conceive a certain new spiritual understanding, or else an
offspring spiritual above others, that is, the very order which Jesus does
design, which order indeed amiable and famous above others that went before
it, shall be initiated in the sixth time, etc. For the first; I have already
showed my reasons why I do not embrace it, where I spoke generally of these
seven Churches: for the second, it is a wonder that the Jesuits so generally
justly hated of all the world, should dote so much in the conceit of their own
excellency, as to intimate a conceit of any such honor belonging to them,
seeing the faith which they stand for, it a new, corrupt and erroneous faith;
and the means which they use to propagate it, are far differing from the
manners of a Philadelphia, that being all love, they all cruelty and bloodshed,
and the greatest incendiaries of kingdoms, that ever were. As for the
authority produced, these words might as well be uttered by the spirit of
error to make such an abominable order the more venerable, as that gross
error about the Trinity was maintained by him in his book against Peter
Lombard, wherein he denied that the essence of the Trinity is one, and was
therefore condemned by their own Lateran Council. There is a third opinion
followed by most, that neither this, nor any other of these Churches are
typical, but only in them all others of like quality are instructed,
admonished and encouraged, and so in Philadelphia I think most properly the
reformed Churches of all countries are spoken unto: for here a door to utter
the truth, and to vindicate it from Popish errors is opened, and though now,
thanks be to God, our strength be not contemptible, yet in the beginning and
for diverse years it was but little, when the Albingenses, and Waldenses, and
Wicklife in England, and John Husse and Ierom of Prague in Bohemia, and
afterward Luther in Germany, had this door opened unto them. This time was so
long, being about four hundred years, that things being weighed with humane
reason, it might well be expected when it should have been shut again and
never more be opened, and therefore needful was that comfort, that none
should be able to shut it. To make a separation amongst these Churches for
outward things, as Brightman does, (the faith of them all being so consenting,
as appears by the harmony of our confessions) so as that Sardis should figure
out the German Churches following Luther, Philadelphia the Geneuan, etc.
following Zwinglius, Laodicea the English being more Pontifical, this
separation I say of those, who do all constantly stand against the corruptions
of Popery, is uncharitable and improbable. If we should go about to parallel
Churches of after times with these seven, the Church of Rome does rather seem
to be a fit parallel to Sardis, and some Iuke-warme state yet for to come to
Laodicea, when Popery being put down, the fire of feruency in standing for the
truth shall go out for want of stirring by contentions: for whatsoever the
indifferency of some particular persons amongst us is, yet our State (thanks
be to God) is fervent for the maintenance of the truth, and against Popery, as
our Parliament laws do declare. As for the other four Churches, I mislike
not in some respects to parallel the Primitive Church with Ephesus and Smyrna
with that in the Arrians times, according to Forbs, and Brightman. But for
Pergamus and Thyatira, they seem to set forth none other but the Church of
Rome considered with her Prophets, and Prophetesses, the head of them being
Popes Negromancers with their lying signs; and among them, that infamous woman
for whoredom, Ioane by name, which called her self John, and is known to
have sitten in that Chair. For I cannot see how any can be more fitly compared
to Balaam in Pergamus, and to Iezabel in Thyatira, than these.

Quest. 3. Who are they which call themselves Jews but are not, Verse. 9.
that shall be brought down to worship before Philadelphias feet?

Answ. For answer to this, see Chap. 2. verse. 9. Only we may add thus much
further here, that for so much as the reformed Protestant Churchesd are figured
out by Philadelphia, the Papists which are the greatest enemeis unto them, may
truly be said to be figured out by these Jews. For as they gloried in the name
of Jews, and in the antiquity of their legal service and worship, and sought
to bring Christians into contempt for the nouelty of their religion, branding
them with most ignominious names; so the Papists glory in the name of
Catholics, and bear themselves upon the antiquity of their religion,
disgracing what they can, both by railing speeches, and by the imputation of
nouelty, the true reformed religion. And as the Jews were the most infest
enemies of Christ of all others, so the Papists of the truth, and consequently
of Christ, thus approving their Pope to be that Antichrist, and their Church
that Babel which shall be brought down in Gods good time before the now
despised Protestants, as the Jews before Philadelphia. That Babel which is
afterward showed to be fallen, is Rome, and Popish Rome (God willing) shall
be proved in the proper place by invincible reasons, Chap. 17. and 18.

Quest. 4. What is meant by the hour of temptation which shall come upon all
the world, and in what sense is it promised, Verse. 10.
that Philadelphia shall be delivered here-from?

Answ. It is agreed by all, that this hour of temptation, was the time of
persecution by the heathen Emperors, from which no country was free. But by
some more restrainedly, Brightman.
the persecution of Traian; I hold it to be spoken generally of all the time
of persecution, against every part of which they had need of comfort and
support. Bullinger.
One says, that it may be understood either of the danger by heretics
through their corrupt doctrine, or by persecutors. I prefer still the first
of persecution, but there can be no error in this. All the time of persecution
is called but an hour, to show the shortness of it, being compared to the
time of joy afterward in heaven. And it is called temptation or trial, to
show that they needed not to fear it, as a means to destroy them, for they
should only be tried, and so bettered, as gold that is tried in a furnace and
then taken out again. It is said to come upon all the world, because in all
countries, none that profess the Christian religion escaping: for all that
will live godly, must suffer persecution.

Touching this Church in particular, it is not to be thought that it should be
altogether exempt, but supported with patience to endure; so that their faith
should not be hereby shaken, or any grace impaired, as must needs be through
the terriblenesse of persecution, if the Lord did not deliver therefrom. And
all these comforts belong to every one that cleaves to Gods word, resolving to
endure any thing, rather than to be beaten from it: his sufferings shall be but
an hour, to his trial and bettering, and his soul shall be safe from all
evil that might accrue unto it thereby.

Quest. 5. Verse. 11.
What is meant by saying, that no man may take thy crown? Can any that are
elected to the crown of heavenly glory miscarry and lose it?

Answ. Some understanding these words of the glory to come, infer the
uncertainty of salvation, because even the Angel of this Church so highly
commended is yet spoken to as in a possibilty of losing his Crown, as Thomas
Aquinas and other popish Writers. Pareus.
Others that maintain a certainty of salvation trouble themselves much about
the resolving of this doubt, how there can be any certainty of any man's
salvation if he may lose his Crown, and another not appointed to it may get
it? But they resolve it, by saying that this is spoken for excitation only, and
because by such admonitions the Lord works perseverance in the Elect. Others
by this Crown understand nothing but the glory and praise of welldoing,
Bullinger. Brightman.
which would be lost and fall to another, if either he should grow remiss or
be corrupted by heresy after that he had carried himself thus worthily: and
to this I subscribe. For he that wears a royal Diadem has not more glory
amongst men than the virtuous Christian before God; true piety is a Crown upon
the head of him that is endued therewith.

Quest. 6. What is meant by this, Verse. 12.
I will make him a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall not go out
any more, and I will write upon him the name of my God, etc. and why is the
reward thus set forth to this Church?

Answ. Some think that it is alluded to the custom of the Romans, Bullinger.
Pareus.
who were wont to set up Pillars to the honor of famous Conquerours,
inscribing their names and noble acts. But it is to be noted, that he does not
say I will set him up a Pillar, but I will make him a Pillar, and therefore the
very same Authors after that allusion mentioned, prefer another exposition,
taking this to be an allusion to the Pillars set up in the Temple by Solomon, 1
King. 7.15. For as they were an ornament to the Temple, so the great luster and
glory which these should have in Heaven is hereby set forth. Some apply this to
the present state of the faithful in this world, who are set fast as those
Pillars, or of whom some are most eminent as Pillars, for so Peter, Gal. 2.9.
James and John are said to have been Pillars, 1 Timothy 3 15.
and the Church it self is called The ground and Pillar of truth. And as those
Pillars, so they are firm by faith, Richard. de Sancto Victore.
strait by equity, erected by intention, and lofty by contemplation. But seeing
the rewards promised in this life went before, being plainly distinguished from
the reward here set forth which is to come, I consent with those that
understand by the Temple of God, Heaven; and by the Pillar, eminency of glory
there. Brightman.
And because those Pillars of the Temple were carried away by Nebuchadnezzar,
that this estate might appear to be more firmly and immovably settled, it is
added, He shall not go out any more. For the names which he says he will
write upon him, The seventh Epistle to Laodicea. Chap. 3.14.
herein the allusion is still continued: for Solomon wrote upon those Pillars
certain names, upon the one (...) he shall establish, and upon the other,
(...) in it is strength: so for the greater glory of this Pillar Gods Name
shall be inscribed, because he is the child of God; new Ierusalems name,
because he is a Citizen thereof; and Christ's new name, that is, Jesus Christ
risen from the dead and set at the right hand of God, because he is of the
number of his redeemed ones. For the other question, why to this Church the
reward is thus propounded, I find nothing amongst Expositers, but the reason I
take it is plain, because they were a long time of little strength, and much
wronged and disgraced: but they should be strengthened as a brazen Pillar, and
honored with the highest titles conferred by the Judge of the whole world. Let
this then comfort every ones heart that mourns in Zion for the tyranny,
oppressions, and opprobries of persecutors, they shall be set as Pillars, etc.

And to the Angel of the Church of Laodicea write, These things says the
AMEN, Chap 3. Ver. 14
that witness, that faithful one and true, the beginning of the creature of
God.

This Epistle does consist altogether of reprehension and admonition for
luke-warmnesse, having nothing of commendation in it, as the Epistle before
going was altogether commendatory, and in no part reprehensory. This Laodicea
was the chief City of Caria, according to Strabo and Pliny, built by Antiochus
Theas, and named from Laodice, the name of his Queen, signifying the Prince of
people, giving Laws unto them.

Quest. 1. Why is the Lord thus set forth to this Church, and whence are these
titles taken, and what is meant by them?

Answ. These titles are taken from Chap. 1.5. where he is called The faithful
witness, and verse. 18. Amen, and generally in all passages, the beginning and
the end. How he is said to be Amen, Saint Paul teaches, 2 Cor. 1.19, 20.
saying, For the promises of God are in him yea, and in him Amen, because
whatsoever he says is true and certain, for which cause that witness and
that faithful one is added. The Arrian lays hold upon this, that he is
called the beginning of the creature, to prove Christ to be but a mere man:
but the words do not imply this, for he is the beginning and the end, that is,
eternal, both ex part ante, and ex part post, all creatures had their
beginning in him, Bullinger.
seeing he made them all. The beginning of the creature then does not argue a
creature, though Bullinger understands it thus of his humanity, Brightman.
Pareus.
but the greatest power by which the creature has the beginning according to
others, who say that the word (...) may also be understood of principality, but
for so much as often before it is so used with (...), as that it must
necessarily be taken for the beginning, I expound it thus only. Now to this
Church the Lord does thus set forth himself that it might be warned to repent,
seeing all the taxations here are true, and whatsoever she pretended of being
rich, etc. yet she was certainly poor and naked, and if she would bethink her
self to be better furnished, she might well come to him for gold and clothing
or any thing, because he was the beginning of the creature, all things have
their being from him, and therefore of him store of all spiritual furniture is
to be had. My Authors adapt it unto power, because of Christ's power to spue
them out. Brightman.
Brightman refers it to the accomplishment of Gods blessings promised to
godliness in outward things, for which he says, that he is faithful. We
learn from hence to submit when we are taxed from the Lord, and acknowledge
our vileness indeed, and to seek from him a supply of all spiritual
necessaries, who is the beginning of the divine creation, in whom all are new
creatures, their deformity being put away.

Quest. 2. I would that thou were either cold or hot. Verse. 15.
What is meant by cold and hot, and how is the cold preferred before the
lukewarm?

Answ. Some by cold understand such as being sinners, have a sense of sorrow
for their sins; by hot, such as have joy in Gods salvation; by lukewarm,
Greg. lib. 34. Mor. c. 2.
such as are well enough pleased in their sinful estate, as not being so great
sinners, but bearing themselves upon their outward works. Others by cold,
understand such as are altogether unconverted, Tho. Aquin. Qu. 3. de malo.
Ambros^ser. 118. Richard. de Sancto victore, etc.
and so enemies to the truth; by hot, such as are zealous for the truth; by
lukewarm, such as by outward profession are for the truth, but in their lives
and doings as sinful as the cold, and hereunto all our new Writers agree. And
this is the most probable, for there is more possibility of the conversion of a
Jew or Pagan, than of him, who having received the truth, is without all power
of it in his life, and the condemnation of the one shall be easier than of the
other, as is declared, Ezech. 16. Heb. 10.2 Pet. 2. Matthew. 11. etc. God does
not therefore wish that men were cold, as taking any pleasure in it, but
comparatively, that such Christians as have no zeal to follow and live
according to the religion by them professed, might learn to acknowledge their
dangerous estate, they are worse than Infidels, than enemies of the truth that
were never enlightened.

Quest. 3. Verse. 13.
I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire etc. What is meant here by
Gold and Garments and Eye-salue, and wherefore are they bidden to buy it of
him, and when as there were four things complained of, he advises but against
three; there was Poverty, Nakedness, Blindness and Misery; here Gold,
Garments, and Eye-salue?

Answ. Some by God understand Charity, by white Garments good works, Beda.
Richard. de Sancto Victore. Rupertus. Bullinger. Pareus.
by Eye-salue spiritual ill umination; and because the want of these three
make a man's case miserable, therefore these only are mentioned, as which being
obtained his misery cease. Others by Gold understand the Word of God received
by faith, because it is compared unto Gold tried seven times in the fire, Psalm.
12. and by white Garments the righteousness of Christ put on by faith. Primas.
Gregor. l. 4. Moral. c. 34.
Others by Gold understand wisdom, and by fire charity, so that gold tried in
the fire or fired, is wisdom joined with charity. For mine own part, I am not
satisfied with any of these expositions, unless by charity we understand the
substance of grace, diffused so in the heart, as that it is truly addicted to
all holy obedience, and by good works and unblameable life, like to that of
Zachary and Elizabeth: and as for the Eye-salue, all are agreed that it is
spiritual illumination, whereby a man sees the excellency of these things,
and the vanity of temporal, being therefore taken up in his meditations and
affections with the one and contemning the other. And thus this passage will
most fitly agree to this Church, for that being Christian only in profession,
but wanting all zeal and care of a conversation suitable, it is said to be
poor, naked, and blind, poor through the want of soundness of Religion
within, naked and so deformed through heathen-like conditions and worldly
manners, blind through an ouer-esteeming of the vain and transient things of
this world, and a sleighting of heavenly things. Wherefore if soundness of
Religion within be gotten, and an unblameable carriage without, and spiritual
light of understanding, there will be a full deliverance from all this misery.
And soundness within may well be set forth by the purest gold, because as that
is most precious of all metals, so this of all graces, being the very oil in
the Lamp, Mat. 25. 1 Cor. 13.
and the charity, without which all is vain, and therefore some are said to be
vessels of gold, 2 Timothy 2.20. As for white garments, it has been already
showed upon verse. 5. that they do rightly set forth an in-offensiue life,
seeing the scandalous are black spots and blots. For the Word of God and
Christ's righteousness applied by faith, I cannot see how they can so fitly be
brought in here, seeing this Church is not charged to have left the Word and
expecting to be justified by faith, as no Hypocrites do, but only faulted in
remissness. Buying here is nothing but getting by prayer and spiritual
endeavors, not for any price given by us, as is expressed by the Prophet
saying, Esaias. 55.1.
Come buy wine and milk without money, as all Expositors consent. Would thou
not therefore be miserable? get soundness at the heart, and rest not in holy
shows with Hypocrites, get white clothing of a spotless conversation, and to
be lifted up in thy heart to things above, that thou may be drawn after
them, and grow into a contempt of the base things that are here below. That
which is added, I chasten those whom I love, is spoken as a reason of the
sharp reprehension before-going, that they might not despair, but be drawn to
embrace his counsel, how bitter soever he might seem to be against them,
because it is spoken in love. And it seems that this admonition had some good
effect to cause this Church to repent, Eusebius. Eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 26. lib.
7. cap 28.
for Eusebius praises the Church of Laodicea in his time, and particulatizeth
some excellent Bishops there who stood zealously for the truth.

Quest. 4. Behold, I stand at the door and knock, Verse. 20.
if any man hear my voice and open the doere, I will come in and sup with him,
etc. What is this standing at the door and knocking? is it in man's power to
open, and what is meant by this Supper?

Answ. Christ is said to knock partly by preaching the Law and threatening,
Pareus.
partly by preaching the Gospel and comforting, partly by afflictions, and
partly by inspiring good motions and inlightning the understanding. He stands
at the door, to show his perseuerant going on in thus knocking at the door of
the heart, though yet shut against him.

Touching that saying, If any man open, this does not argue a power in man to
open if he will, for the opening of the heart is ascribed unto the Lord, Act.
16.14.
He opened the heart of Lydia, and the whole work and every part of our
conversion is from the Lord, Ezech. 36.26. Ioh. 6.44. 2 Cor. 3.5, etc. But man
is thus spoken unto, Aug. de cor. and great. c. 3. O homo in praeceptione
cognosce, quid debes habere: in correptione cognosce, te tuo vitto non habere:
in oratione cognosce vnde accipias quod vis habere.
and Ezech. 18. Turn ye, make you a new heart and a new spirit, that he might
know what he ought to do, he is reproved for not doing so, that he might
know it to be through his own default, and directed to pray to God that he
may be able to do so, that he might know from whence he has the power to do
so, as Augustine has excellently set it forth. Viegas a Jesuit, upon this
place acknowledges, that man has no power to open-without Gods grace
preventing, intimated in that he says, I stand at the door and knock, by his
knocking then we are awakened to open. The Lord comes first with his grace
unto the will inabling it, then the will coworking with grace opens in some,
in others not, who being thus enabled can but will not. For this cause he
says, If any man will open, implying that it is in his power not to open. To
the same effect Bellarmine, lib. 1. de great. and lib. arbit. cap. 11. and the
Council of Trent, Ses. 6. Can. 5. cap. 4. But the truth is, whosoever is
excited by Gods knocking, does open unto him, he being made willing by virtue
of the same knock, whose will before was dead to every good motion. For in the
work of grace a man is not moved as a block or a stone, but as a living thing
that goes upon the own legs, so he by his will opens to the Lord when he
has once put life into it. And this viuifying of the will stirs it so
effectually to open as that it cannot but open, seeing as motion always
follows life, so opening follows the life of the free will. Does not a man
then open? he is undoubtedly dead still: is he quickened? then he does
undoubtedly open. So that they seem plainly to me to speak contradictions,
that say God by his knock inclines the will, from whence flows this act of
opening as a proper act of life, and yet the will thus inclined may resist
against God and keep the door shut still, which argues death in the will.
For no man is so much his own enemy, as not to fly from a deadly danger,
having sense to perceive it, and legs to carry him away, and a passage open,
the instinct of nature conseruatiue of it self puts him on that he cannot
but fly: in like manner, when grace comes, there being life, and legs, and
liberty, and sense of the most deadly danger of all, the same grace will not
suffer, but as an instinct prevail to make a man hasten from this danger in
keeping the Lord out, and let him in without delay. As for this, If any man
open, from a supposition to a simple position, the consequence is not good; If
any man open, therefore some will not open when their doors are knocked at, it
follows no more, than (as if a man should come to a prison full of
malefactors lying in great misery, expecting every day to be cut off, and say,
I have obtained liberty for you all to depart if any man will depart) it would
follow that some would not depart and escape from this misery. As for that
saying, Mat. 23.
How often would I have gathered you together, and ye would not? it does imply no
more, but that they had means to be gathered together, but through their own
corruption they prevailed not amongst them. Moreover, by these complaints and
instigations to turn, the Lord is wont to work a turning in such as shall be
saved. Lastly, the Lord promises, If any man open, that he will come in and
sup with him, etc. This opening is by believing, he comes in by making him
his habitation: for the believer is Gods Temple, and this is more than if
Christ had come in person to our houses, according to that of Augustine, Aug.
ser. 144. de Temp. plus est habere Christum in cord quam in domo, quia cor
nostrum interius est nobis, quam domus nostra. Pareus. Bullinger, etc.
It is more to have Christ in our heart than in our house, because our heart is
more inward to us than our house.

He suppeth with us when he is delighted with those good things that are
wrought in us, for these are meat and drink unto him, seeing he takes
pleasure in them as men do in their meat and drink, and we sup with him by
being made partakers of those joys and spiritual comforts that are in
believing; and finally sit down at his Table in the Kingdom of Heaven. Or
else by this phrase nothing else is meant, but the near familiarity to which
the faithful are admitted with Christ, even as loving friends that use to sup
one with another. And the word Supper is rather used than dinner, because then
is most time commonly for friends to tarry by it and recreate themselves in the
society of one another.

Quest. 5. He that overcomes, Verse. 21.
I will give to him to sit with me in my Throne, as I have overcome, etc. What
is meant by this Throne of Christ, and why is this promised to such as overcome
in this Church?

Answ. This Throne, as all agree, is a participation of Christ's kingly glory
which they shall have, even as he is made partaker of this glory with the
Father in his humane nature. He does promise it, who sometime said that it was
not his to give: Mat. 20.
for that was spoken in respect of his justice, by which he could not for
favor or affection give the chief places to them, but as any were most
excellent, as I have upon that place showed out of Chrysostom. Bullinger.
One ascribes that to his humanity, this to his divinity. And this is
mentioned specially, according to his own example to this lukewarm Church,
that they might not think by their cool going on to come to eternal felicity
with Christ, for he himself attained not unto it, but by labor and striving
with all earnestness, in that he is said first to have overcome, which
argues thus much.

CHAP. IIII.
IN this and the fifth Chapter, the Lord being about to reveal things to come
unto John to the end of the world, takes him up into Heaven in the Spirit,
because from hence only can the knowledge of these things be attained; upon
earth it is known what is past and present, but not what is to come, no not by
Astrologians, or Sooth sayers, or idols, wherein Devils spoke. For let them
tell what shall come, and say they are gods, as speaks the Prophet Esaias. Here
is first declared, in what great state and majesty the God of heaven reigns,
and the Lamb of God the Lord Jesus Christ.

Quest. 1. Who was it that sat upon the throne, Verse. 3.
and why is he like unto a Jasper and Sardin stone, and what means the
rainebow about the throne like to an Emrald?

Answ. It is agreed by all, that he which sat upon the throne was God the
King of all, but for the likeness here mentioned there is great difference.
Some considering the color of the Jasper to be green, of the Sardin to be
red, Ioachim. Forbs. Brightman.
and of the Emrald to be a pleasant bright green, will have the holy Trinity
here set forth; the Father, in whom all have their being and growth, by the
Jasper; the Son, who was all red by that bloody death which he suffered for
our sins, by the Sardin; the Spirit, who is the comforter, by the Emrald.
This does not so well agree, because so the Spirit should not be one with the
Father and the Son, as the rainebow round about the throne and he that
sits in the throne are notall one.

Jasper, and the humane by the Sardin, Ambros. Am^ber. Pareus.
and the grace and mercy of God toward man in him by the rainebow, which was
first appointed for a sign hereof: but against this, makes that which
follows of the Lamb, Cha. 5. for if he were in the same vision sitting upon
a throne in this similitude, he could not be at the same time in the
similitude of a Lamb also.

Bullinger.
and the holy Ghost by the thunder and lightnings proceeding out of the throne:
but for so much as these are things of terror, and the Spirit the comforter,
we cannot understand it thus.

Jasper, and the fire of the last judgment by the Sardin, Tyconius. Beda.
Primasius. Rupertus.
and the interim of peace and grace between these times by the Rainebow: but
how the green Jasper should set forth water I cannot see, nor why the Lord
should carry a similitude whereby these things may be expressed, seeing in
heaven he appears as he is in himself most, and not so much as he is in his
works and judgments.

Pareus follows this* though he defends that of the Son of God also.
some understand by these precious stones, the excellency of God, both in
respect of his glory and that singular virtue that is in him, which nothing can
more fitly express than precious stones, for color and appearance admirable,
and no less admirable in virtue and operation. Viegas.
And more particularly they may well set forth his mercy, by which all things
live, and are in their vigor green and flourishing; and his justice, through
which he becomes fiery red in his anger against sin. Confer. Ezech.
1.27.28. The life of all vegetable things is declared by green, and life of
sensitive things by red, arising from blood; it may be that God is here showed
to be the Author of all life. Verse. 4. Tyconius. Beda. Primasius. Bullinger.
The rainebow like an Emrald is the reflection of these colors, further
declaring the brightness of his glory, and is a settled sign of peace to all
the inhabitants of heaven, who shall never be cast out any more, as the
ambitious Angels sometime were: so that it is good being there, and great
reason there is why our hearts should be always thitherward, that we might
behold this glory, and be out of that mutable condition wherein we now stand.

Quest. 2. And round about the throne there were four and twenty thrones, and
four and twenty Elders, etc. Who were these Elders sitting upon thrones round
about?

Answ. Some understand the twelve Patriarchs and Apostles, as Fox and Pareus
relate; some the whole Church represented by them, seeing the Church under the
old Testament sprang from the Patriarchs, and the Church under the new from the
Apostles, and the Church now is twice as great, as of old when it was in twelve
Tribes, and therefore this number is well doubled: Fox.
some understand nothing but a show of the dependancy and subjection of all
principalities upon and unto God, because they cast down their crowns which
they have of gold: some the four and twenty books of canonical Scriptures in
the old Testament. Grasserus.
Lastly, some understand the most excellent of those which have been set up in
the Church of God, Richard. de Sancto Victore. Rupertus. Pannonins. Ioacbimus.
both under the old and new Testament, who sit now as Senators about the great
Emperor in heaven; not that there are no more but just thus many, but because
a counsel amongst the Jews did anciently consist of four and twenty: this
certain number is put for an uncertain, as the Priests appointed also to serve
in the Temple by course in the days of David, were four and twenty. And this
is most probable, because to the twelve Apostles are promised twelve thrones,
and so likewise without doubt all Apostolical persons shall be likewise most
highly advanced in the kingdom of glory, being placed as Counselors of State
nearest about the King.

As for the other Expositions, first, it were a great wrong to others more
worthy than many of them, to hold that they are not as near unto God as the
twelve Patriarks.

Secondly, it were improper here to understand the whole company of the Church
triumphant, who are spoken of more particularly, Chap. 5. v. 13.

Thirdly, it does not agree by Senators appearing in heaven to set forth all
Princes, whereof many shall never come there. And for that of the four and
twenty books, I cannot conceive any ground for it at all.

Quest. 3. And out of the throne went thunders, Verse. 5.
and lightnings, and voices. And seven lamps of fire burning, etc. What is
meant by these lightnings, thunders, and voices, and what are these lamps?

Answ. I have already showed, that though these proceeded out of the throne,
yet the holy Ghost cannot be meant hereby. Some observing three and three
things mentioned here together, Forbs. Brightman.
lightnings, thunders, and voices; lamps, glassie sea, and beasts, think that
hereby the severity and mercy of God are represented, of each of which there
are three signs. Some by lightnings, Tyconius. Rupertus. Rechard. de Sancto
Victore.
understand miracles done by these Elders to convert the world; by thunders,
Sermons of Gods judgments; by voices, other more mild and moderate teachings.
But if we look back to Ezech. 1.13, 14. where the like vision is set forth,
this lightning will appear to be the flashing out of the fire from amongst the
four beasts, which are described immediately after, for they are said to run
and to return like a flash of lightning: and the thunder the noise of their
wings, and so are the voices: for verse. 24. the moving of their wings is said
to make a great noise, like many waters, and voice of the Almighty, and the
voice of speech, etc. So that the glory and greatness of God is hereby more
set forth, and how terrible he is, that all may do reverence before him: for
thus his going forth is commonly described, Exodus 19. with thunder and
lightning, Psalm. 50. A fire before him, and a great tempest round about him. I
cannot see how these things can be referred to miracles and preachings, the
intention of this place being not to show John what was done upon earth, for
that he saw without being taken up, but in what majesty and terriblenesse God
is in heaven reigning over this world, that all might stand in awe of him.

As for the seven lamps burning before the throne, they are explained in the
text to be the seven spirits of God, of which see before, Chap. 1.5.

Quest. 4. Verse 6.
And before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto Crystal. What is to
be understood by this sea?

Answ. Some by the glassie sea understand the word of God, which is mentioned
next unto the holy Ghost, because it is the outward means of sanctification,
Ioachim. Forbs. Brightman. Grasser.
as the spirit is the inward: for the word is often compared unto water; and is
said to be glassie, because still and untroubled; and clear as crystal,
because it shows clearly those things which pertain to salvation, and now
more especially under the Gospel: whereas before, the Sea in the Temple made
by Solomon, was brazen, that is, thick and not so transparent. Some understand
this world, Bullinger. Pareus. Rupertus. Tyconius. Beda. Pannonius. Glossa ord.
etc.
which is as a glassie sea for fragility, and is transparent as glass in the
eyes of the Lord. Some understand the Sacrament of Baptism, wherewith we are
washed, that we may enter into heaven, as the Priests washed themselves in the
brazen sea, that they might proceed to their office in the Temple: and it is
said to be glassie and clear as crystal, because they which are rightly
baptized are enlightened in spiritual things, they being now made clear and
evident unto them: Heb. 6.
Wherefore the Apostle speaking of the baptized, calls them such as have been
once enlightened: and the Greek Fathers call Baptism (...), as Clem. Alex. lib.
1. paedag. c. 6. Greg. Nazian. Chrysostom. etc. For mine own part I am not satisfied
in any of these expositions, for why should the word of God or baptism be
represented in heaven, where there is no further use of either: And for this
frail world, it is so full of tempests, storms, and dark clouds, as that a
clear still crystalline sea can no way agree unto it. Moreover, this same sea
being again mentioned, Chap. 15. the Saints in heaven triumphing for their
victory, are said to stand upon it being mingled with fire. If therefore amongst
so many so learned, I might put in my poor conjecture, I think, that it is
here alluded to the brazen sea in the Temple of Solomon: 1 King 7.23. Exodus
30.18.
for as that was one part of the furniture of Gods house, wherein water for the
Priests to wash withal was; so in the highest Temple of God, which is heaven,
there is a sea of pure water, as clear as crystal glass, to set forth how
pure and clean all things are which be there, no unclean thing can approach
before the throne of God, as is set forth more at large, Chap. 21. where also a
river as clear as crystal is said to proceed from the throne of God, Chap.
22.1. And that glass is not spoken of for the fragility, but for the
clearenesse and transparency, is plain, Chap. 21.18. where the city of God is
said to be of pure gold, transparent as glass. Or else consider whether by
this sea of glass be not meant that heaven which we call Coelum Crystallinum,
which though it be between the throne of God and this world; yet it hides
not, but rather as a perspectiue glass makes all things here more manifest:
for this may well be called a sea, seeing at the creation waters were placed
there as well as below, so that as ours is the earthly sea, so that is the
Lords heavenly.

Quest. 5. And in the midst of the throne and round about, Verse. 6.
four animals full of eyes before and behind, etc. What are these animals,
translated beasts, and how are they both in the midst of the throne and round
about it?

Answ. They which by the sea understand the word of God, expound these animals
of the ministers of the word in the four parts of the world, who are full of
eyes, Brightman. Chitreus.
to show their vigilance; and have six wings, to show their readiness; and are
like unto a lion, calfe, man and eagle, because with the lion they are
courageous, with the bullock patient of labor, and with man intelligent, and
with the eagle soaring aloft in heavenly meditations, and contemning this
world. Now one is said to be like a Lion, another like a calfe, etc. not
because some have one of these virtues only, but having all these, as is
necessary, they excel more in one kind than in another, and so are figured
out accordingly; or else more particularly, the holy Ghost would hereby
express the diverse virtues of the holy ministry in diverse ages. In the first
age they were bold as Lions, in preaching the Gospel, in the second age, they
were slaughtered like oxen; in the third, as a wise man they discerned the
beast and the number of his name; in the fourth they mount higher, and see more
into heavenly mysteries and become more heavenly. These meditations are very
plausible, but seeing the four and twenty Elders do rather set forth the
principal ministers of God in all ages, I cannot see how these beasts being
distinct things from them, and rather leaders in spiritual hymns to the
praise of God, should be the rest of the whole company of ministers, who are
all doubtless, as the rest of the faithful in their place invested with white
robes, and wearing crowns upon their heads, and not in any different form.
Iren. lib. 3. c. 11. Ieron. in proem. in Matthew. Aug. Lyra Grasser.
Others understand the four Evangelists, ascribing to Matthew the face of a
Lion, to Mark of a calfe, to Luke of a man, to John of an eagle. Of this
opinion though there be grave Authors, yet upon the same consideration it
falls to the ground also: to say nothing of the absurdity that would follow,
that John the spectatour of this should see himself thus represented to
himself. Petrus Aureolus.
Others understand the four Patriarchs of the Christian world, as of
Jerusalem, Antioch, Alexandria, and of Constantinople, and bring their reasons
of all, but not worth the naming or confuting. Ambros. lib. 3. de Virgin.
Arethas.
Others understand the four Cardinal virtues; fortitude set forth in the
Lion, justice in the bullock, because he labors for what he eats;
temperance in the eagle, which eats naught but what prey himself has taken,
though never so hungry; and prudence in a man. Orig. Hom. 1. in Ezech.
Rupertus. Ansbertus.
Others understand the four faculties of the mind, as anger, concupiscence,
reason, and conscience. Others understand the four degrees through which Christ
passed, his incarnation set forth by a man, his passion by a bullock, his
resurrection by a lion, and his ascension by an eagle. Some understand it only
as a representation of the homage done unto God by all sorts of creatures, men,
beasts, and birds. Lastly some, not to weary my self with more relations,
Marlorat. Fulke.
understand the Seraphims, Esa. 6.1. those Angelical spirits which the Lord
uses in the government of the world, under the figure of whom being full of
eyes and wings, his providence extending every whither, and his omniscience is
declared. And to this I subscribe, both because the description does so well
agree, and the form of praising God; and that which is further set forth
Ezech. 1. where they are called animals, as here, and have such appearances,
but only that each one had these four faces, whereas one here is said to have
one, and another another; wherein there is no more difference, but that what
was there represented jointly in each one, is here represented severally: viz.
in what majesty the Lord sits, his Chariot being drawn there, his Throne
supported here, not only by one kind of creature, as is the manner of earthly
Princes; but by diverse, and those the chief made to agree together to do
service unto him: declaring hereby, how in and about his throne, and in his
kingdom there is a sweet harmony and consent, to the praise of his name
amongst those that be of most different natures, as is further expressed, Esai.
11. And for their being in the midst of the throne, and round about, it is
easily also resolved from this conferring of places: for in Ezech. 1.14. They
are said to run and return, and so they might well be sometime in the midst
and sometime about it. The maine exception against this exposition is, that
Chap. 5.9. they are brought in together with the Elders praising God for their
Redemption by the blood of Christ, and therefore it seems cannot be
Angelical spirits. But to this it may easily be answered; that though the
beasts are said to fall down with the Elders, yet it does not necessarily
follow, that they joined with them in their new song; nay rather by some
circumstances it seems necessary to understand that music and song to be
made by the Elders only, both because they could handle viols, which the beasts
could not, and the orderly performing of each ones part requires, that as the
four beasts had before ascribed holiness to the Lord, to which the Elders
said Amen; So now the Elders have sung praise to the Lamb, they should join
and say Amen: neither are the beasts said to have crowns, as they must have to
whom the singing of this song can agree: for they praise the Lamb, because by
him they are made Kings and Priests unto God: this the beasts cannot say, but
only the Elders, who wear the crowns of gold in token that they are Kings.
As for those opinions of the virtues and affections of the mind, they being no
subsistences of themselves as these beasts are, they do easily fall to the
ground. And for that about the mysteries of our Redemption, if any such thing
had been intended, the likeness of a man should have been put first, then of
a bullock, etc.

CHAP. V.
A Representation of the Lords sitting in majesty having been made in the
former Chapter, here is showed in what manner he proceeds to reveal the
things to come. He holds a book in his right hand written within a without,
sealed with seven seals, which when none could open, the Lord Jesus took and
opened it, and upon the opening of each seal there is some representation of
that which should afterward be done. What book this was I think there
needs no great question to be made, for the most reasonable conjecture is,
that it was a book containing the things herein revealed, which were so many,
as that they could not be set down without writing on both sides of each
leaf, and not on one side only, according to the ancient manner of writing:
for to what end were the sealing, if it were written on the back side, that
it, on the cover of the book: it is sealed with seven seals, which none could
loose, because it exceeded the power of any creature to declare them, only the
Lamb of God can do it: neither upon the opening of one can any declare the
rest, but he must open each one in order that we may attain to this
understanding. Others anciently have expounded this Book of the holy
Scriptures containing the old Testament, which is the writing within, because
more obscure; and the new, which is the writing without, because the mysteries
of salvation are herein more plainly revealed: but this is altogether without
ground here, for what should the Book of the holy Scriptures do now in the
Lords hand, when he was not about to explain the mysteries thereof, but only
to reveal things to come hitherto kept secret, so as the mysteries of holy
Scriptures were not? I pass over therefore the first five verses and come to
the sixth.

Quest. 6. In the midst of the Throne and of the beasts and Elders stood a
Lamb, etc. Verse. 6.
Why does a Lamb appear after speech of a Lion that should open the seals,
and why standing, and with seven horns and eyes?

Answ. It is agreed by all that this is the Lord Jesus; but why a Lamb
appeared, after that one of the Elders had told John of the Lion of the Tribe
of Judah, who had obtained power to open the Book, I find no reason rendered.
It seems to me that he is called a Lion by one of the Elders, Genesis 49. Esa.
11.
because by that name, and by the name of the root of David he was anciently
prophesied of, and therefore most fit for one of elder times, being brought in
speaking to tell of a Lion and of the root of David, according to the
Prophesies that then went of him: but when he appears to John, it is most fit
that he should appear as a Lamb, bearing a sign of being killed, because he
was so lately crucified, and by the name of a Lamb he was spoken of by the
Prophet of the new Testament, John the Baptist. There are many reasons rendered
why he was spoken of as a Lion and as a Lamb. He was called a Lion, first,
Ioh. 1.29.
for his strength in ouercomming all his enemies; secondly, for his
principality, whereby he is King of all, as the Lion is of the beasts; thirdly,
for his courage, whereby he fears nothing but makes all afraid of him;
fourthly, for his understanding even in his childhood, as the Lion alone of
all beasts that have claws, sees as soon as he is whelped. And whereas it
may seem strange, that a Lion is spoken of for the opening of a Book, for
which such a creature is unfit; one resolves it well, that sin and the
Devil hindering from the sight of the mysteries of God, Brightman.
a Lion of power to break the force of these is fitly mentioned, because this
hindrance being taken away, the seals that kept them fast in closed are as it
were loosed. The root of David he is called, according to Esaias 53.2. whereas he
is said to be a branch out of the root, Esaias 11.1. because although he be but a
branch, according to the flesh for so much as he came of David, yet he is a
root according to his Divinity, Rupertus. Pannonius.
whereupon David and all the godly are borne by faith partaking of his grace,
as of sap coming from him, and consequently of salvation by him. He is called
a Lamb, because he was offered up in sacrifice for our sins, at what time,
as a Lamb is dumb and complains not, so he opened not his mouth. Orig. Hom.
24. in Number.
He is in the midst of the Throne, because taken up to the same glory with God
in his humane nature, he stands to set forth his resurrection. He has seven
horns to show his kingly power, for horns set forth strength and Kings, and
seven being a number of perfection, that he has the power of all Kingdoms.
Seven eyes set forth the fullness of spiritual light coming from him, as all
Expositors agree. If it shall seem strange that Christ should appear as a
Lamb with seven horns to declare his kingly power, seeing the Lamb is a
weak creature, and has little strength in the horns; I answer, that it was
necessary he being set forth as a Sacrifice for our sins, whereby they were
taken away, being otherwise an obstacle to the perception of divine mysteries,
horns in great number should be ascribed unto him to declare his might yet
remaining when he had suffered, lest his enemies should contemn him as a
weakling. And although two horns, which Lambs usually have, were unfit to set
forth this, yet seven horns do fitly set forth an extraordinary Lamb,
mighty, beyond the nature of that beast. And the seven eyes answer to the seven
Seals, so that he has eyes enough to see what is under every seal.

Note, that sin hinders from understanding the mysteries of God, they must
be first expiated, or else the Book of God will still remain sealed: it is in
vain to diue into the knowledge of these things for an unregenerate person,
that has no part yet in the sacrifice of this Lamb, whereby only his sins
may be done away.

Quest. 2. The Elders are said to have Harpes, and golden Vials full of odours,
which are the prayers of the Saints. What Saints prayers are meant here? the
Saints in Heaven have no need to offer prayers for themselves, be not these
then our prayers, and if they be, is not here a ground to entreat them to
further us in our prayers, seeing they must needs know what we pray, otherwise
they cannot offer the odours of our prayers? And why do they address
themselves thus to celebrate the praises of the Lamb upon the taking of this
book to open it?

Ans. The popish sort will have their presenting of our prayers before God here
understood, or at the least the prayings of the Saints in Heaven for us, which
if it be so, then they are Mediators of intercession and to be sought unto by
us. Our Writers on the other side will have nothing else but the praises of the
Lamb which follow in this Chapter understood, because a thanksgiving is a
kind of prayer. It is most clear, that the prayers of Gods people upon earth
are not meant, because they are odours in the golden Vials of these glorified
Elders, something proceeding from them and the ^est of the Saints in Heaven,
even as the incense offered by the Priests under the Law, was a sweet fume
kindled by them that offered it. But whether they were properly prayers
petitioning for something, or praises, it is a question. Forbs. Brightman.
Some will have this a representation of the Church upon earth, singing and
offering up the sweet odours of prayer: but this cannot stand, because things
in earth are brought in praising the Lamb afterward. Neither can I see how
the following praises should be meant by the prayers of the Saints: for that
was the song which they sung to their Harpes, from which the odours in their
Vials are a distinct thing. It must needs then be yielded, that Prayers are
here properly to be understood, and the prayers of these four and twenty
together, with all the rest of the Saints in Heaven for the Church upon earth.
And so it cannot be denied but that they intercede for us: only their
intercession is for us all in general, not knowing the particular case of any,
seeing as the Prophet says, Abraham knows us not, Esa. 63.16.
Israel is ignorant of us. And therefore to apply our selves to them in our
praying, that we may be helped by their mediation, as we are directed to do
unto Christ, is absurd and superstitious, yea for so much as this honor
belongs to Christ only, it is from him derogatory, and so in a high degree
impious. It is comfort enough to us in respect of the Saints in Heaven, that
they bear still an entire love toward us, and by soliciting the Lord for us,
seek to further our happiness, and that their prayers in this kind are
grateful as odours, and so are all our own godly prayers. Also coming out of
golden Vials, that is, hearts purified and made precious by Faith. For their
disposing of themselves to these praises after the taking of this sealed Book
to open, the reason is plain, it is no small part of blessedness to
understand the mysteries of God herein contained, this blessedness we cannot
attain unto, but by the Lamb that has died for us, wherefore when the Book
of these mysteries comes to the opening, there is great reason that the
virtues of this Lamb should be thankfully commemorated. It is called a new
song in respect of that in the former Chapter, there are the praises of the
creation which was of old, here the praises of the redemption which was new.

Quest. 3. Verse. 9.
And we shall reign on the earth. How shall the Saints reign upon earth, or
how is it that being Kings in Heaven, they joy in thinking upon a future
reigning here?

Answ. Forbs. Brightman.
Some understanding all of the Church militant, say, That reigning upon earth
is nothing else but being in the Kingdom of grace whilst we live here. Others
understanding it of the Saints in Heaven, Bullinger. Pareus.
say, That the reigning upon earth shall be, when at the last day the Judge
descending, they shall come together with him in great glory, and shall appear
to be the Kings and Priests of God with Christ, judging this wicked world.
Arethas. Mat. 5.
Others again understand by earth, that new earth which is promised to the
meek, when it is said, Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the
earth. And unto this as the most probable do I subscribe, for there shall be a
new Heaven and a new earth, Chap. 21.1. and here shall the godly reign in
glory, not as the Chiliasts and Turks hold living in earthly pleasures, for
that is gross, neither is it to be thought that such pleasure is affected by
such as are heavenly and spiritual; but after the consummation of all at the
Day of Judgment, the Saints shall reign in another world, which in allusion
to this consisting of Heaven and Earth, is called a new Heaven and a new Earth.
Or else consider whether it may not be understood of the upper hand which the
Christian Religion should get of all false religions, when Emperors and Kings
should become Christian: for being all of one mystical body, when the
Christian Church gets the principality, the Saints in Heaven may rejoice to
foresee it, and say, We shall reign upon earth, that is, our company which
belong unto the Lamb, and admire and praise him as we do. And it was no small
comfort to know this then, when as all Empire and dominion was in the hands of
heathen men and persecutors, it must needs cheer up the heart greatly to
understand what power Religion should have over the Thrones and Scepters of
this world, and the ancient servants of God may well be said to reign upon
earth also, because their dictates and instructions are generally received and
obeyed upon earth.

Quest. 4. Verse. 13.
And I heard every creature in Heaven and in earth, under the earth and in the
sea, and all in them saying, blessing and honor, etc. What are the creatures
under the earth, and how does every thing speak the praises of God, when as
all cannot speak?

Answ. Ribera.
The Papists will have the souls in purgatory meant by those under the earth,
some the Devils who are compelled to give glory to Christ. But the best
exposition is of the creatures which dwell in subterranean places: for both
they that are without and within the holes of the earth are called upon to
praise God, Psalm. 148. and do praise him and the Lord Jesus Christ in their
kind, by whom a restoration of the world is attained when the faithful shall
be glorified, as is declared, Romans 8.21. and for this cause they serve his
providence, which is their praising of him. It is generally signified hereby
what a consent there is amongst all things which are in expectation of benefit
from Christ, in celebrating his praises that we may do likewise.

CHAP. VI.
HEre is showed how the Lamb begins to open the Seals in order, and what
follows upon the opening of each of them, by such things as appeared future
events concerning the Church of God being emblematically set forth, and as the
opening of every Seal succeeds one another, and after the Seals follow the
Trumpets, Eullinger. Forbs. Brightman. Ly^a. Antonin. Ambros. lib. adulterinus.
Fox.
and after the Trumpets the Vials, so some will have the events hereby set
forth to succeed one another in order in diverse ages to the end of the world.
And some begin the computation from the beginning of the world, by the seven
Seals understanding the seven ages. Some from the four Monarchies of the
Assyrians, Medes and Persians, Grecians and Romans, which they will have set
forth by these four horses which beginnings cannot stand, because John is not
taken up to see things past, but to come, by which reason also that opinion
reckoned up by Andreas is confuted, expounding the first Seal of Christ's
Birth, Andreas ex Methodio.
the second of his Baptism, the third of his Miracles, the fourth of his
Arraignment, the fifth of his Burial, the sixth of his Descent, etc. The rest
which speak more probably, begin the time at the Apostles going out to
preach the Gospel in all nations, and so apply every thing to some notable
accident, as one happened after another from age to age. Yet because at the
opening of the sixth Seal mention is so plainly made of the last day of
Judgment, as that it is but a wresting of the words to expound it any other
way: and again, at the sounding of the seventh Trumpet it is so confidently
affirmed that time was no more, chap. 11. and the time is said to be come of
judging the dead, verse. 18. which cannot be meant but of the day of Judgment:
and again, Chap. 14. the Vintage is cut down and the Wine Press trodden: and
again, Chap. 20. the dead arise, and come to judgment: I cannot see how that
computing of all things in order to the end can stand, because the day of
Judgment, which is last of all, comes so often in the way. There are
therefore, that beginning the time at the propagation of the Gospel abroad in
the world, make diverse periods in these visions, holding that within every
period most notable things which should happen to the end of the world are set
forth, Parcus.
in the first more obscurely, and in every following period more plainly, and
yet not always the same, but if any thing of note has been omitted in the
former, it is supplied in the periods following, neither is every one so
universal as another; for some set forth the estate of the Church persecuted
by Tyrants, flourishing under Christian Emperors, persecuted by Antichrist and
shaking off his yoke, as the vision of the seven Seals, of the seven Trumpets,
of the woman with child clothed with the Sun, and of the Angel binding the
Dragon, being afterward loosened again: but some set forth that part of the
estate of the Church only which was in Antichrists reign and overthrow, as the
seven Vials and the vision of the great whore and her destruction. And unto
this, as being most without exception, do I subscribe, the rather because S.
Augustine long ago gave some light to this method saying, Aug. lib. 20. de
Ciuit. Dei, c. 17.
that here the same things are many ways repeated, that diverse things may
seem to be spoken, when as it may be found out that the same things are spoken
diverse ways. Wherefore with these my Authors I distinguish this Book from
hence-forward to the end into six visions. First, of the seals, etc. to the
end of the seventh Chapter. Secondly, of the Trumpets, to the end of the
eleventh. Thirdly, of the woman in childbed, etc. to the end of the fourteenth
Chapter. Fourthly, of the seven Vials, to the end of the sixteenth Chapter.
Fifthly, of the whore of Babylon, to the end of the nineteenth Chapter. Sixthly,
of the Angel binding Satan, etc. to the end of the Book.

To begin with the vision of these two Chapters.

Quest. 1. Behold a white horse, Verse. 2.
and he that sat on him had a bow, etc. What is meant by this white horse, and
by the red, and black, and pale horse, and why does the first beast prepare to
the beholding of this, the second to the second, etc. and why in speaking of
the third is there a voice out of the Throne heard, Verse. 5.
A measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny, etc.

Petrus Aureolus Cardinalis. Blas. Viegas.
Ans. There is great difference amongst Expositors here. Some will have the
Roman Emperors understood at four times: First, under Caius Caligula, in
whose time the enemies of Christianity, the Jews, were destroyed, and Caius,
though not purposely, was made the instrument. Secondly, under Nero Domitian,
who first put out public edicts for the persecuting of Christians. Thirdly,
under Titus, whose Empire was a black time to the Jews, suffering (besides
many other things) much famine. Fourthly, under Domitianus, who moved the
second persecution, and put John into boiling lead. But all these things being
past, and this vision tending to set forth things to come, this exposition
cannot stand.

Primasius. Augustine. Haimo. Beda. Arethas.
Others understand by the first the going forth of the Gospel under Christ's
conduct, who with his spiritual arrows pierces men's hearts, and has a
Crown to reward the faithful withal; by the second, oppositions of the truth
stirred up by the Devil, as the rider of the red horse; by the third, false
Christians and hypocritical, having a balance only for a color, whom the
Devil also rides; by the fourth, persecutions to the death by the sword and
wild beasts, etc. But neither does this agree, because killing one another
under the second horse is expressly mentioned, and not opposing only, and the
exposition of the third is too general concerning all times, whereas
doubtless the intent here is to set down the diverse condition of the Church
in several ages.

Bullenger. Forbs. Brightman. Aretius.
Others understand by the second horse wars, wherewith the world was punished
for not receiving the Gospel, when the Romans were so full of trouble; by the
third, famins, wherewith they were afterward punished, as in the days of
Seuerus, witness Tertull. in Apologet. who makes mention both of a most
grievous famine, and of a strange eclipse of the Sun in Conuentu Vitcensi.
By the fourth horse, plague and pestilence wherewith they were further
punished, If by these three last horses judgments were set forth upon
persecutors, how is it that the souls under the Altar complain for want of
revenge?
this happened in the days of Gallus and Volusianus, for then a plague
beginning at Aethiopia, ouerspread almost all the East and West, enduring
fifteen years, as Zonaras writes, and Dionys. Alexandrinus in Epist. ad
Fratres. But partly because according to this exposition, either the words
following of the day of judgment must be forced, or the greatest space of
time betwixt that pestilence and the end of the world will be left untouched,
and partly because these punishments took not up all, but some of those
persecuting times: whereas if it may be, such an exposition is requisite, as
may agree to the whole tract of time from this Revelation made unto the end,
therefore I cannot see how this may be received.

Richard. de Sancto victore. Io^chim. D. Chytreus. Aretius. Fulco. Franc. Lamb.
Pareus. Collado.
The most common received exposition is, that by the second horse is set forth
the bloody persecution ensuing the preaching of the Gospel, which went out
conquering upon the first horse, which persecution continued till Constantine.
By the third horse which is black, is set forth the trouble which the Church
suffered by Heretics, such as Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, etc. with which
trouble the Church was conflicting above two hundred years. And by the fourth
horse which is pale, is set forth the trouble of the Church by corruption in
religion, in the Papacy and Mahumetisme, destroying a world of people; after
all which, hell the reward of these disturbers of the peace of the Church
follows: for almost to this effect many Writers speak. And herein, as in the
most sound exposition of these horses do I rest; for the horse being for
war, is fit to set forth either how religion has prevailed, or how it has
been in countered and hindered. I do not so approve that Christ should be
the rider of the white horse, for he stands at this time as a Lamb opening
the seals: but the Christian religion is the rider, and has a crown in token
of victory: upon the red horse rides persecution red with bloodshed; and in
that a sword is spoken of, it agrees excellently to the prediction of our
Savior Christ, I came not to send peace, but a sword. Upon the black horse
rides Heresy, which though it were red through bloodshed also, yet because
the most dangerous thing herein was the obscuring of the truth by subtilty of
argument, it is said to be black. Upon the pale horse rides corruption in
religion, said to be pale like death, because that insensibly hereby is
brought a deadness all over the world, all pure blood of religion, which
makes fresh and ruddy, being wrought out by degrees, and when any begin to
revive, as of late years (thanks be to God) there have been many, they have
been presently destroyed in innumerable multitudes, so that it may well be
said, that the third part is thus consumed.

Touching the beasts in order stirring up to attention, Brightman.
I do not think with some, that either the Apostles in the first age are set
forth, or Justin Martyr in the next, or Tertullian in the third, or Cyprian in
the fourth; but because a crown suteth well with a Lion, a sword or knife with
a calfe, a pair of scales with a man, and a multitude of dead carcasses with
an eagle, to which it usually resorteth: I think that it is said, the first
beast like a Lion calls to the first sight, and so the rest unto the other:
or perhaps there is no signification at all herein intended, but because these
minister about God, first one, and then another acts his crier, until these
four seals be opened without respect unto what was contained under each of
them.

Lastly, touching the voice coming out from the midst of the beasts, it was,
as my Authors agree, the Lambs voice, as was most fit, for he gives a charge
as having authority, wine and oil hurt thou not: but what is meant hereby, and
why this rider is set forth having balances, and wheat is proclaimed at a penny
a measure, and barley at a penny three measures, is a great question. They which
understand by the black horse, a famine wherewith the world was punished for
infidelity, will have these words to sound a great dearth of corn, but wine
and oil, which are not of that necessity, they say, that the Lord in
commanding to spare them, means that they should not be altogether left
destitute of all comforts: How this can any way stand I see not, for in a sore
famine, as in the days of Ahab, nothing that grows is spared: and truly me
thinks, if a measure of the finest grain be to be bought for a penny, and of
courser three measures, men should not be afraid of such a famine, though the
measure be but enough to make four loaves sufficient to keep a man a day, as
the word (...) is commonly expounded here, and the penny be as much as a man
could yearne in a day, according to the parable, where it is said they received
every one a penny for the day. Matthew. 20. 2 King. 7.
By a like* phrase plenty is promised elsewhere, a measure of fine flower for a
shekell, etc. but that there the word is (...) which is a measure of above
half a bushel, at fifteen pence; this of three pintes, at seven pence
halfe-peny of our money, which though it cannot be interpreted of plenty, yet
neither can I by any means be persuaded that it is meant of famine; which in
reason, if it be threatened to terrify, must needs be a far other manner of
dearth, than can be collected hence. Yet even they that understand this of
heresy, expound it of a famine of hearing of the word of God, allegorically
set forth under the terms of wheat and barley. For they say, that heresy
comes with balances, pretending to weigh every doctrine by the weight of
truth; but the Lord gives warning, that true doctrine and good teachers shall
then be very scarce, yet the fundamental points meant by the wine and oil
shall remain unshaken. And Pareus contendeth much to make Christ the rider of
this black^ horse, because heretics pretend Christ, as being by him directed.
For mine own part, I am not satisfied with any of these expositions, and
therefore desire a can did interpretation, if I shall put in my conjecture. I
think then, that the voice in the midst of the four beasts, is the voice of
the crier of this Captain riding upon the black horse; for each horse comes
out from amidst the beasts, seeing the book, at the opening whereof they all
appear, is held by the Lamb in the midst of the beasts, as was before showed.
That which he cries, is neither plenty nor scarcity, but as he makes show,
that rides by his balances, a just and equal price of these necessary
grains, and because wine and oil are not wont to be weighed in the balance,
men are secured, that they shall not be herein wronged; and these are
mentioned as the chief commodities of those countries, whereby the life is
maintained, according to the Psalmist, Psalm. 104.
He gives the staff of bread, wine to make glad the heart of man, and oil to
make him a cheerful countenance. Now in all this it is alluded unto the
doctrine of truth, the heretic professes to teach nothing but what he can
approve for truth, being weighed by the balance of holy Scriptures, and even
as in buying and selling, they are accounted honest dealers that sell a penny
worth for a penny, and make no mixtures in their liquid commodities, but serve
the buyer of them pure and unhurt by such mixing, so he seeks to approve his
dealing in the teaching of his heresies, by professing equity and justice and
freedom from all deceit, and if his corn shall be thought somewhat dear, he
will make you amends in his wine and oil: for it is not unusual to compare
divine instructions to corn, and sometime to milk and wine. Thus it appears
what tragical times the Church has had, but it is by Gods own appointment,
and the last has now been long in acting, neither shall we need to fear
professed enemies unto Christ any more: for wait but a while, till the present
corruptions be purged out, and then comes the living with Christ when there
shall be nothing to annoy us, and in the mean season the comfort is, that of
all these riders the truth only wears the crown; wherefore persecutors,
heretics, and corrupt Christians shall be put down, and such as embrace the
truth, shall reign finally in glory for ever.

Quest. 2. And when he had opened the fifth feale, Verse. 9.
I saw the souls of them that were slain for the word of God under the Altar,
etc. What place was this? how could he see men's souls? upon what occasion do
they cry thus for revenge? and how warrantable is this? what be the robes given
them? and what means the stay till the rest of their fellow-seruants were
slain also?

Answ. Before we come to resolve these doubts, it may be questioned also, why
no voice to come and see is heard at the opening of this and the next seal, as
in the four seals past? About this it is agreed, that the apparitions past,
being but dumb representations, it was necessary that by some voice John should
be excited to behold them; but here the souls appearing make a cry themselves,
which is enough to stir up to attention, and therefore no other preparing
voice was needful: and the like may be said of the sixth seal, such things
were acted, and with such noise, that it was in stead of an exciting voice.

Touching the place where the souls are said to lie, viz. under the Altar, I
prefer that exposition, Brightman. Arethas.
whereby their sacrificing in their martyrdom is held to be alluded unto in
this phrase, they appear lying under the Altar, signifying what death they had
died, and how precious unto the Lord the death of martyrs is, which give their
lives in being faithful unto him. And whereas sacrifices are wont to be laid
upon the Altar, not under it; the reason why they are said to be under may be,
because they were not now in sacrificing, but had been already sacrificed, and
therefore as the ashes of the sacrifice being burnt, fall through a grate under
the Altar, so they are said to lie under.

Beda. Haimo. Pareus. Bullinger. Thom. Aquin.
Some will have Christ meant by the Altar, and so expound it, as a comfort in
suffering, seeing when a man has suffered death for Christ, he is received
under his wing, being conformable to him in being sacrificed, they rest and are
safe with him for ever.

Some expound the Altar, of Christ's humanity, Bernard. sermon. 4. Omnium sanct.
which the faithful are received unto now, it being reserved till the last
day, to give them the full fruition of his divinity also.

Some by the Altar understand the places of the martyrs burial or sufferings,
Ribera. Viegas.
because Altars were wont to be built upon them, and the crying of their souls
they will have to be none other, but as the crying of Ables blood where it was
spilt, and souls are spoken of by a phrase usual, so many men being called so
many souls. But this is a mere Jesuitical imagination, seeing Altars upon
martyrs sepulchers were of a later edition, and though so many men be often
called so many souls, yet when the souls of any that are slain are named, it
cannot be so taken. Whereas most stand for Christ meant by the Altar, I should
willingly incline to think so to, but that Christ yet stands as a Lamb, and
therefore I cannot see how he can at the same time be represented by an Altar
also. I conclude therefore as I began, that by the appearance of an Altar, is
represented their sacrificing, when they suffered, the place wherein they now
are, being heaven the common receptacle of all faithful souls; but said to
be under the Altar, to denote the manner of their death; neither does John see
them with his bodily eyes, but being in the spirit. And fidy do the souls of
the martyred appear after such a number slain by cruel enemies, crying for
vengeance; not vocally, for souls do not utter voices, but vertually; the
destroying and murdering of them having a loud cry in the ears of God, so
that a desire of revenge in them is amiss surmised to be from hence, who
being in the flesh had so much love, as that they prayed for their persecutors,
and were far from the spirit of revenge. But they are brought in crying aloud
for the terror of persecutors, seeing the cries of such shall without doubt
be regarded, though in respect of many more yet in these times of corruption
to be crowned also with martyrdom a delay to bemade; Whereupon it is, that
their answer is also set forth in this manner. And thus I have briefly resolved
the rest of the doubts without delaying the reader: by the diversity of
expositions, Pareus. Brightman. Chrysostom. Hom. in Psalm. 9. August. Sermon. 30.
detemp.
some interpreting their cry for revenge, to be only for deliverance of the
Church from persecutors, having been already so long oppressed: and some for
the taking away of this malice out of men's minds that there may be no more
persecuting, by confounding such Kings and Potentates, that they may be
brought to turn unto Christ. The white robes given unto them, Bullinger.
Brightman.
howsoever some contend that they were signs of some comfort, and breathing
time which the Church should have and had about this time, according to their
exposition; yet both the plain speech which is used in answering them is
against it, for they are told of their brethren that must be slain also, and
white robes are never spoken of in this sense, Pareus.
but to set forth heavenly glory, which is not to be thought now first to have
been given unto them, but immediately upon their departure out of this life,
when their deaths began first to cry, though it was not represented in vision
till now; so that even when they cry, they are in the midst of heavenly joys,
and without all passion of sorrow; only they are not perfectly glorified, till
the whole company being made up at the day of judgment, being reunited to
their bodies, they shall reign in heaven for ever; wherefore they are bidden
rest till their fellow servants were slain also. And well does this cry come
in after the fourth seal, representing the corruptions in the Church fighting
against the truth, because this persecution has been longer than any before
it, and therefore needful it was to tell of martyrs which had been already
made crying out, and of such as should yet be made, when it might seem to be
full time to put an end to these miseries, that expecting so long a
continuance, we might arm our selves with patience.

Quest. 3. The sixth seal being opened, Verse. 12.
there was a great earthquake, and the Sun became black as hair cloth, and
the Moon as blood, etc. What is meant by these things, and whether the day of
judgment or no?

Answ. Most Expositors hold, that the day of judgment is here described, Fox.
Richard. de Sancto victore. Pannonius. Primasius. Beda. Rupertus. Arethas, etc.
when the revenge before cried for is taken upon all sorts of persecutors of
the Church, and the words here used are nothing else but a periphrasis upon
this day: for thus the Lord sets forth the day of judgment, Luke 21.11.
There shall be great earthquakes in diverse places. Verse. 25. There shall be
fignes in the Sun, Moon and Stars, and upon the earth distress of nations
with perplexity. Verse. 26. Men's hearts failing them for fear, etc. and more
expressly Mark. 13.24. The Sun shall be darkened, the Moon shall not give her
light. 25. The stars of heaven shall fall, and the powers of heaven shall be
shaken. The Sun shall be darkened because it shall no more give light to this
world, the Moon shall be turned into blood, to show the great destruction that
then shall be, the stars shall fall, there being no further use of them, when
men shall cease to be here; even as the leaves of the figtree fall off when
there is no further need of them to cover the figs. The heavens are as a book
folded up, when they lofe all their light, being as it were clapped together,
whereas now it stands open. That which follows of the mountains and islands
removing out of their places, is to show the greatness of this earthquake, even
to the destroying of the earth. Then all wicked men, how great soever they have
been in this world, shall quake and fear, being unable to bear the wrath to
come upon them, set forth in their calling to the mountains to fall upon
them, etc.

Blas. Viegas. Who also says, that many Doctors expound this thus. Brightman.
Grasser.
Others will have these things understood allegorically, the great earthquake
of the great persecution under Dioclesian, being in all parts of the earth at
once: then say they, the Sun of righteousness, Christ, was darkened in his
members; the Moon, the Church, appeared like blood, being all bloody with
slaughters; the stars, the ministers of God, many of them fell for fear from
Christianity to idolatry; the he^uen, the Church, was folded up as a book,
hiding it self for fear at that time; and the inhabitants of mountainous
places and Islands were sought out to be destroyed, which is expressed in
saying, the mountains and Islands were removed out of their place, then all
professors of the Christian religion sought to hide themselves from the anger
of him that sits upon the throne, thinking God and the Lamb to be angry
with them, set forth in the last words.

Bullinger. Pareus.
Others will have the corruption in the time of Antichrist meant, which time
(say they) began when Constantine advanced Syluester the Bishop of Rome and his
successors, and continues in the Papacy to this day, then began a great
earthquake by the change of the state of the Church into Pontifical; then the
Sun, the doctrine touching Christ, was darkened through the interposition of
traditions; the Moon, the Church, was turned into blood, either by murders
committed by Antichrist, or by the corrupt worshipping of God; the stars, the
ministers of God, fell from heaven by apostatising from the truth; the heaven,
the Church was folded together as a book, when it appeared not any where, or
the holy Scriptures were shut up from the people; the mountains, Emperors and
Kings, were removed by Popes; the Islands, the people, were removed out of their
place, by being made believe upon pain of damnation, that the Pope is the head
of the Church. And being brought to this estate of corruption, as there can be
no sound peace, but terrors of conscience out of the truth, so all estates are
set forth as terrified by a conscience of Gods judgment, and some indeed
fulfilled this according to the letter, going into wildernesses and
Monasteries, seeking by applying themselves to perpetual devotion, to quiet
their consciences accusing them for former offenses, but could not effect it.
But herein Pareus differs from Bullinger, for he applies this of the
general fear of all estates and degrees to the last day of judgment, which
shall follow, after that the world has been so corrupted in the time of
Antichrists reign.

Lastly, some understand by this earthquake, Forbs.
etc. the great alteration that came upon the Roman Empire by means of the
Goths and other barbarous nations, which was so great, as that the whole world
seemed to be changed. But I subscribe to the first exposition, because most
agreeable to the letter, and where the literal sense may stand, there is no
use of allegories. And indeed without straining, no time but the day of
judgment can be rightly called the great day of Gods wrath, wherein all the
wicked of all estates and degrees are filled with terror at Gods presence. If
it be taken as an allegory, there are so great differences, that there will
be no certainty of truth: Besides that it does no way answer the precedent cry
for vengeance so fitly, as being literally understood of the last day: for
whatsoever commotions there be in states and kingdoms, yet every one is not at
such times so severely animaduerted against, but many escape, whereas here
every one is said to tremble and fear. Whereas Pareus includes both the
persecution under Antichrist and the day of judgment also, I cannot see how
that can stand; for the fleeing away of all estates and degrees for fear is an
effect of those stupendous accidents in heaven and in earth, as in reason it
is likely when such things shall come to pass, no less can be expected but
horrible fear. Let us then study to pacify Gods anger before this day
comes, by true repentance and humiliation, that we may not find it a day of
wrath, but of everlasting mercy to us.

CHAP. VII.
THE dreadful manner of Gods coming to judge and to take revenge upon the
enemies and corrupters of his truth, having been set forth in the sixth
Chapter, lest there should arise anxiety in the minds of the faithful about
the Lords care touching them in the midst of all the miseries before described,
for that it has not yet appeared how they are provided for, when all things
shall be so full of dread and fear, he does apart here set forth Gods care
over them, during all those troubles and affrighting apparitions, they were
marked in the forehead that no hurt might hereby seize upon them, but these
tribulations might be to them a way to future glory, and the inuestment with
white robes washed in the Blood of the Lamb, at what time all tears shall be
wiped from their eyes for ever. For the meaning of the particular passages here.

Quest. 1. Verse. 1.
After this I saw four Angels standing upon the four corners of the earth,
holding the four winds that they might not blow upon the earth, etc. What is
meant by these things?

Rupertus. Caelius, Pannon.
Answ. Most Expositors understand by these winds the Spirit of God in the
Preachers of his Word, diffusing it self in all parts of the world, but the
evil angels, the Devils, which rule in the Antichristian Sect, seek to hinder
these winds by suppressing the pure preaching of Gods holy Word in all places,
Dionys. Bullinger. Pareus. Brightman.
to the corrupting and decay of all true Religion. They keep the winds from
blowing upon the earth, that is, the vulgar sort; the sea, that is, Doctrine;
the trees, that is, men of more eminency; or by the earth they understand men
dwelling in any part of the earth, by the sea the inhabitants of Islands, by
trees such as lurked in woods: or they take the earth for earthly ones, the sea
for the worship of God, and trees for people good and bad which profess to
worship God. Again, there is difference also about these four Angels, for
some understand the four Monarchies, Primas. Haimo. Ambrose. Amsbert. Lyra.
in the time whereof the truth was hindered. Some four persecuting Emperors,
who after that Dioclesian, and Maximianus had forsaken the Empire, did together
persecute the Christian Religion in the four parts of the world, viz.
Maximianus in the East, Seuerus in Italy the west, Licinius in Alexandria in
Egypt the South, Maxentius at Rome; and whereas all others understand Christ by
the Angel with the seal, he understands Constantine the great who
suppressed these tyrants. And some again by the Angel in the East understand
the Mahumetans, in the West the Pope, in the North the Germane Empire, in the
south Spain.

For mine own part, when I consider the premises of great and horrible
miseries to come upon the world, I cannot but think as I intimated before in
general, that comfort against these evils is here intended to the godly, and
therefore I subscribe rather to those that understand these things literally of
four Angels appointed by God as his Ministers herein (for it is said, To them
it is given to hurt, etc.) to destroy all things, Arethas. Ribera. Fox,
and this is fitly set forth by holding the four winds, because in wind and
breath consists the life of every thing in this world, things of the earth,
as men and beasts; of the sea, as fishes and fowls, and the trees and plants
of the earth, therefore these things are mentioned in particular. Neither can I
see why by the strong Angel out of the East should be meant Christ, who stood
yet as a Lamb in the midst of the Throne, and this is not the first time that
a strong Angel is spoken of, for Chap. 5. a strong Angel proclaims, Who can
open the Book. etc. Wherefore, as I take it, he is an Angel indeed who is
said to be strong, for so is every Angel, and he comes up out of the East,
that being the rising place of all heavenly bodies, the Sun, Moon and
Staries; and the lightning is said by our Savior to come out of the East, and
the old manner of worshipping, and so their expectation of comfort was from the
East: as for his commanding these Angels, it was not through his own power
over them, but having commission from the highest so do do; and as he had a
commission to come with the seal, so they were fellow Ministers of God with
him, which is intimated in that he bids them not to hurt any thing till we
have sealed the servants of God in their foreheads, speaking in the plural
number, as joining them with himself. I conceive then that by these four
Angels holding the four winds, are set forth those Ministers of Gods
judgments, who for the sins of the world should destroy all things: evil
angels I cannot think them to be, no more than the Angels destroying Sodom,
especially because as I have already said, they are associated unto the Angel
with the seal of God. Now being appointed to this service, they begin to do
accordingly, but even when they put their hands to it they are stayed for a
time, as those warriors, Ezech. 9. Till the servants of God were sealed in
their foreheads, in token of Gods singular care over them in the midst of those
common calamities, so as that their salvation should not be hereby hindered;
though outwardly they did participate with others in worldly miseries, yet
there was a difference in that they have the comfort of Gods Seal unto
salvation, which others want, being left void of all true comfort to the rage
of these grievous troubles. And thus one objection against this exposition is
answered, that if outward destructions be meant here, then the servants of God
are in vain sealed, because they had their share in these as deeply as any
other: no, it is not in vain, but for their comfort and assurance of safety in
respect of their best good. As for the time when this destruction of things
should be made, it is not only at the last when there shall be an end put to
all things here, but also in all the tract of time from hence till then: for by
reason of persecutions and sins there have been many times mortalities and
destructions brought upon the world; so that it is not necessary that all must
presently be destroyed so soon as the servants of God were sealed, because
they are bidden to forbear till they were sealed: for hereby rather is set
forth that though the Lord being much provoked is fully bent to execute his
judgments, yet the prime and chief thing in his care is to preserve his
Elect, and then secondarily, he will see to the taking of due revenge upon the
wicked world: and thus another objection against this exposition is also
answered, that it cannot stand, because the servants of God do reign with
Christ after their sealing a thousand years before the day of judgment
comes, which how should it be, if the destroying of all be stayed, but till
the sealing be past: for neither is this destruction to be restrained to the
last, nor yet does it necessarily follow, because the servants of God are first
sealed, and no execution must be done till then, that this execution must
needs be done immediately after, but only it is first provided for their safety
against this time whenever it comes. And whereas it is further objected,
that it is not likely that this book being so mystical should set forth
things so plainly, as that by winds, should be meant winds, etc. against
Viegas whose objection this is, I oppose the reason of Ribera, that yet we must
not go from the letter but in case of necessity, when the place cannot bear
the literal sense, as here we have showed that it well may. And yet this is
not without mystery neither, general calamities in the world being set forth
by the holding of the four winds from blowing.

Quest. 2. And I heard the number of them which were sealed, 144000. of the
children of Israel, Verse. 4.
etc. Is this to be understood of the Isaelites properly? and why are not the
tribes set left out, the number of twelve being yet made up in Leui and Joseph?
and what is this sealing?

Answ. Some understand this of the Israelites properly, Ribera. Viegras. Lyra.
Bullinger.
holding that a great number of every tribe shall be converted to the faith of
Christ, even in the days of Antichrist; but a certain number of twelve
thousand of every tribe is put for an uncertain, or else they will have this
conversion in the days of Constantine, or at some other time unknown unto us.
And they say no order is observed, the elder being preferred before the
younger, because before God and in respect of their spiritual estate, there is
no such preeminence in outward regards: and Dan they say is left out, because
Antichrist should come of that tribe and Ephraim, because Jeroboam who was of
that tribe, was the Author of idolarry, and Leui not wont to be numbered when
temporal things are spoken of, yet now is reckoned for one of the twelve,
because when the spiritual estate comes to be spoken of, he is always one;
and the tribe of Joseph, Ephraim, and Manasseh is not set forth as two, but
one, viz. the tribe of Joseph, as Deuteronomy. 27.12, 13. in blessing and cursing, and
Exodus 28.10. in the breast plate of Aaron the names of the twelve tribes are
appointed to be set according to their birth.

Others understand the children of Israel spiritually, and so all the faithful
are called Israel in sundry places, Forbs. Pareus. Brightman. Grasserus. Fox,
etc.
and whereas it may seem to make against this exposition, that the rest of the
servants of God in other countries and nations are expressly distinguished from
these, verse. 9. It is answered, that they are not said to be sealed as these
are, but only they stood before the throne, so that in them we are to
understand the multitude of Saints glorified in heaven; by these sealed ones,
the Church militant upon earth. To this exposition understanding Israel
spiritually, do I subscribe: for it cannot be taken otherwise, because these
only follow the Lamb, from which God forbid that the faithful of the
Gentiles should be excluded, and if it should be understood properly, it were
against the tenure of all Evangelical history, wherein the Jews are declared
in all places to be the stiffest enemies to the faith; to say nothing of the
confounding of the tribes so together, as that they shall not afterward be
known asunder. I prefer also that reason from the Church militant and
triumphant here set forth. For the promiscuous setting down of the names of
the tribes, one observes, that they are reckoned five ways in the old
Testament, ^l. Viegas.
and yet to none of them does this agree: one according to their birth, and so
it is Renben, Simeon, Leui, Judah, Dan, Nephtalim, Gad, Asher, Issachar,
Zabulun, Joseph, Benjamin. 2. According to the order of Jacobs blessing them,
and so in stead of Dan coming in in the fifth place it is Zabulun, Issachar,
Dan, Gad, Asher, Nephtalim, Joseph, Benjamin. 3. According to the order of
their standards, Numb. 2.4. According to the places of their habitation in the
land of Canaan, and he says, there may be a fifth according to their dignity,
beginning with Judah and Joseph.

Touching the observing of no order, Beda. Rupertus. Richard. de Sancto
Victore. Primasius, etc.
here something has been already said; Others hold, that there is an
excellent order in the force and signification of the names. Judah signifies
praise, Reuben the son of vision, Gad girt to, Asher blessed, Nephtalim
latitude, Manasseh forgetfulness, Simeon hearing, Leui changed, Issachar a
reward, Zabulun habitation, Joseph addition, Benjamin the son of a right
hand. And so by this order in setting down these names they think is
intimated, that such as confess and praise God shall see his Son, and be girt
unto his wars, and so become blessed of God, whereby his heart shall be
enlarged so toward heavenly things, as that he shall forget earthly and
neglect them, hearkening only to the heavenly; and being thus changed into a
new man he shall be rewarded, God will dwell in him and increase all heavenly
graces more and more, till at the last he come to have a place at his right
hand in eternal glory. This resolution, I confess, is very ingenious and
holy: but for so much as the diversity of peoples sealed seems rather to be
intimated by these tribes, every one differring from another, and not the
several steps of grace, by which the servants of God pass on to glory: I
rather incline to that countryman of ours, Brightman.
who has been most industrious about this Revelation, understanding this
order of the order of diverse nations cleaning to the true says of Christ,
being considered according to their dwelling East, West, North, and South; for
so we shall find the dwellings of these tribes to have been as that they
which first were famous for the truth of the Gospel held fast amongst them,
answer to Judah, and so others. For when after the time of Constantine the
great, the Arrian heresy ouer-spread other parts, Assyria the South part was
clear, answering to Judah in the South of Canaan: after, when the Vandals
ouerran the South and West, the Churches in the East were clear, answering to
Reuben and Gad in the East of Canaan. After this the Saracens ouer-running the
East, these North parts of Britain were famous for withstanding Popish
corruptions, two thousand Monks of Bangor at once refusing the Popes yoke, and
this answers to Asher and Nephtalim in the North of Canaan. After Leo Isaurus
in the East, and Carolus maguus in the West, together opposed images, answering
to Manasseh on either side of Jordan East and West. After this, the true Church
appeared not in any certain place, but lay hid, as Simeon and Leui dwelt
scattered amongst the rest of the Tribes. After this, notable conuersions were
made of the Northern Polands, Saxons, Danes, Sueuians, etc. answering to
Issachar and Zabulon in the North of Canaan. After this, the Waldenses and
Albingenses were famous, the one dispersed through France, the other through
Germany, answering to Joseph and Benjamin inhabiting middle regions. For
though I do not approve of every thing here, as the extending of the sealing
only from Gonstantine to the Waldenses, whereas doubtless all faithful
Christians in every place under the Gospel, from the first propagation thereof
till Antichrists time, are set forth as sealed; yet doubtless these tribes do
represent the parts of the Church coming on successively, as God in his
providence directed the Gospel unto them.

Lastly, for the leaving out of Dan and Ephraim, it is no new thing to leave
out Dan, for 1 Chronicles. 2, 3 4, 5, 6, 7. where the generations of the several
tribes are reckoned up, Dan is left out, as a tribe that had rent it self from
the rest ever since they took Laish, and dwelt there apart from the rest,
setting up an idol and Priest of their own, Judge. 18. Grasser. will have the
mystery of Antichrists double power spiritual and temporal in these two tribes
set forth. 1 King. 12.
even till the time of the captivity. And touching Ephraim that might also be
well left out in detestation of idolatry so frequent in the kingdom of Israel,
whereof Ephraim was the head, by reason of Jeroboam of that tribe, who was the
first Author hereof unto them.

Touching the sign in the forehead, though some stand for the sign of the
Cross, pressing that of Ezec. 9. where they are said to be marked with that
which of old was written in the form of a Cross, till the letters after the
captivity were altered by Ezra, to avoid communion herein with the Samaritans:
yet the sou^der opinion and followed by most, is that the seal is Gods grace,
so imprinted in the heart, as that they are hereby settled in the way of
salvation; but said to be set upon the forehead, because that is the most
eminent part of the body, and open to the view, to show that these are well
known to the Lord, though men and not able to distinguish them from others,
and also how bold and constant they are in professing the Gospel against the
fiercest oppugners, as the followers of the beast are afterward said also to
bear his mark in the forehead or right hand, to show their impudency in
error, and how by humane industry they further his kingdom all that they can.
According to this exposition of setlednesse in grace speaks the Apostle,
saying, The foundation of God remains sure, 2 Timothy 2.19.
and has this seal set to, God knows who are his. And this may be a great
comfort to all the godly, in that amidst all the persecutions and troubles of
the world, they shall be sure to prosper and proceed in the way to everlasting
salvation, God takes notice of every one of them, has them ever in his fight,
and is so intent unto their best good, as that he staieth the destruction of
the world, till every one of them be well provided for. Only let us embolden
our selves, and not be ashamed to serve God against the mocks and despights of
the world, thus showing the print of his seal in our foreheads.

As for the rest of this Chapter, it has no great difficulty in it, if by the
innumerable multitude in white robes and palms in their hands, we understand
the Saints already glorified, who though compared with the rest of the world
they be but a little flock, yet simply considered they are a great multitude,
they have palms in their hands in token of victory. And whereas in speaking of
the wicked, Chap. 6 he concludes with their misery in respect of the wrath of
the Lamb, here answerably it is concluded with the felicity of the godly
washed in the blood of the Lamb, and everlastingly comforted by him, the
phrases of leading forth to waters, and wiping away all tears, being adaptated
to set forth the same.

CHAP. VIII.
THE whole compass of time from the beginning of the Gospel to the last end
of the world, having been set forth with the most remarkable accidents in one
kind of vision, Chap. 6, 7. here follows another upon the opening of the
seventh seal, which yet remained in this eighth, and the ninth, tenth, and
eleventh Chapters. Wherein, after preparation to attention, and a preludium of
Gods gracious acceptance of the prayers of the Saints, and of his terriblenesse
to the wicked, seven Angels sound their trumpets to call on the hosts of Gods
judgments, to waste both land and sea, to infect their waters whereof they
drank, and the air wherein they breathed, his hosts of hurtful beasts
coming out of the bottomless pit, and of men brought from afar upon horses
for their destruction; the last of the seven, summoning all to judgment, and
making the very dead to come forth: for then the trumpet shall blow, 1 Cor. 15.
and the dead shall rise. In the particular opening of the several passages,
there is very great difficulty.

Quest. 1. And when he had opened the seventh seal, Verse. 1.
there was silence in heaven, as it were half an hour. What is meant by this
silence?

Answ. Some that will have these visions to set forth things done successively,
Brightman.
assign the opening of this seal to Constantines time, when the Church had
peace and quietness for a short time, being broken off again by the Arrians.
Some refer it to the time after Antichrists destruction, when they say the
Church shall be quiet five and forty days before the dry of judgment,
Rupertus. Beda. Anfelm. Richard. de Sancto Victore. Pannonius, etc.
grounding upon that of Daniel 12.11. where 1290. days having been spoken of
for the censing of the daily sacrifice, he is pronounced blessed, that
attaineth to 1335. Some refer it to the time of Iulians persecution, which
was not by fire and sword, but by other subtle means; Blas. Viegas names
thi^ exposition.
yet they were debarred from all public service of God, and so there was
silence in the Church, but it was a very short time, he reign^ng but two years.

Others understand this silence of attention, Bullinger. Pareus. Forbs. Viegas.
F^x, etc.
or a kind of stupour making all silent for a time at the appearing of the
seven Angels with their trumpets, the judgments to come, when they should
blow, being so great and strange, as that the beholders were in some sort a
stonied hereby and interrupted in their heavenly harmony, as it is wont to be
with us when any strange thing happens, and as it was with Jobs friends
coming to visit him, they sat down in silence by him seven days.

Lastly, one adds further, Fox.
that the general peace when Christ is borne, is hereby signified. To this of
admiration and attention do I subscribe, but I do not think any other
signification to be in this silence. The peace of the Chureh cannot be hereby
meant for a time, because the future troubles are not of the Church but of the
wicked, as is plainly expressed under the fifth trumpet, the Locusts hurt only
such as had not the mark of God in their forehead: much less can it be
understood of the quiet after Antichrist destroyed, for then the day of
judgment should immediately have succeeded, as it does not, but six trumpets
first. As for Iulians time, it were too great a leap to come to that at the
first of this vision, all the time preceding being omitted: Augustine.
Primasius. Marlorat.
and whereas some expound it of the rest to come, that being everlasting, it
cannot be so taken. Note, that the judgments against wicked persecutors of the
Church and people of God are so stupendous, that the very Saints and Angels in
heaven stand amazed at them, being but in figures represented unto them.

Quest. 2. And I saw the seven Angels which stand before God. Verse. 2.
Who are these Angels?

Answ. There may seem to be such an analogy betwixt this and that Chap. 1.4.
Seven spirits before the throne, that these Angels and those spirits may seem
to be all one, and that in the apocryphal book of Tobit sounds likewise,
Tobit. 12.15. I am Raphael one of the seven Angels which present the prayers of
the Saints, etc. But as I showed there, those seven spirits are not Angels, but
them anifold gifts of the spirit; and here by the seven Angels, we are not to
understand such a number only standing before God, for thousand thousands
stand before him and minister unto him, but seven of them appointed now to this
ministry, and therefore they have trumpets given unto them. It is contrary to
plain Scripture, and derogatory from the Lord Jesus, to hold that there are
some Angels which have an office, as it were, to receive and present our
prayers before God: for Christ only is our intercessour in heaven, if the
Angels and Saints do any thing for us, it is out of their general love and
affection to the Church, a soliciting of the Lord for the good of us all in
common, that adversaries may be confounded, the Gospel may enjoy a free
passage, and the chosen of God may be gathered together, till their number be
made up.

Quest. 3. And another Angel came and stood by the Altar, Verse. 3.
having a golden censer, etc. What Angel is this, who is said so particularly
to offer odours with the prayers of the Saints, and what is meant by the
thunders, lightnings, and voices following upon his casting of fire upon the
earth from off the same Altar?

Answ. Most Expositours agree, that Christ is figured out by this Angel: for
he is called the Angel of the Testament, Malac. 3.
neither can it agree to any Angel as an high Priest thus alone to go to the
Altar and offer there for all the Saints: the Altar some will have also to be
Christ, as Bullinger and Pareus, and Forbs; Bullingers. Pareus. Forbs. Beda.
Primasius. Haimo.
some the Church of God, well called an Altar, because a spiritual sacrifice
is herein daily offered to God, as Beda, Primasius, Haimo, etc. The golden
Censer some will have to be his humane nature, wherein he offers, as both
the same ancients before named, and Origin. Hom. 6. in Numeros, and August.
Sermon. 98. de tem. others understand his precious passions, as Bullinger, etc.
The odours which were given unto him, they expound of the sights and groans of
Gods servants, or of his graciousnesse, which is as sweet odours added to our
prayers to make them the more acceptable. One has a strange conceit, Brightman.
that Constantine is meant by this Angel, who was the Author of gathering
together that famous Council of Nice, wherein that confession of says so
acceptable to God was concluded upon, but it became an occasion of much
contention, by reason of Arrius and his sect. Lyra.
Another more strangely understands Pope Damasus, ann. 384. who instituted
Psalmodies and glory to the Father, etc. which were added to the common
prayers. Rupertus. Ribera.
Some understand it properly of an Angel, such as he that was present to
Iaacob in his iournying, or Gabriel that appeared to Mary. For mine own part,
I see so much against the most common understanding of this of Christ, as that
I cannot think him to be meant here. For first, he appears still as a
Lamb; secondly, this is said to be but another Angel; thirdly, Odours are
given unto him, as Trumpets to the rest, intimating an equality betwixt them;
fourthly, that the Priest, the Altar, and the Censer, should be all one, it
seems very improbable; fifthly, the prayers of the Saints are spoken of by the
same phrase that Chap. 5. where the four and twenty Elders are said to have
golaon Vials full of Odours, which are the prayers of the Saints. Where by the
prayers of the Saints, their praising of God in Heaven, and praying for our
good in general being understood, and not the prayers of the godly upon earth,
why should it not be understood here likewise? I think then, that nothing else
is here meant, but as before any vision of future things a preparation was made
thereunto by a representation of Gods Majesty, and of the Lamb delighted in
the devotions of his servants as in a sweet persume, but terrible to the
wicked, and therefore issued thunders, lightnings, and voices from before him:
so now the second particular vision being prepared unto, it is set forth in the
figure of this Angel, standing at the Altar and offering Odours with the
prayers of the Saints which come up before God, how acceptable the service is
which by the godly is done unto God; and in the fire taken and cast upon the
earth, producing voices, thunders, etc. how terrible he will be to the wicked
of this world. For the Altar and Censer, it is beyond the intent of this place
particularly to descant upon them, the service which is done unto God being
doubtless thus set forth in allusion to the old manner of worshipping. In the
former representation, Prayers are called Odours, here Odours are added unto
them, Odours to Odours to show yet further their extraordinary sweetness:
their voices and thunders, etc. issue forth, here is showed by what means,
viz. coals taken from the Altar, signifying that howsoever the holy fire with
sweet Odours makes a pleasant smell, yet without Odours it yields a
thundering and terrifying noise, the wicked that pray not can expect nothing but
terror and affrighting from the Lord, who is most comfortable to the godly,
frequenting him with their prayers. As for that exposition of some, Beda.
Haimo. Bullinger. Pareus, etc.
understanding the sending down of the holy Ghost in the likeness of fiery
tongues, whereupon some were terrified as by thundering, some instructed as by
voices, some converted as the earth is moved in an earthquake: I cannot see how
it agrees to the terrible things following, Fox.
some way whereunto is made in this passage. I assent therefore to those rather
who expound it of terror, as I have already said: neither is it strange that
the prayers of the Saints coming up before God, the fire of his anger should
be stirred up against the wicked world, occasioning so many sighs and groans to
come from them.

Quest. 3. And the first Angel sounded, Verse. 7, etc.
and there was hail and fire mingle with blood, etc. Because there is a noted
distance betwixt the four first Trumpets and the other three, and these four
do immediately follow one after another, it will be fittest to handle these
together. What therefore is figured out by the things appearing at the sounding
of these four?

Answ. Some will have these seven Angels to represent the Ministers of the
Gospel at several times and ages of the world: for as they sounded forth the
Word of truth, adversaries soon sprung up, who sought by their fierce
oppositions to suppress it. Haime. Caelius. Pannonius. Richard. de Sancto
Victore. Zeger, etc.
The first were the Apostles, at whose preaching there was great tumult in the
world, to the shedding of the blood of many, set forth by hail, and fire, and
blood mingled with them, the trees and grass burnt up were such, as for fear
fell from the Religion which they had embraced: or else by the hail, etc. they
understand a mixed company of good and bad Christians gathered together from
the rest of the world; of which the bad, which are the third part, are burnt
up, that is, perish by Gods just judgment, and are called trees because of
their instabilitie in times of winds, and grass for their frailty.

The second rank of Preachers set forth by the second Angel, where the
successors of the Apostles in the next age, against whom the Devil, as a
great burning mountain falls, and the third part of the sea is turned into
blood by the destruction of the faithful, the fishes die by the reuolting of
the wavering, and many teachers who as ships had carried on others, through the
greatness of the persecution fall away.

The third rank set forth by the third Angel, are the Preachers of the next
age, to trouble whom Heretics rise up, these are the Star falling from Heaven,
giving light in times past; but now making bitter, by their heretical
doctrine, the fountains of holy Scriptures and the rivers of the Fathers, by
corrupting them to maintain their heresies thereby.

The fourth rank set forth by the fourth Angel, are the Preachers of these
last times, who are troubled by Hypocrites and false Prophets, that under a
pretext of holiness broach new opinions, whereby it comes to pass, that a
good part of the true knowledge of Christ is obscured, which is the darkning of
the Sun to the third part; and the true Church, which is the Moon, much
distminished; and the Doctors, which are the Stars, give not so clear light
through this means as before.

Lyra. Bullinger. Aretius.
Some understand Heretics and heresies of several ages, to encounter with whom
the faithful are stirred up by these Trumpets sounded. For first, Arrius
infected the third part of the world with his heresy. Secondly, Macedonius
infected the Sea with his heresy, denying the holy Ghost to be God; the Sea
is the Church, so called by reason of baptism; the fishes, Christians, who
died by this heresy, etc. Thirdly, Pelagius fell like a Star from preaching
the truth to that heresy of free will, which was as bitter wormwood, as being
contrary to the sweet Doctrine of justification by the grace of Christ.

Fourthly, Eutiches darkened the third part of the Sun, by reaching that there
was but one nature in Christ, obscuring thus his Divinity. Bullinger differing
somewhat from this, makes the first Angels sounding to be in the time of the
Nazarens, and Hebionites, who maintained that justification was not by faith
only, but partly by the Law, the hail of corrupt doctrine being thus mingled
with the fire of pretended zeal. The second in the time of the Valentinians,
Mannichees, and Montanists, who as a burning mountain sought to ouerwhelme all
things. The third, in the time of Arrius, and Samosatenus. The fourth in the
time of Pelagius.

Others parallel these Trumpets with the Seals, at the opening whereof,
Pareus. Glossa.
issued first a white horse, here is fire and hail mingled with blood, as the
effect of the Apostles preaching amongst the wicked Jews. Secondly, a red
horse, here is a burning mountain, hot persecution stirred up by the Heathen
Emperors to the destruction of many. Thirdly, a black horse, here a Star
falls from Heaven, setting forth the Authors of bitter heresies. Fourthly, a
pale horse, here the Sun, Moon, and Stars are said to be darkened, all
things growing corrupt in the Church. Some interpret these seven Trumpets of
seven great judgments, which have been upon the world since the beginning:
first, by the Flood; secondly, by fire in Sodom; thirdly, by the red Sea,
drowning Pharaoh and his host; fourthly, of the Canaanites expelled, etc. as
Aretius says.

Some understand them of the degrees, by which Antichrist grew unto his height
of impiety: Forbs.
first, there were hot contentions; secondly, great ambition; thirdly,
corrupting of the holy Scriptures by false glosses and interpretations;
fourthly, gross ignorance like darkness following after this, every of these
evils being more dangerous than the preceding one, as the sea is not so gross
as the earth, and the rivers are purer than the sea, and the Sun, Moon, and
Stars yet above all: so in the corrupting of one of these there is more
danger than in the other. When fire and hail are cast upon the earth, it is
grievous; but when a burning mountain is cast into the Sea, it is more
grievous, etc.

Some particularly refer the hail and fire to the contentions in the
Council of Nice, Brightman.
the burning Mountain cast into the Sea to the Canons made in the same
Council, touching the dignity of Archbishops and Metropolitans, etc. the
Star called Wormwood, to the reviving of Arrianisme after Constantines time,
and the darkning of the third part of the Sun, etc. to the most bloody
persecution of the Vandals in Affrita under Gensericus, ann. 438.

Lastly, not to weary the Reader with more varieties, some understand the
iudgemets of God at four special times executed upon the Jews and wicked
Heathen for persecuting the Church and servants of God: first, Fox.
the destruction of Jerusalem; secondly, a fearful pestilence wasting many
Provinces in the time of Antoninus Verus, a bloody persecutor, chiefly Rome and
Italy, and wars thorowout all the East, Beda. Aurelius Victo. Eusebius.
and Illiricum at the same time, with earthquakes, plagues, ouerflowings of
waters, etc. so that nothing which might make the world miserable was wanting
in his days. Thirdly, the Pestilence of ten whole years raging all over the
world in the days of Galitenus, who together with his father Valerianus, had
been a most bloody persecutor. It began in Ethiopia, Pomponius.
and having consumed the people in the south, it spread into the East, and other
parts of the world, exhausting the greatest part of the inhabitants, and
leaving some places altogether without inhabitants. At the same time also great
stir was in all parts of the Roman Empire except Italy, Eusebius. Sabellicus.
so as it was not a long time before. Cilicia, Syria, Cappadocia, were wasted
by the Persians. Pontus, Asia, Macedonia, and Grecia, by the Goths. The
Pannonians by the Quadi and Sarmatians, etc. and unto these he joins the
miseries in the days of Dioclesianus and Maximianus, who stirred up the
greatest persecution that ever was, after that the Church had enjoyed liberty
four and forty years, viz. from the death of Valerianus to the nineteenth
year of Dioclesianus. All the ten years of this persecution there were great
commotions of peoples, Eusebius.
and such a famine accompanied with pestilence, that an infinite multitude died
hereof. Then they would give their most precious things for a little food, and
selling their possessions for food, became very poor. Some are grass and
hurtful weeds, and some noble women went out of Cities into the country to
beg. Some going about like shadows ready to fall here and there, stretching
out their hands craved something to be given to them, who were ready to die for
hunger, and the streets and marketplaces lay full of dead bodies, there being
none to bury them. And such of the wealthier sort as escaped the danger of the
famine, were consumed by the Pestilence. Fourthly, the irruptions of the
Vandals, Goths, Longobards, and of other barbarous people into the East and
West, from the years 475. destroying the Emperors, and prevailing till the
time of Carolus Magnus.

Amongst so many varieties it is hard to determine. But seeing it is most
apparent, that the judgments which should come upon the wicked world are here
figured out, in that under the fifth Trumpet they only are said to be hurt by
the Locusts, who had not the seal of God in their foreheads; and under the
sixth, that notwithstanding all which they suffered, they repented not of their
idolatries and murders, etc. whence it may be more than probably gathered,
that the four first Trumpets tend to the setting forth of the like. I cannot
assent to their expositions, which apply these things either to persecutions or
heresies, or hypocrisies, or to the degrees by which Antichrist arose. And
seeing the purpose of these visions is not to show things past, but to come,
that exposition referring the great judgments of former ages hither, is to be
rejected. I do therefore partly assent to the last exposition, applying these
terrible events upon the sounding of these four Trumpets, unto the grievous
punishments inflicted upon wicked persecutors, at four most remarkable times:
first, at the destruction of Jerusalem; secondly, in the time of Antonius
Verus; thirdly, of Galienus; fourthly, of Dioclesianus. For whereas he makes
the two lastone, and brings in the Vandals and Goths for the fourth; I hold,
that there being such a distance of almost forty years, there should be a
distinction of these judgments also. But how do these apparitions agree to
these judgments, being almost every one alike, the Sword, Famine, and
Pestilence, where as in the figures first there is hail, and fire, and blood
upon earth, then a burning mountain in the sea, etc. every one differing
greatly from another? I answer, that the Lord did not respect so much the
diversity of evils to come, as the number of them and the greatness, able to
make all men to turn their eyes to behold and be amazed at them. And more
particularly, these are made choice of to set them forth after the manner of
the Prophets, who are wont to allude unto some remarkable History of things
past, in foretelling of things to come, though they be not of the very same
kind: for upon the Egyptians these things were done almost according to the
letter, there was hail and fire mingled together, their Rivers were so
smitten, as that they could not drink of them without dying, there was
darkness of three days and three nights; and finally, the red Sea like blood,
falling upon them as a huge mountain, became their destruction, being like
fishes tumbled up and down in the deep. To show then that these professed
enemies and persecutors of Christianity should be destroyed by Gods Judgments,
as Pharaoh and the Egyptians were, these figures are taken up, and because they
had many ways to torment Christians, the Lord shows that they also should be
plagued many ways, and be destroyed with strange judgments before unheard of.
For it is Gods manner to punish sinners in their kind; the Sodomites, who
burnt with strange lusts, with a burning fire from Heaven; the builders of
Babel, who sought them a name, with confusion; and the enemies of the Christian
Religion, who sought out strange tortures, with a burning mountain and
worme-wooddy Star, etc. judgments strange and terble. And the third part of
the Sea, and the third part of trees, etc. are said to be affected with these
judgments as I think, because it was but a third part of the whole world
where these tragedies were acted, if the parts unknown till of late, and yet
unknown be considered.

Quest. 4. And I saw and heard an Angel flying through the midst of Heaven,
saying with a loud voice, Woe, Verse. 13.
etc. What Angel was this, and why is this cry interposed here?

Answ. The vulgar Latin, and Arias Montanus, for Angel read Eagle, I saw an
Eagle flying, but in all other Copies it is an Angel. Lyra. Petr. Damas.
Viegas. Ribera.
Hereupon some stand to find out why an Eagle should be used to cry thus, and
resolve that it was one of the four animals like an Eagle, and some John
himself, who was hereby figured out, and some the Preachers of the last times,
or some singular Preacher, who should foretell the judgments of those days.
Beda, Arethas, and Ticonius follow the vulgar: but there is the like passage
again afterward, Revel. 14.6. where it is spoken of an Angel, putting it out
of doubt that it is an Angel here also. Forbs. Brightman. Pareus.
Some will have this Angel to be Gregory the great, who gave warning of the
Ant^christ not above three years before, lib. 4. Epist. 34. The king of pride
is at hand, and which is horrible to speak, an army of Priests is prepared,
Epist. 38. He iterateth the same, and adds, He is Antichrist that shall
challenge to himself to be universal Bishop.

Not much above three years after, Boniface the third took upon him this
title, and his successors likewise to this day, plainly declaring the Pope to
be Antichrist even by their own rule, which is, That the Pope cannot err. And
therefore Pope Gregory erred not in thus saying, but it was truth which he so
seriously and often affirmed, He that will be universal Bishop, is
Antichrist. This, howsoever it be true, yet it has no place here, for the woes
proclaimed are not against the Church, but the inhabitants of the earth, by
which name wicked shedders of the innocent blood of Christians are complained
against under the fifth Seal. It is more genuine therefore by this Angel to
understand an Angel properly, as in speaking of other Angels, who flies
through the midst of the Heaven, that the sound of his denunciation might be
heard every where, he gives warning of greater plagues yet to come. Hitherto
terrible judgments against professed enemies of Christianity riding upon the
red horse had been represented, now the case of heretics and of corrupters of
Religion in the Papacy comes to be described in the fifth and sixth Trumpets,
and the final destruction of all the wicked in the seventh: and because these
indgements should yet be more grievous than the former, it is cried, Woe, woe,
woe, as there were three times of execution yet to come, that if it were
possible, men's hard hearts might be pierced, and many being brought to
repentance might escape these evils. For it is Gods usual manner to give
warning before he strikes, which if it be not taken, the heavier will the
judgments be when they come.

CHAP. IX.
ANd the fifth Angel blew his Trumpet, and I saw a Star fallen from Heaven to
the earth, and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit, etc. What is
meant by this Star, and by the Locusts coming out of hell, together with the
circumstances of their description in their form, time, manner of tormenting,
and King, which is set over them?

Many Writers by this Star understand the Bishops of Rome in their
succession, Brightman.
And some more particularly refer this Trumpet to Boniface the third, who
obtained of the Emperor Phocas to be universal Bishop: for then the fall
appeared being indeed before, as is intimated in the word fallen, not falling,
but now the fall was made more sensible. Darkness arose when ignorance
prevailed, and in these times of ignorance an innumerable company of religious
persons of diverse orders, who like Locusts eat up the fat and best things every
where. They sting like Scorpions when they seem least to intend any hurt, but
only such as are not marked, for God has his Church in the midst of Popery:
others which are misled by them are not proceeded against, as by persecutors
before described; but unwittingly receive such Doctrine from them as turns to
a sting of conscience more grievous than the bodily death, viz. the doctrine of
Purgatory, and of uncertainty of salvation, and of the merit of works, and of
superstitious orders, and tedious pilgrimages, and bloody whippings, more
grievous than present death. The time of five months limited unto them, some
understand indefinitely, Bib^^an ^^r. Arto ^^us. Rullinger. Chytraeus.
this being the whole time of the Locusts which lay their eggs in Autumn, and
being kept all winter in a thin coat, they are hatched in mid-Aprill, and
perish in mid-September, and according to this they will have the whole time of
these Locusts set forth, which is all the time of their flourishing, but how
long this shall be it is uncertain. Ioach. Abbas. Brightman.
Some resolving these months into 150. and taking a day for a year, reckon
upon 150. years, for in the time of Innocent the third, ann. 1210. the warm
time of their hatching came in by the new orders of Dominicans, Franciscans,
Mendicants, Obseruants, Trinitaries, and Friars of the holy Ghost, in so much
as Polidor Virgil says, Lib. 7.3.
That no age was so fruitful of the Religious as this. But in the time of
Wicliffe, ann. 1360. they were blown away as by a strong west wind in many
places. Some understand by these five months a short time only for the comfort
of the godly, Joan. Leonard. D. Fulke.
or five ages of six, which is the whole time of the world, and so this shall
last till the sixth age. Some the whole time of this life, Ambrose. Primas.
Beda. Richard. de Sancto Victore. Thom. Aquin. Haimo. Forbs.
which is maintained by the five senses, or consists of five ages, infancy,
childhood, youth, man's estate, and old age. Some lastly hold, that it is
alluded unto the time of the flood prevailing upon the old world, which was
five months. They go forth like horses prepared unto battle to show their
strength, they have Crowns of gold to show their usurped power over Kings,
they have the faces of men to show their flattery, hair like women to show
their alluring inticements, the teeth of Lions to show their devouring of all.
Their brest-plates for defense show, that they are exempt from the reach of all
secular power, their sting in their tail shows their false doctrine under
the best pretext, for the false prophet is the tail, their King is Satan, and
his Vicegerent upon earth the Pope, destroying all his opposites corporally,
and his followers spiritually. There are some differences in resolving this
description, but all speak almost to this effect. Some add unto the Papists,
the Saracens arising about the same time, Brightman.
and so will have them set forth by the Locusts also. For ann. 630. they began
under Mahomet to afflict the Countries of Arabia, Syria, Mesopotamia, Armenia,
Persia, Egypt, Africa and Spain, and continued till about the end of the
reign of Leo Copronimus, ann. 780. at what time, though their forces were not
utterly broken, for they continued 400. years, yet they were so broken, as
that they could not do such hurt as in times past. Lacanadraco subdued them in
Asia, Constantine with his mother Irene overthrew them, and so did Nicephorus,
and Theophilus, and Michael, etc. After this in Italy, being called from
Babylon to their help, ann. 830. they proved most infest enemies, wasting all,
neither could they be suppressed, till that Otto the second overthrew them,
ann. 980. with so great a slaughter, as that the place where, was called The
death of the Saracens till this day. Some prefer this of the Saracens, Fox.
as most agreeable to these Locusts, because they are professed enemies to
Christianity, and come in great multitudes armed against them, yet where they
submit their lives are spared, but by taking their children from them, and
rauishing their wives, and inthralling them to base slavery, they make their
lives more tedious to them than death: and as for the time of five months he
subscribeth to that allusion noted before unto the time of the Locusts life.
The popish sort expound this Trumpet altogether of things yet to come. For they
say, that the Devil by Gods permission shall stir up a great number of
Heretics toward the end of the world, who shall persecute the Catholics and
torment them diversely: for this Blasius Virgas says, is their common
exposition.

Lyra. R^pertus.
Some by the Star falling from Heaven understand Lucifer, and therefore it is
said which had fallen; he by Gods permission brings as it were out of hell,
an infinite multitude of cruel and barbarous Vandals, who under five Kings
which they had, swarmed in all places, namely under Gunderinus, Gensericus,
Hunericus, Trafimundus, and Gelimer, most horribly tormenting the world both in
the East and West. Now of all these expositions, I find that most of our side
prefer the first, touching the Pope and his religions, and many things in the
description do fit so well that I would gladly join with them, but that I am
resolved upon such reasons as I have already set down, that not corruptions in
Religion, but plagues coming upon the world therefore are here represented.
Which being so, and the last judgments having been executed against professed
enemies of Christianity at the four first soundings; order requires that some
thing now should follow against Heretics, as they were the next troublers of
the Church. If then any great judgment which may be fitted to this
description, can be found out in the time of the Arrian heresy, it seems most
reasonable to me that this should be held to be the figure thereof. For it is
not likely, that when the Lord is so careful in setting down the judgments
to come upon the heathen persecutors and upon the Antichrist of Rome, that the
middle time bringing the Church to so great misery, and therefore most
remarkably punished certain hundreds of years together should be passed over
in silence, a^ it is if we find not out something agreeing unto it under this
fifth Trumpet. I hold therefore with Lyra, Rupertus, and some others, that here
is a description of the Goths and Vandals, a base and ignoble people, and in
times past without name, leaping about like Locusts to make a prey of other
men's possessions, and by their huge swarms and multitudes prevailing where
they came to the bringing of all things to ruin. They were first brought in by
Valens an Arrian Emperor, about ann. 366. but fighting against him they became
his destruction, Ruffind. 2.6.13.
for they fired the town into which he fled, so that he miserably perished
together with it. And after this, partly in Affrike, and partly in Italy,
Germany, and France, even almost all over the Christian world, they were most
manifest scourges sent for a plague upon the Heresies which were most rife in
those times, Victor. vticenfis.
and chiefly that of Arrius. And this plague continued breaking out often times
more violently the space of about 184. years from the first to the last, viz.
till ann. 550. in which time, when they gat the victory, no manner of barbarous
cruelty was spared, in so much as Writers compare some of them with Dioclesian
and Maximi^nus, the most bloody persecutors that ever were. Some were sent into
banishment, and if through infirmity any could not keep pace with the rest,
they were fastened to the tails of horses, and dragged against the stones till
they were pitteously rent and torn. Some were compelled to carry unreasonable
burdens, and if being oppressed with the weight they went slowly, they were
whipped with whips full of iron pricks, that put them to exceeding great
torment. Then they which before had been rulers of the world, were made slaves
unto a barbarous people. For Augustulus was compelled by them to deuest
himself of his imperial robes, and to go into banishment; the Empire in the
West being thence forward ruled by Odoacer the King of the Rugians, and
Theodoricus of the Goths, and his successors, till that Etius being sent by the
Emperor of the East, cut them quite off from having any dominion more. And yet
neither then were they free from the oppression of strangers, for the
Longobards brought in by the said Etius, obtained the Kingdom of Italy, and
ruled for the space of above two hundred years, till the time of Charles the
great. All which History, that it may be understood the better, I have thought
good to transcribe hither as I find it to have been by others collected
together. I have already touched Valens his bringing in of the Goths into the
East to his own ruin about ann. 380. After him reigned Theodosius sixteen
years, all which time that savage Nation was able to do no great hurt. But in
the days of Arcadius and Honorius, the sons of Theodosius, they came in
great multitudes, especially into the west where Honorius reigned. For
Radagisus King of the Goths came in the eighteenth year of his reign into
Italy, with 200000. men ann. 409. but this great multitude being dispersed and
perishing by famine, he came to a miserable end: but five years after,
Alaricus who succeeded him, besieged and took Rome and spoiled it and the rest
of Italy. Adaulphus succeeded him, and took Rome the second time. After him
Genscricus came with 500000. and took Rome the third time, ann. 445. After
this, Odoacer King of the Rugians took Rome, and quite overthrew the Empire,
reigning in Italy fourteen years. Against him came Theodoricus King of the
Goths, sent by Zeno Emperor of the East, who ouercomming him, reigned in Italy
three and thirty years. Atalaricus succeeded him and reigned eight years:
then Theodatus two years, and he being deposed, Vitiges was made King, and
reigned five years; he being taken prisoner by Bellisarius, a Captain sent by
Justinian Emperor of the East, Totilas succeeded; under whom, and Vitiges his
predecessor, Italy and Rome endured infinite miseries. Totilas took Rome the
fifth time and razed it to the ground, burning all with fire fourteen days
together, and so the Citizens being left harbourlesse, wandered about the fields
of Campania, he reigned ten years; and then Etius, another famous Captain
being sent against him, he was overcome, and an end was put to the Kingdom of
the Goths. These times being computed together from the eighteenth year of
Honorius, when these Locusts began first to swarm in Italy under Radagisus,
unto Totilas the last King of the Goths, will appear to be about 150 years.
For the eighteenth year of Honorius, when Radagisus came, was the fourth of
Theodosius of the East, who reigned 38. years after; Martianus 7. Leo 17. Zeno
17. under whose reign Odoacer began and reigned 14. years, Theodoricus 33.
Atalaricus 8. Theodatus more than 2. Vitiges 5. an inter regnum after that
Bellisarius had overthrown Vitiges 2. Totilas 10. From Radagisus then to the
end of Zenoes reign are 80. years, when the Roman Empire was put down in
Augustulus, which time I reckon by the eastern Emperors, because that after
Honorius, who reigned 29. years, Valentmian the third only reigned 30.
years, but after him there were many which stood so short a time, and were so
unhappy in their reigns, as that their times are not counted, as namely
Auitus, Richimex, Maioranus, Senerus, Anthemius, Olibrius, Gliceri^s, Nepos,
Orestes, Augustulus. From Odoacer to the end of Totilas, are 74. years, which
being put unto the former 80. amount to 154. Now it is to be noted, that the
Kingdom of these strangers was some years before the end of Zenoes Empire
before spoken of, and the time of Theodatus might be two or three years more
than are reckoned, wherefore we may deduct out of this some five or six years,
because this change was under Zeno, and so the time will be 148. unto which if
we add again the foresaid two or three, the whole will be about 150. from
ann. 409. to ann. 559. This ground being thus laid, all things will most
excellently agree to these troubles. For first the Devil, who is a murderer
from the beginning, in times past a Lucifer, but fallen, is by God appointed
for a punishment of heresy to bring in an infinite multitude of strangers, and
this is his opening of the bottomless pit, because the purpose of spoiling,
wasting, and destroying is from hell. These are compared to Locusts, darkning
the air through their multitude, as in Egypt, both because they had no
certain place of habitation, but preyed upon others, and because they were not
of any great power to hurt, but by reason of their great multitudes. They hurt
like Scorpions, because when Valens first brought them in, they came as
helpers, but after a while they proved most mischievous to Christendom; as the
Scorpion looks pleasantly, and puts to no pain at the first, till after
three days, when the torments of his stinging are most grievous and kill, for
which cause also their sting is said to be in their tail. Yet there is a
difference from the Scorpions sting, in that these only torment and kill not,
and torment such only as want the mark of God in their forehead. For though
many in these wars were slain, yet the Empire was but wounded as it were,
and not for ever destroyed, seeing after a certain time it revived again. And
it is the state in general whereof it is spoken, when he says, That they
should not kill, but torment them. As for the exception of the sealed ones,
whereas it may seem that they were hurt most, for so much as the Orthodox were
most peresecuted by the Goths, being partly after a time drawn to be Arrians.
This exception I take it, is made to note that such as were not sealed, but
turned away after Heresy, were the cause of this mischief, neither could the
Elect receive any damage hereby, seeing all outward calamities suffered for
Gods sake are turned to an inward advantage unto them. The time of five months
being resolved into days, is just the foresaid term of 150. years, a year
being understood by a day, as is frequent in prophesies. It may also be
applied unto the five times of Romes vanquishment in the compass of these
years. The state being thus often ouerturned, and they who were wont to be
Lords of all into servitude reduced, their houses fired, their wives ravished,
their riches coming into the possession of others, and themselves exposed to
extreme poverty and want, harbourlesse and comfortless, no marvel though they
desired rather to die, expecting no end of these miseries. To show the warlike
manner of their coming, they are further likened to horses prepared unto the
battle; to show the sovereignty to which they attained, Crowns like gold are
ascribed unto them, to show that they were no true Locusts, but only of their
quality and condition, they are said to have the faces of men, and the hair of
women to show their barbarousnesse, and the teeth of Lions for their devouring
and cruel tearing in pieces, none being able to withstand them in their time.
Their iron brestplates show their might, their wings their swift and sudden
coming, their noise their hideousness in their coming. Their term of five
months is again repeated, to make the Allegory taken from true Locusts to hold
the better, seeing this is the whole term of their life, as has been already
showed, and therefore it is set forth by months, and not by days. The Angel
of the bottomless pit, a murderer and destroyer, is said to be their King, to
note out by whose instigation they came forth, and under whose banner they
fought, although God used them herein as instruments to execute his just
judgments. And thus I have by Gods grace fitted a most kindly exposition to
this most hard and mystical passage. Whence we may see; that besides ordinary,
God has unexpected ways to plague wickedness withal, and to abate the pride
of those that are most potent and think themselves most secure. And whosoever
are the instruments to execute Gods will in this kind, can do nothing no
longer time than he permits them. And howsoever the godly being mixed with
others partake in outward miseries, yet nothing shall be able to hurt them, God
having a special care at these times over them, so that they have wherein to
rejoice when all things are confounded; for no hurt, which is an hurt indeed,
can come to them, seeing these outward things are but shadows, and as the
superfluous hairs of the head, in losing whereof there is no detriment, as
Chrysostom and Augustine speak.

Quest. And the sixth Angel blew his Trumpet, Verse. 13.
and I heard a voice from the four corners of the altar, etc. Loose the four
Angels bound in the great river Euphrates. And these four Angels were loosed,
being prepared for an hour, for a day, for a month, and for a year. Who are
these four Angels? What voice commands their loosing, and what is meant by
the time of an hour, day, etc. for which it is said they are prepared?

Answ. Some by these four Angels understand two Popes, Lyra. P^t. Aureol^^. D.
Ant.
and two Emperors; Symmachus, and Laurentius an Antipope, and Anastasius
Emperor in the East, an Eutichian Heretic, and Theodoricus King of Italy, an
Arrian, about ann. 502. For these two in contending for the Popedom, this
Emperor and King in standing for their heresies destroyed a great number of
people, which they were ready to do before, but now being loosed put it in
execution; and they are said to be bound in Euphrates, because it was the
bounds of the Roman Empire. Some, which desire to draw men a far off, that
they may not look at the Pope and Papacy, Beda. Richard. de Sancto victore.
Haimo. Rupertus. Arethas, etc.
expound this of all the Devils in hell which are now bound, but shall be let
loose in the time of Antichrist to make such havoc in the Church, destroying
and killing of Catholics, so as the like was never done before, and this,
Viegas the Jesuit says, is the common opinion. But neither of these
expositions can stand; not the first, because it is much forced to expound the
Angels bound in Euphrates of such as lived a far off, and far distant one
from another; nor the second, because it is a judgment upon the world for
sin, not a trial of the Church by further persecution. And it may be
plainly found out to have been already fulfilled, and therefore in vain
applied to future times.

There is then a third exposition embraced by all ours, by which the Saracens
and Turks are understood here, to have been loosed at this sounding, to
become a scourge to Popery, the last and greatest trouble of the Church of God.
This sixth Angel sounded unto judgments upon the idolatrous Papists the great
corrupters of religion, set forth before by the pale horse, after that the
Goths were put down, who were sent for a plague of Arrianisme. Now although the
Longobards were the next judgment in Italy, yet because there will be a fitter
place to figure them out in another vision, Chap. 13. the Spirit of God
proceeds here to the Saracens, the greater and more universal judgment. The
voice which was heard speaking to the sixth Angel from amongst the four horns
of the Altar, is by the consent of all, the voice of the Lord Jesus, who had
suffered, and was sacrificed for our sins: he utters his voice, not from the
midst of the throne, where he stood, but from the midst of the Altar, under
which it is said before, the souls lay crying for revenge; to show, that their
cries were heard and prevailed to the producing of the grievous evils
following. They were answered before by signs, for the Angel took coals
from the Altar and threw them down to the earth, whence insued thunders,
lightnings, and earthquakes: but now by a lively voice commanding to loose the
four Angels bound at Euphrates, who stood always ready at an hour, day,
month or year, that they might go forth to kill, and destroy, and come upon
these gross corrupters of religion with innumerable and invincible armies of
Saracens and Turks. Brightman.
Some understand by these four Angels, four chief rulers of the Turks
stirred up by the evil Angels, which are devils, ann. 1300. For after a great
overthrow received by the Scythians, recollecting their forces again, they
divided that part of Asia which they held amongst four Peers, Carmanus,
Sarchanes, Gregor. lib. 7.1.
Calames, and Ottoman; there was also for a time a fifth Amurius, but the
government was soon reduced to four again. They are said to be loosed, when
they began to prevail on this side Euphrates, which was not till about this
time. For howsoever they did much damnifie the Romans before, yet they were
made still to retire by the Catalaunes under the reign of Andronicus, Gregor.
lib. 7.3.
who put them to flight and kept them in great awe, but not pursuing their
victory, but returning home they brake out, and in a short space possessed
themselves of the holy land, held till then by the Christians, and in other
places also did greatly enlarge their dominions, whereunto they were more
enabled by growing to a monarchy under Ottoman, after that they had been a
while divided under four. The time of an hour, day, month, and year,
according to this, is applied to the continuance of the Turkish greatness,
which counting a day for a year, is 396. years, and so shall have end ann.
1696. for so much as it began 1^00. And unto this of Brightmans agrees Fox,
Fox.
as touching the time when this takes place, though not in the particular
exposition of these four Angels, and of the hour, day, Bullinger. Ill^ricus.
Pareus.
etc. Others understand the Turks, with all that joined with them from the
first beginning of their prevailing, about ann. 620. in the days of Mahomet:
for there were four sorts of people, who joined together, Saracens, Turks,
Arabians, and Tartarians. These are said to be bound in Euphrates, which is a
great river descending from the mountains of Armenia through the midst of
Caldea and Babylon, because this river was anciently the bound of these
barbarous people, past which they came not to infest the Roman Empire, till
the time of Heraclius, who called forth the Saracens to help him in his war
against the Persians, but dismissing them without their pay, they being hereby
incensed, under their Captain Homar joined unto them the Arabians, etc. and
inuading the Roman Empire, in a short time subdued all Arabia, Palestina,
Egypt, Africa, Cyprus, and Asia the lesser, even to Bizantium, and afterward
Spain, which they held till ann. 1488. in the time of Ferdinand king of
Castile, grandfather to Charles the fifth. These four peoples came together at
the last under one Sultan Ottoman. They are set forth by the name of Angels,
because they were sent of God to punish the wickedness of Christian people.
They were ready for an hour, a day, etc. to note their sudden coming and
growing to such a greatness, and their armies are all figured out afterward
by horsemen.

Some understand here the four Angels of Chap. 7. which held the winds,
Andreas. Grasserus.
because their loosing has not hitherto been set forth, and by the horses
appearing, understand the Goths sacking Rome four times, and by putting down
the secular Empire made way to a spiritual, by the horsemen the R^mane
hierarchy. But this is nothing agreeable to our purpose, neither can I stand to
examine the reason of bringing them in here which have been so aptly fitted to
another place. I hold it most clear and evident, that this passage does
properly belong unto the Saracens and Turks with their associates, being four
in number; so populous, and having upon such a sudden overrun so great a
part of the world. Ann. 631.
For under Homar successor to Mahomet, a great part of Syria and Egypt were
subdued by them, having before taken Damascus, Gaza, and Jerusalem. Ormisda the
King of the Persians at that time called to his aid against them the Turks,
Ann. 634.
who soon after killing him, joined with the Saracens as one people, and wanne
Cilicia, Cappadocia, Ann. 646.
Mesopotamia, Cyprus, etc. Under Homan their next king, they wanne Africa and
Babylon, and so to the number of one and twenty more, successively they were
always enlarging their bounds till ann. 832. their chief Governor being
called Calypha, which signifies a general Lord, and the governors of
Provinces, Sultans. After this, the Sultans growing ambitious, fought one
against another, and against the Calypha; which opportunity the Turks taking,
committed many rapines, and enriching themselves, at the last challenged to
themselves the Empire of Asia, creating one Zadoc their Emperor ann. 1051.
after whom diverse reigned, more and more enlarging their bounds, till ann.
1240. the Tartarians subdued them but in the days of Ottoman, ann. 1300. they
recovered again their former Empire, and further subdued Constantinople, and
have exceedingly shaken the state of Christendom in these nearer parts, as all
men know. And the time of their first beginning agrees best to our purpose,
being not much above one hundred years after that the plague by the Goths was
over, so that I cannot assent unto them that will have the year 1300. designed
here, when the Turks recovered again their greatness, and grew more potent
than ever before, seeing there is no just reason, if we proceed as we have
begun, to exclude, but rather to include the Saracens with the Turks, seeing
together they have been many years, and are one common plague sent of God,
and are united in one and the same religion.

Now to fit every passage in the Text unto them, verse. 14. when it was the
Lords will that they should come and plague the world on this side Euphrates,
he declares it by bidding the four Angels bound in Euphrates to be loosed,
because as there are good Angels to excite unto good actions, so there be
evil ones to instigate unto evil, to rapine, murder, and bloodshed. The
Devil had no power before in these barbarous people, because not appointed by
God, but prohibited from inuading the Christian territories; but now he has
license, and four art said to be loosed, because they instigated four
peoples. And there needed no more but to loose them, for they were most ready
at an hour, etc. whether the Lord would have them go forth at an hours
warning, or a days, or a months, or a years, so that whenever he should
say, go this hour, or this week, etc. they were most expedite. As for Master
Brightmans calculating of the time that the Turkish monarchy should continue,
it seems to be forced, both because it is here only showed upon what warning
they were ready, and not how long they should tyrannize, and because the
accounting of a day for a year holds not so currently in this place, in
respect of the hour also mentioned. They kill the third part of men, such
great slaughters did the Turks make where they came, that of three parts, not
above two escaped. Verse. 16. The number of their armies of horse two millions
of millions. Never was there seen such an army of horsemen together, neither
is i^ possible, but by an hyperbole an infinite number is put for a wonderful
great number. And truly the armies of these people have exceeded in number:
Bai^z^t was once in the field with 500000. and Tamerlan the Tartarian with
1300000. Verse. 17. Their brest-plates of fire and Iacinth, and brimstone, the
heads of the horses, as of Lions. This shows, how they should waste the world
of people by all means, even as a devouring fire and brimstone, which (I take
it) is added in alluding to hell, which burns with fire and brimstone. For as
the rage of that cannot be withstood, no more could these be withstood in
their time, and as that fire is the most hideous of all fires, so these have
been the most terrible of all people: Their Iacinth color is red, or yellow,
or blew, as the Lilly signified hereby. Their lions heads show their
fierceness, Fire, brimstone, and smoke went out of their mouths. They did
even breath out cruelty, threatening destruction to such as withstood them; if
the great Turk does but speak the word, the greatest of his subjects dares
not but submit, even unto the death, yea to the execution of himself. No
Sanneherib has ever spoken more proudly and minaciously, than he has been
wont to do. Their powers are in their mouths, and in their tails: The
Locusts power was in their tails only, for they spoke not against
Christianity in general, but were ready (though in a corrupt manner) to
entertain it: but these as professed enemies defy Christianity, and make war
against it, and by cruelty and deceiueablenesse seek to draw as many to
Mahumetisme as they can; and thus they destroy both souls and bodies. And
because they are said to have lions heads, as the Locusts Lions teeth, and it
is the property of a lion to kill with his tail; they kill also with the tail,
as they did being first called upon for aid, but turning to be destruction to
such as called them; as the serpent proves to him that receives it.

Verse. 20. The rest neither repented that they should not worship Devils, nor
images of gold, etc. Verse. 21. Neither repented they of their murders, etc. In
these words is set forth the obstinacy of the Papists, and it is made yet more
evident, that the Turks were sent for a plague of their superstitions and
corruptions. And the event answers the prediction, for they are as great
worshippers of images, as great murderers and fornicators as ever they were.
Neither can this be applied to any but them, seeing they only of late days
have been notorious for their idolatries, and massacres, and whoredoms also,
which have been observed by all the world.

And whereas Devils are mentioned, the worshipping of whom, it seems, cannot
be charged upon them, let their delusions by apparitions, and voices uttered at
the Sepulchers of Saints, and by images be considered, and I doubt not but the
indifferent arbiter will acknowledge that these things come from Devils, who
are worshipped upon an imagination that they are the Saints. Again, an idol
is nothing, says the Apostle, but what is sacrificed to idols, is to Devils.
Wherefore let not us that have repented, and so are spared from the Turks
invasion, make a relapse again, but praise God for this mercy, and pity their
obstinacy and blindness, which know not the time of their visitation.

CHAP. X.
ANd I saw another strong Angel coming down from heaven, compassed with a
cloud, Verse. 1.
and a rainbow upon his head, etc. Who is this Angel? What little book open
is it that he holds in his hand? Why does he stand so strangely one foot upon
the sea and another upon the land? What means his loud cry, and the seven
thunders uttering their voices thereupon, which must not be written? And why
does he swear so seriously, that time shall be no more but during the
sounding of the seventh Angel? And what is meant in that John is bidden to eat
that little book, etc. for all these things do so hang together, that they
must needs be expounded together?

Answ. It is to be understood, that all these things come under the fixed
trumpet, and therefore are to be referred to the same times, though perhaps
beginning somewhat after the judgments before declared. Hitherto has been
nothing but matter of terror by fierce enemies in infinite multitudes,
destroying a world of people for idolatry, murders, fornications, etc. Now
because the Lord had some people in these most corrupt times, which read and
cleaued unto the Scriptures, and impugned hereby those gross corruptions,
though with danger of their lives, and prospered in respect of their cause in
so doing: it seemed good unto the Spirit of God by some figure to show this
also, and the figure is an open book in the hand of a strong Angel, eaten up
by John, which was sweet in his mouth, but bitter in his belly. And again, in
the next Chapter a reed given unto him to measure the temple, the outward Court
being left unmeasured, as being trampled v^der foot by the Gentiles two and
forty months; in all which time, the two witnesses of God prophecy in
sackecloth, etc.

C^y^rae^s. Bulling^r. Aret^^s. Aug^st. etc. Br^ghtman. For^s, etc.
This being thus generally premised, I come now to the particular Quaeres. This
strong Angel, by the consent of most Expositors, is the Lord Jesus, who has a
rainebow about his head, to show the security brought unto men by him; is
clothed with a cloud, that is, the nature of man; his face shines as the
Sun, because he is the light of the world; his feet like pillars of fire, to
show that his ministers propagating the Gospel, kindle a fire of fervent love
where they come; one foot being set upon the earth and the other upon the sea,
set forth his dominion over sea and land. Ly^a.
Lyra understands the Emperor Justinius, and his Nephew Iustinianus about the
year 518. who held a little book open when he wrote his Epistles against the
Arrians, in favor of the Orthodox.

Lastly, some understand an Angel properly, either Gabriel, or some other,
perhaps the same that was before so desirous to have the book opened, Chap. 5.
but all the seals now being opened, and men not being moved to repentance, it
is precisely noted in the Chapter before going, he comes again roaring as a
Lion, so loud, as that thunders Eccho-like are heard, Arethas. Andreas. Abbas.
Ioach. Fox.
and protests that time shall be no more, etc. that men might hereby at the
least be awakened and made to repent. And unto this do I subscribe, because I
see no necessity of understanding Christ by an Angel here, but rather as the
word sounds: for it is expressed in none other terms but (...), another
Angel, that is, another such, as the Angels blowing the trumpets. When Christ
is set forth by this name, it is always with some addition, as the Angel of
the Covenant, etc. Moreover, what need was there that Christ should now leave
his royal throne in heaven to come down to the earth, when he had many
ministers fit for this service; and indeed, this cannot well be applied unto
Christ, seeing it is expressly said, Act. 3.
The heavens must contain him till the time of restoring all things. Whereas
the apparatus of a cloud, rainebow, etc. may seem not to agree to an Angel
indeed: let it be considered, that the Angels in heaven do partake with
Christ in his glory, as the Saints do; and then it will not seem absurd that
an Angel should be set forth thus descending, all making for the honor of
God and of Christ, to whom they are ministers, being glad with so great glory.
The little book opened, Pareus.
some will have to be the same which before was said to be sealed. Some the
holy Scriptures, the opening and right understanding whereof, Aretius.
after that they had been long kept shut in the time of Popery, is here
figured out. And this seems to me to agree best, for the other book must
needs be very great, out of which so many horses issued, and other things
appeared, this of the Scriptures is but a little book in comparison. Moreover,
the contents of the other book were before declared, and therefore superfluous
it was to propound it again. Pareus. Bullinger. Forbs.
One foot set upon the sea and the other upon the land, some understand to have
been done, to show Christ's dominion over sea and land, even in the time of
persecutions, when he might seem to have been cast out of his possession.
Others allegorically, Brightman. Tho. Aquin. Beda.
by his feet understand the instruments of rearing up the Gospel again, and
so apply his right foot unto the most famous, and the left to others of less
note, these were set upon sea and land, when all sorts of people were
admonished by them. But there needs no such curiosity here, for what does he
come to foretell of, but the approach of the end of the world? Which for so
much as it consists of sea and land, how could he address himself more
fitly to tell of the destruction of it, than by this gesture of setting his
feet upon sea and land, and lifting up his hand to heaven.

Touching his loud cry, and the seven thunders hereupon uttering their voices,
which John must not write; these things serve further to declare the terror of
this messenger sent from heaven: for when the Lion roareth, the beasts of the
forest tremble, so when this Angel is set forth roaring so loud that a
thundering noise reboundeth again from the sound of his voice, the Lord would
have men to tremble at it, and repent, and turn to the Lord from their sins,
wherein they are noted hitherto to have persisted. The things uttered by the
thunders the Lord will not have written, because in all likelihood they were
copiously set forth in other parts of holy Scripture, nothing being more
frequent than to admonish to repent, and to threaten the impenitent. And the
thunders are said to be seven, which is a number of perfection, to show that
many terrors should come upon the world, if happily they would be rouzed up
hereby. Others by these thunders understand the ministers of these times,
Brightman.
who like sons of thunder cry aloud to move men to repentance, and the number
of seven is used, to show that they are guided by the Spirit, with his
seuen-fold gifts, neither do they utter any thing but from Christ's mouth,
whose echoes they are. What they utter must not be written, because there are
some mysteries which should not be known now, Pareus.
but are reserved for after times. Pareus, as he refers all things here in
common to all the six trumpets before going, as matter of consolation to the
godly, so he understands the ministers in the time of persecution, who did
not forbear to utter their thundering voices against Tyrants, though unto deaf
ears; which is noted, in that John is forbidden to write: for when any thing
is spoken or written, but not regarded, it is as if it were not written. And
this is spoken, that Gods ministers might not be discouraged, but account of
their ministry as most precious, and therefore sealed up, though unprofitable
to salvation to the wicked world. Let the reader follow which of these he will,
but the first seems to me most natural and less strained. Pareus.
Pareus mentions other words here used in some copies, as (...), in Andreas,
and Bibliaregia, pro (...), but all comes to one; After these things write
again, and write not these things. Touching the oath here taken, it is to
assure us, that it will not be long before Christ's coming to judgment, but
under the sound of the seventh Angel, that none might defer the time of
their repentance. And yet, for so much as the time of this Angels sounding is
uncertain, Napie^.
though we may know when it begins, the just time of the Lords coming to
judgment cannot hence be gathered. Wherefore that strain of some (which make
the seven seals and trumpets to parallel one another, and to contain every
one an equal portion of time, viz. either two hundred and fifty year more or
less, and from this ground determine of this time of judgment) is to be
declined as erroneous, seeing these times have appeared to be unequal, some
one being as long as two or three others. And he calls the Lords coming to
judgment, and the consummation of this world, the mystery of God by the
Prophets foretold, because it is hidden from most men, and yet apprehended by
faith only, but the Prophets did not cease from time to time to speak of it.
Thus all Expositors agree but only Brightman, who expound h (...), delay;
Brightman.
and the mystery of God of the calling home of the Jews, and of their
flourishing estate, after this their calling foretold by the Prophets. So that
he will have this book to extend no further, but to the accomplishment of this
mystery. But for so much as plain mention is made of the rising of the dead
under the seventh trumpet to come to judgment, Chap. 11. verse. 18. it is
evident, that the mystery to be finished here mentioned, is the consummation of
the world, and not the vocation of the Jews. Touching the eating of this
little book, John is herein made a figure of those instruments, whom God meant
to use to set open the Scriptures, Ezech 3.
after that they had been so long shut up. For by earnest studying they did
even devour this book, taking great pleasure in this study, but afterward it
was an occasion of much suffering, set forth by the sweetness in the mouth and
bitterness in the belly. Thus most Writers agree, Rupertus. Thom. Aquin.
but some understand this of the person of John, who was to return from
banishment, and to preach the Cospell again. But the extent of his preaching
here mentioned is so great, as that it cannot agree to his person, who preached
only in Ephesus a few years after this. Again it is under the sixth trumpet,
long before which John was departed. And^^a^.
Some think that John shall live again in the days of Antichrist, and come
and prophecy with Enoch and Elias. But this is a fond fantasy, the truth
has already been showed, whereupon we may build, because confirmed by
experience. The word of God being shut up in the time of Popery, has long ago
been set open again by the hand of a strong Angel, and it has been
prophesied again to many Kings, Peoples and Nations: and although it be
opposed to this day, and Popery often gets the upper hand in sundry places,
yet herein the truth suffers but as in the time of the Primitive Church, it
was above three hundred years before that it was generally received then: so
that the time of judgment, when an end shall be put to all things, cannot be
far off, and this should move every one of us to turn speedily to the Lord
by true repentance, and to bear patiently any adversity for the Lords sake,
nothing doubting, but as the holding forth of this open book has been
already accomplished, and the preaching again after so long a time of silence,
so whatsoever is here further auerred by the same Angel of the consummation of
this world shall also undoubtedly follow, and yet a little while he that shall
come will come and will not tarry.

CHAP. XI.
AND there was given me a reed like a rod, and the Angel stood and said, Verse.
1.
Arise and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and those that worship in
it. And the outer Court of the Temple cast out, etc. What is figured out by
this measuring, Spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where the Lord was slain?

Answ. These things are very obscure, and therefore Interpreters are much
divided about them. Lyra.
Lyra is the most absurd, referring this to the feast of the dedication of the
Temple, ordained by Pope Felix about ann. 525. as if he had been figured out.
Here Pareus tells of some, that understand this literally of Jerusalem and
the Temple there, the reedifying of which is here figured out: but this cannot
stand, because not only the Court, but Temple, and Altar, and all are trodden
under foot of the Gentiles, neither shall this Temple or Altar ever be
reedified again.

The Papists generally grounding upon the opinion of the ancients, refer all
to Antichrists time, Irenaeus. Justin. Martyr. Cyprian. Ierom. Basil. Chrsost.
etc.
who they think is yet to come, and shall reign three years and an half,
but Enoch and Elias shall resist him, doing many miracles, etc. The consent of
antiquity, I confess, may much move, and is indeed to be regarded in matter of
faith, when with one consent they give the sense of any place of Scripture,
which requires not experience for the better understanding thereof. But the
things here set forth being of that nature, that they cannot be so well
understood, till that in process of time the event gives some light to the
prophecy, it is no derogation from the ancients herein to go from them,
especially when by evident reason it appears, that they have erred in their
judgment. And Bellarmine himself consents, Lib. 3. de P. R. cap. 5.
that the Fathers have erred much about the Antichrist, because they saw not
the histories of future times. Ieronym. in Malac. ad Minerium, and Alexandrum,
cap. 4.
Neither yet are the ancient Fathers for the coming of Enoch and Elias in
person, for Jerome calls them Iudaizers, who think that Enoch and Elias
shall come again in person: for he says, The Jews and Iudaizing heretics
think, that Elias shall come again and restore all things; but to this Christ
answers, when being demanded about the coming of Elias, he says, Elias
indeed shall come, and if ye believe it, he is already come, by Elias meaning
John Baptist.

Moreover, that this is an error is plain; 1. Because it is impossible, short
a time, The Antichrist expected by the Papists confuted.
as they say, Antichrist shall do, that is, be received of all the Jews for
the Messiah, build the Temple in three days, overthrow the Turk, the Persian,
the grand Cham, and Prester John, kill the three kings of Egypt, Libia, and
Aethiopia, build up Rome burnt with fire, and sit there as a Monarch
persecuting the Christian religion in all parts of the world.

2. Because at the end of this time they say Antichrist shall be destroyed,

3. Because the things in this book set forth are said to be such, Paul says
plainly, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
that the mystery of iniquity did then work.

Lastly, Antichristianisme is a mystery that is so covertly carried, that
Antichrist can hardly be discerned when he is come, Bullinger. Fox. Pareus.
Brightman, etc.
so that many shall be deceived which were not so, if he were a professed enemy
and had Enoch and Elias to fight against him. Our Divines generally hold, that
there is set forth a reedifying of the spiritual Temple of God, being ruined
and almost r^zed to the ground by the fury and malice of the enemies thereof,
as in the like figure, Ezech. 40. etc. is set forth the reedifying of the
material Temple being destroyed by the Babylonians after their return from
captivity. Even as when one is set to measure ground for any building to be
set upon it, it does argue an intention to build there. Now as the Temple of
old did consist of an house called the Temple and an Altar, and such as came to
worship there, so the spiritual Temple is described by way of allusion to it,
by these parts.

2. But touching the outercourt there is difference in the reading. Pareus
following Luther, and the copies of Robert Stephanus, reads it the inner
Court, but Arethas the outer, and so Arrias Montanus, Oecumen. August. Beda,
Tho. Aquin. Abbas Ioachim, Rupertus, Haimo, Beza, etc. But the difference in
the sense is nothing, the Court whether inner or outer is left unmeasured to
figure out the power which the Gentiles should have there even in the time of
the repairing of the decays of Gods Church, by oppugning error, and teaching
the truth. But what is meant by the Court is hard to determine. Some understand
the Popish Clergy, Pareus. Bullinger.
which together with the Pope have apostatized from the truth, these are not to
be measured but left out, as aliens from the grace of God; and fitly are they
set forth by the inn Court, which was the Court of the Priests. Some
understand all the Papists, Brightman. Forbs. Grasserus.
which by this figure are set forth to be more than the professors of the
truth, as the Court was greater than the Temple, and the city yet far greater
than it: so the Lord would hereby show, that in the time of light for a long
time the Pope should have the most followers still. By treading under foot is
meant their subjection to the Papacy, and the maintainers of Popery are called
Gentiles, because in their idolatries and ceremonies most like unto them.

One has a singular opinion by himself touching this Court and these
Gentiles, for he understands the Turks, Fox.
and the nations subject unto them, these are left out, because when the Church
should be reedified in these latter days, this reedifying should not extend
unto them, but they should be under the heathen Turks. For mine own part, I
am much affected with this last, but so as that I think the Papists are not to
be excluded, who keep a great part of the Christian world under their
superstitions also, as the Turk does under his; wherefore I resolve that both
are here meant, the Turks are Gentiles, because out of the Israel of God; the
Papists are Gentiles, because idolatrous and superstitious like the Gentiles.
They together then tread under foot the court of Gods house, by holding under
the greatest part of the world, which formerly has been Christian, even still
in these days of light, the one in the East, the other in the West.

3. Touching the time of two and forty months some understand a short time,
Bullenger. Pareus, etc. Centur. Mag. deburg. Iunius.
but indefinite. 1. Some understand the time when the outer Court should thus
be trodden under foot, by the Pope, and so they count from the beheading of John
Baptist, resolving these months into days, 1260. and reckoning them for
years unto Boniface the eight, ann. 1294. out of which four and thirty being
deducted, being the age of Christ, not long before whom John suffered, there
will remain 1260. 2. One reckoning these months by days, Brightman.
and taking the days for years, not according to the Julian account, whereby
two and forty months make 1278. days, but according to the Egyptian, falling
short in this sum eighteen days of the Julian, will have the time accounted
so much short of 1260. as it exceeds by the Julian account, and so
understands here 1242. Julian years, which time he begins in the days
of Constantine, ann. 304. and extends it to the Council of Trent, ann. 1546.
All this time the outer Court was trodden under foot through the heresies that
prevailed, and the two witnesses the old and new Testament prophesied in
sackcloth, but then they were killed by the authorizing of one corrupt
translation only, and falsifying their Expositors, who had anciently given
life unto them by their sound expositions. 3. Another understands the time of
the Turks tyrannizing, Fox.
from Ottoman to the last that shall be, which he reckons by Sabbaths of
years, making every month such a Sabbath, as Daniel does a week, and so the
whole sum of years 294. But experience shows this to be but a conjecture,
because the Turkish tyranny continues still, it being now far past the time
thus calculated. For Ottoman was ann. 1300. unto which add 294. and it will
amount but to 1594. As for that of Brightman, it were to be wished that it
were so, for according to his account, we should soon be delivered both from
Turk and Pope, who I fear have a longer time to continue than he imagined.
But here is both a difference of eighteen years, and the two and forty
months of the Popish Gentiles do not thus agree, much part of this time the
Church being put to it, and the Scriptures wronged by the A^rians and other
Heretics, and not by this Antichristian sect, who are not observed to have
gotten such an head till about Ann. 600. Of the second opinion there is less
probability, seeing it is not set down when this treading under foot should
be, but how long it should endure. And as for the first exposition, it were
strange that no certain time should be meant here, being measured out thus by
so many months and days, when as both in Daniel and Jeremy, and other
Prophets, it has always been found that a certain number named, has noted
out a certain time. Pareus mentions this as being followed by some, and most
approved by himself, if a certain time be here determined.
There is another exposition therefore only remaining, whereby so many years
are meant as there are days in 42. months, that is, as the Spirit of God
immediately directs us, 1260. according to the Egyptian account, reckoning
thirty days to a month, for by this account it is most probable also that the
Lord would have us go, because Egypt is afterward here mentioned. The time
then of the Turks tyranny must be 1260. years, and as Turk and Pope have the
same beginning and continuance, for History shows that they began together,
and as 42. months setting forth thus long a time, are here jointly ascribed to
the Gentiles treading the Lords holy City under foot, so Chap. 1^.42. are
particularly ascribed unto the Pope. Now the time of both their beginnings is
notoriously known to be ann. 606. then Mahomet broched his Alchoran, and
Boniface the third obtained of Phocas to be universal Bishop. If then we
reckon from hence, by adding to 1260. the end of their time will fall out, ann.
1866. The Locusts were a plague but of five months, but by these the Church is
exercised more than four times double thus much, only the comfort is, the
Temple, etc. is measured, to signify the preservation of the Church,
especially after the opening of the Book, so that there shall still be
certain Nations so defended from them, as that the truth shall be there
maintained during this whole time. The Lord Jesus, under whose Banner we fight,
and for whose honor we stand, suffer not his Temple to be any more by Pope or
Turk invaded or lessened in the number of those that worship in it, till the
full time of the destruction of these deadly enemies shall come, and of the
Lords taking of all the Kingdoms into his own hands, but rather increase this
number, taking pity upon the infinite multitude of poor seduced souls, and
give us all faith and patience whatsoever he has appointed us to suffer for
his truth, and if the time of this affliction be yet appointed thus long to
come, he shorten it for his Elects sake, Mat. 24.
as he promised to do touching the time of the siege of Jerusalem.

verse. 3. of whom it is said, I will give unto my two witnesses, and they shall
prophecy, I see no reason why Beza should read as he does, I will give it
unto my two witnesses, as if he meant to give the City unto them: for the sense
is plain, as most agree, I will give the gift or spirit unto them, and they
shall prophecy. The greatest doubt is, who are meant by these two witnesses? I
have already touched the common tenent of the Papists, holding them to be
Enoch and Elias, but this needs no refutation, both for that the time of
1260. days, whereby are meant so many years (according to the exposition
already given of the two and forty months being the same time) does not agree,
as experience shows, the greatest part of this time being expired and Enoch
or Elias not yet heard of: and also because it is plainly against the revealed
will of God to send any from the dead to preach to the living, as the Lord
shows in the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, when Dives made request that
Lazarus might besent to warn his five brethren living, Abraham denies this
request, Luke 15.
and the ground of his denial is, If they will not believe Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they believe if one rise from the dead again. If it be
said Enoch and Elias never died, but are preserved alive for this purpose, the
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews confuteth this: for having reckoned up
many faithful persons, amongst whom Enoch was one, Heb. 11.13.
he concludes, All these died in faith, etc. He confesses indeed, that Enoch
saw not death, because he suffered not the separation of soul and body, but
was extraordinarily changed, as the faithful shall be at the last day: yet
according to our usual phrase, whereby we say of the dead, he is departed out
of this life, he is rightly said to have died. And if this kind of change in
the propriety of speech will not bear this word dying, 1 Cor. 15.
for we shall all be changed, but not all die; yet it is as strange for them,
being so long ago departed hence to come again in person, as if men should
come from the dead again, which shall never be.

Lastly, the description of these two does not agree to Enoch and Elias, but
rather to Moses and Elias, who in their times did such miracles as are here set
forth, Mat. 17. Verse. 2.
and these two are also joined together in the transfiguration of Christ upon
the Mount, and Moses is oftentimes said to be one that did witness of Christ,
and the Scriptures are they that testify of me. Ioh. 5.39.
Which Scriptures being resolved into their parts, are called Moses and the
Prophets, Luke 16.
a most famous man amongst whom was Elias, and therefore well by him may be
understood all the Prophets. Rejecting therefore that of Enoch and Elias,
Brightman. Beda. Tyconius.
as a vain fable, I hold with them that by these two witnesses understand the
holy Scriptures consisting of Moses and the Prophets as they were of old, under
which the Evangelists and Apostles writings come also, as an exegesis, or
illustration of them. For these witnesses must be well known anciently, as
the words do imply; and in taking these to be the Lords two witnesses, we do
but follow the plain evidence of the Word of God, ascribing persons thus to
the two parts of holy Scripture. And consequently, they which sincerely and
rightly preach Moses and the Prophets (for so much as they do but act the same
persons) may well be understood by these two witnesses also. And thus we
shall join together two different expositions of those, who understand by
these two the holy Scriptures, as has been already said, and of those that
understand some few persons that have given testimony to the truth in all the
parts of this whole tract of Turk and Pope, Bullinger. Grasserus. Pareus.
Fulke, etc.
who of late time have bin much increased in number, but yet may well go under
the name of two witnesses, because all ever represent but two, Moses and the
Prophets, seeing they hold, and preach, and set forth none other thing but what
they held and taught. Fox.
There are that particularly apply this to John Husse and Jerome of Prague, who
were ill entreated by the Council of Constance three years and a half, and
being killed, had their dead carcases for a time thrown out into the streets,
but they were revived again, as it were, when the Bohemians stood courageously
for the truth by them maintained, which was greatly prejudicial to the City of
Rome; the tenth part thereof thus falling, and 7000. slain, that is, many
vpheld in an idle course of life by the Pope, in Monasteries, and other
pretended religious places, being thus turned out and losing their liuelihood
whereupon their life consisted. According to this exposition two and forty
months are counted a several time by themselves, of the Turks tyranny, these
1260. days, another several time consisting of just so many days, and the
three days and an half a third several time, so short as the words sound.
There are also wonderful judgments reckoned up which fell upon their enemies
in this time of their trouble, so that the History does notably agree unto this
Text. This, I confess, has much affected me, and I would willingly have
embraced it, for so the rest of the doubts here might easily have been
resolved. But seeing the two and forty months are by the same Expositor
resolved into 294. years, in which he has failed, as has been already
showed; I cannot see how 1260. days can be understood precisely of days,
this being the whole time in all likelihood before set forth by two and forty
months: for why should Gods witnesses mourn 1260. days only of this time,
there being the same cause of mourning all the whole time for the holy City so
many years trodden under foot. Again, although the Bohemians stood manfully
for the truth and did somewhat prevail, yet they were suppressed again, and
the whoorish City flourished till Luther, who gave a far greater blow unto it.

Lastly, Pareus rela^eth an opinion of some, who think that in the last times
there shall be stirred up two famous Doctors in the spirit of Elias, in whom
this shall be accomplished: but according to this, the time should not be yet
begun, and the phrase here does plainly make against it, in that he says, I
will give unto my two witnesses, not I will stir up two witnesses, as it must
have been said if it had been thus meant. I conclude therefore, that by these
two witnesses are to be understood the holy Scriptures anciently consisting of
two parts, together with the faithful Preachers and adherers unto them. These
have never been wanting all this time of 1260. years of Turk and Pope, as
for so much of this time as has been yet expired. For even in the days of
Boniface, who usurped this antichristian supremacy over all, or immediately
after, when Columbanus and Gallus were sent out as his Legates, ann. 617. to
bring other Churches to the obedience of the Roman, two Councels were called,
one in Bauaria, and another in Matiscon under King Lotharius, Anent. annal.
Baiorum lib. 3. Vincent. Balaeus.
in all likelihood to stop their proceedings. For of such Councels Writers make
mention, but what was done is passed over in silence. Not long after, Ardanus,
a Bishop of the Northumberland, opposed himself, and after him ann. 670.
Fannanus and Colmanus, then Adelbertus, Gallus, Clemens, Scotus, and Samson
Scotus, ann. 714. and with them Virgilius, and Sidorius, etc. who so desires
to see more of the witnesses of the truth, may look into my Catechism under
the title, The Church is Catholic, or into Catalogus testium veritatis. Thus
the Lord has ever had his witnesses hitherto, and we doubt not, but as
Antichrist shall consume more and more, so their number shall hence forward
rather increase than be diminished. Whereas these witnesses are further called
Two Olives and Candlestickes, verse. 4. the same phrase almost is found touching
Iehoshua and Ierubbabel, Zach. 4.11. unto which place therefore it is generally
held that it is alluded. Golden Candlesticks the Churches were called before,
chap. 1. and therefore the same appellation is given to these witnesses for
holding out the light of truth. And Olives they are for their participating
with the Lord Jesus, the true Olive, Romans 11.

Moses and Elias: Exodus 5.
for Moses turned the waters into blood, and smote the earth with many plagues
in Egypt; 2 King. 1.
and Elias destroyed his enemies by fifty in a company with their Captains by
fire from Heaven, 1 King. 17.
and at his prayer the Heaven was shut up from raining three years and a
half. But how these things are performed by the holy Scriptures, and the
Preachers of the truth against Turk and Pope there is great question It
seems to me to be spoken only by way of allusion, and that the meaning is
nothing else, but (as before at the sounding of the Angels fire rained down
and waters were turned into blood, chap. 8. setting forth such terrible
judgments as were executed upon Egypt, as has already been expounded) so
here the wicked enemies of the truth are terrified by commemorating what Moses
and Elias did to the confusion of their enemies, for they may be well assured
to drink of the same cup, whosoever they be at any time that dare to oppose
the truth and to persecute the Preachers of it, though no such visible miracles
be wrought, as then, yet strange judgments being executed to their
destruction, as hereby many enemies of Moses and Elias were destroyed. This Fox
does particularly apply to the judgments executed upon the enemies of John
Husse and Jerome of Prague, but it may be observed that there have been many
remarkable judgments at sundry times against the Papals for their tyranny
against such as have withstood their superstitions: for which I refer the
reader to other Histories, lest I should dwell too long upon this place.
Brightman. Gorran.
Some say, that fire comes out of the mouth of the Scriptures, because they
denounce fire and brimstone against the wicked which shall indeed come upon
them. And the waters are turned into blood, in that they are carried away with
errors, because they received not the truth. And the Heavens are said to be
shut from raining, in that there was a long time so little dew of heavenly
Doctrine distilled from the lips of learned Preachers, because there were no
such. Pareus.
Or because the enemies of the truth were void of all dew of grace whereby they
should have been mollified, still continuing hardened in their superstition.
And by the fire going out of their mouths is to be understood the consuming of
corrupt Doctrines, as of stubble by fire through the setting forth of the
truth. And for the waters turned into blood, wars and plagues and other
judgments wasting so many people since that heresy was opposed may be
understood; and they may be said to turn the waters into blood, because it was
an effect of their preaching the truth. Bullinger.
Bullinger understands altogether the denouncing of judgment and
condemnation: for the wicked resisters of the truth shall be destroyed by
fire, Heaven is shut against them that they cannot enter there, and whereas
they might have reaped comfort by the truth preached if they would have
embraced it, set forth by waters; their waters are turned into blood, because
this is turned into their destruction, and all this these two witnesses are
said to do because they denounce them, and they follow upon their preaching,
according to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.16.
We are a sweet smelling savor in those that perish of death unto death. Here
is no great difference from that which I have already said, for all agree that
judgments are here set forth following upon the opposing of the truth
preached, but that some refer them only to spiritual, some to temporal, and
some to both: to which I subscribe, holding that the fire coming out of their
mouths is the fire of hell threatened by them to the wicked; the shutting up of
the heaven, famines; the turning of water into blood, wars; the smiting of
the earth with plagues, strange diseases. Let the Reader consider, and follow
which of these he pleases. But certain it is, that the literal sense is not
to be held; for then men should Chimera-like vomit fire out of their mouths to
destroy such as were near unto them, and then there should be no rain all the
time of this prophesying, and of the Gentiles treading the Court and holy City
under foot: a very unlikely thing, when as Antichrist must (as they suppose
that follow the letter) lead so great armies to destroy Christians.

Sodom and Egypt, where the Lord was killed three days and a half, here is
such a world of darkness yet, as that it is most hard to resolve what is meant
hereby. It is agreed by all, that Antichrist is this beast afterward more
amply described, Chap. 9.11.
and many will have the King of the Locusts called Abaddon or Apollyon, whom
also they take to be Antichrist, to be the same, and that he is here spoken
of, as already well enough known by his preceding description. I grant that
this beast is the same there described, but as I said upon that place, so I
hold still, that the general great Antichrist, the Devil, is meant by
Apollyon and Abaddon, and not a succession of Antichristian men, for their
opposing of Christ in his truth, called that Antichrist. And so here the beast
coming out of the bottomless pit is the Devil in his instruments, whatsoever
they be that impugn the truth, whether Mahumetans or Papals: for both fight
against and kill the servants of God for giving testimony and standing to his
truth, and because herein they follow the Devils instigation and do his
work, he is said to do it, for he does it in them using their hands and
weapons thus to fight and to destroy. When any instrument of the Devil is
spoken of in particular, he is said to come up out of the Sea or out of the
earth, as chap. 13. and not out of the bottomless pit, as in this place.

Touching the time it is said, When they shall finish their testimony, he shall
make war, Pareus.
etc. This is well resolved by those which hold, that howsoever he shall oppose
them all the time of their prophesying, yet he shall not prevail to kill them
till they have finished the work for which they were sent, namely, to give
testimony to the truth. For it cannot be imagined, that these instruments of
the Devil would permit quietly the witnesses of the truth so long a time as
was before set down, viz. 1260. days, but so soon as ever they began to
prophecy, these begin to fight against them, although the Lord, for whom
they stand, will not suffer them to be overcome and slain, till they have
fully ended that work for which he sent them. So that this is not to be
understood, as it may seem at the first, to be done at the end of the
fore-described time of a 1260. days, but within the compass of this time, as
each witness has finished his testimony which he was sent to give. And
therefore it is to be noted, that he says not when the time of their
prophesying shall be expired, but when they shall finish their testimony. The
whole succession then of witnesses is to be understood by these two, who are
all this time, their office being done, some martyred after other some to the
end of the time intimated in the 1260. days. Some applying all this passage
another way, understand by the finishing of their testimony the end of the
whole time, Brightman. Fox.
which is unreasonable and discrepant from all types and descriptions of the
Antichristian rage. For in all numbrings, both here and elsewhere, there is an
admirable consent about three mystical years and an half, sometime called
42. months, sometime 1260. days, sometime three days and an half, sometime
a time, times and half a time, that Antichristianisme should buckle with and
prevail against the truth: but after this time ended, there is not a syllable
of any more hostility, so that if this be taken of some time after these three
years and an half ended, murdering and killing must be expected still; this
storm being quite blown over, which is far from the Lords meaning, who has
expressed most plainly the contrary. Elias his shutting of the Heaven was also
three years and an half. Antiochus Epiphanes his causing of the daily
sacrifice to cease three years and an half, the time of Christ's preaching
here three years and an half, an Antitype or Parallel to which is all the
time of the Antichristian rage, and of the witnesses prophesying in sackcloth.
And hereby it appears further, that no two particular men are meant here,
because thus Antichrists time must be somewhat longer than the allotted two and
forty months, for otherwise he could not kill them after his testimony
finished, which they are giving all this time, nor insult three days and an
half over their dead bodies. But the foresaid Authors conceive another meaning
of this place, as has been already showed. Fox.
One says, that the time of the Council of Constance is here measured out,
which was three years and an half, at the end of which, the two famous
witnesses of the truth, John Husse and Jerome of Prague were slain, being
vildly entreated all that time, and had their dead bodies cast out unburied,
according to the Letter, for three days and an half; their enemies all this
time triumphing for their victory, but hearing of the constancy of the
Bohemians in cleaving to their doctrine, they were stricken with fear, as if
they had been revived again. Brightman.
The other expounds it of the time from Constantine the great till the
Council of Trent, at which the holy Scriptures were put down, whereas the
Papals had great joy for a time, this was done, ann. 1546. and certain
months, and ann. 1550. the Magd^burgians showed some life and spirit again,
opposing the said Council, and so manfully behauing themselves, that the
enemies were put into great fear. I have already showed my reasons why I
cannot consent to either of these expositions. Sleid. l^b. 22.
It is threescore and ten years agone and upward since the Council of Trent,
and much longer since the Council of Constance, and yet the Court of the
Temple is trodden under foot by the Gentiles, and great Massacres have been in
France and England, and other places in this time, so that if this were the
meaning, it should also have been set forth how the Witnesses of God had been
put to death again and again since that time, whereas the next thing that
follows is the ruin of the City, and the transferring of Kingdoms to the
Lord: certainly, the Court and holy City should thus long agone have ceased to
have been trodden under foot, and not have continued in this afflicted estate
as they do still. As for their exposing of the dead bodies in the street,
verse. 8, 9. for the space of three days and an half, Bullinger. Pareus. Fox.
they resolve it well that apply it unto the usage of the dead bodies of many of
Gods faithful servants at sundry times, which they have not suffered to be
interred, as the dead bodies of John Husse and Jerome of Prague, the dead
bodies of those that were massacred in Paris, when they had made the poor
Protestants secure upon a marriage, and the bodies of such generally amongst
them as have not by auticular confession, by penance and extreme unction
reconciled themselves unto them before their death, for they deny them all
Christian burial. The time of three days and an half, as all consent, is put
for a short time, and the rather is this short time thus set forth to keep
Analogy with the other descriptions of this time, half a mystical week of
days with half a mystical week of years. This then is the very same time
with the two and forty months, and 1260. days, but varying in word, as best
befitteth the keeping of dead bodies unburied. The sense is, that in the time
before set forth by 42. months and 1260. days as the faithful should be
killed, so they should be kept unburied in greater detestation. Brightman.
Brightman contendeth, that this must needs be a different time, but he takes
for granted, which I cannot yield, that by that passage going before, when they
have finished their prophecy, etc. is meant the finishing of their whole time.
But seeing it is clearly meant another way, as I have showed already, there is
no such necessity to make three days and an half a diverse time, but another
description of the same time, wherein their cruelty should not be determined in
killing only, but in exposing the dead bodies of the faithful unburied.

The place is said to be the street of Sodom and Egypt, Verse. 8.
spiritually so called, where our Lord was crucified. Here the Papals triumph,
as if by no means the Pope could be counted an instrument from the bottomless
pit, killing the Lords Witnesses, and exposing their bodies without burial;
seeing it is plain, they think from hence that these things shall be done at
Jerusalem and not at Rome: for Jerusalem is the great City where Christ was
crucified, and which the Prophets were wont to vpbraid by the name of Sodom
and Egpyt, for their uncleanness and idolatries there. But who so shall
attentively consider the whole passage here, shall easily find that by
Jerusalem must be understood necessarily a far larger place than that City,
seeing that upon the entrance of this prophecy, that which shall be trodden
under foot by the Gentiles is called the holy City, which no man can deny to be
the Christian Church in all parts of the world, whereof that holy City was a
type, and therefore according to the usual phrase of holy Scripture it is set
forth by that name. This then being taken for granted, the same prophecy still
continuing about that which should befall the servants of God in this City,
being a long time at the will of their enemies, it cannot with any probability
be denied, but that this spiritual Egypt and Sodom where the Lord was
crucified, is the same holy City of the universal Church destined yet to the
treading under foot of the Gentiles, this being one most tyrannous act executed
by them to expose the murdered bodies of Gods faithful servants unburied even
here. But this Church becomes first another Sodom for uncleanness, an Egypt
for idolatries, and yet is old Jerusalem for crucifying and putting to death
the Lord Jesus in his members. This great City then is the universal Church,
before called the holy City, trodden under foot by wicked enemies, not in
respect of all the parts, for the Temple and the Altar are exempted, but in
respect of those parts which are oppressed by the enemies of the truth, both
Turk and Pope, and chiefly the Pope, whose jurisdiction is most infamous for
uncleanness, and therefore called Sodom, and for idolatry, being therefore
called Egypt, and for murders, being therefore here set forth by a
Periphrasis, Where the Lord was crucified. Jerusalem I grant, is properly the
City where our Lord was crucified, but seeing all that has been said hitherto
of the place is allegorical, this cannot be in any reason taken properly but
allegorically also; the City where our Lord was crucified, that is, Jerusalem,
imbrued in the most innocent blood, for the Roman Church so full of innocent
blood; Jerusalem another Sodom and Egypt, for the Roman Church a very Sodom and
Egypt for the uncleannesses and idolatries, as much reig^ing here as ever they
did in those two cursed places. Our Divines do all generally in effect say the
same: for they agree upon the popish Church here meant. But that some apply it
unto Rome, Brightman.
as from whence the authority to crucify Christ was derived, and so the great
City where the Lord was crucified sets forth the Roman Empire, for which
cause it is not only called Sodom, a City; but Egypt, a Country and whole
dominion, which is now under the Pope, as it was then under heathen Emperors.
Pareus. Bullinger.
Some repeating the word spiritually, say that it is meant where the Lord was
crucified spiritually in his members, neither can it be meant properly of
Jerusalem, because all nations and tongues shall see these dead bodies, which
could not be in one City; again, this is doubtless the same City ruling over
the Nations, afterward more amply described, which the learned amongst the
Papists themselves cannot deny to be Rome.

verse. 11. and their being called up into Heaven, and ascending in a Cloud
their enemies beholding it, verse. 12. Some understand hereby other men of the
same zealous spirit that they were of which were slain, Bullinger.
whom God stirs up to abate the joy and to strike new terror into the
Antichristian Sect, who are finally received up into Heaven at the last day in
the sight of their enemies, the Kingdom of Antichrist being first much ruined
by their means, great wars being stirred up called an Earthquake, by which
many thousands are shine, here called 7000. and the state in a great part
comes to ruin, here said to be the tenth part of the great City, whereupon
men suruiuing, who were formerly deluded, return unto God, giving all glory to
him alone, not making others partners with him any more, as in their ignorance
they had before done. With this consents Pareus, Pa^^.
but that he will have their ascending to be the honor and esteem which the
Teachers of the truth come into when their true doctrine is again revived, and
prevails by means of such as God stirred up in the room of those that were
formerly slain by the enemies of the truth; for thus John Husse and Jerome of
Prague being killed, and their tenants condemned for heretical, lived again
in Luther and Melancthon, and Calvin, etc. and were highly honored and
esteemed of together with their doctrine, as also these and other their
successors maintaining the same, whereby great terror was stricken into the
Papals, and that state being much ruined, many were turned to the truth.
Brightman.
Brightman will have this ascending to be of their doctrine, concerning which,
a decree was made by Caesar Ferdinand, and other Princes, Sleid. lib. 26.
that the Religion of the Augustane confession should be free for all men,
ann. 1555. sept. Calend. Octobris. Hereupon followed a great change in the
state, called here an Earthquake, the Pope loses a great part of Germany the
tenth part of his revenue, and the religious lose their means whereupon their
life depended. But these are said to be but 7000. the general loss, the fall
of the tenth part of the City, because this loss by the supressing of
superstitious houses was not so great, extending but to particular persons, as
the vilifying of the Pope, for hereby the state in general was greatly shaken.
For mine own part I consent with these learned Authors in that wherein they all
agree, that by the two Witnesses revived, is not meant properly the raising
again of two particular persons, Enoch and Elias. as the Papists hold: for
this has been sufficiently confuted already, but the stirring up of others in
the room of such witnesses of the truth as have been slain during the reign
of Antichrist. Yet I do not think that this is to be brought within the
compass of the 1260. days, as already accomplished, but that this shall be in
the last declination of Antichristianisme, at what time the enemies of the
truth shall have no more power to persecute and destroy as yet they have. For
within the compass of that time of their power as any have been stirred-vp,
they have not stood still as affrighted hereat, but they have eft soones
prepared for their suppression (though many (thanks be God) in such Nations,
as wherein the liberty of the truth has been maintained, have been out of
their Gunshot.) Neither have their preparations been in vain, for they both
have and still do daily kill many. And therefore I cannot see how any time
already past can agree to that which is here figured out, here being no
intimation of any more opposition and destruction, but of fearing and fainting
on the Antichristian part till they come to ruin. In my poor judgment
therefore, here is set forth what shall be at the end of the half week
before described by two and forty months, and by 1260. days, making half a
mystical week of years, and three days and an half being (as all know)
half a week, for so the Text precisely says, at the end of the three days
and an half. And what shall be then? Verily an exaltation of the truth, no
where to be trodden under foot any more. In the time of the Gentiles power,
when some witnesses are slain, others are raised up, but for so much as they
are also impugned and many of them slain, I understand the whole succession of
witnesses by the two who were made Martyrs some after other some. But when this
tragical time shall be over, they shall be raised up, not to be sought against
and to fall any more, but to terrify the adversaries, to propagate the truth,
and finally to be made partakers of the kingdom of Heaven, here signified by
their being called up and ascending in a cloud, a speech plainly alluding to
that of the Apostle, 1 These. 4.17.
We that are alive shall be caught up together in the clouds to meet the Lord
in the air, and so shall ever be with the Lord. Now this ascending is
subioined immediately after their being raised up, and before the fall of the
great City, not for that these things shall be done in this order (for then
some, which see that fall and repent, should be converted at the day of
judgment, which is no time for that) but the Argument touching the exaltation
of the faithful is prosecuted together to the last, according to the usual
manner of Scripture, joining all things touching one and the same Argument
together, though happening at diverse times, and then comes in that of the
judgment of enemies. It is therefore to be understood, that the servants of
God shall prevail and the true Religion shall flourish, whereat fear shall
come upon the enemies, neither shall they have power to make resistance any
more, but in stead of being murdered as in times past, they shall to their
comfort stand in expectation of the great Day of the Lord, when they shall be
taken up in the Clouds and ever remain in bliss with the Lord. And thus their
ascending is also understood by Bullinger and Fox. Bullinger. Fox.
After this it is proceeded to the judgments against the adversaries when the
truth shall be thus exalted, a great Earthquake shall shake the great City,
there shall be a wonderful commotion in the world, they which are for the
truth taking courage unto them, and assaulting the contrary part of the Papals
and Mahumetans, and then their hearts failing them for fear, being unable any
longer to withstand the force of the Orthodox, the tenth part shall fall away
from that City whereof they held before, becoming professors of the truth,
Hest. 8.17.
as in the days of Mordecai men became Jews for fear, and of those which yet
harden themselves 7000. that is, a great multitude shall be slain, Ios. 10.11.
God fighting against them, as he did sometime against the Canaanites. The
residue seeing this shall relent, and acknowledging their errors embrace the
truth, thus giving glory to God, Ios 7.
as once Joshua bade Achan give glory to God and tell the truth. All which they
suffered before could not make them that suruiued repent, as was showed Chap.
9. v. 20. so that here it being spoken of them in another phrase, their
repentance must needs be intimated, and in this particular most Interpreters
agree. The whole drift of St. Augustine, de Ciuitate Dei, is to show that here
have always been two Cities, the City of God and of the Devil; this city of
the Devil comprehends the whole state of the Gentiles in the present sense,
a Catastrophe whereof shall be when the two and forty months appointed are
ended, no professed enemies to the truth bearing rule in any place being any
more after this fatal blow to be found: but as there is one God, so there
shall be one Religion all over the world. There will be perhaps some perverse
sectaries still being frozen in the dregs of superstition till the glorious
coming of the Lord to judgment, which cannot then be far off, and of this
remainder it may be that the Apostle speaks, 1 These. 2.8.
that the Lord will destroy by the brightness of his coming. And thus have I
by the grace of God gone through this long, dark, and obscure way: let the
learned consider and judge, and if I have erred herein, I shall willingly upon
demonstration of such error retreat; but if nothing of moment can be objected,
let us stand in a comfortable and assured expectation of this issue, glorious
to the now despised and mistermed witnesses of the truth, but terrible to the
adversaries that now for a time triumph over the dead, and subdued to their
lusts. The day of the bitter enemies to the truth shall not last always, the
time of their Sunne-set shall come shortly, and then it shall gloriously arise
to us never to go down any more till the coming of the Sun of
righteousness to glorify us with heavenly glory for ever. And in all this
there is no contradiction to the Lords prediction of the ouer-spreading of
sin at his coming, as in the days of Noah and Lot: for when one religion is
externally embraced by all, all are not by and by reformed according to the
same, but rather trusting to the form of godliness, most shall give
themselves over to licentiousness, loving the darkness in the midst of this
light, till the Lord come upon them as a thief in the night to their utter
undoing and confusion. For by the consent of all Historians, Christians never
were so licentious as in the time of peace and freedom from persecution of
enemies, which makes that which I have said the more probable, and so free
from any note of contrariety to other passages of holy Scripture.

Quest. 2. And the seventh Angel blew his Trumpet, Verse. 19.
and there were great voices in Heaven, saying, the kingdoms of the world are
become our Lords, Verse. 17, 18.
etc. What is meant by this, and in that the four and twenty Elders in
praising God do further speak of the anger of the Gentiles, and the time come
of Gods anger, and of judging the dead, and rewarding the godly. And lastly,
what is figured out by the opening of the Temple in Heaven, and the Arc of the
testimony appearing, and the Thunders, Lightnings, Voices, Verse. 19.
Earthquake and Hail concluding all?

Answ. Some referring that which went before to the times of reformation in
sundry parts, Brightman, Forbs.
understand by these voices the acclamations of praise in the reformed
Churches, for diverse Kingdoms coming under the obedience of the Gospel, as
England, Denmark, Sweuia, and diverse parts of Germany. And that the four and
twenty Elders are the multitude of the faithful following the four beasts,
the Pastors who having stirred them up do more particularly commemorate the
time of judging the dead, meaning the Jews, who hitherto lay dead in
infidelity, but now shall be turned. The anger of the Nations is the Popes and
Papists indignation, striving to take revenge for this revolt, excommunicating
Princes and absoluing subjects from the oath of allegiance, and moving the
Spaniard to come with his great Armado against England, ann. 1588. And now
Heaven is opened and the Arc appears by the more clear understanding of
prophesies than in former times. But unto the wicked there is no comfort
hereby, but matter of terror set forth in the Thunders, Lightnings, etc.

Against this exposition, makes first the fluctuating estate of some kingdoms
where the truth has been entertained, and the holding off of most hitherto,
whereas the Lord is said after the accomplishment of this to reign for ever,
and not some kingdoms, but the kingdoms of the world are said to become the
Lords, by which all kingdoms in general must needs be understood. Again, it
is plainly forced to apply the judging of the dead to the calling of the Jews,
for howsoever the Jews be, as it were, dead hitherto, yet the phrase of
judging the dead will not bear any such sense of coming in grace to any
people, but rather with revenge. And that which is opposed unto it of the
reward of the godly makes it more plain, that by judging must be meant
calling to an account, and proceeding in judgment against them.

Lastly, it is contrary to the oath of the Angel, who swears, Chap. 10. that
time shall be no more but when the seventh Angel sounds, so that to expound
this under the sounding of the seventh Angel of things happening in this
world, it still continuing, I cannot see how it may be justified. Some
understand by this seventh Angel the last order of Preachers, Gagnaeus, and
some other Popish.
after the overthrow of Antichrist, who shall sound out the coming of the Lord
to judgment, when all the world shall for ever be subdued unto him, the wicked
being justly condemned, and the godly graciously rewarded. But this trumpet is
indeed the last trumpet, whereof it is said, the Lord shall come with the sound
of a trumpet. For this is the time of judging the dead, and wherein all
kingdoms are subjected to the Lord, no man ruling any more, and Satan's
kingdom being at an end. Beda. Rupertus. Primasius. Andreas. Aretas.
Bullinger. Fox. Marlorat. Tossanus. Alphonsus. Pareus, etc. The Gentiles were
angry before, but now is the time of Gods anger. Fox.
And therefore most Expositors agree in this, both ancient and modern. After
the fall and slaughter made in the great city before described, whereby Heresy
and superstition is rejected in all parts, none other notable change shall
happen more till the Lords coming to judgment at the last day, when
iustreuenge shall be taken upon all enemies of the truth, who were angry and
had indignation to see it lift up the head, and destroyed such as stood for it,
and the godly shall be rewarded according to all their sufferings, whether
they be Prophets or Saints, and other men fearing God, whereby such matter of
joy is ministered to all the heavenly company, that they break out into
acclamations of praises of the Lord, by whom these things are done. Then the
Temple in heaven appears, and the Arc of the Testimony. The glory of that
place which is yet unseen, and shut up from all mortal eyes, (as the Sanctum
Sanctorum with the Arc of old was, so as that none but the high Priest only
entered once a year, and did see Aarons rod budded, and the pot of Manna
preserved) shall be set open to all the children of God to enter and behold,
and see as they are seen to their unspeakable and everlasting comfort, but to
the wicked as before there were nothing but signs of terror, thundrings,
lightnings, earthquakes, etc. so now they shall feel these terrors to their
everlasting woe, of which they heard before, but not believing them, hardened
themselves still in their evil ways. Some by the Arc of the Testimony here
understand the Lord Jesus, Bullinger. Pareus.
whom we shall then actually enjoy, he appearing unto us in his glory, as he
is; and by the Temple, the Church triumphant, the glory whereof shall then be
laid open to all men. Some by the Arc understand Christ's humanity, but there
being little difference, I will not stand to contend: Beda. Primasius. Rupertus.
but by the happiness of that time, let us all be persuaded to fear God, and
patiently bear what the malice of this wicked world shall lay upon us, and the
baseness of our present condition, for then we shall have a full compensation
of most excellent glory, such as hitherto has not been seen, yea which no
mortal eye can see, or heart conceive.

CHAP. XII.
IN this and the two Chapters following is another period of time contained,
wherein by new figures are set forth the troubles of the Church by Antichrist,
and what judgments shall finally be executed upon him and upon all his
adherents, they shall be tormented, and the smoke of their torment shall
ascend for evermore, they shall be trodden in the wine press of Gods wrath, by
the ministry of his Angels being sent out to gather them together, as clusters
of grapes are cut down and gathered together to the wine press when they are
ripe. But the figures and passages here are so mystical, as that we need pray
much to the father of lights to enlighten us to go in a right path of the
understanding of these things, or else we must needs be wildred and lost in
this search. Trusting therefore only to this enlightening, I thus enter this
way.

Quest. 1. And a great sign was seen in heaven, Verse. 1.
a woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and upon her
head a crown of twelve stars, etc. What woman is this, and what does this
strange kind of apparel about her signify? What is her being with child,
and pained to be delivered? What child is it that she was about to bring
forth, that should rule all nations with a rod of iron, whom a great red Dragon
stands ready to devour, having seven heads and ten horns, and with his
tail drawing the third part of the stars, and casting them to the earth,
which Dragon is said to be in heaven also? And how is this child taken up to
God, and to his throne from out of his danger?

Answ. Some Popish Expositors by this woman understand the Virgin Mary, Ribera.
Viegas. Methodius. Primasius. Bullinger. Fox. Pareus, etc. Hos. 1.2.3.
but the learned of their own side, Ribera and Viegas, and others reject this,
as not agreeing, if the following circumstances of being pained, and having
other seed, which is afterward persecuted, be considered. The common stream
of Interpreters is for the Church of God, which is the spouse of God, whom he
is said to have married unto himself. And thus without all doubt we are to
conceive of this woman.

Quest. But how is she said to be in heaven?

Answ. Pannonius.
To this Pannonius answers well, that howsoever the Church has her being in
this world, yet she is but a stranger here, heaven is her country to which she
aspireth, and from whence comes her election and being, Tertui. apolo. c. 1.
Scitgens Christiana se peregrina^ in terris agere, inter extraneos facile
inimicos inuenire, Caeleru^ genus, spem, sedem, gratiam, dignitatem in coelis
habere.
as Tertullian does excellently declare, saying, The Christian nation knows
that she is a stranger upon earth, and does easily find enemies amongst
strangers, but she has her stock, seat, grace, hope and dignity in heaven.

Touching her apparel here set forth, The Sun is most bright and shining of
all the lights in heaven, to show therefore the exceeding great glory of the
Church, she is said to be clothed with the Sun. A speech much like to
this, is that of our Savior Christ, The just shall shine as the Sun. But
this is for her future condition; Matthew. 13.43. Pannonius. Bullinger. Parcus.
Forbs, etc.
for the present, Christ the Sun of righteousness is her glory, for so he is
called, Mal. 4. he by faith is put on as a garment covering her round about,
and beautifying her, so all Expositors generally agree, except Fox and
Brightman, who stand, (and specially Fox) for a most illustrious glory hereby
generally set forth; but hold, that it is not intended that this figure should
be strained any further by applying all the particulars. And indeed, for so
much as the child in her womb is Christ, as by and by shall be declared, I
cannot see how it can so well agree in the same figure, to hold that he is
both set forth as the clothing of the Church, and the fruit in her body at the
same time, though in diverse respects he is and ever has been so. I hold
therefore rather, that her glorious estate before God only in general is here
set forth. And therefore as worldly glory consists in glorious apparel, and
a crown of gold beset with precious stones, and an high elated throne, that
place where all inferior persons stand, being under the seet: so the Church is
said to be clothed with the Sun, to wear a crown with twelve stars, and to
have the Moon, which is above all this world, under her sect, so high is she
mounted. But why twelve stars in her crown, neither more nor less? Herein I
take it, it is alluded to the twelve precious stones in the breast plate of the
high Priest, according to the number of the twelve tribes, which made this
number of twelve familiar in this Prophecy, as appears by the twice twelve
thrones round about the throne, Chap. 4. the twelve thousand sealed of the
twelve Tribes, Chap. 7. the twelve precious stones in the walls of the new
Jerusalem, and the twelve gates, Chap. 21. Many will have these twelve stars
to set forth the twelve Apostles, and the Moon under her seet, the
mutablethings of this world; but if that which has been already said be
considered, I think the Reader will not be of that mind.

Touching that which she trauaileth withal there is great difference, some
understand it of the godly in all ages, Andreas. Viegas. Ribera. Parent, Forbs.
with whom the Church trauaileth, and is ever at the point of bringing forth;
but when any are brought forth, the enemy is ready to devour them, in spite
of whom they are finally glorified in heaven, which is set forth by this
phrase, he shall rule all nations with a rod of iron, according to that
promise Chap. 2.27. And they say, that the offspring of the Church is called a
child in the singular number, because though they be many, yet they are but
one mystical body; and a male child, as being the more perfect, and the
heir, and of more courage and constancy. And of this exposition applied
specially to the last times, do the Papals most greedily lay hold, as making
for them in their doctrine about their supposed Antichrist. For the Churches
being pained, and crying out, sets forth the straits wherein she should be
at that time. And thus they seek to draw the Reader from looking at any time
past, or that now is, and to hold him in expectation of the time of Antichrist
yet for to come. But against this exposition makes both the distinction
afterward following in the end of this Chapter, where it is spoken of the rest
of her seed, and the description of this child, He shall rule over all nations
with arod of iron. For if all the faithful be the seed of the woman here set
forth, they being taken up to heaven, how can she yet have a seed remaining
upon earth to be persecuted still? And touching this large reigning, howsoever
the faithful are promised in the place before alleged, that they shall rule
over the nations, yet it is not said as here, over all nations, nor is it
spoken of as a dignity to which they were borne, but as conferred upon such as
overcome, whereas here the man-child mentioned is so spoken of, as coming to
it by right and inheritance. The male child therefore here must be one
singular person most remarkable, as the firstborn, for this his extraordinary
power and authority over all, to which he is borne. Most therefore, seeing
that there is none other such to be found in all the world, Bullinger, Fox,
Gorian and Pareus delivers this first, applying it anagogically to the
faithful.
resolve upon the Lord Jesus Christ, for the history of his birth and ascension
does so answer this description in every particular, as that all things do
most excellently agree, if it be understood of him. And so the prophecy Psalm.
2.7. agrees also, I will give thee the nations for thine inberitance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession, thou shall rule them with a
rod of iron, etc. Thus also there will be a good construction of the rest of
her seed after mentioned, seeing he is said to be the firstborn amongst
many brethren. Whereas it may seem absurd, that the Church is said to have
Christ in her womb, and to bring him forth, when as he is her husband, and she
has rather her original from him, for which cause she is called his body;
some resolve this by applying this woman's travailing with child and bringing
forth, to the conception and birth, which is by faith. For the old Church by
faith longed for, and was pained in expecting his coming so long a time, and
every man may be said to travail with Christ, and to bring him forth, when
through many inward troubles, and much sorrow for sin, he comes to be
regenerate, and to lead a new life, for then he lives not any more, but
Christ lives in him, Gal. 2.20. Bullinger. Gorran.
as Saint Paul speaks; and this according to Bullinger and Gorran. But
because this is daily done, and here is rather an allusion to Christ's corporal
birth, from which time, that which is here figured out begins to take place,
it does not seem to me to agree so well, and therefore I understand it rather
of his corporal birth by the Virgin Mary, as Bullinger does at the first. For
although she were but one particular member of the Church, yet that for the
effecting of which she was used, as an instrument herein, may well be ascribed
to the whole body whereof she was a member, and therefore St. Paul speaking of
the whole Jewish nation, says, Romans 9.5.
(of whom Christ came according to the flesh.) As for other circumstances of
being pained, and crying out to be delivered, I hold them to be merely
allegorical, and not to be strained to a particular signification; but as when
a woman is near her time of being delivered, it appears by these signs, so
they are here mentioned to signify the near approaching of the time, when the
Church of the Jews should corporally in Mary (a vessel chosen to this
purpose) bring forth our blessed Savior. And this is one reason also, why the
Church is set forth by a woman, because the head and the chief upon whom all
the rest depend, was promised by the name of the seed of the woman. If there
shall seem to be a disagreement in the time, because the things set forth
here were not already past, but altogether such as should happen afterward; I
answer with Pareus, Pareus. Bullinger.
that the intent of this vision is to set forth things to come: but for more
orderly proceeding, if it be begun a little higher, even at the birth of
Christ, there is no going from the matter propounded, viz. to set forth things
to come, since it is done only to illustrate them them the better, as was also
done before in the opening of the first seal, when a white horse issued out,
that he might the more orderly, and with better light proceed unto the red, and
black, and pale horses, etc. It is said that he should rule all nations with
a rod of iron, to express his terriblenesse to his enemies and such as rebel
against him, which are commonly expressed by the name of Nations or Heathen,
because they knew him not.

One expounds this of Constantine the great, but neither was he watched at
his birth to be devoured, Brightman.
but after that he came to the Empire, at what time the child here spoken of
is past all danger (if it be understood of his spiritual birth, when he became
Christian, it were preposterously set down, for so his birth should follow his
being taken up into the throne) neither did he rule over all nations, Chap. 4.
neither can the throne of God be fitly applied unto him here upon earth,
seeing this throne is before described so, as that no man can be said to be
taken up to it, till he be glorified in heaven.

One will have Heraclius the Emperor, Lyra.
who destroyed and succeeded the usurper Phocas, understood here, but there is
no color for it.

v. 9. that he is the Devil, but is called a Dragon in alluding to his first
appearance unto Eve in a serpent, when he tempted her; he is red through fury
and cruelty, Ioh. 8.44.
he was a murderer from the beginning. Viegas.
He is said to be in heaven here, according to some for the like reason, that
the woman is said to be there, because he persecuteth her, who is said to be in
heaven, or rather because he had his abiding sometime in heaven, and though he
be excluded, because he kept not his first standing, yet a long time he had
the liberty of appearing there before God amongst the good Angels: for he
appeared amongst them to accuse Job, and that it was his common practice is
here afterward plainly intimated, Job 2.
verse. 10. how he comes to be quire excluded, and when, we shall see
further by and by, but still he is said to be Principalities and powers in
heavenly places, Ephesians. 6.12. Pareus.
because he has the liberty of the Aerean heaven to this day. His seven heads
with crowns upon them, set forth by the common consent, the many kings of the
earth, who are ready as his instruments to execute his will, the number of
seven being usual in this book to set forth many, his ten horns, his great
power by means of other states of people, who also serve him, who are more in
number. Certainly the largeness and multitude of his dominions, and his
manifold power is hereby figured out, and how great a Potentate he is, to
express the more the danger wherein this child was, that the power whereby he
was preserved might be the more magnified. His tail drawing the third part of
the stars, and casting them to the ground, does yet more illustrate his
stupendous power. By these stars I understand the Angels that fell together
with Lucifer, who as the chief drew them after him, and therefore he is said
to draw them with his tail, because they followed him in sinning, and were
thrown down to the ground, which was by being deprived of their place and
dignity in heaven. For there is one Devil as the chief and ringleader set
forth, the rest of the infernal spirits followed him. And this, though done
long before, is brought in here, as auailing to a perfect description of him,
that it might the better appear how formidable he was. Some by the stars
understand, Parous. Viegas.
as in Chap. 1. the Churches which are seduced unto Popery, and some the
Doctors who by worldly preferments and respects are fawned upon, Bullinger.
Forbs.
and so drawn away from the truth unto error, and so by heaven they
understand the Church of God; by earth the world of the wicked, who are set
upon earthly things, into whose society they come, being thus drawn away. But
for so much as heaven is a distinct thing here from the Church, if the woman be
the Church, for she appears in heaven, I cannot see how by heaven should be
understood the Church here, and consequently how by the stars should be meant
the Doctors, and therefore I rest in the first exposition as most natural, and
the rather because they are not only said to be stars, but stars of heaven,
as he himself at the first was, and therefore is called Lucifer, Esa. 14.12.

He stands ready to devour this child so soon as he should be borne, for
he stirred up Herod to send his executioners to kill all the male children in
Bethlehem of two years old and under, and from the time that he showed
himself after his baptism, he never left persecuting him, and plotting his
destruction, till that at length he was crucified: but even then in stead of
being devoured, nothing befell him but what he did voluntarily undergo, and
he was soon raised up again, and taken to the throne of the Father, and
therefore he is spoken of as missing his purpose herein, for so much as Christ
by his death gat the dominion, Heb. 2.15. Col. 2.14.
and even upon the Cross triumphed over the Devil.

Learn we from hence both of how excellent a condition the Church of God is,
heaven is her country, and her glory is heavenly and most magnificent, that we
may prefer to be members of the Church before all worldly honors: and also
what a terrible enemy we have of the Devil, so that we can no sooner become
Christians, but he is at hand to devour us; neither does he want power so to
do, but he shall not be able to hinder our salvation, that we may put upon us
the armor of God; never being secure, but always making account that we stand
in the midst of greatest dangers, and therefore continually seeking to the
highest power by prayer, and out of a confident expectation of being taken up
out of all danger to glory at the last, becoming strong in the faith, to bear
all oppositions without shrinking, howsoever we be assaulted.

Quest. 2. The woman fled into the wilderness, Verse. 6.
where she has a place prepared of God, that they may nourish her one thousand
two hundred and threescore days, etc. To what time is this fight to be
referred, what is this wilderness, and how long is this time of one thousand
two hundred and threescore days?

Answ. This relation comes in here by way of anticipation, as most consent,
for this very persecution and flight into the wilderness is more largely
described, verse. 13. and this time is the same, only by a prolepsis it is in
short here propounded, to satisfy such as would be ready to inquire what
became of the mother, after that the son was taken up, she was persecuted
and fled, etc. but in order of time somewhat happened before this, and
therefore before a full declaration of this persecution that is set forth in
the next words, And there was a great battle in heaven, Verse. 7, 8.
Michael and his Angels fought, etc. of which we are to consider before we
answer this, the proper place for this coming in afterward, viz. verse. 13.

Quest. 3. Where is the fight here said to be in heaven, what is Michael and
the devils casting out of heaven, etc.

Answ. No man does hold that this is to be understood according to the letter,
for it were absurd, that there should be a fight in heaven, being a place of
all peace and comfort, and not for any variance. Heaven therefore is to be
understood as before, when the woman is said to appear in heaven, and the
great red Dragon against her; which was all done here below, but represented in
heaven as the proper place of the Church, which is but a stranger in this
world; and the place where the Devil first had his abode, and where he was
wont to appear to accuse the godly. For so a great fight is said to be in
heaven, when as indeed it was in this world, because they which do instigate
and stir up unto it, are on the one side the holy Angels of God, whose abode
is in heaven; Ephesians. 6.12.
and on the other side the troop of unclean spirits, who are in heavenly
places, that is, the upper part of the air. Many stand for the Church, that by
heaven here the Church is meant, but seeing the woman is the Church, who is
persecuted after this fight and casting down of the Devil from heaven to the
earth, I cannot see how heaven should be put for the Church also. But being
understood, as has been before delivered, all things following will
excellently agree. Michael the Archangell with his Angels fight, that is, that
principal good Angel, who is superior to all the rest, as the Devil is the
principal of the evil Angels: he with the other good Angels, I say, standing
for the truth, stirred up Christian Emperors and Governors, to fight for the
truth; and the Devil on the other side with his infernal rabble, stirred up
Heathen Emperors and Governors to fight against the truth. Forbs. Brightman.
Mason.
And thus almost does Forbs and Brightman understand it, for they make
Constantine the great and his assistants in his battles, Michael and his
Angels; and Licinius with his assistants, the Devil and his Angels. Many will
have Christ meant by Michael, Bullenger. Grasserus. Pareus.
both here and wheresoever else this name occurreth, because he is said to be
the Archangell, that is, the Prince of Angels, and Michael, one as God. But why
may not one Angel be chief amongst the good Angels, as well as one Devil is
chief amongst the evil Angels? And if so, it is no whit absurd to say that he
is like God, being so eminent an image of his majesty and excellency. And
therefore some hold Michael to be an Angel indeed, Fox.
as has been already said, and by the ancients it has been generally held
to be so, only some question has been of what Angels Michael is the chief,
and herein most following Dionysius, who wrote of the orders of Angels, have
held him to be the chief of the lowest order only. I cannot approve so well
of expounding Michael the Archangell of Constantine, or of any man, or the
Devil of Licinius, because there is none other place of Scripture which gives
light unto such an exposition, and the following circumstances agree not,
seeing Licinius perished when he was overcome of Constantine, neither did he
persecute the Church any more, and afterward this Devil said here to have but
a short time, is also said to be bound up a thousand years, and then to rage,
as having but a short time, which can no way agree to that Tyrant.

Michael therefore fights by his pupils, Constantine, Theodosius, Valentinian
and other godly Emperors; the Devil by the heathen Emperors before
Constantine, and Licinius, and Julian, and Eugenius, who sought to beat down
the Christian religion. This fight began soon after Christ's ascension, and
continued till ann. 394. in three hundred of which years the Devil fought so,
as that by his agents, the Heathen Emperors, the truth was put in great
hazard; but then Michael began his battle so fiercely, as that error and
idolatry was put to the worse; but by Julian the Devil reinforcing his battle
again, a Gratian was raised up, and unto him was joined a Theodosius, who when
Gratian was slain by Andragathius a Captain of Maximus and usurper, being
Emperor alone, behaved himself so valiantly, that in his time the Heathen
idolatry was quite put down, and the temples of idols destroyed, neither were
any permitted to sacrifice to idols any more. For the Devil seeing his
religion to grow toward a desperate estate, thought to put all upon the
fortune of one battle, and therefore stirred up Eugenius with his Captain
Arbogastus, with a mighty power to set upon Theodosius: but Theodosius having
prayed unto God, began the battle against them, and being miraculously
assisted with a mighty wind blowing in the face of the enemy, soon gat the
victory, and they being slain, Theodor. l. 5. cap. 20. Socrat. l. 5. c. 24.
Sozem. l. 6. c. 22. and cap. 20.
there was no place for the old heathen idolatry any more, as both Theodoret,
Socrates, and Sozomen agree in their histories.

Chap. 9.20. and all this time he occupies heaven, as it were, which is the
place of Gods residency, to whom alone this service is due; when this kind of
worship is put down, he is cast out of heaven. And at this fall there is great
joy in heaven, the Angels who are ministering spirits about Gods chosen being
greatly affected with their prosperity: for if when one sinner is converted
there be joy in heaven, Luke 15.
then much more when so many thousands are delivered from so great a sin as
idolatry is. And this benefit is further amplified by another epithere of the
Devil, Verse. 10.
the accuser of the brethren, who accused them night and day before God. He
that was so infest an enemy against them, has his forces broken, and is not so
able to do them hurt, as before. And then it is more plainly declared by whom
he was thus brought down, and who were the warriors under the guardian of
Michael and his Angels, viz. the brethren, who loved not this life unto the
death, and all by the blood of the Lamb, Verse. 11.
he is the stronger man armed, that cast out this strong Champion the Devil,
and by his power razed the temples where he kept possession before, and was
worshipped.

Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, Verse. 12. Bullinger. Pareus. Brightman.
and of the sea, etc. Some expound this of earthly minded men, who though they
be outwardly of the Christian religion, yet there is no power of godliness in
them, but the lodestone that draws their hearts, is the earth with the
profits and pleasures thereof. A woe comes now upon them, they say, by
variances and wars happening amongst themselves, and by the Goths and
Vandals, sent as a scourge upon them, to bring them into intolerable miseries.
And to this do I so far forth subscribe, as they apply this to the troubles
happening after Theodosius his time, which was after ann. 400. for till that
time the fight before spoken of extends, when the idolatry of the heathen was
utterly subverted in all the Roman Empire. After this, there are great stirs
by the instigation of the Devil, by means of the Goths and Vandals, Heruls
and Longobards, by the invasions of whom, what miseries the Roman Empire
suffered, chiefly for the space of one hundred and fifty years, ye may see in
their history, the brief whereof I have already set down in speaking upon
Chap. 9.3. under the fifth trumpet. And well may we by the inhabiters of the
earth and sea, understand the wicked Roman Empire, even after the suppression
of idolatry, both because they were Lords of land and sea, and because though
there were now a form of religion, yet all was full of cruelty, hatred and
despite, by reason of the heresies which gat head in those times, as has
been showed before in speaking of the black horse. Some yet hold, Fox. Forbs.
that in this passage is only a brief of that which is more largely
prosecuted in the verses following, about the persecuting of the Church: but
this were very improper, by the inhabiters of the earth to understand the
Church, which is mortified to the world, neither by thus expounding it is there
any satisfaction given touching the interuening time betwixt the battles end
before spoken of and the persecuting of the Church, which I think ought
carefully to be observed. As for the short time which the Devil is said to
have, I assent to those, that approve the whole time from hence to the end of
the world to be but short, according to the Scripture phrase, and by comparing
it with the eternity to come afterward. It was long ago said, Heb. 10.37. a
Pet. 3.8, 9.
Yet a little while and he that shall come will come and will not tarry, and
The Lord does not defer his coming, as some count deferring, for a thousand
years with the Lord are but as one day.

This passage is of singular comfort to the godly of these times, who are
sollicitous for the truth, seeing it in so great danger by the preuailings of
the adversary: for as in the Primitive Church, when things seemed to be most
desperate, they were nearest a most joyful time by reason of the utter
overthrow of heathen idolatry which straight way followed; so I doubt not but
when the truth now professed shall be brought to greatest streights, there
shall be a way happily set opon to come out of them by the utter ruin of
Popish idolatry, which shall then be even at the doors; for though the Devil
may seem at the first to have the best, yet Michael shall finally overcome
him; but wicked worldlings can never have any comfort of immunity from his
rage, he growing still more and more terrible to them, even unto the end, and
in the end they must suffer with him unspeakable torments without end or ease,
there being none to stand by them to help to auert his rage from them, as the
godly have.

Quest. 4. To what time is this to be referred, Verse. 13.
whereof it is said, Then he persecuted the woman that had brought forth a
male child? What is her flying into the wilderness with Eagles wings, and the
time of her abode there, called time, and times, and half a time? And what is
the flood cast out after her, and the earths devouring it?

Answ. Some refer this time to the Apostles days, Bullinger.
when the Church soon after Christ's ascension began to be hotly persecuted,
and hereupon they took occasion to disperse themselves amongst the Gentiles,
where she abides to the end of the world, set forth by time, and times, and
half a time; a phrasevsed to show that the time is certain with the Lord, but
concealed from us.

Somereferre it to the days of Constantine, Pareus. Bibliander. Brightman.
when the Church through wealth and liberty began to grow corrupt by pride,
contentions and errors, holding that the Church in the wilderness is opposed
to the Church in heaven before described with her heavenly glory, which she had
all the time of persecution, but now being in peace, corruption and
superstition comes on, making her like a woman in the wilderness: yet the
time which she is said to be in the wilderness, they distinguish from the
time of her flight, holding that she began to take her flight in the days of
Constantine, and was flying three hundred years, even until Phocas, who
established the Bishop of Rome for universal, ann. 606. from that time forward
she was in the wilderness, a time, and times, and half a time, before
described by one thousand two hundred and threescore days, being either so
many years, or a long time unknown to us; and therefore thus set forth, that
we might not be troubled, though we see this persecution continued still, for
it is not only for a time, but times after that, and then half a time more.
And to make the time of this flight to be three hundred years the more
probably, they observe, that not a Doves, but Eagles wings are given unto her,
arguing a flight strong and of long continuance. Forbs.
Some referring it also to Constantines time, will have him to be the great
Eagle, giving wings to the woman to fly into the wilderness, by enduing the
Church with so much worldly wealth, whereupon much corruption soon crept in,
and she became like a woman in the wilderness; but extend the time here set
forth no further, but till the rising of the beasts in the next Chapter, unto
which a way is hereby made.

Some referring this time to the Apostles days, Fox.
hold two times of persecution, the one of the Primitive Church, set forth ver.
6. the other of the Church under Antichrist toward the end of the world, set
forth here. Either time is the same, one thousand two hundred and threescore
days, that which time, and times, and half a time is, and the same with the
two and forty months before described, Chap. 11. which if they be reckoned as
Daniels weeks, seven years to a month, they make two hundred ninety and
four years. And such a time was the Church under persecution until
Constantine, from whence one thousand years being counted of Satan's binding,
mentioned Chap. 20. together they amount to one thousand three hundred years,
at what time this persecution by Papists and Turks began, the uttermost end
thereof being 1594. But experience has already confuted this, it being now
1625. and yet these persecutions holding out. There are other computations made
here by others also, as of three years and a half, which has been
sufficiently refuted already, Grasserus.
and of so much time as makes this to fall upon the beginning of the sixteenth
century, when Popery began to decline. But I will not trouble the Reader with
more varieties. If I may put in my conjecture amongst others, I take it, this
time is not to begin in the Apostles days, because it is the same with the 42.
months of Ierusalems being trodden underfoot, Chap. 11.
and the one thousand two hundred and sixty days of the two witnesses
prophesying in sackcloth, which begins not till the sixth trumpet, as has
been already showed; and it seems to be too general, by a time thus many
ways so often described, to understand only a time without any certain
determination, seeing experience of former Prophecies teaches, that when time
is thus set forth by a certain number of days, or weeks, or months, a
certain proportion of time to be hereby counted is meant. Neither would I
begin it in the days of Constantine the great, because the Church was not then
persecuted, but maintained, though there were some stirs by means of Arrius,
whereas a persecution here is intimated, putting the Church so hard to it, as
that she is feign to fly into the Wilderness for safety. And it is strange,
that if this time were meant and thence forward till Phocas, which was 300.
years, wherein they say she was fleeing, that any mention should be made of
wings to fly with, which in common reason argue swiftness. I think therefore
that this time is to be referred to the years following the destruction made
by the Goths and Vandals when they were expelled out of Italy, which was
between the year 500. and 600. for not long after this the Popes of Rome in
the West having climbed up into the chair of supremacy, great troubles began
about images by their means, they being bitter against those that would have
no Images in divine worship, daring to anathematize even Emperors that
withstood them, and Mahomet in the East persecuted all that would not receive
his damnable Alcoran, as has been already showed to have been done about
ann. 606.

Here was now a new kind of persecution begun, not by Heathen Idolaters, to
bring in the worship of Devils again, but of such as were Christians in show,
but indeed pleading for Baal under a new name, and of such as revived Iudaisme
again in part in somewhat a different manner, under pretense of another Moses
or Prophet of God, Mahomet. Then the Church has two wings of an Eagle given
her to fly into the Wilderness, as sometime the people of Israel are said to
have been brought out of Egypt upon Eagles wings, Exodus 19.4.
and they are two, because by faith and patience they are borne out of this
danger, as is said in the Chapter following. Chap. 13.10.
By this flying into the wilderness then is meant, that after such time as the
Pope and Turk thus invaded the Church of God, she held no visible state any
more by ruling in all Countries and Nations, by possessing Cities and Towns,
but as the people of Israel being carried out of Egypt into the Wilderness,
wandered a long time up and down in unknown places, being fed with Manna from
Heaven, and so preserved yet from perishing: so the Church of God all this time
lies hid, such as hold the truth still being of ignoble condition in worldly
respects, and so not taken such notice of in the most and greatest Kingdoms of
the world, but yet she is provided of such spiritual food, though in secret
places, as that she is miraculously preserved from perishing. And the time of
this her solitariness is before said to be 1260. days, as in chap. 11. here
time, and times, and half a time, time being put for a mystical year, times
for two years, half a time for half a year, which together are three years
and an half, wherein are 1260. days, which set forth here so many years, as
was proved chap. 11. If it be demanded why this variety is used in expressing
the same time, Pareus resolves it well, Pareus. This phrase is borrowed from
Daniel 7.25. and c. 12.7. where it sets forth the time of Antiochus his rage
who was the forerunner of Antichrist. Brightman.
that this is done that we might not faint under this persecution when we shall
see it last long: for though being set forth by 1260. days it may seem short,
yet the Spirit of God would have us know that it is a long time as we account,
there being first a certain space of time, and when that is expired, times,
and last of all, half a time more; and Brightmans conceit herein is excellent,
that happily the Lord by this distinction would have us understand, that in this
time of Antichrists reign, and the Churches being under, there are three
distinctions; one of Antichrists rise, wherein was the beginning of this woman's
solitude to be understood by a time, for in this space he came to his height,
and the Church was brought to the lowest ebb; the second, of his holding in
that state which is twice as long; the third, of his declining when the Church
shall grow toward her deliverance, which is effected in half a time. Thus he.
But I hold me rather to the former resolution, as more agreeable to that which
I have before delivered touching the determination of this time, which in all
probability will not be till ann. 1860. And then the declining time of
Antichrist and the rising time of the Church will be 360. years.

And thus I have delivered what I conceive touching the time when this
persecution begins: for when we come to expound the time of continuance in
the Wilderness, I hold the same with diverse learned Writers on our side before
mentioned, who make the Cities conculcation, when the Witnesses prophecy, and
the time of this lying hid in the Wilderness, all one. Let the Reader consider
and judge of all.

Touching the flood cast out of the Dragons mouth after the woman, Brightman.
which was by the earth swallowed up in succor of the woman, some understand
it of the ouerflowing of Africa and part of Europe, by the Goths, Vandals,
Heruls, and Longobards, by whom the whole Church was endangered as by a flood
of being utterly extinct, but these earthly and barbarous people set forth by
the earth, coming into these parts were brought to the embracing of the
Christian Religion, though corruptly, and so became more mild toward
Christian people, which is the earths swallowing up of the flood. I cannot see
how this does any way agree, both because this incursion by these Barbarians
was made about ann. 400. long before the Churches desolation here described,
and if the Church had been succored by their growing more gentle, it would
have been said rather, but the flood dried up, and not as here, the earth
swallowed it up, noting some relief that came to the Church aliunde.

Some by the flood understand the Popes endeavors to bring the Roman Catholic
Princes into a league, Grasser.
to root out with their joint forces the reformed Religion, which they could
never effect by reason of the differences amongst them in respect of their
earthly possessions: this made Clement the eighth of late to excommunicate the
Counselors both of Spain and France, and this variance of theirs about
earthly things is said to be the earth, helping the woman by Gods providence,
who turns it to the good of the Church.

Some will have this Flood to be the edicts of heathen Emperors against
Christians to root them out; Fox.
and the Earth, the Famines, and Pestilences, and Wars that still happening
hindered the execution of these decrees: but these things being in former times
are misapplied here. Bullinger.
And likewise, whereas some understand it of the Scismes and Heresies happening
in the primitive Church, and of the troubles and persecutions stirred up by
Satan when the Church was fled amongst the Gentiles, against which they were
succored unexpectedly, the earthly ones themselves being oftentimes a means
to appease these tumults, as the Town Clerk in Ephesus was, Act. 19.

Pareus reckons up other Interpretations made by some, Parcus.
that this flood is the troubles and afflictions of the Church in all times,
but this is too general, and more specially the heresies and blasphemous
opinions held in the days of Christian Emperors, whereby the Devil, as by a
flood, sought to drown all true Religion for the space of 300. years, after
Constantine, which before he set forth to be the time of the woman's fleeing
away, and herein he rests. The earth, he says, some interpret to be Christ
for his stability, some general Councels called from all parts of the earth
for the condemning of heresies, which is not likely, seeing such Councels do
rather resemble Heaven, Ioh. 3.
and Christ is said to be from Heaven heavenly, in opposition to such as be
from the earth earthly. He therefore expounds it only in general of a
miraculous preservation, Numb. 16.
in allusion to the earths opening the mouth and swallowing up Chorah and his
company, holding that we ought not to search any further into any particular
meaning. But for so much as I have already gone from the ground of this
exposition, viz. the reckoning of the time of the woman's fleeing to be 300.
years, and this flood was cast out after her upon her fleeing, and being come
into the wilderness, which was in a short time, for she was soon chased
thither, and when she abode there, this flood was sent out after her: I must
needs rather subscribe to them, which hold that the time of casting out this
flood was in the time here described, Grasserus.
said to be a time, and times, and half a time, and so some great wars
attempted by the Popes instigation for the utter rooting out of the reformed
Religion are figured out by the flood. And of such wars we shall find there
have been many ever since the breaking out of the light in the time of John
Husse and Jerome of Prague, and before that against the Waldenses and
Albingenses, and afterward against the Lutherans in Germany, and the
Caluinists in France, where diverse great men entered a league to root them out.
But the earth help the woman. The History of the Bohemian wars is most
famous for the illustrating of this: for Sigismund the Emperor, being stirred
up by the Pope to persecute the Bohemians for cleaving constantly to the
Doctrine of John Husse, after that it and they were condemned in the Council
of Constance, invaded Bohemia with a great power, but his army being
overthrown and much wasted by a few scattered troops of the Hussites, Henrici
Mutij Chron. lib. 27.
the Emperor departed home much discouraged. But soon after greater forces
are sent against them being led by the Princes of Germany, the Duke of Saxony,
the Marquess of Brandenberge, and the Archbishop of Treuers, by the
instigation of Pope Martin the fifth. They entered in three great armies, but
when the Hussites under the conduct of Zisca appeared, a fear came upon them
all and they fled with all haste, casting away their weapons, and leaving their
Tents well furnished to the enemy. And yet again, by the persuasion of
Sigismund another Army was sent under the conduct of Brandenberge, which being
also taken with fear before the Hussites came in sight, fled away and could
not by any means be made to stay. What was this but a most miraculous
preserving of the Church by Gods own immediate hand, there being nothing but
the very earth that affrighted them so soon as they came into that land, being
taken with an horrible fear against all sense and reason. And thus at sundry
other times, the Church being assaulted in other parts she was miraculously
preserved, not by any power of her own, but by the hand of God, being against
her enemies and for her, which deliverance is said to come by the earth,
helping her in allusion to the History of the lands, spuing out of the
Cananites before the Israelites, or of the earths opening the mouth to swallow
up Corah and his company, that Moses and Aaron being endangered by their
conspiracy might be preserved. Pareus.
For this seems to me the most probable resolution of this saying, which was
also noted out of Pareus before. To this if we join that of the differences
happening between Catholic Princes about earthly things, Grasserus.
keeping them from uniting to extirpe the Church at other times, it may also
further serve to clear this place the more, and in the East the differences of
the Persian and Turk being both for Mahomet, yet divided about Haly his
successor, whereby the Turks have still been hindered from their purposed
invasions of Christendom. The Church have had also other help from the
Princes of the earth, who has been stirred up to favor and defend the truth,
as the Princes of Germany, and Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, who aided the
Hollander being at the point of drowning, abated the pride of the Spaniard, and
maintained the Protestant Religion in France. That all this passage is
allegorical, and will bear such exposition, is plain, because it is said, as
it were a river, and so it is but as if the earth had help the woman against
this river by devouring it, seeing there is nothing more frequent, than by a
flood to set forth great armies flowing into Countries to destroy them.

Note, Note.
that when all means fail to preserve the godly, yet as long as the earth
stands they shall have succor, though they can see no more likelihood
hereof, than they that are in the Wilderness, where nothing but the vast
ground appears to save them from the devouring of the wild beasts.

Quest. 3. What is meant by the rest of the woman's seed, Verse. 17.
and the Dragons making war therewith, set forth in these words, And the
Dragon was angry with the woman, and went forth to make war with the rest of
her seed which keep the Commandments of God, etc.

Brightman. Gorran.
Answ. Some understand the Christian people in diverse parts of the world,
against whom the Saracens were stirred up about ann. 630. when he could do no
good otherwise, he made open war by them.

Pareus. Forbs.
Some hold, that here is a preparatiue only to the persecutions raised by the
Pope, described in the next Chapter, these being here first generally spoken
of, and then more at large described under the double beast.

Some by this seed understand all Christian people which should be begotten
unto God from the time of John to the end of the world; Bullinger.
for the Dragon has always made war against them, first by the Emperors,
and then by Antichrist.

Some understand particular members of the Church, Fox.
who are in diverse Countries laid hold upon and put to death where Antichrist
has power, when as he sees that his attempts by war to extinguish the
whole Church are frustrated. And to this do I subscribe, as best answering
that which was said before of the male child which the Church brought forth,
he was the first seed; now the rest of the seed are all godly persons, who are
likewise after all the troubles before described, particularly singled out unto
martyrdom: for he that hears and does the Word of God is my mother, Mat.
12.50.
my brother, and sister, says our Savior Christ. So that this is added to
show, that as the Devil shall attempt to extinguish the Church by wars, so
these not succeeding as he desires, he will yet do what hurt he can by
fighting against particular persons, and destroying them wheresoever his power
lies. And this is verified by experience, the Spanish Inquisition is a great
Engine wherewith the Devil fights and destroys many, and other Commissions
appointed both here in England in the days of Queen Mary, and in other
Countries for the finding out and putting to death by fire and faggot the
servants of God which held the testimony of Jesus Christ, and who would rather
lose their lives than depart therefrom. As for the other expositions, they
cannot hold in regard of the time according to the computation which I have
hitherto followed and showed to be the most probable.

We must expect then, Note.
that the faithful servants of God shall never be free from trouble and danger
during the time allotted unto Antichrist, but partly by great armies, and
partly by particular persecutions they shall ever be impugned, that we may
stand ready armed with faith and patience, comforting our selves in this, that
the Church shall never be extinguished, when all the forces that can be made
are raised against her, but she shall still remain to triumph over Antichrist
and all her enemies at the last.

And I stood upon the Sea shore, Verse. 18.
in the Latin this is read, he stood, as if the Dragon were meant, but in all
Greek Copies, I stood, and so Rupertus and Primasius and all ours, and amongst
the Papals Ribera and Viegas read it so, and it is most plainly a passage to
the next vision of the Beast rising out of the Sea; for to behold this, he
shows here that he was placed upon the Sea shore.

CHAP. XIII.
WHat is figured out by this Beast, Verse. 1.
whereof it is said, I saw a beast ascending out of the Sea, having seven heads
and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the names
of blasphemy. Verse. 2. And he was like to a Leopard, etc.

Answ. There is great difference amongst Expositors here, some holding this
beast to be a figure of the Turk, Viterbiensis.
both because he rises out of the Sea, and waters afterward are expounded to
set forth peoples and Nations, Chap. 17.15. for the Turkish Empire consisted of
diverse peoples, Arabians, Turks, Saracens, Tartarians, etc. and the
similitudes agree of a Leopard, because he has the Kingdom of the Grecians in
Daniel figured out by a Leopard, and of the Persian figured out by a Bear, and
of the Assyrians figured out by a Lion: for even the Persians and Assyrians are
Mahumetans, though under another King; the blasphemies also of this state
against Christ and the wars with all Christians, and the invincible power do
all agree. But for so much as this beast is said to have seven heads, Chap.
17.9, 10.
which are interpreted Chap. 17. to be seven Mountains and seven Kings,
whereof five are fallen, one is now (in the writing of this) said to be, and
the seventh yet for to come, it cannot possibly be applied unto the Turk, but
unto Reme, famous for the seven hills and the diverse manners of government like
so many Kings. Again, one of these heads is wounded to the death and yet
lives again; and the second beast coming with wonders to deceive the world
causes men to worship this beast, which can no way agree unto the Turkish
State.

Tertul. Ieronim. Eusebius. Orosius. Bullinger. Fox. Osiander. Iunius. Aretius.
Whitaker. Grasser. Seb. Meyer. Aug. Marlorat. Primasius. Rupertus. Haimo.
Others therefore will have this beast to be a figure of the heathen Emperors
of Rome, set forth in Dan. 7.8. by a beast with ten horns, and with a mouth
speaking great things. The seven heads some will have to be seven sorts of
government in that state, viz. of Kings, Consuls, the Decemuiri, Dictators, the
Triumuiri, Emperors and Popes, as Petrus Artopaeus, and Fulke. Some seven
particular persons who governed that state, either the first from Romulus to
Tarquinius, or from Julius to Nero, or from Nero to Nerua, as Bullinger and
David Chytreaus. The ten horns some apply to all the Kings under this Empire,
who joining their forces together, sought to root out Christianity. Some to the
Consuls reigning in several Provinces, who had power like Kings, as Borrheus
and Chytreus, and some to those ^en Tyrants in special, who stirred up the ten
persecutions, Nero, Domitianus, Traianus, Antoninus, Seuerus, Maximinus,
Decius, Valerianus, Aurelianus, Dioclesianus and Maximinianus together, as Fox.
Dent.
And this Empire, some say, is likened to a Leopard for velocity in conquering
as the Grecian was, Alphonsus. Fox.
to a Bear for voracity as the Persian was, and to a Lion for courage and
audacity in attempting, as the Assyrian was, or simply because these rulers
were as outrageous against the people of God, as these wild beasts usually
are. For other circumstances about this beast, they shall be further considered
by and by.

Irenaeus. Ambrose. Prosper. Methodius. Arethas. Andreas. Bellarmin. Gagneus.
Ribera.
There is a third opinion of such as hold Antichrist to be figured out here
both by the first and second beast, affirming that they are both one and the
same, but in diverse respects said to be one and another, for which they bring
diverse reasons. First, because the description of this beast and of the little
horn in Daniel, which by the consent of all is a figure of Antichrist does
notably agree. Secondly, because the beast out of the bottomless pit, Chap.
11. which is Antichrist, and this out of the sea is all one. Thirdly, because
that beast, Chap. 17. which is Antichrist, and this is all one. Lastly,
whatsoever is to be expected in Antichrist for blaspheming, for universal
reigning, and for being followed and adored, is attributed to this beast.
Hitherto therefore even the most learned amongst the Romanists agree: but when
it is more particularly determined who this Antichrist is, they part: for they
expect one to come, and ours hold that he is the Pope of Rome, with the whole
succession of that Sea ever since Phocas granted unto him to be universal
Bishop.

These two opinions, howsoever they may seem either of them so probable, as
that it is hard to except against them, yet if some circumstances be
considered, they do neither fully satisfy, but there is need yet to find out
some other exposition of these visions. For first, that of the Heathen
Emperors cannot be so well approved, because the Devils fight by his
instruments against the Church in her desolate estate is here set forth, as is
most plain from the last words of the twelfth Chapter, which as it has been
proved, must needs be referred to the times of Popery and not of Heathenisme,
and the time of two and forty months, and the circumstance of making war
with the Saints do so agree with the beasts making war with the two
Witnesses, and the holy Cities being trodden under foot two and forty months,
Chap. 11. as that it is doubtless the same under another figure and in other
words. Again, for that of the Roman Antichrist, howsoever he be here set
forth, yet I cannot see how two beasts rising out of diverse places at several
times and shapes should be one and the same. It is true indeed, after mention
here once made of two, both in the end of this Chapter and afterward Chap. 17.
we read but of one, yet this proves not that they are both one, for the word
is varied, Chap. 17. and that which is here another beast with two horns, is
there a woman sitting upon the beast, and Chap. 19.20. the false prophet, and
so likewise Chap. 20.10. For the beast and the false prophet are cast into the
lake of fire. It seems therefore to me that by the first beast is to be
understood the Imperial Roman state, diffused thorowout so many Countries and
Nations, all over which Antichrist reigns: and by the second, which is
afterward said also to be a woman and a false prophet, the Hierarchy of Rome,
which as Antichrist swaieth all against the truth of Christ, causing men rather
to reverence and to stand in awe of his greatness, which consists in the
beast whereupon he rides, and which he weildeth and orders at his pleasure.
And to this Pareus in effect plainly comes, Pareus. Chap. 17.8.
when as having found some incongruities in the expositions of all others about
the beast, of which it is said, It was, and is not, and yet shall ascend, he
determines that Antichrist was in the Heathen Monarchy of the Romans, because
that Monarchy afterward became Antichrists, and yet he is said not to be,
that is, in Saint John's time, because he had not yet that power. And according
to this, all circumstances will well agree, neither can any exception be justly
taken against it. The beast coming out of the Sea sets forth the Roman
Empire generally to be considered from the first arising thereof even unto the
end, with a special reference to that which should be done therein in the two
and forty months, or 1260. days, or a time, times, and half a time of
Antichrists jurisdiction, when the Church should be most endangered, for the
better knowledge of which Antichrist, this state wherein he should govern is
so fully described. So that if any man shall object that the order of these
visions, this being after the persecuting of the woman who fled into the
Wilderness, will not bear such an exposition as whereby it should be
understood of the Roman Empire from the beginning, which was long before, it is
easily answered; that for so much as the thing intended is not to show when
this Empire began, or what was anciently done therein, but only so far forth
as might avail to give light into those passages that properly concerned after
times, which could not without propounding a general view of that estate from
the beginning be so well conceived of, order may well admit such a figure to be
brought upon the stage, as whereby things long before past are represented,
being available to help to the understanding of the figures of things
afterward to come. For the similitude of a beast it is usual, and it was
before in Daniel, by a beast to represent a Monarchy, which is against the
truth, because such have no more understanding than a beast, and as a monstrous
beast deuoureth and destroieth most cruelly. It is said to rise out of the Sea
because it is constituted of many peoples, as was said before, for waters are
afterward expounded to be peoples. The seven heads are the seven sorts of
government in that Monarchy, for thus it will agree best, as I shall afterward
show, Chap. 17. the ten horns crowned are the Provinces wherein Consuls with a
regal power ruled. The names of blasphemy were the arrogant titles that some
Emperors in this state took to themselves, Chron. Laurentij L^^berg. Nero and
Domitianus prodijs immort-se adorari iubent, and de Domitiano scriptum
reperitur, sic dominus Deus noster Domitianus iubet, sic and Dioclesianus.
as the title of God usurped by Caius Caligula, and to make men the rather to
believe him to be a God, to thunder and lighten by devices which he had: for
this is commonly counted blasphemy, as we may see in the Gospel, where they
said that Christ blasphemed, because being man he made himself God, when as
God, he forgave sins.

Note, that before God they are beasts and monsters, and no men, how great
soever they be, which are void of the knowledge of God and of his truth, Note.
and shall certainly go into perdition for that which they do wickedly in
their ignorance as this beast did, that no man may be drawn by the pomp and
outward glory of such men to admire them as happy, or to follow their wicked
examples, but avoid them as monsters amongst men.

Quest. 2. What means the diverse figure of this beast, where it is said,
Verse. 2.
He was like to a Leopard, and his feet as the feet of a Bear, and his mouth
as the mouth of a Lion, etc.

Answ. These similitudes are borrowed from Daniel 7. where the four Monarchies
of the world are compared to four beasts, the first a Lion, the second a
Bear, the third a Leopard, and the fourth diverse from all these, and therefore
not assimilated to any creature, intimating a certain compound thing of many,
which in all likelihood is the same with this or such another, but there the
assimilation is concealed, here declared to be compounded of those three,
because that whatsoever savage and brutish qualities were in all the Monarchies
before described, do all concur in this alone, or because in the long
continuance of time wherein this Empire has stood, there have been thus many
metamorphoses, it being sometime Heathenish, sometime Arrian, and sometime
Popish. The Dragon, that is, the Devil, is said to give him his power and
Throne in respect of the large extent of this dominion into all Countries and
Nations, as he said sometime unto Christ when he showed him all the Kingdoms
of the earth, All these are mine, and to whom I will I give them: Mat. 4.
and because as a Vicegerent of the Devil, this Empire has almost in all
ages, but specially in the time of Antichrist, who is chiefly aimed at here,
maintained the worshipping of the Devil, for such idolatry is, Revel. 2.13.
see Chap. 9.20. and where wickedness reigns it was said before that Satan's
Throne is.

Quest. 3. What head is this, whereof it is said, One of the heads was wounded
to death, and his deadly wound was cured, and all the earth wondered after the
beast, etc.

Answ. Pareus mentions diverse opinions; first, Pareus: Grasserus. Bullinger.
of some that hold Julius Caesar to have bin this head, who was killed in the
Senate, but lived again as it were in Augustus. Secondly, of somewhat hold
Nero to have been this head, because in his death the family of the Cesars was
extinct, and after him three others, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, were cut off
in a few months, whereby there seemed now to be an end of the Emperors: but
in Vespasian, who succeeded next, this wound was cured. Thirdly, of some that
hold Heraclius in the East to have been this head, in whose days by the
Turks in the East, and the Barbarians in the West, the Imperial State became
desperate: but it was cured by Charles the great. And at lenghth he delivers
his own opinion, that the Pope is this head, who was deadly wounded when the
division happened betwixt the Italians and the French, the Italians choosing for
Pope Urban the sixth, the French Clement the seventh, about ann. 1390. after
whom two Popes, and lastly, three continued till the Council of Constance,
ann. 1417. when by the constituting of one again, Martin the fifth, and the
deposition of the three this deadly wound was cured. The two first he confuteth
rightly, because those things happened before this Revelation; whereunto it may
be added that particular Emperors were not the heads here spoken of: for then
the beast should have had not seven, but many more heads. The third shall be
further considered afterward.

Touching his own opinion, I cannot see how it can stand, because that after
this all the world is said to follow after the beast, and war is made with
the Saints who are overcome, and power is given to the beast to do two and
forty months, whereas after the Council of Constance many that had followed
the Pope within a few years fell from him, and wars were made against him
with success in diverse places, neither is his time half so long, if we reckon
the 42. months, as in Chap. 11.

Alphonsus Mantuanus an Italian refers this wound to the time of the
breaking forth of the light of the Gospel, Alphonsus Mantuanus.
whereby diverse Countries in a short time fell from the Pope, by which as by a
deadly wound he seemed, as it were, to lie a dying, but revived again by
prospering in his wars undertaken against the Reformers: but neither does the
time agree to this.

There is another opinion, Fox.
that this mortal wound was given by the Goths and Vandals, whose History, and
how deadly they wounded the Roman State, see upon Chap. 9. under the fifth
Trumpet. This wound began ann. 469. and lasted till that Totilas being
overcome by Narses, a Captain sent by Justinian Emperor in the East, about
ann. 560. there was an end put to the Kingdom of the Goths, and this they
count the healing of this wound; one part of the state being brought to misery
by these barbarous people, but the other remaining whole still under the
Emperors of the East, and succouring it thus in process of time. And when the
Longobards had again brought a great part in subjection to them reigning 204.
years, they were expelled by Charles the great, being stirred up hereunto by
the Pope, and thus this wound was perfectly cured.

Others agreeing in the wound, Forbs.
hold that the cure was made by the Popes of Rome working by flattery, and the
pretense of sanctity so effectually even with the Conquerours, that they
brought their necks under their yoke, and so reigned over all in the pristin
splendour of the old Roman Empire. And some consent that Justinian began the
cure, Brightman.
not only by repressing those Barbarians, but also by decreeing that the
Bishop of old Rome should be the chief Priest of all, Constitut. Iustiniani
131. Decernimus secundum sacrarum synodorum decreta sanctis: veteris Romae
Episcopum primum esse omnium s^cerdotum.
and Phocas perfected it about 50. years after, when he made him universal
Bishop.

Touching these three last, and the third before mentioned by Pareus, there is
not much difference in them: for they all agree about the time when this wound
was given, namely when the Goths and Vandals with other Barbarians prevailed so
far, as that the Roman Empire was quite overthrown and lay diverse years for
dead. And this is undoubtedly the wound here meant, which cannot be applied to
any particular person to be understood by this head, because it reuiueth gain,
so as never did any particular Emperor; but to the Imperial state which had
life again afterward, and was more adored and admired than ever, as is here
afterward declared. The difference then is about the time of this cure and the
person by whom it was wrought. And herein I prefer that exposition which makes
the Pope the Surgeon, by flatteries and colorable persuasions, advancing
his Sea at Rome to as universal a souereignty as was sometime that of the
imperial seat in the same City, which was effected in the days of Phocas. ann.
606. and more established not long after by Pipin the French King, and
vindicated from the molestation of the Longobards by Charles the great his
son, and in process of time by the Popes practices augmented, so as that
this sea reigned as well in the East as in the West, even as the old Roman
Emperors were wont to do. And thus, as this deadly wound was long in making,
being begun when Constantine the great divided the East from the West, (which
was a great weakening to this State, Rome reigning now but in these Western
parts, which was wont to reign over all) and growing more deep and deadly by
the coming in of the Barbarians: so it was long in curing, the cure being
begun in the time of Phocas, and increased by a Council at Constantinople in
the time of Basilius who slew his associate Michael, Constantinop. Council. the
eighth. general Council
that he might reign alone, ann. 871. and perfected in the time of Michael
Paleologus, ann. 1273. when the Grecians also were by his perfidie subjected to
the Sea of Rome. I do not think it so fit to ascribe this cure to any of
these Emperors, because howsoever they were helps, yet the other beast spoken
of afterward is plainly intimated to be he that cured this wound, and this
beast is the papal Sea, as it shall further appear when I come to explain
those words. Pet. du Moulin. The accomplishment of prophesies.
One, a learned Writer that came now to my hands, differs from all others
about the time of this wound, for he assigns it unto the time of Aistulphus
King of the Lombards, who he says gave this deadly wound unto one of the
heads, when he destroyed the Exarchate of Rauenna, which had continued 200.
years from Narses, as a Lieutenantship to the Emperors of the East: but he
having now subdued the Exarch, challenged Rome also as a part of the Exarchate,
ann. 750. Hereupon Steven the second being then Pope, craved aid from Pepin the
Emperor, being unable to help, and prevailed so far that he came into
Italy the first and the second time, subdued Aistulphus, took the Exarchate
from him and bestowed it upon the Pope, making him hereby Lord of Italy, ann.
755. This exposition makes the head here said to be wounded to the death to
remain whole, even when the Roman Empire ceased to be, because there were
Exarchs under the casterne Emperors still, whereas the Imperial dignity of
Rome being this head, it was certainly thus wounded notwithstanding the
continuance of an Exarchate of Italy. The bestowing of this Lordship upon the
Pope was not then the curing of the wound, but a perfecting of the cure begun
long before, and now made more perfect seeing that from the time of Phocas at
Rome there was exercised a kind of imperial power which in time grew more and
more.

Quest. 4. Verse. 4.
How is the whole world said to admire after the beast, and to worship the
Dragon that gave power to the beast, and the beast?

Answ. They admire after the beast, that out of a venerable opinion conceived
of the beast follow him: Brightman. Moulin.
and so all the world in a manner being drawn to it by instruments sent out
from the Pope have followed him. England in the days of Gregory, first by
Augustine a Monk; France, Frisland, Denmark, Germany, Slauony, by Boniface or
Venefrid, about ann. 720. about which time also Ireland, Scotland, Norway,
Sweuia, Lituania, etc. were brought to venerate this power. They worship the
Dragon, that is, the Devil, who worship Idols, and the beast, that speak and
make account of this state as of God and Christ Jesus himself, Brightman.
Pareus.
for infallibility of judgment and immunity from all error: yet some make
these two to be one, the worshipping of the Beast and of the Dragon, seeing in
the Beast, the Dragon who does set him up is worshipped. Bullinger.
Some understanding all of the Roman Empire in the time of Heathenisme, say
that they worship the Beast who receive the superstitious rites and ordinances
of that Empire. But one thing here makes it most plain, that it is not the
Heathen, but the Papal Empire. Now after the cure of this wound which is
followed and worshipped, viz. because it is said that they wondered after the
beast, intimating that voluntarily they did submit, so as they never did to the
Emperors, but by compulsion being overcome: neither did they generally
attribute that divine power unto them as being irresistable, as God is, as they
have done unto the Pope, even all the earth, that is, such as are led by
earthly things, the honors and preferments of this world, they cry out, Who is
like unto the beast, or who can war with him?

Beda. Primas. Richard. de Sancto Victore. Haimo. Ansel. Tho. Aquin.
Many Ancients, who are commonly followed by the Papals say, that Antichrist
shall feine himself to be dead three days, and then reviving again he shall
strike all men into an admiration, etc. But Viegas himself does sufficiently
confute this: because it is not said, he seemed to be dead, but was wounded
deadly, and therefore he rather holds that one of the seven Kings which shall
fight against Antichrist, but afterward submit unto him, shall before such his
submission be wounded, but after be cured again: but this is as absurd as the
former, for not an opposite, but an head of this beast is wounded, and
therefore no King fighting against him. Let them tremble that read this
passage, who admire after any man, and extol and magnify him as if he were a
God, as the Papists do the Pope: for in thus doing, they worship the Dragon,
and show themselves plainly to be such, as have not their names written in the
book of life, as it follows, verse. 8.

Quest. 5. Verse. 5.
How can the speaking of blasphemies be applied unto the Pope, the blaspheming
of God and of his Tabernacle, and of such as dwell in heaven, when as he does
worship them all? And what time is this two and forty months, of which it is
said, Power was given him to make war two and forty months?

Answ. I hold herein with those, Pareus. P. du Moulin. Brightman.
that expound this blaspheming of God of the Popes arrogating to himself such
titles and abilities as belong unto God only; the titles of the head and
husband of the Church, King of kings, the Lord of heaven, earth and hell, that
has all mysteries and laws in the closet of his breast, Judge of all, and to
be judged of none, who has all power in heaven and in earth, shuts and no
man opens, opens and no man shuts, yea, and the Lord God: the abilities
are to make something of nothing, to make God, to make the word, to be free
from all possibility of erring, to make decrees of the like certainty and
authority with the Canonical Scripture, to be such a universal Sovereign, as
that all upon pain of damnation must be subject unto him, to give the
kingdoms of the earth, etc. for all these are maintained properly to belong
unto the Pope, and accordingly he does take upon him. Now that this is a
blaspheming of God, it has been a tenent so ordinary and common, as that when
our Savior Christ did take the like upon himself, as to be the Son of God,
and so God; the Jews cried out, he has blasphemed: neither can a man speak
greater things of himself, and more blasphemous against God than these. He
blasphemeth his Tabernacle, which is his Church; by vaunting that the Church
whereof he is the head is the only true Catholic Church, arrogating thus unto
his Apostaticall Synagogue that which is proper to the true Church of God, and
as for the true Church indeed, he ladeth it with most ignominious names of
heretical, schismatic, infidel, deuillish and damned. The Church is called
the Tabernacle in allusion to the Tabernacle of the Jews, wherein God sometime
dwelt in the midst of them. He blasphemeth the Saints in heaven by making
idol Gods of them, affixing them to certain Temples, where the old idols of
the heathen sometime dwelt, and assigning them such offices, some to be over
hogs, some over horses, some over this particular disease, some over that, etc.
P. du Moulin. Pareus. Brightman.
These expositors do also mention another inter pretation of heaven, being
taken for the Church, and so the Saints there for the godly here, whom the Pope
blasphemeth by imputing vile names unto them, and laying to their charge vile
actions: but certainly we must make a distinction between the Tabernacle of
God here mentioned and heaven, otherwise the word should not have been varied,
but as it was spoken of blaspheming the Tabernacle, so it should have been
added, and the Saints that dwell in this Tabernacle, but it is the Saints in
heaven which may well be properly understood, and therefore this sense is the
rather to be preferred. They make also the blaspheming of them, the ascribing
of divine properties unto them, as when the Virgin Mary is prayed unto by the
name of Queen of heaven, our Lady, our only hope, our salvation and
mediatrix: and when of her and other Saints is begged help, comfort,
deliverance from sins, and from damnation. This is indeed a blaspheming of
God, by ascribing that unto his servants which is peculiar to his majesty, but
how it should be termed a blaspheming of them I cannot see, for it is rather an
ouer-honouring of them.

Some understanding all of the old Roman Emperors, Bullinger. Fox.
say that they spoke great things when they boasted of their great victories,
and blasphemed by preferring their idols before the God of Israel, and the
Tabernacle which was amongst the Jews, by vilifying it, and the Saints by
speaking vily of the holy Prophets, and other servants of God. But seeing this
is after the wound given and healed in the Popes arising to the Imperial
State, as has been already showed, the order will not permit this exposition.

Andreas.
Some by the Tabernacle of God understand the body of Christ, which is
blasphemed by the Popes taking upon him to make it in the Mass, affirming that
the Bread is his true substantial body, and therefore to be adored as Christ
himself.

Gagnaeus. Gorran. Blas. Viegas. Beda. Haimo, etc.
As for the expositions of those that apply all things here to Antichrist yet
for to come, holding that he shall blaspheme God by saying that he is no God,
and that himself is God, that he shall blaspheme his name in speaking against
the life and Doctrine of Christ, his Tabernacle, that is, the Church militant
dwelling here, as it were, for a time in Tabernacles, and the Saints in heaven
by saying that they are all damned: These, I say, and the like, whereby the
ancients have been carried away in times past, I omit to confute, as falling
together with that tenent of Antichrists reigning but three years and an
half, rejected long before in this our exposition.

As for the time wherein it is given him to do, Verse. 5.
or to make war, (for in some copies it is read the one way, and in some the
other) viz. two and forty months, this is the same time which was mentioned
before, Chap. 11.2.
Chap. 11. and is to be computed likewise, the reader therefore may have
recourse thither. Some expound it of the continuance of the Roman Empire, Beard.
as it was governed by Emperors and Kings, etc. till the coming in of the
Goths and Vandals: for from the building of Rome till the birth of Christ,
were seven hundred and fifty years; from thence, till the overthrow of that
Empire, about five hundred years, in all near upon one thousand two hundred
and threescore, set forth by these two and forty months.

Some expound these months, Fox.
as Daniels Sabbaths of years, and so reckon them to be two hundred ninety
and four, all which time the Roman Empire did by persecution, as here it is
said to be given him to do: for from the imprisonment of John the Baptist,
when this persecution may be reckoned to begin, to the time of the Churches
deliverance at the death of Licinius, who was overcome by Constantine the
great, were just two hundred ninety and four years.

Some holding, P. du Moulin.
as I have already said, that the time here described, is the same with that
Chap. 11. viz. one thousand two hundred and threescore years of the Papal
persecution, begin it not till ann. 755. and extend it to 2015. which is almost
400. years hence.

And lastly, Brightman.
some taking this time for the whole time of Antichrists birth, growing,
wounding, and recovery, that he might be able to exercise his malice against
the Church of God, begin it ann. 304. when ambition first crept into the Church
through the bounty of Constantine the great, and end it ann. 1546. at what time
the Council of Trent having so plainly opposed it self against the light then
breaking out, the forces of the Papacy were broke;, men beginning every where
to revolt from the obedience of that Sea: but because that part of this time
the Pope could do little or nothing, viz. all the time of the Empire of the
Goths, which was one hundred and forty years, they hold that this space of
time is to be added to one thousand five hundred forty and six, wherein he
shall still have power, that is, unto ann. 1686. but then there shall be a
full end of his greatness, and in this time is his fight with the two
witnesses mentioned Chap. 11. Whilst I was considering of these diverse
expositions, I heard a man of great note for his accurate calculating of these
times, handling this very point; his opinion was, that this time ought to be
begun when the head spoken of in the Text was deadly wounded by the irruption
of the Goths, Vandals, and Rugians, which because it was not all at once, but
at three most remarkable times, first under the conduct of Alaricus King of the
Goths, ann. 414.2. Under Gensericus King of the Vandals, ann. 445. or 459.3.
Under Odoacer King of the Rugians, ann. 476. he determined it to be uncertain
when this time of the beast shall be fully ended, even as the ending of the
seventy years captivity spoken of by Jeremiah was uncertain, till the
accomplishment upon the like reason of three several times of captivity, from
either of which it might be reckoned. And thus the nearest time should be
ann. 1658. reckoning by the Egyptian account, the next 1689. and the furthest
of all, 1710.

But this beginning of the time cannot stand, because to have power to do,
argues life and strength, and not a languishing estate, as of one deadly
wounded; and in the order of the Text, it is after the healing of the wound
again, that this power is given to the beast, and not in the time that he lay
bleeding under the wound. Against that of Brightman I have showed my reason
before, Cha. 11.2. and it is improbable that this time of two and forty months
should be interrupted, and so to be made up by one hundred and forty years
following after: and if it be taken together, and so ended at the time of the
Council of Trent, the Pope has far exceeded his limited time, seeing he
has made so much stir about religion, now fourscore years since, and still
prevails mightily, and so here were little solid comfort in the prophecy. The
error in Du Moulin is in that he begins this time too high, long after the
wound healed, whereas the time of any Potentate is to be reckoned, not from
his coming to an height and perfection of power, but from his very first
beginning to reign, though more weakly. The rest that apply these months to
the old Roman Empire, consider not the wound made and healed, after which the
computation ought to begin, and whereas the scope of this Revelation is chiefly
to comfort us against the Roman Antichrist by setting a bound to his reign, by
this their exposition applying this time another way they leave it boundless.
Other expositions there are, but lest I should be over tedious, I omit to
recite them, resolving most confidently, that this time began ann. 606. as I
showed before upon Chap. 11.2. when the deadly wound of the Roman Empire might
well be said to be healed in the Popes rise and first attaining to such
universal authority.

Touching that Epiphonema verse. 10, 11, 12. Verse. 10, 11.
it is agreed that it is added to stir up men to a diligent enquity about
Antichrist, that finding him out, they may take heed of being carried on with
others to worship him to the destruction of their souls: the comfort is, that
Antichrist who has tyrannized for a time, by killing with the sword, and
bringing his oppugners to great misery, shall finally perish most miserably
himself, at what time the Saints who have suffered under him shall have
perfect deliverance. And this is the end that faith and patience shall have,
after the greatest troubles and miseries, and the end that cruelty and
oppression shall have, though it goes on unrevenged a long time.

Quest. 6. And I saw another beast rise out of the earth, Verse. 11.
which had two horns like the Lamb, and spoke like the Dragon, etc. What
beast is this, and what is meant by his rising out of the earth, by his
Lambe-like horns, and Dragon-like voice?

Answ. This beast is the Pope of Rome, who does no more differ from the first
beast, but that the state whereof he is the head is represented by it, and he
the head ruling in that state by this. They which by the first beast understand
the old Roman Emperors, by this do generally understand the Popes reviving
that decaying Empire: but they which make both these beasts one and the same,
Pareus. Forbs.
interpret the first of the Pope the head, and this second of his guard of
spiritual persons considered together with him, who endeavor by all means to
advance him in the hearts and devotions of the people. Why the first beast may
not be taken for the Roman Emperors of old, I have already showed, and
touching this guard, or these instruments helping to advance the beast, I
cannot see how they should be here represented: Brightman. He has equal
power with the beast, so as no instrument of the Popes has or ever had.
for it is not any body but an head which the Spirit of God does altogether
apply himself to describe here; this beast therefore does set forth the Popes
when they came to an Imperial dignity, thus putting life again into that
state altogether ruined by the irruptions and preuailings of the Barbarians.

That which is here represented does serve to declare, how and by what means
the deadly wounded head was healed, and after that prevailed so wonderfully:
for something having been shortly spoken of the Roman State, as it was from
the beginning thereof, that Antichrist, whose description is chiefly intended,
might be the better understood; it is showed first, that after this head
wounded, he sprang up by the healing of it again, verse. 4.5, etc. and then
more at large this Antichrist the Author of so great a cure is described, and
what powerful means he used to effect it.

Ribera. Pareus.
The Pope who is this Antichrist, is said to rise out of the earth, because from
a poor and mean beginning he attained to such an height of dignity, being but
lately a poor Bishop, and subject to Emperors, Kings and Princes, he
suddenly rose up above them all. He has two horns like the Lamb, because the
Lamb the Lord Jesus is his pretense, he boasts himself to be his Vicar:
but he has only two of his seven horns, to intimate his weakness in
comparison of the fullness of Christ's power. He speaks like the Dragon, that
is, like the Devil, for the Dragon has been before showed to be the Devil;
concerning whom, howsoever we read nothing before of his speaking, yet that he
had a mouth to speak is intimated, in that the first beast being revived, to
whom he gave his throne and power, is said also to have given unto him a mouth
to speak great things and blasphemies, verse. 5. His speech then is added, that
he might be the better discovered, as the Ass of Cuma marching in the Lions
skin was discovered by his braying. If a man should look at nothing but his
horns like the Lambs, that is, his goodly pretense of setting forth Christ
and the right governing of his Church, he might easily be deceived, but attend
his speech so full of pride, arrogance and blasphemy, whereof it has been
spoken before, Brightman.
and thou may easily discern him to be Antichrist. Some expound his rising
out of the earth, of his rise by the help of secular powers above them all,
and his two horns of Charles and Pipin subduing the Longobards, and other
enemies unto him, applying this his rise unto those times wherein he did so
much differ from that which he was before, that he is, as it were, another
beast for the accession of more authority. He speaks like the Dragon also,
say they, in that as the old Emperors, Nappier.
so he deposes and sets up for Kings whom he wills. Some by the two
horns understand the double power of the Pope, spiritual and temporal. But I
rest in the former exposition as most simple, and agreeing to the drift of this
vision, which is to show the fair pretense under which the Pope should ascend
to his height of honor. Note, that this is a certain mark of one which has
no communion with Christ, how much soever he pretends him, if he be of an
arrogant speech magnifying himself above others: for this shows a proud
heart, since out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, whereas the
humble only have communion with Christ, and with such the Lord dwells, Esa.
66.2.

Quest. Verse. 12, 13, 14, etc.
6. How does the Pope exercise all the power of the beast, and how does he
cause all to worship the first beast? How does he make fire to come down from
heaven? What image is it that he causes the inhabitants of the earth to make
to the first beast, and how does he give life unto it to speak, that it might
be worshipped, he destroying all that refuse to worship it, and not suffering
any to buy or sell, that had not his mark, etc.

Answ. They that by the first beast understand the Roman Emperors, expound
these things thus; Bullinger. Arethas. Verse 12. Grasserus.
He exercised all the power of the first beast before him, that is, as the
Roman Emperors who were before the Popes, made account that all kingdoms were
their own to dispose of as they thought good; so the Popes represented by this
beast, do both challenge and usurp a power over all kingdoms. Witness
Steuchus the Popes Library Keeper, who put out a book, wherein he shows out
of the Register of Gregory, that the kingdoms of Spain, England, France,
Denmark and Pannonia, etc. are held of the Sea of Rome, and that the kings
holding them are but vassals of that Sea. And as the old Emperors made war
upon all that refused to be subject unto them, filling all parts with
slaughters and bloodshed, so do the Popes, as all the world knows. He
makes all the inhabiters of the earth to worship the first beast: that is,
either the Roman Empire now swayed by the Pope, in that they have brought it to
pass, that this Empire is now every where accounted sacred and divine, and
accordingly reverenced: or idols, whereby the Roman religion being received by
their subjects, the Emperors are said to be worshipped, and so now the Popes by
their images, which are the same in effect, constituting in a great part the
Roman Catholic religion.

And does great wonders, Verse. 13.
so that he makes fire to come down from heaven in the sight of men: that
is, many lying signs either by the fraud of Monks and Priests, or by some
evil art. The fire is spoken of in allusion to Elias, 2 King. 1.
who called for fire from heaven to consume the Captains with their fifties
who were sent to fetch him. Popes have caused fire to come down from heaven,
partly by pretending to give the holy Ghost, who is compared to fire, Act. 2.
and once came so down from heaven; and partly by their excommunications like
lightnings, in that unto them are added firebrarnds, and candles burning, which
together are thrown down from an high, as if fire came down from heaven to
smite the excommunicated. This is said to be done first in the sight of men,
then verse. 14. in the sight of the beast, which is all one; for most men, yea
and the beast himself, that is, the Empire wherein the Pope does this, is
deceived by these signs.

Saying to them that dwell on the earth, Verse. 14. Napier.
that they should make an image to the beast, etc. The image of the first beast
was the new re-erected Empire in Charles the great ann. 800. being crowned
Emperor by Leo the third, when as the Empire had been void from the time of
Augustulus by the space of three hundred years and upward. And it is
significantly spoken, he said to the inhabitants of the earth, or to the
earthly minded men who were ruled by him, that they should make this image,
because the Pope did no act toward it, but spoke and so stirred others up to
establish a new Empire by appointing seven Electours to choose one at every time
of vacancy, which yet was but an image in comparison of the old Roman Empire,
so far did it come short of it in glory and power. And he had power to give
life unto the image of the beast, Verse. 15.
etc. that is, to this reerected Empire: for all the life of it is from the
Pope, and whatsoever it speaks or decrees is by his direction. And caused
that they which would not worship the image of the beast should be killed; that
is, which would not receive the ordinances and Laws of this Empire touching
the Roman Catholic religion, for by embracing that religion the image is
worshipped: all then that refuse to be Papists, they take order to put to death.

And he caused all, Verse. 16.
both great and small, free and bond, etc. to receive a mark in their right
hand, or in their forehead. This is added the better to know this beast, his
mark or character must needs be received, that is, a public and open
profession must be made, that a man is a Roman Catholic, and believes all
their new Articles touching the Supremacy, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, etc.
for to believe in Christ, and to hold all Articles of the Apostles Creed, and
to receive the word and Sacraments, are nothing worth without this, Summa
angel. in titulo confirmat.
neither is Baptism of any force without the Character of Chrysme in
confirmation given by the Bishop. Such may neither buy nor sell, that is, as
excommunicate persons others may not have communion with them: for neither
Turks nor Jews are dealt so hainously withal as poor Protestants, no place
is allowed unto them, nor any being in the world. The mark, the name, and the
number of the beasts name is all one, he that has the mark has them all.
Hitherto out of Bullinger. Others not differing much here-from, Fox.
expound the Popes exercising of all the power of the first beast, of his
cruelty against the faithful, as great as ever that of the heathen Emperors
was: his miracles in general only of sundry strange miracles related to have
been done for the establishing of Popery, his causing men to worship the image
of the first beast, of his compelling all to the obedience of the Roman Sea,
otherwise they shall bear none office, nor be suffered to have communion with
men, etc. as has been already said.

They that by these two beasts understand one Antichrist, Pareus. Napier.
which is the succession of Popes in the Sea of Rome, expound the power of the
first beast exercised by this in the sight of the first, of his blaspheming,
warring against the Saints, and reigning over every tribe and nation, which the
Pope does by his Legates and subordinate officers; and so it is said to be done
in the sight of the first beast, because his agents do it at his beck, and
they do many great wonders to draw the world to the veneration of the Pope.
He makes fire to come down from heaven, that is, as was before expounded, by
giving the holy Ghost, and by his excommunications, and this kind of miracle
is the rather singled out, as answerable to a speech in use amongst the Jews
even till this day, If any man shall make fire to come down from heaven, and
deny the Law of Moses, let him be accursed. The image to the first beast is the
image of Christ, the Virgin Mary, and the holy Apostles at the Popes command
made, set up and adored by earthly people, these are enliued by the imposture
of Priests and Friars, and made to speak, laugh, frown, and sweat. The mark
in Greek is (...), not (...), setting forth more at large any note or mark,
Heb. 1.
whereas (...) is the image or resemblance of a thing, so Christ is called
(...): it is not any external visible mark upon the forehead or right hand
indeed, but the profession of being a Roman Catholic, and a readiness with
all the might to defend that Religion. D. Abbot.
This Character is double, as there are two sorts of men of that Religion;
first, of the common people, the Chrysme, Holy water. Agnus Dei, Crucifixes,
etc. secondly, of the Religious, their vow to propagate and maintain it to the
uttermost, and therefore by a wonderful providence it is come to pass that
such profess an indelible Character to be imprinted upon them in their
ordination.

Others expound his causing men to worship the image of the first beast,
Brightman.
of the Popes seeking honor to himself under the color of antiquity: his
miracles of making fire to come down from Heaven of the Popes smiting men with
his Excommunications, as if it were with fire from Heaven. Hildebrand a Pope,
in his Epistle to the Germans said, that Henry the fourth being smitten with
his Excommunication was blasted with lightning. A certain Bishop reproving him
for his heart-burning against Henry, Cent. 11. Auent. annal. l. 5.
perished by lightning, and giving up the ghost cried out, Oh wretch that I am,
alas I am carried bound with a fiery chain to hell, etc. The Image which he
would have men to make unto the first beast, is the acknowledgement of the same
power and authority in him that was in the Bishops of Rome of old before the
deadly wound given. In other things there is no difference.

Others that expect Antichrist yet to come, Bellarmin. Viegas. Ribera.
who they think shall be but one particular man, reckon up three notes whereby
he may be certainly known; first, his reviving again after death as Christ
did; secondly, his causing of fire to come down from Heaven, as Christ sent
the holy Ghost in the likeness of fiery tongues; thirdly, his giving life to
an image which he should cause to be made, as Christ gave life to dead bodies
by his divine power, which because they cannot rightly be applied unto the
Popes of Rome, they maintain that they cannot be Antichrist, but some other
yet to be expected. But the expositions of ours already set down make it
plain that these things do most fitly agree unto the Popes, wherein though
there be a little difference, yet it is agreed amongst us all in the maine,
that the Antichrist of Rome is here painted out in his lively colors. And it
is indeed absurd to imagine the fulfilling of these things according to the
letter, for so Antichristianisme should be no mystery, neither should there
need such wisdom by the number of his name to find out Antichrist. That the
Pope is this Antichrist it is no new conjecture of ours out of malice, but a
very ancient opinion maintained by sundry learned and godly men in diverse ages
of the world, that no time since his springing up might want a testimony
hereof. Gregory the first, called the great, Greg. lib. 4 regist, Epist. 38.
Rex prepe est, and quod di^^ est ne^ as, sace^ d^tum ei paratur exercitus, quia
ceruici militant elationis qui ad hoc positi sunt, vt ducatum praeberent
humilitatis.
about ann. 600. plainly foretold of his being at hand, saying the King is at
hand, and which is horrible to speak, an army of Priests is prepared for him,
because they war for the maintenance of pride who were set to lead the way
of humility. Herein he spoke most truly and significantly when Antichrist was
even at the doors: for the very next Pope to him after Sabinianus, namely
Boniface the third began to fulfill this prediction when he obtained the
title of universal Bishop. Arnulphus Bishop of Aurelia, in the Council of
Rhemes, about an. 900 brake out into this speech touching the Bishop of Rome,
What think ye of him that fitteth in his high Throne, Council. Rhemens.
clad in Scarlet and glittering with gold, what think ye him to be? Verily, if
he be destitute of charity, he is Antichrist. Ann. 1340. a Council was held at
Ratisbone against the tyranny of the Roman Bishops, wherein Eberhardus
Archiepise. Salisburg. rising up said, Under the title of the high Priest we
may perceive, if we be not blind, a Wolf in the coat of a Shepherd.
Hildebrand, Auentin. annal. lib. 7.
like an Antichrist 170. years agone laid the foundation of this Empire, and
began the war, which has been continued by his successors ever since.
These high Priests of Babylon desire to reign alone, they cannot bear an
equal. Believe me, they will not cease till that all powers being put down
they sit in the Temple of God, and exalt themselves above all that is
worshipped. He changes Laws and establishes his own, that wretched man whom
they are wont to call Antichrist does contaminate, kill and destroy, etc. Abbas
Ioachim, who also lived about the same time, called the Pope Antichrist. Ann.
1158. Gerhardus and Dulcimus taught, the Pope to be Antichrist, and Rome with
the Clergy there to be Babylon. Ann. 1160. was Waldus who taught the same, Ann.
1370. Francis Petrarch, an eloquent Italian, wrote many inuectiues to the same
effect. Who so desires to see more, let him look into Catelogus testium
veritatis.

He that does not wilfully blindfold his eyes cannot choose but see the Pope to
be Antichrist, here described by the second beast: for he has all the power
that ever the Roman Empire had, whereunto the Devil gave his Throne, setting
up Kings and deposing Kings, ruling and reigning far and wide, and all this
is done before that beast or in his sight, that is, before the people of this
Empire in whom it consists, for verse. 13. that which is said to be in the
sight of the beast, is said to be in the sight of men. He causes the first
beast to be worshipped, that is, his own greatness to be admired and
reverenced, which is the same with the ancient majesty and dominion of this
Empire: for in the state over which the Pope does now rule set forth by the
first beast there were two things, the peoples of diverse Countries and Nations,
and the imperial authority exercised over them; in respect of the first, he
is said to do these things in the sight of the first beast, in respect of the
second, to cause all men to worship the first beast by being obedient to this
authority now translated to himself.

Touching the great wonders and fire brought down from Heaven, Verse. 13.
I subscribe to Pareus and Brightman, who have sufficiently illustrated this
passage. Touching the image of the beast which he causes the inhabiters of the
earth to make, I cannot approve of that exposition which applies it to Images
deceitfully inclined, Verse. 14.
because this image that he speaks of here has power to put to death all
that will not worship it, so as a Popish Image has not, neither do I think
that the present Emperors are meant, who are but Images in comparison of the
old Emperors, for the Pope is not so eager to have them worshipped by the
people, but rather to debase them, that he alone may go away with all the
honor: but it is a religious kind of worship which is here meant, and the
Pope himself is this Image, and he does say unto men, That they should make
this Image by teaching it to be necessary unto salvation to have the successor
of Saint Peter in the Sea of Rome for universal Emperor of the world: for
this is in effect to rear up an Image of the first beast, that is, of the old
Imperial authority: and because that if the Pope had no more but this title
without any lively Imperial power, he should be but as it were a dead Image
and exposed to contempt, he brings it about by his bewitching doctrine, that
he is thus esteemed in the hearts of men who are all ready to fight for his
honor as for the divine Majesty, and to suppress all oppugners, and thus he
puts life into this Image, etc. For this beast is both a beast and a false
prophet; as he is set forth by the name of a beast, his authority is intimated,
that he is a great ruler and commander; as he is a false prophet, he raises
up his Empire and command by his delusions to such an height, as that he
becomes a very lively Image of the supreme Roman Majesty, not suffering
himself to be neglected any more than the old Emperors did. The woeful
experience of these times does show the truth of this prophecy, there being
nothing whereof the Pope is so tender as of this Universal honor, not sparing
sex or age, but killing all that will not give it unto him.

Touching the mark which all are caused to receive on their forehead or right
hand, Verse. 16. Pareus.
though Bullinger and some others hold, the mark, the name, and the number of
the name to be all one, yet some distinguish them, expounding the mark of the
indelible Character, which Priests and religious persons are said to receive in
their ordination, when lifting up their right hand they swear fidelity to the
Pope, and by anointings and rasures they are marked in the forehead for his:
and the name and number of his name, of the mark, which all others of that
Religion receive, which is to be called Roman Catholics. Some a little diverse
from this, Brightman.
by the mark understand the oath and public profession of such as are in holy
orders, and of Princes and great persons to defend the Roman Catholic Church
and Pope; and by the name, the title whereby the common sort of the Papals are
known, as Pontificians, Catholics, or Papists, from the Pontifex, Catholic
Bishop or Pope; by the number of the name, such as are more remote from the
Pope, and yet dare not renounce all obedience to his sea, Napier.
as the Grecians. Napier consents unto Bullinger, that the mark, name, and
number are all one, and therefore reads it, Chap. 15.2. The mark of the
number of his name. I cannot see how the distinction before named should stand,
because the very mark is received by all great and small, rich and poor, and
therefore not by Princes and the Clergy only. And if the mark were a diverse
thing from the name or number of the name, it would have been as needful to
set men a work to find out all three, as this one of the number of the name.
I subscribe therefore to Bullinger and Napier touching the identity of these
three. Touching the name, and number of the name, we shall see more in the
next question.

Note from that which has been already said, Note.
that the cursed instruments of the devil can go far in showing signs and
doing acts of great power, and therefore we ought to take heed of being
deluded hereby, yea, by Gods permission, they kill and shed the blood of such
as withstand them, whereby we may gather a certain mark of an Antichristian
spirit communicating with the great red Dragon, and by consequence, of the
communion that the bloud-sucking Papacy has with him.

Quest. 7. What name is set forth by these Greek letters (...), Verse. 18.
which are said to be the number of the name of the beast, and yet the number
of a man?

Answ. Before we come to the resolution of this question, something is to be
premised touching the words of the Text: First it is said to be the number of a
man, Richard. de Sancto victore. Pareus.
according to some, because man may compute it, these numbers being to betaken
not as mystical numbers, as some others in this book of the Revelation; but
for so many as these numerall letters do by the usual account of men set
forth, and therefore one expounds these words as an explication of what was
said before, let him that has wisdom find out the number, Ribera.
for to number is the point of a man, not of any other creature which is void
of understanding: according to others, the number of a man, Arethas.
because a familiar and ordinary name amongst men: according to others, the
number of a man, Beda.
not of any devil or other creature, for no such is to be understood, though
he has been hitherto spoken of as a beast; and to this last do I subscribe,
as plainly thwarting that fond popish conceit, that Antichrist should be
begotten by the Devil; for as touching his generation, he shall be but an
ordinary man as others are. An ordinary name it is unlikely that it should be,
because by it Antichrist is to be known from others, so as he could not be by
his name, if it were common to other men also: neither needed there any such
caution to say, that the number is of a man, as he does usually understand
numbers, which other creatures do not, for this is a thing commonly known
without admonition, and it is employed in the words before that he must be a man
and a wise man that can cast up this count.

Secondly, touching the numbers (...), Pareus makes mention of some that read
it (...), Iren. lib. 5. c. 25.
but all Greek Copies are otherwise, some read it in words at length, (...),
as all Latin Copies and Arias Montanus. But Ireneus affirms, that these
letters are found in all Copies, and inueigheth against the changers of the
letter.

For the several expositions of this number, it were but lost labor to recite
all; I will therefore name some only, referring him that desires to see more
to other Writers. Bullinger. Balaeus lib. 3. de act. Pontif.
Some think that this number sets forth the time when Antichrist began: but
that being ann. 606. here are threescore years more, neither could by the
time, the mark of the beast be found out and his name, as by this number. Most
therefore hold that these be the numerall letters of his name, not precisely to
be found therein letter for letter, Pareus. Fox. Napier. P. du Moulin. Grasser.
etc. Brightman.
but such letters as amount according to the Greek numbering to this number,
and hereupon diverse men have invented diverse names which I spare to mention,
but that which the most learned and judicious of our side do generally rest
upon is, (...) valet (...) found first in Ireneus, and the name (...) coming
to the same number. Fox finds this number in this name in Hebrew, (...) valet
(...) and in Greek, (...) valet (...) This I confess does move me much for
the reverence of so many and grave Authors: but seeing this number of 666. is
not set forth in words, as the number of them that follow the Lamb, chap. 14.
and of the sealed ones, Chap. 7. I cannot be persuaded that the Spirit would
have us look barely to this number, but to the very letters here used. And
indeed, as long as we go this way to work in finding out this number, we
shall never be able to convince the adversary, there being so many names more
containing this number, though all circumstances here considered, some name
agreeing to the Pope is most probably the name here meant. Forbs.
It is not without cause therefore, that one does so much wonder that so many
grave and learned men should be carried away in this manner; howsoever I like
not his conjecture neither, that the number of the name of the beast is
compounded of sixes in opposition to the number of those that follow the Lamb
who are counted by twelve thousands, Chap. 14.
Chap. 7. of every of the twelve Tribes, intimating that the followers of the
beast are not any of this number, but rather a building reared up by Satan's
chief instrument, as sometime the golden Image of threescore cubits height and
six cubits breadth set up by Nebuchadnezzar, and not of that building called the
new Jerusalem, Chap. 21. consisting altogether of twelues. For the scope of
setting down this number is not to show that the followers of the beast are
opposite to the followers of the Lamb, or of the Devils stirring up, for this
has been already made plain enough, in that the Dragon is said to give the
beast his power, and all are said to follow him but only such as have their
names written in the Book of Life. But the intent here is to teach us a mark
or name whereby all that are wise may certainly know him and beware of him.
Viegas. Bellarmine.
The Papals to keep men from searching too far herein teach, that it is
impossible to know his name before that he be come, which time taking for
granted that it is not yet, all search hereafter after may seem to be vain.
For they say, that as the name Jesus could not be known till his coming,
although one of the Sibils did foretell the number that should be in his name
in these Verses, Namque octo monadas, totidem decadas super ista: Lib. 1.
Sibil. carminum.
atque hecatont adas octo infidis significabit, Humanis nomen, that is, 8.
ones, 8. tens, and as many hundreds, that is 888. which are found in the name
(...) valet 10. (...) so the name of the beast should not be known till his
coming: but blind men that they are, whilst they affirm a truth, being
mistaken in the time, they cannot see him who is most easy to be seen to be
disciphered out by this name and mark. Primasius. Ambsbert.
It has bin an ancient opinion, that the compend which is used to express the
name Christ should be the mark of Antichrist, which compend is this, the
lower part of which is t, the upper part r, the Cross intermingled with the
tch, together chrt, Christ. And herein Ambsbertus is so confident, that he
says it was revealed unto him. Somewhat answerable unto this is that which
some have delivered touching the mark of the beast, which they say is the
sign of the Cross, for that is made in diverse figures, two of which our Lords
Cross and St. Andrews Cross as they call them, are plainly in this compend.
Now the name is somewhat more than the mark, for when a man sets his mark
upon any thing he does it by a letter or two, so the mark here is but one
letter ch or t, but the name has in it three letters of note, chx, not much
different from the forenamed compend of Christ, for in stead of being as much
as st, there is t the last letter of this name, and in stead of chapterr which as
one has well noted, if it be written thus, x, Napier.
as it often is, it does not differ from the letter, which in Latin is
equivalent to x in Greek, for sometime x is written thus, and if otherwise, as
is more usual, it is thus, ch, and so is most suitable to the mark before
spoken of. And it is to be thought that the Spirit of God purposely altered the
middle letter, putting ch in stead of r, that we might take occasion to seek
in another language the mystery that lies more close under the Greek x, but
is most apparent in the Latin X, and so in the Latin state find the beast
here pointed at, which in all things pretends Christ, but in truth is
altogether for superstitious crossings and other vain humane inventions, the
true (...), or root of truth, Christ, signified in r being put out, or quite
hidden through the multitude of superstitions.

To conclude then, I hold, that the number of the beasts name consisting in
three letters, is the number of the most reverend Name of Christ, with the
alteration of the middle letter into one equivalent to the Roman X. being a
Cross, which is usually by the Popes and Roman Catholics affixed at the end
of this or any other name of Christ, as thus (...) but has not been thus used
by the Evangelists or Apostles: so that where we find a chief ruler above all
others glorying in the bare name of Christ, and in the figure of the Cross, we
may confidently affirm there is Antichrist, for even very ancient Writers have
held, that he should come under the fairest pretense of holiness. And where
can we else find such an one in all the world, but in the Sea of Rome, the
Bishop whereof calls himself Christ's Vicar, and carries himself as if he
were Christ, forgiving sins, and pretending to be the husband of the Church,
and the rock whereupon she is built, the very peculiars of Christ Jesus; and
as for the figure of the Cross, it is always carried before him, all his Bulls
of pardon are guarded with many Crosses, and he makes Crosses to bless
himself and the people. By a singular divine art therefore is he set forth by
these letters, which are all the letters numerall both in the Greek and Latin
Alphabet, representing the Cross, for ch is a plain Cross, and t the last
letter of, and if you take it together it does also signify the Cross, which
is (...), and therefore may well be marked out by the first letters thereof,
and x taken in the letter equivalent thereto amongst those to whom it properly
pertains is ch the figure of a Cross, or take it together with ch, and it
may well set forth the Cross, which is Crux, or more barbarously written, as
it is sometime, Chrux, seeing these two ch x are the first and last letters of
the word, which in short writing are used for the whole word.

Consider this (O ye Papists) and be confounded, for your head thus plainly
showed to be the beast that shall go into perdition with all such as are
deceived by him. Do not with Ribera seek to elude this, Ribera.
by holding that Antichrist shall give for his mark in his seal, the form of
a Dragon: for his own fellow Viegas confuteth this; neither with Viegas, or
Gagnaeus, by saying that this name, and what it means, cannot yet be known,
especially against one of your own side, Amsbertus, who most seriously
professes, that it was revealed unto him what the mark of Antichrist was,
whereby much light is given to his name, as has been already showed. Why will
ye believe other revelations of other your writers if not this, being contested
unto by grounds of truth? If it shall be said, then we in the Church of
England have the badge of Antichrist, because we have crosses in Baptism, upon
our coin, and in sundry places; I answer, it is not the bare using of a Cross
that makes this badge, but the ascribing of virtue thereto to bless every
thing, as we do not, and glorying in the external form, which is far from
us.

It is the point of every wise man to enquire into these things, for he that
has wisdom is bidden to count the number; Note.
and if we be not of the number of the wise, but foolish, God will not
acknowledge us for his, no more than the foolish Virgins. Let all then make
conscience to search and enquire into this number: Matthew. 25.
and if my labors herein may be any help to the Reader, let him use them, or
enquire out better reason; in the mean season this does fully satisfy me, and
God open the eyes of all his people every where, that they may not ignorantly
be seduced by this beast any more, to the destruction of their souls; and
give courage and resolution to us, who through his mercy are made to see, that
we may never yield to bear the beasts mark, but rather with the Saints yield
to be killed here, that we may live with the Lamb hereafter.

CHAP. XIV.
AND behold a Lamb standing upon mount Zion, Verse. 1.
and with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Fathers name
written on their foreheads, etc. Who are these, and to what time is this to be
referred? What is that musical voice which comes from heaven, and the new
song sung there, which none could learn but these one hundred forty and four
thousand? And what is meant by saying that they are virgins, and follow the
Lamb, and that they are the first fruits unto God, and that no guile is found
in their mouth, etc.

Answ. I will not delay the Reader much here with diversity of expositions, for
this place, as I take it, is parallel to that in the seventh Chapter, so that
as there after much violence and bloodshed of the servants of God spoken of
before, it is added as a comfort, that of every tribe were sealed twelve
thousand, making up all together this number of one hundred forty and four
thousand, In calling him the Lamb he takes up the speech used Chap. 7.8. All
worship the beast whose names were not written in the book of life of the
Lamb.
which stood fast unto the truth of God notwithstanding the danger of those
persecuting times: solikewise here, after the beasts bloody proceedings against
all that would not worship him spoken of in the foregoing chapter, this
comfort is added, that the Lamb Christ Jesus all the time of Antichrists
reign stands upon mount Zion, that is, is vigilant over his Church to
preserve it from perishing, and he has still with him, even in these times of
greatest streights, and hundred forty and four thousand followers, that is,
many thousands thorowout the twelve tribes of his whole Church dispersed over
the world, set forth thus in allusion to the old Church of God under the Law.
And these followers of his are immovable as mount Zion, that is, most fixedly
adhering to his truth, for so the firm standing of the faithful is described
by the Psalmist, saying, Psalm. 125.1.
They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, that can never be removed.
And they have Gods name in their forehead, to set forth their constant and
confident professing of the truth of God, all superstitions of Popery, which
are a mark upon the forehead of those that follow the beast, being utterly
abandoned. And as after the sealing there, an infinite multitude are brought in
with white robes and palms praising God, with whom the Angels join making a
most sweet consent, it being a representation of the joyful condition in
heaven of such as have suffered for Christ in this world, but now are
triumphing there, that the languishing spirits of such as are yet militant upon
earth might be recreated, the more cheerfully to bear the terrible brunts of
hottest persecutions, who were before set forth by the sealed ones: so here is
an intimation of an infinite multitude already rejoicing in heaven, in that he
says, that he heard the voice, as it were, of many waters, and of a great
thunder, and of harpers, which sung a new song: for these speeches may well set
forth an infinite multitude, whose noise is as the noise of great waters and
great thunders, but this seems to be spoken of their congregating together to
this heavenly harmony, which is performed, as it were, by harpes, and singing
of a new song, that is, a most rare and excellent song of the praise of God,
and of the Lord Jesus Christ, which song the faithful here do learn, but
none else, because none but they do praise God, all others magnify the beast,
but these by their praising of God from honest and sincere hearts sanctified by
the truth, begin even now to come into the quite of heaven, to which they and
none but they shall be undoubtedly joined at the last, praising God for their
deliverance perfected, as now they do for the fountain and beginnings hereof,
the Lord Jesus Christ and his spiritual graces, and the joy of the holy Ghost
resulting here-from, whereby they do even now, as it were, sit together in
heavenly places.

And as there an Angel is brought in questioning with John, and telling him
who these were, and of their perfect holiness through the blood of the Lamb,
set forth by white robes washed therein, and of the Lambs being in the midst
of them, and leading them forth to the waters of life: so here John is directly
informed, that these one hundred forty and four thousand of the Church
militant are most excellent and worthy persons, all immaculate and unspotted
before God, both for that he imputes no sin unto them, being justified by
faith in the blood of the Lamb, and for that they have kept themselves virgins
unto God, not having committed fornication with the beast by idolatry, who is
afterward called also the great whore, and have a simple honest heart, like
Nathaneel, who is said to be without guile, so that they could not be blamed,
either for the common vice of others by fornicating in such manner, nor for
hypocrisy and double dealing in professing the truth, as aiming at some
sinister end, or by yielding in show unto those idolatries, thinking that as
long as their hearts were right, they might in show be such for the safeguard
of their lives. These were not too blame any of these ways, for they were
ready, in giving witness to the truth, to lay down their lives. And they are
said to be redeemed from the earth, and from amongst men, to note the power
from whence they were enabled unto this, and in what a most happy condition
different from other men they are, when others, as men of the earth, perish at
the destruction of the earth and earthly things, these are by the Lamb
delivered, and made partakers of that fullness of joy that makes their fellow
servants, who went into heaven before, to play and sing in such an admirable
harmony. And these are led forth by the Lamb, for they follow him whither
soever he goes: they follow him in suffering, and they follow him into glory,
that where he is they may always be.

Napier. Pareus. Brightman. Fox, etc.
That this is parallel to that in Chap. 7. most consent, and it sets forth
the number of such as were not carried away with the common stream of
corruptions prevailing in the time of Popery, and the Lord Jesus appears most
significantly as a Lamb, because he yet suffered his enemies in their
persecuting, but he stands to show his vigilant care over his Church. Arethas.
Some think that this is a diverse thing from that in Chap. 7. there being set
forth the sealed amongst the Jews, here the sealed amongst the Gentiles: some
hold, Alcasar.
that the faithful under the persecuting Emperors are set forth, but all
things so fitly agreeing, and this coming immediately after the description of
the beast, as a thing contemporanean with him, I can see no ground of such
opinion.

It is a notable place for satisfying that question, Note.
what became of the Church all the time that the Pope prevailed, if the Roman
Catholic Church be not the true Church? As in the days of Elijah there were
seven thousand scattered thorowout the tribes of Israel, who were unknown; 1
King 19.
so in these times there were many thousands, some in one country, and somein
another that did distaste the idolatries and superstitions of Rome, preserved
by the care of the Lamb, when the roaring Lion, the Devil, devoured most.

Bullinger Napier. Fox.
the multitude of whom is set forth by the voice of many waters, their bold
threatening of judgments against sin by thunder, and their joy in the midst
of trouble by singing, and playing upon harpes that new song of redemption by
the blood of Christ, set forth in the Gospel; not an old song, such as was
wont to be sung under the Law, though this song be also to be applied unto the
Saints in heaven. And one more particularly understands the noise as of many
waters, Brightman.
of the teaching of the Doctors that lived in the time of the woman's first
beginning to be in the wilderness, such as Augustine, Ambrose, Ierom, etc. who
made a confused noise like to that of many waters, not distinctly setting down
the points of faith, the noise of thunder of Wickliffe, John Husse, Ierom of
Prague, Luther, etc. who stirred up men in diverse parts as the cracking
thunder, and the harpers singing, of the reformed Churches after obtaining a
liberty of the true religion in Heluetia, Sueuia, Geneua, etc. where God was
praised for the light breaking out amongst them. Lyra.
One tells a tale of an hundred forty and four thousand Monks slain by the
Hagarens in Syria and Antioch about the end of Heraclius his reign. Ribera.
Some understand such a number of the Jews which shall be converted when
Antichrist shall come, or part Jews, and part Gentiles. But Pareus is of the
same mind, and agrees with this our exposition, distinguishing the company
with the Lamb, and those of whom the noise is heard; and indeed to understand
it otherwise is to confound things distinguished, seeing after the hundred
forty and four thousand spoken of upon mount Zion with the Lamb, this noise
is heard from heaven, and these upon earth still learn their song, which none
else could do, because as none but the faithful have the Spirit of God, and
feel that joy, which is in the grace of God, so none but they can produce the
true effects of this joy by heartily magnifying Gods holy Name.

Heartily to praise God then, being affected with his mercy in Christ, Note.
is a propriety of such as belong unto Christ, the praises of others are but
the harsh sounding of the instruments of an orall voice, without the grace of
the consent of the animal voice, wherein only is life and sweetness.

Bullinger. Tossanus. Pareus. Fox. Aug. non polluerunt se m^l. cribu^, l.
^^^u^ciau^ra^t carnal cupiditat. bus, nec adhascrunt idolis, d^js alients,
l^ae^^^ius aut ei^ori^us, sed sunt virgins spirituales, quorum spoasus
Christus est.
These have not defiled themselves with women, etc. most of our new Writers
consent to that which has been said, that whoredom committed with the great
whore is specially meant, from which they have been free, though some apply it
unto chastity also, in respect of the body both in the single and married
estate. And not only our new Writers, but the ancient Fathers understand
spiritual pollution by idolatry here, as Augustine saying, They have not
defiled themselves with women, that is, they have renounced carnal
concupiscences, neither have they cleaued to idols, to strange Gods, heresies
or errors, but are spiritual Virgins, whose husband is Christ.

And Ambrose says upon that speech of the Apostle, I have prepared you for one
man, that I might present you a pure Virgin unto Christ. He will have them to
be virgins in faith, such as John does describe being with Christ in the
Revelation, where he says, these are they that have not defiled themselves
with women. It is most absurd to hold here with the Hieracite, a sort of
Heretics of old, who condemned marriage, as joined with pollution, and many
Popish Writers now adays, that apply this unto votaries that lead a single
life, and therefore one of them, Alcasar being ashamed of this, Alcasar.
consents with us that they are the Virgins here meant, who have not
corrupted themselves by an inordinate affection toward the creature. And
indeed, if Virgins properly understood should be meant, many absurdities would
follow thereupon. 1. None of the Patriarchs could be followers of the Lamb,
because they were all married, as were diverse of the Apostles also. 2. Gods
own ordinance should be an hindrance to the following of the Lamb. 3. All
that are truly religious must needs be single, because all that are redeemed
and saved, are here set forth, etc.

It is the praise of those that have been separate from Popish abominations,
they as pure virgins are of the society, Note.
and make the Spouse of Christ, others that are corrupted by error have nothing
to do with him, no more than impure with pure, darkness with light, Belial
with God.

Touching their following of Christ whithersoeuer he goes, it is well
expressed further by some, Bullinger. Brightman.
that if he will have them go after him to the loss of their goods, of their
good name, yea of their life by any kind of most cruel death, yet they are
ready thus to follow him. They are a first fruits unto God that is most holy,
and but a few in comparison of the great multitude that shall come in, as the
truth shall further enlarge it self, Antichrist being more and more consumed
and confounded, even as the first fruits of corn are consecrated unto God, and
are but a little quantity in comparison of the whole crop.

This allegory is most significant to set forth the small number of those that
shall be saved, and their praise before going, Note.
which is also their happiness, serves notably to show the Christian
resolution of this number, they are ready bent to follow Christ through the
greatest troubles, and worldly miseries, so that if any will be a follower of
him, but only so far forth as may stand with his ease, profit or preferment,
he is excluded out of this number.

Quest. 2. And I saw another Angeli flying through the midst of heaven, Verse. 6,
etc.
having an eternal Gospel to preach to all the inhabitants of the earth, and
to every nation, tongue, and people, etc. What is set forth by this Angel and
the two Angels following, whereof the one proclaims the fall of Babylon, the
other the punishment of such as worship the beast?

Brightman. Pareus.
Answ. Some very particularly by these three Angels understand three ranks of
Preachers set out at three several times. 1. About ann. 1371. when Wickliffe
preached against the Pope and Popish idolatries and superstitions, with whom
joined Richard Killington, and Robert Langland here, and in Italy, Dantes,
Marsilius, Patauinus, and Franciscus Petrarcha, and a little after, viz. about
thirty years, in Bohemia, John Husse, and Ierom of Prague, and Nicolas de
Clemangis. 2. About ann. 1500. when Luther, and Zwinglius, and Oecolampadius
began in Germany and Heluetia. In the third rank they place all the zealous
Preachers of the Gospel, which have been since Luther in d^uers countries, as
Bucer, Capito, Hedio, Brentius, etc. in Germany, Bullinger, Pelican, Gualter,
etc. in Heluetia, Farrell, Virell, Calvin, etc. in Geneua, and in England,
Cranmer, Hooper, Latimer, etc. in Denmark, Palladius, Hemingius, etc. in
Italy, Martyr, Zanchy, Tremellius; in Poland, John a Lasco; in Hungary, Michael
Statinus, Stephanus, Szedegenus, Paulus, Thurius, etc. And because after this
no more Angel appears, but the next thing is Christ's coming in a white
cloud to judgment, therefore they hold that the Preachers which now are, shall
never be put down, but continue to maintain the truth brought to light, till
the second coming of the Lord.

Others taking these Angels for three of the seven, which are afterward showed
to power out their vials, Napier.
understand by the first, the forenamed prime Preachers, Luther, Zwinglius,
etc. by the second, a great ruining of the Popish Empire, about ann. 1590. and
by the third, the utter fall of the Pope, about ann. 1639. after which time,
some will still remain in the dregs of their old superstition, but if they
do, here is the portion which they are to expect, to be tormented for
evermore.

Others more generally understand the breaking out of the Gospel again,
Bullinger. Fox. Forbs. Grasserus.
after that all had been corrupted by Popery, the light of which Gospel
breaking out should extend as the truth did at the first to all nations,
because some in all countries should be stirred up to publish the same,
although all receive it not, no more than they did in the Apostles times
carrying the light forth at the first into all countries, for although many
still were idolaters, yet we hear the Apostle affirming, 1 Timothy 3. Col. 1.
that the Gospel was then preached all over the world.

Amongst all these differences, it is agreed in the maine thing, that the
breaking out of the light of the truth, which now, by Gods grace, shines in
England, Scotland, Denmark, etc. is here figured out, opposite unto which, is
Babylon, that is, Rome still laboring to hold men in the darkness of Popish
superstition. But touching the particular application of these figures, either
as Brightman and Pareus does to three distinct times, the last of which is not
distinct, for from Luther, etc. has been only a continuation of those happy
beginnings, and therefore I do not think, that according to that distinction
the Preachers of the truth are figured out. Neither do I subscribe to Napier,
that the third Angel sets forth the Preachers which shall be when the Pope
is quite put down, because killing of the Saints is still spoken of for not
worshipping the beast, and they are comforted with the blessing that shall
follow upon such a death. Nor yet do I think, that generally only the
breaking out of the light is here set forth, but because here are three Angels
succeeding one another in order, I hold that three things are here figured out,
which experience has taught us that live in these days.

1. That the light of the truth should break out, whereby men should be warned
against Popish idolatry and superstition, as it did by Wickliffe first in
England, as England had first a Christened King Lucius, so having the honor
first to hold out the light dispelling the mists of Popish darkness: but
almost contemporanean with Wickliffe were others mentioned before in other
countries also. 2. That the light should shine so, as that the fog of Popery
should vanish in many countries, and that the truth should be so powerfully
preached, that Babels walls should be shaken and ruined, which was done by
Luther and the rest of the Worthies in diverse countries before spoken of. 3.
That the utter fall of the Pope should yet after this be deferred, he
continuing still where his power yet remains to kill and destroy his
opposites. For why else should the third Angel so seriously admonish men not
to worship the beast, etc. adding, Verse. 12.
here is the patience of the Saints, and Blessed are the dead that die in the
Lord, etc. but only because the servants of God in many places should still
be exercised with bloody persecution after the fall of Babel before spoken of
in a great part. So things are like to continue in this state a long time,
only the comfort is, that we are hence assured, that there shall be
Preachers to give warning against the Pope and all false religions till the
last coming of Christ unto judgment, and hereby he shall be consumed more and
more, till the date of this time shall be quite out.
According to this exposition then to expound every passage more particularly;
Verse. 6.
He says, I saw another Angel, when no mention is made, of any Angel in this
Chapter before, having reference to the Angels of the tenth and eleventh
Chapters; flying through the midst of heaven; Eullinger. Fox.
that is, to express the swift and free passage of the truth hereby
represented: That of Brightman expounding it of the imperfect knowledge of
those first Preachers, seems to me to be too far fetched. The Gospel which he
brings, Pareus.
is called the eternal Gospel, to meet with the imputation of the Papists,
who challenged them for broaching a new religion, when as indeed, they preached
nothing but the eternal truth of God which was from the beginning. There was
not long before this, Cent. Magdeburg. 13.
a certain fellow called Cyril a Carmelite Friar, who made a book, which he
entitled The eternal Gospel, grounding upon this place, and the religious of
those times readily received it, because it tended to the maintenance of their
superstitions, affirming that the Gospel set forth by the Apostles was at an
end, and this was now to take place. A most blasphemous tenent, when as this
our Gospel is said to be such, that if an Angel from heaven bring any other,
Gal. 1.8.
he is to be counted accursed. It is none other Gospel therefore which is here
meant, but this only Gospel, which being obscured by the veil of an unknown
tongue, and by false Glosses and interpretations in the time of Popery, is now
come to light again; and that not in a corner, but in all countries and
nations of Christendom, and shall, we doubt not, be diffused into all other
parts ere long. This is the same in effect with that Chap. 10. Thou must
prophecy again to Nations, and Kings, and many peoples.

Fear God, Verse. 7.
and give glory to him, etc. this is all the effect of our preaching now, and
the speech is adaptated to the present occasion: for in the time of Popery men
fear the beast, Pareus.
give him glory, and worship him as most admirable, as was showed Chap. 13. The
chief thing therefore now to be pressed, is to fear God and to worship him,
by giving over that fond admiration of the Pope, whereby they were drawn after
him, trusting in him, and receiving his Dictates as the Oracles of a God, which
indeed is the worshipping of him. And the phrase here used, give glory to God,
does fitly answer that in Chap. 11.13. where it is said, that the great city
being fallen, and seven thousand slain, the rest trembling gave glory to God,
that is, were converted from that superstition. The time of his judgment is
come, that is, is at hand, so that we may gather hence, as Chap. 10. where
after the open book appearing, the Angel swears that time shall be no more,
etc. that now since these things have come to pass, the destruction of the
Pope, and Papacy, and of all wicked ones is very near, even at the doors.

Touching the second Angel proclaiming the fall of Babylon, Verse. 8.
it is plain, that by Babylon here the old city of the Assyrians so called is
not meant, both because this Babylon is described to be such as had dominion in
the time of Saint John over the Kings of the earth, Chap. 17.18. and because
the people of God are bidden to come out of this Babylon, where they had not
been five hundred years before the time of this Prophecy. But some have
held, that by Babylon the world is meant, wherein there is so much confusion by
reason of the Devils reigning in it. But this cannot stand, Ambros. Beda.
Arethas. Haimo. Primasius. Ansel.
because this Babylon is spoken of but as a part of the world: for with her all
nations have committed fornication, and when it is fallen, yet the world of the
wicked remain, for they are threatened with everlasting torments by the next
Angel. And lastly, we are bidden come out of Babylon, which we cannot do, if
by Babylon the whole world be understood. If we look back to Chap. 11.8. we
shall find a great city mentioned, which before was called the holy City,
verse. 2. trodden under foot by the Gentiles two and forty months, in which
city it is said the Lord was slain and his two witnesses, their dead carcasses
being cast out, and all nations and kindreds beholding them, which city all men
know according to the letter is Jerusalem, but spiritually the Text says, it
is Egypt or Sodom. This city I showed there, sets forth the Church of the
Gentiles sometime holy, but by Popery and Mahumetisme in time corrupted
wonderfully, and therefore called Egypt or Sodom; and the fall of it in part
is also there spoken of verse. 13. Now the same is called Babylon, another great
city, and of great note for rule and dominion, and of infamy for idolatry and
cruelty; and because Rome is the head of this corrupted Church, and the chief
city of the world, the Papal Empire residing there, but extending it self
into all parts, it is meant by this Babylon, the name being aptly changed from
Egypt or Sodom to Babylon, Ribera.
to express this imperial Babel-like power. Ribera the Jesuit acknowledges
Rome to be meant by Babylon here, alleging many worthy Writers, who affirmed
the same. As Augustine, August. de Ciuit. Deid. 8.6.22.
who says that Babylon falling, Rome was built; the daughter of Babylon, and
another very Babylon: so likewise Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 14. Beda, Oecumen.
Victorinus, Ieronym. in Esa. 24. Tertull. lib. 3. contra Marcion. Sixtus
Senensis, Ludonicus Viues, Lindanus, Bellarmine, etc. But he will not have
Rome, as the state thereof now stands, to be Babylon, but as it was under the
persecuting heathen Emperors. But this is a most vain defense, 1. Because
Antichrist was not come whilst heathen Rome stood, who by the consent of all
must be come before this fall of Babylon. 2. Because from this Babylon
spiritual fornications, that is, idolatries are derived to all countries and
nations, whereas it was never so with heathen Rome, for then all countries were
suffered to enjoy their own religions, but the Christian only. 3. Because
none of the Authors alleged, except Tertullian, lived whilst heathen Rome
stood, and therefore could not call Rome Babylon; meaning heathen Rome. Lastly,
because this Babylon is afterward called The great Whore, noting a state
apostatizing from the truth sometime received, to go after Idols: for in the
holy Scriptures Israel only and Judah are taxed for whoredom and not either
Countries, because they were married as it were unto the Lord, and yet they
fell from him to the serving of Idols. Other Nations which were never taken in
for Gods peculiar, though they were full of Idols, could not properly be said
to go a whooring, no more could heathen Rome, but the Popish state now iuling
there may justly be thus charged. Ribera seeing that it is but a shift to apply
this to Heathen Rome, at the last leaves it and says, That Rome is meant as
it shall be, when in the time of Antichrist it shall forsake the Pope and the
Catholic Religion as he labors to make it probable that it shall do. But
who so is wise will easily see that this is but a shift to elude a plain
evidence.

To Rome that now is, and to the Pope who has his seat there, all
circumstances do so agree, as that we are sure this Prophecy thus taken is
already verified, a state falling from the Pope there and returning to their
old heathen idolatry is but a phantasma, like the man in the Moon, which none
but fools will believe to be so indeed. Here is now the Empire over Kingdoms
and Nations, here are miracles and shows that draw the world after the Pope.
After a long time of delusion by fair pretenses, the eternal Gospel is come
to light again, and this state has been much shaken this thousand years and
upward, and is in a great part fallen, but yet murthereth and destroys the
Saints according to their old manner; from hence are idolatries and
superstitions derived into all Countries, and lastly now stands that revived
head which was deadly wounded being the seventh, which was to come after Saint
John's time, for of the seven five were fallen, one that is Emperors then
stood, and the seventh, that is the Pope, was to come. And the Jesuit in
yielding that Rome shall fall away to heathen idolatry from the Catholic
Religion does quite forget himself of that grand Maxim, that the Church cannot
err, and is always visible; whereas if this should befall the Church of Rome,
which they hold to be the only Catholic Church, it should both err fowly,
and the Church should sometime be overthrown by the gates of Hell and put
down from the visibility; into such contradictions do they plunge themselves
that are contradictors of the plain and evident truth of Gods Word.

Touching the third Angel threatening eternal destruction to the followers of
the beast, Verse. 9.
enough has been said already, to show to what time it is to be referred,
and as for the torments here mentioned and the comforts propounded to the
faithful, it is easy for any man of himself to render the sense thereof.

Note from all that has been said, Note.
that the doctrine of the reformed Churches at this day is the very doctrine of
Gods Angel: for we teach to ascribe all glory and to give all worship ^o God
only, and not to make any a parta^er with God herein, and in these points not
to fear the tyranny of the Pope and his adherents, but in the fear of God to
persist herein to the end, which is the very effect of the Angels teaching, To
this tends our impugning of Images, and the worshipping of Saints departed,
our denying of the merit of works and supererrogations, the Popes power of
pardoning sins, our ascribing all to grace in the conversion of a sinner, and
holding no virtue to be in crossing and holy water, etc.

Again, Note.
see a plain evidence that this is the truth, and the Roman Catholic state
(Babylon) falling before it in diverse Countries, and which shall be utterly
razed to the foundation, so that a stone shall not be left upon a stone.

Lastly, Note.
all prosperity and prevailing is not to be expected by the servants of God
upon the first falling of Babylon: for she makes head still and puts many
to death, whose comfort yet is, that they are blessed and rest with the Lord,
whereas if cowardly they should for fear turn to the beast, they must be
tormented miserably for evermore. But why is this word from henceforth put in,
are not all the dead that die in the Lord at any time blessed? Yes doubtless,
but there is an opinion of Popery, by which men were carried away in times
past, touching the pains of purgatory fire to be suffered after death which is
secretly here glanced at, as if it should have been said. Hitherto a long time
it has been thought that there is no r^st in death to the godly, but further
pangs yet to be endured in Purgatory, but the vani^y of this tenent being now
discovered by the preaching of the Gospel set forth under the type of the
three Angels, no such thing shall henceforth b^feared, but they shall comfort
themselves in the expectation of immediate rest and joy.

Quest. 3. And behold one like unto the Son of man sitting upon the cloud,
Verse. 14.
having upon his head a crown of gold, and in his hand a sharp sickle, etc.
Who is this and what are the Angels next mentioned; whereof one coming out of
the Temple calls to him to put his sickle into the harvest: and a second
coming out of the Temple also having a sharp sickle, to whom a third coming
out from the Altar that has power over fire, calls to put his sickle into
the Vintage, which is cut down and trodden in a Winepresse without the City,
the blood coming out up to the bridles of the horses by the space of 1600.
furlongs.

Answ. Almost all Expositors agree, that the coming of Christ to judgment is
here represented: for he is like the Son of man, though a great Judge, he
shall come in the Clouds, 1 These. 4. and the consumma ion of the world is
likened unto the cutting down of the Harvest, Mat. 13. and both to the Harvest
and Vintage, Joel 3.13. from whence this phrase seems to be taken. But some
understanding Christ by one like the Son of man as it is commonly taken, P.
du Moulin.
yet hold that some other judgments upon Babylon are here set forth to be
applied to the times of the three Angels going before, the first whereof come
with the eternal Gospel, ann. 1039. in Berengarius, opposing
transubstantiation, and prevailing so far, that France, Spain, Guil.
Noribrigens. Eng. ^^ist. lio. 2 chap 13.
Italy and Germany were full of men holding the same with him, for William
Noribrigens. says, that they were as the sands of the Sea, but they were
persecuted for this, whereupon the Lord being offended sent his Angel with a
sharp sickle of judgment, ann. 1076. About the time of Berengarius his death,
by a quarrel arising between Henry and Gregory the seventh, named Pope
Hildebrand, betwixt whom forty bloody battles were fought, and all things were
filled with confusion and misery.

The second Angel came with threatenings against Babylon by Peter de Bruis, and
Henry de Toulouse, ann. 1130. and by Johannes de Waldo of Lions, ann. 1158. for
they called Rome Babylon, and exhorted all men to go out of her: but Innocent
the third then Pope, caused the Croisado to be preached, and by that means
within a few months 200000. of them were slain in Prouence, Ioh. Cassanion
Hist.
Languedoc and Guienna. Hereat God being again offended, sent another sharp
sickle by Frederick Barbarossa his armies and the Popes, by reason of which
the miseries were so great as that no Pen can express them sufficiently. For
whilst these wars lasted, the Moors wasted Spain together with the
Sarazens, murdering all the Christians which they could find, and the
Saladine destroyed the Kingdom of Jerusalem, which had cost so many millions
of men's lives to conquer it. The third Angel came with admonition to beware of
worshipping the beast by the Preachers of these times, against which when the
Papacy shall grow most outrageous, some greater judgment then ever yet shall
come upon them to the effusion of so much blood, that it shall come up a
wonderful great space of ground to the very horse bridles, which is not yet
effected.

Forbs. Grasserus.
Others hold, that here is set forth the increase of such as should stand for
the truth, it being first vpheld by the immediate power of Christ set forth by
his coming in a cloud with a sharp sickle, but afterward diverse Countries
being converted, his Angels dare be bold to be seen to stand for the truth,
both temporal Kings set forth by the Angel with his sharp sickle, and
spiritual Ministers coming from the Altar, who by their exhortations and
preaching stir up the other against Babylon, so that here in brief is set
down what is more at large described under the seven Vials powered out by the
seven Angels following.

Some more particularly by one like the Son of man understand the protestant
Princes in Misnia, Brightman.
Hassia, Prussia, etc. such as Fredericus Saxo, Mauritius, Philippus
Lantgranius, Johannes Brunswicensis, etc. by the first Angel coming out of
the Temple, Iustus, Jonas, Melancthon, Ambrosius, etc. who were a means to
stir up those Princes to abolish the Mass and to restore the truth, unto the
year 1530. By the other Angel with a sickle, the Lord Cromwell here in
England in the time of King Henry the eight, who did much against Popery, and
by the Angel coming out from the Altar. Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury in those days, who is said to have power over the fire, because he
triumphed in his suffering in the fiery flames for the truth, and he stirred
up the Lord Cromwell out of his great zeal to put down superstition. And the
distance of the place where the blood out of the Wine Press over flowed being
1600. furlongs does notably agree, for in our English miles this is two
hundred, for although the length of England be three hundred miles, yet one
hundred in respect of the coldness and barrenness may well be cut off, as
where there was no such great Vintage of religious persons, who still gathered
to the fattest places of the land. I cannot approve of any of these
expositions, because not particular judgments but the general judgment,
which at last shall be executed upon Babylon is here figured out, unto which
also all the circumstances may be very well fitted, as by and by shall be
showed. And where any thing in words agreeing with the general current of the
holy Scriptures may well bear a suitable interpretation, it is but curiosity to
invent singular interpretations. Brightman has been much taxed for his making
one like the Son of man coming upon a cloud to be an earthly Prince, neither
does that of his touching Cranmer agree, over whom the fire did rather prevail
than he over the fire, in that for fear he recanted for a time, though
afterward he constantly suffered martyrdom, to say nothing of the hundred
miles more in England than the space here set forth, which in vain he seeks
to reconcile.

Others that are for the last judgment of Babylon when Christ shall come at
the end of the world, expound these things diverse ways. Some will have Christ
represented here twice: first, like the Son of man; secondly, by the name of
an Angel with a sickle, because he is the Author of the destruction of the
wicked, and this vindicatiue power is origin^lly and vertually in him, but
instrumentally in the Angels which are implored therein. The Angel coming out
of the Temple calling to him to put in his sickle into the harvest, they
expound of some prime Angel who entreats him thus to do, and so likewise
the Angel coming out from the Altar who has power over the fire, that is, to
execute Gods vengeance by fire as it shall be at the last day. This is
mentioned by Fox in part, who also adds, that they hold that two similitudes
are here used to set forth one and the same thing, that of the harvest to
signify the gathering together of the Elect, this of the Vintage to signify
the gathering together of the reprobate. Pareus.
And part of it is Pareus his, who will have a prime Angel meant every time
that an Angel is mentioned here, also he does justify that exposi^ion of the
Angel with a sharp sickle of Christ before considered in himself, here in
the Ministers of his judgment, as Ioh. 4. Christ is said to baptize more
Disciples than John, though he baptized not but his Disciples. Fox.
Fox holds that two sickles are mentioned, though thence be but one and the
same sickle of Christ, in allusion to that in Joel 3.13. where sickl^s are
spoken of, and whereas an Angel speaks unto Christ to put in his sickle, he
holds that nothing else is hereby signified but that Christ comes to
judgment at the last day by the counsel and appointment of the Father, of
whom he said, that of the day and hour knows no man but the Father. And
that two similitudes are used the more amply to set forth the proceedings which
shall be at this great day of judgment. I will not weary the Reader by
producing more expositions, but rather come directly to show what I conceive by
comparing all their expositions together to be the true meaning of this
apparition.

I think it to be without doubt, that Christ's coming to judgment is meant by
one upon a white Cloud like the Son of man, and specially against Babylon,
whose case more particularly is acted here: for Fox affirms that this was
constantly held by all without contradiction till his time. Act. 1. Mark. 13.26.
It was said that he should come so as he went up into Heaven, that is, in a
Cloud, and that he should come in the Clouds, and his golden Crown is a plain
demonstration that he is the King of Heaven. In that an Angel coming out of
the Temple bids him put his sickle into the harvest, for the time is come.
Bullinger seems to me most rightly to resolve it that this is spoken
parabollically, Bullinger.
wherein all things are not to be streined, but only the scope to be
respected, and so an Angel is brought in telling him that the harvest is ripe;
as if a man's servant coming out of the Corn field, should tell him it is time
to set on workmen to cut down his Corn, for it is ripe and begins to shed
in the field: and if any man will needs go further in expounding all
particulars here, Fox.
that of Fox is the most probable, that hereby is set forth that the particular
appointing of this time is at the will of the father, who because when he
declares himself he is wont to do it by sending an Angel, is said to send
out from his presence an Angel here, for he comes out of the Temple, a fit
type of Gods presence.

Touching the other Angel coming out of the Temple also with a sharp sickle,
Verse. 17.
I assent unto them that hold the same thing to be the second time hereby
represented, for the more ample declaration of the proceedings which shall be at
the day of judgment, a thing not unusual in the holy scriptures, and
particularly in Joel 3.13. whereto it is alluded here. It is intimated therefore
by this double description, that as men do in the time of harvest, and in the
Vintage time, they cut down their Corn, they cut their Grapes, so all the
people of the earth shall be cut down at the last day. Now whereas amongst them
some are good and some bad, it is left to be sought out elsewhere what shall
become of the good, and according to the scope of this place, which is to
terrify the wicked adherers to the Whore of Babylon, the proceedings against
them only are described, they shall be cut down as the Corn in the time of
harvest, and as the Grapes in the Vintage time, that is, they shall be
destroyed from out of this world, neither shall that be all, but after this
they shall be cast into the Wine Press of Gods wrath, there to be crushed and
squeesed in infinite multitudes an infinite long time, set forth by the blood
running out in so great abundance, arguing both many grapes and a long time of
pressing. There is no ground by the reaping of the harvest to understand the
gathering in of the godly as some would have it taken, for Tares are amongst
the Corn, and this similitude, howsoever it does sometime set forth the
putting of an end to this temporal life in all men, yet sometime with a
particular respect unto the wicked only as here, and Joel 3.13. and then it is
only to be so far forth applied, as it sets forth a cutting off or
destroying from off the face of the earth, and if we shall go a little
further in applying it, it must be in that which is understood, but in other
places further added, viz. in respect of that part of the harvest which is to
be burnt with fire, the tares and the chafe which it may be is also intimated
here by the Angel which is said to be over the fire, whose office happily it was
when the other Angel had destroyed the world temporally to cast the bundles of
tares into unquenchable fire, and the grapes which were sharp and sour into
the Wine Press of Gods wrath for evermore. And this Angel comes from the
Altar fitly, because fire is usually taken from thence for the destruction of
the wicked, as Chap. 8.5. from whence happily he may be thus described, as
afterward he that powers out his Vial upon the waters is said immediately to
be the Angel of the waters, Chap. 16.5. so this the Angel of the fire or that
had power over the fire. If any man shall further demand, but why does not
Christ appear the second time like the Son of man, but an Angel is said to
appear, if both apparitions serve to express the same thing. I answer, that
in the destruction of the world at the last day two things are to be
considered, the Judge by whose power and authority it shall be acted, and the
instruments which shall be employed herein; the first, is the Son of man, the
second, the Angels spoken of as one here, to show their going about this
ministry as one, and according to this twofold consideration there are two
diverse appearances of the Son of man sitting and crowned, and of an Angel
neither sitting nor crowned, whereby we are to understand the Lord and Master
of this great Harvest and Vintage is Christ Jesus, he only gives power to
cut down, and a fruit of his just wrath is the wickeds suffering of endless
torments: but he does instrumentally act both the one judgment and the other
by his holy Angels, the sentence giving is omitted here, the just manner of the
whole proceeding at that day being sufficiently declared elsewhere. He shall
come in a Cloud having a sharp sickle in his hand, that is, being ready to
condemn the wicked world and to cut them off with the breath of his mouth as
with a sharp sickle, then the Angels with all readiness as his Ministers
shall destroy the world, and after sentence by him given leaving the godly who
are invited into the Kingdom of Heaven, they shall cast the wicked into their
place of torment in innumerable multitudes. And thus I think that all hitherto
is made most plain. There remains only the space of ground without the City
where the Wine Press is trodden, being 1600. furlongs to be considered:
touching which, I find that most Exposi^ors content themselves with this
general, that here is set forth the great abundance of those that shall be
destroyed, so that if men on horseback would look out to it, their blood
covers the ground such a distance and so deep as that it comes up to the
horse bridles, it being alluded unto Esa. 66.24. where somewhat a like phrase
is used.

But one besides Brightman before spoken of, Napier.
who applies it to England, expounds it particularly of the time when this
great judgment shall be, viz. ann. 1600. from the time of this vision, that
is, about ann. 1699. But here is nothing to intimate any time but the
greatness of the place where this Wine Press stands. Rabbi Menahen.
Rabbi Menahen upon Genesis fol. 60. says, that the land of Canaan was 1600.
furlongs in length, now for so much as all things are carried here on in an
Allegory to the Temple, the Altar and the holy City which were of the Jews, I
doubt not but in this space without the City it is also alluded unto that
Country, such an innumerable multitude are destroyed, as if such a slaughter of
men were made as would ouerflow in this depth all the whole land of Canaan.

The valley of Iehoshaphat has been of old set forth to be the place of
judgment, and Tophet, Joel 3. Esa. 30.
which is in that Country, to be wide and large, where there is wood enough,
and the breath of the Lord as a river of brimstone kindling it. It is without
the City of the Saints, which is much greater, even 12000. furlongs square,
Chap. 21.16. not for that the number with shall be tormented together is less
than the number of those that shall be saved, but because to be streightened is
an addition to pain, to be enlarged an addition to joy and comfort.

Touching the Angel of the fire, I do not think with some, that either here
or Chap. 16. where the Angel of the waters is spoken of, it can be justly
gathered that diverse things are assigned to diverse Angels to rule over, for
they together are ministering Spirits to execute the will of God, sometime in
one kind, and sometime in another; and because this Angel before, Chap. 8.5.
is said to take a Censer full of fiery coals from the Altar, he may now be
brought in by this Periphrasis, tacitly implying what shall become of the
harvest of the wicked before said to be reaped, and he that afterward is
called the Angel of the waters, is plainly so called because he powered out his
Vial upon the waters.

Note, Note.
that when the godly who have suffered and been toiled in this world shall
rest most sweetly from all travel and labor, the wicked followers of the
beast of Rome, and all wicked persons come to burning and pressing with
intolerable pangs, neither can there be any avoiding of it, because the Lord
Jesus and his holy Angels, from whom none can lie hid (and not men who may be
deceived) shall be actors in adiudging and compelling them into the Wine Press.

CHAP. XV.
ANd I saw another great wonder in Heaven, Verse. 1, 2, etc.
seven Angels having the seven last plagues, etc. Verse. 2. And I saw as it were
a glassie sea mingled with fire, etc. To what time is this to be referred, what
is this glassie Sea whereupon the Harpers stand, and what is the song of Moses
which they sung, and who are they that sing this song?

Answ. Some refer the pouring out of these Vials unto the time of Hadrian,
Leo, and Hildebrand, Lyra.
Popes with their successors, who powered out these Vials against Constantinus,
Iconomachus, Henry the fourth and other Emperors, even until the time of
Peter the Eremite, who stirred all up to the holy war, that is, from the
year 742. to the year 1094. Some apply these things to the supposed three
years and an half of Antichrist, Ribera. Viegas. Gagnaeus. Rupertus. Beda.
Haimo. Pannonius. Richard. de Sancto Victore. Gorran, etc. Forbs. Brightman.
Pareus. Ballinger. Fox. Napier.
holding that according to the letter it shall be fulfilled as in the plagues
of Egypt. Some, that these Angels set forth the Preachers which have been and
shall be then, denouncing Gods judgments against the wicked in all times and
ages since the first preaching of the Gospel. Some refer this vision to the
tune after Antichrists discovery, holding that it is here set forth by what
degrees he should be brought down until his final utter destruction. And
lastly, some do make these seven Vials parallel to the seven Trumpets, and so
to set forth the judgments of God against persecutors in all ages since the
first propagation of the Gospel. This last is coincident almost with the
third, touching Preachers denouncing Gods judgments in the several ages of
the Gospel, neither of which can stand here, because these are the last
effects of Gods anger in this book reucaled, and so necessarily after all the
judgments before figured out any kind of way. As for that of Lyra, it is not
worth the refuting, because so these judgments should all have been executed
long ago, when it is plain here that they hold to the end of the world. And
that of their taking effect in the supposed three years and an half of
Antichrists reign is most ridiculous, because if in such a time according to
the letter these things should be sensibly fulfilled, it were easy for every
man to know Antichrist, and when the day of judgment shall be, which are both
very great mysteries. I subscribe therefore to them that apply these things to
these latter times, wherein Antichrist being revealed, is diverse ways plagued,
and shall be plagued till that he be utterly destroyed. For now that the
spirit is fallen upon Antichrists ruin, Chap. 14. 8, etc. he continues in the
description thereof, and of the preuailings and final happiness of such as
stand for the truth, to the end of the book, handling in order the passages of
his fall more at large, and of the last general judgment of the whole world.
The judgments of God upon Antichrist and his adherents are set forth first
obscurely under the figure of Angels pouring out their Vials, Chap. 15, 16.
then more plainly the Whore of Babylon and her fall being more at large
described, Chap. 17, 18. and the joy of the godly Orthodox therefore, Chap. 19.
after which the chaining up of Satan and his loosening being mentioned, Chap.
20. together with the fearful destruction of the wicked, the most happy
estate of the godly is described, Chap. 21, 22. and who shall be excluded from
it.

Beda. Pannonius. Primasius. Richard. de Sancto victore. Rupertus, etc. Forbs.
Touching the glassie Sea mingled with fire, some will have it to be baptism,
wherein the holy Ghost like fire is given: the faithful that have held the
faith whereinto they have been baptized, not being overcome by the fear of
Antichrist though they have passed through the fire, stand now rejoicing and
praising God for his downfall. Some understand the pure Word of God
accompanied with the Spirit set forth here, Brightman. Bullinger. Pareus.
Napier.
as the means whereby Antichrist is overcome. Some the word or truth
accompanied with contention about some points by the Lutherans, etc. And some
by the glassie Sea understand the world like unto the Sea for tumultuousnesse,
but glassie because transparent to the eyes of God or settled unto the
faithful, it is mingled with fire by adversities and persecutions which the
faithful meet withal here. I have already delivered my poor conjecture
touching this glassie sea spoken of before, Chap. 4.6. which as I take it is
the same with this. A Sea of pure water transparent like Crystal, sets
forth holiness and immunity from corruptions in the midst of the Antichristian
state. Hereupon the faithful are set forth standing, because they abide still
in the pure worshipping of God, but this their purity is not without the
mixture of fire through adversity for the cause thereof, for to fire are
sufferings here compared by Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 4.22.
whereas he bids us not to think strange of the fiery trial. Those
expositions which are for Baptism and for the Word of God do not differ much
from this, they being a means of sanctifying and settling them in this grace,
but in this sense the proper scope of this place is not so fully declared. How
the world may be figured out by such a clear water, seeing it is so miery and
corrupt, I cannot see. Touching the fire mingled, if it be understood of the
holy Ghost, here were nothing but purity to purity, which is unlikely; if
contentions amongst the faithful themselves, they should not at the same
instant have been brought in in so sweet an harmony of praising God: but by
fire understanding affliction, the estate of the godly even in these times
wherein Antichrist is going down, is most significantly set out, they are not
yet in their reformed serving of God without all mixture of the fire of
persecution, but are as it were upon a glassie Sea mingled with fire. They are
said to have overcome the beast and his Image, etc. because they have prevailed
about the reformation of Religion by an high hand, setting up the same against
the machinations of the beast, his image, character, or number of his name. The
harpes of God which they have, seem to have reference to that which was spoken
of Harpers, Chap. 14. they heard the Harpers in Heaven then and learned their
song, now they sing it playing as they did. And all this is said to be done in
Heaven, because the godly by faith are in Heaven in mind, though in body they
be in this world. The song which was only mentioned before, is here more
particularly declared to be the song of Moses, a most fit song for such as
precaile against the beast, for in that song Moses and the children of Israel
praised God for their deliverance from Pharaoh, Exodus 15.
and for executing judgment upon him in the red Sea, wherein his might did
wonderfully appear: so likewise the Church being endangered by this beast, but
the victory being obtained through God inabling her, though she cannot yet
stand upon the Sea bank, but in the Sea mingled with fire, yet for her
deliverance in part obtained, and fully by faith expected to be ere long, with
Harp and song she praises God as Moses then did. And it is called the song of
the Lamb also, because containing his praises, as Chap. 5.9. Here God is
praised for his power already showed, and the coming in of all the Gentiles is
prophetically mentioned in these words, Verse. 4.
And all the Gentiles shall come and worship before thee.

Here is matter of comfort to all the faithful, Note.
that in purity study to serve God without admitting any popish corruption,
although there be opposition and much trouble to them still, yet they may
rejoice as Victors over the Pope, being assured that he with all his adherents
shall go down more and more, and the number of the pure worshippers of God
shall increase, till that even all the Gentiles come to join with them, popish
corruptions being quite abolished in all places. And out of our joy herein we
ought to be thankful to the Lord, singularly praising him for this incstimable
blessing, wherein we of the Church of England have shared with the first and
in the largest measure.

Quest. Verse. 5.
2. After these things I looked, and behold the Temple of the tabernacle of the
testimony was opened in Heaven, etc. What is meant by this, and in that the
seven Angels which come forth are so clothed, and have seven golden Vials
given unto them by one of the four Animals, and what is meant by the smoke of
the glory of God filling the Temple, and hindering that none could enter till
the seven Angels had powered out their Vials?

Answ. Brightman.
Some by the opening of the Temple, wherein was the Tabernacle of the two
Tables, being the Holy of holies, understand a greater measure of knowledge in
the most mystical and recondit things of God which now should be in the
Church, Antichrist falling, Forbs.
or the Church coming to light, which had hitherto a long time lien hid
through persecution: Napier.
yet some that parallel these Vials and the Trumpets together, apply it to the
primitive Church in this sense. Some understand nothing but just proceedings,
Bullinger. Fox.
because they come out of the Temple where the Law of righteousness was kept.
Some without any mystical signification hold, Pareus.
that as in a Stage Play the Actors come out of diverse places, and the
beginning of a Scene is set forth by the opening of the place from whence they
come, so here these Angels are set forth coming out of the Temple in Heaven.
We read of the Temple being opened, Chap. 11.19. that the Arc of the
testimony might appear: but here the same Temple is opened for another
purpose, that the Angels with their plagues might come forth and power them out
upon the earth. I think therefore that they are mistaken, which confound these
two as one mystery of divine revelations now made more than in times past.
There is no need to press this passage any further, than that the Temple is
set open for them to come out being seven in number, whereas no opening is
spoken of in the foregoing Chapter, because there one Angel came forth alone,
here seven together, but they come all out of the Temple, that is, from Gods
presence, who is the Author of the ensuing plagues, and so are apparelled
accordingly in a glorious manner as becomes the servants of so great a
majesty, and have golden Vials given them by one of the four Animals before
described to be round about the Throne, Chap. 4.
who as a chief Officer in the Court of Heaven, is appointed to give them
Commission and a charge to execute his wrath, to show that it is not left to
the will of any creature to plague the world when he lists, but at the time
appointed by the Lord, and such judgments as happen are not casual, but by
him determined and appointed in respect of all circumstances.

Touching the smoke from the glory of the Lord; some expound it of the anger of
the Lord, the effects whereof were these Vials.

Primasius. Bullinger.


Ambros. And^eas. Gagneus.
till these judgments be executed.

Pareus. Exodus 40.34. 1 King. 8.10. Gorran consents to the blinding of the
reprobate here signified.
so that Moses could not enter in; and likewise at the dedication of Solomon's
Temple, the blinding of the eyes of the greatest Doctors in the Papacy being
figured out, so that they shall not be able to see into the errors by them
maintained, till they have smarted by all these following plagues, that is,
never.

Brightman.
when the full number of the faithful shall be made up at the time of the
Jews conversion, which is intimated, shall not be till these Vials be powered
all out, when it is said, no man could enter into the Temple till the seven
Angels had done pouring out their Vials. In the mean season, they which
embrace the truth shall be but a few, and the light shall be hold by the
adverse part to be but a fume or smoke, because they shall not see into it.

Forbs.
even till the emptying out of all these Vials, so as that none could hinder
them all the time in their proceedings.

Napier.
so as that till the pouring out of these Vials finished, there should be no
pure Church cleansed from all corruptions.

Of all these expositions, Forbs.
that seems to me to be most genuine and least streined, which applies this
unto GODS powerful presence, so that nothing can hinder the executing of these
plagues till the full end thereof: for out of the Temple the Angels with these
plagues are said to come, intimating that the Lord, who dwells there, has
decreed them; now because happily there might be some hope that he might be
entreated and alter this decree, it is added, that none could enter into the
Temple, till that all these vials of wrath were powered out, the Temple was so
full of smoke from the glory and power of the Lord, being exceedingly angry
for the blasphemies and outrages of Antichrist, that is, none of the
Antichristian sect could turn to the Lord, and by humbling themselves before
him seek to auert his anger till it had had the full course; and to this
agrees the first and fourth exposition, and it is further confirmed, Chap.
9.20. The second exposition cannot stand, because so it would follow, that it
is a vain thing to search into these mysteries, whereas we are in sundry places
commanded and encouraged so to do. The third is absurd, because they enter
into heaven, who go thither in soul, as all the godly do continually,
whenever they depart out of this life. The fifth is too particular in applying
this entering to the Jews, and both fifth and seventh too much strained in
making the smoke a sign of obscurity: for as these plagues shall be executed,
certainly we shall be more enlightened in the mysteries of God here set forth.

Note, Note.
that the world is deceived in their common tenent, that they can repent when
they list* let them consider this example and tremble, taking time before the
smoke of Gods anger for their persisting in sin become so great, that not one
of them can enter his Temple. The Israelites hardened themselves, Heb. 3.
wherefore God swear that they should never enter into his rest, no more shall
they that now harden themselves in hope of turning afterward soon enough to
obtain mercy.



CHAP. XVI.
AND I heard a great voice out of the Temple, Verse. 1, etc.
saying to the seven Angels. Go and power out your vials of the wrath of God
upon the earth. And the first went and powered out his vial upon the earth,
etc. What are the plagues here figured out, and at what times are they or shall
they be executed?

Answ. Some hold, that the judgments of God upon the world for sin ever
since the time of the Gospel, Napier.
are here figured out in several ages. 1. From the year 71. to 316. when the
Roman Empire was judged diverse ways. 2. From 316. to 561. when the seat of the
Empire being translated to Constantinople, it was left as a prey to the Goths.
3. From 561. to 806. when Mahumetisme ouerspred the world, and became a great
plague unto it. 4. From 806. to 1051. when contentions were rife about images,
and men blasphemed, calling them Gods that were no Gods. 5. From 1051. to 1296.
when Zadock, an Emperor of the Turks, invaded the Roman Empire more and more,
to the great astonishment of those that were of this Empire. 6. From 1296. to
1541. in which time was Ottoman the great Turk, who wan Constantinople coming
from Euphrates, and then by the solicitation of agents on both sides, said here
to be unclean spirits, they were stirred up to fight many battles, both they
of the Popish and of the Mahumetan religion. 7. From 1541. to 1791. when all
shall either be Papists, Protestants, or Neutrals, being divided into three
parts, and in this age the world shall end. And thus they parallel these seven
vials with the seven trumpets before going.

Fox.
plague upon the heathen persecutors in the days of Gallus and Volusianus,
which was a little before the ten years persecution by Dioclesian. By the
second and third, the destructions of heathen Emperors by violent deaths,
being as the sea; and of subordinate powers under them, being as rivers. By the
fourth, that extraordinary heat of the Sun in the camp of Antoninus
Philosophus the Emperor, about an. 162. in his expedition against the
Marcomanni, when his whole army having been oppressed herewith by the space of
five days together, and now ready all to perish, a great shower of rain was
obtained by the twelfth legion, being full of Christians. By the fifth, the
ruinating of the Roman Empire by the Goths, Vandals, etc. By the sixth, the
judgments which came upon the world by the Turks and Tartarians, before
figured out under the sixth trumpet, after which all join together against the
truth: the Dragon, which is the Devil; the beast, which is the Pope; and the
false prophet, who is the Mahumetan: for though one of these is against
another, yet in this they join all together, that they persecute Christ in his
members. Judge. 5.19.
But they assemble together none otherwise than Iabin and Sisera did at
Megiddo, that is, to their own destruction in the end. By the seventh, the end
of all things.

Neither of these expositions can stand, because the first of these plagues is
inflicted upon such as bear the mark of the beast, as is expressly said, verse.
2. Wherefore they must needs have all reference to the latter times, after that
Antichrist had long tyrannized, and compelled men to bear his mark, putting
to death all that refused so to do.

Others therefore more rightly, apply these plagues unto the times since that
Antichrist began to be discovered by men zealous for the truth of God. But yet
in the particular declaration of themselves they differ much one from another.

ann. 1494 in the Neopolitan war made by the French and Spanish, Bullinger.
by means of an whore in their army: with this loathsome disease especially
the Friars and Nuns of France are plagued, who are such infest enemies against
Matrimony. By the second the pestilence, which is caused by the corruption of
waters and air. By the third the chief Doctors of the Romish religion, who
are compared to rivers of blood, because such incendiaries of war in all parts
of Christendom. By the fourth, some great drought breeding fevers, and hot
diseases in men's bodies, the common effect whereof, is to make them outrageous.
By the fifth, the obscuring of the glory of the Popish religion by the arising
of the light of the truth, that being now detested, as full of errors and
abominable, which before drew all men unto it, as most venerable. By the sixth,
the taking away of the profits of the Roman Sea, which were wont to come from
the countries round about, whereby it shall be made weak and feeble, and so be
quite overthrown by the professors of the truth, who are meant by the Kings
of the East, for they are said to be Kings and Priests unto God, and as
Euphrates was to Babylon, so the Popes rich revenues are a defense to his Sea.
Against this plague the Pope bestirreth himself, sending out his Legates, which
are said to be three evil spirits like frogs, because they are ever croaking
in the ears of kings and princes of the earth to move them to war for the
defense of holy Church; and they are three, that is, a full number, likely to
prevail, as it is said of a threefold cord, that it is not easily broken.
These prevail so, as that the Potentates of the earth stand to the Pope, and
fight for him and his religion, even until the great day of the Lords battle,
when all shall be cut off, that is, at the day of judgment, which is
described under the next vial, by the commotions in the air, by thunderings
and lightenings, etc.

Gregory the seventh, Grasser.
when the Roman Clergy began to be exempt from the secular jurisdiction,
becoming thus the more licentious in their filthiness, seeing none but the
Pope and his instruments now had power to judge them. So that they make these
seven vials none other but types of corruption by degrees inuading the Church
of Rome; first in their manners, they becoming most filthy and vile. 2. In
their doctrine, set forth under the second vial, by the sea turned into blood.
3. In their bloodshed, by being an occasion of many civil wars and
dissentions. 4. In their tyranny, scorching like the heat of the Sun in the
Canicular days, beginning in the days of Gregory the eighth. 5. After all
this, the throne of the beast was darkened in the Council of Constance, by
means of John Husse and Ierom of Prague, boldly laying open the wickedness of
the Papacy, which made them even to gnaw their tongues for sorrow. 6. The sixth
vial took effect in the sixteenth age of Christ's incarnation, when the
Lusitanians passing beyond the promontory of the cape of good hope, came into
the Persian gulf, whereinto the river of Euphrates falls, and subjected the
East parts thereof, and going further took Calecut, and Molucco, and Iapania,
which are the uttermost bounds of the world, and of the East in respect of us,
founding there many Bishoptickes, and seminaries of Jesuits, whereas this way
was never opened before, neither had they any knowledge of the Romish religion.
And that this Prophecy might be fulfilled according to the letter, by the
coming of the Kings of the East from those parts so far remote, the Jesuits
brought over the Ambassadors of the three Kings of Iaponia, ann. 1584. through
the most famous parts of Spain and Italy to Rome, where in the name of their
kings they did obedience to Gregory the thirteenth then Pope: Genebrard. in
Psalm. 68 v 34.
and this Genebrard himself a Papist acknowledges to be the fulfilling of
this prophecy; holding that they came over to succor the Church now
languishing through the great opposition that it finds in these parts. And in
this time the Popes Legates and the Jesuits, like frogs leaping about, bestirre
themselves to make civil commotions in all parts of Christendom, for the
rooting out of heretics, as they call them, but the armies are gathered
together into Harmageddon, signifying a cursed army, and so they make a way
hereby to their own utter destruction, figured out under the seventh vial.
This exposition is prosecuted very largely by the Author.

Forbs.
the earthly kingdom of Antichrist, distinguish them according to the relation
betwixt the earth, sea, rivers, and air, which at the first are altogether
understood by the earth which is below, being opposed to heaven above. And thus
the first vial is the first and lightest degree of evil that befell this
kingdom, when by the light of the Gospel, their avarice, filthiness, pride
and hypocrisy, as noisome boiles were detected, ^ew yet daring to challenge
their doctrine, which is impugned under the next vial, when this Sea appeared
filthy like blood, the very worship, processions, and pilgrimages amongst them
being exclaimed upon as superstitious. Under the third, the corruption of their
chief Doctors, who as rivers, seek (by their eloquence and learning) to
sweeten this Sea, is set forth; and withal, the execution done upon them for
their conspiracies and treacheries against states and kingdoms. Under the
fourth vial they are enraged against the truth, being exceedingly heat and
vexed, by the light and Sunshine thereof growing clearer, and of more force
every day; for in stead of repenting they are more obdurated hereby. Under the
fifth vial is showed, how the glory of Antichrists kingdom is darkened, the
Pope and Papistry becoming now vile and odious to many, whereupon like men
distracted they gnaw their tongues for sorrow. Under the sixth vial is showed,
how the riches, glory, and dominion of this kingdom being decayed, set forth
by the river Euphrates dried up, wherein it is alluded to Ier. 51. an open way
shall be made for the Jews and Mahumetans in the East to come in and receive
the Gospel, that as their defection in the Eastern parts to Mahumetisme was
occasioned by the rise of the Pope, so their coming again to embrace the
truth may follow upon the fall of the Pope. But the Popes emissaries compared
to unclean spirits and frogs shall still seek to hinder it, by exciting the
Potentates of the earth to wars in favor of the Pope, which when they shall be
about with an high enterprise, set forth by the word Harmageddon, that is, the
mountain of Megiddo, which place is twice mentioned, 1. Judge. 5. when Iabin
and Sisera are said to fall at the waters of Megiddo; 2. when Josiah was slain
by Pharaoh Necho in the valley of Megiddo, 2 King. 23. but here neither waters,
nor valley, but mountain of Megiddo is named, to show, that when they should
be at the highest pitch of their design, they should be defeated, as God is
said to foil Gog upon the mountains of Israel: and hence a twofold sorrow
shall ensue, one worldly of those that are overthrown, as the Midianites
sorrowed when Iabin and Sisera were discomfited; the other godly of those that
hereby take occasion to see and acknowledge him, whom they have pierced, as
Zach. 12. and as they mourned for Josiah when he was slain by Pharaoh Necho.
Under the seventh vial, the great alteration that after these things shall be
in the world is set forth; all the enemies of the truth being destroyed, the
Church shall come to a flourishing state, having nothing to expect more, but
the coming of the Bridegroom Christ Jesus.

Brightman.
who were stirred up against the Papacy, will have the first to be Queen
ELIZABETH of blessed memory, about ann. 1560. and the byle to be her favoring
of the reformed religion, turning out of their Bishoprics and livings, Popish
Bishops and Parsons. The second Chemnitius, in his writing of that book called
Examen Concilij Tridentini, wherein the Sea of the Council of Trent is set
forth in the colors, all bloody and corrupt. The third, the Parliament here in
England ann. 1581. decreeing, that they should be proceeded against as
traitors, who should at any time after go about to draw any to the Roman
religion, thus seeking to alienate their hearts from their lawful Prince: for
hereby many rivers, setting forth their Popish Doctors, came to run with
blood, when they were for this executed. The fourth, such as have illustrated
the dark places of the holy Scriptures, which are as the Sun, and the more
they come to be explained, as it is now to be expected, that they shall be
daily more and more, this being the time wherein knowledge shall increase the
more, as with the heat of the fire shall the Romanists be vexed and tormented,
but rather to their obduration than to their conversion. The fifth, some greater
calamity than ever, that shall come upon Rome it self to the utter overthrow
thereof, according to that prophecy of the Sybil, (...), Then thou shall be
all desolate, as if thou had never been. The sixth, a Divine power that shall
bring the Jews home unto the truth, ^. Esdras 13.43.
who as Esdras says, went through the straight passages of Euphrates: for of
their return Esayas prophesies, saying, I will say unto the deep, be dry,
and I will dry up thy floods, Chap. 51.10. they are called kings, because they
shall reign all over the E^st parts. Then the Turk and the Pope set forth by
the Dragon, and false prophet, and beast, shall bestirre themselves by their
agents, Bassaes, Jesuits, and the like, sparing for no cost to suppress the
truth: and the powers which they shall assemble shall be in these Western
parts, where the Gospel has most prevailed, being called Harmageddon, the
mountain of delights, of Har a mountain, and (...) Maggedim, delights. The
seventh is, according to this exposition, applied as in the exposition before
going, all the prophecies of holy Scripture have now taken their effect: The
great City is divided into three parts, the three before spoken of, viz. the
Dragon, beast, and false prophet; that is, the Turk and Pope being destroyed,
but yet no end of the world.

Pareus.
holding that the first vial was powered out by Luther and Zwinglius, laying
open the sores of Popery to their great vexation: the second, when the Council
of Trent set down such corrupt Canons of religion: the third, which is not yet
fulfilled, when the Bishops, and Doctors, and chief vpholders of the Roman
religion, shall have the same measure meted unto them, which they have measured
unto others by the shedding of their blood: the fourth, when by the light of
the truth increasing, the Papals shall be heat, and troubled, and blaspheme it
out of their anguish; the fifth, when the state of Popery shall yet become more
abominable, the foggy darkness thereof appearing more and more by the coming
on of the light: the sixth, when the revenues of the Popedom decaying, new
kings, set forth by the kings of the East, because they shall be converted to
the truth, shall be a means of the destruction thereof. This was Bullingers
before, and is subscribed unto by Aretius and Illiricus, and by Pareus his
Auonymus, as he says, who wrote above two hundred and threescore years agone.
This decay in the Papail revenues has been these hundred years, but how does
the Pope seek to help himself? There are three unclean spirits like frogs
coming out of his mouth, which are the Popes Legates, the Bishops who direct
them, and the Jesuits, who draw into their league the Kings of America, India
and Persia, for the defense of the Popedom, so that there are like to be
great stirs in the world, and a great conspiracy to oppress the truth: but
their gathering together shall be to their own destruction, because into
Harmageddon where Josiah fell, an occasion of much sorrow and mourning. For the
seventh Angel shall then power out his vial, the great day of judgment being
come, the terriblenesse whereof is set forth by many fearful events of
thunder, lightening, earthquake, and hail.

Primas. Richard. de Sancto Victore. Hanno. Ambsbert. Pannonius. Ioachim. etc.
who at several times have threatened Gods judgments, are set forth. By the
first, the Apostles threatening the Jews for their infidelity, which as an
incurable sore, remains upon them to this day. By the second, the Preachers
which threatened the sea of the Gentiles. By the third, such as opposed
heretics. By the fourth, such as reproved the Clergy and chief Bishops for
their corruptions. By the fifth, such as opposed the followers of Antichrist,
and that Antichrist. By the sixth, such as reprove the Kings and Princes
adhering to Antichrist. By the seventh, such as threaten the destruction of the
prince of the air, the Author unto Antichrist of all his tyranny, after which
he shall be thrown down to his place of torment. Diverse Popish Writers
follow this also, as Gorran and Gagneus, etc.

Viegas will have all to be literally understood, holding, that as the
Egyptians were visibly and sensibly by diverse judgments confounded before the
Hebrews, Blas. Viegas.
so Antichrist and his followers shall be before the Catholics.

Mason*
the slaughters made of the Papists by the Turks are to be understood, by the
vial powered out upon the Sun, the turning of their Bishops, Friars, and
other religious persons out of their dens here in England, etc. making them
boil in heat at it. By that upon the beasts throne, the taking away of the
Popes revenues, to the great darkening of his glory, consisting so much in
worldly pomp and riches. By that upon Euphrates, the removing of all
impediments, that the kings which have formerly given honor to the beast, may
now come and destroy her. By that into the air, producing thunderings, etc.
the utter destruction of Popery by the powerful preaching of the word, when
all fly away, that is, turn from Popery to the embracing of the truth.

Babylon was when Euphrates was dried up; whereupon the Jesuits have done
their uttermost endeavor to stir up Popish Princes to succor this
languishing state, but by a secret providence they have been brought together
into Harmageddon, that is, to their destruction, so that the place may well be
called from hence by this name, signifying the destruction of an army, as the
Hebrews were wont from any notable accident to give the name to a place. And
all this he holds to be already fulfilled for the most part, the Spanish
Armado in 1588. being brought by such means into an Harmageddon. So that now
we live under the seventh vial, wherein shall be greater mutations in states
than ever, and that in this very age, the Popish faction being destroyed with
horrible destructions, and so a final end being put unto Rome and to the
Popedom. I might set down more expositions, but these shall suffice, wherein
indeed I have been the larger, because of the obscurity of this place, giving
such occasion of diversity of conjectures, as that amongst our new Writers
scarce two are to be found that agree together in all things, that having so
many before our eyes, we may ^^e helped the more in finding out the truth.
expound these vials of Preachers in diverse ages are surely mistaken, because
these are the last plagues of all in this book contained, and therefore cannot
be in diverse ages, but in the last only: and they are powered out against
Antichrist his marked ones, and upon his throne, and to his disturbance,
intimated in that out of his mouth come the frogs, to move the Kings of the
earth to wars in his defense.

If in the entry it be a stumble, as some have made it, how these Angels may be
justified to do according to their command, when as being bidden to power out
their vials upon the earth, they do not but one of them only, the rest pouring
out their vials upon the sea, rivers, throne of the beast, Sun, and air,
this I take it, has been well resolved already in the fifth exposition, all
these are but the parts of the earth, as it is here taken, viz. for the
kingdom of Antichrist here below opposed to heaven above so often mentioned in
this prophecy, when the faithful servants of God are spoken of.

Touching the first Angel with his vial, 1. Angel,
I cannot with Brightman understand it of Queen Elizabeth, because howsoever
she was an excellent instrument for the comfort of the godly and the vexation
of the Popish, yet she was not the first, as this Angel is. I hold therefore
with Forbs and Pareus, that the first oppugners of Popery showing their filthy
byles, to their great vexation are here figured out; and here we may ascend
higher than Luther, even to Wickliffe, and to the Waldenses and Albingenses
before, together with many Worthies, who wrote and spoke against the
filthiness of the Priests, Monks, and Friars many years agone, as all that
are but meanly conversant in history know. And herein, as in almost all the
rest, it is alluded unto the inchanters in Egypt, who were smitten with a sore
byle, that they could not stand before Moses and Aaron: for as these make men
loathsome, so the abominable vices of the Roman Clergy made them loathsome to
most men.

Touching the second, 2. Angel.
I do not think, that the doctrine and Doctors of that Synagogue of Rome are
meant: for so the speech of the Angels justifying the Lord in his proceedings,
giving them blood to drink, as they had shed the blood of the Saints, would
not so well agree: for here is plainly noted a paying of them with the like to
that which they had done. I approve therefore here rather the tenth exposition,
that hereby is figured out the blood of the Popish, shed by the Turks
especially, and the order of time does agree most excellently; for after that
the blood of many thousands of innocents had been shed in Merindall, and
Cabriers, and other neighboring parts for religion, a great destruction
happened to the Papals by the Turks, Munster. Cosmogr. de Turcis.
about ann. 1444. Ladislaus the Emperor himself being slain, together with
many Princes, Dukes and Nobles, and an infinite multitude of common people. And
in Hungary and Transiluania still after this, the Turk prevailing many years,
a sea of blood was shed. As for the rivers, I take it not to be amiss to
apply their turning into blood, to executions done upon Priests and Jesuits
for their treasons here in England, and upon Jesuits in other parts together
with the apparent judgments of God upon many of them that have been most
forward in persecuting to their destruction, and the slaughters that have been
made of them in their civil wars procured by their own seeking.

Touching the fourth, I hold that the increase of the light of the Gospel is
hereby set forth, 4. Angel.
as most of my Authors agree, for the word of God is compared to the Sun,
Psalm. 19. which as it enlightneth, and so is comfortable, so it heateth; and
the nearer it draws to any part of the world, the more it scorcheth with the
exceeding great heat thereof. And thus this vial does very well agree to the
event, for the Sun being risen to enlighten the world, gat up higher still
daily in the firmament, till the heat of it grew intolerable to the Papals,
making them to rail and swear against it like mad men.

Touching the fifth, there cannot be a more kindly exposition, than to apply it
to the obscuring of the Popes glory: 5. Angel.
for when by the Sunshine of the truth, the Doctors of that Church, and others
who stand to the defense of it, are scorched so, as that they cannot maintain
with any reason any longer the Popes usurped Supremacy, infallibility of
judgment, indulgentiary power, and power to make Laws, and to dispense with
Laws, but their only refuge is railing, and virulency of tongue, then what
must needs follow next, but a vilipending of their Pope, whom they so much
magnified? And when this comes to pass, how can they that are the Popes
vassals, and in their minds inthralled to his Holiness, but sorrow extremely,
and behave themselves like frantickes?

Touching the sixth, I cannot think that the conversion and return of the
Jews is once glanced at herein, 6. Angel.
seeing that not by them, but by the Western Kings, who set up the Whore, she
must be made desolate again, as is plainly showed, Chap. 17.16. and it were
strange, that such a poor runnagate people as the Jews should have the title
of Kings of the East, where they are the basest and of the least account. I
subscribe therefore to them that expound it as altogether Allegorical, by
Euphrates, the revenues of the Popedom being meant, and by the Kings of the
East, such Kings as God would stir up in these parts to be her utter ruin
and overthrow, the great defense which is in the river of worldly wealth being
taken away, as sometime Euphrates was dreaned, whereby Babylon was taken by
Cyrus and Darius, Eastern Kings. And because the wealth of Spain is so great
a means to strengthen this kingdom, yet I think it not amiss to bring that
in also within the compass of this great river. In that part where the Popes
revenues run the water is very shallow at this day, and there is great
probability that the other will be much diminished shortly, if not clean dried
up, if the Indian treasure be once cut off, which is very powerfully attempted.
And hitherto I think, that these vials have taken effect for the most part
already, only we are to expect the drying up of this Euphrates more and more;
and then that such Kings and Princes as abominate Rome for the wickedness
thereof, should uniting their forces, give the onset unto her desolation.

Touching the seventh Angel, I hold it best to go with the common stream of
them that expound this of the final judgment, 7. Angel.
not only of the beast and his followers, but of the whole world, that of the
beast being again reassumed to be more fully declared in the Chapters
following, as being the most remarkable thing pointed at in this book. For
without wresting and straining the passages here in such manner, as that there
is no president for it in other places of holy Scripture, it cannot be applied
otherwise. It is done, Babylon came into remembrance to give unto her the cup
of the wine of the fierceness of Gods wrath, and every Island fled away, and
the mountains were no more found. What else can these speeches set forth, but
the full and final recompencing of the Whore of Babylon, and of others enemies
of the truth, which cannot be said to have been done but at the last day? For
then only it may be rightly spoken, it is done, it being till then but in
doing, and it is at that time only that there is flying away to hide
themselves from the wrath of God, and that the fashion of the world is altered.
It should seem to make against it, that the great city is not said to fall,
Verse. 19.
but to be divided into three parts. I answer with Pareus, that hereby the
utter ruin of it is set forth, seeing three parts, which may well be taken for
all the parts of a building, are said to be divided or rent in sunder, and in
speaking of three, it is alluded to the three before spoken of, as the founders
of this city; the Dragon, the beast, and the false prophet, and the three
unclean spirits, like frogs coming out of their mouths. Again the nations
are immediately said to have fallen, that is, to be quite ouerthrown, and
therefore it is not likely but that the utter ruin of Rome is meant also,
though delivered in a diverse phrase. Or if by the great city we understand all
the countries where the Christian religion has been planted, as I have
expounded it before upon Chap. 11. then the city of Rome is not so much meant,
but the whole dominions of Turk and Pope, for it is likely that Rome shall be
destroyed before, the river Euphrates, the defense thereof being dried up, yea
it must needs be so by reason of the lamentation made by such as have had
traffic there for the desolation of that city, Chap. 17. which cannot be
after the great day of judgment. And if the great city be thus taken, then by
the nations, other countries which are neither Mahumetane nor Popish are to be
understood, which for their sins shall come to ruin also, this being plainly
set forth; and the fall of the city by a periphrasis taken from such a fall as
is by division, as Jerusalem fell before the Romans by a triple faction therein,
to which in particular it is to be thought that it is alluded, for so much as
Jerusalem trodden under foot by the Gentiles, is a type of Christendom under
the dominion of Turk and Pope, as has been showed more at large upon Chap.
11. Verse. 21.
If it should seem to make against this exposition, that a great hail like
talents is said to follow after all this, whereupon men blaspheme God, which,
as Brightman says, is not to be thought shall be at the day of judgment,
because all mouths shall then be stopped, the general silence of all arguing
their consent to the justice of Gods proceedings, and none blaspheming any
more; I answer with Pareus again, that howsoever the wicked shall subscribe to
this judgment in their own conscience as most just, and so shall not mutter
any word of reason against those proceedings, yet the sense of the extremity of
torment, from which they shall despair ever to be delivered, will so inrage
them, Exodus 6.
as that like the Egyptians when hail and fire mingled therewith came down
from heaven, or like the Canaanites, upon whom God hailed with exceeding great
hailestones, to the destroying of most of them, to which I think it is rather
than to the other alluded here, as they, I say, being moved with anguish did
doubtless bitterly take on against the God of Israel, so here the wicked at
the last day are brought in blaspheming to express the sense of intolerable
pangs, upon which wicked men are wont thus to do. And happily their tongues will
thus rebel against God, as the tongues of persons enraged everlastingly. These
things being thus explained, we see that there is no reason why any should be
offended, and doubt whether Popery shall ever go down altogether or no,
because it is still vpheld after so many years since it first received a blow:
for it must fall by degrees as it rose by degrees; and as it had a long time of
rising to the full height, so it must be long in falling into utter
destruction. And seeing five of these Vials have so manifestly taken effect
already, and the sixth in a great part, why should we not by faith assuredly
expect the full accomplishment of it, as well as we see the accomplishment of
those foregoing by experience. O ye foolish and blind Papists, why are ye so
hard to believe the things that this Prophet has foretold touching your
Babylon? if ye love your souls, open your eyes, and by that which has been
hitherto done be assured of a full destruction, and therefore come out of
Babylon in time, and be not led hood-winked into inevitable perdition.

Quest. 2. Verse. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Who are these three unclean spirits like Frogs, that come out of the mouth of
the dragon, the beast, and the false prophet? and what place is that
Harmageddon, into which the Kings of the earth are gathered, and by whom are
they gathered together into that place?

Answ. It is agreed that these foul spirits are instruments of the Pope, who
come as it were out of his mouth, because so like unto him both in the same end
which they aim at, and the means to effect it, lying signs and wonders; and
more particularly I hold them to be none other but the Jesuits, because the
time of their beginning by Ignatius Loyola within these threescore years does
notably agree, and their leaping up and down in Kings Courts, they being the
greatest Statists that the Pope has for him to maintain his credit with the
Kings of the earth, that his revenues may be no more diminished: neither do
their practices to stir up to war against Heretics, unjustly so called,
disagree; for they are known to be the very firebrands of dissentions,
tumults, treasons, and bloudsheds thorowout all Christendom ever since they
began to be. They are said to be three, when as indeed they are many
thousands, to note out their triple original from the Dragon, who is the
Devil, the Beast, the Roman State which they travel for, and the false
prophet, the Pope (who before was called the second beast, and not till now a
false prophet, but here more fully declared by his name, as there by his
pseudopropheticall practices) whose eldest sons they are, bending themselves
up to the highest streine of wit and resolution for the supporting of his
tottering chair. These stir up popish Kings and Princes so, as that they
enter into leagues and unions to root out poor Protestants. But silly men that
they are, whilst they are thus busy for the benefit of the Popedom, little
do they think of him that sits above and laugheth them to scorn, for that
the joining of popish Princes together to root out the truth, shall by him be
turned to a gathering together to be destroyed, so as that they shall never be
able to make head again. And this is intimated in saying, That they gather
them together to the battle of the great day of God, that is, Verse. 14.
wherein God will have glory by their utter overthrow, which is also further
confirmed in that changing the number by and by, he says, He gathered them
together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue, Verse. 16.
Armageddon. What is meant by this word Armageddon, there is great difference
of opinions. Some think, Beza. Iunius. Forbs. Fox. Pareus. Judge. 5.19. 2 Chronicles. 35.22.
that it is to be read Harmegiddo, and so expound it as alluding to the place
called Megiddo, where Iabin and Sisera with their army were destroyed before
Debora and Barak by the Lord, and where Josiah fell before Pharaoh Neco King of
Egypt, giving occasion to a great mourning to the children of Israel for the
loss of so good a King: for each History may be well alluded to here, that of
the Canaanites destruction for the overthrow of popish kings with their people,
the other of Josiah, for the mourning which the Jews being converted shall
make for their former opposition against Christ, slaying him so good a King,
that came to save them, as is foretold by the Prophet, saying, I will power out
upon them the spirit of compassion, Zach. 12.
and they shall see him whom they have pierced, and mourn every family apart.
For they hold that at the same time the Jews shall be converted. As for the
change of the waters of Megiddo, as it is in the first place, or of the Valley
of Megiddo, as it is in the second, into Har a Mount and Megiddo, they think,
that this is not without a mystery, Forbs.
it being hereby intimated that the enemies of the truth shall be in an high
attempt when this destruction shall befall them, Beza. Iunius.
and therefore purposely a Valley is turned in the word here used into a
Mountain, whereas it should be Megiddo. Others read it Horma-geddon, a cursed
warfare, Luther. Grasserus.
of Horma signifying a curse, and geddon which comes of Gadad, signifying to
gather together an army; or of Harma, crafty, because by craft they shall be
gathered together to their own destruction, as God will turn it. Others with
a single (...) read it (...), expounding Har a Mountain, and Maggedim
Delights, holding that it is alluded to that in Dan. 11.45. And he shall fasten
his tents in the mount of his holy beauty, (...) for as there the Turk is
pointed at apart, so here all the enemies of the Church joining together, and
as Jerusalem is properly so called, so the pure Church of God figured out
thereby is here called so, and therefore this battle and destruction of the
enemies shall be made in these parts of the world where the pure reformed
Religion has taken effect. Napior.
Some expound it the Mountain of the Evangelist applying it likewise.

Some expound it the destruction of an Army, of Cherem destruction, Deuteronomy.
and Gedud an Army, holding that the slaughter of the enemies shall be so
great, that according to the manner of the Hebrews, amongst whom many places
are named from the event, the place where this shall be shall take the name
also.

Jerome, as Pareus shows, expounds it Montem furum, the Mountain of the
eues, others a cursed troop, others the destruction of the River. All we see
are agreed here that no proper place is designed, but some place only where
the enemies of the truth shall be destroyed. There will be no error therefore
which way so ever it be taken, only I think it dangerous to admit of any
corruption in the change of the word by the incury of the Scribe. I prefer
that of Dent, holding withal, that it is alluded unto the destruction of Iabin
and Sisera with their armies, and that it should be likewise with the enemies
of the truth ere long, they shall be in a Catholic league together, bending
all their forces against the reformed; but God helping his, their attempts
shall be turned to their own utter overthrow. Whether this be now a working,
seeing they were never so combined together, neither have they been about so
great attempts as now, God knows. Happily the gathering together of Papists at
this time is the gathering together here pointed at; if not, as the time will
scarce bear, it is a preludium thereof; some famous destruction may happen to
them in the end of this conspiracy now, but the greatest whereunto this may
make a way afterward. Howsoever, let all men take heed of the Jesuits, as of
unclean and dangerous spirits, and let us be comforted when the Romish
Catholics bend their forces most against the professors of the truth,
assuring our selves that they are nearest their utter ruin.

CHAP. XVII.
IN this Chapter and that which follows, the great City before said to be
divided into three parts is more particularly described, together with her
utter ruin and overthrow, in respect of the head and fountain Rome, from
whence all the abominations of idolatry and superstition have flowed. In the
exposition of the particulars there is no great difference nor difficulty, so
much light having been already given, and therefore I will the more briefly,
only touching the diversity of interpretations, come to open every passage as
it lies in order.

Quest. 1. Which of the seven Angels is it that shows John these things,
Verse. 1, 2, etc.
who is the great Whore whom he says he will show unto him, what are the
waters called also a beast verse. 3. strangely described that she sits upon.
And why was he led into a desert place to behold this? and touching the more
particular description of this Whore, and the word Mystery written in her
forehead, what is meant hereby?

Answ. The Angel is held by some to be the fifth, Brightman.
who powered out his Vial upon the throne of the beast. Pareus. Napier.
But others more rightly hold him to be the seventh Angel, upon the pouring
out of whose Vial the great City was divided into three parts, which is again
more particularly undertaken here, that by the relation of this Angel it might
be more fully understood, both what this City is, and how and by what means
she comes to be destroyed.

Others indefinitely take this Angel for one of the seven. Bullinger, etc.


Rome, Bellar. lib. 3. de Romans pont fice cap. 13.
yea even by Romanists themselves. Bellarmine says, We may say, and that
better in my judgment, that by the Whore Rome is understood: so likewise
Ribera and Viegas the Jesuits upon this place. Tertullian of old spoke to the
same effect: Tertul. contra Iudae^s.
Babylon in Saint John does represent Rome, being as great and as proud of her
dominions, and as tyrannizing over the Saints as ever Babylon was. Ieronim. 11.
qu. ad Algasiam.
And Jerome says, According to the Revelation of Saint John, in the sorehead
of the queen clad in purple, there was a name of blasphemy written, to wit,
Rome the everlasting. See more touching this before, Chap. 14. verse. 8. and how
that shift of heathen Rome being meant here is confuted, whereunto we may
add, that heathen Rome cannot be meant, because then Rome subdued the Kings of
the earth by force, and not by subtle inticements as this Babylon does, and
because the Rome here spoken against shall be utterly destroyed for the sins
found then therein when the time of destruction comes; but heathen Rome was
not so destroyed, and if Rome should at the last be destroyed for the
idolatries of the Heathen, this destruction must come for idolatries put down
many hundred years agone, which is contrary to the course of the Lords
proceedings against sinful places. As for their last refuge to an apostasy,
yet to be expected in Rome, in regard of which it is thus spoken of here, see
also Chap. 14. verse. 8.

verse. 15. to be peoples, and Nations, and tongues, over which Rome rules by
the power residing there. And this circumstance of her sitting is varied every
time that it is spoken of. Verse. 3.
Verse. 3. She is showed sitting upon a beast of a purple color, full of names
of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns: and verse. 9. the seven heads
being spoken of are said to be seven hills whereupon the woman sits. Verse. 9.
She is showed sitting thus diversely for diverse respects; she sits upon
many waters, because she rules over many peoples and Nations; upon a purple
colored beast, because the Senators and Rulers of this State under the
Emperors did wear purple and skarlet clothing, ascribing divine titles of
honor unto their Emperors in a blasphemous manner, as the Cardinals, by whom
the Pope rules now do unto him, being also likewise apparelled; and upon
seven hills, because the City was anciently seated upon seven hills. And this
variation makes it so plain, as that nothing can be plainer, than that Rome
is meant by this Whore, seeing no City in the world is so seated but Rome
only, neither does that periphrasis whereby this City is described, verse. 18.
agree to any other, This is the great City that has rule over the Kings of the
earth. And this name Whore is chosen to express Rome the head of the
Antichristian Sect, for continuation of the allegory of a woman, in the
similitude of whom the Church appeared, chap. 12. The true Church is a chaste
and holy woman, who keeps her self only to the Lord to whom she is married,
refusing to worship any other, or to make any other partaker with him in his
divine titles and attributes. The Antichristian Sect is a whorish woman,
together with the Lord worshipping Images and Saints departed, and attributing
that unto the Pope which is proper to the Lord only, wherein truly spiritual
whoredom does consist.

Touching the place, the Wilderness, Verse. 3. Brightman.
into which he was led to see this sight; some take John carried hither for a
type of such as should be able to see Rome to be the beast, and the Pope to be
the Whore tiding this beast, they should be obscure persons, and such as in
whom this light should be little expected, even as in a man living and brought
up in the Wilderness there is expected no great matter of learning and
knowledge. Some expound the Wilderness of Gentilisme wherein Popery indeed
appears, Bullinger.
for so much as the idolatries and superstitions of the Gentiles barren of good
men, as the Wilderness is without people, are the very attire wherein Popery
marches. Pareus.
Some hold that reference is had here to the woman before spoken of, Chap. 12.
flying into the Wilderness in the time of heathen persecution, being then
chaste and beloved of God, but now become an Whore by her manifold idolatries.
Lastly, Forbs.
some hold that he is carried into the Wilderness as the fittest place for
contemplation, and he that will diue into any deep mysteries must retire
himself from all worldly encumbrances. I hold with this my last Author, that
there is no mystery in this passage, but as upon other occasions it has been
used, Mat 4.
Christ was carried by the Spirit into the Wilderness to be tempted, so here
John is carried into the Wilderness to see this mystery, only that in so
solitary a place there might be no interruption by the coming in of any man,
or any occurrence which vnusually happens in places more frequented; whereunto
if we add, that the Wilderness is in a secret place, Verse. 4. Pet. du Moulin.
Lib. 3. Sanct. Ceremon. c. 5. sect. 3. Ruber color proprie ad papa^ pertinet.
lib. 1. cap. 1. sect. 9. Planum totu^ cum magno scabello coopertu^ erit panno
coecineo, Caligis rube^s, sanda leis rubeis, aurea cruceornatis. lib. 1. cap.
6. sect. 1.
it will not be impertinent. And hence we may note, that it is not the case
of all men to understand this mystery, but it is a long time showed but unto a
few taken apart from others.

Touching the array of this Whore in purple and skarlet color, and gold, and
precious stones, and pearls, and upon her forehead a name written, Mystery,
Babylon the great, etc. We shall not need to seek far for the fitting of
these things to the Hierarchy of Rome. For the Pope, according to the orders
set down in his Book of Ceremonies, ought to be clothed in Skarlet, and his
Chair is to be covered all over with cloth of Skarlet, yea, his very stockings
and shoes are appointed to be red, adorned with a golden Cross. And his very
Mule by the ordinance of Paul the second is to be clothed with Skarlet, as
Platina reports. He is also apparelled with a long Albe, a Girdle, and a
Stole hanging about his neck all imbost with Pearl. She has in her hand a
golden Cup full of abominations to set forth the Pope of her state, and
secretly to intimate the very name of him that is here meant, the first letters
of these words in Latin, Poculum aureum plenum abominationibus, put together
making Papa. As for the word Mystery in her forehead, this does most notably
agree, for in the Castle of Saint Angelo in Rome, Brocard. Scaliger.
are certain old plain Miters, which have the name M^sterium engraven upon
them, as both Brocard affirms upon this place, and Joseph Scaliger, that
being at Rome with Mounseur de Abin, the French Kings Ambassador, amongst
other things they were showed unto him. Moreover, a mystery in the forehead
does argue a profession of mysteries: for all things in their Sacraments and
service, they say, are full of mysteries. But chiefly it is thus written,
because being so abominable a strumpet, it should be hidden from the eyes of
most men, honoring in stead of loathing her. Babylon the great, the mother of
harlots. Rome is called Babylon, because so like to old Babylon in tyranny,
pride, power, and dominion over the world. The mother of harlots, because they
that seek to draw the world to spiritual whordome by idolatries have their
authority from thence. These things being so plain, let us be ashamed still to
continue so blind as that we should not see them; the Pope of Rome could not
more plainly have been described than he is in this place: for what would one
have more to know the party meant by, than a description by his apparel and
manner of going, and his very name?

Quest. 2. How are these words to be understood, Verse. 8.
The beast which thou saw was and is not, and shall ascend out of the
bottomless pit, by and by rendered thus again, The beast that was and is not,
and yet is.

Answ. The words immediately following, verse. 10, 11. serve to explain this
Riddle. There are seven Kings, five are fallen, one is, and the other is not
yet come. And again, The beast that was and is not, even he is the eighth,
and is of the seventh. All this then is spoken of the Pope with his imperial
power, declaring the order and manner of the coming on thereof. This highest
power upon earth which he does exercise, was in the old Rulers of the Roman
state, during the time of Kings, Consuls, Tribunes, Decemuirs, and Dictators;
but is not, when the sixth head of Emperors was deadly wounded by the Goths and
Vandals, Heruls and Longobards: for then the beast as quite destroyed ceased to
be for many years, as has been already showed, Chap. 9. under the sounding
of the fifth Angel. And in speaking of this in the present tense, when as it
was to come long after, he does but proceed in a prophetical style, as he
plainly speaks also of that which was to be long after this, of which he had
immediately before spoken in the future tense, for coming to repeat was, and is
not, and yet shall ascend, he renders it thus, was, and is not, and yet is.
Whereas in regard of this sixth it is by and by said, one is, but here, is not,
the reason is, because that being explanatory is but an historical narration,
and so reports things so far as they had been and at that time of Saint
John were, but here seeming to speak of a thing present, he prophetically
sets forth that which should be afterward. So that in respect of the same
head of Emperors it might be truly said one is not, and one is now; to speak
historically, one is now, prophetically, one is not: and so for the time, the
beast is not, because put down by a foreign power. That which is added, but
shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, or but yet is, sets forth the rise
of the Pope in Rome after this by a diabolical invention, as if he had been
plainly seen rising out of Hell. He is the seventh, but yet is the eighth, for
he is a like powerful with his predecessors, the rulers of that state, and
has another kind of singular government by the spiritual sword different
from them all. And hereby it is plain, that the term beast, and head or
King, are coincident one with another, P. du Moulin. Pareus, etc.
because he which is called the beast, verse. 11. is said to be one of the
seven heads, which are expounded to be Kings. Almost to this effect speak
some of my most judicious Authors, Brightman.
and Brightman not much different will have this saying, the beast is,
expounded of the Pope under Constantine, is not, of him in the days of the
Goths, and shall be of him restored to his dignity by Justinian and Phocas
after him. But some hold that the vanancy of the Empire in Saint John's time by
the decease of Domitian is here meant: Nopier. Bullinger.
for thus it might be said that it was before, but is not, and yet is, because
Nerua Cocceius of base lineage succeeded, and departed shortly again, for he
died at the end of a year, three months and nine days. But being thus taken,
that which follows cannot be applied as explaining this, nay, it cannot be
reconciled how it should be said one is not, and yet of the same, is now.

Quest. 3. Verse. 12.
Who are the ten Kings which are said not to have received any Kingdom as yet,
but receive power as Kings at one hour with the beast: and afterward again
grow to hate the whore, and make her desolate and naked, Verse. 16.
and eat her flesh, and burns her with fire?

Answ. Most Expositors consent, that these Kings are the Kings that arose out
of the ruins of the Roman Empire: for whilst this stood, all Kingdoms about
were subject unto it and made tributary, except Scotland; but this Empire
falling by the invasion of the Barbarians, Goths, Vandals, Heruls in the west,
and of the Turks, Saracens and Tartarians in the east, there was an
opportunity offered unto them to resume their ancient state which they did, and
so became absolute Kingdoms of themselves, without dependence upon any higher
power upon earth. But whether these Kings be just ten, or said to be ten, that
is, many, it is dissented. Bullinger. Pareus. Grass^rus. Genesis 31.7.
Some stand for an uncertain number, as the word ten is used in some other
places, as in that of Iaacob challenging Laban for changing his wages ten
times; and of the Lord, affirming that the people had tempted him ten times,
that is, many times. Numb. 14.22.
Some hold, that these ten are such a just number, P. du Moulin.
and reckon them to be either 1. France. 2. England. 3. Spain, held by the
Visigoths. 4. Lumbardy, held by the Longobards in Italy. 5. Selauonia. 6.
Hungary, held by the Huns and Auarians. 7. Bulgaria and Seruia, held by the
Bulgarians. 8. Denmark. 9. Poland. 10. the Kingdom of Naples and Sicely. Or
else thus; France, England, Spain, Lumbardy, Denmark, Hungary, Napier.
Sweden, Scotland, the Exarchate of Rauenna, and the Kingdom of the Goths in
Italy. As for the Kingdoms of Arragon, Granado, Portugal, Castile, Leon,
Toledo, Galicia, Navarre, they are inferior Kingdoms, and appendices either
of the Empire, Spain, or France. Sicily, Bohemia, and Naples are of the
Empire, Burgundy of France, Norway of Denmark, Ireland of England, Cyprus a
late Kingdom and not in Christians hands. Brightman.
Some different from all others will have ten Emperors to be meant, in whose
time the Pope flourished, but after their Empire expired he suffered much: 1.
Contantinus magnus. 2. Constantinus silius, and Constans, ac Constantius. 3.
Iulianus. 4. Iouinianus. 5. Valentinianus. 6. Gratianus. 7. Valentinianus
secundus. 8. Arcadius. 9. Honorius. 10. Theodosius. These are said not to be in
Saint John's time, because heathen Emperors ruled then, but received their
Kingdom the same hour, that is, about the same time with the beast. This
exposition of all others seems to me to disagree most with the Text: First,
because the horns of the beast are of the beast, and certainly limbs of
Antichrist, such as God forbid that we should count these godly Emperors.
Secondly, because these Emperors did neither receive their Kingdom, which
argues a thing newly erected, and that was not before, neither were they all
at one hour, for they succeeded one another in sundry years. Thirdly, because
the same ten which give honor to the beast shall at the last destroy her,
which cannot possibly be applied unto them who did ever only stand to her and
defend her, if the Pope be counted the beast in their times. Neither can I
approve of a certain number put here for an uncertain, because howsoever ten
may be thus put elsewhere, yet here about the heads and horns of the beast the
spirit is more punctual, for the seven heads it is agreed, and why should
another kind of exposition then be given of the ten horns? Precisely ten
therefore are doubtless meant, and not so much Kings as Kingdoms, being taken
with the succession of the Kings reigning therein, and of these Kingdoms I do
not think Lumbardy to be any, or any Kingdom springing up at the dissolution
of the Empire to endure a short time only, but such Kingdoms as then
delivering themselves from the Imperial yoke, have stood and shall stand free
till the ruin of the Pope. And these I take to be 1. England. 2. France. 3.
Spain. 4. Poland. 5. Denmark. 6. Sueuia. 7. Hungary 8. The whole Kingdom of
Germany both higher and lower. 9. Bohemia. 10. The free States of Italy,
Venice, Genoa, etc. Ireland is not reckoned, because an inferior Kingdom and
under the Crown of England, Navarre of France, Portugal and the Kingdoms of
Naples and Sicilies of Spain, Norway of Denmark. Germany, which has been
since governed by Emperors, is also a new kind of Kingdom diversely ruled,
and not as in times past; and the other free States may well be set forth by
the name of a Kingdom, and of one, because all in one Nation. To Bohemia
belongs Morauia and Silesia, and although it be in Germany, and commonly is
under the Emperor, yet for so much as it has the liberty of Election and is
an absolute Kingdom in it self, I think that we may well reckon it for one.
As for Solauonia, together with Dacia and Seruia joining to it, and Bulgaria,
or any other Kingdoms which sprung up also at the dissolution of the Empire,
howsoever they were popish in times past, and had a hand in giving honor to
and setting up of the Pope, yet now they are Mahumetan, and therefore the Lord
foreseeing this, left them out of the number, as not being likely to have an
hand with the rest in destroying the Pope at the last. Their receiving of power
at one hour with the beast is not so strictly to be taken as it sounds, for
by an hour in Scripture, sometime a compass of times consisting of many years
is to be understood; thus the time of the Gospel is called the last hour, and
the same hour here is much about the same time 100. years before or after or
somewhat more; and if it be thus taken, the event does notably agree, the
springing up of these Kingdoms being out of the ruins of the Empire, about
ann. Dom. 500. etc. till 700.

These Kings with one consent have made war with the Lamb, by taking the
Popes part against the professors of the truth, when any have showed
themselves, persecuting them with sword and fire, as woeful experience has
proved many years, but the Lamb has overcome them by planting his truth in
their dominions, notwithstanding all their hot oppositions, and by subiecting
some of them to himself, by bringing them to the acknowledgement and
profession of the same truth, as England, Denmark, Sweuia, Bohemia, and sundry
free states of Germany, to whom we hope more shall be joined, though not all,
(for some must take the Popes part unto the end, till the greatest fatal blow
that shall be given to him and them in Harmageddon, as has been already
showed upon Chap. 16.) and these together shall hate the Pope, and deuest him
of all the honor which formerly in their ignorance they or their predecessors
gave unto him, and destroy him, overthrowing and burning Rome down to the
ground. And to put it out of all doubt that Rome is meant here, he adds, that
it is the great City that rules over the Kings of the earth. Verse. 18.
Let all these things be considered together, and there is nothing in this
kind that can be plainer, than that the Pope of Rome is the subject of all
this description, and whatsoever can be said here-against, will easily appear
to be but a devised evasion.

CHAP. XVIII.
IN this Chapter there is nothing difficult, but that by a short paraphrase the
Reader may easily understand and be resolved touching any question or doubt
arising here, and therefore I will not delay him with other ambages, but come
briefly to this paraphrase. It is to be understood that the things here set
down follow in order that which was declared of the Kings making Rome and the
Pope desolate in the former Chapter. For after this great desolation and
destruction it is here showed, that it shall continue so, never to be built up
or inhabited again, for foul spirits and unclean birds are wont to keep in
desolate and forsaken places, happily that men might be the less troubled with
them, Verse. 2.
and that by the horror of such places there might be the more lively
representation of hells horror. Ribera.
Ribera yields a double reason of evil spirits being in desolate places, one
before Christ's Incarnation, that through fear such as pass by might be
drawn to idolatry, the other, after that monastical persons might be
terrifyed from reparing to desolate and solitary places. But this last sauoreth
of superstition, whereunto they that are addicted, are ready to receive any
reason for good tending to the confirmation thereof, but I should think
rather, if for any respect toward Monks they keep in such places, it is
because they love their society being the fittest company for them, Verse. 1.
seeing they have abandoned the society of men. The Angel that tells of this
desolation is wonderfully glorious to set forth the more the glory of God who^
the Angels serve. Verse. 4. Verse. 6.
The other voice from Heaven warning Gods people to come out of her, is the
voice of God, he bids them to reward her double, not more than she has
deserved, Psalm. 137.9.
but double so much as she did formerly to the Saints, as she is well worthy.
As they are pronounced blessed that shall take the children of Babylon and dash
their brains against the stones. It is no pity, but disobedience to God, to
show favor to the bloodthirsty Babylon, yea, all that be the people of God
ought to join together to pull her down and to destroy the Pope. Verse. 9.


The Kings of the earth, who shall bewail her ruin, are some obstinate and
stiff popish Kings, that shall continue so even till this be accomplished, so
that as I said upon Chap. 17.16. it does here further appear, that not all,
but some of the Kings who gave honor to the Whore, shall be her destruction,
some continuing in their seduced estate still. Verse. 11.


The Merchants of the earth that lament her fall also, whose merchandise none
will buy any more, are the Popes Officers in his Datary, to sell Benefices,
Penitentiaries, and such as go about with Indulgences, and all such as make
benefit by Shrines, Images, and relikes of Saints, by Diriges and Trentals,
etc. These being now of no repute any longer, the great gain which they made
hereby shall utterly cease.

After this, the benefit and variety of commodities that came in to the Sea of
Rome, and her factors are particularly named, Gold, Silver, precious Stones,
Pearls, fine Linen, Purple, Silk, Skarlet, Thine-wood, etc. The like place
to this is Ezech. 27.12. etc. of Tirus, from whence this seems to be
borrowed. Tirus was stored with such varieties from diverse Nations, Brightman.
and so is Rome, with Gold, Silver, and precious Stones from the ^^^niards
Indies. With Cinamom, Frankincense, Oil, and Wine from Italy; with Wheat and
Flower from Sicely, Sordinia, Corsica; with Beasts from Germany; with Sheep
from England; with Horses and Chariots from France; with bodies of men from
Heluetia, for the Heluetians are the Popes guard; and lastly, the souls of men
of all nations are mancipated to the Pope, when as it is held necessary to
salvation to be subject unto the Pope. After these Merchants, such as trade by
Sea are brought in, Verse. 17.18.
lamenting her overthrow, Ship-masters, the company in Ships, Sailers, and such
as trade by Sea. By Ship-masters understand all inferior persons, for
Ship-masters, and Mariners, and Sailers, etc. are under the Merchant, so that
by them we may understand all ordinary Seminary Priests, Jesuits, and Monks
of every order that trade in this Sea: for I do not think that particularly
just four orders are here set forth, as Parcus has it. Pareus.
That which follows serves only to set forth Romes utter desolation, and
the cause her extreme bloudthirstinesse, whereby it may also be gathered that
Rome, as it is now governed by the Pope is certainly meant, because the poor
servants of God, which stand for his truth, are no where so murdered as there,
and by means of the Pope and such as rule under him. A true Christian may
find more favor at the hand of a Turk or Barbarian than amongst the Roman
Catholics: for they are more bent against such than against Jews and
Infidels, nothing but their blood will satisfy if they be found out within any
of the Popes dominions. Is not this then the City wherein the blood of the
Prophets, Verse. 24.
that is, Preachers of the Gospel and of the Saints is found in the greatest
abundance? And how is it then, (O ye Papists) that ye are so bewitched that ye
see not into this to come out from this Babel, as ye would not be guilty of
bloodshed? When Christ was so mild and always ready to rebuke striking with
the sword, and used a bit to curb and keep in such hot spirits as would have
such consumed with fire from Heaven as would not receive him. How can ye
possibly believe him to be Christ's Vicar, that is so wood and furious against
his impugners, as that nothing will satisfy him but their destruction by fire
and faggot, or else by the sword? God open your eyes that ye may not any longer
take the Wolf for a Lamb, because of his two horns, but by his Lion-like
voice discern him to be the Beast, and abandon and forsake him for ever.
Whereunto that ye may be moved the rather, I have here set down certain
passages in the Oracles of the Sybillae, most excellently consenting with, and
serving to illustrate our Exposition of the Revelation in that part which
concerns the Beast, from the seventeenth Chapter, etc.

Out of the seventh book faithfully translated thus:

Rome fierce in mind when Grecians are down driven,
Shall stellifie thy self up to the Heaven:
But when thou think thy self in highest height,
God shall tread down thy sturdy strength and might.
Out of the eighth Book.

When reigned in thee have fifteen Emperors,
Of all the world that have been Conquerours.
Then comes a King a manifold Crown to bear,
Whose name shall be to Ponti very near.
His wicked foot the world shall vilitate,
Great gifts and goods then shall he impetrate:
Huge heaps of gold he shall have into treasure,
With silver hid and money without measure:
Discovered things he shall loose and remit:
Of Magic Art well shall he know and wit,
The mysteries and secret sorcery.
The mighty God he makes a Babe to be.
Down he shall tread all true worshippin,
And at chief heads of error first begin.
His mysteries to all he shall expone,
Then comes the time of mourning and of moan, etc.
These books of the Sybils were much esteemed of, and kept in the Capitol at
Rome, during the Ethnicisme thereof, the providence of God ordering it so, that
from Rome we might learn, that he whose Sea is there is the child of
perdition, and after the Popes triple crown (for he is most plainly here
described) much corruption should be in the worship of God, and after that
should come upon that state inevitable destruction.

Touching Romes rise at the fall of the Grecian Empire no learned man is
ignorant, and it fell again by means of the Goths, Vandals and Heruls, and
Longobards. But touching the time of the new kind of Empire in him, that
wears many crowns, it may justly be doubted, seeing many fifteen Emperors
have been before the Pope came to this height of honor, which was not till
the days of Phocas. It is therefore necessary to distinguish betwixt Heathen
and Christian Emperors, for this being applied to the first sort will in no
case stand, but to the other it does very well agree: for from Constantine the
first Christitian Emperor to Phocas are but fifteen, if Julian the Apostata
be cast out who was no Christian, and Mauritius by the murdering of whom,
Phocas attained the Empire, be not reckoned, as there is no reason to reckon
him, seeing another usurped that dignity and took it from him. The second to
Constantine was Constantius and his brethren together, the third Iouinianus,
the fourth Valentinianus and Valens together, the fifth Gratianus, Valentin. and
Theodosius, the sixth Arcadius and Honorius, the seventh Theodosius and
Valentin. the eighth Martianus, the ninth Leo, the tenth Zeno, the eleventh
Anastatius, the twelfth Justinius, the thirteenth Iustinianus, the fourteenth
Justinius the younger, the fifteenth Tiberius. Next to Tiberius, Phocas gate the
Empire from Mauritius his Master, in whose days this new kind of Empire
began, which from Ponti may justly be called Pontificiam. These things thus
consenting to make plain the mystery of iniquity in the Popedom: do not
harden your selves (O ye Papists) but be wise in time and come out of Romish
Babylon, that ye come not with her to perpetual most horrible destruction.

CHAP. XIX.
AFter the utter destruction of Babel represented, here follows a
representation of the great joy which should hereupon be amongst the faithful
triumphing over her in heaven, together with the cause of her destruction and
of her partakers, and the description of the King by whom she is destroyed.
Brightman. Verse. 1.
Some will have the Church of God understood by heaven, which hearing of the
destruction of Babel praises God for it, lest if heaven be properly
understood it should follow, that the Saints there know of the things done upon
earth. Bullinger. Pareus. Grasserus.
But I subscribe rather to those that understand heaven properly, as they in
heaven were exhorted before, Chap. 18.20. to rejoice over Babel fallen: for
howsoever they are ignorant of particulars, yet it is not unlikely but that
they understand either by the relation of Angels, or by revelation from God,
what ingenerall is the state of the Church in this world, else how could the
souls of the slain lying under the Altar cry out for revenge upon persecutors
as not being yet taken? Revel. 6.10.
Moreover, there went before a particular exhortation to rejoice for this,
which argues the notification of it in heaven by divine revelation.

Touching the song Hallaluiah, Verse. 3.
it is compounded of Hallalu, praise ye, and iah, the Lord, Hebrew words. It
is a question amongst Expositors, why they are exhorted to praise God by an
Hebrew word? To this some answer, Brightman.
that mystically the joining of the Jews, who should now be converted to the
faith, is intimated, but most without any such mystery hold that a word of this
language is chosen, as in many other passages, in alluding to the old manner of
praising God in his Church that first was: Bullinger. Pareus.
for Halleluiah in prefixed before many of the Psalms, as a word then
ordinarily used to praised God. And for the same cause the Arc of the
Testimony, the Altar, and Censers with incense are mentioned before, because
what was, and was done in the Temple of God of old amongst the Hebrews, did
serve to figure out what should be, Verse. 4.
and be done afterward in heaven. Touching the four and twenty Elders, and
four beasts, who have hitherto stood by as spectatours of all that has been
done, and now give their applause and approbation, it has been already showed
what they are, Verse. 6.
Chap. 4.4. etc. The voice of all the multitude that stir up to praise God
compared to the sound of many waters and of thunder, is so compared, to set
forth the greatness of the company, for they must needs be very many from
whom such a loud sounding voice must come. Verse. 7.
The matter of this joy next unto the ruin of Babel, is the marriage of the
Lamb approaching, and the adorning of his wife for the marriage. This wife is
the woman before spoken of Chap. 12. that fled into the wilderness from the
face of the Dragon, but her enemies that sought her life being destroyed, she
is brought in now again, her weeds of mourning and sorrow being laid away, and
garments of joy and gladness, as of a Bride going to be married, being put
upon her. For after the overthrow of Popery, there shall be no enemies any more
to cause mourning and wearing of sack cloth, but a most flourishing estate of
the Church begun here, and soon after perfected in heaven. For I do not
think, that the joyful time of this marriage here set forth, is to be
understood only of the flourishing estate of the Church in this world after so
long a time of persecution, but because here is both a preparation and a
marriage Supper, both the time of the Churches joyful condition for a time
here where it is prepared, and hereafter in heaven where the marriage is
perfected and the supper held, are included: for here the Church is prepared
for the Bridegroom Christ by sanctification through the word and Sacraments,
which have now their course more freely than in times past, there she is
presented unto him, and they being really joined, a feasting supper is held of
heavenly comfort and joy everlastingly. And this is the apparelling of sine
linen granted to the Church here spoken of, which is said to be the
righteousness of the Saints: but it is to be noted, that it is spoken in the
plural number (...), righteousnesses, intimating, as one has well observed,
Brightman. Verse. 8.
both the righteousness that is by faith imputatiuely, and that holiness
which by the spirit of grace is wrought in the Saints: for inherent holiness
is imperfect in the best, and therefore cannot justify, and faith, where this
is wanting, is feeble and dead, and so unable to justify. That we may
therefore be fully justified, both are necessary, faith to lay hold upon the
perfect righteousness of Christ, who is our justification, and inherent
holiness to make this garment of righteousness shine before men. Nothing is
more usual in this book, than by white and pure clothing to set forth the
sanctity and innocence of Gods servants, see Chap. 3. verse. 4. verse. 18. Here
some in Sardis are commended, for that they had not defiled their garments, and
they of Laodicea are counseled to get them white garments by reforming their
wickedness, in respect of which they were said before to be naked: yet we are
not here with the Iesuice to conceive, Ribera.
that the Saints are just before God by their own righteousness, for this is
contrary to the whole course of Scripture, whereby every one, yea the best is
concluded to be a sinner. But by the Spirit of God we are sanctified, and so
prepared for the Bride groom, so many as believe, and by believing lay hold
upon the blood of Christ, without which our garment of sanctity is spo^ted, but
with which it is washed white, as is said of the martyred Saints, They washed
their robes white in the blood of the Lamb. Revel. 7.14.
Let no man then trust to his own righteousness, nor yet to the
righteousness of Christ, which he thinks is imputatiuely made his, if there
be in him a naked and bare faith only, but consider that the clothing of the
Bride is righteousness, and therefore let him so rest upon the one, as that he
neglect not the other, rely only upon Christ's righteousness to salvation,
but unto this get sanctity of heart and life, because otherwise it is dead and
profits not unto salvation.

In that John falling down and worshipping the Angel that talked with him is
reproved and bidden to worship God only, Verse. ^.
it is plain, that all religions falling down before any creature, how
excellent soever, is unlawful, and by all means to be avoided. The reason why
he would not be worshipped of John is, because he was his fellow servant, and
of them that have the testimony of Jesus, for the testimony of Jesus is the
Spirit of prophecy. If because he was a Spirit coming from the Lord with
this revelation, he were conceived to be worthy of worship, it must be
understood, that even in this he was the fellow of John and the rest of the
Apostles, to whom the secrets of God were revealed also, and so they had that
within them which was as excellent as an Angel, for in that they had the
testimony of Jesus, they had the spirit of prophecy, and having such a spirit,
they were no underlings that ought a duty to the Angels in heaven, but even
fellows unto them. And if they be fellow servants to the Apostles, then to all
the faithful also, seeing they all make but one body in Christ.

That which follows touching one sitting upon a white horse, Verse. 11.
who appeared unto John, the heaven being opened, it is generally agreed that
he is Christ Jesus. He does not now appear in this manner, Bullinger.
as if according to the order of this vision he did not begin, till now to
fight against the enemies of his truth: for how should Babylon then have
fallen, and the beast have been destroyed? But this fall and destruction
having been hitherto set forth in the proper place under the figure of Angels
pouring out their vials, and cutting down with sharp sickles, and by a voice
calling upon the kings of the earth to be revenged, which they act accordingly
now as was needful, the Captain of these armies employed in these wars
comes at the last to be described, both by the place of his residence heaven,
the form wherein he goes to the wars, upon a white horse, the name by which
he is called faithful and true, judging the word of God, the Lord of lords,
and King of kings, his parts and apparel, eyes like flames of fire, a mouth
out of which went a two-edged sword, many crowns upon his head, a vesture dipped
in blood, and also by his train, the armies of heaven following him upon white
horses, and his dominion, he rules all nations with a rod of iron.

Whereas his name is said to be such, Pareus.
that no man knew it but himself, and yet by and by it is said, that his name
is the word of God, it is to be understood, that no man could know Christ to be
the Word and God, but by revelation. The last judgment has been often
mentioned before, but the Judge has never been described, wherefore it was
necessary now at the last to set down this ample description of him.

The Angel that stands in the Sun, Verse. 7.
crying to the fowls to gather themselves together to the Supper of the great
God, does set forth nothing else, Bullinger.
but how open and manifest a destruction of Antichrist and his adherents shall
be made, when the time of their final overthrow shall come, it shall be as
manifest to all the world as the Sun in the firmament. That whereunto the
fowls are invited, is the supper of God, Verse. 18.
consisting of the flesh of Kings and Captains, and of mighty men, and horses,
etc. this is altogether allegorical, being taken out of Ezechiel, the meaning
is, Ezech. 39.17. Bullinger. Pareus, etc.
that as when men are destroyed in the wars, their cakasses, of all estates
and degrees, lie as a prey to the fowls of the air, theirs and their horses
and retinues, and when it falls out to be thus, it is a sign of their utter
destruction, so the Lord would hereby have it understood, that Antichrist and
his followers, the Kings and others that shall still obstinately cleave to him,
when by others repenting and reuolting from him he shall be impugned and
weakened, shall have a day, when as re-uniting their forces to repair the
broken state, they shall be utterly destroyed, never being able to make head
again till the coming of the Lord to judgment, at what time they shall be
taken and cast into everlasting fire. Bullinger. Pareus. Brightman.
So that here the end of the gathering together of the kings into Harmageddon
under the Angel with the sixth vial, seems to be fully set forth, which was
but intimated there. Whereas in the next place, Verse. 20.
the beast and false prophet are said to be taken and cast alive into the lake
burning with fire and brimstone, and then the remnant are slain, the fowls
filling themselves with their flesh: it is not to be conceived, that the Popes
destruction in hell being effected, the company cleaving to him should after
this fall by the sword; but his end, as the principal is first set down, who
it seems shall not be utterly destroyed till the coming of Christ unto
judgment, but shall stand still, though Rome be burnt, lurking in some other
place till the end, for thus much seems to be implied in the word alive,
shall be cast alive. And his end being thus set down first, as he is the
first and chief in opposing the truth of God, the destruction of his adherents
follows next, they shall be slain with the sword in the last great battle
which they shall fight for him in Harmageddon, which shall be some time before
the day of judgment, and therefore their final casting into hell also is not
spoken of as being improper to this place, but that hell fire shall be their
portion also when the day of judgment comes, is plain from other places,
Chap. 14.10. c. 13.8.

Some conceiving a little otherwise of this passage, Brightman. Forbs.
say that Christ upon a white horse does figure out the joyful condition of
the Church in these times of Antichrists overthrow in Harmageddon; and the
Angel in the Sun, some prime Champion of the Lord in these Western parts,
who shall be a Captain and ringleader to others unto that battle, and the
fowls the Christians suruiuing after Antichrist utterly destroyed, who shall
divide all those parts amongst themselves, and possess them that were before
under the Pontifician rule. For they say that Rome being destroyed, the Pope
shall reside a certain time at some other place, as at Auinion or some other,
but not about five and forty years, which time being expired, the unfortunate
battle in Harmageddon shall be fought, where all the Pontifician forces and
the Pope also being quite overthrown, the Orthodox shall prey upon their lands
and houses, and possess them from thence forward to the end. And whereas two
diverse punishments, of fire and brimstone for the Pope, and being slain with
the sword for his followers are mentioned, they understand them both of
temporal judgments, the one of the Pope, being so set forth as most grievous
according to the excess of his sin above all others, whereof many shall yet at
the last turn and submit themselves to the truth. This, howsoever it be witty,
yet it cannot stand, both because the final destruction of the Pope shall be
at the day of judgment, after which there shall be no entering upon earthly
possessions, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
and because the Scripture does not admit of such an exposition of fire and
brimstone, as whereby it may be applied to temporal destruction, and therefore
I rest upon the former exposition as most genuine. The strength of the Papacy
shall be in some desperate attempt against the truth quite disanulled, and at
the last judgment he in person shall be destroyed in hell fire for ever and
ever.

CHAP. XX.
AFter much time spent in the seven preceding Chapters in prophesying of the
beast and the false prophet, now this prophecy being brought to an end, it is
requisite that we should be acquainted with the case of the Dragon, who was
left persecuting the woman's seed, that is, the faithful, Chap. 12. and from
that time nothing more has been yet spoken of him, but that he gave unto the
beast his throne, and great power, Chap. 13. Wherefore in due time here is
showed what becomes of the Dragon, he is cast into a prison, and bound, and
fast locked up by an Angel a thousand years, and then let loose a short time
again. For the better understanding of all the passages in this Chapter, I
will make use again of my former method, viz. by proposing questions as they
arise in order, and answering them, I will endeavor to clear all the
obscurities here.

Quest. 1. What Angel this is that is said to descend from heaven having the
key of the bottomless pit, Verse. 1, 2, 3.
and a great chain in his hand to bind and lock up the Devil? when does the
time here spoken of, a thousand years, wherein the Devil should continue
locked and tied up from the deceiving the nations, begin? and what time is that
little time, of which it is said, he should be loosed for a little time again
after this?

Answ. By this Angel some understand Christ, Pareus. Dent.
chaining and locking up Satan by the preaching of the Gospel, before which
idolatry, Brightman.
the Devils worship fell in all places. Some will have Constantine the great to
be meant by this Angel. Some understand the order of the holy Apostles,
Bullinger.
who as they went forth preaching the Gospel, may well be said to have
chained and locked up Satan. Napier.
Lastly, some understand as the words sound, that God by the ministry of his
Angel bound up Satan all this time. Let the Reader choose which likes him best
of all these, for the difference is little, but I incline rather to that of
Constantine in particular, whom God did singularly use in this service of
binding Satan, when by his authority and example, Kings, Princes, Governors
and people in all places did more generally embrace the Christian religion,
which before they persecuted, and the Temples of idols were shut up and their
worship was prohibited.

Touching the time of the Devils imprisonment there is greater difference. Some
will have an indefinite time meant, viz. all the time from the first going
forth of the Gospel till Antichrist his reign, Aug de Ciu. Dei. lib 20. cap.
7. Ribera. Viegas. Beda. Rupertus, etc. Bullinger.
a thousand years being often put for a long time, but not precisely so many,
as Job 9.3. Psalm. 91.7. 1 Samuel 18 7. Psalm. 90.4. All this time they say, Satan
is bound up from deceiving the Gentiles, because their idolatry and
superstition falls before the Gospel every where. Some hold, that precisely
a thousand years are here meant, but they differ much about the beginning of
this time. Some set down three remarkable times, holding that it is
indifferent to begin it at one of them. 1. At the passion of Christ, ann. 34.
and so it is determined, ann. 10 34. in the time of Benedict the ninth, who was
a coniurer, and was taken away by the Devil, having first sold his
Pontificallity unto Gregory the sixth. 2. When Paul preached the Gospel at
Rome, ann. 60. and so it is determined ann. 1060. in the time of Nicolas the
second, when by the means of Gregory the seventh there was much trouble in the
world, as if the Devil were again broken loose. 3. From the destruction of
Jerusalem, ann. 73. at what time the obstacle by the malicious Jews being
removed, the Gospel was more generally dispersed amongst the Gentiles, and so
it is determined ann. 1073. in the time of Gregory the seventh called
Hildebrand, in whom many Historians affirm that the Devil reigned so stoutly,
did he oppose himself against goodness and further evil. Pareus. Iunius.
Dent.
Some pitch particularly upon the last of these times, holding that these
thousand years were expired in Pope Hildebrands time. Some reckon from the
nativity of Christ to the time of Siluester the second, about ann. 1000. yea
one of the Popes side, Aretius. Benno Cardin Chytraeus.
Cardinal Benno computeth this time thus. Some pitch upon the first particular
time before mentioned, viz. the passion and resurrection of Christ. Lastly,
some begin this time at Constantine the great, Brightman. Forbs. Napier.
ann. 300. and end it ann. 1300. at what time the Devil did seem more
evidently to be loosed than at any time before, since the persecuting
Emperors, both in the Pope and Turk, the one in the West persecuting the
Waldenses, and all others that since that time have dared to oppose his usurped
authority and superstitions; the other in the East inuading and subduing the
Gretian Empire, professedly making war against Christ and Christians. There
is another opinion which is scarce worth the naming, that these thousand years
begin not till the Pope be utterly destroyed, and then the faithful slain in
the time of Popery shall be raised again in their bodies, and being received
into heaven shall reign with Christ all this time after which the general
resurrection of all others shall be. This differs not much from the opinion
of the old Chiliastes, who held, as Augustine relates it, Aug lib. 20. de Ciu.
Dei cap. 7. The error of antiquity.
that as the world was six days in making, and upon the seventh was the
Sabbath, so after six thousand years expired since the creation, there should
be a Sabbath of a thousand years here to the faithful, which had suffered for
Christ, who rising then in their bodies, should enjoy, during this time, all
worldly delights of meats and drinks, etc. And of this he says Papias was the
Author, Papias.
whom Ireneus and Ierom report to have been a disciple of the Apostles:
howsoever indeed he was not, as appears by his own confession in the
beginning of his work, where he says, that he never heard or saw with his
eyes any of the holy Apostles. Yet so reverent esteem was given unto him for
his supposed antiquity, that many of the Ancients were entangled with this his
error, as Justin Martyr dialogo cum Triphone. Irenaeus lib. 5. Nepos Episc.
Aegypts, Tertull. lib. 3. contra. Marcior. Lactant. l. 5. institut. c. 23.
Victorinus Pictaniensis in Apoc. and Augustine himself confesses, that he
also was sometime of the same opinion. But this of the old Chiliafts can by no
means stand, Ioh 3.29. 1 Cor. 15.
both because according to it, other plain places teaching the resurrection of
all men's bodies at one time, should be false if the bodies of all the Martyrs
be raised before: and also because it does abhor from all Christian reason,
that the faithful being raised again should wallow in carnal pleasure,
growing now dissolute, when as in the infirmity of the flesh they were so
strict and abstemious before. And it is worth the no^ing, how God has let us
to live to see this error confuted by experience, for they reckoned the birth
of Christ to be anno mundi 5199. so that ann. Dom. 80 1. the time of their
supposed six thousand years was expired, and so the seventh thousand of this
pleasant life, after that supposed resurrection should have begun 824. years
agone, it being now the year of our Lord 1625. And as for the latter
Chiliasts, who hold a resurrection first of the Martyrs after Antichrists
overthrow, that they may in body and soul live in heaven, before the general
resurrection these thousand years. They err with the other about the general
resurrection, making two times, whereas the Scriptures make but one only, and
they plainly contradict the Text speaking of the souls that rise again and
not of the bodies. And lastly, by their opinion the world should continue a
thousand years after Antichrist utterly desroyed, whereas he shall be
abolished by the brightness of Christ's coming. Let us therefore consider of
the other expositions, and first of the first, taking these thousand years for
a time indefinite, although it cannot be denied, but a thousand years are
sometime thus put, yet here so many years are precisely meant, because the
word a thousand years is often repeated, and that with an affix (...), these
thousand years, as is not used any where to express an indefinite time.
Besides, where the words may be properly taken, as here they may without any
absurdity, we must not fly unto a figure. And without all doubt this
exposition is erroneous, because the time set forth by a thousand years,
according to it should be expired before Antichrists reign, whereas his reign
must needs be included in a great part within the compass of this time, seeing
they which reign with Christ in his time are particularly described by their
not worshipping of the beast, v. 4. which could not have been spoken of them,
if the beast had not been till after their days. Let us come therefore to
those that hold precisely a thousand years to be meant here, amongst whom I
cannot subscribe to them that will have this begin either at the birth,
passion, or resurrection of our Savior Christ, at the preaching of Paul, or
the destruction of Jerusalem, because the Dragons persecuting of the Church
described, Chap. 13. must needs be yielded to have been before this, both
because it is in order set forth before, and in reason the Dragon must have
done somewhat under the Gospel, for which as a malefactor he should be
apprehended and cast into prison, before that he could be thus proceeded
against. The persecutions of the Primitive Church therefore must needs precede
this shutting up of the Devil, and so the time cannot well be begun till the
days of Constantine the great, about an. 300. For till then, howsoever Satan
had not that liberty to deceive, by means of the Gospel, yet he seduced still
the Kings and Princes and great ones of the earth, which being the heads of the
rest, and drawing a world of people after them, the Devil cannot well be
counted to have been shut up from the deceiving of the Gentiles, till that
they, or the most of them being enlightened by the truth, abandoned idolatry,
and became embracers of the holy Gospel of Christ Jesus. And if we begin this
time then at an^. 300. and end it at an. 1300. the event will notably answer to
the Prophecy. For the Devil was then plainly shut up, when the Temples of
idols were shut up, and the true Religion was commanded to be received every
where, hindering him from deceiving the world any more, as formerly he has
done. And he had his prison set open to him again, when the Turk brake in
upon the Eastern Empire, wanne Constantinople, and made it the seat of his
Empire, seeking to draw the world of people, which came under his jurisdiction
from Christ unto the impostour Mahomet, which was ann. 1300. And when
corruptions in the Church being long in hatching were grown to that height,
that they which were seduced by them, might as well be counted to be deceived
by the Devil, as the Gentiles of old were, seeing the like idolatries with
images, Masses and Crucifixes were daily committed, and a Queen of heaven was
also set up, the blessed Virgin Mary, etc. which was also about the same time,
as I have showed more at large in my book called An Antidote against Popery,
page 66. Since that time the Devil has notoriously raged again by the Turks
in the East, and the Pope in the West, but for our comfort it is called but a
short time, wherein they shall thus proceed, and then by the final judgment
they shall all be cut off, and receive according to the deserts. It is not to
be taken for a short time according to man, but according to the divine phrase
directed thus for consolation, it being indeed but a short time with the Lord,
though in our account it be long, 324. years being already past since, and God
knows how long this rage shall yet endure. If it be objected, that it seems
contradictory in it self to hold that the Devil was imprisoned, and at the
same time Antichrist his great Lieutenant was in the world, the Pope and Turk,
it must be considered, that their beginnings were so slender, both of the Turk
for want of that power, and of the Pope whose mystery of iniquity was long in
coming to a full height, as it seemed not good unto the Spirit of God to point
at their first beings, through the instigation of Satan, but at such a state,
as wherein Satan might evidently appear to have broken out of hell again, to
abuse the world, as he did in the time of Heathenisme.

Quest. 2. And I saw thrones and them that sat upon them, etc. Who are they
which are said here to sit upon thrones, Verse. 4.
and to have the judgment committed unto them? What is the living again of
those that were slain for the truth, and their reigning with Christ a thousand
years, and when shall this time be? Who are the rest of the dead that arise
not till after these thousand years expired? Verse. 5.
And why is this called the first resurrection, and they pronounced blessed
that have part in it, are there any more resurrections than one, or are they
only blessed that suffer death for the truth? And are all the rest of the dead
without this bliss?

Bullinger. Pareus. Arethas.
Answ. Some will have those that sat upon thrones, and had judgment given
unto them to be all one with the souls spoken of immediately after, for these
souls live and reign with Christ a thousand years, which is all one with
sitting upon thrones, and having judgment given unto them: for it is written,
Give thy judgments (O Lord) unto the King, because he that sits upon the
throne is wont to judge, and to have the power of judging from God, is to rule
and reign. They understand this therefore of the glorified estate of the
souls of the faithful, who either suffered under the heathen Emperors, or in
this time of a thousand years. For being considered altogether as one
mystical body, they may be said to reign a thousand years, though some of
them came so late into this blissful condition, as that they were not therein
above a hundred, fifty, twenty, or ten years before the expiration of this
time. As a man may say of any family to which an estate has remained from
generation to generation five hundred years, this has been their inheritance
five hundred years, though some of them came not to it till twenty or ten
years agone. And it is to be noted, that not they only who suffered death
came within the compass of this number, but also all those that keep
themselves in the midst of Popish corruptions undefiled with them: for it is
added, and whosoever have not worshipped the beast, nor his image, etc. For
that which is further added, the rest of the dead lived not again till the
thousand years were expired. Verse. 5.
They understand it in a spiritual sense of all that were corrupted in
religion that were void of true grace, for they which are so, are dead, and
these live not again till the thousand years ended, that is, never: for
though they shall live again, yet they shall not live as the living of the
faithful is spoken of, in joy and glory, for only such as have part in the
first resurrection are thus blessed and happy, that is, they which receive the
truth into honest and believing hearts, and cleave to it, not having any tang
of the leaven of the common corruptions in religion.

Some others agreeing in this* Brightman. Forbs.
that the souls here spoken of, are they that sit in thrones, yet differ in
the exposition of this their sitting, and living and reigning, for they apply
all to living and reigning by grace, and cleaning to Christ in the
acknowledgement and profession of his truth: for this is truly to live and
reign with Christ, though outwardly they were poor, despised, and persecuted,
seeing by grace we are made to sit together in heavenly places; but withal,
they say, that the flourishing estate of the Church is here set forth in this
time, the Devil being put down in removing the rule and dominion from Heathen
to Christian Emperors, in whose time the souls of such as suffered in the
days of the Heathen are said to live and reign, because they were honorably
esteemed of, and revenge was now in some part taken upon their adversaries. And
of these, one in particular, viz. Brightman seems to hold, that the thousand
years here spoken of, are a different time from the former thousand years,
beginning soon after ann. 2300. for he says, that of them three hundred
years are now expired. And Pareus makes mention of some that held the same.

Others expound this sitting upon thrones, Aug. de Cin. Dei lib. 20. cap. 7.
Dent.
of the Preachers of the word of God, and Ecclesiastical Governors now being
lifted up, and exercising their discipline with authority.

Others holding two several things here set forth, Napier.
expound the sitting in thrones of the Popes dignity, in the days of Pope
Siluester, ann. 315. to whom Constantine the Great gave the judgment, when he
set him up so high, and his successors after him: and the souls, the souls of
such as were by the Popes appointment afterward put to death, viz. all true
hearted Christians.

They which stand for a different time from the thousand years spoken of
before, are certainly in an error, because by all circumstances in the Text,
the time is all one. For the Devils being bound and loosed again, is also here
mentioned as the boundary of this time, as it was of the former. Moreover, here
were a strange gap opened into an expectation of this world to last yet seven
hundred years, which is against all probability.

That exposition which refers the thrones to the Pope, cannot stand in
reason: for Satan being bound, it is not to be thought that his Lieutenants,
the Popes, advancement should be showed, but rather the advancement of such as
withstood him. Neither can I subscribe to that of the glorified estate of the
Saints departed, unto whom the rest of the dead are opposed, who lived not
again, till the thousand years expired: because some visible alteration is
here doubtless set forth at the binding of the Devil, seeing otherwise the
accomplishment of this Prophecy could not have been conceived of by the
faithful upon earth for their comfort, when as it was without doubt set forth
for this end and purpose. And as for that exposition, whereby these things are
applied unto the Prelates and Rulers of the Church, the description of being
set upon thrones and having power of judgment, is too glorious to agree unto
them. Wherefore I prefer that of the sensible most happy alteration in the
state of the world, in the days of Constantine the Great: for then thrones
were set for Christians, and they had the power of judging, who before were
judged: and in this time the souls of the faithful who had been put to death
for the Christian religion in the time of persecution, might well be said to
live and reign with Christ, because they had been set forth as lying under
the Altar, and crying for revenge upon those that shed their blood, Chap. 6.
verse. 9. all the time that the Heathen reigned. And whosoever worshipped not
the beast, as they departed out of this life, they had communion with them in
this their erection all these thousand years, that is, the body of the Saints
being considered as one, but not every particular member. For they all and
every of them lived and reigned in this time of a thousand years, though some
a longer, some a shorter part of it. Their living and reigning then here spoken
of, must needs have reference to their lying and crying before mentioned, and
therefore as that was spoken of, to set forth times of persecution without any
appearance of a deliverer that might revenge that innocent blood, so here is
nothing else set forth, but a deliverance of the Church, and a putting of power
into the hands of the faithful to revenge themselves upon the heathen, as was
sometime given to the Jews by the^ means of Hester Ester 8.
and Mordecai. For although the souls of the faithful did live and reign
with Christ before, mmediatly after their separation from the body, yet because
unto perfect dominion it is not only requisite to be in glory and joy with the
Lord, but to have our enemies beaten down and destroyed, they are not said to
live and reign with the Lord till this accomplished. Touching the rest of the
dead, who are said not to rise again till these thousand years ended, I
cannot think that it is meant of the dead in sin and superstition, who rise
not till then, that is, never: because they which were before spoken of, are
corporally dead, for they were slain; and these are plainly a part of them,
for he says, the rest of the dead, and therefore corporally dead also. I
suppose then, that by the rest of the dead, the innumerable company of them
that have died since the beginning of the world, are meant, the time of whose
resurrection is not to be expected till after these thousand years, lest when
we hear of some living and reigning with Christ, and of thrones set, and the
judgment given, we should imagine the general resurrection, and Christ's
coming to judgment to be here meant.

This is the first resurrection. Verse. 5.
Verse. 6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection,
etc. This may seem to be plain, for a bodily resurrection maintained from
this place by the Chiliasts, because the living of the souls before spoken of,
being here reiterated, is called a resurrection, which cannot be taken but for
the rising again of the body, seeing the soul falls not at all. But it is
to be understood, that these words are metaphorical and not proper, the
rising of the Church from under persecution to such an estate, as wherein the
truth is propagated with authority, is, as it were, a resurrection from the
dead, and therefore is so called: and because of the life that universally came
then into the world, by means of the Gospel, thus propagated, it is called
the first resurrection: as the conversion of the Jews which shall be, is
called by the Apostle, Romans 11.15.
Life unto the world from the dead, which is all one as if he had said with our
Prophet here, a resurrection. They are said to be blessed and holy that have
part in this resurrection, that is, the faithful of these times are above
others blessed in this, that they rule and reign, the world being now
Christian, and are not under the dominion of their enemies, neither shall the
second death seize upon them, as upon none else that are in the like condition,
that is, by the power of the Gospel and spirit raised up from the death of
sin to the life of righteousness. For of a bodily resurrection it cannot
possibly be understood, as I have already proved, but being thus understood,
all things will most excellently agree. I saw thrones set, and them that sat
upon them, etc. that is, it was represented unto me, how in the time of
Constantine the Great, the faithful should begin to rule and reign in this
world. And I saw the souls, etc. that is, and at that time it was showed me by
the altered condition of such as had given their lives for the truth, who
before were set forth as crying, but now as ruling and reigning, in token of an
end put to those calamities, and a beginning made of prosperity, that the case
of the Church was altered, and this lasted a thousand years. This is the first
resurrection, etc. that is, this the faithfuls being advanced to rule and
reign here, being a means to convert so many millions in all parts to the
truth, is, as it were, a general resurrection going before that at the last
day, against which they are well prepared that have their part in this, by
being quickened in grace, for the second death shall never seize upon such: but
they shall reign with Christ a thousand years by the prosperous and
flourishing estate which the Church enjoys here, and afterward for ever, by
being actually possessed of the kingdom of heaven in body and soul for
evermore.

Note, Note.
that the only way to be safe from everlasting destruction in hell, is by
making a resurrection before the last resurrection, that is, a resurrection
unto grace, which is only when the Word does powerfully operate in the heart to
make a man come out of his sins. For a man may live in the time of this
resurrection, and yet not have part in it, if after the manner of most men he
contenteth himself with an outward profession and name of a Christian, not
caring to have grace in his heart, whereby he may prove that he has attained
to a new life.

Quest. 3. And when the thousand years shall be expired, Verse. 7, 8, etc.
the Devil shall be loosed out of his prison again, and shall go forth to
deceive the nations in the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, etc. How,
or in whom is this accomplished, who are Gog and Magog gathered in such
innumerable multitutes by Satan unto the battle, what is the Camp of the
Saints, and the beloved city which they compass about, at what time God
sends down fire to destroy them, when also the Devil, who deceived them, is
cast into a lake of fire and brimstone?

Answ. Forbs.
Some by Gog and Magog understand the enemies of the Church indefinitely,
whatsoever they shall be in the last days, who shall make their last attempt
against the truth, but shall then be utterly destroyed.

Some understand the Turks by Magog, Brightman.
and the Scythians, who are now called the Tartars by Gog, being both of one
stock; Genesis 10.2.
for Magog was one of the sons of Iaphet, of whom came the Scythians, who are
all one with the Turks and Tartars, for they spring from the Scythians, but
they are thus distinguished into Magog, setting forth the Turk, and Gog the
Tartar, because Magog does contain in it Gog and more, as the dominion is now
in the Turks, the Tartars serving only under them in their wars. Which they
seek to prove also by the place over which Magog is said to be the chief
Prince, viz. Mesech and Tubal, Ezech. 38.2.
that is, Cappadocia and Ibenia the ancient seat of the Turks, till that ann.
1300. they further enlarged their bounds. The camp of the Saints, is the true
Church of God in Europe, which is so small in comparison of the Turks, as that
they may well be said to compass them about, as in a siege: the beloved City,
is the company of the Jews which shall be converted to the faith, but being
opposed by the Turks then, God shall miraculously destroy the Turks, and
preserve them; as if he sent fire down from heaven upon them, and then the
Emperor of the Turks shall have no place but in hell any more, which is set
forth by the Devils being cast into the lake of fire and brimstone. And as
touching the time when this shall be, it is the same with the battle
mentioned before in Harmageddon, Chap. 16.16.
which shall be fought, and then all enemies of the truth shall be quite
overthrown at the end of Daniels 1335. Dan. 12.12.
years which will be abbout anno Dom. 1690. Hitherto Brightman. Bullinger.
Parcus.
Others understanding the Turks also, yet go another way in expounding this
place. The Devil being let loose again goes out to seduce the nations,
partly by the increase of Popery, which now little differs from Heathenisme,
and partly by Mahumetisme, which after this loosing of Satan prevailed
wonderfully, in so much, that those parts in which were famous Churches of
Christians, are now turned into places of Turkish superstition, few Christians
that understand and profess the truth remaining. Moreover, he stirs up the
most cruel and deadly enemies of Christians to the wars, viz. the Turks,
which wars were begun first about the holy Land, and have continued ever since
innumerable armies, as the sands of the sea shore, being gathered together to
destroy the Church of God. But they shall at the last be confounded at the
coming of the Lord in flaming fire to take vengeance upon all the wicked, at
what time the Devil, the stirrer up of these and all other troubles shall be
for ever shut up in hell.

Napier. Dent. Mason.
Others according to the etymology of the name, expound Gog of the Pope, and
Magog of the Turk: for Gog signifies covered, and Magog uncovered, such as
the Pope and Turk are; he a secret, this an open enemy to the truth. Again, 1 Chronicles. 5.4.
Gog was an Israelite coming of Reuben; Magog an Heathen, Genesis 10.2.
coming of Iaphet: so the Pope is of Israel, bred in the bosom of the Church,
and the Turk an Heathen.

Lastly, Gog was the chief Prince of Mesheeh and Tubal, of one of which, viz.
Tubal, came the Iberi, which are the Spaniards, subject to the Pope: and of
Magog came the Scythians, who are the Turks and Tartars, subject to the
Emperor of the Turks.

Augustine says the same in effect with the first exposition, August.
that no certain people are here set forth, but all the enemies of the truth
at large, in who^, whilst the Devil lurketh, Gorran.
they are rightly called Gog, that is, tectum an house, but when he breaks
out into violence, Magog, detectu^, vnhoused. The Papists generally hold, that
such as shall assist Antichrist against true Christians, are here set forth,
and that they shall come out of Scythia, Bellarmine.
and some, that Gog is Antichrist. Iudaei.
The Jews hold that Gog and Magog are the Northern people shut up beyond the
mountain Taurus by Alexander the great, who shall at the last come forth and
waste Jerusalem by their wars, but then the Messiah shall come and stay them,
according to the Prophecy of Ezechiel. And the Alchoran of the Turks also has
something touching Gog and Magog, a little different from this.

^unius. Tremel.
Some derive these names from Gyges the king of the Lydians, who built a City in
Asia the lesser, and called it after his own name Gog-kartah, that is, the
City of Gog or Gyges, and hereby was afterward understood the whole Country of
Asia the lesser, and Syria, from whence arose the chief enemies of the Jews
after their return from their captivity, viz. Ptolomeus, Seleucus, Antigonus,
Cassander, etc.

Having thus set down the diverse expositions which I find upon this place, I
come now by the help of them to determine. By the Devil, I understand the
Devil properly, and not the Emperor of the Turks, because he is the Author
of seducement to such as are seduced, and he, not the Turk, was shut up a
thousand years: but now getting loose, he goes out to deceive the Nations in
that wherein he was hitherto restrained, viz. by idolatry and superstition,
through the means of the Turk and Pope his chief instruments. For the
idolatry of Popery and their superstition, and the superstition of the Turks
began to increase mightily about ann. 1300. Neither was this all that the
Devil labored in, but that there might be none to oppose these things, he
gathers Gog and Magog together, whose number is as the sand of the Seashore,
that is, he stirs up the Pope a secret enemy in the West, and the Turk an
open enemy in the East, by fire and sword to destroy the company of those that
stand for the truth, which howsoever it has been in a great part fulfilled
already, yet the most remarkable time is to come, wherein being gathered
together in greatest multitudes, they shall be by the immediate hand of God
destroyed as with fire from Heaven, so that they shall never be able to make
head again, as was before set forth under the sixth Vial, Chap. 16.16.
by the place called Harmageddon, into which they should be gathered. Which
time, the Devil being concluded in hell, should not in such manner seduce any
more till the coming of the Lord to judgment, which is next set forth. And I
hold with those, that say the phrase here is borrowed from Ez^echiel, because
of the similitude of that which was then done and now. Then the people of God
being returned from the captivity were assaulted by Seleucus and Nicanor and
Antiochus, etc. out of Asia Minor and Syria, but were mightily delivered by
Judas Machabeus, and his brethren, being extraordinarily stirred up and
assisted from Heaven: Ezech. 38.22. Ezech. 29.6.
and therefore their overthrow that came against them is set forth by fire and
brimstone; and again, by a fire which the Lord threatens to send upon Magog.
For in like manner the people of God in these latter days, being come out of
the captivity of Popery, are assaulted with innumerable enemies, but the Lord
does mightily preserve them and disappoint their enemies of their purpose; and
will, we doubt not, when greatest need shall be at the last, yet more
miraculously save his by destroying their enemies both Turks and Papists when
they shall be in an highest attempt against them. That the Scythians came of
Magog, who are the present Tukes and Tartars, is agreed by all Writers, and
that Meshech and Tubal, over which Gog is said to be the chief Prince, are
Iberia, that is, Spain and Cappadocia, Ieron. de inter Heb. nom.
Jerome shows De interpr. nominum Hebr.

Touching other exposi^ions, and first for that of enemies in general, it is
too large, and takes away from the light given here to see more particularly
into this matter: for that which restreineth it to the Turks only, seeing two
names are here used, I see no reason why both should be referred to one sort of
enemies, especially there being two that continually infest the Church of God
so aptly figured out by them. Touching the fire, and the casting of the Devil
into the lake of fire and brimstone, I cannot think it is to be meant of the
last judgment, and of the fire of that great day of the Lord, because when
that day shall come, there shall be a general security, eating and drinking,
marrying and giving in marriage, and not warring and sighting, for if an end of
these wars should be made by the Lords coming to judgment, how should the
faithful have time here to rejoice and to give thanks unto to God for their
greatest enemies overthrown. It is true, there may be some relikes of the
Antichristian Sect after this, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
in regard of which it is said, that Antichrist shall be abolished by the
brightness of the Lords coming: but that he shall stand to be able to make
so great a power as is here described, is most improbable. The Turks have had
hitherto great success in their wars against Christians, but they whom they
have fought against, have been as bad as themselves or worse, and therefore
they have been armed to become a scourge unto them, as was showed chap. 9. But
when they shall come in their greatest power against the true Christians of the
Reformed Religion, though the Papists shall join with them to make their
Armies innumerable, God will from Heaven fight against them and confound them.
In confidence whereof let us be resolute, and comfort our selves, if we should
see greater preparations of war made by all our enemies, for we shall
undoubtedly triumph over them all at the last.

Quest. Verse. 11.
4. What is meant by the appearance of a great white Throne, and the coming
together of all before him that sat upon it, and the fleeting away of Heaven
and Earth from before him? what are the Books, and the other book called, The
Book of life, according to the contents whereof all were judged, and according
to their works? and how are death and hell cast into the lake of fire?

Answ. Brightman.
There is no great difference amongst Expositors here, only some turn all
that is said into an allegory of the conversion of the Jews, holding that by
the dead here set forth to rise together, they are meant who have been all
this time dead as it were in infidelity. But the place is so plainly of the
general resurrection at the last day, and the arguments so sleighty to cause
us to vary from the common received exposition, which is of the general
resurrection, and the exposition which applies it to the Jews in the
particular passages here is so wrested and forced, Pareus.
as one, a learned Writer has well noted, as that this may by no means be
admitted. The chief reason of this interpretation is drawn from that which
follows, Chap. 21.22. because the Author of it conceiueth; that the
description of the new Jerusalem with the circumstances cannot agree to the
state of the Church triumphant in heaven, and therefore a famous Church to come
upon earth must needs be pointed at there: but how these may be applied to the
state of the Church triumphant in heaven shall appear in their proper place.
In the mean season I follow the common exposition of all Writers, holding that
the general resurrection and proceedings which shall be at the last day are
here set forth: for every place of Scripture is properly to be understood,
unless there be a necessity of admitting a figure, because otherwise either
some absurdity will follow, or it will not agree with the analogy of faith,
neither of which can be justly said here. He that sits upon a great white
Throne is the Lord Jesus, who appears thus to show his glory, for white is a
sign of glory, Mat. 17.1. the heaven and earth are said to fly away from
before him, to declare the fierceness and intolerablenesse of his anger at
that day, which is such, that neither earth nor heaven are able to bear it, a
circumstance very unfit to be applied to that most notable work of grace in
bringing the Jews home to the faith. They shall fly away in regard of their
external form and figure, for they shall be changed as a vesture, the heavens
melting with heat, and the earth flaming with fire, but their substance shall
still remain after this called a new heaven and a new earth, as most hold. The
dead that stand before the Judge, are both great and small, every one rising in
that stature of body, wherein he fell; against the Jesuits conceit, that all
shall be of such a stature as one is ordinarily at his full age. The books
that are opened, are according to some, the books of men consciences,
according to others, the books of holy Scripture, but according to Augustine
both, which I think to be rightest; for every man's conscience shall then be
made manifest, whether it be good or evil, foul or clear, and according to
the books of holy Scripture all shall be judged, as they have received and
observed the things therein contained or not. The other is according to some,
Napier. Par^us.
the book of predestination, for then it shall be made manifest who were
elected, and who reprobate: according to some, Bullinger.
the book of faith, for he that believes has life, to believe is to live;
the book of life then is the book of faith, for he in whomsoever a true faith
is found shall then live, the rest shall be cast into hell. I subscribe to the
book of Predestination, for this of faith was spoken of before amongst the
books, and because it is hidden from us who are written in this Book, God
only knows that a thing well known to us is further spoken of, viz. Works,
every man is judged according to his works, for good works always are in
such as be written in this book. It is not said according to their faith,
because that is more latent, and there is more deceit in it, neither is it
said, for their works, but all that were not found written in the book of
life, that is, that were not elected, are cast into the lake of fire, but yet
justly, for their evil works deserve it: on the contrary side therefore, they
which are saved, are such as be written in the book of life, here is the
original of their salvation, God has elected them, and good reason there is,
in respect of men, that they should be saved, for their works have been good,
whereas the works of the reprobate have been evil, and to good works God
has promised a reward, as he has threatened judgment to evil works, yet in
respect of God, there is no reason of merit in the best works, because it is
our duty to do them, and being examined by the rule of Gods righteousness
they are defective, when we do them in the best manner that we can; but there
is good reason of merit of death in evil works, because upon pain of death
they are forbidden, so that he shall be well worthy to die that commits
them, even as a murderer or robber is worthy to be hanged; but on the other
side, he that does good works is not well worthy of everlasting life, though
it be promised that he shall be thus rewarded, no more than a dutiful subject
is worthy for that service which his Prince commands him, and promises to
reward with the marriage of his daughter, and making him his son, can be said
to be worthy of it. For it was of grace that his Prince made him such a
promise, to whom he ought that service without a reward, neither could it be
worthy of so great a reward, though greatly deserving, and therefore it came of
grace, not of his merit. But if of merit, yet there is a great disproportion
betwixt the service of any subject to his Prince, and the actions of a
Christian toward God: for the Prince does merely command and furnish his
subject with necessaries to do that service which he puts him upon, but it
is his own valor and wisdom, whereby he performs it without any inabling
further from his Prince in the very doing: for notwithstanding his furnishing
of him, he may as well miscarry as effect that which he goes about. But God
inableth his to that which he requires, He works the will and the deed of
his own good pleasure. Philip. 2.13.
Again, the greatest reward of a Prince is but the reward of a man to a man, a
temporany reward, and so happily the benefit that redoundeth to him by that
service may be equal to the reward: but everlasting life, which is the reward
of God, is far more excellent than any thing that any man can do, or the
benefit hereby redounding unto God which is none; for, If thou be righteous,
thou art righteous for thy self, Prou. 9.12.
if thou be wicked, thou alone shall suffer. The Papists therefore, that from
hence and from the like places seek to establish the merit of good works, do
greatly strain and force such places against all sense and reason. By death
and hell, which are said to be cast into the lake of fire, some understand the
Devil, August. Napier.
who by his temptations becomes death and hell to the wicked, for that he
draws them on to such a course as tends to death and damnation. Dent.
Bullinger. Pareus.
Some understand all such as to whom death and hell belongs, all the
reprobate and wicked; and some, whatsoever is obnoxious and hurtful, so that
after this, nothing remains to hinder the perfect bless^dnesse of the new
Jerusalem, which comes next to be spoken of. And this seems to be most
probable, because the Devils damnation was spoken of before, verse. 10. and the
reprobates damnation, verse. 15. Here therefore may fitly be brought in the
utter destruction of death and hell in respect of the faithful, so that they
should not be in any fear of them any longer: for according to this it is
promised, 1 Cor. 15.16.
The last enemy which shall be destroyed is Death, and Cha. 21.4. Death is said
to be no more after this, this casting into the lake then is but a periphrases
of destruction. But me thinks there may be another more agreeing sense yet
rendered, if by a Metonymy we understand by death and hell, such as death and
hell were said before to give up; the wicked which hitherto lay dead and
buried, the continent being put for the content, as we call the inhabitants of
an house, the house. For if hell should be meant as the word sounds, then
hell should be said to be cast into hell, which cannot stand; if the heirs
of hell, then the same word should be used in another sense, as it were with
the same breath; that is not likely, but being taken, as I have said, it does
well correspond unto the words before going, and the argument of the wickeds
destruction, which only is here set forth, is fitly prosecuted, the comforts
of the faithful being reserved to be spoken of in the next Chapter.

Touching death and hell, which are said to give up their dead, R bera.
I hold it not amiss with Ribera to expound it of such as have died
ordinarily, or extraordinarily have been swallowed up, and gone alive, as it
were, into the pit. St. Augustine will have it meant of the bodies in the
graves, and of the souls of the wicked in hell.

This is a notable place to show both the universality of the judgment that
shall be, Note.
and the terriblenesse of the Judge to the wicked, so that nothing shall be
able to abide his presence, and the just proceedings according to which all
shall be sentenced, because they shall be by books, and according to men's
works: and lastly, the woeful estate of all that have done evil, after this
time, they shall be cast into the lake of fire, and the joyful estate of those
that have done well, death and hell is abolished unto them, so that they shall
stand in fear of these enemies no more. What is written in the book of life
is kept so secret that we cannot know it, but they whose works are evil, may
be sure that they are not therein written, the book of life and the register
of men's works do parallel one another. Would thou then see into this great
secret? go to thy works, and consider them, if they be good, thou art
assuredly written in the book of life, otherwise thou may be sure that thou
art not, and then the lake of fire gapeth for thee. Psalm. 34.12.
Be not deceived therefore by thy faith, but would thou live long and see
good days? refrain thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no
guile, cease to do evil, seek peace and ensue it. Attend to that direction
of our blessed Savior, given to him that asked what he should do to be saved,
1 Timothy 6.7.
keep the Commandem^nts, and if thou be rich, forget not to distribute of thy
goods to the poor, and so lay up to thy self a good foundation.

CHAP. XXI.
IN this, and the Chapter following, under the figure of the new Jerusalem, the
state of the Church triumphant in heaven is set forth, as it shall be after the
day of judgment, according to the opinion of all Expositors, Brightman. Forbs.
except two of ours, who understand it of a flourishing Church upon earth after
the Pope and Turk destroyed, and the Jews converted, and some Popish Writers
who expound it of the Church of Rome, whom Alcasar a Jesuit mentions and
confuteth. But that it cannot possibly be understood of the Church upon earth
in any time or age, is most plain: first, because this vision follows after
the vision of the last great day of judgment, and therefore in order should
represent somewhat after that. 2. Because the condition of the Church is such
here, as that it can never be free from suffering and sorrow. All that will
live godly must suffer persecution; Rom 8.17.
we shall be glorified with Christ if we suffer with him: Ioh. 16. 1 Pet 5.8.
and In the world ye shall have trouble, and if at any time there be outward
peace, yet the Devil like a roaring Lion goes about continually seeking whom
he may devour: and there are bodily pangs and sicknesses, and other
occurrences that do afflict whilst this life l^steth, Heb. 12.10.
for if we should be without chastisement, we should be bastards and no
sons. And lastly, there is sin ever here in the best, which makes them to
sorrow, Matthew. 5.5.
according to that, Blessed are they which mourn, for they shall be comforted.
But the new Jerusalem here described is without all sorrow and pain, verse.
4.3. Because the Church here described has the glory of God, which is all one
with being glorified in heaven, so as cannot said of any upon earth, verse.
11.4. Because this Church is without a Temple, needs no light of the Sun,
etc. verse. 22, 23. whereas the Church upon earth must always have a place to
resort unto, and must be enlightened, and vpheld in grace by means, and shall
ever need the light of the Sun and Moon. 5. Because no unclean thing is in
this Church, verse. 27. whereas in this world the kingdom of heaven is ever
like a corn field with tares in it, like unto ground with thorns and briars
and stones in it, and such, as that it may be said always, Many are called but
few are chosen. Lastly, to put us out of doubt, that no state of the Church
here is meant, but in heaven, he says, that they shall see his face, Chap.
22.4. for this shall never be till we come in heaven, 1 Cor. 13. then shall we
see as we are seen, and herein stands the perfection of blessedness, 1 Ioh.
3.3. for now we are the sons of God, but it does not yet appear what we
shall be, for we shall see him as he is. To say nothing of the new heavens and
the new earth, 2 Pet. 3.13.
which Saint Peter speaks of when he has showed how the world shall be
destroyed by fire; but we, says he, look for a new heaven, and a new earth,
wherein dwells righteousness. These reasons, I think, may satisfy any
reasonable man against the probabilities, that are, that it should not be meant
of the Church triumphant in heaven, except the fantastical Chiliast, who may
think to reconcile all these to his imagined joyful time of a thousand years
upon earth after the first resurrection of the Martyrs only, for they apply
all this to that imaginary condition. But that has been sufficiently confuted
already; and whereas any thing may seem to make against the common tenent of
the glorified estate of the Church here set forth, it shall be answered in the
proper place. And so I hasten to the exposition of the difficulties here, as
they offer themselves in order.

And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, Verse. 1.
for the first were passed away, neither was there any more sea. By the new
heaven and earth, here most Expositors understand not any new creation, but so
great an alteration in the heavens and the earth, as if they were made new. For
these heavens and earth, say they, shall not cease to be in regard of their
substance, but become more glorious, as is taught, Romans 8.19. being no more
subject to corruption. Neither shall they be renewed, that we might again have
a dwelling here, (for we shall ascend, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
and ever remain with the Lord above) but to intimate the new glorified estate
of the faithful; if the creatures which were made to serve them, shall come now
to a new glorious condition, then much more they for whose service they were
made, as Bullinger speaks. Bullinger.
But I have already delivered my conjecture upon 2 Pet. 3.8. for the first
heaven and earth were passed away. This was showed before, Chap. 20.11. and
because no mention was there made of the sea, here it is added, the sea was no
more, that we might not conceive, but that all the parts of the world fled from
the Lords angry presence. Bullinger.
Some think that nothing else is meant, but that the sea was altered to a more
glorious estate, even as the heaven and the earth; but it is to be noted, that
he speaks only negatiuely of the sea, but both affirmatively and negatiuely
of the heaven and the earth, as does also Saint Peter; 2 Pet. 3.13.
and therefore I do not think that any sea shall have a being any more, but
the glassie sea before the throne, Chap. 4. the sea that now is being consumed
with the heat of that fire, as the Schoole-man speaks. And indeed the sea is
such an huge depth, and so hideous to behold when it works, and the waves
thereof are tossed to and fro, that there is in it some representation of hell,
that bottomless pit boiling with fire and brimstone, and therefore for comfort
it is added, that there was no sea. Chap. 9.
The Locusts before were noted to come out of the bottomless pit, and the
beast as terrible as they, out of the sea; Chap. 13.
the sea therefore is as another bottomless pit, against which there is need
we should be comforted. There shall be no more sea then for any such beasts to
arise out of again for the terror of the faithful, and this I take to be the
very meaning, without any further curious enquiring with the Schoolmen what
shall become of the sea then, and determining that it shall be changed into an
heavenly sphere. Saint Augustine by the sea here, understands the troubles
of the world, Aug. lib. 20. de Ciu. Dei cap. 17
the adversities, persecutions and great mutations of states which are always
here, but then shall be no more.

And I saw the new Jerusalem coming down from heaven, Verse. 2.
etc. This new Jerusalem is the Church glorified, and so adorned like a Bride
in all her best array. Whereas it is objected, that the Church glorified is in
heaven, and therefore cannot be said to come down from heaven, Pareus.
I answer with Pareus, that she is said to come down from heaven, not in
respect of local motion, but of her original, which is from God and from
heaven, for the Saints are begotten of God, Iam. 1.18.
and therefore may well be said to descend from him; yea, the Church of God
being spoken of elsewhere by this name of Jerusalem, is said to be from above
in this sense, Gal 4.26.
Jerusalem which is from above, is the mother of us all. Whereas it is further
objected, that she is spoken of as a Bride prepared for her husband, which is
by the ornaments of grace in this world; I answer, it is true, the Church
indeed is in preparing for Christ in this life, but she is not fully prepared
till the accession of glory that shall be at the last day, which is the day of
her marriage, and therefore to intimate this time, the Lord is spoken of not by
the name of a Bridegroom, but of an husband, for it is, (...). We may gather
then from hence, that the glorified estate of the Church must needs be meant
here, because till that time she is not fully adorned and prepared for the
marriage, as she is set forth here to be, for she is not without some
imperfections until this time, but here she is described, as most complete and
perfect in every respect.

The Tabernacle of God is with men, Verse. 3.
etc. that is, with the faithful he will henceforth make his abode, being
under the same roof, as it were, perpetually, as the Bridgegroome lives with
his Bride after the marriage consummated, and then it is showed, how happy this
estate shall be by the freedom from all misery, and the fruition of all good
things; which happy condition of the faithful, that it might be made yet more
illustrious, the contrary estate of the wicked is described.

The fearful and unbelieving, Verse 8.
etc. shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone.
By the fearful understand such as in the time of persecution are faint
hearted, so as that rather than they will come into any bodily danger, they
will fall from their profession of the truth. They and all other wicked
persons, whether they be such as are here particularly reckoned up, or in any
other kind, (which is set forth by unbelievers and abominable) shall burn for
ever in hell, where they shall weep, and wail, and gnash their teeth, when as
all sorrow and crying shall be done away to the godly. Let the wicked therefore
tremble at these things, and turn, and so many as fear God, comfort
themselves in the assured hope and expectation to be comforted far beyond all
the sorrows that they do or can endure in this world. From hence-forward the
Church reigning in heaven, is described under the name of the new Jerusalem.

Having the glory of God, Verse. 11.
and her light was like unto a stone most precious, even like a Jasper stone,
clear as crystal, etc. The Church does communicate now with God in the
brightness of his glory, which before was represented by a Jasper stone, Chap.
4.3.
which is of incomparable brightness, and so is the Crystal. From hence it is
proceeded to the wall great and high, Verse. 12.
and the twelve gates. The wall of a city serves for defense, that the
inhabitants may be safe from the incursions of enemies, and therefore the new
Jerusalem is said to have a great high wall, to set forth the safety thereof.

Touching the gates, whereof three are toward the East, Verse. 13.
etc. this is plainly borrowed from Ezech. 48.31. The gates toward all parts
show, that this Church is gathered out of all parts of the world, which is also
plainly taught, Luke 13.29. They shall come out of the East, West, North and
South, Luk 13.29, Andreas. Napier.
and sit down in the kingdom of God. Neither do I dislike of the mystery of the
Trinity hereby intimated, according to some, for why else should the number of
three be set down rather than any other number? The names of the twelve tribes
of the children of Israel are written upon these gates, to show, that unto the
true Israelites only this city does appertain, and consists of such only.
Twelve Angels stand at the gates, to show, how by the conduct and guidance of
the Prophets, Bullinger. Pareus. Napi^r.
Apostles and Ministers of God they are brought in, according to some: but me
thinks, that Angels are rather properly to be understood, who are placed as a
guard unto the city at each gate: Psalm. 34.
for the Angels of God pitch their tents about those that fear God, and they
conduct the faithful into heaven, for the Angels at the last day are sent out
to gather the wheat into Gods barn.

The Apostles are expressly mentioned in the next place, Verse. 14.
in speaking of the foundations of this city, whereupon their names are
written. And it is set forth to have foundations, because strong buildings have
foundations well laid, and the twelve Apostles names are inscribed upon them,
according to the place which they had in the Church in this world. Ye are
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20.
Christ Jesus himself being the chief corner stone. Not that Christ only is
not the foundation of the Church, but because they are the chief next unto
him, and by them others are built upon Christ. This is therefore thus set forth
for honors sake unto them, being the most eminent in this spiritual building.
The objection which is made from hence, that the Church triumphant in heaven
cannot be meant here, because the faithful shall not then depend upon the
Apostles as they do in this life, for so much as here they need their writings
for instruction and direction, this I say, is most weak; for they are not
therefore said to be foundations in heaven, because others depend upon them,
but for the eminency of their glory, which is in the highest degree, as they
have been instruments of greatest glory to God in this world.

And the city lies foure-square, Verse. 16.
and the length is as large as the breadth, and he measured the city with the
reed twelve thousand furlongs: the length, and the breadth, and the height of it
are equal. This foure-square figure serves to set forth the firm and
immovable standing of the faithful in that glorious estate: Bullinger.
the number of furlongs here mentioned, is thought by some to be the length,
and breadth, and height severally, each of them being twelve thousand: But I
assent rather to them that account this to be the whole compass of the city,
Pareus.
comprehending the breadth and length, for they are plainly cast up together, so
that there being four sides to measure, each is but three thousand furlongs,
that is, three hundred seventy and five of our English miles, a city of
wonderful greatness, far exceeding old Babylon, Herod. lib. 1.
which is also described by Herodotus to be foure-square, but in compass
only four hundred and fourscore furlongs, the height was two hundred cubits,
and the thickness of the wall fifty cubits, but the compass of this is twelve
thousand furlongs, the height equal to the length or breadth, that is, three
thousand furlongs, and the thickness follows one hundred forty and four
cubits. It is set forth to be thus large, because there is room enough for all
the faithful, and of an equal breadth and length, and so each side equal, to
show that it consists alike of people of all parts of the world, for as much
as the Gospel was sent to all the world. It is of this extraordinary height
and thickness, to show, that there is no getting into it but by the gates, and
it is impregnable for strength. That the thickness of the wall is meant, when
it is said, He measured the wall thereof 144. cubits, must needs be yielded,
because the height was described before. And it is to be noted, how all the
numbers here go upon twelve, according to the number of the twelve Tribes, and
the twelve Apostles for twelve being multiplied by twelve, make one hundred
forty and four; to show, that only true Israelites, such as are built upon
the holy Apostles, are members and parts of this building. The measure whereby
the city is measured, is said to be of a man, which is the measure of the
Angel. Haime.
Some understand this of the shape of a man wherein the Angel appeared, and so
it was the measure of a man, that is, of the Angel in appearance like unto a
man: but this is overthrown by that which went before, at the first coming of
the Angel to talk with John, where it is said, one of the seven Angels came
unto me, not one like unto a man. Some therefore think that it is meant,
Viega^*
that man is an Angel in the estate here described, according to that of our
Savior Christ, They shall be as the Angels, for they come into the place of
Angels: but no such thing, as I take it, can be meant here, because not man,
but man regenerate and sanctified shall be as an Angel, and in this state he
is not wont to be spoken of by the name of man, but the faithful or Saints.
Lastly, the most genuine, and most received exposition is, Bull^nger. Pareus.
Napier.
that the measures of furlongs and cubits here measured by, are such, as be
usual amongst men, for this kind of measure was the measure which the Angel
used, and he says, which is of the Angel, that is, which is the measure used
by the Angel. Whereas this is used as an argument to prove that the Church
triumphant is not meant here, but the Church militant upon earth, because the
measure of a man is used, it is very weak, seeing the only end of this
explication of the measure, is for our understanding of the just length,
breadth, height, and thickness of the walls of the city, as this Prophecy is
directed to us, and not to show where this city is. Having thus described the
measures, he proceeds next to the matter of the building.

And the building of the wall was of Jasper, Verse. 18.
and the City was pure gold, like unto clear glass. The Jasper stone is much
celebrated in this book, he that sits upon the throne is likened to a
Jasper, and when the glory of this city was said to be as the glory of God, the
light of it is immediately said to be as of a Jasper, here the wall is of
Jasper, and the prime stone of the foundation is Jasper. This stone is of a
most beautiful green color, and so may well set forth a state like the
Spring, always green, never withering or decaying by age, such as is the
glorified estate of the Saints in heaven. The clear crystal (...) also spoken
of before in describing her light, unto which pure gold is also added here,
these being things of greatest ex^^^ency, and most clear and pure, that hereby
we might understand what the excellency of this estate is, and more eagerly
ensue after it, as worldly men do after gold and precious stones. Unto the
foundations more particularly are ascribed particular precious stones, with
which they are said to be garnished: for upon the foundations were inscribed
the names of the twelve Apostles, as representing them now in their glorified
estate who as a foundation in a building are the chief part of this ^^^^uall
edifice. These foundations therefore are set forth th^^ garnished, to show,
that as all this building is glorious so the Apostles who have been the
chiefest instruments ^^orifying God upon earth, are most glorious.

The ornament of the first foundation is a Jasper stone, Verse. 19.
the second a Sapphire, the third a Calcedony, etc. Some will have these stones
disposed unto this order, according to the order of the Apostles, so that the
first in the nature and virtues thereof is fitted unto the first of the
Apostles, Peter, and the other to the rest, applying to each Apostle one,
Arethas. Andreas.
but here some make Paul the second, and some Andrew.

Peter, for his continual most affectionate love to his Lord and Master
Christ, as the Jasper does represent the green spring. Io^chim. Ribera.
The Sapphire, they which are for Andrew, say, agrees well unto him, because it
is sky colored, representing the heavens, with some streams of little
clouds, for he was most heavenly minded: but they which are for Paul, apply it
to his being taken up into the third heaven. They which apply the second unto
Andrew, proceed to apply the Calcedony to James the elder, the Smaragd to John,
the Sardonix to Philip, the Sardis to Bartholomew, the Chrysolite to Matthew,
the Berill to Thomas, the Topaz to James the lesser, the Chrysoprasus to Judas
the brother of James, the Hyacinth to Simon, and the Amethist to Matthias. But
for so much as the Apostles are not always reckoned up in the same order, but
in a diverse, Mat. 10. Mark. 3.16. Luke 6.13. Neither can it be certain in
what order they are to be placed, for that the order of their calling is
uncertain, I hold with them, that decline this particular applying of each
precious stone to each Disciple, Bl. Viegas. Pareus. Bullinger, etc.
as a point of curiosity, and think rather, that only in general these
twelve stones are said to be in the foundation inscribed with the names of the
twelve Apostles, to set forth the excellency of their glory, as in the diverse
virtues and graces of the holy ghost they have excelled here, to represent
which these precious stones do fitly serve. The Jasper, besides the most
delectable green color, Francis Rucus. Par^us. Viegas who alleges Plizy,
Is^^^e and B^da for his Authors.
a fit type of the Apostles freedom from vain fantasies of this world, and
of their always virent faith and love.

The Sapphire, say some, is like the pure sky, with some streams of little
clouds transfused, and that the virtue of it is to make chaste: but some say
that it is of a green color also, full of Crystalline and golden points, and
that the virtue of it is medicinal. The first is roost certain for the
color, for the Sapphire is so described, Ex. 24.10. it is said to be as the
body of heaven in his clearness. And this does well agree to all the Apostles,
who shone as the clear heavens by the light of their doctrine, and stirred up
many to make themselves chaste for the kingdom of Heaven, that is, to abstain
from marriage, that they might be the fitter to go about preaching the Gospel,
or to bear the adversities of those times. Or else by their preaching they
wrought so, as that men became chaste in respect of spiritual uncleanness, in
abandoning idolatry and sin. And if there be a medicinal virtue in it, they
were all Physicians of the soul.

Egypt; Pareus.
in Lotharingia there are of them that be red, it is a kind of Carbuncle, the
virtue of it is to expel melancholy, and fearfulness. This does serve fitly
to represent the bloody passions of the Apostles, being void of all fear, and
most courageous in the midst of their sufferings. Blas. Viegas.
Others compare it with the flame of the fire which appears abroad, but not
in the house, and so it is applied to their light and open setting forth of the
Gospel, not in corners and secret places.

Scythia, Pareus.
they ascribe unto it virtue against poison, and against the falling sickness,
being hanged about the neck, or worn in a ring, it helps chastity,
recreateth the sight, cherishes the memory, and increases wealth, which last;
I think, is to him that has store of them by their price: it is easy to
apply this to the manifold good coming to the world by the Apostles. Blas.
Viegas.
Others say, that it is of the virtue to change any thing near it into its own
color, which if it be so, it may well be applied to the Apostles, who
converted others to the fame faith to which they had been converted before.

Pareus.
for Onyx is such a nail. It grows in India and Arabia, it is good against
disdainfulnesse and all hurtful affections. Blas Viegas.
To this others add, that it is like the nail of a man's hand with the flesh
appearing through, which is by reason of that, red, and of it self white, and
so it takes the name from a Sardis, which is red, and Onyx, the nail of the
hand, which is white: the whiteness may set forth their purity, the redness
their martyrdom.

Pareus.
freeth from witchcrafts, stencheth the blood at the nose, quickneth the wit,
and makes the mind joyful. To this some add, Viegas.
that it strikes fear into wild beasts, so the Apostles did into Devils.



India, it helps watering eyes, and the evil affects of the Liver and
sighings: so the Apostles brought joy to those that were before in a sad and
woeful case.

Pareus. Andreas.
sending out a milkie liquor: it cures the eyes, it stencheth blood in a
wound, and as the virtue is more or less, according to the increase or
decrease of the Moon, so it helps the lunatike. Viegas.
Some say that it has a golden and a sky color, and that if it be polished,
it becomes the more obscure: so the Apostles in their writings; if by humane
art and eloquence they be set forth, their luster is the less, they are no way
so glorious, as being simply and plainly set forth in the euidenc^ of the
Spirit.

Chrysos is gold, and Frason a Leeke, because the green is like the green of
a Leeke, it strengthens the heart and heals the weakness of the eyes; so
the Apostles comforted the hearts of those that heard them, and did help the
weak sighted.

that this stone changes the color with the Heavens, being clear sky
colored when they are clear, and gloomy when they are ouerspread with Clouds:
so the Apostles were changed in name at the command of the Lord of Heaven, and
exercised diverse virtues, as the Heavens were clear or cloudy by the
tranquillity or persecution of the Church, sometime charity, sometime patience
and constancy.

The Amethist is of a Violet color, Pareus.
not much unlike the Hyacinth, it has the name from the virtue, for it keeps
a man sober being laid unto the Navel, as Aristotle writes, by drawing away
the vapors of the Wine, and so is derived from (...) not, Viegas. Napier.
and (...) to be drunken. Some add, that it is most easy to be engraven, so
the Apostles to bear the prints of violences offered unto them for the Gospels
sake. Some apply all these stones to such, as by the twelve Apostles were
brought into this building, as being men of greatest eminency of all sorts,
that as precious stones beautified the foundation. One from the Indies brought
in the faithful, who are always green as the Jasper and never withering in
their faith. Another the heavenly minded like the Saphires. A third, the
zealous professors of Egypt, like the fiery Chalcedony. A fourth, the sincere
Christians of Scythia, like the green Smaragd. A fifth, a meek and chaste
people from Arabia, like the Sardonix. A sixth, such as are soft hearted, like
the Sardius. A seventh, the wise and constant, like the Chrysolite. An eighth,
the Peacemakers, like to the Berill. A ninth, patient men and restrainers of
their affections, like to the Topaz. A tenth, such as glory in the golden
treasure of Heaven, like to the Chrysoprasus. A leuenth, such as being most
rich in grace overcame all temptations. A twelfth, the temperate and the sober,
like to the Amethist. Some in a different streine from all others applying
these to the Doctors of the Church, which shall be here after the conversion of
the Jews, think that the mystery of these precious stones lies partly in the
place where they grow, Brightman. Forbs consents in the general, but not in
the particuars.
and partly in their excellency according to their order. The six first grow
Eastward, showing that men of greatest note shall be stirred up in these parts
to set forth the Gospel; the other six grow partly East and partly South in
India and Ethiopia, none of them in these Western or Northern parts, to show
that from these places where yet there is most barbarism, the greatest light
shall arise. And as the Jasper is the most divine, (for it is used to set forth
God for the innumerable varieties therein) so some man near unto God, like
Moses, is hereby represented, who shall begin and be the first amongst the
twelve in converting the people unto God: and as the four last have each of
them some golden appearance, so they which shall be stirred up last of the
twelve to join in this service, shall be durable and delightful as gold, such
a kind of glorious ministry never failing for many generations, and the
people never growing weary, or being mutable in their love and affection to
their ministry. But these are things rather to be wished than hoped for or
taught, seeing toward the end the world shall rather wax worse and worse.
Exodus 39.10.
There is a description not much unlike unto this, which is made of Aarons
breast plate, wherein four rows of precious stones were set, three stones in a
row, in all twelve, unto which I think it is alluded here, most of these being
the same with them, though both in the order, and in some of them here be a
variation. Those stones did serve to represent the twelve Tribes, these the
twelve Apostles; the twelve Tribes being the foundation of the old Church under
the Law, because it sprang from them; the twelve Apostles of the Church under
the Gospel which sprang, as it were, from them, seeing by their ministry
people were begotten unto Christ. In those I doubt not but the properties of
the Patriarchs were aimed at, they being fit to set them forth, and so in
these the properties of the Apostles, if we could conceive how to apply them
particularly: but herein I have already delivered what I conceive to be the
most probable conjecture. These stones are all full of admirable virtue, so
were the Apostles of grace: these all are of an admirable beauty and luster, so
are the Apostles in Heaven of admirable glory.

That which follows serves yet further to set forth the glory of this
Church, The twelve gates were twelve pearls; Verse. 21.22.
there was no Temple, for the Lord God and the Lamb are the Temple of it: that
is, such service as was wont to be done in the Temple at Jerusalem, by
celebrating Gods praises, and offering unto him, is performed here without a
Temple: for there needs no medium to come unto God for spiritual blessings
to them that stand continually in Gods presence; neither is there need of any
medium of the Sun and Moon for light and external comfort to them to whom God
is all in all. And in all this John speaks much after the manner of the old
Prophet, who says touching the stones of the Churches foundation, Behold, Esa.
54.11, 12.
I will lay thy foundations with Saphires, and I will make thy windows of
Agates, and thy gates of Carbancles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones.
And touching the light, The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, Esa 60.19.
neither shall the Moon give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto thee
an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.

Object. Which speeches, because they are used of the Church under the new
Testament even while she is in this world, it is objected, that this here
cannot be meant of any other estate but the most excellent estate of the
Church, which shall be after the conversion of the Jews.

Answ. But I answer, that although it cannot be denied, but the graces of the
Evangelical Church are here pointed at, when they should not need the means
of types and figures, as under the Law, to enlighten them, which is meant by
the Sun and Moon: yet this is not all which the Prophecy sets forth, but
the full accomplishment of these things is in the life to come, which must
needs be yielded also to be employed, when it is said that there should be no
more sorrow, a thing not to be expected in this world; and that the Lord should
be her everlasting light, which cannot properly be applied, but to that estate
which is everlasting.

And the Nations of them that are saved do walk in the light of it, Verse. 24.
and the Kings of the earth do bring their glory and honor unto it.
Bullinger. Tho. Aquin.
Some understand this light of the Lord and the Lamb, who were said before to
be the light of this City: in this light they walk that enjoy it, as all the
saved of the Gentiles shall do: and by the Kings of the earth they understand
all Regents temporal and spiritual, politic and Ecclesiasticke, who bring
their glory and honor hither, when having drawn many by their care and
industry in their places to piety, they present them before the Lord in Heaven.
For this is immediately after set forth to be the glory here spoken of, when it
is added Verse. 26. Verse. 26.
And they shall bring the glory and honor of the nations into it, for the
nations and peoples who have embraced the faith by their means, are their
glory, as Saint Paul calls the Corinthians his glory, 2 Cor. 1. 1 These. 2.
Pareus. Napier.
and likewise the Thessalonians. Others agreeing in the light here spoken of,
yet differ a little about the Kings bringing of their glory hither, for they
say, that they bring their glory hither, when as they refer their power and
authority to the honoring of the Church, so coming at the last to enjoy this
glorious light: for thus the Prophet Esaias speaking of the same, sets it
forth in words a little different from these, Esa. 60.3.
The nations shall walk in thy light, and the Kings in the splendor of thy
rising. It is again objected here, that it cannot be meant of the Church
triumphant in heaven, but of the flourishing Church of the Jews that shall be
upon earth, because the nations are distinguished here-from, so as they shall
not be in heaven in the participation of that light, for all shall enjoy it
immediately, not the nations by the means of the Jews, as they are set forth
here to do. Again, all earthly kingdoms being in the end destroyed, what
glory shall the kings of the earth have to bring into heaven? They may indeed
be rightly said to bring their glory to the Church, when as they come in with
their subjects to the embracing of the faith of Christ, but otherwise there can
be no good exposition of this passage. I answer, that the nations are not
spoken of for distinction, but for necessary resolution, that the faithful
amongst them should enjoy this glorious light as well as the faithful of the
Jewish nation, who might easily be understood by the general type here
represented, the new Jerusalem: now lest any man should doubt whether the
faithful amongst the Gentiles should not partake of this light also, he
resolves it, by saying, And the Gentiles that are saved shall walk in the
light of it, for as much as they concur to the making of this holy City.
Touching the Kings bringing of their glory to it, I take it, that nothing else
is meant but their accession unto this building, so many of them as have been
wise, and have served the Lord against the Whore, as it was declared that they
should, Chap. 17.16. though at the first there were not many Noble, yet the
truth should so prevail in time, as that the Church should not only consist of
the vulgar sort, but of Kings and Princes also, who are the glory and the most
magnificent amongst the nations, and as they help to constitute the spiritual
building in this world, so shall they be a part of this new Jerusalem in the
world to come, when all their worldly glory shall seem nothing to them to the
glory which they shall then partake of, for which sense, that of the Prophet
Esaias before alleged, makes notably, Esa. 60.3.
The nations shall walk in thy light, and Kings in the splendor of thy
rising. And so it is no more, than as if it had been said, As this City shall
be infinitely rich for gold, and all the costly precious stones, and glorious
like unto the glory of God, so they which seem most glorious in this world,
the Kings of the earth that be of the faithful (and not the common sort of
people) shall joy to be made partakers of this glory, bringing in, as it were,
and laying at the Lords feet all their temporal honor and glory as naught
worth in comparison of this, as the faithful in the Primitive Church brought
in their goods, and laid them at the Apostles feet, willingly depriving
themselves thereof, that they might enjoy their blessed and heavenly society,
in comparison of which, they counted all this world as nothing. All this then
serves only to express yet more fully the glory of the new Jerusalem.

The gates of it shall not be shut. Verse. 25.
It is the manner of citizens to shut their gates in the night to prevent
danger, because the world is full of evil disposed persons, by reason of whom
they may justly fear to have them stand open then: but this state here
described enjoys perpetual day, here is no night, neither is there any fear
of enemies, for they that are in heaven dwell most securely in this respect,
and therefore the gates are set forth to be continually open. Yet whatsoever is
unclean is not permitted to enter, for the Angels stand at the gates to keep
it out. O thrice and four times happy are they which shall partake of this
estate! Do thou love to be rich, to be glorious, to be safe from danger, to
be for ever free from the assaul^s of enemies, and the vexation of such as be
of corrupt and filthy conditions? then love the truth, and walk according to
it, and abandon error, for such only as cleave to the truth, and are constant
against all temptations, have a part in this admirable City.

CHAP. XXII.
IN this Chapter it is proceeded in the description of other commodities of
this City, keeping to the allegory of a City, wherein, as a river of clear
water running through the midst of it is very pleasant and comfortable to the
inhabitants, and trees by the rivers side always green, springing and
fructifying, do yet add unto the pleasantness of the place: so the heavenly
city is set forth: For he proceeds, saying, He showed me a pure river of
water of life, Verse. 1.
as clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of God and of the Lamb.
And in the midst of the street, Verse. 2.
and on either side of the river was there the tree of life, which bare twelve
manner of fruits, and yielded fruit every month, and the leaves of the tree
were for the healing of the nations. There is a place not much unlike to this
in Ezechiel, where waters were showed unto the Prophet, Ezec. 47.^.3.5.
increasing to a great river that issued out from the Temple, Verse. 7.
and many trees growing on the banks, on the one side of the river and on the
other, and it was told him, that every thing, Verse. 9.
where these waters should come, should be healed and live, and that the trees
should be all sorts of trees for meat, Verse. 12.
whose leaves fade not, and they should bring forth fruit according to their
months, their fruit being for meat, and their leaves for medicine. Compare the
particulars together, and you shall find an excellent agreement betwixt these
places, so that I doubt not but in this vision it is alluded unto that, there
the graces of the Church militant being represented, here the glory of the
Church triumphant, betwixt which there is a great analogy and correspondency.
The river here is the Spirit of God, who is most pure and holy, proceeding from
the Father and the Son, who is also as a river of living waters in the
Saints, refreshing and comforting them without end. The tree of life is Christ,
for so much as he only is food to them that live for ever, and hereby it
appears, that this is spoken of the glorified estate of the Church, because
when a reward in heaven is promised to him that overcomes, it is under these
terms, To him that overcomes I will give to eat of the tree of life. Chap.
2.7.
And both in the river and this tree it is plainly alluded unto Paradise, out
of which a river arose, and wherein was the tree of life. This one tree was
manifold both in the midst of the street, and on either side of the river,
because there is no want of it to the infinite multitude of Saints, but ever
ready there to yield food unto them all. And to show the multiplicity of
delights that are herein, twelve sorts of fruits, and fruit-bearing every of
the twelve months in the year is ascribed unto it, which does also imply a
tree always flourishing, never fading; and the leaves are healthful to the
nations, that is, not as if sickness were now incident unto them, and they
needed healing, (for all sickness and pain is done away) but to declare their
ever healthful condition, there being no less use of medicine to preserve
health than to restore it. From hence forward all things are easy, and need no
interpretation until v. 10. howsoever some expound John's falling down at the
feet of the Angel to worship him, Verse. 8. Brightman.
verse. 8. as an act repeated from Chap. 19.10. and not done the second time:
but it is plain, that he was again to blame herein, having so soon
forgotten himself after that admonition; whereby we may see what the weakness
of the best and of the most holy is, if they be not continually propped up by
Gods grace, that we all may continually crave it out of an humble
acknowledgement of our weakness much more, and not presume in any case upon
our own strength. Verse. 10.
But Verse. 10. it may be doubted, why John is bidden not to seal up this
Prophecy, and what the Angel means by bidding him that is unjust to be
unjust still: for he says, Verse. 11.
Let him that is unjust be unjust still, etc. The common answer here is, that
sealing being used to keep close writings, that they may not be looked into and
read, the Lord would not have this Prophecy sealed, because he would have all
his people to look into it and understand it, as setting forth things which
were shortly to begin to take effect. Whereas Daniel is commanded to seal up
his Prophecy, Dan 12.4.
it was because it should be a long time before it should take effect, a
certain argument that Antichrist being the chief subject of this Prophecy,
came long ago, and is not still to be expected.

Touching the other words, Let him that is unjust be unjust still, etc. they
are not spoken as intimating a leaving of every one to the liberty of his own
will, as Popish Writers do hence collect, but come aptly in here after the
leaving of this Book unsealed mentioned. For if it should be thought this will
do more hurt than good, the wicked enemies of the truth being rather provoked
against the faithful professors of it by having these things applied against
them, the Lord cares not for this (for he will soon come to give them their
payment for all) so that the faithful may be comforted and the more settled in
righteousness and holinesse^ thus some. Bullinger. Pareus.
And this indeed does very fitly agree, seeing the Book left unsealed to the
reading and considering of all sorts is by the wicked but contemned, they being
no whit the more moved to a reformation. Andreas. Tho. Aquin.
Some will have these words to be spoken prophetically, as if the Lord expected
none other event, but a neglect of this prophecy amongst the wicked who would
not be reformed at all hereby: for thus it is plainly spoken in a like case in
the Book of Daniel, Many shall be purified, Dan. 12.10. Napier. Eccles. 11.9.
but the wicked shall do wickedly. Some hold it to be ironicall, as that in
the Preacher, Rejoice (O young man) in thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy
heart, etc. but know, that for all this God will bring thee to judgment. It is
not amiss to follow any of these Expositions, but I prefer the second,
understanding the words as prophetical, and withal I think that they have
reference to the former words about leaving the Book unsealed: sealed: for the
speech concerns alike the godly and the wicked, and therefore cannot be
ironicall. Whereas the righteous are bidden to be righteous still, Popish
Expositors turning it, Let the justified be yet more justified, think that
they have a ground here for the increase of justification, after that a man is
by faith justified he may by his good works make himself more just: but for
so much as the righteous here is opposed to the unjust spoken of before, and
the holy to the filthy, such righteousness must needs be understood as is
contrary to unrighteousness, viz. righteousness in fact, and not the
righteousness which is by faith, wherein a man may and ought to grow daily:
but neither is the word (...) thus rightly expounded, for it is [still] noting
perseverance herein, and not an increase of it, for thus this word is used,
Verse 3. There shall be no curse (...): and Chapter 10. the Angel swears,
That time shall not be (...), Chap. 3.12. After this the Lord Jesus being
described, and they which shall be shut out of this City again mentioned, and
the contents of this book confirmed, there is an inuitation to drink of the
water of life made to all that will. Verse. 17. Verse. 1^, 17.
I am the root and the offspring of David, and the bright morning star. And
the Spirit, and the bride say, Come. And let him that hears say, Come: and
let him that is a thirst, come: and whosoeur will, let him take the water of
life freely. Christ calls himself the root of David in respect of his
Divinity, and his offspring in respect of his humanity; and the bright morning
Star for the light of comfort which we have by him, before the Sun of
glory arises that shall be revealed.

The Bride is the Church, the Spirit speaks in the Church making her to long
after his coming for her full redemption: he that hears, who is invited to
say likewise, is every one that hears this Prophecy, and what a joyful
estate the faithful shall be in in Heaven. For he cannot but wish and desire
for this day. Let him that is a thirst, come; as he longs after the coming
of the Lord to the perfecting of his happiness, so let him come to the Lord by
faith and obedience; and let him that will, this is added to note, not that by
the power of his own will he can do thus, but that his will must be
sanctified, and of unwilling he must become willing, God working in him a new
will and new desires before that he can come unto Christ, this Fountain of
living water. That which follows is added, as a necessary muniment unto this
and to all the books of holy Scripture against forgers of the Word of God,
which the Spirit did foresee would be in after times. Verse. 18.
For I testify to every man that hears the words of this Prophecy, if and
man shall add to these things, God shall add to him the plagues that are
written in this Book, etc. Verse. 16.
These are the words of our Savior Christ, who had before spoken of his Angel
whom he sent to testify these things, and therefore in the Original it is
(...), I witness together. Touching the rational particle [for] some omit it
as redundant, but it is of great force to argue a necessity of attending to and
reverently regarding what is here set forth. For that must needs be of great
consequence which is guarded with such a caution. If testimonies be alleged
only to prove the truth of a thing, it does not so much move to consider of
it, but it being auerred to be such, as that it is danger of death to deprave
it any way, all men will begin to attend unto it as handling matter of life
and death. And what is spoken of this Book, by the like reason is well applied
by our Divines to all Books of holy Scripture: for why is it so dangerous to
take away or to add unto this Book, but because it is of God? And is it not
as dangerous then to intermeddle in this kind with any other of the Books of
God, such as all the Books of Scripture are. But it is well added to this as
the last, as the charge of not putting to or taking away from the Books of
Moses is added in the last of his Books. Bellarmine excepteth against this
inference, Deuteronomy. 4.
holding that the threatening pertains only to the detractors from or adders
to this Book, and necessarily, for otherwise, with what color could they
obtrude to the people of God unwritten traditions as being of equal authority
with the Word of God? How durst they take away the Cup in the holy Communion,
and the second Commandment out of the Decalogue, and with such audacity change
our Lord in many places into our Lady, with many the like corruptions? With
what face could they hold and maintain that all things necessary to salvation
are not set forth in the holy Scriptures, when as they are so complete as that
there may be no addition made unto them? But this exception will do them no
good, when God shall justify his care to be a like tender over all other
Books of Scripture as over this divine Book. And that these words may be
certainly known to be the words of Christ, Verse. 20.
Saint John says for conclusion, He which testifies these things says,
Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus. For whose coming that we
may be the more fit, let us acquaint our selves with the things herein
contained, since they are left unsealed to us to this end and purpose, and being
acquainted with these mysteries, which being explained (as through Gods
assistance thou have them here presented unto thee) do so evidently show the
Pope to be Antichrist, and his estate together with all that follow him to be
damnable, halt not betwixt two opinions, but be a resolute reformed Catholic,
nothing doubting, but certainly expecting their final overthrow and confusion,
and thine own deliverance and everlasting salvation: which let us all pray
with this our blessed Apostle, that it may come quickly. Amen.

Trinuni Deo gloria.

Errata, In the Catalogue of Names, for Cicillus, read Cyrillus.
PAge 27. for do, read to. p. 31. wandering, r. wavering. p. 44. or, r. 2. p.
60. Ioh. 24. r. 2. p. 78. his, r. has, in marg. p. 92. aninu^, r. animu^, in
marg. p. 104. run, r. cun. p. 140. was, r. as. p. 163. Secutoro, r. Secuturo,
in marg. p. 177. onus, r. vnus, in marg. p. 183. word, r. world. p. 434. (...)
r. X. p. 485. Pope r. pomp. p. 493. vilitate, r. venerate. p. 5 14. which
time, r. after which time.


