THE ANATOMY OF POPE IOANE.

WHEREIN HER LIFE, MANners and death is lively laid abroad and opened, and the
forged cauils and allegations that our adversaries use for her, thoroughly
unripped and confuted.

Necessary for all those that are not fully acquainted with the story, and
not unfruitful to all them that love and embrace the true religion of Christ,
and abhor the sottish illusions of Romish Antichrist.

Written by I. M.

printer's or publisher's device ANCHORA SPEI

Imprinted at London by Richard Field dwelling in great Woodstreet. 1624.

To the reasonable Reader.
THou have here mine Anatomy of Pope Ioane briefly comprised: if not cunningly
as it ought, blame mine insufficiency: if not as an expert Surgeon, impute
the fault to want of skill, and not of good will. Howbeit, errare fortassis
possim, hareticus esse non possum. The matter hereof is so manifest, that corun
copiae were needless to polish it, and the truth so evident, that the
Pumi-stone of exquisite and superficial eloquence would not have been
requisite to flourish and smooth it. Read therefore willingly, judge
indifferently, and correct friendly. Let reason rule thee, authority move
thee, and truth enforce thee. And let us both pray together, that the truth may
be maintained, all errors confounded, and Gods name glorified. Farewell.

CHAP. I. How our adversaries the Papists are ashamed of Pope Ioane, and how
some of them do peremptorily deny the story thereof.
AS the Scriptures are plain to prove, the Doctors and learned fathers
plentiful to testify: so many and great are the signs and tokens which the
Lord from time to time has showed, that Rome is Babylon, the Pope Antichrist,
the abomination of desolation, the arch-enemie of Christ, and that man of sin,
which lifts himself above all that is called God. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
Among which none surely is more lively and evident, and more to be weighed and
considered, then that of Pope Ioane, which is such a notable president and
singular demonstration thereof, that no man (unless wholly possessed of Satan,
and a verier beast then ever was Nabuchadnezar) will doubt or put any
diffidence therein. This is that which is the only eyesore, and biting
corasiue to our adversaries, which pulls down their proud peacocks feathers,
and battereth their paper walls clean to the ground. This is that which
grieueth them to the galls, and pricketh them to the quick, which
ouerwhelmeth them with horror, and drowneth them top and tail in shame and
dishonor. Eus;eb. lib. 10. cap. 14. Superati pudore and adoperti co^fu^ione
discedunt
For as the shameful and detestable end of Arrius, was such a terror and
cooling card to his adherents, that they went away hushed, overcome with shame,
and covered with confusion: so yt strange event of Pope Ioane and her
opprobrious death, is such a torment and torture unto them, that in their own
consciences they are stinged and accused, and compelled to cry: Esa 1.21.
Quomodo facta est meretrix vrbs fidelis? How is that faithful City become a
strumpet? Anton. Par 2. tit. 16. cap. 1.7
Antoninus the Archbishop of Florence, when he had opened this whole story of
Pope Ioane, was so astonished with the strangeness and admiration of the matter,
that he cried out: O altitudo sapientia, and scientiae Dei: quam incredibilia
sunt iudicia eius! O the depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how
incredible be his judgments! A story writer, living in the time of king
Edward the son of Egelred, and Emma.


See Marianus printed at Basil, collum. 407. sub an. Dom. 854.
Marianus Scotus, perceiving what a deep downfall and ruin this brought to
the Sea of Rome, and that God would have such a matter openly known, to the
everlasting detestation both of the person and place, writes thus: The Author
corrupted.
Propter turpitudinem roi, and muliebrem sexum, Authors Pontificij huius
Iohannae nomen non ponunt. Both for the shame of the matter, and also for the
woman kind, the Popish Chroniclers leave out the name of Pope Ioane. Can there
be a more manifest token then this, both of great corruption of manners, and
dissoluteness of life? Can there be a more infallible argument of open horror
and filthiness, in that only Sea above all others? Psalm. 147.15.
Surely, surely, the Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his
works, and all his judgments are done in truth and equity. A proper
fig-leafe of our adversaries to cover Dame Ioane.
But our adversaries have a figge-leafe to cover this shame, and think by that,
to shift and face out the matter, and to pass away invisible in a cloud. They
flatly deny that there was ever any Pope Ioane in Rome, yea they stoutly and
sturdily defend it, and say, that it is a fond and vain fable, a lie, and a
tale invented of malice and stomach against them. Soft and fair, my Masters:
your figge-leafe is dry and withered, and not worth a rotten fig, for it
does uncover your shame, show your nakedness, and bewray your treachery and
dastardness in the cause. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 21.
You cannot bridle the flowing Seas, nor blind the Sunne-beames: you have as
great an advantage by the denying of it, as the Ebionites had by denying S.
Paul's Epistles, and calling him an Apostata of the Law. But can you prove it
so? Alas you cannot: for your own Doctors and Proctors have written and
related it so plainly and pithily, that you must needs (unless you clip their
credits, and deface them) confess it. Martinus Polonus the Popes
Penitentiarie, and a Monk of the order of Cisterce, who lived about ye year
of our Lord 1320. has written and reported it: Johan 8. mu^ier vt fertur.
Testimonies or the proof ^f Pope Ioane ^vs dicitur.
So has Platina in Iohanne. 8 Sabellicus, Enneadis 9. lib. 1. Marianus Scotus:
Rauisius Textor in Officina: Antoninus the Archbishop of Florence: Supplementum
Chronicorum: Fasciculus temporum, and other more. Are all these liars and tale
tellers? Are the writings of all these men fabulous and untrue? I trust you
will not say so. Then give place unto the truth, and kick not against the
spur: for the truth is great, and will prevail, will ye, nill ye, it will
conquer. Deny not such a miraculous token, showing as it were in a glass, the
corruption and abomination of the Roman Church, and of the Pope thereof, the
open adversary of God, and the abomination standing in the holy place.
Acknowledge and cenfesse it, and let the remembrance thereof work such
repentance and remorse in you, t^^t you may renounce your errors, abjure your
herefies, forsake the kingdom of darkness, and serve the Lord in true
holiness and righteousness.

CHAP. II. How some of our adversaries go about to excuse and shift the matter,
by possibility of nature, saying, that Pope Ioane might be Hermaphroditus,
that is, a man and woman both in one.
THe Lion is known by his claws, the Leopard by his spots, and our
adversaries by their perverse and corrupt dealing to defend Pope Ioane, and to
color her filthiness and abomination withal: wherein as many of them have
toyled and moiled not a little, so especially has one Cope our countriman, an
earnest Procter for the Pope and his Prelates, who writing of this matter,
says thus: Dialogo. 1. page 47.
Neque hic ego quicquam dsco de Hermaphroditis and (...) de quibus veterum
librs pleni sunt. I will here say nothing of such persons as be called
Hermaphroditi, and are both man and woman all in one, whereof in old writers we
find much mention. Meaning thus in effect, that the Pope might be
Hermaphroditus, an Herkinalson, that is to say, a man and a woman both in one:
and thinking by this means somewhat handsomely to excuse and shift the matter.
Gentle stuff for the nonce; and worthy divinity for such a Roman courtier.
What toy is there so vain and ridiculous, and what excuse so childish and
frivolous, which they will not force to serve their turn? The Pope may be a
man and a woman both in one: very likely, for he might peradventure wash
himself in the fountain Salmacis in Caria, and be made half a man: or he
might perchance embrace a woman as the Nymph did, finding Hermaphroditus the
son of Mercurius and Venus naked, and desire of the gods as she did, that of
them two might be made one body. Is not this Catholic Theology, and
Apustolike discipline meet for a Roman champion? Is not this credible and to
be justified? ^orn. Agrippa de Occul. Phi^osophia. lib. 1. ^ap. 45.
Yes no doubt, for the Pope that is a God and above Angels, may transform
himself if it please him, as well as Proteus, Periclimenus, Achelous, and
Metra the daughter of Erisichtho, and may and can do greater miracles then
these: for in his hands is heaven, hell, and purgatory, he has all the earth
at his command, all the saints at his commandment, yea, and all the devils
too if need be. Therefore a small matter it was for him, and the least miracle
of a thousand, to make himself a man and a woman both in one. What cursed
doctrine is this? alas what a childish and silly excuse is this, to cover Dame
Ioanes infamy, and to bring her to some credit in the world? Omiserable and
fantastical imaginations, of very heathen Atheists and Apistes not allowed
nor maintained. For shame, for very conscience sake, for the regard of the
world, and for fear of Gods heavy wrath, reject such foolish dreams and
ceremonies, and uphold no longer such blind and vain excuses, in defense of
that which is so well and perfectly known to the world, and which is such a
clear light, and plaiue signification of sacrilege, superstition and idolatry
in the Roman sea. Let not Antichrist any longer deceive you, nor the Romish
Babylon infect you with her poisoned cups. Ierem. 2.13.
Damn not up the springs of the water of life, nor break up puddles of your
own, such as are able to hold no water, but serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice unto him with reverence; embrace his word, love him, and put your whole
trust in him: then you shall be his people, and sheep of his pasture, then
your leaf shall not wither, yea and then look whatsoever you shall do, it
shall prosper.

CHAP. III. How some say, that the Pope being a man, may afterward be changed
into a woman.
GReat is the subtlety, and marvelous is the craft ye Satan uses to drown
men in heresy, to thrust them headlong into sin and perdition, and to make
them obstinately wallow and welter therein. He will provide for them such fine
excuses: he will get for them such starting holes and defenses, that they shall
think themselves secure, to be in the right way, and to stand upon good and
firm ground, when it is far otherwise: yea he will leave no means vnaffayed
to keep them in his subjection, and to make them drunken with their own
erroneous opinions. This may be perceived in none more perspicuously then in
the Papists, and in no one thing more apparently, then in their defense of Pope
Ioane, whom the devil has so bewitched, so blinded, and so wedded to their
own self wills, that to cover her deformity, and to paint it out with some
color to the world, they have spread themselves again as the heavens, and
left no way unattempted. Wherefore let us go further, and see more of their
dealing, and more of their fetches in the matter: and let us come again to
Cope, and see what a good and ghostly Master he is for his Dame Ioane. After
he had said, that the Pope might us an Hermaphroditus, he rests not there,
but going further, he forces Ouids Metamorphosis to serve his turn, and
says, that the Pope being a man, may be changed into a woman: for these be his
words: Et ne a nostri temporis memoria longius abeam, non ignore monumentis
literarum esse traditum, Mulierum quandam nomine Aemyliam Antonio Spensae, Ciui
Eubulano nuptam, post duodecimum a nuptijs annum in virum tran^^^sse. Legi
etiam alteram mulierem, vbi puerum peperisset, in marem fuisse mutatam.

But not to go farther then the remembrance of our own time: I know that it is
written that a certain woman named Emylia, married unto one Antonius Spensa a
Citizen of Eubulum, ten years after she had been married, was turned into a
man. I have likewise read of another woman, that when she had been brought a
bed, afterward became a man. Certes this is strange, for a man to be turned
into a woman: but all things well considered, it is nothing strange at all. For
the Pope has all laws and knowledge within his breast, and whatsoever he be,
he is holy, and immaculate, and can work no small wonders. May not he change
himself into sundry shapes, as well as Jupiter, Mercury, Apollo, and other
of the Gods? Metam lib. 3. Ponta^us.
May not he be changed into a woman as well as Tiresias was: or as well as
Caietana and Aemilia into men? Yes doubtless, for he is far above them, and
can do much more then ever they could, Therefore master Copes surmise, that
the Pope may be changed into a woman, is very Catholic and substantial, and
fit for such a pregnant and illuminate doctor. But fie for shame, what a
sottish excuse is this? What a vain illusion and Maygame? Is there no better
shift nor surer refuge then this? Is there no thicker cloud to spread over the
matter with more likelihood? Then who sees not the bondage of Egypt? who sees
not the spiritual Babylon, and the madness of them that commit spiritual
fornication with her? Better it had been, and the safer way by a great deal,
simply and plainly to have confessed it, then by a miracle to turn the Pope
from a man into a woman, and that which is worst of all, obstinately to defend
it. For now every one does see, that you had leifer be filthy still, then
leave off your filthiness, and had rather (because you love your vices)
Excusare, quam excutere. Excuse them, then forsake them: and as many as in
spi^^^ and truth do love the Lord, do mou^^e for grief, to see men carried so
heau^ (...) with such godless and retchlesse ima^^^ations.

CHAP. IIII. How they have left cut Pope Ioanes name out of their Calendar: and
how they have hired Onuphrius Pamuinius of set purpose to face out the matter.
SOme of our Adversaries take this Enthimeme for an insallible argument: An
Enthimeme of our adversaries to deny Pope Ioane.
Dame Ioane is not registered in the Calendar among the Popes: Ergo it is but a
vain fable that ever Dame Ioane was Pope in Rome. The consequent is very
simple, and not to be granted, because it is well known, that the Bishops
names as well in Rome as in other places, have upon sundry occasions been
oftentimes quite stricken out of the Calendar. But Dame Ioanes name (they say)
is not in their Calendar. It may be so: and wherefore I pray? Martious Polonus,
one of their own sworn brothers does tell us. Iohanna (says he) non ponitur
in Catalogo Pontificum, tam propter muliebrem sexum, quam propter deformitatem
facti. Pope Ioane is not reckoned in the Calendar of holy Popes, as well for
that she was a woman, as also for very shame of the matter.

The like does Sabellicus set down. Nullus defunctae honor habitus: fama
tenet, ob tam foeda rei memoriam. There was no honor bestowed at her burial:
the report is, for the remembrance of her filthy act. By this we see, that the
name of Pope Ioane was not put into the Calendar of the Popes, partly because
she was a woman, and especially, because she was a woman of such a filthy
life, and vicious behavior. Therefore this reason of our adversaries is a
blind conjecture, and of no force. But (say they) In Scholijs in Platinam.
Onuphrius Pamuinius upon Platina, has truly and learnedly written hereof: and
he that list to read that discourse of his, shall easily believe the whole
matter to be fabulous. Truth it is, that such a one indeed has of late written
hereof, and beaten his brains not a little to help out this matter, but all in
vain: for he was one of the Popes Parasites, hired and procured by him only
for that business. His book was printed in Venice, and plausiblie accepted of
his friends and well willers: but the stuff that he has brought in there, to
make the world believe, that there was never any Pope Ioane in Rome, is such
trash, and so ridiculons, that it will grieve a good Christian in in his heart,
to read and see it.

This is the craft and policy of the Pope, to hire and procure men to smooth
and sooth his matters, and to face and grace out his impieties, with many
forged lies and false suppositions: thinking by that means, to dazel men's
eyes, and to make them believe they be true, godly, and apostolical. Most
impudent and notorious railers and liars.
This have many popish Pages of late done, and especially Amphilochius,
Onuphrius, Surius, and Hieronimus Bolsecus, one that has used most shamlesse
railing, most vile, spiteful, and horrible lies and cauils, with an immoderate
and uncivil bitterness, proceeding from the unsavory and unquiet humor of
his heart, against the godly and reverend ministers of the Gospel, Calvin,
Beza, with others more. God of his mercy grant, that they may repent and amend
their lives, renounce their damnable errors, forsake their cursed slanders, and
not adventure their wits in such desperate causes. For, Nemo periculosius
peccat, quam qui peccata defendit. No man sins with more danger, then he
that stands in defense of sin.

CHAP. V. What year of the Lord Pope Ioane lived in Rome. How long she was
Pope: and between what Pops she was.
Herodotus.
XErxes the great king of Persia, when he brought over his huge army into
Grecia, sent out his letters of defiance unto the great mount Athos that is in
Macedonis, and commanded him to stand still, and not to stir a foot, nor to
work any displeasure, either to himself, or to his army. Even by like
authority, and with as good discretion, the Pope and his hirelings have done
with Dame Ioane, who being able no kind of way, to color or cloak her
sufficiently, have sent out their letters and defiance to all Countries and
Regions that perfectly know her, commanding them not once to spurn or kick
against her, nor so much as to make any record or mention of her. But let them
wrestle and wrangle so much as they will, let them curse and defy while they
list, and let Onuphrius, and all the rabble rout of them do what they can, the
truth thereof will never be forgotten: it is and will be absolutely known, to
the utter confusion of proud Antichrist, and to the everlasting execration of
all the popish and peevish synagognes. What the cause was, that they have left
Pope Ioane out of their Calendar.
For although they have left the name of Pope Ioane out of the Calendar of the
Bishops of Rome, only for shame, lest it should appear in records that a
woman, and such a woman had been bishop of Rome, or that the bishop of Rome had
been with child: and although they never cease to bolster and bungle up the
matter, sometime with this shift, sometime with that, sometime affirmatively,
sometime negatiuely: yet so many Chronicles would not have recorded it, nor so
many men would have written it, nor the world would so universally have
believed these things of the Pope, more then of any other, had it not been
true, credible, and verity. For where I pray began the history of her first?
In Rome. From what place was it first published abroad into the world? From
Rome. What he they that have written and declared it? The trusty friends of
Rome: yes the great authentical Doctors and commissioners of the Pope, have
described and avouched it, some living four hundred years ago, some five
hundred, who have ever bin counted famous fathers in Rome, and whorthy of no
small authority and reverence. What year of our Lord was Dame Ioane Pope in
Rome? As they have written, 853. How long was she in the Popedom? As they have
written, two years, one month, and four days. Betwixt what Popes was she?
As they themselves have written, between Leo the 4. and Benedict the third.
Seeing then that our adversaries own friends and Proctors have written and
related it, and so plainly and expressly showed it, I marvel with what faces
any of them can deny it, or go about to excuse it.

CHAP. VI. What Pope Ioanes name was, how she was not borne in England, but at
Mentz in Germany, and how she came to Rome, and to the Popedom.
MAny there be (I know) and those our own countrymen, who think and believe
Dame Ioane to be an English woman borne. The cause why Pope Ioane is thought to
be an English woman born.
I can conjecture no other thing to be the cause hereof but report only, being
for the most part more commen then true, and especially because in many
authors entreating of this matter, is found, Johannes Anglicus, or Johannes de
Anglia, which seems unto them to be transtated, John an English man, or John
of England. Because I would have all those that be not as yet truly certified
and resolved herein to agree together, and rightly to believe this point, I
will declare unto them the truth of the matter, according to the opinions of
the best and most approved writers. Why she was called Ioane English.
She was called Ioane English, by the surname of her father, and borne at Mentz
in Germany. Martinus Polonus the Popes ghostly Penitentiarie, discoursing at
large of this matter affirms the same, for thus he writes: Johannes Anglicus
natione Maguntinus, sedit annos duos, mensem vnum, dies quatuor, etc. John
English (so surnamed) borne at Mentz, sat in the Roman Sea two years, one
month, and four days. Theodoricus Niemus also, sometime the Popes
Secretary, and therefore had good cause to know the truth hereof, does lively
paint out the whole matter, and expressly shows the same. Et fuit mulier de
Maguntiae nata, quae studuit Athenis sub virili habitu: and in tantum profecit
in artibus, vt tandem veniens Romam per biennium in schola Arts liberales
legerit: and adeo sufficient fuit, vt etiam Maiores and Nobiles vrbis eius
lectiones frequenter audiuerint. Et postea eligitur in Papam, etc. And there
was Ioane a woman, borne at Mentz, who had studied at Athens in the apparel of
a man, and had so profited in the Arts, that at last coming to Rome, two
years together she professed the liberal sciences in a School. And her gift
in teaching was such, that the Elders and Nobles of the City resorted often to
here her read. Afterward she was chosen Pope, etc. Pope Ioane a Dutch woman.
We need not cite any more testimonies for farther proof hereof: these two do
manifestly show that she was a Dutchwoman borne, and not called Ioane English
by the name of the country, for that she was an English woman borne in England
(as many imagine) but only by the surname of her father. For who knows not
that there are many at this day called by the names of Scot, Irish, French,
Welsh, Norman, Gascoine, Holland, and yet not borne in any of these countries,
but only in England. Her right name was Gilberts, but called Joan the eight.
Therefore it is true, and without all doubt, that Pope Ioane was not borne in
England but in Germany. Notwithstanding some there be (whose authority is
very credible and sufficient) that say her name was Gilberta, and called Joan
the eight: Pope Ioane was a student at Athens.
who likewise affirm, that she was a Dutch-woman of Mentz, and went with an
English Monk out of the Abbey of Fulda to Athens, in man's apparel. Well, truth
it is that she was in the young years of a girl brought to Athens by one that
was her lover in man's apparel. There she studied, and profited so much in
diverse sciences, that none were found to be compared with her. Women brought
up in men's apparel, and taken for men.
This is not strange, nor much to be marvelled at: For Rauisius Textor in
Officina writes the like of one Marina, that dissembling what she was, lived
many years in an Abbey as a Monk: and of Lasthenia, Axiothea, and others,
that being women, came into the School in man's apparel to hear Plato. The
like does many others write of Euphrosyna that holy maid, that dwelt thirty
and six years in Monks apparel among Monks, and was never otherwise taken
then for a Monk.

Pope Ioane came to Rome.
From Athens she came to Rome, and there professed learning openly, and had
great Doctors to her scholars, and for opinion of learning and good life by one
consent of all, was made Pope. She was created Pope of Rome. Her behavior in
that high office.
Being in this high and glorious seat, she behaved her self so orderly, and
discharged that supernall office so absolutely, that she was with child, and as
she went in procession delivered thereof, and so died. A most lively president
of the whorish Sea.
Thus was the Pope of Rome, who is such a parles fellow that he cannot e^re, a
woman with child, delivered in procession, dead openly in ye streets, and
buried without any honor or solemnity. God give all Christians grace by this
example to beware of the Antichristian and Babylonicall Pope, to renounce him,
and all his errors, to reject him and all his parasites, and to see the truth,
and that blessed hope whereunto they have been called, so as they may glorify
him alone, who is the true God, and also that same Jesus Christ whom he sent
down to us from heaven: to whom with the Father, and holy Ghost be given all
honor and glory everlastingly. Amen.

FINIS.

