THE GOLDEN ART, OR The right way of Enriching.

Comprised in ten Rules, proved and confirmed by many places of holy Scripture,
and illustrated by diverse notable examples of the same.

Very profitable for all such persons in City or Country, as do desire to
get, increase, conserve, and use goods with a good conscience.

By. I.M. Master in Arts.

1. Sam. 2.7. The Lord makes poor and makes rich, brings low, and exalts.

ECCLESIASTIC. 11.14. Prosperity and adversity, life and death, poverty and
riches, come of the Lord

2. Cor. 9.8. Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he being
rich, for your sakes became poor, that ye through his poverty might be made
rich.

LONDON, Printed for William Leake, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Holy Ghost. 1611.

To the two most Famous, Ancient, and Opulent Sister-Cities of the
Ocean-walled-world of Britains I Will, the Augustious Chambers of our most
gracious King JAMES the Concorder, and the first Christian Uniter thereof.
LONDON, the Lady of Cities, and Load stone of Strangers. and EDINBVRG, the
bright Eye of the North. And to the Honorable GOVERNOVRS, ALDERMEN and
SHERIFFS, BAILLIES, and DEANE of the Guild.
With the whole Worshipful CORPORATIONS and COMPANIES thereof: A Britain, for
a perpetual testimony of his obseruancy, does in right humble and hearty manner
dedicate the Golden Art of Enriching, being the first Art that ever was written
upon this subject, and likewise the first that ever was written originally in
the Britannish Tongue.

JAMES MAXVVELL.

To the Right Honorable, SIR WILLIAM CRAVEN Knight, Lord Mayor of the
Augustious City of LONDON, and the flower of all Noble- minded Merchants. and
SIR JOHN ARNOT Knight, Lord Provost of the Royal City of EDINBVRGE, and
Collector of the Crowne-rents of Scotland. All desirable Felicity.
Right Honorable,
I BEING of late in reuoluing and reuiewing the confused Mass of mine
unpolished papers, among mine other exercises and essays, I found the project
and platform, of this present Art: and having taken some pains about the
polishing and finishing thereof, I was loath it should perish, or yet lie any
longer shut up in the obscure corner of a coffer. And therefore partly
presuming, and partly hoping that it might do some good, unto such as labor,
either to get goods with a good conscience, or to use their goods already
gotten in a good and godly manner, I was so much the more willing to set it out
to public veiw. And because it was mine hap to prosecute my studies, and to
run my Philosophical course in the Noble City of EDINBVRGE, whereby my small
capacity has herein been furthered; and my fortune to write and finish this
present Art in this famous City of LONDON, where now I live: therefore I
thought it my duty to dedicate the same unto the foresaid two most Honorable
Cities of this I Will, and that for a testimony of mine obseruancy, and grateful
affection toward them both; Being so much the more moved to implore and employ
their honorable patronage therein, as for because that the subject thereof
does especially concern Cities and Citizens, and genenerally all such in
City or country as labor to be rich in the right way. In it truly is
contained whatsoever thing the Sacred Scripture dispersedly does afford
concerning poverty and riches, and the virtues and vices which are incident or
conversant about the same. Out of the which holy Book, I have collected the
whole rules reasons, probations, and exemplifications of this Art, and
therefore I have not amplyfied nor enlarged my discourse, as I might have done
with the foreign stuff of humane testimonies, and that for these three
reasons. First because that the holy Scripture being diligently searched is no
lesse-sufficient to show a man the right way of Enriching, then it is of
Believing; and that the reasons and testimonies thereof are of vncontroullable
authority. Secondly because I did foresee how that this Art by such enlarging
would arise to such a volume, that it should be both hardly read over of rich
men, who have too little time to peruse large books, and hardly compassed or
got of poor men, who have too little money to buy big books. And lastly,
because it is my purpose, God willing, to discourse both Theologically, and
Philosophically, in the Art of Flying, how that no lesle then these ten
Schoolemaisters, 1. Almighty God; 2. The glorious Angels; 3. The holy Penmen
of sacred Scripture, Prophets and Apostles; 4. The reverend Doctors of the
Church; 5. The wise Philosophers of the Heathen; 6. The Worlds frame in the
Heavens, Stars, and Elements, 7. The Fowls of the Air; 8. The Fishes of the
Sea; 9. The Beasts of the Field; 10. And the creeping things of the earth, do
all of them coniunctly concur to teach Man, how to become a Bird of Paradise;
that is to say, how to fly from all vices, to all opposite virtues: Accept
therefore, Right Honorable, in good worth, in the name of your foresaid two
flourishing Cities the Golden Art of Enriching, such as it is, being the
first Art that ever was written upon this subject, yea, and the first Art,
that ever was originally written in the common language of this most noble I Will,
and as I suppose the first book, that ever did bear this Vnionall kind of
Dedication. Grace it therefore with your favorable visage, and guarde it with
your worthy patronage, So shall it be secured under your shadow, and I
encouraged to offer, God-willing, one day, unto the honor of these your two
most Honorable Sister-citties, our JAMES ANNA, that is, the pattern of a
perfect City. That which rests is my thrice hearty wish unto God, who has
planted peace in your Borders, Psalm. 147.13.14.
strengthened your gates, and satisfied you with the flower of wheat, that it
would be his gracious pleasure, to crown you more and more with all kind of
Spiritual and Temporal blessings, that your Sons may be as the plants,
Psalm. 144.12.13.14.
growing up in their youth, and your Daughters as the corner-stones graven
after the similitude of a Palace, Psalm. 65.9.10.11.12.13.
that your corners may be full, and abounding with diverse sorts, and the
furrows of your fields may be made soft with showers, and filled with
fatness. That your pastures may be replenished with dewy grass, and clad with
sheep, bringing forth thousands in your Territories, together with kine
sending forth the soft streams of sweet milk, and likewise with oxen strong
to labor your land. That your valleys may be covered with corn, Psalm. 132.15.
Zach. 9.17.
and your trees and orchards laden with fruit; so that your Poor may be
satisfied with bread, and your Yong-men and Maids for joy may shoute and sing.
Psalm 144 14.
That there be no invasion from without, nor sedition from within, nor no
crying in your streets, Isay 23.58.
and circumiacent towns. That your Merchants may be as Princes, and your
Chapmen and Shopmen as the Nobles of the earth, that they may be rich in
godliness and in good works, no less then in gold and in goods, ready to
distribute and communicate, 1. Tim. 6.17.18.19.
laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may obtain eternal life. Exodus 18.21.25. and 23.1.2 3.6.7.8.9. Deuteronomy
1.13.16.17. 2. Chron. 19.5.6.7.
That your Lawyers, Justices, and Judges may be replenished with wisdom, and
understanding in the Law, and with conscionablenesse and courage in pleading
the good cause, and in doing of Justice and Judgment without respect of
persons, or yet of reward. That your Priests may be clothed with salvation,
Psalm. 132.16. Malach. 2.7. Mat. 5.14.15.16. Deuteronomy. 32.5. Philip. 2.15.
that their lips may preserve knowledge, and that they may shine as lights by
their sound instruction and sanctified conversation in the mids of the blind
and naughty multitude of sinful and earthly minded men. Finally, that it
would please his Divine clemency always to rescue David his servant, and to
show his salvation and word more and more unto Jacob our Sovereign, Psalm.
61.6.7, and 91, 14, 15, 16, and 144, 10, 11, and 147.19, Hosh, 14, 6, 7, 8.
to satisfy him with long life, and to make his years as many ages, to be
with him in trouble, to amplify his Majesty, and to increase his glory in the
sight of all his enemies, that he may grow as the Lilly, and fasten his
roots in Albion, as the trees of Lebanon. That his branches may spread, and
his beauty may be as the olive tree, and his smell as Lebanon, that they that
dwell under his shadow may flourish as the vine, and that the sent of Albion
may be as the wine of Lebanon, That so a blessed Princes blessed People may go
on from blessedness to blessedness, and thus blessed may always bless him,
who is the blesser of you both, even he whose name is Jehovah, who will bless
you in this life, with temporal and spiritual prosperity and crown you after
this life with eternal felicity.

And thus I rest an earnest lover Of your Lordships, and your honorable
Cities honor, JAMES MAXVVELL.

A Summarie view of such more notable points as are declared and explained to
the meanest capacity in the Glosses of this Art.
I. OF the excellency of the fear of the Lord, and of the nature, property,
and branches thereof. Page 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 9. 10. 11. II. Of the prosperity
of the wicked, and of the euanishing condition of the same. page 7. 8. 90. 91.
III. Of Salomons three capital evils, which are to be hated above all other;
pride, the evil way, and the mouth that speaks lewd things. page 10. 11.
IIII. Of Gods fatherly corrections, and how a man ought to carry himself
therein, and make use of afflictions. page 12. 13. 14. 89. 90. 91. 92. V. Of
the excellency of wisdom, and the preciousnesse thereof. page 15. 16. 17. 18.
VI. How that Lettered men must endeavor to be well seen in Arts and Sciences.
page 18. 19. 20. VII. How that Merchants, Traffikers, Tradesmen, and the
laborers of the ground ought to endeavor to be skillful each one of them in
their own particular callings. page 21. 22. VIII. How that the unwise and
wicked may oftentimes be rich, and the wise and well-qualified poor, and the
reasons and occasions of both, page 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 90. 91. 92. 93. IX.
Of the dignity and excellency of the spiritual calling of Churchmen, above
the temporal callings of other men. page 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. X. Of the
excellency of diligence, and carfulness about a man's calling, and of the
great damage that insueth upon idleness and sloth. page 34. 35. 36. 37. 38.
39. 40. XI. How that as good Gentlemen as any that live now-adaies, have
embraced a Trade. page 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. 45. XII. Of the unfruitfulness of
man's labors without Gods blessing. page 46. 47. 48. 49. XIII. Of the cursed
conditions of all oppressors, extortioners, deceivers, Lawless Lawyers, and
unjust Judges. p. 50. 51. 52. 53. 54. 55. 56. 57. 58. 59. 60. 61. 62. 63. 64.
65. XIIII. Of lending friendly, and of the unlawfulness of usury. page 66.
67. 68. 70. 71. XV. Of true and due measure in selling of wares. page 68. 69.
70. XVI. Of the unlawfulness of Stew-houses in a Christian Commonwealth. page
72. 73. 74. XVII. Of the right use, and the pernicious abuse of stage-plaies.
page 75. 76. XVIII. Of the use and abuse of play at cards, and dice. page 77.
78. 79. 80. XIX. Of the cursednes of covetousness, and of the blessedness of
contentation. page 81. 82. 83. 84. 85. XX. Of the setting of our hearts upon
heavenly treasure, and not upon earthly trash. page 86. 87. 88. 94. 95. 96.
97. XXI. Of the cheerefulnes and readiness that ought to be in subjects toward
the maintenance of their Princes. page 97. 98. 99. 100. 101. 102. 103. 104.
105. 188. XXII. A short discourse touching the manner how princes amongst the
people of God have been maintained of old, together with a defense of Solomon
against the false imputation of his subjects, slandering him to be a grievous
yoake-maker, page 106. 107. 108. 109. 110. XXIII. A plain plea for the
honorable and liberal maintenance of Gods Ministers, against all God-spoiling
Anti-Gods, and sacrilegious Church-robbers, page 111. 112. 113. 114. 115. 116.
117. 118. 119. 120. 121. 122. 123. 124. 125. 126. 127. 128. 129. 183. XXIIII.
How that the ministers of the Gospel ought not to disclaim the honorable
Title of Priests. page 122. 123. 177. 178. XXV. Of the honor due unto
Churchmen in gesture of body, and in word of mouth: And how that in holy
Scripture, the Governors of the Church are enstiled Fathers, Lords, Princes,
and Angels. page 171. 172. 173. 174. 175. 177. 178. XXVI. Against the sins of
covetousness, and carelessness in Churchmen, page 184. 185. 186. 192. 198.
XXVII. Of the large extent and outward glory and unity of the Church toward
the latter times. page 175. 176. 186. 187. 196. XXVIII. How men ought to take a
part of their own goods in all hearty and cheerful manner. page 130. 131.
132. XXIX. Of the great hurt that redoundeth to a man in soul, body, and
goods, by reason of excess, intemperancy, and superfluity, pa. 133. 134. 135.
136. 137. 138. 139. XXX. A plea for charitablenesse to the poor, against the
dead devotion of these uncharitable days. page 140. 141. 142. 143, 144. 145.
146. 147. 148. 149. 150. 151. 152. 153. 154. 155. 156. 191. 192. 193. 194. 195.
196. 197. XXXI. A collection, and description of such famous men, and women
mentioned in holy Scripture, as have gotten goods with a good conscience, and
used their riches aright, and have been blessed of God. Page 157. 158. 159
160. 161. 162. 163. 164. 165. 166. 167. 168. 169. 170. 171. 172. 173. 174. 175.
176. 177. 178. 179. 180. 181. XXXII. A collection, and description of such
persons mentioned in holy Scripture, as have swerued from the right way of
Enriching, and have been punished of God. Page 182. 183. 184. 185. 186. 187.
188. 189. 190. 191. 192. 193. 194. 195. 196. 197. 198. 200. XXXIII. A
description of the sins reigning of old in the Cities of Sodom, Babel,
Tyrus, Samaria, and Jerusalem, with the Authors hearty wish for the Felicity of
the two most famous Cities of this I Will London and Edinburgh. Page 200. 101.
202. 203. 204. 205. 206. 207. 208. 209. 210. 211. 212. 213.
A short form of prayer, very fit to be used of every regular student in this
Art.
1. Sam. 2.7.
LORD, thou that art the giver of riches, and sender of poverty, incline mine
heart unto thy testimonies, Psa. 119.36. Pro. 30.8, 9.
and not to covetousness; Give me not poverty nor riches too much, feed me
with food convenient for me, lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, who is
the Lord, or least I be poor, and steal and take the name of my God in vain.
Amen.

Errata.
Page 70. line 17. for gain, read gain. p. 109. l. 12. for wretchlesse read
retchlesse. p. 110. l. 10. for that read has. p. 111. l. 3. for free-parted
read siue-parted. p. 173. l. 1. for Elisha, read Eliah. p 185. l. 22. for unit
read union, p. 201. l. 7. for wearing read swearing. p. 203. l. 10. for clear
read clearer. p. 211. l. 14. for makes read made. p. 212. l. 21. for name read
day.

THE GOLDEN ART, OR THE RIGHT way of Enriching.
The definition of this art.
The Golden art, is the right way of getting, increasing, conseruing, and using
goods with a good conscience.

I. Rule. The fear of the Lord, and his blessing make the poor man rich, and
the rich man yet more rich.
Probation, and declaration.
YE shall serve the Lord your God (says the Lord our God by his holy servant
Moses) and he shall bless thy bread, and thy water. Exodus 23.25.
The land shall give her fruit, Leuit. 25 18.19. and 26.3.4.5.14.15.19.20.
and ye shall eat your fill, and dwell therein in safety. I will send you
rain in due season, and the land shall yield her increase, and the trees of
the field shall give their fruit, and your threshing shall reach unto the
vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sowing time, and ye shall eat
your bread in plenteousnesse, and dwell in your land safely. But if you will
not obey me, but break my covenant, I will make your Heaven as iron, and your
earth as brass, and your strength shall be spent in vain, neither shall your
land give her increase, neither shall the trees of the land give their fruit.
Deuteronomy. 8.17.18.
Beware lest thou say in thine heart, my power and the strength of mine own
hand has prepared me this abundance, but remember the Lord thy God, for it is
he which gives thee power to get substance. and 7.12 13.14.
For if ye hearke^ unto these laws, and observe and do them, then the Lord
thy God shall keep with thee the covenant and the mercy which he swear unto
thy fathers, and he will love thee, bless thee, and multiply thee; he will
also bless the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land, thy corn, and
thy wine, and thine oil, and the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy
sheep, and thou shall be blessed above all people. I will also give rain unto
your land in due time, and 11.14.15.
the first rain and the latter, that thou may gather in thy wheat, and thy
wine, and thine oil; also I will send grass in thy field, for thy cattle,
that thou may eat and have enough. and 28.3.4.5.6.8.15.16.17.18.19
Blessed shall thou be in the City, and blessed also in the field, blessed
shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, the fruit of thy
cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep, blessed shall
be thy basket, and thy dough, blessed shall thou be when thou come in, and
blessed also when thou go out. The Lord shall command the blessing to be
with thee in thy storehouses, and in all that thou set thine hand to. Deuteronomy.
30.9.
The Lord will make thee plenteous in every work of thine hand, in the fruit
of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of the land for
thy wealth. But if thou will not obey the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep
and to do his commandments, and 28.15.16.17.18.19.23.24.38.39.40.42.
then cursed shall thou be in all the things aforesaid.

The Lord (says the godly woman Anna, the mother of holy Samuel in her song)
makes poor, 1. Sam. 2.7.8.
and makes rich, brings low and exalts, he raises up the poor out of
the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among
Princes, and to make them inherit the seat of glory, for the pillars of the
earth are the Lords. 1. Chron. 29.12 Psalm. 113.7.8. and 107.36.37.38.41. and
25.12.13.
The same thing says the holy Prophet and godly King David. The soul of the
man that fears the Lord shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit the
land. Trust thou in the Lord, and do good: and 37.3.4.5.7.9.11.18.19.22.29.34.
dwell in the land, and thou shall be fed assuredly. Delight thy self in the
Lord, and he shall give thee thine hearts desire: commit thy way unto the Lord,
and trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass: wait patiently upon the
Lord, and hope in him; for they that wait upon the Lord shall inherit the
Land. Meek men shall possess the earth, and shall have their delight in the
multitude of peace. The Lord knows the days of upright men, and their
inheritance shall be perpetual. They shall not be confounded in the perilous
time, and in the days of famine they shall have enough. Such as be blessed of
God shall inherit the land, and they that be cursed of him, shall be cut off.
The righteous men shall inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever: wait
thou on the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee that thou shall
inherit the land: Psalm. 61.5.
for he will give an heritage unto those that fear his name. Blessed is the
man that fears the Lord, and 112.1.2.3.
and delights greatly in his commandments, his seed shall be mighty upon
earth, the generation of the righteous shall be blessed, and his
righteousness indureth for ever. and 128.1.2.
Blessed is every one that fears the Lord and walks in his ways, when thou
eatest the labors of thine hands, thou shall be blessed, and it shall be well
with thee. The blessing of the Lord (says king Solomon, Prou. 10.22.
whom the Lord blessed both with wisdom and riches) makes rich, and he
adds no sorrows to it. and 13.22.
The good man shall give inheritance unto his childrens children: but the
riches of the sinner is laid up for the just. The fear of the Lord leads to
life, and 19.23.
and he that is filled therewith shall continue, and shall not be visited with
evil. and 22.4.
The reward of humility and the fear of God is riches, and 31.30.
and glory, and life. Also Salomons virtuous woman that increases the wealth
of her husband and house, is such a one as fears the Lord.

Ecclesiastic. 1.11.12.13.18.20.21.23.
The fear of the Lord (says Jesus the son of Syrach) is glory and gladness,
and a joyful crown; who so fears the Lord, it shall go well with him at
the last: he shall prosper, and in the day of his end he shall be blessed. She
fills men with her fruits, she fills their house with all things
desirable, and the garners with the things she brings forth; she has
brought unto honor them that possessed her. and 11.14.17.
The fear of God (says he) fills men's hearts with wisdom, and their houses
with all desirable things. and 15.1.5.6. and 38.8. and 40.26.27.
The fear of the Lord exalts them above their neighbors, and clotheth them
with the garment of glory, for of the Lord comes prosperity and wealth over
all the earth. Riches and strength lift up the heart, but the fear of the Lord
is above them both. There is no want in the fear of the Lord, and it needs
no help. The fear of the Lord is a pleasant garden of blessing, and there is
nothing so beautiful as it is. Finally, the blessed Apostle S. Paul teaches
us, 1. Tim. 4.8.
that godliness is profitable unto all things, as that which has the promise of
the life present, and of that that is to come. Now what other thing else is
godliness, but the fear and worship of God, and what other thing else is the
fear of God, but godliness?

Thus ye see, O ye students in the art of Enriching, what an excellent thing
the fear of God is; how that she is a pleasant and profitable garden of
blessing and of blessedness. In this garden which the hand of God has planted
himself, grow the tree of knowledge, and the tree of life, even both wisdom
and wealth: Psalm. 111.10, Prou. 1.7. and 22 4. Ecclesiastic. 11.14.17.
for the fear of the Lord is the beginning of both. She fills the heart with
wisdom, and the house with variety of goods: with the right hand she
reaches out spiritual wealth, and with the left hand, temporal store.
Prosperity on earth is her temporal guerdon, and felicity in heaven is her
eternal reward.

But I know some will object and say, that even the godless, and such as will
neither know God, nor acknowledge him, neither love him as a Father, nor fear
him as a Lord, may be likewise rich, and oftentimes enjoy great prosperity and
wealth. To which I answer thus; such as the fear of God makes rich, Luke
12.21.
they are rich in God, as our Savior in the gospel gives us to understand:
that is, they are rich with goods given out of Gods own hand, and their goods
are gotten with a good conscience, they do good with their goods, and reap
more good and goods at Gods hand by using them to his glory and their
neighbors good. For unto them that have (says our Savior) it shall be
given: Matthew. 25.29. Luke 19.26.
that is, unto such as have godliness and goodness, shall be given goods, and
unto such as have used their goods aright, shall be given yet more goods:
whereas from the man that has not godliness and goodness, even those goods he
has shall be taken away, and given to him that has more goodness then he.
Psalm. 25.12.13. and 37.18.29.
Moreover, the riches of the man that fears God, as they shall be increased,
so shall they be continued to him and his posterity, walking after their
fathers footesteps in the ways of Gods fear: as for the wicked, and such as
are void of Gods fear, they may well be wealthy and rich, yea and very rich,
they may wax old, and grow in wealth, Job 21.7.
says Job, the miror of patience, they may be strong and spread themselves
like a green bay tree, Psalm. 37.35.
says divine David; they may take root, grow and bring forth fruit, and their
way may prosper, Ierem. 12.1.2.
says holy Jeremy: yet for all this, they cannot be rich in God. For though
the most high, who is kind unto the very unkind, and good unto the evil,
Matthew. 5.45. Luke 6.35.
make his sun to shine on the evil as well as the good, and send rain on
the unjust, as well as the just (as our Savior speaks in the gospel:)
though, I say, he rain down riches even upon irreligious men, and give gold
unto the godles, and goods unto such as have no goodness at all; yet it is in
the same manner as he gave of old, flesh unto the murmuring Israelites to eat:
Psalm. 78.27.28.29.30.
He rained flesh upon them as dust, and feathered foul as the sand of the sea,
he made it fall in the midst of their camp, even round about their
habitations. So they did eat, and were filled, for he gave them their desire:
he made them to eat in his anger, Numb. 11.18.19.20.33.34.
until it came out of their nostrils, and was loathsome unto them; while their
flesh was yet between their teeth, before it was well chewed, even the wrath
of the Lord was kindled against the people, and he smote them with an exceeding
great plague, so that ever after, the place where they fell bare the name of
the graves of lust. Job 22.18. and 21.7.13.16.17
In like manner God oftentimes raineth riches upon the godless, and he
fills their houses with good things: they grow in wealth, they spend their
days in wealth: but lo for all this their wealth is not in their hand. It is
not given to them and theirs for ever, but only lent them for a time: and when
the time is spent and past, and 15.29.
God will put out the candle of the wicked, and divide their lives in his
wrath: he shall not be rich always, and 20.10.15.23.28.
neither shall his substance continue, neither shall he prolong the perfection
thereof in the earth: his hands shall restore his substance; he has devoured
substance, and he shall vomit it, for God shall draw it out of his belly: Job
26.14 16.17.21.22.23.
he shall be about to fill his belly, but God shall send upon him his fierce
wrath, and shall cause to rain upon him, even upon his meat. The increase of
his house shall go away: he shall flow away in the day of his wrath, and his
posterity shall not be satisfied with bread. Though he should heap up silver
as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay, he may prepare it, but the just
shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver. God shall hurl him
out of his place, and shall cast upon him, and not spare, though he would feign
fly out of his hands. Every man shall clappe their hands at him and hiss at
him out of their place. and 20.6.7.29.
Lo this is the portion of the godles rich man from God, and the heritage that
the man shall have of God that is rich, but not rich in God. Though his
excellency mount up to the heaven, and his head reach unto the clouds, yet
shall he not enter into heaven, yea he shall be hurled not only down from
heaven, but also out of the earth, and shall perish for ever like his dung; and
they which have seen him shall say, where is he? Though he be strong for a
time, prosper and flourish like a green bay (as holy David speaks) yet his
arms and his branches shall be broken; Psalm. 37.17.20.29.30.
he and his prosperity shall perish and melt away like the fat of Lambs:
whereas the righteous men (that is, such as fear God and eschew evil) shall
inherit the land for ever. And thus I hope the objection made against the
infallibility of the first rule may be satisfied.

Now if a man that loves to study this art, will ask what the fear of God
is, which opens so wide a door unto a man to be rich, and how such a man may
be known; Solomon, 1. King. 3.5.6.7.8 9.10. Eccles. 3.14. and 12.13. Prou.
8.13. and 14.16.
(who was a man both rich and wise, and one that feared God not only before,
but also after his fall in mine opinion) will give him satisfaction. The fear
of the Lord (says he) is to hate evil. A wise man fears and departs from
evil: Job 1.1. and 28.28.
and therefore it is said of Job who was a wise man and a rich man both, that
he feared God and eschewed evil; and with all he tells us that the fear
of the Lord is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding. So then the
fear of God is the hatred of evil, and the man that hates evil fears God.
And a man may know him by this mark, even by his departing from evil and
eschewing of sin: and good reason forsooth, that a man who should love God as
the sovereign good, and would be loved of God; that he hate evil as the
devil, that would make him hated of God. The devil is all made of evil, (for
so has he made himself by sin) and evil flows from the devil; even as
God is all good, and every good thing is from God. So that these vocables or
words, God and good, devil and evil, are not so near or like one another in
sound, as they are in substance. And as we must hate evil with our hearts, so
must we depart from evil in our hands, yea in the actions of our whole lives.
We must depart from evil, that would make us depart from God, and God from us
for ever. We must eschew the evil of sin, as we would eschew the evil of
eternal shame, and the horrors of hell.

Prou. 8.13.
Solomon when he defines the fear of God to be the hating of evil,
mentions immediately three capital evils, that a man must hate above all
other; pride, the evil way, and the mouth that speaks lewd things. Genes.
18.27. Job 10.9.10.11.12. and 25.6. 1. Mac. 2.62. Ecclesiast. 10.12.
As for the evil of pride; what greater pride or what greater evil can there
be, then for man who is but a worm, and the ordinary repast of worms, even
dust and ashes, and who holds his breath and all that he has of God, not to
humble himself daily before his footestoole, and to pray unto him, earnestly
for grace and all good things, and to praise him heartfully for such blessings
as he has bestowed upon him, whether in body or in soul, or in both? withal
acknowledging all his felicity to flow from him, who (as the Apostle S. James
teaches) is the giver of every good and perfect gift from above. James 1.17.
And as for the other evil, of the evil way; good Lord! what way can be more
evil, then for a man to do his own worldly will, and his own wicked way on
the Lords day? for a man, I say, to pollute the holy day of the holy One, by
following the worldly ways of profit and of pleasure, and to steal away from
him both his service and the day of his service, which ought to be wholly spent
and employed in holiness (without which the Apostle says, Heb. 12.14.
no man shall see God) even in the public exercise of piety toward God, and
of charity and mercy toward man for Gods sake? And as for the third evil, of
the mouth and tongue that speaks lewd things; what more lewd thing can the
mouth of man utter, then to use or rather abuse so irreuerently, as the most
part now adays do, the adorable name of God, to swear almost at every word
by the same, and by the blessed name of Jesus, by his passion, by his wounds,
and by his blood? The holy Scripture wills every knee to bow at the blessed
name of Jesus, Isai. 45.23. Romans 14.11. Phil. 2.10.11.
in sign of reverence and subjection (for thereby we do acknowledge him even
as he is man to be our Sovereign, the Lord of Lords, and the King of Kings)
and enioyneth every tongue to confess that he is the Lord, 1. Cor.
15.24.25.26.27.28. Heb. 2.7.8.
unto the glory of God the father, who has put down all things under his
feet. But these lewd mouthed men will neither reverence him with the bowing
of the knee, nor honor him with the confession and sanctification of the
tongue. Their knees will not honor the Son, and their tongues will needs
dishonor both the Father and the Son. Well, let them be rich who will,
surely such as be proud in Gods sight, and will neither praise him nor pray
unto him, and such as be prophaners of his holy name, and of his holy day, and
will not sanctify both, they shall never be rich in God. They may well gather
goods, but they shall not prove goods to them, they shall not turn to their
good, neither shall they reap any good at Gods hand by them, neither shall
they remain to them and theirs. For only the fear of God (which mother-vertue
these men want) is the fountain of good goods, and of durable riches.

Now the fear of God has two branches, the one is, we must fear to offend
him, because he is our Father, whom we must love in the highest degree: the
other is, when we have offended him, we must fear his fury and punishments,
because he is our Lord. Our fear must not be servile or slavish, such as is
the bond-mans fear of his master, which is only and merely because of
punishment: but our fear must be filial and sonly, such as is the childrens
fear of their father, Psalm. 2.11.
as being loath to offend one whom we love: we must serve the Lord in fear and
trembling: we must fear to offend, before we offend; and when as through
humane frailty we fall into any offense, we must tremble for fear of his
rods: like faulty and guilty children we must shake and quake before the face
of our heavenly father, and prostrated at his feet, and under his feet, we
must entreat him with our tears to be appeased toward us for his mercies
sake, and to be pleased with us for his Sons sake, in whom he is well
pleased. We must, I say, implore him by his fatherly pity to lay his rods
aside, each one with godly David, Psalm. 6.1.
saying and praying, Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in
thy wrath. But if our most wise and provident father find it not expedient for
us to spare us, and to let us pass unpunished; then must we throw our selves
down at his feet, and offer willingly both our bodies and our goods unto his
blows. Let us suffer his punishment with all patience, his correction with all
submission of mind: let us beware to murmur against our good father, though
his blows seem somewhat bitter, and his stripes touch us to the quick: let
us always intertaine this christian cogitation in our hearts, that our father
is a most wise father, and therefore knows well, yea better then any other,
and best of all other, what is most for our good: and that he is a most good
father, and one that loves his children most dearly and entirely, and
therefore will do nothing unto us, but that which will do us much good.

In the mean time let each one that is chastised, beseech God to do it in so
merciful a manner, that his correction may serve for his erection and
direction all the days of his life: That it may serve for his instruction ever
thereafter, and not for his destruction, as it does to the obdured and
reprobate: and therefore let him say and pray with the holy prophet Jeremy,
Lord, correct me, Ierem. 10.24.
but with judgment (that is, with moderation and measure) not in thine anger,
lest thou bring me to nothing. Finally, he must be so far from making
perverse inference upon the correction of God, as though it did argue that God
did hate him, because of handling him so; that he must gather the quite
contrary conclusion thereof, and even say to himself thus; The man God loves
most, he corrects most; for so says Solomon the wise, My son, Prou.
3.11.12. Psalm. 9 4.12.
refuse not the chastening of the Lord, neither be grieved with his
correction: for the Lord corrects him whom he loves, eue^ as the father does
the child in whom he delights. So says the Apostle Saint Paul to the
Hebrews; Heb. 12.5.6.7.8.
Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and he scourges every son that he
receives. If ye endure chastening, God offers himself unto you as unto
sons; for what son is it, whom the father chasteneth not? If therefore ye
be without correction, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and
not sons. Lastly, so says our Savior himself by his servant S. John, Revel.
3.19.
As many as I love, I do rebuke and chasten; be zealous therefore and amend.

Thus we have three true witnesses, and one of them more then a witness,
telling and testifying, that correction and chastisement is a token of Gods
love. And we know, or at least ought to know, that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses, being true, every word must stand; so then, if God correct us
because he loves us, as it is most certain that he does, we must not doubt,
but that it is done for our good. And therefore the holy Prophet David, who was
as much beloved of God as any; and therefore as much chastised of God as any,
and who profited as much by correction and affliction as any, says of himself
thus; Psalm. 119.67.71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes.
For before I was afflicted and chastised, I went astray; but now I keep thy
word. As if he should say, affliction is a good rod, for it brings to God.
Thus have I showed the nature, quality and good effects of the fear of God,
so much as me thought might suffice for the declaration of the first rule of
this Art, which takes his beginning from that, which is the beginning both of
wisdom, and of durable wealth. And therefore to shut up this first discourse
upon this first rule of the golden art with some golden sentence; let me say
unto every one that would be wise or wealthy in this world, and happy in the
world to come, that which Jesus the son of Syrach says: Trust in the Lord,
hold fast his fear, Ecclesiast. 2.6. and 40.26.
and grow old therein; there is no want in the fear of the Lord, and it
needs no help: for (as wise Solomon says) in the fear of God is an assured
strength, and his children shall have hope. Yea, Prou. 14.26.
that which they hope for they shall have; even as much as is good for them to
desire or have here, and as much as they can desire, or would have, or shall be
able to receive hereafter.

II. Rule. Wisdom and understanding, that is, the knowledge of God and good
things concerning the public good of Church or Commonwealth, with humane
discretion, foresight and good government about a man's own private life, make
the poor man rich, and the rich man yet more rich.
Probation, and declaration.
BLessed is the man that finds wisdom (says Solomon, Prou.
3.13.14.15.16.17.18.
who sought wisdom and found it) and the man that gets understanding; for
the merchandise thereof is better then the merchandise of silver, and the gain
thereof is better then gold. It is more precious then pearls: and all things
that thou can desire, are not to be compared unto her. Length of days is in
her right hand, and in her left hand riches and glory. Her ways are ways of
pleasures, and all her paths prosperity. She is a tree of life to them that
lay hold on her, and blessed is he that retains her. and 4.5.6.7.8.9.
The wise shall inherit glory, but fools dishonor, though they be exalted.
Get wisdom, and get understanding; forget not, neither decline from the words
of my mouth. Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee, love her and she
shall keep thee. Wisdom is the beginning, get wisdom therefore, and above al
thy possession get understanding. Exalt her, and she shall exalt thee, she
shall bring thee to honor, if thou embrace her. She shall give thee a comely
ornament unto thine head, yea she shall give thee a crown of glory. I wisdom
dwell with prudence. and 8.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.19.20.21.
I have counsel, and I have strength. By me Princes rule, and the Nobles, and
all the Judges of the Earth. Riches and honor are with me, even durable riches
and righteousness. My fruit is better then gold, even then fine gold, and my
revenues better then fine silver. That I may cause them that love me to inherit
substance, and I will fill their treasures. The wise man Job has an excellent
description of the worth of wisdom. Job
28.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.19.20.20.22.23.24.25.26.27.28.
But where is wisdom found? And where is the place of understanding? Man
knows not the price thereof: for it is not found in the land of the living.
The depth says, it is not in me: the sea also says, it is not with me. Gold
shall not be given for it, neither shall silver be weighed for the price
thereof. It shall not be valued with the wedge of gold of Ophir, nor with the
precious Onyx, nor the Saphir. The gold nor the Crystal shall be equal unto
it, nor the exchange shall be for plate of fine gold. No mention shall be made
of Coral, nor of the Gabish: for wisdom is more precious then pearls. The
Topaz of Aethiopia shall not be equal unto it, neither shall it be valued with
the wedge of pure gold. Behold the fear of the Lord is wisdom, and to depart
from evil is understanding. Prou. 12.14.
A man shall be satiat (says Solomon) with good things by the fruit of his
mouth, and the recompense of a man's hands shall God give unto him. and 13.2.18.
A man shall eat good things by the fruit of his mouth, but the soul of the
trespasser shall suffer violence. and 16.20.
Poverty and shame is to him that refuses instruction, but he that regards
correction shall be honored. and 21.20.
He that is wise in his business shall find good: for in the house of the
wise, is a pleasant treasure and oil. and 15.31.32.
Through wisdom is an house builded, and with understanding it is
established, and by knowledge shall the chambers be filled with all precious
and pleasant riches. Wisd. 7.11.
Innumerable riches come through her hands, and 8.5.18. and 10.10.11.12.
and in the works thereof are infinite riches. Wisdom made Jacob rich in his
labors, and made his pains profitable, and gave perpetual glory to Joseph,
yea, brought him the scepter of a Kingdom. and 4.1.2.
Virtue is always crowned and triumphs, and wins the battle, and the
undefiled rewards. Ecclesiast. 11.1. and 15.3.4.5.6. and 24.19.
Wisdom (says Jesus the son of Syrach) lifts up the head of him that is
low, and makes him to sit among great men. Finally, the flowers of wisdom are
the fruit of honor and riches, even the garment of glory, the crown of
gladness, and an everlasting name.

Thus ye see, O ye students in the art of enriching, of how great moment,
wisdom and understanding are for the attaining of riches. She makes the
poor man plenteous, and garnisheth the needy with wealth. The man that is low
she raises aloft: she leads him by the hand from among the despised, and
places him among princes. She lifts up his head, and as she storeth and
decoreth his heart with grace, so she crowns his head with honor here, and
with happiness hereafter. It behooves therefore every man next after the
knowledge of God, and of his duty toward him (for this is the chief) to
study and learn the understanding and knowledge of that calling God has made
him to embrace. Let him labor then to be wise and well seen in his own art
and occupation, be more then any other, and more in it then in any other. The
man that follows the liberal profession of letters, let him endeavor to know
and comprehend the condition and constitution, the marrow and the mysteries of
the art, science, and exercise he has betaken himself to. Prou. 21.1.
For what wots he, but that God, who has the hearts of kings in his hand, may
open a door in some kings heart for him to enter into? and not only open the
door of his heart to make the king love him, but also the door of his head, I
mean his mouth, to make him say of him, Genesis 41.38.39.
as once Pharaoh, King of Egypt, said of Joseph; Can we find such a man as
this, in whom is the spirit of understanding and wisdom? Yea, more then this,
open also his hand unto him, and make the Prince do unto him, as Pharaoh did
to Joseph, even prefer him unto some worthy place in the Church, his Court or
Commonwealth. What wots the lettered man, I say, but that God, Dan.
1.17.18.19.20.
who oftentimes gives his children favor in the eyes of kings, will make it
befall him, as we find it did to the four children, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael
and Azariah, to whom God gave knowledge and understanding in all learning and
wisdom, and favor in King NebuchadneZZars eyes? So that the King disdained
not to commune with them, though they were but young boys, who finding them
ten times more cunning then all his other Wise men; he began to honor them
with the liberty of ordinary access unto his presence, and appointed them
always to stand before him. And as God thus opened the Kings heart to love
them, and like of them more, then of the other wise men; who were not wise in
God: so afterward he opened also the Kings hand unto them in a more liberal
and bountiful manner, then unto the other wise men. For it is said, and
2.46.47.48.49.
that the King greatly honored Daniel, and for his great knowledge made him a
great man, gave him many great gifts; yea, he made him governor over the whole
Province of Babel, and chief of the Rulers, and above all his wise men. So
that he sat in the gate of the King, Genes. 41.40.41.42.43.
even as chief Ruler representing the King. Even as Pharaoh set Joseph over
his house, yea, over all the land of Egypt, to rule over his rulers, and to
teach his wise men wisdom. Likewise Daniels three fellows were preferred by
NebuchadneZZar, and set over the Province of Babel under Daniel.

In one word, the lettered man must labor and endeavor to be such a one as
Jesus the son of Syrach has painted out in these words; Ecclesiasticus
39.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.
He only that applies his mind to the law of the most High, and is occupied in
the meditation thereof, seeks out the wisdom of all the ancient, and
exercises himself in the prophecies. He keeps the sayings of famous men,
and enters in also to the secrets of dark sentences. He seeks out the
mystery of grave sentences, and exercises himself in dark parables. He
shall serve among great men; and appear before the Prince, he shall travel
thorough strange countries: For he has tried the good and the evil among men.
He will give his heart to resort early unto the Lord that made him, and to pray
before the most high, and will open his mouth in prayer, and pray for his
sins. When the great Lord will, he shall be filled with the spirit of
understanding; that he may power out wise sentences, and give thanks unto the
Lord in his prayer. He shall direct his counsel and knowledge, so shall he
meditate in his secrets. He shall show forth his science and learning, and
rejoice in the law and covenant of the Lord. Many shall commend his
understanding, and his memory shall never be put out, nor depart away: but
his name shall continue from generation to generation. The congregation shall
declare his wisdom, and show it. Though he be dead, he shall leave a greater
fame then a thousand: and if he live still, he shall get the same.

And as the literal man must labor to be wise, and well seen in his liberal
profession; so must the merchant and trafficking man take pains to understand
what belongs to the handling of merchandise and wares in the ship, and in the
shop, at home and abroad; that it may be said of him, Ezeck. 28.4.5.
that was once said of the Prince of Tyrus, who was a merchant: Lo here a man,
who with his wisdom and understanding has gotten him riches, and silver and
gold into his treasures, and by his wisdom and trafficking, has increased the
same. But let the Christian merchant in the mean time, beware of that other
quality of this princely merchant, which the prophet does mention in the next
words; And thine heart is lifted up because of thy riches: as also of that
other evil quality noted in this City in these words; verse. 16.17.18.
By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst of thee with
cruelty, and thou have sinned. Let him beware of these, I say, lest God cast
him with the princely merchant of Tyrus out of the mountain of God, and bring
him to ashes upon the earth in the sight of all them that behold him. And
therefore let our Christian merchant rather imitate the godly and good
qualities of the virtuous woman-merchant described by Solomon: Prou. 31.10. to
31.
Who as she is wise; for she opens her mouth with wisdom, and the law of
grace is in her tongue: so she fears the Lord, and is not proud of her
riches: she stretches out her hand to the poor, and in so doing, is not
cruel or unmerciful, as the merchants of Tyrus were. Well, my wish is, that
it may be said of the merchants of these our two famous Cities, which was once
said by the Prophet Isay of the merchants of Tyrus; Her Merchants are Princes,
and her Chapmen the Nobles of the earth. But yet more that that may be said of
them, which Solomon has uttered in the commendatio^ of his virtuous woman
merchant: The merchants of these Cities fear the Lord, and stretch out their
hands to the poor; the law of grace is in their tongue, and they feel that
their merchandise is good.

And as the merchant and trafficking man must take pains to be skillful in his
calling, so must the husbandman and the labourer of the ground labor to
understand all things belonging to his farm, his plough, his cattle, his
pasture, the fruits of his land, and the flocks of his sheep. Genes.
26.12.13.14.
To the end, that with Isaac, he may find an hundredth fold by estimation of his
sowing, and wax mighty in flocks of sheep, in herds of cattle, and in a
great household. Likewise must the tradesman or craftesman be careful to grow
expert and cunning in his craft, and wise in his occupation, Exodus 28.3. and
31.2.3.4.5.6. and 35.30.31.32.33.34.35.
that he may be praised for his great skill with Bezaleel and Aholiab, two
tradesmen wise in heart, and in cunning; of whom it is said, that God filled
them with an excellent Spirit of wisdom, understanding and knowledge in all
workmanship, to work curiously in gold, silver and brass, in grauing and
setting of stones, in hewing and caruing of wood, in working of broidred and
needleworke, in blue silk, in purple, in skarlet and in fine linen; in
weauing and working all manner of curious devices, and subtle inventions. In
one word, every man that desires to be rich, must endeavor to understand
the nature, quality, secrets, and perfection of his own vocation. Which if he
do, and join thereunto the fear of the Lord, whereby he shall draw down
Gods blessing upon his adoes, he cannot but prosper.

But I know it will be objected, that it is oftentimes seen, that many
ignorant men, many foolish and unwise folks are very rich: and on the other
part, that many wise, learned, and well qualified men are oftentimes very
poor; so that it may seem that this second rule does not hold true, etc.
Hereunto I answer thus; It is very true which the Preacher of Jerusalem has
said, Ecclesiast. 9.11.
that he saw under the Sun, that the bread is not to the wise, nor riches to
men of understanding, neither favor to men of knowledge; meaning, that wealth,
riches, honor, and favor of princes and great men do not befall only, and
always unto wise, learned, and well qualified persons, but also, and that very
often, unto ignorants, idiots and fools: and yet notwithstanding the wise
Preacher does not contradict himself. For although as well the evil as the
good may be rich, yet it is in a very different manner. For the ignorant and
unwise cannot be rich in God, nor with a good conscience, nor yet durablie
rich, as the wise and well qualified are. Prou. 8.18.
Riches and honor are with me (says Salomons Wisdom) even durable riches
and righteousness. So that durable riches and righteousness, that is, goods
with a good conscience, Prou. 13.9.11. and 14.11.18.
are only proper unto such as are wise. For the riches of vanity (says he)
that is of folly, shall diminish; the candle of the wicked shall be put out, his
house shall be destroyed, and the foolish shall inherit folly. In one word,
his riches, though in themselves they be goods, yet are they not goods to him,
because they turn not to his good, Ecclesiast. 13.25
but rather to his evil. For (as Jesus the son of Syrach says) riches are
good, or goods unto him that has no sin in his conscience: that is, unto the
man that has not gotten, increased, kept and used, or rather abused them with
an evil conscience. And as the Apostle says, Tit. 1.15.
that unto the pure are all things pure, but unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their minds and consciences are impure:
So likewise may it be well said, that unto the godly and good, are al things
good, but unto them that are godless and evil, is nothing good, but even
their very goods to them are not goods, but evils. For as to the godly all
things turn to the best, Romans 8.28.
so to the godless, al things, yea, even such things as in themselves be
good, turn to the worst. And this is the saying of Jesus the son of Syrach;
The principal things for the whole use of man's life, is water, fire and iron,
salt and meal, wheat, honey and milk, the blood of the grape, Ecclesiast.
39.26.27.
oil and clothing. All these things are for good to the godly, but to the
sinners they are turned into evil. So then this stands sure, that although
foolish, unwise and ignorant men may be rich, yet can they not be rich in God.
For I have now showed, Luke 12.15.16.17.18.19.20.21
his goods to him are not goods, and his riches are not durable riches. So
says Jesus, the Son of God, in the Gospel, of that rich fool, whose ground
brought forth fruits plenteously, so that he was constrained to build bigger
barnes, to gather in his grains and his goods; and reioycingly said to his
soul; Soul, soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, eat,
drink, live at ease, and take thy pastime: O fool (says our Savior) this
night will they fetch away thy soul from thee; then whose shall those things
be which thou have provided? And thus shall it fare with the man that gathers
riches to himself, and is not rich in God: Even with the man who has gotten
or increased goods with an evil conscience, who has goods and gold, but
wants goodness and godliness; who is wise in the world, but not wise in
God. Even he whose gold is his God, whose house is his heaven, whose bed is
his Abraham's bosom, whose board is to him the banquet of the Lamb, whose
praying is his playing, whose almesdeeds are all misdeeds, whose fasting is his
feasting; and in one word, whose temporal fullness is his eternal felicity.

As for the other part of the objection touching the poverty and need of many
men that both fear God, and are wise and endued with great understanding, and
for the more full satisfaction thereof; it is to be considered, that about
poverty and riches, there do occur three diverse endeavors of men diversely
disposed. Some are voluntary yoke-embracers, others are voluntary
yoke-bearers, and other some are voluntary yoke-breakers; and all the three
orders are praisable, though in a different degree. The first two are properly
students in the art of poverty; for there is a kind of poverty that does
require both great skill and great courage to embrace it, or to bear it, as it
should, and ought to be embraced or borne. So that the rules and precepts of
this art do not concern them who are either willing embracers, or patient
bearers of pouerties yoke, but only the third kind, who are yoke-breakers,
that is, such as labor and study to break in pieces pouerties yoke, and to
wind themselves out of want by winning of wealth by their virtuous endeauours.
For this art teaches a man, not how to make himself poor for Christ's sake
(which is an attempt and study of an higher pitch) but how to make himself
rich in God and with a good conscience, that he may have whereupon to impart
unto the poor for Christ's sake.

And to speak a little more of the two first kinds of men; the voluntary
yoke-embracers, I call such as being rich, do willingly abandon their riches
to embrace pouerties yoke; either by forsaking all that they have for Christ's
sake and the Gospel, as in the times and places of persecution; or by giving
away all that they have, or the most part unto the poor for Christ's sake, and
that in the time of peace and immunitie from persecution: Matthew. 5.20.22 and
19.27.28.29. Luke 12.33. Act. 2.44.45. and 4.34.35.
Such rare men esteeming it their greatest glory to resemble our Savior by
making themselves poor, that others by their poverty may be made rich. Even
as our blessed Jesus, who was rich, as heir of heaven and earth, for our sakes
became poor, and so poor, that he had not a house, yea hardly a hole to hide
his head in, Matthew. 8.20. Luke 9.58. 2. Cor. 8.9.
even poorer then the birds of the heaven, the^ the swallow or the sparrow, and
poorer then the foxes of the field; and all this, and more then this, for our
sakes, that we who were poor, through his poverty might be made rich. And of
such yoke-embracers and voluntary poor men the primitive Church had not a
few; but our age (wherein devotion is nigh dead, and charity grown cold, and
perfection almost every where turned into imperfection, yea, into defection)
has but too few. Now as for these men, who sees not but they must needs be
poor, though they fear God never so much, and be never so well accomplished
for wisdom, knowledge and good parts, seeing they are such, as will needs be
poor, and will not be rich?

The other kind of voluntary poor men, I call yoke-bearers, who be they
never so godly and wise, yet they may be and are ordinarily poor, because they
take not care to be rich, their chief study being to bear the yoke of
poverty patiently, with an invincible courage and fortitude of mind, and to
learn to be content with a little for the love they bear unto tranquillity
of mind (as many Philosophers and moral men have done, Heb. 11.26.
and yet do,) or else for the respect they have to the eternal reward, as many
Ecclesiastical and Churchmen have done, and yet do. And of this disposition
are all those, that notwithstanding their ability, to follow a more gainefull
calling, as great as that of others, and perhaps greater, yet had rather
decline and shun the same, in regard of the manifold toiles, turmoiles, and
dangerous snares it is subject unto, and betake themselves unto a less
gainefull calling; so that it be not accompanied with so many headstrong
tentations and entanglements, as the other is environed with. As for example, a
man that had rather follow the profession of Philosophy in the Academie for
small gains, then follow the practice of physic in the city or country
with much gains. Or a man that had rather play the physician and sauer of the
sick in the bed for little, then the pleader of the ignorants cause at the
bar for much. For this second order of men consists for the most part of
these two sorts; of Philosophical and liberal professors, and of
Ecclesiastical ministers, which for the most part are poor, though in the
mean time they be both godly and wise, and be appointed of God to teach and
preach unto men godliness and wisdom.

Psalm. 84.10.
These men are such, that they had rather serve as doore-keepers in Gods house
and want much, then dwell in the Tabernacles of wickedness, and have much.
Isai. 55.1.2. Ezekiel. 47.1.7. Zachar. 13.1. Psalm. 36.8.9. 1. Cor. 3.1.2. Heb.
5.12.13.14. 1. Pet. 2.2. John 6 50.51. and 15.1. Matthew. 26.26.27.28. 1. Cor. 11
23.24 Revel. 2.17. and 3.18. and 22.2.
They had rather keep Gods Inn to sell unto men without silver the living
waters that flow from the fountain of life, for the washing away of our
fleshly filth; and for the refreshing of our spiritual thirst, to sell the
pure milk of the principles of the word for the feeding of such as are babes
in Christ, and the strong meat of the harder and higher things of the same
word, for such as are more aged in Christ, and the bread of the hidden Manna
that descends from heaven, and gives spiritual strength unto the heart of
man, yea eternal life unto the soul of man, together with the wine, that the
true vine above does yield, which makes the heart glad, and the soul of man
to sing: They had rather, I say, keep an Inn for God, and win little, there
to sell without silver for God spiritual victuals to feed and make fat men's
souls, then to keep an Inn for men, and win much, by selling for silver,
Revel. 3.18.
food for the refreshing and fatting of men's bodies. They had rather sit in
Christ's shop, and sell for him unto naked and needy souls gold tried by the
fire, even the gold of godly instructions, and good directions, that they may
be made rich in godliness and in goodness, together with the white raiment of
Christ's righteousness (for as Jacob got his earthly fathers blessing in his
elder brothers clothes, Genes. 27.15. Mat. 22.11.12, Galath 3.27. Revel. 19.8.
so must we our heavenly Fathers blessing in our elder brothers coat) that
they may be clothed, and that their filthy nakedness do not appear: they
had rather, I say, sit and sell in Gods shop without silver such celestial
wares, and in the mean time be poor; then to sit in man's shop, and sell silks
and satin, or clothes of silver and gold to cover men's backs with, and
thereby to become very rich in silver and gold. Revel. 3.18. and 22.2. 1. John
2.20.
They had rather labor in anointing the inward eyes of blind, or dim-sighted
souls, with such eie-salue as Gods spirit composeth; and to anoint the hard
hearts of some, and the bruised hearts of other some with the suppling oil of
wholesome exhortations, and gracious consolations, and to apply the spiritual
plaster made of the leaves of the tree of life, for the purging and cleansing
of sore-running souls; they had rather, I say, play the spiritual physicians
and be bare, then be ministers of medicine to sick and sore bodies, and
abound. They had rather stand in the pulpit, Isai. 1.2.16.17.18. and 34. and
48. and 51. and 58. Ierem. 2. and 7. and 27. Ezech. 3.17.18.19.20.21. Hose. 4.
and 8.
and plead for Gods right, that is, for piety and devotion against
irreligious men, and for the princes right, that is, for loialtie, obedience
and relief against disloiall, disobedient, and unreasonable subjects, and for
the poores right, that is, for charity and mercy in alms and hospitality
against covetous and unmerciful men, and in the mean time be but mean men
themselves in their worldly estate; then to stand and plead at the bar for
another man's right, and redress of wrong, and thereby to become mighty on
earth. They had rather stand and minister at the Lords Table in the Church, and
get little, then attend or stand at the Kings table in the Court, and gather
much. And yet to say somewhat more; they had rather sit in the chair of the
Church (for every pastors and prelates particular Church-chaire is a part of
the Apostolical chair) to judge between doctrine and doctrine, Deutero. 13.
and 17.8.9.10.11. 2. Chron. 19.8.9.10.11. Act. 15. 1. Cor. 14.32. 1. John
4.12.13 2. John 9.10. Matthew. 21.42. Ephesians. 2.20. 1. Cor. 3.11. 1. Pet. 2.6.7.
verity and heresy, between the sound building of gold, silver and precious
stones, and the slight building of wood, stubble and straw upon the foundation
and corner stone, Christ Jesus; and that according to the rule and square of
the sacred Scriptures; they had rather, I say, sit and judge in doctrinall
causes and cases, and possess in the mean time, but little in comparison of
many others, and yet have less to leave behind them unto such as do belong
unto them; then to sit in the gate or seat of civil judgment to judge
between parties and parties, about cases and causes of inheritance, of
usurpations, violence and wrongs, and thereby acquire great possessions for them
and theirs. Finally, as with David, Psalm. 84.10.
they had rather serve as doorekeepers in the house of God, then dwell in the
tabernacles of wickedness, (as I said of them in the beginning): so with Moses
they had rather choose to suffer adversity with the people of God, Heb.
11.24.25.26.27.36.37 38
(who were tried by mockings and scourgings, by bonds and imprisonment, and did
wander up and down through wildernesses and mountains, having no other
lodging but the dens and caves of the earth, and no other clothing, but
sheep and goats skins, and at last were stoned, hewn asunder, or slain
with the sword) as the Apostle Paul speaks to the Hebrews, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sins for a season: Esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater
riches, then the treasures of Egypt, yea then the treasures of the whole world;
as having with godly Moses a respect unto the recompense of the reward, even
the eternal reward in the heavens. So this being the disposition of poor
Ecclesiastical men (for generally such men are poor) what can we say of them
else, Luke 10.40.41.42.
but that which the blessed Son of blessed Marie said once of a happy Marie,
that they have chosen the better part, which shall not be taken away from them?
whereas other men of other secular callings (for being a lay man my self, I
would be loath to condemn any of the foresaid lay callings, and yet as loath
would I be to flatter any of them, as I would not wish any man should flatter
himself in the vain and frivolous preferring of his secular vocation
howsoever gainefull, honorable, or excellent it be, before the spiritual)
where as, I say, other men of other callings are with careful Martha combred
about many things. And these things being duly considered, I hope both the
parts of the objection above propounded will be satisfied, and the rule
sufficiently verified.

And so much the more willing I have been in this place upon this occasion to
discourse of the dignity, and excellency of the Ecclesiastical calling, as
for that, because laymen, and chiefly the richer sort, are commonly so prone
to despise, and so apt to vilipend Churchmen, and that for nothing so much as
because of their poverty and base estate. As also for that the richer sort of
laymen be generally so loath to consecrate any one of their children to the
service of God, so that they do prefer a gaineful calling, be it never so
base, unto that which is the Queen of callings. If we will read the histories
of Kingdoms and Countries, yea even but those of our own, we shall find how in
former times, the sons of Monarchs, Kings and Princes have been Ministers,
Preachers and priests in Gods house: and yet now adays, we see that a Lawyers,
a Merchants, yea, a tradesmans son will skorne to be a Minister, if he have
any means. Alas miserable men that we are, we are so deaf we cannot hear
what the Evangelical Prophet (who was both a Preacher, and of princely blood,
even brothers son of Vzziah King of Judah) proclaims touching the dignity
of the Ministers of the Gospel; Isai. 52.7.
How beautiful (says he, and after him the Apostle Saint Paul) Romans 10.15.
upon the mountains are the feet of him that declares and publishes peace!
That tells good tidings, and publishes salvation, saying unto Zion, Thy God
reigns. We are so blind, we cannot see how that such as turn many to
righteousness, (be they never so base for birth, Fisher-mens sons, Tent
makers sons, or Carpenters sons, or what ye will) that such, I say, shall
one day shine as the stars for ever and ever. For this thing, godly Daniel (who
was first a prisoner, Dan. 12.3.
and afterward both a Prophet in the Church, and a Prince in the Commonwealth
under the King) or rather the holy Angel by his mouth tells us. Finally, we
are so ignorant and lumpish, that we cannot consider, Matthew. 19.28.
how that poor fishermen for being Christ's Ministers, shall in that great day
sit upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, as the great
Judge of the world has said. And therefore to shut up this present discourse,
I my self being a layman, wish all laymen to give care unto the exhortation
of the holy Apostle; We beseech you brethren, 1. These. 5.12.13.
that ye know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord and
admonish you; that ye have them in singular love for their works sake. Heb.
13.7.14.
Remember them which have the oversight of you, which have declared unto you
the word of God, whose faith follow, considering what has been the end of
their conversation. Obey them and submit your selves unto them: For they watch
for your souls as they that must give accounts, that they may do it with joy,
and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you.

III. Rule. Diligence in a lawful calling, as in laboring the ground, in
trading or trafficking, or in following some literal profession, together
truth, temperancie in living, and flying of idleness, and excess make the
poor man rich, and the rich man yet more rich.
Probation, and declaration.
Prou. 5.26.
Drink the waters of thine own cisterne, and of the springs out of the midst
of thine own well, says Solomon. and 6.6.7.8.9.10.11.
Go to the Pismire O sluggard, Behold her ways, and be wise, for she having
no guide, governor nor ruler, prepares her meat in Summer, and gathers her
food in Harvest. How long will thou sleep O sluggard? When will thou arise out
of thy sleep? A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of thy hands
to sleep; therefore thy poverty comes as one that trauelleth by the way, and
thy necessity like an armed man. and 10.4.5.
A slothful hand makes poor, but the hand of the diligent makes rich, he
that gathers in summer, is the son of wisdom, but he that sleeps in
harvest, is the son of confusion. He that tilleth his land, and
12.11.14.24.27. Eccles. 10.28. and 22.1, 2.
shall be satisfied with bread: but he that follows the idle, is destitute of
understanding. A man shall be satiate with good things by the fruit of his
mouth, and the recompense of a man's hands shall God give unto him. The hand of
the diligent shall bear rule, but the idle shall be under tribute; whereas
the riches of the diligent man are precious. Where none oxen are, Prou. 14.4.23.
there the crib is empty, but much increase comes by the strength of the
ox. Where by the ox is meant labor, and by the crib the barn, signifying,
that without labor there is no profit. For in all labor, and 28.19.
says he, there is abundance, but he that follows the idle, shall be filled
with poverty. and 13.4.
The sluggard lusts and has naught, but the soul of the diligent shall have
plenty. Love not sleep, and 20.13. Eccles. 40.28.
lest thou come unto poverty, open thine eyes, and thou shall be satisfied
with bread. and 20.4. and 19.24. and 21.5.17.25.26.
The slothful will not plow because of winter; therefore shall he beg in
summer, and have nothing. The thoughts of the diligent do surely bring
abundance, but whosoever is hasty, does come to poverty. He that loves
pastime, shall be a poor man, and he that loves oil and wine, shall not be
rich. The desire of the slothful slaieth him, for his hands refuse to work.
He coueteth ever more greedily, but the righteous gives and spares not. and
22.29. Wisd. 3.15. Prou. 23.20.21.22.29.30.31.32. 1. Cor. 5.11. and 26 14.15.
Prou. 24.30.
A diligent man in his business stands before Kings, and not before the
baser sort: for glorious is the fruit of good labors. Keep not company with
drunkards, and with gluttons, for the drunkard, and the glutton shall be poor,
and the sleeper shall be clothed with rags. I passed by the field of the
sloathfull, and by the vineyard of the man destitute of understanding. And lo,
it was all grown over with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof,
31.32.33.34.
and the stonewall thereof was broken down. Then I beheld, and I considered it
well: I looked upon it, and received instruction; yet a little sleep, a little
slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep; so thy poverty comes as
one that trauelleth by the way, and 26.14.15.
and thy necessity like an armed man. As the door turns upon his hinges: so
does the slothful man upon his bed: he hides his hand in his bosom, and it
grieueth him to put it again to his mouth. and 27.23.24.25.26.27.
Be diligent therefore to know the state of thy flock, and take heed to the
herds. For riches remain not always, nor the crown from generation to
generation. The hay discovers it self, and the grass appears, and the
herbs of the mountains are gathered. The lambs are for thy clothing, and the
goats are the price of the field; and let the milk of the goats be
sufficient for thy food, for the food of thy family, and for the sustenance of
thy maids.

and 31.10. to 31.
Likewise Salomons virtuous woman acquireth riches for her self, and her
husband by diligence and industry; for she ouerseeth the ways of her
household, and eats not the bread of idleness. She seeks wool and flax,
and labors cheerefullie with her hands. She rises while it is yet night,
and gives the portion to her household, and the ordinary to her maids. She
considers a field, and gets it, and with the fruits of her hands, she
planteth a vineyard. Her candle is not put out by night, she puts her hand
to the wheel, and her hand handles the spindle. She makes her self carpets,
fine linen: and purple is her garment. She makes sheets and sells them, she
gives girdles unto the merchants, and she feels that her merchandise is
good. This woman's price the wise man accounts far above the pearls, honor
is her clothing, and her children call her blessed. Her husband trusts to her
virtue, and by her virtue he is known in the gates. So that he praises her,
and crowns her with this commendation, Many daughters have done virtuously,
but thou surmountest them all. But Isaies idle and carelsse women are of
another nature. They are haughty, Isai. 3.16.17.18.19.20.21.22.23.24. and
32.9.10.11.12.13.14.
and not humble, they are walkers, and not workers, their feet and their eyes
are always wandering. They spend whole days and nights in decking themselves,
and in beautifying their bodies; their whole study is about their onaments of
tires, hoods and calls, of sweet balls, bracelets, and bonets, of tablets,
earings, muflers and rings; of vailes, wimpels and crisping pins, of girdles,
glasses, fine linen and launes, and such other pieces of costly apparel. And
therefore the Prophet speaks to them in this wise: Rise up ye women that are
at ease, hear my voice, ye careless daughters, hearken to my words. Ye women
that are careless shall be in fear above a year in days: for the vintage
shall fail, and the gathering shall come no more: Ye women that be at ease be
astonished: fear O ye idle women: put off the clothes (meaning their costly
and pompous apparel) make bare, and gird sackcloth upon the loins, (as if he
should say, Turn your silks into sackcloth, and your odours into ashes): men
shall lament for the teates, even for the pleasant fields, and the fruitful
vine. Upon the land of my people shall grow thorns and briars: yea upon all
the houses of joy in the city of rejoicing.

It cannot be otherwise said then, but that as a virtuous woman is a most great
good, so an idle vicious woman is a most great evil. Eccles. 10.18.
By slothfulnes, the roof of the house goes to decay, and by the idleness of
the hands, the house droppeth through. Hate not labourious work, (says Jesus
the son of Syrach) neither the husbandry, Eccles. 7.15.22.
which the most high has created; and if thou have cattle, look well to
them. and 9.19.
Also in the hands of the craftesman shall the works be commended. and 25.3.
If thou have gathered nothing in thy youth, what can thou find in thine age?
and 40.28.29.30.
My son lead not a beggars life, for better it were to dig, then to beg.
Begging is sweet in the mouth of the unshamefast, and in his belly there
burns a fire. Act. 20.34 35. 1. These. 4.11. 2. These 3.7.10.11.12. 1. Tim.
5.8. 2. Tim. 2.6.
Likewise the holy Apostle, as he labored with his own hands, to relieve his
own necessities, and those of other poor brethren, so he will not have idle
men, and such as will not work, to eat. And therefore very earnestly he
exhorts, yea commands such folks to labor with quietness, and to eat
their own bread; for the husbandman must labor before he receive the fruits,
and he that provides not for his household, is in that part worse then an
Infidel.

The world now a days is combred with two sorts of idle men; some have a
calling, and will not follow it, and others are ashamed to learn a manual
trade or occupation, because they are Gentlemen borne, though they have no
lands. As for the first order of idle men, it were a pitilesse pity, to pity
such men's poverty; for it is good reason that he be poor, who having a
calling to wind himself out of poverty, will not inure himself to exercise
and follow the same. And good reason that he eat not, but starve for hunger,
who may work, and can work, and has occasion offered him to work, and yet
will not work, 2. These. 3.8.9.10.11.12.
whereby he may have what to eat, (for so says the Apostle) ye that will
not imitate the holy Apostles example, who wrought with labor, and travel
night and day with his own hands, lest he should have been chargeable to
others. And therefore all that have betaken themselves to a gainefull calling
ought to imitate the diligence of Salomons virtuous woman, be they women, or
be they men. Prou. 31.13.15.18.
She labors cheerfully with her hands, yea her candle is not put out by
night, for she rises while it is yet night, and gives the portion to her
household, and the ordinary to her maids. As for the other order of idle men,
who are gentlemen, but without lands, and yet are ashamed to betake themselves
to a trade, because of their Gentry, or Nobility of blood. Truly in my
conceit, their poverty is to be pitied, but yet their idleness me thinks
cannot be excused. Neither can I see, how a man's Gentilitie can be disparaged
any whit by the means of a virtuous art of an honest craft or occupation.
Neither can I see any such antipathie, or opposition between Gentilitie, and
mechanical industry that they cannot consist together. No, no, they can well
enough agree together, though poor Gentlemen be loath and are ashamed, that in
their persons they should join together. But this shame of theirs is not a
good shame, but such a shame as they ought rather to be ashamed of. Gentilitie
took the first original from virtue, and there is no Gentilitie or Nobility
in blood, but in regard of the seeds of virtue, which are supposed to
accompany the blood of such as are called Gentlemen borne. The which thing
being true, as it is most true, it follows that Gentilitie cannot be either
extinguished, or impaired by a mechanical trade, which is likewise grounded
and founded upon virtue, and is practiced for the cherishing of virtue, and the
quelling of vice. So that Gentilitie, and mechanical industry are sisters,
even the daughters of one dame; for virtue is the mother and mistress of both.
Men may well set them together by the ears; but (as I said before) they of
themselves could well enough agree. Genes. 2.8.
The Lord himself would not be idle: for besides the creation of the world, he
planted a Garden Eastward in Eden, and so in a manner played the Gardener. It
is also said, that he made skinne-coates for Adam and Eve, and 3.7.21.
and so for the good of man, and for our good example, he disdained not in a
manner to play the tailor. For whether the Lord himself as he planted the
garden of Eden for our first parents, so also made the skinne-coates for them,
as the letter of the text does import, or whether he gave them knowledge to
make themselves clothes, as some do suppose; it is not much material. It is
sufficient that we learn this lesson hence, Exodus 28.3. and 31.3.4.5.6. and
35.30.31.32.33.34.35.
that a man ought not to be ashamed to practice a mechanical art, seeing God
is the author thereof. And therefore God himself by Moses calls the making
of Aarons garments, a work of the Spirit of wisdom: As also the working in
gold, silver and brass, the grauing and setting of stones, and caruing of
wood, the working in broidred and needle work, in blue silk, in purple, in
skarlet, and in fine linen, together with weauing, and the practicing of such
inventions, and works as flow from the spirit of wisdom, knowledge and
understanding. And therefore they be such exercises and employments, as a
Gentleman borne ought not to be ashamed to learn the^, and to practice them
rather the^ to live in idleness. If then even almighty God himself disdained
not to work for the benefit, behoof, and good example of men (for as for
himself, there was never yet any that needed less to work then he) what
reason have we to be ashamed to work with our hands, chiefly such as have no
other means besides working to live by?

And not only has God wrought, but also the best Gentlemen that ever were,
have likewise followed some one laborious occupation or other, and that both to
gain by it, and to keep themselves from idleness, which is the root of all
evil, and makes a man's, both soul and body poor. Genes. 2.15. and 3.23.
and 4.2. and 9.20. and 13. and 26. and 29. and, 0.
Adam, the first father of mankind, and the monarch of the earth, when as he
was yet innocent, (and therefore out of doubt a better Gentleman, then any that
are now) was put into the garden to dress it, and to keep it. Though God was
his father by creation, and formation, (for besides him, he had no other
father) yet he was not brought forth, or borne to be idle, but to be a
gardener, before his fall, and a labourer of the ground after his fall. Also his
two sons were men of occupation, Abel a keeper of sheep, and Cain a tiller
of the ground. And Noah the father and monarch of the renewed earth, was he not
an husband man, and did he not plant a vineyard? and were not Abraham and Lot,
Isaac and Jacob, and their children husbandmen and shepherds? Yea more, all of
these had lands, fields and pastures, besides houses and flocks, yea more then
many Lords and Knights, now adays have, and yet we see they disdained not to
labor; whereas many of our Gentlemen that have none of all these, or but very
little, will be ashamed to do as they did. But what will our idle Gentleman
say of David, who being a young man, was the keeper of his fathers sheep, 1.
Sam. 16.11.12.18.19.21.22.23. and 17.33.34.35.36.37.45.46.47.48.49.50.51. and
8.17.18.20.23.25.27
and who (if God had not taken him from the sheepe-coate to make him a King,
and a keeper of his people) would have played the husbandman still? was not
young David a Gentleman, even then when he kept the sheep? If any one doubt
of it, I will show them that he had even then more gentlemanlike qualities, then
any of our Gentlemen now a days have. King Saul's servants reported to their
master, that Ishai the Bethlemite had a son, who was a cunning player upon
the harp, a man of war, strong and valiant, and wise in matters, and a
comely person, and such a one as feared the Lord, which is the crown of al
Gentilitie and Nobility. Wherefore King Saul sent messengers unto Ishai, and
said, send me David thy son, which is with the sheep. Thus David was
fetched from the sheepe-coate to the Kings court, and brought from feeding of
sheep, to be the Kings Favorite, his Musition and Physician both at once. For
when the evil spirit came upon the King, David took an harp, and played with
his hand, and Saul was refreshed and was eased, for the evil spirit departed
from him. Also he was the Kings armor-bearer; for he was so strong, that when
as he yet kept his fathers sheep, he slew both a lion and a bear that came
among the flock; and afterward in the field he slew the mighty Giant
Goliath. Finally, he behaved himself so valiantly against the Philistims,
who were Gods enemies, that by his virtue and valor, he deserved the marriage
of the Kings daughter, howsoever that he was (as he says of himself to
Saules servants, who in the Kings name made offer to him to be his son in
law) a poor man, Matthew. 1.20. and 13.55. Mark 6.3. Luk 1.27. and 2.4.51. and
4.22.
and of small reputation. Thus I have showed then, that David was as good a
Gentleman, as any Gentleman of these days is, even then when he kept his
fathers sheep. Moreover, what can our idle Gentlemen say of Joseph, the
husband of the blessed virgin, who was a man of the house and lineage of David,
and by the Angel, called the son of David; was he not of as good an house,
and of as Gentle blood as any of our idle Gentlemen are, yea, and better by
many degrees? and yet he for all that, disdained not to be a Carpenter, and to
follow this trade. Finally, Christ the son of David, yea more, the Son of
God, would not be idle, when as he was yet young, but was subject to his
supposed father Joseph, and unto Marie his mother, and exercised the Carpenters
trade; and therefore the Jews called him in disdain, not only the Carpenters
son, but also the Carpenter. Wherefore I wish, that never a Gentleman borne
should be ashamed of a mechanical craft after our Savior Christ, and that no
Christian Commonwealth should esteem a man to have lost his Gentilitie for
exercising of a trade.

Alas what will our idle Gentleman say, when he shall be asked at the last day,
concerning the calling he should have followed here in this life? shall he have
no other thing to answer, but that he was of no craft or occupation, because
he was a Gentleman borne? what an unsavory answer will it be before God, who
not only has taught men mechanical trades, but also disdained not to work
himself by the word of his mouth, in creating the world, in planting the
garden of Paradise, and in making of skinne-cloathes for Adam and Eve? What an
unsavory answer shall it be, I say, before our Savior Christ, Mark. 3.6.
Luke 2.51. Matthew. 4.18.21
the Son of God, who disdained not to work in the Carpenters trade in his
supposed fathers house Joseph, who was of the same craft? John 21.3.
and before his blessed Apostles, which were fishermen, as Saint Paul was a
Tent-maker? Then I fear me, Act. 18 1.2.3.
shall the idle Gentleman say; Would God I had been a Tailer, when I was a
stealer; a Ropemaker, when as I was a Robber; a Peddler, when as I was a Pirat;
a Dier, when as I was a Dicer; a Carter, when as I was a Carder; and a
Shoemaker, when as I was a swaggerer. Would God I had been of any lawful
calling, when as I was an idle man living without all calling. And truly if a
man must render an account of every idle word he speaks in this life,
Matthew. 12.36.
at the day of judgment (as our Savior himself has said) how much more must
he render and give account of his idle living in this life at that day?
Idleness and excess (as the Prophet teaches us) were two of the sins of
Sodom; Ezekiel. 16.49.
and therefore if we would shun and eschew the fire and brimstone of Sodom,
let us shun and eschew their sins. Besides that (as the Wise man tells
us) the drunkard and the glutton shall be poor, Prou. 23.21.
and the idle sleeper shall be clothed with rags; And the laboring man that
is given to drunkenness, Eccles. 19.1. and 33 26.
shall not be rich. Thus we see then, that diligence and temperance are of
great moment, both to get and augment riches. And truly as the love of
intemperance and excess does hold the poor man from being rich, so does the
practice of excess in table or apparel make the rich man poor, as we shall
show in the declaration of the ninth Rule of this Art.

And therefore to conclude this present discourse concerning diligence in a
lawful calling, I wish the student in this Art to observe this one thing, that
except he beg daily Gods blessing to his business, his diligence and
industry will but little avail. He may well carry out much seed into the
field, Deuteronomy. 28.23.24.38. Micah. 6.14. Haggai. 1.6. Amos 4.7.8.9.
but except the Lord bless it, he shall gather but little in, for the
grasshoppers shall destroy it, or the heaven shall be as brass above it, and
the earth as iron under it, for the Lord shall withhold the first, and the
latter rain, and shall shut the windows of heaven, so that it shall be
consumed with drought: or he will open the windows of heaven in such a
manner, Joel 1. Genes. 7.11. Psalm. 107.33.34.
that either the floods shall ouerflow the fields, or the clouds shall power
down rivers of waters to drown the corns, so that the seed shall rot under
the clods; or else will he smite them with blasting and mildew; so that
howsoever he sow much, yet shall he reap but little, except the Lord bless
that which he has sown. He may well plant a vineyard, or a hopyard, and
dress it, but except the Lord bless it, he shall not drink of it, for the
worms shall eat it. He may well plant many fruit trees, fig trees, Deuteronomy.
28.39. Joel 1.4.12.
apple trees, and plum-trees; but except the blessing of the Lord be present
with his planting, swarms and armies of palmer-wormes, canker-wormes, and
caterpillars shall devout and eat up his fruits, and the buddes of his
trees. Deuteronomy. 28.18. Joel 1.4.18.19.20.
He may well enjoy heardes of cattle and flocks of sheep, but except the
Lords blessing be with the owner, he shall be cursed in them all; yea, the
Lord shall make his beasts to mourn, his cattle to consume, and his flocks
to fall away for want of pasture, which shall either not spring out of the
earth, being hard as iron, or shall be withered away through the excessive
heat, or shall be eaten up by the multitudes of grasshoppers. Zephan. 1.13.
He may well get goods, and build houses, but except the Lord bless him in
the same, his goods shall do him no good, they shall go away from him, or he
shall be spoiled of them, Prou. 28.8. Eccles. 2.26.
or he shall leave them to such as will do more good with them, then he: he
shall heap up, to give and leave to him that is good before God; and the
houses that he has builded, he and his shall not inhabit. In one word, to
speak with the Prophet Haggai, Hag. 1.6.
He may well eat, but he shall not be satisfied, nor have enough; he may
well drink, but he shall not be filled; he may well cloth himself, but
he shall not be warm; and he may well earne wages, but he shall put them
into a broken bag. And the cause of all this, is the want of the Lords
blessing. Psalm. 127.1.2.
For as the Kingly Prophet says, except the Lord build the house, they labor
in vain that build it: Except the Lord keep the city, the keeper watches in
vain. It is in vain for you to rise early, and to lie down late, and eat
the bread of sorrow: but he will surely give rest to his beloved. Not that
he will exempt them from labor, but only from the unprofitableness and
vncomfortablenesse thereof. For he will give to his beloved, that is, to such
as are dear unto him for the love and fear of his name, and do continually
beg his blessing to their adoes, he will give them rest from all,
unprofitable and uncomfortable pains taking; Leuit. 26.20.
whereas without his blessing, a man's strength shall be spent in vain. He
may well pass and spend nights and days in toiling and moiling, but he shall
reap but little profit and less comfort, let him labor never so much, and
never so long. For diligence is no better then negligence, and business is but
idleness without the Lords blessing. Psalm. 65.9.10.11.12.13. and
107.35.36.37.38.41. and 67.6.7. and 68.9.
For it is the Lords blessing that waters the earth, and makes it very rich,
even that waters abundantly the furrows of the earth, and causes the rain
to descend into the valleies thereof, and makes it soft with showers, and
droppeth fatness upon the fields, so that the hills are compassed with
gladness, the pastures are clad with sheep, and the valleies are covered with
corn, which makes men to shout for joy and sing.

IIII. Rule. The poor man must not purchase, nor the rich man increase his
riches by violence, oppression, theft, robbery, extortion, bribing, unjust
detention, neither yet by perverting of equity, as by false testimony,
pleading in an evil cause, or unrighteous judgment.
Probation, and declaration.
Exodus 22.21.22.23.24.
TThou shall not do injury to a stranger; (says the Lord by Moses) neither
oppress him; ye shall not trouble any widow, nor fatherless child. If thou
vex and trouble such, and so he call and cry unto me, I will surely hear
his cry; then shall my wrath be kindled, and I will kill you with the sword,
and you wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless. Thou shall not
overthrow the right of the poor in his suite. and 23.1.3.6.7.8.9.
Thou shall keep thee far from a false matter, and shall not slay the
innocent, and the righteous. Thou shall not receive a false tale, neither shall
thou put thine hand with the wicked, to be a false witness. Thou shall not
esteem a poor man in his cause. Leuit. 19.13.
Thou shall not oppress thy neighbor by violence, neither rob him, or do
him wrong. The workemans hire shall not abide with thee until the morning. Thou
shall not oppress an hired servant, that is needy and poor, neither of thy
brethren, nor of the stranger, that is in the land within thy gates. Deuteronomy.
14.15.
Thou shall give him his hire for his day, neither shall the sun go down
upon it, for he is poor, and therewith sustaines his life, lest he cry
against thee, unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee: and 16.19.
Wrest not thou the law (says the Lord to Lawyers and Judges) nor respect any
person, neither take reward, for the reward blinds the eyes of the wise, and
peruerteth the words of the just. God stands in the assembly of Gods, Psalm.
82.2.3.4.
(says the godly King David) he judges among Gods. How long will ye judge
unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked? do right to the poor and
fatherless, do justice to the poor and needy, deliver them, Prou. 15.25.2^
and save them from the hand of the wicked. The Lord (says wise Solomon) will
destroy the house of the proud oppressor, but he will establish the borders of
the widow. He that is greedy of gain, troubles his own house, but he that
hates gifts shall live. and 22.16.28. and 23.10.11.
Rob not the poor, because he is poor, neither oppress the afflicted in
judgment, for the Lord will revenge their cause, Deuteronomy. 28.17.
and spoil the soul of him that spoileth them. He that oppresses the poor
to increase himself, and gives unto the rich, shall surely come to poverty.
Remove not the ancient bounds, and enter not into the field of the
fatherless, for he that redeemeth them is mighty, and he will defend their
cause against thee; and cursed be he that remooueth his neighbors mark.
Prou. 3.27.28.29.
Withhold not the goods from the owners thereof, though there be power in thine
hand to do it. Say not unto thy neighbor, go and come again, and to morrow
will I give thee, if thou now have it. Intend none hurt against thy neighbor,
seeing he does dwell without fear by thee. A man cannot be established by
wickedness, and 12.3.7. and 11.4.
but the root of the righteous shall not be moved: for riches avail not in the
day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from death. He that oppresses the
poor, and 14.31. and 17.5.
reprooueth him that made him; and 15.6.27. and 13.22.
but he honors him that has mercy on the poor. The house of the
righteous has much treasure, but in the revenues of the wicked is troube:
yea, the riches of the sinner is laid up for the just. He that is greedy of
gain, troubles his own house, but he that hates gifts shall live. and
16.8. and 19.1.8. and 28.6.
Better is a little with righteousness, then great revenues without equity.
Better is the poor that walks in his uprightness, then he that peruerteth
his ways though he be rich. and 21.7.
The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them, for they have refused to
execute judgment. and 28.15.16.18.
As a roaring Lion, and an hungry Bear, so is a wicked ruler over the poor
people. A Prince destitute of understanding, is also a great oppressor, but he
that hates covetousness, shall prolong his days. He that walks vprightlie
shall be saved, but he that is froward in his ways shall once fall. There is
a generation, and 30.14.15.
whose teeth are as swords, and their chawes are are as knives, to eat up the
afflicted out of the earth, and the poor from among men. The horseleach has
two daughters, which cry, Give, give. Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause
of all the children of destruction, and 31.8.9.
open thy mouth, judge righteouslie the afflicted and the poor.

If in a country thou see the oppression of the poor, Ecclesiast. 5.7. and
7.9.
and the defrauding of judgment and justice, be not astonished at the matter:
for he that is higher then the highest regards, and there be higher then
they. Surely oppression makes a wise man mad, and the reward destroys the
heart.

Some (says the holy man Job) remove the land-markes, that rob the flocks,
Job 24.1. to 20.
and feed thereof, they lead away the ass of the fatherless, and take the
widows ox to pledge. They make the poor to turn out of the way, so that the
poor of the earth hide themselves together. Behold, others as wild asses in
the wilderness, rise earelie for a pray, they reap his provision in the
field, but they gather the late vintage of the wicked. They cause the naked to
lodge without garment, and without covering in the cold. They are wet with the
showers of the mountain, and they embrace the rock, for want of a covering.
They pluck the fatherless from the breast, and take the pledge of the poor,
they cause him to go naked without clothing, and take the gleining from the
hungry. They that make their oil between their walls, and tread their
winepresses suffer thirst: men cry out of the city, and the souls of the
slain cry out. The murderer rises early, and kills the poor and needy,
and in the night he is a thief. But their portion shall be cursed in the
earth. As the dry ground and heat consume the snow waters, so shall the grave
the sinners. The pitiful man shall forget him, the worm shall feel his
sweetness, he shall be no more remembered, and the wicked shall be broken
like a tree. and 15.21.28.34.
The destroyer shall come upon the wicked man in his prosperity, he shall not
be rich always, neither shall his substance continue, neither shall he
prolong the perfection thereof upon earth, and fire shall devour the houses of
bribes. and 20.6.7.14. to 28.
Though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto the
clouds, yet shall he perish for ever like his dung, and they which have seen
him shall say, Where is he? He has devoured substance, and he shall vomit
it, for God shall draw it out of his belly: he shall suck the gall of aspes;
he shall not see the rivers, nor the floods and streams of honey and butter:
he shall restore the labor, he shall devour no more. Even according to the
substance shall be his exchange, and he shall enjoy it no more. For he has
undone many, he has forsaken the poor, and has spoiled houses, which he
builded not; surely he shall feel no quietness in his body, neither shall
he reserve of that which he desired. There shall none of his meat be left;
therefore none of his shall hope for his goods: when he shall be filled with
his abundance, he shall be in pain, and the hand of all the wicked shall
assail him. He shall be about to fill his belly, but God shall send upon
him his fierce wrath, and shall cause to rain upon him, even upon his meat.
He shall flee from the iron weapons, and the bow of steel shall strike him
through. The arrow is drawn out, and comes forth of the body, and shines
of his gall, so fear comes upon him. All darkness shall be hid in his
secret places: the fire that is not blown, shall devour him, and that which
remains in his Tabernacle shall be destroyed. The heaven shall declare his
wickedness, and the earth shall rise up against him. The increase of his house
shall go away: it shall flow away in the day of his wrath.

Isai. 32.6.7.8.
The niggard (says Isaiah) will speak of niggardnesse, and his heart will
work iniquity, and do wickedly, and speak falsely against the Lord to make
empty the hungry soul, and to cause the drink of the thirsty to fail, for
the weapons of the churl are wicked. He deuiseth wicked counsels to undo the
poor with lying words, and to speak against the poor in judgment: but the
liberal man will devise of liberal things, and he will continue his
liberality. and 33.1.
Woe to thee that spoilest, and wast not spoiled: and do wickedly, and they
did not wickedly against thee: when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be
spoiled: when thou shall make an end of doing wickedlie, they shall do wickedly
against thee. The Lord looked for judgment, and 5.7.8.9.
but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a crying. Woe unto them
that join house to house, and lay field to field, till there be no place,
that ye may be placed by your selves in the midst of the earth. This is in
mine ears, says the Lord of hosts, surely many houses shall be desolate,
even great and fair without inhabitant. As a cage is full of birds (says the
Prophet Jeremy) so are their houses full of deceit, Ier. 5.27.28.29.
thereby they are become great, and waxen rich. They are waxen fat and shining,
they do ouerpasse the deeds of the wicked: They execute no judgment, no not
the judgment of the fatherless; yet they prosper, though they execute no
judgment for the poor. Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord? or
shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? and 22.13.
Woe unto him that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers
without equity, he uses his neighbor without wages, and gives him not for
his work. Let it suffice you, O Princes of Israel (says the Lord by his
Prophet Ezekiel) leave off cruelty and oppression, Ezekiel. 45.9*
and execute judgment and justice, take away your exactions from my people,
says the Lord.

Also the Lord complains by his Prophet Amos very earnestly of such as turn
judgment to wormwood, Amos 5.7.
and leave off righteousness in the earth: They have turned judgment into
gall, says he, the fruit of righteousness into wormwood. That is, in stead
of justice and mercy, they exercise oppression and cruelty. Ierem. 8.14. and
9.15.
And therefore what marvel though the Lord gave them water with gall to
drink, and fed them with wormwood? and 23.15.
Woe unto them (says the Prophet Micah) that imagine iniquity, Micah. 2.1.2.
and 3.2.3.9.10.11.12.
and work wickedness upon their beds, when the morning is light, they
practice it, because their hand has power, and they covet fields, and take
them by violence, and houses, and take them away, so they oppress a man and
his house, even man and his heritage. They hate the good, and love the evil,
they pluck off their skins from them, and they break their bones, and chop
them in pieces as for the pot, and as flesh within the caldron. They abhor
judgment, and pervert all equity. They build up Sion with blood, and
Jerusalem with iniquity. The heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests
thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof prophecy for money. Therefore
shall Sion for your sake be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall be an
heap, and the mountain of the house, as the high places of the forest. The
Prophet Habakuck complaininglie cries unto the Lord in this manner; Habbak.
1.1.2.3.4.13.14.15.16.17.
Why do thou show me iniquity, and cause me to behold sorrow? for spoilings
and violence are before me, and there are that raise up strife and contention.
Therefore the Law is dissolved, and judgment does never go forth: for the
wicked do compass about the righteous; therefore wrong judgment proceeds.
Thou O God art of pure eyes, and can not endure to see evil, thou can not
behold wickedness; wherefore do thou look upon the transgressors, and
hold thy tongue when the wicked deuoureth the man that is more righteous
then he? and make men as the fishes of the sea, and as the creeping things
that have no ruler over them? They take up all with the angle: they catch it in
their net, and gather it in their yarne, whereof they rejoice and are glad.
Therefore they sacrifice unto their net, and burn incense unto their yarne,
because by them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous. Shall they
therefore stretch out their net, and not spare continually to slay the
nations? Ho, and 2.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.
he that increases that which is not his, how long? That is to say, the man
that enlarges his desire as hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied,
but gathers and heapeth unto himself al things (as the Prophet speaks in
that same place) how long shall he continue his oppression? And he that
ladeth himself with thick clay? shall they not rise up suddenly that shall
bite thee? and awake that shall stir thee, and thou shall be their pray?
because thou have spoiled many nations, all the remnant of the people shall
spoil thee, because of men's blood, and for the wrong done in the land, in the
City, and unto all that dwell therein. Ho, he that coueteth an evil
covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest on high, to escape from
the power of evil. Thou have consulted shame to thine own house, by
destroying many people, and have sinned against thine own soul. For the stone
shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it.
Woe unto him that builds a town with blood, and erecteth a city by
iniquity.

I will visit (says the Lord by his Prophet Zephaniah) all those which fill
their masters houses by cruelty and deceit, Zephan. 1.9.12.13.
and the men that are frozen in their dregs. Their goods shall be spoiled,
and their houses waste; they shall also build houses, but not inhabit them; and
they shall plant vineyards, but not drink the wine thereof. Execute true
judgment (says the Lord by his Prophet Zecharie) and show mercy and
compassion every man to his brother, Zechar. 7.9.10.
and oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the strangers, nor the poor,
and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in his heart. For I will
come near to you to judgment (says the Lord by his Prophet Malachie) and I
will be a swift witness against false swearers, Malach. 3.5.
against those that keep back wrongfully the hirelings wages, and vex the
widow, and the fatherless, and oppress the stranger, and fear not me. Behold
(says Saint James) the hire of the laborers, James 5.4.
which have reaped your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries,
and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord
of hosts. Luke 6.24.
And as unto such ungodly and unjust rich men, Christ Jesus does pronounce a
terrible woe, so the holy Apostle threatens fearefullie wicked rich men in
this manner; Go to now (says he to them) weep and howl for your miseries
that shall come upon you, your riches are corrupt, Iam. 5.1.2.3.4.5.
and your garments are motheaten, your gold and silver is cankred, and the rust
of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were
fire. Ye have heaped up treasure (to wit, by violent oppression, cruel
extortion, usury and unrighteous detention) for the last days: ye have
withholden the hire of the laborers, ye have lived in pleasure on the earth,
and in wantonness, ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter,
ye have condemned and killed the just, and he has not resisted you.
Finally, the blessed Apostle Paul exhorts, 1. These. 4.6.
that no man oppress or defraud his brother in any matter, for the Lord is the
auenger of all such things. He will be avenged on all oppressors,
Godspoilers, Church-robbers, extortioners, bribers, unjust detainers, and all
such violent men, Prou. 4.17.
that (as Solomon speaks) eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine
of violence, and chiefly upon all peruerters of equity, justice and judgment.
Even upon such as imagine iniquity upon their beds, and eat the bread of
iniquity at their bords, and speak and practice iniquity at the bar, and
in the seat of judgment. In a word, the great Lawgiuer and Judge of the world
will be avenged on all lawless Lawyers, on all perverse pleaders and
proctors, and on all unjust Judges.

And therefore let all such folks as are excised and employed about laws,
justice and judgment persuade themselves of this, that the time shall come,
when a day of law shall hold, when all their tricks and entanglements, their
niceties and their nets, their deceits and their delays, their bribing and
their biting, their negligence in following and furthering a good cause, and
their diligence in an evil: And finally, their deceitful collusions, and
unlawful conclusions shall be laid open before men and Angels. Then they
shall be all tongue-tied, and shall not have so much as one word to answer or
plead for themselves. No, though all the subtlety, policy, craft and
eloquence of all the Lawyers and Judges of the world were to be found in any
one such man, yet shall he not have so much as one word to utter in his own
defense. God shall intend process against him, the Angels both good and bad
shall plead against him, so shall good and holy men: and that which is more,
his own conscience shall accuse him, yea, his own tongue shall condemn him.
So that it may be well said, that as a just Judge is a visible god, so is an
unjust Judge a visible devil. And as an upright Lawyer is an earthly Saint,
so is an unrighteous Advocate, Pleader, Proctour or Attorney, worse then an
heretic. For the heretic sins most part of ignorance; where as the
unrighteous and deceitful Lawyer sins against his knowledge both wittinglie
and willingly. For although he know his parties cause to be evil, yet
benefit and gain will make him to say, that it is good, and his adversaries
cause which he knows to be good, the same gain will make him to say, that
it is evil. In which doing, they make themselves obnoxious unto that fearful
woe pronounced by the Lord and his holy servant Isaiah, Isai. 5.18.19.20.23.
Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as with
cartropes. Woe unto them that speak good of evil, and evil of good, which
put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet,
and sweet for sour; which justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the
right of the upright or righteous man from him. Amos 5.7.
Woe unto them that decree wicked decrees, and write grievous things. As if he
should say, such Judges as turn judgment into gall, and such Lawyers as turn
the fruit of righteousness into wormwood, shall one day know, what it is to
pervert justice, equity and judgment, what it is to call evil good, and good
evil, what it is to make right wrong, and wrong right. Their delight was in
turning of things one into another; and therefore their plague shall be
conformable to the nature of their trespass: They turned good into evil, and
sweet into sour; and therefore shall God turn their sweet wine into waters
of gall, Ierem. 8.14. and 9.15. and 23.15. Job 20.16.
and their dainty cheer and pleasant bread into wormwood; they shall suck
the gall of Aspes, and the old Serpents tongue shall slay them, Isai. 66.24.
for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched. Job
15.33.34.35.
God shall destroy them, as the vine her sour grapes, and shall cast them off,
as the olive does her flower. For the congregation of the hypocrite shall be
desolate, and fire shall devour the houses of bribes. For they conceive
mischief, and bring forth vanity, and their belly has prepared deceit.
That is, their belly has made them deceivers, and double dealers, and
peruerters of equity and right, even belli-gods, who for the love of their
belly, care not a pin to displease God. and 20.12.13.14.15.23.26.
And because wickedness was sweet in their mouth, and they hid it under their
tongue, and favored it, and would not forsake it, but keep it close in their
mouth; therefore God (says the holy man) shall turn their meat in their
belly into the gall of Aspes; yea, the substance they have devoured, God shall
draw it out of their belly. So that when they shall be about to fill their
belly (with meat gotten by perverting of equity, by unrighteous pleading,
and unjust judgment) God shall send upon them his fierce wrath, and shall
cause to rain upon them, even upon their meat, yea, the fire that is not
blown, shall devour them and their belly both, and that which remains in
their Tabernacle shall be destroyed. And therefore let me say unto every
student in this Art, that which Solomon says, Prou. 2.20.21.22.
Walk thou in the way of good men, and keep the ways of the righteous. For
the just shall dwell in the land, and the upright men shall remain in it, but
the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the transgressour shall be
rooted out of it.

V. Rule. The poor man must not purchase goods, nor the rich man increase his
goods already gotten by using of usury, or false weights, by keeping of
pledges, or hording up of corn to a more dear time, and by ouerprising of
wares; by keeping or holding of whorehouses, by sinful playing and gaining,
nor yet by cosening, cogging, deceiving and lying, for all such wealth of
vanity will soon vanish.
Probation, and declaration.
Exodus 22.25.26.27. Deuteronomy. 24.12.13.
IF thou lend money to my people (says the Lord by Moses) that is, to the poor
with thee, thou shall not be as an usurer unto him, ye shall not grieve him
with usury. If thou take thy neighbors raiment to pledge, thou shall restore
it unto him before the Sun go down, for that is his covering only, and
this is his garment for his skin, wherein shall he sleep? Therefore when he
cries unto me, I will hear him, for I am merciful. Thou shall not sleep
with the poor bodies pledge, but shall restore it when the Sun goes down,
that he may sleep in his raiment, and bless thee, and it shall be
righteousness unto thee before the Lord thy God. When thou sellest ought to
thy neighbor, or buiest at thy neighbors hands, ye shall not oppress one
another. That is, neither must the seller take occasion of the buyers need, to
ouerprise his wares, above the just value; neither must the buyer take
advantage of the sellers present necessity, and so give him much less then it
is worth. Leuit. 25.36.37.
If thy brother be impouerished, and fallen in decay with thee, thou shall
relieve him, thou shall take no usury of him, nor vantage; thou shall not give
him thy money to usury, nor lend him thy victuals for increase. There shall be
no whore of the daughters of Israel, neither shall there be a whorekeeper of the
sons of Israel. Deuteronomy. 23.17.18.19.20.
Thou shall neither bring the hire of a whore, nor the price of a dog into the
house of the Lord thy God for any vow: for even both these are abomination unto
the Lord thy God. Thou shall not give to usury to thy brother; as usury of
money, usury of meat, usury of any thing that is put to usury; thou shall
not lend upon usury unto thy brother, that the Lord thy God may bless thee in
all that thou set thine hand to. Leuit. 9.3.
Ye shall have just balances, true weights, a true Ephah, and a true hin. Thou
shall not have in thy bag two manner of waights, a great and a small. Deuteronomy.
25.13.14.15.
Neither shall thou have in thine house diverse measures, a great and a small,
but thou shall have a right and a just weight, a perfect and a just measure
shall thou have, that thy days may be lengthened in the land which the Lord
thy God gives thee. He that gives not his money to usury (says the Prophet
David) nor takes reward against the innocent, Psalm. 15.5.
Prou. 12.27.
shall never be moved. The deceitful man (says Solomon) rosteth not that he
took in hunting. and 21.6.
The gathering of treasures by a deceitful tongue is vanity tossed to and fro
of them that seek death. and 13.11.
The riches of vanity shall diminish, but he that gathers with the hand
(that is, with his handie labor, and by his virtuous industry) shall increase
them. and 10.2.3.
The Lord will not famish the soul of the righteous, but he casts away the
substance of the wicked, and 19.15.
and a deceitful person shall be famished. and 20.17.
The bread of deceit is sweet to a man, but afterward his mouth is filled with
gravel. and 19.22. and 28.6.8.
A poor man is better then a liar. He that increases his riches by usury
and interest, gathers them for him that will be merciful unto the poor. and
11.1.
Diverse weights and diverse measures are both of them abomination unto the Lord;
and 16.11. and 20.10.23.
deceitful balances are not good, but a true weight and balance are of the
Lord, and a perfect weight pleases him. and 21.17. and 11.27.
He that loves pastime and play, shall be a poor man. He that withdraws
the corn, the people will curse him, but blessing shall be upon the head of
him that sells corn. The Prophet Jeremy complains of the people of the
Jews, and amongst other things of this: Ierem. 9.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.
that they did bend their tongues like bows for lies, that every brother did
use deceit, and every friend did deal deceitfully, that they taught their
tongues to speak lies, so that their habitation was in the midst of
deceivers. Shall I not visit them for these things, says the Lord? Or shall not
my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? and 17.1^.
As the Partrich gathers the young which she has not brought forth, so he
that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his
days, and at his end shall be a fool.

Hear this, Amos 8.4.5.6.7.8.
(says the Prophet Amos) O ye that swallow up the poor, that ye may make the
needy of the land to fail, saying, When will the new moon be gone, that we
may sell the corn, and the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, and make
the Ephah small, and the shekel great, and falsify the weights by deceit, that
we may buy the poor for silver and the needy for shoes, yea, and sell the
refuse of the wheat? The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, surely
I will never forget any of their works. Shall not the land tremble for this,
and every one mourn that dwells therein? Micah. 6.9.10.11.12.13.14.15
The Lords voice (says the Prophet Micah) cries unto the city, and the man
of wisdom shall see thy name: hear the rod, and who has appointed it. Are
yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and the skant
measure that is abominable? Shall I justify the wicked balances, and the bag
of deceitful weights? For the rich men thereof are full of cruelty, and the
inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their
mouth. Therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting thee, and in making thee
desolate, because of thy sins. Thou shall eat, and not be satisfied, and thy
casting down shall be in the midst of thee, and thou shall take hold, but
not deliver; and that which thou deliuerest, will I give up to the sword. Thou
shall sow, but not reap. Thou shall tread the olives, but thou shall not
anoint thee with oil, and make sweet wine, but shall not drink thereof.
Matthew. 7.2.12. Mark. 4.24. Luke 6.31.38.
And our Savior commands to give a good measure, pressed down, shaken
together, and running over, for with what measure ye mete, with the same shall
men mete to you again. And whatsoever we would that men should do to us, even
so must we do to them. Now no man would willingly that another man should
oppress, rob, extort, bribe, spoil, cosen, deceive, indamage, hurt or
impouerish him by violence, deceit, briberie, usury, exorbitant gain, or yet
by gain; and therefore according to our Saviors rule, No man ought to hurt or
indamage another man by any of the foresaid ways. For that which a man would
not have done to himself, he ought not to do it to another: and as he would
that men should do to him, so let him do to them likewise, for this is the
Law and the Prophets, says our Savior. As for usury, as it crosses the law
of nature, which suffers nothing to be empty, for we see and find, that the
air which naturally ascends, will rather descend into the hollowest places
of the earth to fill them, then suffer any void room therein; so it crosses
the law of grace, which enioyneth men to be gracious and charitable, and
commands such as have more, to give cheerefullie; or to lend freely a part
of their goods to such as have less. Give to every man that asks of thee
(says our Savior) do good, Luke 6.30.35.38.
and lend, looking for nothing again, and your reward shall be great, and ye
shall be the children of the most high. Give, and it shall be given unto you.
Give, and give chearefullie; 2. Cor. 9.7.
for God loves a cheerful giver: lend, and lend freely, looking for nothing
again; Psalm 37.21.26.
for God loves a free and a frank lender. And the righteous man (says David)
is merciful and gives, and like merciful and lends, and his seed enjoys
the blessing. Psalm. 15.1.5.
And in express terms he tells us, that the usurer shall not dwell in Gods
tabernacle, nor rest in his holy mountain. So that the Christian must beware
of usury, and of getting, or increasing goods by any such means. So must he
likewise not only in his own person flee whoredom, but also all sorts of
whoremongerie in regard of others, that he use no such abominable means to
come by money. Deuteronomy. 23.17.18.
The Lord expressly forbids there should be any whorekeeper among his people,
and tells us, that both the whore and her price are an abomination unto the
Lord. Let the whoremonger gather never so much goods by his whoremongerie, yet
both he and his wealth shall perish. Eccles. 23.17.
All bread (says Jesus the son of Syrach) is sweet to a whoremonger, he will
not leave off till he perish. Ephesians. 5.3.
And the holy Apostle forbids covetousness and uncleanness once to be
named amongst Christians, and therefore exhorts us to mortify our earthly
members fornication, Colos. 3.5.6.
uncleanness, and evil concupiscence, inordinate affection and covetousness;
1. These. 4 3.4.5.7.
for the which things (says he) the wrath of God comes on the children of
disobedience; for this is the will of God, even your sanctification, and that
ye should abstain from fornication, that every one of you should know how to
possess his vessel in holiness and honor, and not in the lust of
concupisence, even as the Gentiles which know not God: 1. Cor. 6.9.10.15 Heb.
13.4.
for God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. And as for
whores and whoremongers and adulterers, such God will judge; neither can they
inherit the Kingdom of God, says the same Apostle. That is, as the blessed
Apostle S. John expounds it, Revel. 21.8.27.
they shall not enter into the great city, holy Jerusalem, but shall have
their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death.

Now if Christians be commanded by God, by his Son Jesus Christ, and by his
servants, to mortify, fly, abhor and shun all uncleanness and
concupiscence, does it not thence most necessarily follow, that Christian
magistrates may not permit any place for the exercise thereof? And if whoredom
is not to be once named amongst Christians, how much more ought it not to be
practiced by private men, or permitted by the Prince in the commonwealth for
any respect whatsoever? and if God will judge whooremongers, and not suffer
them to enter into his holy City, and kingdom, then they that are called Gods
ought likewise to punish them, and not suffer any such persons to have any
place in their cities or kingdom: But rather with godly Iehoshaphat, 1. King.
22.40. 2. King. 23.7.
and Josiah, they ought to put clean out of the land all whooremongers and
whoorekeepers, and break down, and burn all their brothel-houses, as an
abomination unto the Lord. Far be it from all such as are called Gods, and
ought to repress and punish sin, to permit any place in their Cities or
kingdoms for the increasing of sin, and the dishonouring of God, by the
professed practice of sin. Neither does it suffice to say, that Magistrates
and Princes, for the prevention of the greater evils of private Sodomites, of
unnatural copulations, and private fornications, may permit and tolerate the
lesser evil of a public brothel-house, in some place remote from the City;
for besides that the Magistrates care and vigilance ought to be such, that
there be no enormious sin or heinous offense privately or publicly
committed, or at least left unpunished; it can not be otherwise but that one
whore-house publicly permitted, is more able to pull down Gods indignation
and judgment against the whole City or kingdom, as well Prince as people,
then an hundredth private houses being defiled can do, being either not known
unto the Magistrate, or being punished by him, if they be known: For a smaller
sin being permitted to be publickely professed and practiced, provoke God
more then a greater sin does, if it be by the Magistrate repressed and
punished, It is not in the Princes power to keep sin out of his City or
Kingdom, neither is he liable to judgment and punishment for that, which
comes not within the compass of his possibility; But it lies in his power
to keep out of his kingdom a schoole-house for sin, and a worke-house for
wickedness; and therefore if he do otherwise for any respect whatsoever, he
in so doing makes himself and his kingdom obnoxious unto Gods indignation.
In one word it is an intolerable shame, that Christians, who are called to
study and learn in Christ's school, mortification and sanctification of the
flesh, should have a school of sin opened up to them, wherein they can
learn no other thing but to offend God, to slay their own souls, to consume
their bodies, and to wast their substance, and in one word, to make shipwreck
at once of godliness, goodness and their goods. Hereunto also it belongs
that no amorous or voluptuous books, ballads, or songs, nor no lascivious and
profane plays, or representations ought or are to suffered in a Christian
Commonwealth: For as the whore-house is the devils schoole-house, and
whoremongers are the keepers and vshers of the school under the great master
thereof, the spirit of uncleanness; so amorous and lascivious books, ballads,
and songs, are the books that this unclean schoolemaister makes his scholars
buy, to teach them how to defile their bodies, and to slay their souls, that
in the end they may be made fit fuel for hellfire: And lascivious
stage plays and representations are the same unclean school-maisters sports,
pastimes, and plays, which he appoints unto his scholars, for to quicken
and encourage them, in the study and exercise of sin; Not that I mean to
condemn all exercises of stage-playings, minstrelzies, or music, for I doubt
not, but in themselves they are all lawful, and may be so used, that men may
be much furthered thereby in the way of virtue; But only that in a Christian
Commonwealth great care ought to be had, least that any of them be abused to
the stirring up, enticing or alluring of men unto sin, prophanity, vanity,
and vice. Truly in my conceit, the stories and accidents of the time past may
be represented in such manner upon the stage, that both men and women may be
more and more stirred up to love and follow virtue, and to hate and fly vice,
to fear to offend God, and to tremble at his judgments showed from time to
time upon men and women for their sins; and stage-plaies being thus used,
are in mine opinion both lawful, honest, pleasant, and profitable. But if
either the subject in part, or in whole, be lascivious and licentious, or yet
the words wherewith it is expressed, or the gestures whereby it is acted, be
either impious, irreligious, filthy, and profane, or hurtful to honest ears,
or offensive to modest eyes; then in that case, the Christian Magistrate ought
to punish all such abuses of stage-plaies: for stage-playing being thus abused,
is no better then a contemplative brothel-house. For there men are taught by
the lascivious and wanton words and gestures which they use in playing, how to
play the unclean persons, and in the brothel-house they put in practice the
sin, and wickedness which they learned at the stage, by the ear and by the
eye. And therefore I wish that all stage players should so carry themselves,
that they minister not any occasion of sin, and vice unto their auditors and
spectators, but rather help them and further them what they can, to virtuous
living, whereas otherwise by abusing their exercise to sin, both sinning
themselves and inciting others to sin, they shall heap up unto themselves
wrath against the day of wrath and endless confusion, for making an exercise
and trade of sin, to heap up unto themselves wealth and money here on earth.

Lastly, I say the Christian ought to beware, least he gather or increase his
wealth, by the endamaging and impouerishing of his neighbor through playing
and game. If no man wishes or would willingly that another should win his
money or goods, by play, then no man ought to desire to win another man's
money by that way, for it is expressly against the law of God; which bears
that the thing a man would not to be done unto himself, he ought not do it to
another. Not that I mean to condemn all playing at cards, or any such other
games as unlawful, for there is nothing more reasonable, then that a man may
well take a little of his time from his more serious affairs, for refreshing
of himself with any honest passetime, to the end he may be the better enabled
to follow the actions of his ordinary calling, and yet must it be but a little
time that is this way spent: for time is precious, and therefore ought to be
employed and spent in precious employments, neither must he make a vocation of
a recreation, or of an hours passetime, an ordinary practice, for God has not
called men to play away time, but to spend time in good and godly employments,
and to redeem time by doubling our diligence, when as we have idily misspent
any part thereof. True it is that diverse good men have thought playing at cards
altogether unlawful, in regard that they do bear in their conceit, the
nature and quality of a Lot, which being used to divine purposes, ought not to
be abused to any humane or profane action or affair. But by their leave,
their reason is not so sound as they do suppose. For if cards be lots, then it
were lawful for men to use cards in the consulting of God for the
determination of some certain doubts, as we read both in the old and the new
Testament, that lots have been used, and if this be absurd, then it follows
that they are not lottes as they do imagine. But supposing that to be true
which they say, even that cards are Lottes, I say that it does not follow, but
that they may be used in humane affairs: Prou. 18, 18.
for it is well known, that Lottes have been, and yet are lawfully used, in
civil bargains and businesses belonging to partition and division of lands,
merchandise and wares; and why may they not be likewise used in other humane
exercises of recreations and plays? Of their own nature, lottes are
indifferent, and are neither in themselves good or evil, divine or humane but
become such by the abuse or right use thereof; Even as Music which is used
both at home, for humane delight and recreation, and in Gods house, in the
divine and solemn celebration of service, and as it were absurd and
ridiculous, to think or maintain, that Music, whether in voices or
instruments, may not be used at home for humane delight, because it is used in
the house of God, to the setting forth of Gods praises; so were it a thing no
less absurd and ridiculous, to argue, that Lottes may not be used in humane
delights and recreations, because that they have been sometlme used in the
consulting of God, for the determination of certain doubts. Hence it
follows, that though cards were a kind of Lottes, yet they may be lawfully
used in exercises, of play and passetime. But in the mean time the Christian
must take diligent heed, least he abuse a lawful recreation to his own
damnation hereafter, and to the indamagement of himself or of his neighbor
here, and therefore he must not make of an hours recreation, a daily or a
nightly vocation (as I said before,) nor yet turn a matter of delight into a
matter of debate, by unchristian and uncharitable altercations, quarrellings,
and contentions; That we turn not the time of ceasing from our ordinary
actions, and of solacing our selves, into a time of sinning, by swearing,
banning, cursing, and blaspheming the blessed name of God, and of his Son
Jesus. A man also must beware, least he change the nature of the thing it
self, by making it of an excerise of pleasure and company, an exercise of
profit and commodity. For a man ought to play, only to refresh himself, not
to enrich himself by another loss, not yet to impouerish himself by
another winning; The one is unthriftiness, and does not beseem a prudent or
provident man; the other is covetousness, and does not become a Christian. So
that if men will needs play for money, it were very well done, to play for no
more, then they would willingly bestow upon the poor, and therefore Christians
shall show themselves Christians, in the very playing at cards, if they shall
agree upon converting the wager being won, into some charitable use, for the
support of the indigent brethren; If they do otherwise, they play not as
becomes Christians, but do bewray their covetous, and uncharitable
disposition, flowing from a base mind, which is so far bewitched with the
love of money, that it makes them to forget that they are Christen men. And
chiefly this ought to be the practice of all Carders, players, and gamesters,
at Christmasse, and such other Festiaull times, even to play for the poor, and
to give the gain of our gaiming to God, To the end that the poor being
supported by this means, may be the more encouraged to celebrate joyfully the
solemn time of our Saviors birth. For what thing is there more unbeseeming
Christianity, then for men to spend the days of this festival time, in
playing to gather money for themselves, and to practice either more
covetousness, or else more unthriftiness, at this time more then at any
other? What thing is there I say or can there be more vnbecomming a Christian,
then not to spend this time in the exercise of piety toward God, and of
charity toward our neighbor for his sake? Shall one Christian be so
unchristianly affected as to turn his playing with his brother into a preying
upon his brother, so that his covetousness cannot be quenched till he have
emptied his purse? Or shall the Christian play, and not show himself a
Christian in his playing, by imparting the pence he has won unto the poor?
and therefore to shut up this present discourse, as the Apostle exhorts us,
that whether we eat or drink, we do all to the glory of God, so say I of
this matter; whether we play for money, or lay money for a wager, let us
always remember to play and lay like Christian and charitable men: and in all
our actions let our piety toward God, and our charity toward our neighbors
appear.

VI. Rule. A man must not make haste to be rich, as being possessed with an
immoderate desire and love of riches, and miscarried with an excessive care to
purchase or increase wealth: But ought rather to be content with little goods
gotten with a good conscience, and enjoyed with quietness of mind, then to
purchase or possess much with an evil conscience, with strife, toil, and
trouble of spirit.
Probation and declaration.
Travail not too much to be rich (says Solomon) for riches takes her to her
wings as an Eagle, and flies into the air; Proverb. 23.4.5. and 28.20.22.
Eccles. 31.1.2.5.6. Proverb. 21.5. and 20.21.
and he that makes haste to be rich, shall not be innocent. A man with a
wicked eye hastes to riches, and knows not that poverty shall come upon
him: for whosoever is hasty comes surely to poverty. An heritage is hastily
gotten at the beginning, but the end thereof shall not be blessed. and 29.20,
See thou a man hasty in his matters, there is more hope of a fool then of
him. and 15.27,
He that is greedy of gain troubles his own house, and he that troubles
his own house shall inherit the wind. and 11.29.
An honest name is to be chosen above great riches, and 22.1.
and a good conscience is a continual feast. and 15, 15, 16, 17,
Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasures, and
troubles therewith. Better is a dinner of green herbs where love is, then a
stalled Ox, and 28, 6,
and hatred therewith. Better is the poor that walks in his uprightness,
then he that peruerteth his ways, and 17.1.
though he be rich. Better is a dry morsel, if peace be with it, then an
house full of sacrifices with strife. Ecclesiast. 4.6. Ecclesiast, 29.24 25.
Better is an handful with quietness, then two handfuls with labor, and
vexation of spirit. Better is a little with righteousness, then great
revenues without equity. Proverb. 16 8, Tobith. 1^.8. Ecclesiast. 5.9.
He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver. And he that loves
riches (meaning immoderately) shall be without the fruit thereof. Psalm 37.16.17.
A small thing unto the just man is better then great riches to the wicked and
mighty (says the holy Prophet David) for the arms of the wicked shall be
broken, and 39.6. and 49.16.17.
but the Lord vpholdeth the just man. Man walks in a shadow, and disquieteth
himself in vain, he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them,
for he shall take nothing away with him when he dies, neither shall his pomp
descend after him. Prou. 4, 17, and 23 34. Ecclesiast. 5.11
The man who eats the bread of wickedness, and drinks the wine of violence,
in his sleep is as one that sleeps in the mids of the sea, and as he that
sleeps in the top of the mast: yea the satietie of such a rich man will not
suffer him to sleep: whereas the man who is content of a little with a good
conscience, Psalm. 4.7.8.
may well say with godly King David: Thou have given me more joy of heart,
then they have had when their wheat and their wine did abound. I will lay me
down, Ecclesiast. 40, 18. and 29.25.
and also sleep in peace, for thou (O Lord) wilt make me dwell in safety. To
labor, and to be content with that a man has, is a sweet life, says
Siracides. Be it little or much, let him hold himself contented.

Godliness is great gain (says the holy Apostle Paul) if a man be content
with that he has: 1 Timothy 6.6.7.8.9.10.
for we brought nothing into the world, and it is certain that we can carry
nothing out. Therefore when we have food and raiment, let us therewith be
content. For they that will be rich, fall into tentations and snares, and into
many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction.
For the desire of money is the root of all evil, which while some lusted
after, they erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows. And in another place he wills that covetousness should not be once
named amongst Christians, Ephesians 5.3.5. 1. Cor. 6.10.
and tells us that a covetous man is an idolater, and that he shall not
inherit the kingdom of God, meaning that the covetous man's God is his gold,
as the gluttons God is his belly. The one is well called a belly-god, and the
other may be rightly called a pelfe-god, or if ye will, a gold-god. The ones
religion is belly-goddisme, and Epicurisme, Soul, eat, drink, and take thy
rest, for thou have much meat laid up for many years. The others religion is
little differing, but in name, from the first, and is gold-goddisme: Soul,
take thy rest and be merry, for thou have much money and gold laid up for many
years. As this man's gold is his God, so his house is his heaven, his bed is
his Abraham's bosom, his board is to him the banquet of the Lamb, his praying
is his playing, his misdeeds are all his almesdeedes, his fasting is his
feasting, and his temporal fullness is his eternal felicity. Mark 4, 18.19.
Wherefore our Savior teaches us, that the immoderate cares of the world, and
the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things, choke the seed
of the word, sown by the spiritual Sower, and make it unfruitful. Math.
26.27.28.29.30.31.32.33.34. Luke 21 34. and 13.22.29.
And therefore he would have us to be so far and free from all excess of
care for worldly things, that he forbids us to be grievously careful for
the morrow, and for this life, what we shall eat, or what we shall drink, or
what we shall put on, for our heavenly Father (says the Son) knows that we
have need of all those things. Philip. 4.6.
Be nothing careful (says the Apostle) but cast all your care on God, for
he cares for you. Heb 13.5.
Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with those
things that ye have; for he has said: I will not fail thee, Psalm. 55, 22.
and 107.9.
neither forsake thee. Cast thy burden upon the Lord (says the holy Prophet)
and he shall nourish thee: for he satisfies the thirsty soul, and fills
the hungry soul with goodness. and 65.9.10.11.12.13.
He visits the earth, and waters it, he makes it very rich: the River of
God is full of water, and he prepares men corn. He waters abundantly the
furrows of the earth, and causes the rain to descend into the valleys
thereof. He makes it soft with showers, and blesses the bud thereof. He
crowns the year with his goodness, and his steps drop fatness. They
drop upon the pastures of the wilderness, and the hills are compassed with
gladness. The pastures are clad with Sheep, the valleys also are covered
with corn, therefore the shout for joy, and sing. As it is he that gives
deliverance unto Kings, and 144.10.11.12.13.14.
and rescueth David his servant from the hurtful sword, and makes our sons
to be as the plants growing up in their youth, and our daughters as the
corner-stones graven after the similitude of a palace. So is it he that makes
our corners to be full and abounding with diverse sorts, and that our Sheep
may bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets; and 145, 15.16.
and that our Oxen may be strong to labor. Finally, the eyes of all wait
upon him, and he gives them their meat in due season, he opens his hands,
and fills all things living of his good pleasure. Wherefore let the Christian
learn to depend upon Gods providence, and to cast all his care upon him; Phil.
3.11.12.
let him study and endeavor with the holy Apostle, in whatsoever state he be,
therewith to be content, even as well to have want, as to have wealth, to be
bare, as to abound. And with the holy Prophet, Psalm. 119.36.
let him always pray: Incline mine heart Lord unto thy testimonies, and not
unto covetousness.

VII. Rule. The man that would be rich, must before all other things, and more
then all other things, with great feruency and constancy crave at God
spiritual blessings; and when he has gotten riches as he must not set his
affection thereupon in loving them too much, so he must not put his affiance or
confidence in them by trusting to them, or glorying and boasting himself of
them: Neither must he murmr against God if he afflict him by the loss of a
part thereof, or yet of the whole; but ought to bear his cross patiently and
valiantly. Finally, he must love his riches so little in comparison of Christ,
and the salvation of his own soul that (if the cause and occasion offer it
self) he be content to forsake all for Christ's sake, and for the saving of
his own soul.
Probation and declaration.
Math. 6.33. Luke 12.29.30.31.
SEekee ye first (says our Savior) the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things (to wit, food and raiment, and such other
external commodities of this life) shall be ministered unto you. And the
Apostle exhorts us to set our affections on things which are above, Colos.
3.2. 1 Timothy 4.8.
and not on things which are on the earth. For godliness is profitable unto
all things, as that which has the promise of the life present, and of that
that is to come. Psalm 119.165.
They that love thy law (says the holy Prophet David) shall have great
prosperity. And because that Solomon asked of God, 2 King. 3.5.9.10.11.12.13.
not long life, nor riches, nor the life of his enemies, but only an
understanding heart to judge his people. Therefore said the Lord unto him:
Behold I have done according to thy words, lo, I have given thee a wise and an
understanding heart: so that there has been none like thee before thee,
neither after thee shall arise the like unto thee. And I have also given thee
that which thou have not asked, both riches and honor, so that among the Kings
there shall be none like unto thee all thy days. If riches increase, (says
the holy Prophet) set not your heart thereon. Psalm 62.10. and
49.6.10.11.12.16.17.
The wicked trust in their goods, and boast themselves in the multitude of
their riches, they think their houses and habitations shall continue for ever,
and call their lands by their names, but they shall die like the beasts, and
leave their riches for others; they shall take nothing away with them when they
die, neither shall their power descend after them. and 52.5.6.7.
The man that trusts unto the multitude of his ^iches, Pruerb. 11.28.
Ecclesiastic. 5.1.8. and 31.8. Ecclesiast. 5.9.
shall be rooted out of the land of the li^ing. He that trusts in his riches
(says Solomon) shall fall, but the righteous shall flourish like a ^eafe. He
that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver, and he that loves
riches shall be without the fruit thereof. Job. 31.24.25.26.27.28.
The holy man Job protests ^f himself that he made not gold his hope, nor
^et said ever at any time to the wedge of gold: Thou art my confidence. That he
never boasted ^imselfe, because his substance was great, or because his hand
had gotten much: for in so doing says he) I should have denied the God above.
And the same holy man, notwithstanding he was the richest of all the men of
the East, and 1.3.4.20.21. Job, 42.10.12.
(for his substance besides money, houses, and lands, was seven thousand
sheep, and three thousand Camels, and five hundredth yoke of Oxen, and five
hundredth she Asses) yet when God suffered him to be spoiled and denuded of all,
he fell not into murmuring, and grudging impatiently against God; but fell
down upon the ground, and worshipped God, saying: Naked came I out of my
mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither. The Lord has given, and the
Lord has taken it; blessed be the name of the Lord. And we find also that God
did reward him for his patience, for he gave him twice so much as he had
before, and blessed his last days more then his first. Ierem. 9.23.24.
Let not the wise man (says the Lord by the Prophet Jeremy) glory in his
wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his strength, neither the rich man glory
in his riches, but let him that glories glory in this, that he understands
and knows me: for I am the Lord which shows mercy, judgment, and righteousness
in the earth, for in these things I delight, says the Lord. Trust not unto thy
riches, and say not, I have enough for my life (says Jesus the son of
Sirach: Ecclesiast. 5.1. and 31.8. and 2.4.5.6.
) blessed is the rich which is found without blemish, and has not gone after
gold, nor hoped in money and treasures. Whatsoever comes unto thee, receive
it patiently, be patient in thy change into affliction, for as gold and silver
are tried in the fire, even so are men acceptable in the furnace of adversity:
believe in God, and he will help thee, order thy way aright, and trust in him,
hold fast his fear, and grow old therein.

Hereby Christians are taught, not to grudge against God, if at any time he
cross us in our prosperity, and take from us our substance, whether in part,
or whole: yea we ought to confide so far in Gods goodness, that he will
send us again, that which he has taken from us, and restore it with
advantage, if he sees that it shall be expedient for us, and profitable for
our souls health. Otherwise we ought to think that it is far better for us
to want goods, then to be void of goodness, and that our case is more blessed
to lack or loose goods, then to enjoy them, and withal to abuse them to
luxury, superfluity, licentiousnes, and sin. Psalm. 119.71, and 94.12. Heb.
2.10.18. Act. 14.22. Eccles. 2.4.5.6.
It is good for me (says holy David) that I have been afflicted, that I may
learn thy statutes. And blessed is the man whom thou chastisest, o Lord, and
teach him in thy law. And therefore the blessed Apostle tells us, that by
affliction we are made like to the Son of God: yea that we must through many
afflictions enter into the kingdom of God. Our most wise and bountiful Father
knows best what is best for his childrens behoof. Neither ought the virtuous
minded man think any whit the worse of himself for his want of wealth, or yet
be dejected in courage therefore, as though he were by reason of his indigence,
less in Gods favor, then others that do abound. Neither must we measure Gods
favor with the yard or ell of earthly prosperity. For the Prophet David
tells us, Psalm. 10 4.5.6. and 37.7.35. and 73 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
that the wicked and his ways do prosper oftentimes; so that he says in his
heart, he shall never be moved nor be in danger; yea he is strong, and
spreads himself like a green baie tree: there are no bands in their death,
but they are lusty and strong, they are not in trouble as other men, neither
are they plagued with other men, their eyes stand out for fatness, they have
more then heart can wish, they are licentious and speak wickedly, they talk
presumptuously, they set their mouth against heaven, and their tongue walks
through the earth: Lo these are the wicked (says David) yet prosper they
always and increase in riches. And the holy Prophet Jeremy questioneth the
Lord about the same matter in this manner; Ierem. 12.1, 2.
Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper, why are all they in wealth that
rebelliously transgress? thou have planted them, and they have taken root,
they grow and bring forth fruit, thou art near in their mouth, and far from
their reins. Likewise the holy man Job shows us in very large and ample
manner the wickeds prosperity; Job 21.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
They live and wax old, and grow in wealth, their seed is established in
their sight, their houses are peaceable without fear, and the rod of God is
not upon them, their bullock gendreth and fails not, their cow calueth and
casts not the calfe, they send forth their children like sheep, and their
sons dance; they take the tabret and the harp, and rejoice in the found of
the organs; they spend their days in wealth, and suddenly they go down to
the grave. Thus we see, that even the wicked, and such as blaspheme God, and
oppress the poor, may enjoy great prosperity and wealth for a time. And
truly it shall be no more but for a time: for as the same two holy men teach
us, Psalm. 10.15. and 37 9, 10, 17, 20, 34, 36. and 52.5. and 7.3, 18, 19, 20.
Job 21, 17, 18, 19, 20, 30. and 27.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20
The Lord will break the arm of the wicked, God shall cut off him and his
seed, he shall destroy him for ever, he shall pluck him out of his Tabernacle,
and root him out of the land of the living: he shall pass away and perish,
and shall not be found any more, he shall be suddenly destroyed, horribly
confounded, and his image shall be despised. The candle of the wicked shall be
put out, they shall be as stubble before the wind, and as chafe that the
storm carries away, they are kept unto the day of destruction, and they shall
be brought forth to the day of wrath. The sword shall destroy his children, and
his posterity shall not be satisfied with bread. Though he should heap up
silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay, he may prepare it, but
the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver. Terrors
shall take him as waters, and a tempest shall carry him away by night. And as
the wicked oftentimes enjoy great plenty and prosperity, so have many of the
godly many times been afflicted with penury, poverty, and want. And yet for
all this, God left not off to love them most dearly. For their adversity,
affliction, and trouble, they were not a whit the less beloved of God, but
rather the more, according to that saying of the holy man Job, Job 5.17.
Blessed is the man whom the Lord corrects. And therefore not only wise king
Solomon, Prou. 3.11, 12. Heb. 12.5.6, 7.8.9.10, 11.
and the holy Apostle Paul, but also our Savior himself teaches us, that the
Lord corrects him whom he loves, even as the father does the child in whom
he delights. Also the same Apostle tells us, Revel. 3.19.
that many of the children of God of the old times were brought to such a
pinch, that they were bitten with poverty and want, Heb. 11.36.37.38.
for they wandered (says he) up and down in sheep skins, and in goats
skins, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented: they wandered in
wildernesses, and mountains, and dens, and caves of the earth, obnoxious
unto racking, mocking, scourging, chaining, imprisoning, stoning, hewing, and
slaying with the sword.

And what was the poverty of Christ Jesus the Son of God, in his birth,
life, and death, it is more then manifest; 2. Cor. 8.9.
for he being rich (as Lord of heaven and earth) became poor for our sakes
(says the Apostle) that we through his poverty might be made rich. Matthew.
1.16.20. and 13.55.
He was so poor in the time and manner of his birth, that he was laid in a
cratch, Luk 2.4.5.6.7. Mark. 6.3.
even in a stable among oxen and asses, folded and swathed in clothes of little
price. The house wherein he was borne was a base Inn, yea a stinking stable.
The cradle wherein he was laid was a cratch, a place more fit for beasts to
eat in, then for the Son of God to lie in. His mother that bare him, though
descended of noble lineage, yea of royal blood, was also abject and poor, both
in her own person, and in her fortune. For she was betroathed to a poor
Carpenter, Joseph, a tradesman, though descended of the noble house and lineage
of King David. Hence it was that the Jews called our Savior Christ in
contempt, the Carpenter, and the Carpenters son. In his life he was so
poor, Matthew. 8.20. Luke 9.58.
that he had not a hole to hide his head in, or a bed to rest his body on,
whereas the Foxes of the field had their holes, and the birds of the heaven had
their nests. Matthew. 27.55.
So that it behooued certain godly women of Galile to minister of their
substance for the releeuing of his necessity. Luke 8.2.3.
Finally, in his death he was so poor, that he had not so much money as to
buy himself a winding sheet, or to defraie the charges of his burial, till
there came a rich man of Arimathea, Matthew. 27.57.58, 59, 60.
named Joseph, who took the naked body of poor Jesus, and wrapped it in a
clean linen cloth, and put it in the self same new tomb which he had
hewn out in a rock for himself. A happy rich man in so doing: and therefore
such a rich man, as all rich men that desire to be happy ought to imitate, and
do imitate, when as upon their own charges (as godly Tobias did) they do
bury the bodies of the poor members of Jesus, who shall one day, Tobit. 1.
Matthew. 25.34.35.36.37.38.39.40.
even in that great day, acknowledge all the good, good rich men have done to
good poor men, as if they had done it unto himself, and withal recompense
their charity with an inestimable reward.

And as for the Apostles, how poor and indigent they were, Mat. 4, 18, 29.20
21, 22. Mark 1, 16, 17.18, 19, 20. Luke 5, 8, 9, 10 11, 28, Math. 10.2, and
19, 24, 27, 28.29 Mark. 10, 28, 29, 30, Luke 18, 28.
no man does know; poor Fishermen they were for the most part, who yet
forsook their nets, and all that they had to embrace Christ's poverty, who was
yet poorer then they, and followed him. Likewise Matthew the Customer, as soon
as Christ said unto him, follow me, left all, rose up and followed him.
Whereupon the prime of the Apostles, in the name of the rest, said unto our
Savior on a time, when as he had discoursed of the difficulty of rich men's
salvation: Behold we have forsaken all, and followed thee, what shall we have?
And Jesus answered: Verily I say unto you, that when the Son of man shall sit
in the throne of his Majesty, ye which followed me in the regeneration, shall
sit also upon twelve Tribes of Israel. And whosoever shall forsake houses or
lands for my names sake, and the Gospels, he shall receive more in this world,
yea an hundredth fold more, and shall inherit everlasting life.

Whereby Christians are taught to be ready and willing to forsake all their
goods, be they never so precious and copious, rather then to forsake God, and
a good conscience, to leave their inheritance on earth, rather then their
inheritance in heaven, and to loose the life temporal rather then the
eternal. Math, 16, 25, 26, and 10, 39, Mark, 8, 35, 36, 37. Luke 9, 23, 24,
25, 26,
For whosoever will save his life, (says our Savior) shall loose it, and
whosoever shall loose his life for my sake, shall find it. For what shall it
profit a man though he should win a whole world, if he loose his own soul?
or what shall a man give for recompense of his soul? And if the man that
loves father or mother, or yet his own life, more then Christ, Math. 10, 37,
38, 39. Luke 14, 26,
is not worthy of Christ (as himself says:) How shall that man be worthy of
the eternal inheritance, that loves the temporal inheritance better then it?
And truly whosoever will be loath to leave and loose his worldly wealth, for to
follow Christ, and to save his own soul by embracing the Gospel, will be
much more loath to lay down his life for Christ's sake and the Gospels in the
time of persecution. And with what face can such a man claim or crave at Gods
hands, the life eternal, that will not for his sake, leave, or lay down his
life temporal?

Thus we see that rich men must be so far from loving their riches too much,
Math, 13, 20, 21 Mark, 4, 16.17, Luke 8 13, 1 Timothy, 1, 29,
and trusting unto them, that they should resolve with themselves rather to
leave and loose their gold, then God and godliness, rather to forsake their
whole goods, then to fall from the faith, or to make shipwreck of a good
conscience, to exempt themselves from persecution, and to the end they may
possess in peace their worldly commodities. Ephesians. 5, ^. Colos, 3, 5,
Godless rich men they are, who will prefer earthly trash before heavenly
treasure, goods before goodness, and gold before God; whose God is their belly,
1 Timothy, 6, 5, Philip, 3.19,
and all their godliness is gain, and their religion golden idolatry, goldisme,
or belly-godisme, (for so may their irreligious religion be well called) whose
glory is to their shame, and whose end is damnation, says the Apostle. Exodus
32.31.
Oh said Moses unto the Lord, this people have sinned a great sin, and have
made them Gods of gold. And may not the like be well said of godless rich men,
that make gold their God; yea make a God of their belly, which is yet a more
base stuff, and are guilty of a kind of idolatry, which is the basest of all
other. And therefore the holy Apostle bids the godly Bishop of Ephesus,
Timothy: 1 Timothy 6.17.
Charge them that be rich in this world, that they be not high minded, and
that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God, which gives
us abundantly all things to enjoy. And it is to such godless rich men that
the holy Apostle, and first Bishop of Jerusalem, S. James, cries out, saying:
Iam. 5.2.3.
Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl for the miseries that shall come upon
you; your riches are corrupt, and your garments are moatheaten, your gold and
silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your flesh as it were fire: ye have heaped up treasures for the
last days. And in another place he speaks of such godless rich men in this
manner: and 1.10.11.
For as when the Sun rises with heat, then the grass withers, and his
flower falls away, and the beauty of the fashion of it perishes: Even so
shall the rich man fade away in all his ways. Luke 16.13.
No man (says our Savior, the great Bishop of our souls) can serve God and
riches. And it is to such seruers, and immoderate lovers of riches, and 6.24.25.
that he says: Woe be to you that are rich, for ye have received your
consolation. Woe be to you that are full, for ye shall hunger. Finally it is
chiefly of such as trust in their riches, and serve them, and love them more
then God, or their poor brethren, Mat. 19.23, 24.
that our Savior gives out this verdict: Verily I say unto you, that a rich
man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven: yea I say unto you again,
Mark 11.23. Luke 12.5. and 18.24.
it is easier for a Camel, or a Cable-rope to go through the eye of a needle,
then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. Wherefore take heed,
and beware of covetousness, (says our Savior) for though a man have
abundance, yet his life stands not in his riches.

VIII. Rule. The man that would procure Gods blessing for the augmentation, and
conservation of his store, both to himself and to his posterity, must show
himself thankful to God in blessing and praising him for his benefits, and in
giving unto God that which is Gods, to wit, first fruits and tithes unto his
Friests, and likewise in giving unto Caesar that which is Caesar's. That is to
say, he must give unto the prince (but chiefly if he be a Christian Prince) as
being Gods great Minister and Deputy for the good government of his people, be
they Ecclesiastical or secular persons, a proportionable proportion of his
goods, tribute, and subsidy, whenever he stands in need. And this ought
each one to do with all possible good will, readiness, and cheerfulnes of
mind, without grudging resisting, and rebelling, love we our wealth never so
well.
Probation and Declaration.
When thou have eaten and filled thy self (says Moses) Deuteronomy. 8.10, 15, 12,
13, 14.
thou shall bless the Lord thy God, for the good land which he has given
thee, beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, least when thou have eaten,
and filled thy self, and have builded goodly houses, and dwelt therein, and
thy beasts, and thy sheep are increased, and thy silver and gold is
multiplied, and all that thou have is increased, then thine heart be lifted up.
Prou. 3.9.10.
Honor the Lord with thy riches (says Solomon) and with the first fruits of
all thine increase, so shall thy barnes be filled with abundance, and thy
press shall burst with new wine. Above all things (says Jesus the son of
Sirach) give thanks unto him that has made thee, Eccles 32.14. and 7.29.30.
and replenished thee with his goods. Fear the Lord with all thy soul, and
honor his Ministers; Love him that made thee, with all thy strength, and
forsake not his servants. Exodus 22.28.29
Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people, (says the Lord by his
servant Moses) thine abundance and thy liquor shall thou not keep back.

Whereby we are given to understand, that we must not think, or speak
irreverently of the Prince, for craving of subsidy, or requiring of tribute:
neither must we deny him, or keep back from him a part and portion of our
store, if he stand in need thereof, or require it at our hands, as also we must
beware, least by our murmuring against the Ruler we do procure unto our
selves at Gods hands, the diminution of our abundance and store. Math
22.17.21. and 17.24, 25, 26.27.
And therefore our Savior being asked concerning the paying of tribute to
Caesar, answered thus: Give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto
God, the things which are Gods. Luke 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
Likewise the holy Apostle exhorts men to all dutifulness, and obedience in
the behalf of Princes. Romans 13, 1.5.6.7.
Let every soul (says he) be subject unto the higher powers, not because of
wrath only, but also for conscience sake. For this cause (says he) ye pay
also tribute, for they are Gods ministers, applying themselves for the same
thing. Give therefore to all men their duty, tribute to whom ye owe tribute,
custom, to whom custom, fear, to whom fear, honor to whom ye owe honor. He
also enioyneth Titus the first Bishop of Crete, Tit. 3.1, 2.
to put the people in remembrance that they should be subject to the
principalities and powers, and that they be obedient and ready to every good
work.

And truly if it be a good work for the brother to relieve the brother in his
need with a portion of his goods, it cannot but be a far better work for
the children to releive the parent in his need. Now the Prince is the parent
of the patrie, and the great and common father of this great family, the
subjects are the Princes children, and therefore they are bound to impart unto
him a part and portion of their goods, when as his need presses him to
require the same at their hands. And the Apostle telling us that Princes are
Gods Ministers, in the very leuying and taking of tribute, does teach us that
when we pay tribute unto Princes, or afford them any such furtherance,
subsidy, or relief, that we do it not so much unto them as unto God
himself. For what good office soever we perform at any time unto Gods
Ministers, but chiefly to his chief Minister, that he does repute as done
unto himself. And therefore we ought to obey the Prince in this duty as in
all other, not only for fear of his anger and indignation, but also for the
conscience we must make of our Christian vocation, and subiectionall condition.
1 Pet. 2.17.
Fear God, honor the King, says the blessed Apostle S. Peter. An exhortation
worthy of all Bishops, Prelates, and Patriarchs, to whom it does belong
especially to exhort, persuade, and encourage the subjects of all Christistian
Kings to loialty, reverence, and obedience in their behalf. We must honor the
Prince in the worthy and reverent opinion of our minds, in the respectfull and
dutiful speeches of our mouths, in the submisse and humble gesture of our
bodies: and lastly, Prou. 3.9, 10. Exodus 22.8. Psalm. 82.1.6. Ioh. 10.34.35.
as we must honor God with our riches, and the oblations of our hands, so must
we likewise them whom God has called Gods: to wit, godly Princes, whom when
as we honor with our riches, in giving them cheerfully a portion for their
honorable provision, then we honor God himself with our riches, as Solomon
exhorts all men to do that would have God to bless them with abundance.
And truly if we would be loath to let God want (if he were subject to want
in his own person, as man is, then ought we likewise be loath to let the
Prince want, who represents God, and therefore is called God (to teach us)
that what we bestow upon him we offer unto God) and in whose person God
oftentimes carries himself as one that wants, and stands in need of our
help. And if we would willingly, cheerfully, and without murmuring bestow
upon our most bountiful father, our goods, in whole or in half, then truly
we ought not to murmr or grudge to bestow upon Princes, (whom God has
called by the name of the children of the most high) a convenient portion of
the same, at least, for their fathers sake. Psalm. 82.6.
So that a Christian subject, when he sees a king, chiefly a Christian king,
and such a one as besides his power is adorned with the divine qualities of
wisdom, bounty, justice, and mercy, he ought to think with himself, that
he sees God in man's likeness. And when such a one asks a Subsidy, or any
such relief at his subjects hands, he ought to show himself as willing and
ready thereunto, as he should if God himself in a man's likeness were come
down amongst men to crave a sacrifice or oblation at their hands.

And though it be true, that Almighty God does not stand in need of any thing
we have, (for he is all-sufficient in himself) yet we must think that it is
his pleasure to carry himself as one that does need oftentimes in the persons
of the Prince, the Priests, and the Poor. And this he does, to try whether
we love Almighty God and our neighbor better then our goods, or no, and to
know by the effect, if we have as yet attained to this perfection, as to give
unto God all that we have, if he should require it at our hands. For the man
that will grudge to give a part unto Gods image and chief minister for his
sake, will never be willing to forsake all for Gods sake: no, he would never
be willing to bestow his whole goods upon God himself, that will refuse or
repine to give a part unto his chief minister. And contrariwise, the man that
does cheerfully bestow upon the prince, in regard that he is Gods image and
deputy, does evidently show that he loves God better then his goods, and
goodness better then his goods, and that he would make no difficulty to
bestow most willingly all that he has upon God; yea to forsake his whole
goods for Gods sake. Wherefore if we resolve to give cheerfully unto Gods
Vicar for his sake, a proportionable portion of our goods, he will both account
it as given unto himself, and will reward the giver for his gift, 2. Cor. 9.7.
Philip. 2.14.
and for his cheerful giving likewise; for God loves a cheerful giver, and
therefore wills us to do all things without murmuring and reasoning, he
will reward him with increase of goods and goodness in this life, and with
fullness of glory in the life to come. Kings be also called Gods, for that
they must excel all other men, as in power, so likewise in beneficence: so
that the Prince, as he shall have cause and occasion, may lawfully ask,
crave, and receive a part of his richer subjects goods, and give of the same to
such as are poorer. And this he may do, yea and ought to do, to the end his
beneficence and bounty (wherein he must resemble God most of all other) may
be showed and continued, Psalm. 112.9. 2. Cor. 9.9.
and that it may be said and sung of him, he has distributed and given to the
poor, his righteousness and benevolence remains for ever, his horn shall
be exalted with glory. In one word, to the end that both his poorer subjects
may be relieved, and his faithful servants may be rewarded.

Princes are likewise called Gods, to show us that they have a right, I say
not unto all, but unto a certain part of each of their subjects goods. For as
I would be loath to flatter the prince and wrong the people, by affirming or
maintaining the extent of his right and interest to the bodies and whole goods
of his subjects (for the most absolute Prince that is, must not think himself
so absolute: and as it were a ridiculous thing to subject the prince to his
subjects laws, so were it an impious crime, to exempt him from Gods laws) as
I would be loath, I say, to flatter the prince, and wrong the people, by
affirming his right to their whole goods, so would I be loath to flatter the
people, and wrong the Prince, by denying his right to a proportionable part of
their goods. And therefore as God does require at his peoples hands, for the
maintenance of his ministers, first fruits, because he is the first, and tithes
because he is the last (as an ancient writer yields the reason) and that in
name of an annual and perpetual rent, and in token of a double
acknowledgement we owe him: the one, that he is alpha and omega, the beginning
and the ending, the first and the last: the other, that all that we have, we
have it and hold it of him. So Princes, who are called Gods, of God himself,
and are his immediate subjects, and his subjects only, and are liable, if they
offend, to the punishment of his hand only, they may justly claim and require
at their subjects hands a competent portion of their goods, for the maintenance
of themselves, their families, and servants, as the holy Prophet Samuel
describing the quality and privilege of an absolute Prince, does abundantly
testify. For the holy Prophet dissuading the Israelites from the seeking of a
King as yet, 1. Sam. 8.14.15.16.17.
and before the convenient time (for as yet the time was not come that God
should set his servant David above them, who was to be the first elected King
of Israel with Gods absolute approbation, and the type and forefather of the
king of kings, according to the flesh) tells them before hand what power he
should have over them and their goods. And namely, that he would not only take
their fields and their vineyards, and give them to his servants, meaning, in
case they did heinously offend against his laws, (for as God is the Lawgiver
of Kings, so are Kings the Law-giuers of their people) but also yearly ask and
take the tenth of their corns, of their vineyards, of their fruits, and of
their flocks, for the maintenance of himself, and of his servants. And yet in
all this, the holy man painteth out no usurping or vntitular tyrant, Verse. 18.
but even an orderly elected king, that is, such a king as they themselves with
a common consent should receive: neither yet any practical tyrant, Verse. 11.
or tyrannizing king: but even such a king as should reign over them, and not
tyrannize over them; as should rule them, and not ruinate them. To which
purpose the words of the Prophet are most perspicuous and clear, read them
who will.

But hereof we shall entreat more fully in our Alboni, or Pattern of a perfect
Subject; wherein we shall God-willing discourse substantially and soundly of
the several duties of subjects, in the behalf of Princes. And out of doubt,
their first king Saul reigned in this manner over them, and yet we find him
not blamed for any tyrannical oppression, extortion, or exaction practiced
upon his people: whereof, if he had been guilty, it should have been
recorded, no doubt, amongst his other grievous trespasses. Likewise king David,
who was their first king, by Gods absolute approbation (and therefore the
spirit of God has begun with David the first Book of the Kings) even a man
after Gods own heart, 1. Sam. 13.14.
no doubt he exercised the same power over his people: 1. Chro. 27.1, 25, 31.
as may appear by the monthly courses of his officers appointed over the
treasures in the fields, in the cities, and in the villages, for the
collection, custody, and dispensation of his substance.

And as for Solomon, king David's son and successor, it is more then manifest,
that he did put in practice this foresaid kingly power, 1. King. 4.7, 22, 23,
27, 28.
described by the Prophet, in taking order for the monthly provision of his
house, by his twelve officers, whom he appointed each man his month to provide
victuals in the diverse parts and quarters of his kingdom, for himself, and
all that came to his table. And who will, or dare say, that Solomon in so doing
played the tyrant? 1. King. 10.23.
was he not a wise King, and so wise that he excelled all the kings of the
earth, no less in wisdom then in wealth? and being so wise as he was, did he
not know well enough what was both fit for a King to require at his subjects
hands, and what was fit for subjects to impart to their Prince? yea, was he not
a just king, and one that did govern his people, as with wisdom, so also
with equity and justice? shall we think that king David's prayer for the
prosperous estate of his son Solomon and of his kingdom, was frustrate and
without effect? Give thy judgments to the king, Psalm. 72.1, 2, 3.4.12.13, 14.
O God, and thy righteousness to the kings son: Then shall he judge thy
people in righteousness, and thy poor with equity: the mountains and the
hills shall bring peace to the people by justice. He shall judge the poor of
the people, he shall save the children of the needy, and shall subdue the
oppressor; he shall deliver the poor when he cries, the needy also, and him
that has no helper, he shall be merciful to the poor and needy, and shall
preserve their lives, he shall redeem them from deceit and violence, and
dear shall their blood be in his sight. Shall we think I say, that the holy
Prophets prayer and prediction touching the excellency of his sons, godly,
just, and peaceable government, was either false, or of none effect? God
forbid: far be it from us to think that God would have chosen an oppressor
of his people to be a type of the king of righteousness, to be his son, 1 Chronicles, 22.9, 10.11. and 28.5.6, 10.
and to build the house of his sanctuary. He asked of God wisdom and
understanding to do judgment, and to rule and judge his people aright, 1.
King. 3.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.28.
and the Lord granted him his petition, and gave him besides great wisdom,
even honor and riches also: and it is said, that the people saw that the
wisdom of God was in him to do justice, so that they feared the King.

Wherefore we must not think that he was guilty of tyranny, oppression, or
exaction in the behalf of his people: but rather that his leuying of the
Tenths of his subjects substance, was an effect of his divine wisdom, and the
lawful means whereby he gathered together so much wealth, and so great
riches as he did, 1 King 9.20.21.
together with the tribute he did receive at the hands of many other nations.

And it is to be noted, that the people of Judah and Israel by their cheerful
readiness and willingness in yielding unto Solomon their king the Tenthes of
their fruits and of their flocks, for the monthly provision of his household,
procured at Gods hands the blessing of great prosperity, security, and peace,
which he powered upon Israel and Judah in Salomons days. 1 Chronicles. 22.9. 1
King. 4.20.25.
They multiplied as the sand of the sea in number, eating, drinking, and making
merry. They dwelt without fear, every man under his vine, and under his fig
tree, from Dan even to Beersheba, all the days of Solomon: 1. King. 10.21, 27.
during the which, there was so great wealth, that he made silver as plentious
as stones in Jerusalem.

And though after the death of Solomon the people did insinuate unto his son
Rehoboam, 1. King. 12.1, 2, 3, 4, 11, 14.
the grieuousnesse of the yoke his father had put upon them in his life, and
therefore did present a petition unto him for the lightening thereof, at his
entering to the crown: yet we find no mention made of any such murmuring of
the people against Solomon, in the time of his own reign. And therefore we
may well think, that the people made this complaint and petition, not so much
as for that they had any just cause (for as I said before, Solomon was no
tyrant, nor yet an unjust exacting king) as for that they were become more
covetous after the death of Solomon, then they had been in the time of his
life; and together more factious and seditious then they had been before.

Where it is to be noted, that the Lord punished this their covetous and
grudging disposition, with the diminution of their wealth; so that their
condition became much unlike unto that it had been in the days of Solomon. 1.
King. 12. 2. Chron. 10. and 11. and 12.
Besides, that this their preposterous love of commodity, brought them into
the guilt of two grievous sins, of Rebellion from their lawful king, and of
idolatrous defection from the true worship of Almighty God. So that not
without cause the holy Apostle calls the love of money 1. Tim. 6.10.
the root of all evil.

And certainly, Ezekiel. 45, 7, 8.9. Prou 28.15.16.
as God would not have his sons to oppress his servants: that is, Princes to
grieve their people with unnecessary, exorbitant, and cruel exactions, and
with ill-aduised Rehoboam, to make their subjects yoke heavier then it ought
to be: Exodus 22, 28, 29
So would he not have the people to be so unnatural, unreasonable, and
unjust, as to abound themselves, and in the mean time to see their Princes
destitute of provision answerable to their place.

As the Prince, I say, must not with wretchlesse Rehoboam, make the peoples
yoke more heavy then it ought to be by right: so must not the people, with
the murmuring and complaining Israelites, call that a grieuance, or a grievous
yoke, which is not so indeed, but only in the apprehension of their covetous
conceit. 1 Timothy 5, 17, 18,
The Apostle speaking of the maintenance of the ministry, says: That such
Priests as rule well, and labor in the word and doctrine, are worthy of a
double honor. And the same may be well said of a Prince, that is also a
Christian, and consequently rules and labors not only in the
Commonwealth, but also in the Church of his kingdom, by protection of her
spiritual, and direction of her temporal estate, even that he is worthy of a
double maintenance: especially of such a Prince as detesteth nothing so much as
the oppression of the poor, and the destruction of the needy, Amos. 4, 1,
Prou. 31, 4, 5.
and delights in nothing so much, as in bounty and beneficence. Eccles.
10.16, 17 Amos 6.1.4.5.6, Deuteronomy. 17.17.
A Prince that abhors all voluptuous, intemperate, and delicious living; and
that has not taken to himself many wives, or many Concubines, thereby to be
chargeable unto his people, but such a one that as he loves unity and union,
both of Britannes, and of all other Christians: so that he made choice of one
to love, and she a happy mother of most hopeful children, the honorable
maintenance of whom ought to be dear and precious in our eyes. A Prince, I
say, renowned for his singular temperance, continence and sobriety over the
whole world. And such a one as (according to that which our Lord himself
requires of a Prince) does not give himself to gather together in heaps much
silver and gold, being borne to give, and not to gather; who like unto the
Sun, has no sooner drawn up vapors and waters into the air, that is,
customs, taxations, and subsidies into his treasury, but as soon powers the
same down again upon the earth, by distributing that which he receives,
amongst his servants, English as well as Scottish, as he sees either their
necessity, or yet their desert does require. So that all the rivers of his
revenues, rents, and riches, do return into the sea of the commonwealth,
whence they came.

Finally, a Prince all made of bounty and beneficence, to whom God has given
(as unto Solomon) a large heart, 1 King. 4.29. 1 Chronicles. 9.
both for learning and liberality, even as the sand that is on the sea shore,
and who deserves no less at his subjects hands then as Solomon like a
purueiance, as their ability can reach unto, for the honorable maintenance and
sustenance of himself, and his free-parted family. And this much shall it
suffice to have spoken of the maintenance of the Lords chief Minister, to wit,
the Prince.

In the next place it follows, that we speak of the maintenance of his other
Ministers, to wit, the Priests, which rule or serve in the Church, either in
keeping of uniformity and good order amongst the Clergy themselves, or in
reading publicly, and expounding the word, and ministering the sacraments unto
the people.

All the tithe of the land, Leuit, 27.30, 31, 32.
both of the seed of the ground, and of the fruit of the trees is the Lords, it
is holy to the Lord (says the Lord by Moses) and every tithe of bullock and
of sheep, and of all that goes under the rod, the tenth shall be holy unto the
Lord. Deuteronomy. 14.22.23.27.29.
Thou shall give the tithe of all the increase of thy seed that comes forth
of the field, year by year, the tithe of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine
oil, and the first borne of thy kine, and of thy sheep, that thou may
learn to fear the Lord thy God always, and that the Lord thy God may bless
thee in all the works of thine hands, which thou do. Deuteronomy. 12.17.18.19.
Thou may not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, nor of thy wine,
nor the first borne of thy kine, nor of thy sheep, neither any of thy vows
which thou vowest, nor thy free offerings, nor the offering of thine hands.
Beware that thou forsake not the Leuite, as long as thou live upon the earth.
For behold I have given the children of Leui all the tenth of Israel for an
inheritance for their service which they serve in the congregation, Deuteronomy. 26.
Numb. 18.12.13.17, 18, 19.20.21.22.23.24.
even the tithes of the children of Israel have I given them. Also the fat of
the oil, of the wine, of the wheat, which they shall offer unto the Lord for
their first fruits, I have given them unto thee, says the Lord to Aaron. And
the first ripe of all that is in their land, which they shall bring unto the
Lord, shall be thine, as also the first borne of kine, sheep, and goats. Nehem.
10.35.36.37.38, 39.
And therefore Nehemiah and Ezra do mention, how that the people after their
captivity being restored to liberty, and to the enjoying of their own land,
amongst other duties, resolved, and protested before God, that they would bring
the first fruits of their land, and of their fruit-bearing-trees, year by
year into the house of the Lord, and the first borne of their flocks, of
their cattle, bullockes, and sheep, of their trees, wine, wheat, and oil,
unto the Priests, to the chambers of the house of our God (for there the
Ministers of God dwelt) and the tithes of their land unto the Levites, that
they might have the tithes in all the Cities of their travel. 2 Chronicles.
31.4.5.6.7.8.
And of Hezekiah, that godly king, it is written that he commanded the people
that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give a part to the Priests and Levites, that they
might be encouraged in the law of the Lord. And when the commandment was
spread, the children of Israel brought abundance of first fruits of corn,
wine, and oil, and honey, and of all the increase of the field, and the tithes
of all things brought they abundantly: so that when Ezekiah, and the Princes
saw the heaps which they had brought for the space of 4. whole months, they
blessed the Lord, and his people Israel. Every where the Lord does claim first
fruits and tithes as his proper possession and inheritance, the which he has
allotted unto his Priests for their perpetual wages and peculiar patrimony,
saying unto them, or rather resigning unto them his whole title, right and
claim thereunto. Numb. 18.20, 21. Deuteronomy. 10.9. and 18.2, Josh. 13.14.33. Ezekiel.
44.28.29.30.
I am your inheritance, part and possession among the children of Israel: yea
the Lord is so jealous of this their right, that he does repute himself as
spoiled and robbed with a violent and strong hand, when his Ministers are
defrauded of their due, cursing such as withold from them, what is theirs,
and blessing those that give them their own.

And as the Lord expostulating with his people for their idolatry, says unto
them: Ierem. 2.11.
Has any Nation changed their Gods, which yet are no Gods? but my people have
changed their glory, even their God, for that which does them no good: So
likewise expostulating with them for their sacrilege, he says unto them:
Molach, 3, 8, 9.10, 11, 12.
Will a man spoil his Gods? yet have ye spoiled me: but ye say* Wherein
have we spoiled thee? in tithes and offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse, for
ye have spoiled me, even this whole nation. Bring ye all the tithes into the
storehouse, and prove me now therewith, says the Lord of Hoastes. If I will
not open the windows of heaven unto you, and power you out a blessing without
measure. And I will rebuke the deuourer for your sakes, and he shall not
destroy the fruit of your ground, neither shall your vine be barren in the
field, and all Nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a pleasant
land says the Lord of hosts.

But it will be said of some, and chiefly of such as love more to prey upon
the Church, then to pray in the Church, that the paying of first fruits and
tithes does belong to the Ceremonial law of the Jews, and therefore does not
oblige us Christians to the observing thereof. Ephesians. 5, 3, 5, Colos. 3, 5,
For the refutation of which errrour, and double idolatry flowing therefro,
(for if covetousness be idolatry, as the holy Apostle affirms that it is,
then sacrilege which is not only a coveting, but also an occupying, yea a
robbing and stealing of holy things must needs be a double idolatry) I will
show such substantial reasons, as that the verity and truth of this matter
shall be made manifest, and this error sufficiently refuted.

Heb. 9, 10, and 10, 1, and 8, 4, 5.
First, Judicial ceremonies were euanishing shadows and external
representations of spiritual things to be accomplished in Christ, and they
had relation to God alone, as being a part of his worship. But so it is that
first fruits and tithes were no shadows, or figures of spiritual things to
be accomplished in Christ, neither had the paying thereof only a respect unto
God, as all the external and ceremonial ordinances of Religion had, but it
was a duty to be performed by man unto God and man coniunctly: that is, unto
his Priests or Ministers, for a demonstration of the perpetual acknowledgement
and obligation we owe unto God, as being the Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and ending of all our good, for bestowing upon us these earthly things, and for
the honorable and perpetual maintenance of his Ministers; Wherefore paying of
first fruits and tithes, is no ceremony of the Jewish religion, and
consequently is not abolished. Numb. 18, 12, 13.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,
1 Cor. 9, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,


Secondly, the maintenance of such as are worthy of maintenance, is no
ceremonial, but a moral thing. But so it is, that the paying of first fruits
and tithes is the maintenance of such as are worthy of maintenance, even of
Gods Ministers, and such as serve him in his house, and therefore paying of
tithes is no ceremonial, but a moral, and perpetual duty.

Thirdly, 1 Cor. 9, 9, 10, 11, 12.13, Heb. 10.
the Priests and Ministers of the Gospel have succeeded in the room of the
legal Priests and Ministers of the Tabernacle. Wherefore it follows, that
they have succeeded to their maintenance and provision, except we think them
unworthy of any certain maintenance.

Fourthly, Genesis 33, 11, Deuteronomy. 10, 14. Acts 17, 28, Psalm. 24, 1. 1 Cor. 10, 26,
Christians do hold their earthly things of God, no less then did the Jews,
and therefore they are bound by the same law, that the Jews were, to
acknowledge this their tenure and holding of him as the Lord and owner of the
earth, and all that is therein: and consequently must deliver into the hands of
his Collectors and Stewards, which are his Ministers, the annual rent of first
fruits and tithes.

Genesis 1.1. Revel. 22, 23.
V. We do not find in the Scripture, that God has given his proper
inheritance to Laymen, or that he has made Lay men the collectors of his
annual rents, or that he has under the Gospel given and granted his
possession unto other men then such as do serve him in his house.

Deuteronomy. 10.9, and 12, 19. and 14, 23.29. 1 Timothy 5.17, 18, 1 Cor. 9.9.10.
VI. If God was so careful for the provision of his Priests and Ministers under
the Law, how much more then may we think he would be careful for his Priests
and Ministers under the Gospel, chiefly seeing they serve him in a more
excellent manner, then the other did? If he would not have his Ministers to
beg under the law, or yet to depend upon popular beneuolences, shall we
think that he would now have his Ministers under the Gospel to be subject to
such a beggarly condition?

Genesis 14.20, Heb. 7 4.8.
VII. Before there was any ceremonial Law delivered by Moses, the servant of
God, unto the people, Gen, 28.22.
we find that Abraham, the Father of the faithful, paid tithes unto
Melchisedeck, the high Priest of the most high. Likewise Jacob, his
Grandchild, vowed to give unto God tithe of all his increase. Whence it
appears, that the paying of tithes is not a branch of the ceremonial, but
even a duty of the moral law. And seeing that not only the Priests after the
order of Aaron, but also those of Melchisedeckes order received tithes, it
follows that Evangelical priests, Heb. 7.17, 21, 26, 28. and 8.1, 2, 3, 4.
as being under Christ, who was an high priest after Melchisedecks order (for
every high priest must have his inferior priests, according to his order) may
and ought to receive tithes also.

VIII. Every provident and wise master provides for his household and servants;
wherefore it follows, 2. Tim. 2.6.
that God who is the most provident and wise master of all other, has provided
for the maintenance of his household servants, for his priests and ministers of
his house; and we find no other maintenance allotted them in the Scripture, but
only first fruits and tithes: wherefore these must either be their portion and
allowance, or else they have nothing certain at all.

IX. Luke 10.2.7. 1. Tim. 5.18. Matthew. 9.37, 38.
All laborers have certain standing wages: the ministers of the Gospel are
Gods laborers, therefore they ought to have their standing wages likewise: and
we read of none other, except first fruits and tithes. Luke 10.7.
And therefore our Savior forbids his Apostles to go from house to house,
telling them that the workman is worthy of his hire. And truly, if he would
not have his Apostles to go from house to house, even in that time when as
tithes were withheld from them by the Jewish clergy; shall we think that
now, when as the Jewish clergy is abolished, he would have his ministers of
the Gospel to go from house to house, or yet to send from house to house, to
beg the peoples beneuolences? those that hold from Christ's ministers and
Apostles the duty of first fruits and tithes, were such as persecuted both them
and Christ, and crucified him in the end. And such god-spoyling Gospellers as
do now a days withold the Church-rents from Churchmen, what do they else
but persecute Gods ministers, and crucify Christ daily in his members?

Deuteronomy. 10 9. and 12.19 and 14.23, 29. 2. Chro. 31.4. Prou. 3 9, 10.
X. The ends of paying first fruits and tithes unto Gods priests are perpetual,
to wit, that the Ministers of God may be maintained, and not forsaken, but
more and more encouraged in the service of God, that God may be honored with
our riches, and acknowledged to be our great Landlord, and good-lord, that we
may learn to fear the Lord, and that he may bless us in all the works of
our hands, that so our store may be increased, and our barnes filled with
abundance. Are not Christians Gods tenants, farmers, and vassals, as well as
were the Jews? and do we not hold all that we have of God, as well as they?
and are we not bound to pay our annual rents unto God, as duly and truly as
they? and what reason have Christians to forsake their ministers, more then the
Jews had? and do not the one deserve as well to be liberally maintained and
encouraged in their work as the other? and have not Christians as great cause
to learn to fear God as had the Jews? Finally, do not Christians desire as
earnestly as the Jews did to be blessed in the works of their hands, and in
the increase of their store? Wherefore it follows necessarily, that we
Christians must not pretend any exemption from paying of tithes and first
fruits more then did the Jews?

XI. The holy Scriptures set down the paying of these yearly Church-rents,
amongst moral duties, and accounts of Sacrilege, not as if it were the
mere transgression of a ceremonial ordinance, but even the violation of a
moral law. Will a man spoil his gods? Malach. 3.8.
(says the Lord God by his Prophet Malachie) yet ye have spoiled me in tithes
and in offerings. Prou. 3.9, 10. and 20.25.
Honor the Lord (says Solomon) with thy riches, and with the first fruits of
all thine increase, so shall thy barnes be filled with abundance, and thy
press shall burst with new wine. But it is a destruction for a man to devour
that which is sanctified: meaning, that the man who will not honor God with
first fruits, and tithes, but does devour the holy things, and commits
sacrilege, brings destruction upon himself, his soul, his body, his goods,
and his house. Romans 2.2^
Thou that say a man should not commit adultery, breakest thou wedlock?
(says the holy Apostle:) and thou that abhorrest idols, do thou commit
sacrilege? as if he should say, thou that detestest the honoring of a false
god, will thou nevertheless spoil and dishonor the true God? Whereby we are
given to understand, that sacrilege is not only a transgression of the moral
law, but that it is even a double sin, compounded of robbery and idolatry,
and consequently, a more detestable and abominable evil then idolatry it
self. Leuit. 18.21. and 20.2. 2. King. 23.10. and 16.3. and 17 17. Ierem. 7.31.
For the idolater with his heart, his body, and substance; yea sometimes with
the blood of his dearest children honors a false god, yet thinking that it
is the true God indeed he does thus worship: whereas the sacrilegious
god-spoyler robs the true God of his own. The idolater is careful to
worship some god, but the god-spoyler cares for no god at all, a false god he
does not know, and the true God he will not acknowledge. The idolater being
misse-led with an erroneous opinion, makes and takes that to be God, which is
not God, that is, ignorantly of an idol he makes God; whereas the
sacrilegious god-spoyler, maliciously, even wittingly and willingly of the true
God, makes no god at all, but a mere idol; otherwise he durst not be so bold,
as to rob him of his right. For it is an infallible maxim, That a man will
never rob or spoil him whom he loves, honors, or fears.

1. Tim. 5.17.18.
XII. The maintenance of the ministry is very diligently recommended unto
Christians by the holy Apostle. The Priests (says he) that rule well, are
worthy of double honor, specially they which labor in the word and doctrine:
for the Scripture says, thou shall not mousle the mouth of the ox that
treads out the corn, 1. Cor. 9.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
and the labourer is worthy of his wages. Who goes a warfare any time at his
own cost? who planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who
feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? say I these things
according to man? says not the law the same also? for it is written in the
law of Moses, Thou shall not musle the mouth of the ox that treads out the
corn. Does God take care for oxen? either says he it not altogether for our
sakes? for our sakes, no doubt, it is written, that he which eareth should ear
in hope, and that he that thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope. If
we have sown unto you spiritual things, it is a great thing if we reap your
carnal things: do ye not know that they which minister about the holy
things, eat of the things of the temple? and they which wait at the altar are
partakers with the altar? So also has the Lord ordained, that they which
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Now who is he that can say from
his heart, that to live of the Gospel is to live of begging, and of popular
beneuolences? and not rather of having, by way of justice, the tenthes of the
goods of them to whom they preach the Gospel. Except we mean to make the
condition of living by the Gospel, inferior unto the condition of living by
the legal sacrifices. And it is to be noted, that the holy Apostle proves,
even by the law of Moses, the right that the Ministers of the Gospel have unto
our carnal things, and that unto such carnal things, as both Moses does
prescribe in his law, and the Apostle himself does mention, entreating of
this matter, comprehending them under these two kinds; the fruits of the field,
and the flocks of the fold. Whereby it is more then apparent, that the Apostle
meaned, that the perpetual maintenance, allotted unto the legal priests, in
first fruits and tithes, by the Law of Moses was due unto the priests and
ministers of the Gospel, after the ceasing and abolishing of the other. And
that as the Gospel of Christ has succeeded into the room of the law of Moses,
Heb 7.1, 2, 3, 4, 5 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 17, 26.
and the Evangelical priesthood into the place of the Legal priesthood; even
the renewed order of Melchisedecke into the room of the abolished order of
Aaron: so have the priests of the one order succeeded unto the maintenance of
the other, even the inferior priests of Melchisedecks renewed order, under
their high priest Christ Jesus, unto the patrimony and provision of the
inferior priests of Aarons abolished order. For as I said before, the law of
maintenance is perpetual and common to the priests of both orders, though the
law of the priesthood be but temporal and changeable.

And as for such ministers as disdain to be called by the name of priests,
but delight in new names and new opinions, and would rather want tithes then be
called priests, to the end they may be unlike unto other Churches of
Christendom, and the Churchmen thereof: I will say no more, but that it is a
great pity that the Church of God should be troubled with such
newfanglednesse, and that any of Gods ministers should be misse-led with such
fond and frivolous, yea vnministerly opinions. As learned, godly, and holy men
as they are said to be, or thought to be, they are much deceived, if they do
think otherwise, but that more learned, more wise, and holy Churchmen have
bin called by the name of priests, then they: If the whole people of God be
called a royal priesthood by the holy Apostle S. Peter; 1. Pet. 2.9. Revel.
1.4, 5, 6, and 5.9, 10.
and if the blessed Apostle S. John, writing unto the angels or bishops of the
7. Churches of Asia, calls them priests, and if the 24. Elders in heaven call
themselves priests: finally, Heb. 7.15, 17, 21, 24, 26, 28, and 8.1, 2.3.
if Christ Jesus himself be called a priest, yea an high priest (which
presupposes that he has priests under him, for as much as every high priest
must have his inferiors) shall any of the ministers of the Gospel then be
ashamed to be called priests? or shall any of them be so fond as to disclaim
tithes, which are due to priests, rather then to be called by this honorable
name of priest?

XIII. And lastly, the holy Apostle Paul, not only exhorts Christians to
remember them which have the oversight of them, Heb. 13.7.
and have declared unto them the word of God, but also in express words he
enioyneth him that is taught in the word, Galat. 6.6.
to make him that has taught him partaker of all his goods. The people must
give a part of their goods unto their pastors, and this part must either be
equal unto the Leuitical part, or greater then it, or else smaller. To give
them a smaller, were a most unreasonable indiscretion, and a more then beastly
ingratitude: and if they will not bestow a greater, then they must either give
an equal portion to that of the legal priests, or else no portion at all. Yea
the iniunction of the Apostle bears, that the maintenance of the Evangelical
priests, ought rather to be more, then less then was that of the legal
priests: for they had a right unto a tenth part of some certain goods; namely
of fruits, and of flocks, but not of all their goods whatsoever, or of the
value thereof in money: whereas the Evangelical priests ought to be made
partakers of all indifferently. And truly, 2. Cor. 3.6, 7, 8, 6, 10, 11.
look how far the ministry of the Gospel is more excellent then that of the
Law, so much the more ample and liberal ought to be the maintenance of the
ministers of the Gospel, then was that of the ministers of the tabernacle. O
how ugly then is the sin of sacrilege, that bears nevertheless such a
sway in this Isle! O how horrible an iniquity is it for men of might to pull
out of Gods mouth the diet of the church, to put it into their own, and to
fill the bellies of their hounds and their horses, with the meat of Gods
ministers! It is a sin of that high nature, that because of it God has said
unto us, Malach. 3.9, 10, 11.
as once he said unto the people of Israel upon the like occasion, ye are
cursed with a curse, for ye have spoiled me, even this whole nation: and that
he has sometimes sent scarcenes of bread, Amos 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
and cleanness of teeth in our cities, and towns, sometimes has withheld
the rain from us, when there were yet three months to the harvest, and shut
the windows of heaven upon us, Isa. 16, 9, 10.
and stayed the rain til the fruits of the earth were destroyed with drought,
sometimes has smitten our fruits with blasting and mildew, and sent the
palmer-worm to devour the fruits of our trees, Hagg. 1.10, and 2.18.
yea made our singing and showting for joy in harvest to cease, and made us
drunk with our tears, for that the heaven above us was stayed from dew, and
the earth under us from yielding her increase. For this abominable sin God
has sometimes sent the pestilence amongst us, to rage in most violent manner,
to consume our bodies, and the fire to burn, and the water to ouerflow our
towns, lands, houses, and habitations.

In one word, it is this horrible sin of sacrilege that has overthrown the
strength and glory of diverse mighty and wealthy houses; God in his most just
judgment shutting such from their inheritance, as were so audacious and bold
as to rob him of his. Job. 15.25.26, 27.
The sacrilegious God-spoyler is the man which (as Job speaks) has stretched
out his hand against God, and made himself strong against the Almighty.
Therefore God shall run upon him, even upon his neck, and against the most
thick part of his Shield, because he has covered his face with his fatness,
and has collopes in his flanks. As if the holy man should say, because this
God-spoyling anti-god has presumed to shut God from his inheritance, and has
taken from him his tithes, and has made himself fat with Gods meat, which
he has pulled out of the hands and mouths of his Ministers, Ver.
29.30.31.32, 34.
therefore God shall be avenged on him, he shall not be rich always, neither
shall his substance continue, neither shall he prolong the perfection thereof
in the earth. He shall never depart out of darkness, the flame shall dry up
his branches, and he shall go away with the breath of his mouth. His branch
shall not be green, but shall be cut off before his day, and the congregation
of the hypocrite shall be desolate. And who is so great an hypocrite as the
sacrilegious Church-robber, who being an impure God-spoyler indeed, will needs
in the mean time be esteemed a pure Gospeller, and one of the most precise
professors of the reformed Church? He may well make himself merry with the
meat of Gods Ministers, as profane Balthazar did with the golden and silver
vessels of Gods house; Dan. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Job. 20.5, 6, 7, 8.9, 10.
but he shall know in the end, that the rejoicing of the wicked shall take an
end: and (as Zophar speaks) that the joy of hypocrites is but a moment.
Though his excellency mount up to the heaven, and his head reach unto the
clouds, yet shall he perish for ever, like his dung, and they which have seen
him, shall say: Where is he? He shall fly away as a dream, and they shall not
find him, he shall pass away as a vision of the night; so that the eye which
had seen shall do so no more, and his place shall see him him, no more. As if
he should say, though he were never so great and mighty a man, that robs
Gods Church, yea though his height did reach unto heaven, yet for all his
height shall he not enter into heaven; but shall fall to the earth like his
own dung, and his sacrilegious soul shall stink more vilely then his dung
amids hell flames. His children shall flatter the poor, Verse. 10.
and his hands shall restore his substance. As if he should say: Because the
father, through pride and tyranny oppressed the poor, and spoiled Gods
Ministers, therefore God shall make the posterity of that man, for poverty and
want, to beg at other poor folks doors: yea that thing which the
sacrilegious father took away by violence, his barnes shall be brought to
restore again by force. Verse. 15.16.17.
He has devoured substance, and he shall vomit it: for God shall draw it out
of his belly, for to him it belongs, and in place thereof he shall suck the
gall of aspes, and the vipers tongue shall slay him: that is, his portion shall
be with hypocrites, and the generation of vipers, for the old Serpent shall
slay his soul, he shall not see the rivers, nor the floods and streams of
honey and butter. That is, he shall not taste of the happiness of the heavenly
Canaan. He on earth shut God from his inheritance on earth, but in the end God
shall shut him out of the earth, and debar him from heaven, and hurl him
headlong into hell. Verse. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
He shall restore the labor, and shall devour no more, even according to the
substance shall be his exchange, and he shall enjoy it no more. For he has
undone many, he has forsaken the poor, and has spoiled houses which he
builded not, even Church-mens houses, yea Gods house, and God himself has he
spoiled. Surely he shall feel no quietness in his body, neither shall he
reserve of that which he desired: there shall none of his meat be left,
therefore none of his shall hope for his goods. As if he should say, because he
would needs devour Gods meat, and the diet of his Ministers, therefore God
shall send the deuourer to devour his meat. For when he shall be filled with
his abundance, that is, with Gods portion, and Church-mens provision, he shall
be in pain, and the hand of all the wicked shall assail him: that is,
because he was so wicked as to stretch out his hand to spoil God, therefore
God shall make many wicked men's hands to spoil him: He shall be about to fill
his belly, to wit, with Gods Ministers meat, but God shall send upon him his
fierce wrath, and shall cause to rain upon him, even upon his meat. As if he
should say, Ver. 14.15.16.
Gods Ministers meat shall do him no good: for God shall either draw it out of
his belly, or else he shall turn it into the gall of Aspes in the midst of
him. And not only shall God draw his meat out of the God-spoilers miserable
belly, Ver. 26.27.28.29.
but he shall also draw his sacrilegious soul out of his devouring body, and
it shall burn in the fire that is not blown: that is, in hell fire that
needs no blowing. The heaven shall declare his wickedness (for he was so
impious as to spoil the God of heaven) and the earth shall rise up against him
(for he was so ungracious as to rob Gods Ministers and Vicegerents on earth)
the increase of his house shall go away, it shall flow away in the day of his
wrath. As if he should say, the man's house that is increased, builded, or
reared up by the decrease and robbery of Gods house, it shall not stand always,
the grease and fatness of it shall flow away like water, the pelf and wealth
thereof shall euanish and melt away like the fat of lambs, or as does the snow
before the Sun. Such is the portion of the wicked from God, and the heritage
that of GOD he shall have. As if he should say, desolation and destruction in
substance, in body, and soul shall be the portion and heritage of all
impenitent God-spoyling Gospellers, men worse then idolaters, which turn the
true God into an Idol, as the other do an Idol into God, and worship and
fear neither true, nor false deity. A false God they know not, and the true
God they will not acknowledge: for otherwise they would stand in awe to spoil
God of his portion, and to bereave him of his inheritance.

And therefore to shut up this pleading for Gods Priests, let me say unto
every Student in this Art of Enriching, that desires to be rich, here, and
happy hence, that which rich Zacheus promised to do, Luke 19.8
and practiced at the time of his conversion: That every man that has taken
from the Church, or withheld from the Churchmen their tithes by
sacrilegious impropriation, and wicked usurpation, that he restore with
repenting Zacheus, fourfold, or at least, let him restore the principal
stock, which he has in his hands. Let him, I say, listen unto the moral
exhortation of wise Solomon: Prou. 3.9
Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thine
increase, so shall thy barnes be filled with abundance, and thy Press shall
flow over with new wine, and to the precept of the most high, uttered by the
mouth of his prophet Malachie: Bring every tithe into the storehouse, Mallach.
3.10.11.12.
that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me withal, says the Lord of
hoasts, if I will not open the windows of heaven unto you, and power you out a
blessing without measure; And I will reprove the deuourer for your sakes, and
he shall not destroy the fruit of the ground, neither shall your vine be
barren in the field, says the Lord of hoasts, and all nations shall call you
blessed, because ye shall be a pleasant land.

IX. Rule. A man, to whom God has given riches and store, ought to take his
own part thereof cheerfully, so long as he enjoys the same: yet so that in
the mean time he keep himself from all excess in diet, or apparel; all
intemperancy, luxury, superfluity, drunkenness, gluttony, and prodigality,
least God punish the abuse of his benefits with penury and poverty.
Probation and declaration.
Eccles. 9.7.8.
GO eat thy bread with joy (says Solomon) and drink thy wine with a
cheerful heart, and let thy garments be white or neat: for there is no
profit to a man, and 2 24, 25. 26.
but that he eat and drink, and delight his soul with the profit of his
labor: I saw also that this was of the hand of God. Surely to a man that is
good in his sight, God gives wisdom, and knowledge, and joy; but to the
sinner he gives pain to gather, and to heap, to give to him that is good
before God. When goods increase, and 5.10.16.17.18.19.
they are increased that eat them. And this is also an evil sickness, that
all his days he eats in darkness with much grief, sorrow, and anger.
Behold then, what I have seen good, that it is comely to eat, and to drink,
and to take pleasure in all his labor wherein he trauelleth under the Sun, the
whole number of the days of his life which God gives him, for this is his
portion. Also to every man, to whom God has given riches and treasures, and
gives him power to eat thereof, and to take his part, and to enjoy his
labor, this is the gift of God. Surely he will not much remember the days of
his life (that is, the painful days of the time past) because God answers
to the joy of his heart. and 6.1.^.
There is an evil which I saw under the Sun, and it is much among men: A man,
to whom God has given riches, and treasures, and honor, and he wants
nothing for his soul of all that it desires: But God gives him not power to
eat thereof, but a strange man shall eat it up; this is vanity, and an evil
sickness.

Riches are not comely for a niggard (says Jesus the son of Sirach) and what
should he do with money? Eccles. 14.3.4.5.6.10.11.14. and 31.23.24.
He that gathers together from his own soul, heapeth together for others
that will make good cheer with his goods. He that is evil unto himself, to
whom will he be good? for such a one can have no pleasure of his goods. Such a
man (says he) enuieth himself the bread, and withers his own soul by the
scarceness of his table. Wherefore he exhorts a man to do good to himself
of that he has, and not to defraude himself of the good day. In one word, as
man is apppointed to serve God, and not Riches: so Riches are appointed to
serve Man, and not Man to serve them. Luke 16.13.
Ye cannot serve God and Riches, says Jesus the son of God. Wherefore the
man that makes himself a slave unto his substance, it is a pity he should
have any place amongst freemen, but that he should be sequestered and put
apart, as one stricken with an infectious disease; and that on the gate of his
slavish abode should be engraven in great letters: Here dwells a monster, a
man without an heart, a rich man, but a slave unto his riches. Thou that
passest along, and viewest his abode, spit at his door, but enter not in,
least that going in a freeman, thou return from thence turned into a slave.

But as a man that has wealth should take his part thereof in all cheerful
and hearty manner: (for what profits it for a man to have goods, and to want
the good use thereof?) So must he beware on the other hand, of abusing Gods
benefits to intemperancy, luxury, gluttony, drunkenness, superfluity, and
excess, whether in table or attire. For by this means he shall both provoke
God to anger against him, and bring himself into poverty, necessity, and
need. Besides that it is the custom of men, for the most part, not to pity
such a one, as through his own miscariage has made himself poor, whereas,
by good government, he might have had sufficient for himself, yea also
whereupon to gratify his friends, and to relieve the poor. Keep not company
(says Solomon) with drunkards, nor with gluttons, Prou. 23.20.21.
for the drunkard and the glutton shall be poor; and the sleeper shall be
clothed with rags. He that has pleasure in bankets (says he) shall be
poor, and 21.17.
and who so delights in wine, and delicates, shall not be rich. Jesus the
son of Sirach, as he commends the liberal man, so he condemns the
niggard; and yet he painteth out the manifold incommodities that follow upon
excess. Who so is liberal in his meat (says he) men shall bless him,
Eccles. 21.23.24.27.28.29.30.
and the testimony of his honesty shall be believed: but against him that is a
niggard of his meat, the whole City shall murmr, the testimonies of his
niggardnesse shall be sure. Yet show not thy valiantness in wine, for wine
has destroyed many. Wine soberly drunken, is profitable for the life of man:
what is his life that is overcome with wine? wine was made from the beginning
to make men glad, and not for drunkenness. Wine measurably drunken, and in
time, brings gladness, and cheerfulnes of mind: but wine drunken with
excess, makes bitterness of mind, with brawlings, and scoldings: drunkenness
increases the courage of a fool, til he offend, and it diminishes his
strength, and makes wounds. Verse. 19.20.
How little is sufficient for a man well taught? and thereby he belcheth not in
his chamber, nor feels any pain. A wholesome sleep comes of a temperate
belly, he rises up betimes in the morning, and is well at ease in himself,
but pain in watchings, and choleric diseases, and pangs of the belly are
with an insatiable man.

Therefore (says he) be not greedy in all delights, and 37.28.29.30.
and be not too hasty in all meats, for excess of meats brings sickness,
and gluttony comes into choleric diseases, by surfeit have many perished,
but he that governs himself prolongeth his life. Prou. 23, 29.30 31.32.
To whom is woe (says the wise man?) to whom is sorrow? to whom is strife? to
whom is murmuring? to whom are wounds without cause? and to whom is the
redness of the eyes? Even to them that tarry long at the wine, to them that go
and seek mixed wine. Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, and when it
shows his color in the cup, or goes down pleasantly. In the end thereof it
will bite like a Serpent, and hurt like a Cockatrice.

Whereby we are taught, that excess and superfluity does occasion many
incommodities to man, not only in his substance, but also in his body, and in
his soul, and that it makes many a soul sinful, many a body sickly, and
many a man miserable and poor. Wine and strong drink, immoderately used, will
steal away a man's strength, be he never so strong: yea it will steal away the
strength of his soul: for true fortitude cannot harbor in that heart, that is
always swimming and bathing in the barrel of strong drink. The head that
cannot be holden from the Hogs-head, but must always be tumbling and tippling
in the Tun, is more like unto a hogs head indeed, then a man's head, and the
heart of him likewise: yea not only shall strong drink immoderately used,
wound the man that uses it in his soul, in his body, and in his substance,
besides his offensive wounding and hurting of others, but also (says Solomon)
it will in the end bite him like a serpent, and hurt him, or rather kill him
like a cockatrice. It will even slay him, both in his soul and in his
substance; for as the drunkard and the glutton drinks away and deuoureth his
inheritance on earth, whereby he becomes poor, so he drinks and eats
away his inheritance in heaven, to please his belly he sells away his part
of paradise, whereby he becomes miserable both here and hence, and this is
that which the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6.10.
That drunkards and gluttons shall not inherit the kingdom of God, Heaven, as
great and wide as it is, cannot hold a glutton nor harbor a drunken head. Gods
kingdom has no room to receive a belly-god. Reu. 21.21.
Every gate of the heavenly Jerusalem, is of one pearl (says Saint John) how
then should a belly-god, whose head is a hogs-head of drink, and whose belly
is a burial place of so much meat, how should such a big body, and such a
swollen soul enter at so narrow a gate? Get in then who will into the kingdom
of God, a belly-god cannot get in.

The Christian that would be rich must likewise beware of excess and all
pompousnes of apparel. Eccles. 11.4.
Be not proud of clothing and raiment (says Jesus the son of Sirach) and
exalt not thy self in the day of honor. Luke 16.19.
And the holy Evangelist tells us, or rather our blessed Savior Jesus the
Son of God, that the damned rich glutton was clothed in purple, and fine
linen, and fared well and delicately every day. 1. Tim. 2.9, 10. 1. Pet. 3.3.
And the blessed Apostle, as knowing how that women are more subject unto this
fault of excess in apparel, then ordinarily men are, and how that thereby both
pride in their hearts is nourished, intemperancie and daintiness cherished,
and the substance of the house much diminished; he enioyneth them, that they
array themselves in comely apparel, with shamefastness and modesty, not with
broyded hair, or gold, or pearl, or costly apparel, but as becomes women
that profess the fear of God, with good works, and with a meek and quiet
spirit, which is before God a thing much set by. Iam. 2.1, 2, 3, 4.
And the Apostle S. James wills us to make no reckoning of a man for his gold
ring, and his goodly apparel, nor yet to despise the poor and modest man for
his course and slender array: Psalm. 147.10, 11
as the Lord has no pleasure in the strength of a horse, neither delights in
the legs of man, but only in them that fear him, and attend upon his mercy;
so he has no pleasure in the bravery and beauty of apparel, neither
delights he in the costlinesse and curiosity of clothing. God sees not as
man sees, 1. Sam. 16.7.
for man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord beholds the heart.
God looks not to the decking and arraying of the body, but to the decking and
adorning of the mind. Sackcloth likes him better then satin or silk, 2.
King. 1.8. Mark. 1.6. Luke 7.25. and 16.19.
he is more delighted with the hairecloth of Eliah, and of John Baptist, then
with the soft and silken raiment of courtiers, or with the purple, and fine
linen of Dives. The king of Niniue lying upon the earth, Jonah. 2.6. Act.
12.21, 22, 23.
covered with sackcloth, and sitting in ashes, found mercy with God, whereas
Herod sitting in his throne, arraied in royal apparel, was smitten by an
angel, and eaten up of worms.

Thus we see how displeasing unto God, and how hurtful unto man, this vice of
excess is, whether in diet or apparel, and how that it is an enemy both unto
man's prosperity on earth, and his felicity in heaven. It shuts him out of
his inheritance on earth, and bereaueth him of his inheritance in heaven. And
this is not all the evil that comes by excess, for God oftentimes punishes
the whole city, the country, yea the whole kingdom with scarcity and famine
for this abuse of his benefit. Woe unto them (says the Prophet Isaie) that are
mighty to drink wine, Isa. 5.11, 12, 13, 22.
and to them that are strong to power in strong drink, therefore they are men
famished, and the multitude thereof is dried up with thirst. They lie upon
beds of Iuorie (says the Prophet Amos) and stretch themselves thereupon,
Amos 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
they eat of the lambs of the flock, and the calves out of the stall, they
sing to the sound of the violl: they invent to themselves instruments of
music, they drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief
ointments, and therefore their sorrow is at hand says the prophet: and that so
much the more in that they used this excess in a time when as they ought to
have been rather sorry for the affliction of Joseph, that is, of their
brethren, Joel. 1.
whereof now many were slain and carried away captive. And the Prophet Joel
sounds into their ears this exhortation and commination, Awake ye drunkards,
and weep, howl all ye drinkers of wine, because of the new wine, for it shall
be pulled from your mouth. As if he should say, ye drunkards that lie snorting
and sleeping in your beds of down, awake; and ye that use to quaffe and swill
upon your knees, doing worship to Bacchus, like idolaters, or to your own
bellies like belly-gods, arise: and all ye that be merry begin to mourn, and
turn your loud laughing into lamenting, your harping into howling, for the new
wine, the strong drink, and the dainty cheer, which ye do abuse in this
manner, shall be pulled from your mouths, and not only from yours, but also
from many other mouths for your sakes. For behold, the vine and the new wine
is dried up, the oil is decayed, the corn is destroyed, the field is wasted,
the fruits of the ground are eaten up by the palmer-worme, the grasshopper, and
the caterpiller, the trees of the field are withered, the seed is rotten under
the clods, the garners are destroyed, and the barnes broken down, the pastures
of the wilderness are burned up, and the springs of water dried up; so that
the herds of cattle, and the flocks of sheep do pine away for want of
pasture, and the beasts of the field do cry and mourn for lack of water:
Ierem. 14.3, 4, 5, 6.
yea, the whole land mourns. And as the Prophet Jeremy speaks, the ground
is destroyed for want of rain, the plowe-men are ashamed, and cover their
heads, the Hind also calueth in the field, and forsakes it for lack of grass.

Thus it appears manifestly, how horrible a sin excess is, and how
Almighty God is wont to punish the abuse of his benefits, with famine,
scarceness, penury, and indigence When men in their abundance will needs play
the beasts, God will be avenged both on them, and on the beasts for their
cause: yea, he will change their diet, and send them to feed with the beasts.
So that they shall be feign for extreme famine to eat the grass of the
field, and gnawe the bark and roots of the trees, and to drink the water of
the flood, that the table of beasts may teach them not to play the beasts any
more, in abusing Gods good creatures to excess. And good reason forsooth, that
such as will needs live riotously, and quaffe and swill upon their knees,
should be brought upon their knees in good earnest, and be made to feed with
the beasts, until they learn to live like reasonable and moderate men, and
not like unreasonable and intemperate beasts.

X. Rule. A man to whom God has given riches and store, (though but in a mean
measure) if he would have God to bless him and it, both with increase and
continuance, as he ought to give a part thereof cheerfully unto the Prince,
and another part unto the priests, and take a third part for himself, so ought
he charitably to impart a proportionable part thereof to the poor, by lending
or giving to them according to his power, and their poverty and need.
Probation and declaration.
Deuteronomy. 15, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
IF one of thy brethren with thee (says the Lord by Moses) be poor within any
of thy gates, in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shall not
harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother: but thou shall
open thine hand unto him, and shall lend him sufficient for his need which he
has: thou shall give him, and let it not grieve thine heart to give unto him,
for because of this the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and
in all that thou put thine hand to. Because there shall be ever some poor
in the land, therefore I command thee, Exodus 22.25, 26, 27. Leuit. 25.35.36, 37.
saying, Thou shall open thine hand unto thy brother, to thy needy, and to thy
poor in the land. Thou shall relieve him, and if thou lend money unto him,
thou shall not be as an usurer to him, thou shall not give him thy money to
usury, or vantage, nor lend him thy victuals for increase. And if thou take
thy neighbors raiment to pledge, thou shall restore it unto him before the
Sun go down, for that it is his covering only, and this is his garment for
his skin, wherein shall he sleep: therefore when he cries unto me, I will
hear him, for I am merciful. Leuit. 19, 9, 10, and 23, 22. Deuteronomy. 24, 19, 20
21.
Also when ye reap the harvest of your land, ye shall not reap every corner
of your field, neither shall thou gather the glainings of thy harvest, thou
shall not gather the grapes of thy vineyard, but thou shall leave them for the
poor, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow. When thou cuttest down
thy harvest in the field, and have forgotten a sheafe in the field, thou shall
not go again to fet it, but it shall be for the stranger, Psalm. 37, 21, 26.
for the fatherless, and for the widow, that the Lord thy God may bless thee
in all the works of thine hands.

The righteous is merciful (says the prophet David) and gives, and 41.1.
he is ever merciful and lends, and his seed enjoys the blessing. Blessed
is he that judges wisely of the poor, the LORD shall deliver him in the time
of trouble. and 112.4, 5, 9.
Unto the righteous arises light in darkness, he is merciful and full of
compassion, a good man is merciful and lends, and will measure his affairs
by judgment, he has distributed and given to the poor, his righteousness
remains for ever, his horn shall be exalted with glory. Let not mercy and
truth forsake thee (says King Solomon) bind them on thy neck, Prou. 3.3.4.
and write them upon the table of thine heart, so shall thou find favor in the
fight of God and Man. and ^, 27,
He that is merciful rewards his own soul. and 14.21.31.
He that has mercy on the poor is blessed; yea the Lord honors him that
has mercy on the poor. and 19.17.
He that has mercy upon the poor, and 21.13.21, 26.
lends unto the Lord, and the Lord will recompense that which he has given.
The righteous gives and spares not, and he that follows after righteousness
and mercy, shall find life, righteousness and glory; but he that stops his
ear at the crying of the poor, he shall also cry and not be heard. and
11.24.25.26.
There is that scatters and is more increased, but he that spares more then
is right, surely comes to poverty: the liberal person shall have plenty, and
he that waters, shall also have rain. He that withdraws the corn, the
people will curse him; but blessing shall be upon the head of him that sells
corn: to wit, and 22 9. Eccles. 31.29.
good cheap, and when the people stand in need, by reason of scarcity and
famine. He that has a good eye, he shall be blessed: for he gives of his
bread unto the poor. Prou. 25.21.22.
If he that hates thee be hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he be
thirsty, give him water to drink, for thou shall lay coals upon his head, and
28.27.
and the Lord shall recompense thee. He that gives unto the poor shall not
lack, but he that hides his eyes shall have many curses. Give ye strong
drink unto him that is ready to perish, and 31.6.7.
and wine unto them that have grief of heart, let him drink that he may
forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more.

and 31.20.
Also Salomons virtuous woman, that increases exceedingly her store and her
substance, is described to be such a one as stretches out her hand to the
poor and needy. Eccles. 11.1.2.
And therefore in his Preacher he exhorts men to be liberal to the poor in
these words: Cast thy bread upon the waters, for after many days thou shall
find it. Give a portion to seven, and also to eight, for thou know not what
evil shall be upon the earth. Is not this the fasting that I have chosen
(says the Lord by his prophet I say) to loose the bands of wickedness, to
take off the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye
break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou
bring the poor that wander to thine house, when thou see the naked that thou
cover him, and hide not thy self from thine own flesh? Then shall thy light
break forth as the morning, and thine health shall grow speedily, thy
righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall embrace
thee: then shall thou call, and the Lord will answer, thou shall cry, and he
will say, here I am. If thou power out thy soul to the hungry, and refresh the
troubled soul, then shall thy light spring out in the darkness, and thy darkness
shall be as the noone day, and the Lord shall guide thee continually, and
satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a
watered garden, and like a spring of water where waters fail not. And they
shall be of thee that shall build the old waste places, thou shall raise up
the foundations for many generations, and thou shall be called, the Repairer of
the Breach, and the restorer of the paths to dwell in. Tobit. 4.7, 8, 9, 101
11, 16.
Give alms, (says Tobias to his son) of thy substance, and when thou give
it, let not thine eye be envious, neither turn thy face from any poor, least
that God turn his face from thee. Give alms according to thy store; if thou
have but a little, be not afraid to give a little alms, for thou layest up a
good store for thy self against the day of necessity.

Because that alms does deliver from death, and suffers not to come into
darkness: for alms is a good gift, or present before the most high, to all
them which use it. Give of thy bread to the hungry, and of thy garments to them
that are naked; yea of all thine abundance give alms, and let not thine eye
be envious when thou give alms. It is better to give alms then to lay up
gold (says the glorious Angel Raphael to Tobias) for alms does deliver from
death, and 12, 8.9.
and does purge all sin, and those which exercise alms, and righteousness
shall be filled with life. Water quenches burning fire, and alms takes away
sins (says Jesus the son of Sirach) and he that rewards good deeds
will remember it afterward, Eccles. 3.33, 34.
and in the time of the fall he shall find a stay. and 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9.10.
My son, defraude not the poor of his living, and make not the needy eyes to
wait long: make not an hungry soul sorrowful, neither vex a man in his
necessity. Trouble not the heart that is griued, and desire not the gift of the
needy. Refuse not the prayer of one that is in trouble: turn not away thy face
from the poor, nor thine eyes aside from him, and give him none occasion to
speak evil of thee: for if he curse thee in the bitterness of his soul,
his prayer shall be heard of him that made him. Be courteous unto the company
of the poor; let it not grieve thee to bow down thine ear unto the poor,
but pay thy debt, and give him a friendly answer. Be as a father unto the
fatherless, and as an husband unto their mothers; so shall thou be as the
son of the most high, and he shall love thee more then thy mother does.
Stretch thine hand unto the poor, and 7.33, 34, 35.
that thy blessing and reconciliation may be accomplished. Liberality
pleases all men living, Tobit. 2.4 7.
and from the dead refrain it not. Let not them that weep be without
comfort. and 4.17.
Be not slow to visit the sick: for that shall make thee to be beloved. Let
upright men eat and drink with thee, Eccles 9.18.
and let thy reioicing be in the fear of the Lord. Do good unto the
righteous, and 12.2.4.5, 7.
and thou shall find great reward, though not of him, yet of the most high.
Give unto such as fear God, and do well unto him that is lowly. and 14.13.
Do good unto thy friend before thou die; and according to thine ability
stretch out thine hand, and give him. and 17.20, 25.
The alms of a man is as a thing sealed up before God, and he keeps the
good deeds of a man as the apple of the eye, and gives repentance to their
sons and daughters. At the last shall he arise and reward them, and shall
repay their reward upon their heads. He that will show mercy, and 29.1.2.9.11,
12.13.14.
lends to his neighbor. Lend to thy neibour in the time of his need, and pay
thou thy neighbor again in due season. Help the poor for the commandments
sake, and turn him not away because of his poverty. Bestow the treasure after
the commandment of the most high, and it shall bring thee more profit then
gold. Lay up thine alms in thy secret chambers, and it shall keep thee from
all affliction. A man's alms is as a purse with him, and shall keep a man's
favor as the apple of the eye, and afterward shall it arise, and pay every
man his reward upon his head. and 40.24.
It shall fight for thee against thine enemies, better then the Shield of a
strong man, or the Spear of the mighty: yea alms shall deliver more then
friends. I have showed you all things (says Saint Paul to the Ephesians) how
that so laboring ye ought to support the weak, Acts 20.35.
and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how that he said: It is a
blessed thing to give rather then to receive. And the same Apostle labors
much in exhorting the faithful to distribute unto the necessities of the
Saints, Romans 13.8.13.
and to give themselves to hospitality, and to show mercy with all
cheerfulness of mind. Heb. 13.2.16.
Be not forgetful (says he) to lodge strangers: for thereby have some
received Angels into their houses unawares: to do good, and to distribute
forget not, for with such sacrifices God is pleased. This remember, that he
which sows sparingly, shall reap also sparingly, 2 Cor. 9, 6.7.10.11.
and he that sows liberally, shall reap also liberally. As every man
wishes in his heart, so let him give, not grudgingly, or of constraint, for
God loves a cheerful giver. Also he that finds seed to the sower, will
minister likewise bread for food, and multiply your seed, and increase the
fruits of your benevolence, that on all parts ye may be made rich unto all
liberality, which causes through us thanksgiving unto God. Gal. 6.9.10.
Let us not be weary of well-doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we
faint not. While we have therefore time, let us do good unto all men, but
specially unto them which are of the household of faith. 1 Timothy 6.17.18.19.
And he enieoyneth Timothy, the first Bishop of Ephesus, to charge them that
are rich in this world, that they do good, and be rich in good works, and
ready to distribute and communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may obtain eternal life.
Whosoever has this worlds goods, 1 Ioh. 3.17.
(says the Disciple whom the Lord Loved) and sees his brother have need, and
shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? The
Apostle S. James, Iam. 127. and 2.1.2, 3, 4.5, 6.13, 14, 15, 16.
and first Bishop of Jerusalem, teaches us, that we must not despise the poor
for their poverty, and course clothing, seeing God has chosen the poor of
this world, that they should be rich in Faith, and heirs of the kingdom
which he promised to them that love him. He likewise warns us, how there
that shall be judgment merciless to him that shows no mercy, to him that
will not fill the hungry belly, and clothe the naked back; for pure religion,
and undefiled before God the father (says he)is this to vesit the fatherless,
and widows in their adversity, and for a man to keep himself unspotted of
the world. 1. Pet 4.8, 9.10.
Above all things (says S. Peter, the first of the Apostles) have fervent
charity among you: for charity covers the multitude of sins. Be ye harborous
one to another, without grudging. Let every man, as he has received the gift,
minister the same one to another, Math. 5 42. Luk 6.30.35.36.38.
as good disposers of the manifold grace of God. Give unto him that asks
(says our Savior) and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not away.
Love your enemies, do good and lend, looking for nothing again, and your
reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the most high: for he
is kind unto the unkind, and good unto the evil. Be ye therefore merciful, as
your father also is merciful. Give, and it shall be given unto you, a good
measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over, shall men give unto
your bosom: for with what measure ye mete, with the same shall men men mete to
you again. Math. 5.7. Math. 10.42: Mark 9.41.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Whosoever shall give
unto one of these little ones to drink, a cup of cold water, in the name of a
disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall not loose his reward. Math. 6, 19,
20, 21,
Lay not up treasures for your selves upon the earth, where the Moath and
Canker corrupt, and where thieves dig through and steal: but lay up
treasures for your selves in Heaven, where neither the Moath nor Canker
corrupts, and where thieves neither dig through, nor steal: for where your
treasure is, there will your heart be also. Sell that ye have, and give alms,
Luke 12.33. and 14.12.13, 14, and 16.9.
make you bags which wax not old, a treasure that can never fail in
heaven. Make you friends with the riches of iniquity, that when ye shall
want, they may receive you into everlasting habitations. And when thou make a
dinner, or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, neither thy
kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbors, lest they also bid thee again, and a
recompense be made thee. But when thou make a feast, call the poor, the
maimed, the lame, and the blind, and thou shall be blessed, because they cannot
recompense thee: for thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just.
Matthew. 25.34, 35, 36, 40 41, 42, 43, 46.
Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the
world: for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, I thirsted, and ye gave me
drink, I was a stranger, and ye lodged me, I was naked, and ye clothed me, I
was sick, and ye visited me, I was in prison, and ye came unto me: verily I
say unto you, in as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
brethren, ye have done it to me. Then shall he say unto them on the left hand,
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
devil and his angels: for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat, I
thirsted, and ye gave me no drink, I was naked, and ye clothed me not, I
was a stranger, and ye lodged me not, I was sick, and in prison, and ye
visited me not: Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye did it not to one of
the least of these, ye did it not to me.

If this be true, which the Truth has both said, and says he shall say, then
truly many Christians of this last age, in Gods account, are accursed, and
many of the men of these last days, must needs go at the last day into
everlasting fire. Even as many as do now refuse to feed and refresh, to cloth
and to lodge, to visit and to comfort Christ Jesus, living, or rather dying
daily amongst us, in the persons of poor, needy, sick, and comfortless men.
Charity is grown so cold in these last days, that Christ may well wander
through our streets, we will not bring him in, he may stand crying at our
doors, and starve of hunger and cold, for fault of food and clothes, we will
neither fill his belly, nor cover his back; he may lie sick and sore in the
high way, and in the corners of our towns, we will not build him an hospital,
or if we do, it is so little it can hardly lodge him, or hold him, neither
will we take the pains to go see him there, to cause minister him medicine,
to bind up his wounds, to cure his sores, and to comfort him in his anguish. He
may for us lie in prison with fetters on his feet, and yet the merciless rich
man that has put him in prison, will not prove the deliverer, and set him
free; nor yet will one or more rich men prove the redeemer, and pay his debts,
that he may be set at liberty. Yea, he may lie dead at our doors, or in the
high streets, and scarcely will we bury him; or if we bury him, we will be
ashamed to accompany him to the burial place, he is in his members so abject
and contemptible in our eyes. Every man finds out some one excuse or other,
to cloak and to cover this his coldness of charity. The man that has much,
and may give much alms, says, he has so much ado with it for other uses,
that he cannot spare any part thereof to relieve the poor. Christ in heaven
(I wot well says he) has enough, and needs none of my goods, and if he
were on earth, and stood in need, I would not stand to bestow upon him all
that I have. And this may suffice. On the other hand, the man that has little
(and yet not so little, but that he might impart a little thereof, unto such as
have less then he) says, he has little enough for himself: So that between
these two sorts of men, have they much, or have they little, Christ can have
nothing at all: For both of them pretend that they have too little for
themselves, too little meat for their own bellies, and therefore Christ must
be hungry; too little drink for their own mouths, and therefore Christ must
be thirsty: too little clothing for their own backs, and therefore Christ
must go uncovered, except he be covered with rags: too little money in
their purses, and therefore Christ must be still in prison vnredeemed.

Thus then all plead they have too little, no than is found that thinks he
has much, or too much: And yet Solomon thought, Prou. 30, 8,
that a man might have too much, when he prayed unto the Lord, not to give him
too much. And truly, if the man has too much burden on his back, when he
does not only under it bow, but also break: and if the ship has too much
loading, when not only she drinks the salt sea, but also sinketh therein:
then truly that man has too much riches, when his love of them, confidence in
them, and care for them, make the back of his soul crack, or make the ship
of his soul to drink, yea to sink in the infernal flood of Gods fury. Then
shall the poor soul say, Woe is me, that I had so much riches, yea too much,
though once I thought a man could not have too much, Amos 4.2, Prou. 30.15.
but said always, bring, bring, give, give: and woe is me, I gave so little
alms upon so much as I had, for if I had not had so much, and done so little
good with my so much goods, I should not now have tasted of so much torment.
What a fool was I, Luke 12, 48
that would not believe the true saying of the master of Truth? Unto whomsoever
much is given, of him much shall be required. Good Lord! how is it possible
that men can look for so much good and glory at Christ's hands, who will yet
give so little of their goods, or nothing at all unto him and his for his sake?
How can they hope at his hands to be fed with the bread of life, the hidden
Manna from above, or refreshed with the water of life, out of the fountain of
the Paradise of God, or clothed with the white robe of righteousness, and
covered with the garmen^ of glory, or redeemed from their spiritual debts,
and delivered from the bondage and fetters of sin and Satan, and brought into
the fruition and liberty of Gods kingdom? How is it possible I say that such
men as do behave themselves in the behalf of Christ's poor members so
uncharitably, should expect at Christ's hands, for such great and inestimable
goods? With what face I say, can the man crave, or yet hope to receive at
Christ's hands, the bread and drink of eternal life, that will refuse to
minister unto him, or his members for his sake, the bread and drink of this
transitory and temporal life? or how can he expect to have the filthy
nakedness of his soul covered with the white-red robes of Christ's
righteousness in this life, and after this life to be clothed both soul and
body with the robe-royall of glory, who will refuse now to cover Christ's
nakedness with a piece of his course cloth, or with his old clothes?

It is recorded of the first Christians, Act. 2.44, 45, and 4.34, 35.
that they had all things common, for they sold their possessions, and goods,
and parted them to all men, as every one had need; so that there was none among
them that lacked. Was it so? then, merciful God, how unlike are our Christians
of these last times, unto those of the first times! even as unlike unto them in
devotion and charity, as were the feet of Nebuchadnezzars image unto the head
thereof, in nature and quality. Dan. 2.32, 33.
The head of the image was of fine gold, but the feet of it were part of iron,
and part of clay. And the first Christians were even fine as the finest gold of
Ophir, they were tried and fined every day in the furnace of affliction:
godliness to them was gain, and their glory was not to gather and hoord up
gold, but to give their gold and their goods unto the poor and needy members
of Christ Jesus: yea even to forsake their gold and their goods, and to lay
down their lives for Christ's sake. And such was the godliness and goodness,
the piety and charity of those golden times. But we Christians of these last
times, are more like unto the feet of Nebuchadnezzars image, which were of iron
and clay mingled together. Our hearts are hard as iron, we take no pity nor
compassion upon the poor, they are hard as an Adamant, they are hardly moved
with any contrition or sorrow for sin. As they are void of compassion in
behalf of the poor, so are they of compunction for our manifold trespasses.
Our hands are hard as iron, and in a manner made of iron, for they are more
ready to bruize and break our poor brethren by oppression, extortion,
usury, robbery, and all kind of hard and cruel usage, then to help them any
whit. Our souls, as they are lodged in tabernacles of clay, so are they almost
turned into a clay eye substance: for what other thing do we mind but claie,
and corruptible things? Our affections are set upon the things that are below,
and we are wholly consumed with worldly cares. So that, look how great odds
there is between gold and iron mingled with clay, between the head and the
feet of that image: as great odds is there between the Christians of the
first and last times. The first Christians were sellers of their substance, to
the end they might give unto the poor: but the last Christians are many of
them buyers of the substance, and taskers of the goods of the poor. The first
Christians had the use of all things necessary common: but the last Christians
have the use of all things private. The first Christians parted their goods
among such as had need: but the last Christians do rather pluck and pull
from such as do need. Finally, the first Christians suffered none amongst
them to lack: but the last Christians suffer many multitudes of their poor
brethren, not only to lack, but even to lose their lives for want.

Except your righteousness (says our Savior) exceed the rihhteousnesse of
the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 5.20.
ye shall not enter into the kingdom of God. And may it not be well said?
That except the charity of Christians, equalize at least, if not exceed, the
charity of the heathen Lacedaemonians (who sufferered none in their
commonwealth to want) we shall not, nor cannot prove worthy of such a king, as
is the son of God, nor of such a kingdom, as is the kingdom of heaven.
Matthew. 12.41.
The men of Niniue (says our Sovereign) shall rise in judgment with this
generation, and condemn it, for they repented at the preaching of Jonas, and
behold, a greater then Jonas is here: So may it be well said, The men of
Lacedemon shall rise in judgment with us Christians of the last times, and
condemn us; for they did communicate their goods amongst themselves, at the
appointment of their Lawgiver Lycurgus, and behold a greater then Lycurgus
has enjoined us to do the like, to communicate, not indeed the right and
possession it self (as the Anabaptists do dream) but the use of our goods
only, for the mutual relief of one another. O then the unspeakable shame!
that heathen men should do more for the commandment of a temporal lawgiver,
or king, then we Christians for the law and counsel of the eternal lawgiver,
and the king of the whole world; Or that men living under the obscure light of
nature, should be so charitable; and we who live under the clear light of
grace, should prove so merciless and miserable.

EXAMPLES OF Diverse regular Students in the Art of Enrichiching, which did all
practice the Rules of this Art, and were blessed of God.
Having set down the precepts and rules of this art, being ten in number, and
having verified and justified the same by manifold allegations of sacred
Scripture, both of the old and new Testament, in the manner abouesaid: It
follows that in the next place, we mention certain such examples as may
serve to illustrate the foresaid rules, and those we do distinguish into two
ranckes; The one is of such notable persons as are recorded in holy writ to
have attained to riches by right means, and to have used the same according to
the rules of this art, the which have been blessed of God, and have prospered
for their regularities sake. The other rank is of such others, as in
laboring and studying to be rich, have been irregulars: that is, either have
not attained to riches by the right way, or else never used them after the
right manner, and therefore have been accursed of God. Of the first rank the
examples are these:

Abraham, the father of the faithful, Genesis 12.1, 2, 3, 7. and 13.4.18, and 14,
20, and 18.23, and 20.17, and 21.33. and 23.13, and 24.34.35.
was a regular student in this Art: for he was a man that feared God devoutly,
called upon his name diligently, obeyed his voice readily, and lived amongst
men uprightly, following the vocation the Lord had called him unto carefully.
He was likewise careful for all such as were under his charge, that they
should do the like: for he commanded his sons and his servants to keep the
way of the Lord, even to live religiously, and soberly, and justly in this
present world. And the Lord blessed him exceedingly, he magnified and
multiplied him; so that he gave him in great store, men servants, and maid
servants, silver and gold, Camels and Asses, Sheep and Beeues.

Genesis 12.5. and 14.12. and 19.1, 2, 3. and 13.5.6.7.
Lot, Abraham's brothers son, was likewise a regular Student in this Art. He
was a man that feared God, upright in his ways, hospitable, charitable, and
diligent in his calling. And the Lord blessed him with store and abundance of
sheep, cattle, and tents; so that the land could not bear them, that he and
his Uncle might dwell together.

Genesis 26.2, 3, 4.12.13.14.24.25.26.27.28.29.30
Isaac, the son of Abraham, was also a regular Sudent, to wit, a man fearing
the Lord, upright, charitable, and diligent in his calling. And the Lord, whom
he served devoutly, was with him effectually, and blessed him exceedingly: so
that he waxed mighty, and still increased, his hand brought forth an hundredth
fold; he had flocks of Sheep, and heardes of cattle, and a mighty
household: so that the Philistines (amongst whom he dwelt) envied his
greatness; but king Abimelech seeing manifestly that the Lord was with his
servant Isaac, made an alliance and covenant of amity and peace with him.

Jacob, the son of Isaac, Genesis 28.13, 14.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.21.22. and
30.27.43, and 31, 17.18.38.40. and 32.9.10 7. and 33, 4.11 and 35 1, 2, 3.4.
and 36.6.7.
was a man father-like religious, just, charitable, and diligent: wherefore the
Lord was with him whithersoeuer he went, so that he became very rich, and
increased exceedingly: for he had man servants, and maid servants, Camels and
Asses, and many flocks of sheep, and herds of cattle: yea Laban his father
in law, who was an Idolater, was blessed of God with temporal increase for
Jacobs sake. And it is very likely that God blessed also Esau with temporal
blessings for receiving his brother Jacob at his return, so kindly, and so
tenderly as he did, and for being appeased toward him. For Esau hearing that
his brother Jacob was coming home again, he ran to meet him, and embraced
him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him, and they wept: And therefore Jacob
called the present he sent to his brother Esau of his goods, his blessing: I
pray thee, quoth he to him, take my blessing that is brought thee; The holy
man insinuating thereby, that as it was a blessing from God unto Jacob, so it
should be a blessing from God unto Esau, by Jacobs hand: And consequently, a
means to make Esau more blessed in worldly wealth for Jacobs sake.

Joseph, the son of Jacob, Genesis 37.26.27, 36.
was a man that feared God, sober and chaste in his carriage, upright amongst
men, and diligent in his calling: first in Potiphars house; and 39, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6 20, 21, 22, 23. and 41.14, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44.
then in the prison; and afterward in the Princes palace. The Lord was with
him every where, and he prospered: yea all his masters prospered for his sake.
Potiphar, Pharaohs Steward, was his first master, who bought him at the hands
of the Israelites, unto whom his brethren had sold him. Potiphar seeing that
the Lord was with him, and that he made all that he did to prosper in his
hand, of a slave he made him the ruler of his house, and put all that he had
under his hand. And the Lord blessed the Egyptians house for Joseph's sake: yea
the blessing of the Lord was upon all that he had in the house, and in the
field. His second master was the master of the Kings prison house. After that
he was put in prison by the malicious craft of Potiphars wife. But even there
the Lord was with Joseph, and got him favor in the sight of the master of the
prison; so that he committed to Joseph's hand, all the prisoners that were in
the prison, and looked unto nothing that was under his hand, but trusted Joseph
with all, seeing the Lord was with him: for whatsoever he did, the Lord made it
to prosper. His third master was King Pharaoh himself, who sent for him out
of prison, to interpret his dreams; and afterward, for his divine wisdom,
made him chief ruler over his house, yea over all the Kingdoms of Egypt* so
that all the revenues and riches thereof came under his hand.

Thus we see Joseph, of a slave, made a servant, and a ruler of servants in his
master Potiphars house: and thereafter, of a prisoner, made a ruler of
prisoners in the prison; and in the end, of a poor prisoner made a potent
Prince: so that such as he once served, were made to serve him, and he made
the master and Lord of such as had been his masters before. His brethren had
sold him for silver into Egypt, Genesis 45, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
and he afterward sold them without silver, corn in Egypt, yea saved them in
Egypt from the great famine, even his father and all his family. Thus we find
it most true, which the holy woman Anna sings in her song, 1 Samuel 2, 7, 8.
Psalm 113.7.107, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 40, 41 42.
and the sweet singer of Israel in his Psalm: The Lord makes poor, and
makes rich, brings low, and exalts; he raises up the poor out of the
dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among Princes,
and to make them inherit the seat of glory. He turns the wilderness into
pooles of water, and the dry land into water springs. And there he places the
hungry, and they build a City to dwell in, and sow the fields, and plant
vineyards, which bring forth fruitful increase: for he blesses them, and
they multiply exceedingly, and he diminishes not their cattle. He powers
contempt upon princes, and turns the springs of water into dryness, and a
fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. Yet
he raises up the poor out of misery, and makes him families like a flock of
sheep. The righteous shall see it, and rejoice, and all iniquity shall stop her
mouth. And this is that which the holy Psalmist sings of godly Joseph more
particularly. Psalm. 105.17, 18 19, 20, 21, 22,
Joseph was sold for a slave, they held his feet in the stocks, and he was
laid in yrons until his appointed time came, and the counsel of the Lord
tried him. The King sent and loosed him, he made him Lord of his house, even
the ruler of the people delivered him, and made him ruler of his substance, yea
of his Princes and rulers, that he should bind them unto his will, and teach
his ancient and wise men wisdom. Genesis 45.16.17.18 19.20.21.22.23.
And the Lord that thus gave Joseph favor in the eyes of Pharaoh, inclined
likewise the heart of the King to favor and love Jacob the father of Joseph,
and his brethren for his sake: so that when the tidings came unto Pharaohs
house, that Joseph's brethren were come, it pleased Pharaoh well and his
servants.

Moreover, Pharaoh said unto Joseph, say to thy brethren: This do ye, lade
your beasts, and depart, go to the land of Canaan, and take your father, and
your households, and come to me, and I will give you the best of the land of
Egypt, and ye shall eat of the fat of the land. And I command thee: Thus do
ye; Take you chariots out of the land of Egypt, for your children, and for
your wives, and bring your father, and come also; regard not your stuff: for
the best of all the land of Egypt is yours. And the children of Israel did so;
and Joseph gave them Chariots according to the commandment of Pharaoh; he gave
them victuals also for the journey; he gave them all (none excepted) change of
raiment; and unto Benjamin he gave three hundredth pieces of silver, and five
suites of raiment. And unto his father likewise he sent ten he Asses laden
with the best things of Egypt, and ten she Asses laden with wheat, and bread,
and meat, for his father by the way. And when as Joseph's father and his
brethren were come into Egypt, the good King knowing thereof, Genesis 46.33 3^.
and 47.3, 4.5, 6.11, 12.
and understanding that their trade (for they lived not idle) was to be
occupied about cattle and sheep, as Sheepheards, after that he had admitted
them to his presence, spoke to Joseph saying; Thy father and thy brethren are
come unto thee, the land of Egypt is before thee, in the best place of the land
make thy father and thy brethren dwell; let them dwell in the land of Goshen;
and if thou know that there be men of actiuity among them, make them rulers
over my cattle. And godly and happy Joseph placed his father and his brethren,
and gave them possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, even in
the land of Rameses, as good and bountiful Pharaoh had commanded. And the
blessed son nourished his blessed father, and his brethren, and all his fathers
household with bread, even to the young children.

David attained to great riches and honor by practicing the rules of this Art,
1 Samuel 16, and 17 2 Samuel 2, and 5, and 7, and 8, and 22. 1 Chronicles, 17, and 29. 1
King 3, 6, Psalm. 78, 70, 71.72.
he feared God exceedingly, called upon him continally, walking before him in
truth, in righteousness, and in pureness of his spirit: yea he was a man after
the Lords own heart: and he that was in his heart, was with his heart, and in
his hand also, and blessed him abundantly. He chose David his servant, and
took him from the sheepe-folds: even from behind the ewes with young brought
he him to feed his people in Jacob, and his inheritance in Israel. So he fed
them according to the simplicity of his heart, 1 Samuel 18, 18, 23. Psalm. 113.7,
and guided them by the discretion of his hands. He was, (as he says of
himself) a poor man, and of small reputation; but God, who takes pleasure in
raising up the poor out of the dust, and in lifting up the beggar from the
dongue-hil) changed his poverty into riches, his despisednesse into honor,
his shepherds crook into a princely scepter, his country cap into a kingly
crown, his base sheep-cote into a stately court, and his pasture of small
compass, into an ample kingdom. In one word, God that does great things took
him from following the sheep, that he might rule over his people Israel.

1 King, 3, 11, 12, 13. and 10.21.23.25.27, 28. 2 Chronicles. 1. and 8. and 13.
Eccles. 2.4.5.6.7, 8.9,
Solomon, David's son, did attain to his great riches by practicing these
rules: and namely because he did ask of the Lord understanding to do judgment,
and not riches, nor honor, nor long life, nor yet the life of his enemies;
therefore the Lord gave him not only that which he asked, but also those things
he asked not, even riches and honor, more then any in Israel had before him, or
yet after him. So that he builded houses, planted vineyards, pleasant gardens,
and orchards, replenished with fruitful trees; purchased great possessions of
Beeues and sheep, gathered abundance of silver and gold: yea he made silver
as plenteous as stones in Jerusalem, and exceeded all the Kings of the earth,
both in riches, and in wisdom.

Iehosophat did attain to great prosperity by practicing these Rules: 2.
Chro. 17.
He sought the god of his fathers devoutly, and walked in his commandments
diligently, even in the ways of his forefather David, and therefore the Lord
was with him, stablished the kingdom in his hand, and all Judah brought
presents unto him, so that he had of riches and honor in abundance.

Esther and Mordecai attained to riches and honor by these Rules: Esth, 2. and
6. and 8. and 10.
The uncle and the niece both of them feared God, and therefore he raised them
from low degree, unto princely dignity, from poverty advanced them to great
riches: So that Esther of a poor despised maid, became a famous and an
honorable queen, even the wife of king Ashuerus the mighty Monarke of the
Medes and Persians; and Mordecai, of a poor despised man, was preferred to
great riches and honor, so that he was made second unto the king.

Daniel and his three fellows, Dan. 1, and 3, and 6.
commonly called the three children, practiced the Rules of this art. They
excelled in the fear of the Lord, and in wisdom, which flows therefro; so
that of poor captives and prisoners, he made them Princes companions, they
were promoted in the Province of Babel to high honors, and endowed with great
riches, and Daniel was set over the whole governors and rulers of the
kingdom, and he and his fellows prospered exceedingly.

Obadiah, the governor of Achabs house, 1, Kings 18, 3, 4, 12, 13.
was a man that feared God greatly, even from his youth; and when Iezebel
destroyed the Prophets of the Lord; he took an hundredth Prophets, and hid them
by fifties in a cave, and fed them there: So that according to his name he
proved a servant of the Lord: yea a servant of his servants, who, at every word
called himself the servant of Eliah, and him his Lord. And no doubt but the
Lord blessed him abundantly, and so will he do all such Noble men and
Gentlemen, as in Kings Courts further either with countenance or maintenance,
Gods Ministers, chiefly in the time of any persecution raised for the Gospel.

2 King. 4, 8.9.10, 11.12.13.14.15. to 37.
The Shunamite Gentlewoman that harbored the man of God Elisha, observed the
rules of this Art. Behold (said she to her husband) I know that this is an
holy man of God that passes by us continually; let us make him a little
chamber, I pray thee, with walls, and let us set him there a bed and a table,
and a stool and a Candlestick, that he may turn in hither when he comes to
us. And in recompense of this her piety and charity, God blessed her house,
yea and her barren womb: at the prayer of the man of God he gave her a son,
when as her husband was now waxed old: and not only this, but also when the
child was dead, God, by the hand of the prophet, restored him from death to
life again. Whereby we may learn that it is a work which brings with it
great reward, to entertain and cherish Gods servants, and not only to
minister unto their necessities of our subbstance, but also to honor and
reverence them both by gesture and compellation, as we see this worthy
gentlewoman did. The Prophet was a poor despised man, and stood in need of
help in outward things, and yet because he was the man and servant of God, this
noble woman called him at every word her Lord, and her self his handmaid.
When she came before him, it was her humble demeanor, to fall at his feet,
and to bow to the ground. So did the Bethelite widow behave her self toward
the same Prophet, 2. King. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
and God in requital of her piety and reverence, of one little pitcher of
oil she had, filled many vessels; even all the empty vessels she had
borrowed of her neighbors. Likewise the widow of Zarephath, who ministered unto
Elias a part of her small portion (for in the great famine that then was, 1.
King. 17.9, 10 11, 12.13, 14, 15 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 21, 22, 23, 24,
all the victuals she had were gone, except a little meal in a barrel, and a
little oil in a cruze) was requited of the Lord, for her fear of God, and her
charity toward his servant. For the meal in the barrel wasted not, neither
was the oil spent out of the cruze, according to the word of the Lord, which
he spoke by the hand of his Prophet. Yea more, her dead son was restored
again to life, at the prayer and supplication of the man of God: So that
whatsoever benefit we bestow upon Gods servants, God will abundantly requite
it, with spiritual and temporal blessings, both in this life, and in the life
to come.

Job practiced the Rules of this Art, Job. 1.1, 2, 3, 4, and 29.4.12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17, 18, 19. and 42, 10, 11, 12.
he was an upright and just man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil, he
delivered the poor that cried, helped the fatherless, and him that had none
to help him: he caused the widows heart to rejoice, he was the eyes to the
blind, the feet to the lame, a father unto the fatherless, a protector of the
poor man's right: and therefore Gods providence was upon his tabernacle, his
root was spread out by the waters, and the dew did lie upon his branch, and
his family was so great, that he exceeded all the men of the East. For his
substance was seven thousand sheep, three thousand camels, five hundred yokes
of oxen, and five hundred she asses, besides gold, silver, houses, and lands
And though he was for a time sorely and heavily afflcted with poverty,
sickness, and sores, and so denuded of all his former prosperity; yet because
he perseuered in Gods fear, no less in his adversity, then in his
prosperity he had done: therefore the Lord blessed his last days more then
the first, and gave him even twice so much as he had before.

Tobit. 1. and 2. and 8. and 10. and 11. and 14.
Tobias practiced the rules of this Art, he walked all his life long in the
way of justice and truth, he showed much liberality and charity to those of
his nation, he offered the first fruits and tenths to the priests, he gave much
alms to the poor, he gave his bread to the hungry, and his clothes to the
naked, he bid to dinner, and feasted such as feared God, and buried the dead:
And therefore God blessed him both with spiritual and temporal goods. And
though his goods were spoiled by Senacherib, yet within fifty five days he
was restored: for God made his brothers son Achiacharus to find favor with
Sarchedonus the king of Assyria, so that he placed him next unto him, to be
cup bearer, keeper of his signet, and steward of his house. And though that
afterward he was also afflicted with blindness, and brought to that exigent,
that his wife was constrained to labor for her living, in taking women's work
to do: yet ere long, he was restored unto his sight, and blessed with
prosperity and wealth, by the means of his son Tobiths marriage with Sara,
the only daughter and heir of rich Raguel.

Zacheus of an irregular became a regular student in this Art, Luke 19.1, 2, 3,
7, 8.
as soon as he had heard the great Schoolmaster Jesus teach him his lesson
in his own house. Being a rich man, and a receiver of Tribute, he gave the
half of his goods unto the poor, and from whom he had taken any thing by
forged cauillation, he restored him four fold. It were a happy thing, if our
Church-robbers, and sacrilegious God-spoylers would follow this happy man's
example, and make restitution of the Church livings, which they have impiously
possessed, and godlesly appropriated to their own private uses.

Marie the wife of Cleophas, Matthew. 26.7. and 27.55, 56, 61. Luk 8.2, 3. and
10.38. Ioh. 11.2 29. and 12.3. and 19.25. Act. 12.12. Romans 16.6.
and sister of the blessed virgin Marie, the glorious mother of Jesus, Marie
the mother of James and John, Marie the mother of James and Ioses, Marie
Magdalen the sister of Lazarus, Marie the mother of John, Mark, Martha, Ioanna
the wife of Chuza, Herod's Steward, and virtuous Susanna, together with such
other godly women as ministered unto our blessed Savior and his disciples were
such as practiced the Rules of this art; had they much, or had they little,
they purchased it by lawful means, and used the same religiously and
charitably: for they imparted thereof unto the poor Ministers and members of
Christ, according to their power; and therefore no doubt but they prospered.
This Mary the wife of Cleophas, and sister, as is said, of the Queen of
Mary's, yea the Queen of women, the blessed Virgin Mary is she whom the
Apostle of the gentiles, Romans 1.1, to 7. and 16.6.
Saint Paul, writing to the Church of Rome, saluteth in the end of his Epistle,
as she that had bestowed much labor upon the Ministers of Christ. And it was
Mary Magdalene, the sister of Lazarus, and Martha, that took a box of ointment
of Spikenard, very costly, and anointed Jesus, even from the head to the feet,
and wiped his feet with the hair of her head, Mark. 14, 3. and 16.1. Ioh. 12.3.
so that the house was filled with the savor of the ointment. The same holy
Marie, together with another godly Marie, the mother of James, and devout
Salome had prepared costly ointments, to embaulme the balmie and sweet body of
our sweet Savior Jesus.

Act. 9.36, to 41.
Tabitha was a regular student in this Art, she feared God, she was full of
good works, and alms which she did, a virtuous woman, and diligent in her
calling; who by the Lords blessing, and her virtuous industry, attained to a
competent wealth, and being dead, the Lord raised her again from death to
life, by the hand of blessed S. Peter.

Cornelius, a captain of the Italian band, Act. 10.1, to 7.11, 22, to 26.
practiced the Rules of this Art: for he was a devout man, and one that feared
God, with all his household. He prayed unto God continually, he gave much alms
unto the people, so that his prayers and his alms came up into remembrance
before God: wherefore God blessed his temporal store with increase, but
chiefly his soul with spiritual grace: for the Lord whom he served
incessantly, sent his angel unto him, to bid him send for his servant Saint
Peter into his house: for he shall show thee (quoth the holy angel) what thou
ought to do. Toward whom, Matthew 10, 2. Ioh. 21.15, 16, 17 Luke 22 31, 32.
Act. 2, 14, 41 and 9.42. and 10, 44. to 48 and 11.1, 2, 15, to 18.
the godly Captain behaved himself so humbly and reverently, notwithstanding
his abject and contemptible estate, in regard that he was appointed of Christ,
to be the great feeder of his flock, the shepherd and pastor both of his
sheep and lambs: that is, the conuerter and spiritual ruler, both of Jews
and Gentiles, as also the confirmer and establisher of his brethren, that is,
of the rest of the Apostles: toward whom, I say, he behaved himself so
humbly and respectively, that he called together his kinsmen and special
friends to go and meet him, and to do him honor; So that as soon as he
saw the blessed servant of Christ, he fell down at his feet and worshipped
him. Who on the other part, to show his Christian modesty, as the other had
done his Christian humility, and to signify unto Cornelius and the rest, that
he craved no such courtesy at his, or their hands, took him up presently,
saying to him, stand up; for even I my self am a man. The which example,
teaches both Clergy and Laytie, true humility. First, it teaches the
people to reverence and honor their pastors, both with humble gesture of
body, and with compellation of honor: ^ Sam. 1.14. to 18,
for the priests and prophets of God, that did bear rule in his Church, have
not only bin called fathers and Lords, by the people; but also they are
honored in the holy Scripture, with the titles of Lords, Princes, and Kings.
This holy woman Anna, the mother of Samuel, called the high priest Eli, her
Lord: who, when as he had thought she had been dumb, because that praying in
the temple, her lips did but move only, so that her voice was not heard,
she answered and said: Not so my Lord, I am a woman of a sorrowful heart, I
have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have powered out my soul before
the Lord. Yea, she calls her self by the name of his handmaid; Count not
thine handmaid (quoth she) for a wicked woman: and again, let thine handmaid
find grace and favor in thy sight. Thus the widow of Zarephath behaved her
self humbly, 1. King. 17.28, 24.
in the behalf of the prophet Eliah. Thus godly Obadiah king Achabs steward, 1
King. 18.3, 4, 7 9, 12, 13.
and governor of his house, who feared God greatly, and hid an hundred
prophets in a cave, and nourished them there in the time of Iezebels
persecution, behaved himself in the presence of the same prophet: when as he
met him by the way, he fell on his face, and said: Art not thou my Lord Elisha?
Was it not told my Lord what I did when Iezebel slew the Prophets of the Lord:
not only called he the prophet his Lord, but also he called himself the
Prophets servant. What have I sinned (said he) that thou would deliver thy
servant into the hands of Ahab to be slain? but I thy servant fear the Lord
from my youth upward.

Thus also did the Captain over the fifty, 2 King 1.13. 14,
sent by Ahaziah the King, behave himself humbly in the presence of the man of
God: he fell on his knees before Eliah, and said unto him: O man of God, I
pray thee let my life, and the life of the fifty thy servants, be precious in
thy sight. Thus the Bethelite widow called herself the Prophet Elishas servant
and handmaid. and 4, 1.2.16.27.28.
And the Shunamite Gentlewoman, whom we spoke of before, said unto the same
Prophet, when as he had promised her from God a child: O nay my Lord, thou man
of God, do not lie unto thine handmaid. And when as her child afterward
died, she went to the man of God to mount Carmell, and caught him by the feet,
and said; Did I desire a son of my Lord? and when as he had revived her
son, she fell at his feet, and bowed herself to the ground.

Thus Naaman, 2 King. 5.1.9.10.15.17.18.19.20 21,
Captain of the Host of the King of Syria, a great and mighty man, expert in
war, and honorable in the sight of the King his master, as General of his
Army, came with his Horses and Chariots, and stood at the door of the house
of Elisha, till the Prophet sent his messenger unto him, saying: Go and wash
thy self in Iordane seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and
thou shall be cleansed. And when he was cleansed, according to the saying of
the man of God, he turned again to him, he and all his company, and stood
before him, and said: Behold, I know now, that there is no God in all the
world, but in Israel: Now therefore I pray thee, take a blessing of thy
servant. And the Prophet having refused his reward, Naaman said: shall there
not be given to thy servant, as much of this earth as two Mules may bear? for
thy servant will henceforth offer neither burnt sacrifice nor offering unto any
other God, save unto the Lord. Herein the Lord be merciful unto thy servant,
that when my master goes into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and
leans on mine hand, and I bow my self in the house of Rimmon: when I do bow
down, I say in the house of Rimmon, the Lord be merciful unto thy servant in
this point.

Thus we see how that this great and mighty man called himself at every
word, the servant of Gods servant; yea moreover he bare him such honor, that
when as he saw Gehezi the servant of Elisha running after him, he lighted
down from his Chariot to meet him, and said: Is all well? Thus we see how
good and godly men and women, as well the rich as the poor, and as well the
noble as the ignoble have honored the servants of God, and the Governors of his
Church, and called them Lords. And yet this is not all the honor the Spirit of
God gives them in the holy Scripture. 2 Chronicles. 17.7. Psalm. 45.9.13, 16.
For the Prophet David as he speaking of the future glory of the Catholic
Church under Christ the head thereof, says thus: The Kings daughter is all
glorious within, her clothing is of broydred gold. She shall be brought unto
the King in raiment of needle work; so prophesying of the future splendor and
dignity of the fathers and governors of the Church, he uses these words: In
stead of thy fathers shall thy children be: thou shall make them Princes
through all the earth; meaning that of the children of the Church, should be
chosen such as should be Fathers and Rulers of the Church; as Patriarchs,
Archbishops, and Bishops, which should be honored throughout the whole
Christian world as Lords and Princes: for the holy Prophet, as he describes
typically Christ, as the King of the Catholic Church, and none but he to be
King, and the Church as the Queen and Spouse of this King: so does he
signify unto us, that the Princes of this King and kingdom, are the Rulers
and Governors of the Church above named, which of children of the Church,
should be made Fathers of the Church, and should be honored as Princes through
all the earth: for we must not imagine that the kingdom of Christ is to be
included within the walls and circuit of one City, whether Rome, Jerusalem,
Geneua, or Amsterdam, nor yet within the compass of some three or four
kingdoms; but we must believe that the Church of Christ is of far more
ample and spacious bounds then so.

Psalm. 45, 27.
All the ends of the world shall remember themselves (says the Prophet David)
and turn to the Lord. And all the kindreds of the Nations shall worship before
thee. and 2.8.
Ask of me (says the eternal father to the son) and I shall give thee the
Heathen for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy possession:
his dominion shall be from sea to sea, and 72.8.11.
and from the river unto the ends of the land; yea all kings shall worship him,
all nations serve him.

But to pass over this matter of the large extent of the Catholic Church, and
to return to the honor the people owe unto her governors, we read what was
the demeanor of the Iayler toward Saint Paul and Silas being prisoners, Acts
16.24.25. to 34.
whose hands and feet the Lord loosed, as also opened the doors of the prison,
by the means of a mighty earthquake; so that the Iayler came trembling, and
fell down before Paul and Silas, and brought them out and said: Sirs (or as
the word in the original also imports) my Lords, what must I do to be
saved? And they said, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved, and thine household. And they preached unto him the word of the Lord, and
to all that were in his house; and when he had brought them into his house, and
had washed the stripes and wounds of their bodies, and likewise they the
spiritual stripes and wounds of the souls of him and his household by
baptism, he set meat before them, and rejoiced that he with all his
household believed in God. Lastly, Revel. 1.11.19.20 and 11.8.12.18. and
3.1.7.14,
Saint John writing to the Bishops of the seven Churches of Asia, calls them
by the name of seven Angels: or rather our Savior and Sovereign himself
calls them so, who also expounds the seven stars to be the Angels of the
seven Churches, and bids him write unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus
thus; and unto the Angel of the Church of the Smyrnians thus; and so unto the
other Angels of the other Churches. Where note, that although that in every one
of these Churches were more Ministers then one; yea there was many in every one
of them, and namely in Ephesus, as is more then clear by the tenor of Saint
Paul's Epistle to Timothy, 1 Timothy 13.4. and 3.1.2.
the first Bishop of Ephesus; yet the name of Angel is by the spirit of God,
the mouth of Christ, and the pen of the Apostle appropriated unto only one
of the Ministers of the foresaid Churches, even unto him who was Bishop amongst
them.

And as the four and twenty Elders glorify Christ for making them Kings and
Priests unto God; so the holy Apostle and Prophet Saint John, Revel 5.10.
Revel, 1.4.5.6.
writing unto the said seven Angels or Bishops of the said seven Churches, in
his salutation ascribes all glory and dominion to Jesus Christ the Prince of
the Kings of the earth, who (says he) has made us Kings and Priests unto God
the Father.

And thus have I verified mine assertion, that the holy Scripture honoreth the
Governors and Rulers of the Church, with the honorable Titles, and names of
Fathers, Lords, Princes, Kings, and Angels. And therefore let no man think
that I have said too much, for yet I could say more, and yet no more then the
word of God does warrant me to say. And therefore I wish all us Laymen to
think, that it is not the peaceable spirit of Gods Church, but the popular
perturbing spirit of Amsterdam, or some such other respectlesse private spirit,
that moves men to dislike of the giving of honorable titles to the Governors
and Prelates of the Church. But as the example of Cornelius his demeanor in
the presence of the great Apostle, does teach us Laymen humility and reverence
in the behalf of Gods Ministers: so does the example of the modest demeanor
of the first of the Apostles, in the behalf of godly Cornelius, teach all
Pastors, and Prelates, all Patriarks, Archbishops and Bishops to show and
Practice all Christian modesty in the peoples behalf; by letting them
understand, that all worship and honor is properly due unto God; and that men,
whom God has set in authority, are to be respected and reverenced, not for
their person, but for their place; not for their own sakes, but for his sake
whose servants they are. Revel. 1, 6.
And always it becomes them with the holy Prophet Saint John, to ascribe all
the glory and honor unto him who has made them Kings and Priests unto God the
father: yea Kings themselves, Psalm. 82, 1, 6.
I mean the Kings and Monarkes of the earth, whom God has called Gods,
because they represent him most in power, majesty, justice, mercy, and bounty,
when as they are honored of their subjects, as God with prostration and
adoration of the body, supplication of the mouth, and with illustrious and
lofty compellations, or yet with egregious and great commendations, they must
remember to give all this honor they receive at their subjects hands, unto
God, acknowledging themselves but as the conduit-pipes whereby all honor
whatsoever, all glory and praise is conveyed unto him, to whom it most properly
belongs. Otherwise God will be avenged on his little Gods, for holding back
of his honor from him; Psalm. 107.40. Job. 12.18, 19, 21.
and he that powers contempt upon Princes for contemning of him, and loses
the collar of Kings; yea and leads them as a prey, for not praying and
praising him, will abate their honor, and turn their glory into ignominy,
and their fame into shame, as he did in the behalf of Herod: Act. 12.21.22.23
of whom it is written, that upon a day appointed he arraied himself in
royal apparel, and sat on the judgment seat, and made an Oration unto
them; and the people gave a shout saying: The voice of God, and not of man. But
immediately the Angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not glory unto
God; so that he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost. This godless
little God would not give glory unto the great God, and therefore the highest
creature in heaven, and the lowest creature on earth, conspired together to be
avenged on him for his godless withholding of Gods honor. Thus he that was
a little God, and spoke like a little God, became a Thief, and robber of the
glory of the great God, and therefore died like a man; yea like a beast; so
that the worms eat up his flesh. One part of his flesh was turned into
worms, and they preyed upon the other part, till he gave up the ghost, which
fell into the hands of a worse worm then all the other worms, Isay. 66.2^.
even a worm that never dies, but always lives, and never leaves eating.

Psalm. 2.10.11.12
And therefore let all Kings hearken unto the exhortation and admonition of a
King: Be wise now therefore (O Kings) be learned ye Judges of the earth; serve
the Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling, kiss the Son least he be
angry, and ye perish in the way, when his wrath shall suddenly burn: blessed
are all that trust in him.

Acts 14.15.
Lydia, a seller of purple, was a regular Student in this Art, she feared
God, and worshipped him devoutly, she heard the blessed Apostle of the
Gentiles attentively, she believed steadfastly, and was baptized, also she
ministered unto the necessities of the Saints liberally, and God blessed her
both with spiritual and temporal blessings abundantly. I wish that this
godly woman should serve for a mirror to all Merchants, Prou. 31.10. etc.
and Salomons virtuous woman for a pattern to all good Christian huswiues.

Acts 9.43. and 10.32.
Simon the Tanner practiced the Rules of this Art, he feared God, and
entertained his servants, chiefly the chief of the Apostles Saint Peter, who
tarried many days in his house: he was likewise diligent in his calling, and
doubtless God blessed him with prosperity in a competent measure.

Onesiphorus was a man that feared God, 2 Timothy 1.16, 17.18.
and refreshed his servants, namely the blessed Apostle of the Gentiles Saint
Paul, neither was he ashamed of his chain, but when he was at Rome he
sought him out very diligently, and found him, and in many things he ministered
unto him at Ephesus. Wherefore no doubt but it fared with him according to the
holy Apostles prayer; The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, for
he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain, but when he was at
Rome he sought me out very diligently, and found me. The Lord grant unto him,
that he may find mercy with the Lord at that day. And the same grace and mercy
the same God grant unto all good men, which resemble good Onesiphorus in
giving of their goods unto the Ministers, and poor members of Jesus Christ.

EXAMPLES OF SVCH As laboring to be rich, were Irregulars; that is, did not
study nor practice the Rules of this Art, and therefore have been both
accursed, and punished of GOD.
Josh. 6.24. and 7.
ACHAN was an irregular Student in the way of Enriching: He feared not the
Lord, and walked not with an upright heart before him; but upon a covetous
desire hasted to be rich by unlawful means, even by theft and sacrilege:
for he stole of the excommunicate thing at the ransacking of Jericho: he stole
even of that part of the spoils which the Lord had appointed to be set aside
from a common use, and to be put into the treasure of his house. For he stole
a rich Babylonish garment, and two hundredth shekles of silver, and a wedge of
gold of fifty shekles weight. For this sin of sacrilege the Lord punished
the whole Israelites, so that they were put to flight before their enemies, and
the hearts of their huge troops melted away like water, until the
sacrilegious God spoyler was found out stoned to death, and burned with fire,
both he and his sons, and his daughters, his Oxen and Asses, his sheep, and
all that he had. Now if God punished so exemplarily this sacrilegious stealth
of Achan, for coveting and conueying away a part of the spoils, which he had
appointed to be put into the treasure of his house, to serve for the
garnishing and adorning thereof, and for the necessary uses of his Priests,
shall we think that our sacrilegious Achans shall always both here and hence
escape unpunished, which with a strong hand have robed the Lord of his own
perpetual inheritance? Acts 5.
And if the Lord was so angry with Ananias and Sapphira for keeping back but a
part of the price of the possessions which they themselves of their own accord
had offered unto God for the relief of his Saints, that by the hand of his
servant Saint Peter in a sudden he bereft them of their lives: How shall he
not be angry one day with our Church-robbers, and God-spoyling Gospellers, men
an hundredth fold worse then Ananias? for they are so far from giving any part
at all of their lands or goods to Gods Ministers (whereas Ananias gave almost
all that he had) that they bereave them of that which is theirs, even of that
which both God and good men bestowed upon them in former times. And whereas
Ananias did keep back but a part, even a smaller part of that which otherwise
was his own; these God-spoyling anti-gods keep back, either the whole, or at
least the better part of that which is no wise their own, but belongs unto
God, and unto his Priests, as their peculiar patrimony. Numb. 22. and 31.6.
Josh. 13.21. 2 Pet. 2.15, 16, Jude 11.


Balaam was as an irregular man in the way of Enriching, for he loved the
wages of unrighteousness, and was quite miscarried with covetousness.
Wherefore the Lord opened the mouth of his dumb ass whereon he rode, to rebuke
him, and to forbid his foolishnes as if the poor ass should have said,
Master, will thou needs play the ass, to curse the people of God for gold? do
not so I pray thee, lest thine end be worse then mine: do not that which king
Balaac bids thee, but rather that which thine own poor ass advises thee,
that so it may be well with my master and me too. For if thou curse Gods
people, God, yea thine own ass, will likewise curse thee; and so thy case will
be more miserable then mine. The man may oftentimes be wiser then his master,
but yet it is a rare thing, to find a beast wiser then the owner: and yet we
see here is one, and none but one, even Balaams ass wiser then Balaam
himself, who rode thereupon. And what was his end? was it not almost as ill as
his asses, when as the gold-thirsty wretch lost his life amongst the
Midianites, and fell by the sword of the people of Israel? By this example, all
men, but chiefly Churchmen, are taught to abhor covetousness, and to fly
from it, Eccl. 5.5. Coloss. 3.5.
as being a base kind of idolatry: for covetousness is idolatry, and the
covetous person is an idolater, 1. Tim. 3.3. Tit. 1.7. Ierem. 5, 30, 31.
says the Apostle. And if the priest or the prophet, the preacher or the
Prelate, be given to filthy lucre, if they prophecy any thing a man wills
for an hire: or if the priests bless or curse for a reward, how shall they
rebuke and reprove such of the people as are guilty of the like sin? for as
the people ought not to withold from their pastors, that which is theirs,
namely, first fruits, and tithes: so must not the pastors and priests, by
covetous courses, prey upon the people, and pluck from them what is theirs.
The holy men of God, Isaie, Jeremy, Isay 56.10, 11, 12. Hos. 4.6.
and Ezekiel, as they exclaim and proclaim Gods judgments against all
ignorant and blind watchmen, Ierem. 5.31. and 6.13.14. and 8.10, 11. and 10.21.
and 23, 1.11, 14, 15, 16, 25, 26, 27 28, 29, 30.31, 32. Ezekiel, 22.25, 26 and 34.
that have no knowledge, being as dumb dogs that can not bark: and against all
sleeping and slumbring shepherds, being as drowsy dogs that will not bark:
and against all deceiving and seducing prophets, that speak the counsel and
vision of their own private spirit: and against all brutish and beastly
pastors, that scatter their own flocks, and commit filthiness, and
strengthen the hands of the wicked, and teach vanity and lies, even their own
private opinions, whereby the sheep of the fold are scattered, that is,
Christian people are divided amongst themselves, and from themselves: of one
flock made many flocks, of one church many churches: Men of itching ears, 2.
Tim. 4 3.4.
getting themselves an heap of teachers to their own liking (as the Apostle
speaks;) and so turning unit and unity, into division and plurality,
verity into vanity, antiquity into novelty, and Christian communion into
unchristian disunion and separation: as the prophets, I say, exclaim mightily
against all these kinds of ill churchmen, and namely against dumb dogs that
cannot bark, and sleepy dogs that will not bark; so do they likewise against
greedy dogs, that can never have enough, which look to their own way, every
one for his advantage, and for his own purpose, as Isaie speaks, and which
like a roaring lion ravening the prey, conspire to devour souls, and take
away the riches, and precious things, from the owners thereof, by their violent
and fraudulent ways, as Ezekiel speaks: who in the name of the Lord
pronounces a heavy woe against all such shepherds as feed themselves, and
eat the fat, and cloth themselves with the wool, but feed not the flock,
neither strengthen the weak, nor heal the sick, nor bind up the broken, nor
bring again that which was driven away, nor yet seek out that which was lost:
but have been careless and cruel in their behalf, have even eaten the flesh
of the fat, and torn their claws in pieces. O idle shepherd (says the Lord
by his prophet Zachary) that leaves the flock, the sword shall be upon his
arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean dried up, and his right
eye shall be utterly darkened. And as the Lord shall be avenged on all idle
loytring Churchmen, be they priests, or be they prelates: so will he one day,
make all deceiving and seducing Churchmen to be ashamed of their visions, and
revelations, and private inspirations. 2. Tim. 4.6, 7.
They shall not always deceive men with their show of godliness, creeping
into houses, and leading captive simple women, laden with sins, 2. Cor.
11.13, 14, 15.
and led with diverse lusts. The ministers of that old serpent, shall not
always be suffered to transform themselves master-like into angels of light,
as though they were the ministers of righteousness: Zach. 13.3, 4, 5,
for in that day (says the Prophet) when any shall prophecy lies in the name
of the Lord, his father and his mother shall thrust him through, and they shall
be all ashamed every one of his vision. I am no prophet, shall he say, I am an
husbandman: for man taught me to be an heardsman from my youth. I am no
Cleargy-man, I am a layman, a tradesman, a husbandman, or an heardsman. Men
shall not then go gadding from place to place to hear some new vpstart
teacher, nor run from one country or city to another, as from England to
Amsterdam, 1. Cor. 1.11, 12.
after some new inspired preacher. One shall not say, I am Paul's, and another I
am Apollos, and an other I am Cephas. The new nicknames of Papist and Puritan,
of Caluinist and Lutherane, of Brownist and Anabaptist, shall be no more in
use. For men shall be ashamed of their new compellations and denominations, of
their new revelations and inspirations, of their new separations and
schismatic congregations, of their new doctrines, and of their late devised
disciplines. And God grant it may be soon. Revel. 22.20,
Even so come Lord Jesus, come, and come quickly: Habbak. 2.14. Isay 11.6. to
9. Zephan. 3 9.
send the spirit of knowledge and unity amongst all manner of men, that the
earth may be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters
that cover the sea: that the wolf may dwell with the lamb, the leopard may lie
with the kid; and that there may be no more destruction or contention amongst
Christians in the mountain of thine holiness. Come God of peace (we pray)
according to thy promise, and turn to thy people a pure language, that they
may all call upon the name of the Lord with one consent.

Nabal was an irregular rich man, destitute of the fear of the Lord, covetous,
churlish, and il-conditioned. The wretch would not relieve the necessities of
worthy David, and his distressed servants: In revenge whereof, the Lord smote
the covetous churles heart with amasement and fear, so that about 10 days
after that he died. I wish all rich subjects should beware of Nabals
niggardlines, and that they no wise refuse or repine grudgingly to impart a
part of their wealth to David, that is, to the prince, when he stands in need
thereof, and requires their supply. And therefore, let them always remember
how that the Lord punished the churlish and covetous refusal of niggardly
Nabal, both by bereauing him of his goods, and of his life at once Besides
that, a good part of his wealth fell presently thereafter, into the hands of
godly and bountiful David, by the means of Nabals widow, the virtuous and wise
Abigail, whom he took to wife.

1. King. 21. and 22 2. King, 9,
Achab and Iesabel were both of them irregulars in the way of enriching, both
of them were void of Gods fear, and unjust; for they would needs have Naboths
vineyard, by cruel violence, and tyranicall oppression. But God, to whom it is
proper to chastise kings, and to punish princes, was avenged of them for their
idolatry and tyrany. He gave the blood of Achab to the dogs to lick, and
the flesh of Iesabel to the dogs to devour, and her carcass, though she
was a Kings daughter, and a kings wife, was made as dongue upon the ground, in
the field of Isreel; so that none could say, this is the fair painted Iezabel.
And this example teaches Kings and Queens to subject themselves unto Gods
laws, howsoever they be above their own. And therefore they, as well as
other men, are bound to practice the Rules of this Art, which is gathered out
of Gods word, if they would get, gather, or increase goods with a good
conscience. If they do otherwise, God, who is the great Schoole-maister and
scourger of Kings, will undoubtedly punish them for their tyrany, cruelty, or
oppression, when, and in what manner he thinks good.

Gehezi, the servant of Elisha, the man of God, 2 King. 2, 20.21.22.23,
24.25.26 27.
was an irregular in the way of Enriching: for he seeing that his master had
not received the reward that Naaman the Syrian had brought him after that he
was cleansed of his leprosy, he followed speedily after him, and asked of
him, in the name of his master, a Talent of silver, and two change of
garments, who gave him more then he asked, even the two change of garments,
together with the two Talents, which he bound in two bags, and gave them to
two of his servants, that they might bear them before him. But when he came
home, and stood before his master, Elisha said unto him: Whence come thou
Gehezi? And he said: Thy servant went no whither. To whom he replied: Went not
mine heart with thee, when the man turned again from his chariot to meet thee?
Is this a time to take money, and to receive garments, and olives, and
vineyards, and sheep, and oxen, and men servants and maid servants? The
Leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and to thy seed for ever.
And he went out from his presence a Leaper as white as snow. How detestable a
thing is it then in the servants of God, to have covetous minds? Luke
12.16.17.18.19.20. and 16.19, 20.21.22.23.


Dives, the rich glutton, was an irregular rich man, his soul was hunger-bit
and bare, in the mean while that his back was clothed with purple and fine
linen, and his belly fed every day with dainty and delicate dishes, like that
other rich man whose ground brought forth fruits abundantly; so that he had
scarcely room enough to lay up his fruits till he pulled down his barnes,
and builded greater: and in the mean time the belly-god says to his barren
soul: Soul thou have much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat,
drink, and take thy pastime. The wretch had much goods for his body, but
little goodness, and no godliness at all in his soul: For he was so
uncharitable that he would not vouchsafe so much as the very crummes of his
Table to refresh poor Lazarus, who was laid at his gate full of soars: No,
the little dogs were more pitiful and kind in the poor man's behalf, then
this unnatural mastie, the miserable master of these dogs was: for they came
and licked the poor man's soars, and so gave him some ease.

Prou. 6.6.
Had Solomon seen this sight (who sends the sluggard to the Pismire, to
learn of her wisdom and diligence in gathering of meat,) no doubt but he
would have sent this merciless rich glutton to learn of his dogs pity and
compassion, in giving to the poor a part of his meat. Go to the Pismire, O
sluggard, (says he to the sluggard) behold her ways and be wise, learn of
her to gather thy meat in due season. Go to thy dogs, thou rich glutton,
behold their ways, and learn of them to pity the poor, for they lick his
soars with their tongues, and yet thou can not find in thine heart to
refresh him with the crumbs that fall from thy table. But look to the end it
was as easy for these little dogs to enter into the kingdom of heaven, as
for this unnatural monster-masties soul. Ere it was long, his barren soul
was fetched out of the beastly abode of his body, and his body that had so much
dainty meat to feed on, and so many suites of costly apparel to put on, had
no longer leisure to enjoy so much goods. Behold, the body that did feed upon
so much good meat, was by and by in a grauie earthen dish set before the
worms of the earth to feed on, and the soul that had so much goods, and so
little goodness was carried into hell fire, where there is no good thing at
all to be had, no not so much as a drop of cold water to cool the burning
heat of the tippe of his tongue, which in this life had not so much goodness
in it, as was in the tongue of his dogs, whereas Lazarus soul was carried
into blessed Abraham's bosom. I wish then that this voice should sound at all
meals in rich men's ears, least they be made partakers of this rich man's
anguish and end. When Dives has dined, let Lazarus have the crummes.

Math. 26.6.7, 8.9, 10.14.15. Mark. 14.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.11. John 11.2.
and 12.3.4, 5, 6,
Judas Iscariot the peerless traitor was an irregular student in the way of
enriching, he was so miserably miscarried with the spirit of covetousness, that
he was sorry that the box of costly oyntme^t which religious Mary Magdalen
powered upon our Saviors head, should have been so spent as it was: for in his
opinion it was but misspent, and foolishly, and superstitiously employed. What
needed this waste (quoth he, with some others of the company as he had moved to
find fault with the godly woman's praisable fact) why was not this ointment
sold for three hundredth pence, and given to the poor? For so he knew it should
have come into his bag, and being bag-bearer he thought all that lost that
passed by his bag, yea though it had been bestowed upon Christ's own blessed
body. The covetous wretch pleaded for his bag and his belly, but pretended to
plead for the poor and their belly; yea though he had pleaded sincerely for
the poor, yet in this case he did greatly offend: for Christ's body was to be
preferred befote the bellies: of the poor. There was some other means to
relieve them, then by converting this ointment to their use. And therefore
Jesus knowing of this their preposterous pleading for the poor, said unto
them: Why trouble ye the woman? For she has wrought a good work upon me:
for ye have the poor with you always, and when ye will, ye may do them
good, but me ye shall not have always. She has done that she could: she
came aforehand to anoint my body to the burying. Verily I say unto you,
wheresoever this gospel shall be preached, throughout the whole world, this
also that she has done shall be spoken of in remembrance of her. Of such
bagge-bearing Indases, now a days there is not a few, who will bestow nothing
upon Christ and his servants themselves, and yet grudge at the charity and
liberality of others, and blame the good and godly men of the former times,
for bestowing of their goods, lands, and livings, upon the Church. Let a man
talk with these bagge-bearing Church-banes, touching the great care the good
men of old have had to supply the wants, and relieve the necessities of Gods
ministers, by their charitable donations, and liberal endowments; they will
tell you again, that they were silly simple idiots, that lived in the time of
darkness and ignorance, 1. John 2, 10.
and knew not what they did. And yet S. John says, that he that loves his
brother, abides in the light; And who loved their brethren more then these,
that were so charitable unto the poor, and so beneficial unto the servants of
God?

But let it be so as they say, that they lived in a dark age, for so me
thinks it was in some respect, if it be compared with ours, (wherein, to
speak with a modern Divine, there is more science, and less conscience, then
was in theirs:) shall it follow therefore, that their liberality toward the
ministers of God, was a work of darkness also? If any man thinks so, me
thinks he has good cause to fear and tremble, lest at the last day
darkness be his doom. No rather, as Christ Jesus said once to the Scribes
and Pharisees, requiring a sign. The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment
with this generation, and condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of
Jonas, and behold, a greater then Jonas is here. So may it be well said in
this matter. The owle-eied Christians of the old time shall rise in judgment
with this eagle-eied generation, and condemn it: for those blind believers
were more bountiful and beneficial unto Gods Ministers, then our
sharpe-sighted professors and protesters are now: and behold, a greater light
then was then, is now, and greater knowledge, by many degrees. And yet for all
that, our conscience and charity is as many degrees inferior to theirs, as
their science and knowledge comes short of ours. Their night was more
fruitful in good works then our light; their darkness more devout then our
day. And who sees not, but that all the shame redoundeth unto our selves.
Eccles. 44.1.
And therefore as Jesus the son of Sirach exhorts men to praise the godly
men of old: Let us now commend (says he) the famous men of our Fathers, of
whom we are begotten; And as Jesus the son of Mary says of an other Mary,
that the good work which she had wrought upon him, should be spoken of
throughout the whole world in remembrance of her: So may we well say of such
good men and women, as in former times were so beneficial unto Gods Ministers,
and so charitable to the poor. Let us commend the devout and bountiful men
and women of old, of whom we are begotten, and let us praise them for their
devotion and good deeds, which all devout and godly persons shall remember so
long as the world stands. But in our days, alas, that old serpent the
devil, whose only study is to undermine piety and true religion, has
invented a new devise to disgrace and discredit both devotion, and devout men:
For the devout person is called a Papist in half or in whole; and diverse
exercises of piety are called by the hateful name of Popery: as namely, the
observing of holy days, the kneeling, or capping at the adorable name of
Jesus, the fasting on certain set times of the week, or of the year, the
founding of hospitals, the beautifying of Churches, and the endowing of
Churchmen with ample livings, and titles of honor.

When any motion chances to be made for the building and repairing of
Churches, the decking or adorning of the same, or for the furnishing of Gods
house with such implements and instruments, as are requisite for the reverent
performing of his service, and the decent celebration of his Sacraments;
forthwith will these Churchbanes, object with Judas: What needs all this
waste? were it not better to bestow all this gear upon the poor, then to
spend or employ the same about such needless uses? They plead for the poor
in show, but for their own purses in substance: for they will not fear to
pull from the poor, both with tooth and nail, all that they can, and from
Gods Priests likewise: yea they will bestow more upon their horses, their
hawks, and their hounds, then they will do upon both; More upon the building
of a Kitchen, then of a Kyrke; more upon a stable then the Lords Table. No,
Judas was not so loath that the three hundredth pence worth of ointment should
pass by his bag, and be spent upon the Lords body, as these men are that
once one piece of money should go out of their bags to any such religious
use. And yet to say the very truth, our Saviors sweet body stood not so much
in need of any such anointing with balm, spikenard, or any such sweet smelling
ointment, as we do of buildings, and Churches to worship God in, and of
external furniture for the comely execution of his service in his house.

And whereupon can our silver and gold be better employed then upon Gods
service? To which purpose the Evangelical Prophet has foretold, that in the
last times, Isay 60.5.6.7.8.9.13.
the riches of the Gentiles shall come unto the Church; and they shall bring,
not only their sons and daughters unto Christ, but also their treasure and
their substance, their silver and their gold, their balm trees and fur
trees, their boxes and their elmes, to beautify the place of the sanctuary of
God, and to adorn the house of his glory. The kings daughter (that is the
Church) is all glorious within, Psalm. 45.13.14.15.16.
says the kingly Prophet; but yet he means not that all her glory is within:
for immediately after he says: that her clothing is of broidred gold, and her
raiment of needle-worke, and her Fathers (that is her Rulers, and Governors,
as Patriarchs, and Prelates) are Princes throughout all the earth. But
now-adaies men are like unto the slack and slow people of the Jews in the
time of the Prophet Haggai, who said; the time is not yet come, that the Lords
house should be builded. Haggai 1, 2.3.4, 5.6.7.8, 9.10.11.
And therefore the word of the Lord came unto them by the ministry of the
Prophet, saying: Is it time for your selves to dwell in your seeled houses, and
this house lie waste? Now therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, consider
your own ways in your own hearts, ye have sown much, and bring in little;
ye eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled; ye do
cloth you, but ye be not warm: and he that earneth wages, puts the wages
into a broken bag. Thus says the Lord of hoasts, consider your own ways in
your own hearts. Go up to the mountain, and bring wood, and build this house,
and I will be favorable in it, and I will be glorified, says the Lord. Ye
looked for much, and lo it came to little, and when ye brought it home I did
blow upon it; And why, says the Lord of hoastes? because of mine house that is
waste, and ye run every man unto his own house: Therefore the heaven over you
stayed it self from dew, and the earth stayed her fruit: and I called for a
drought upon the land, and upon the mountains, and upon the corn, and upon
the wine, and upon the oil, upon all that the ground brings forth, both upon
men, and upon cattle, and upon all the labor of the hands.

Thus we see how sharply God has punished men's niggardnesse and slownesse
about the building and beautifying of his house; And are not we as much bound
to have an house of prayer to pray in to God, as were the Israelites of old?
and is not God to be honored with our riches and treasure now, as well as he
was then? And is not our niggardnesse and slownesse in doing of such duties, as
punishable as theirs?

But to return from pleading against our young Iudases, 1 Timothy 1, 19. and 6.10.
to old Judas; the miserable man was so much mis-caried with the love of money
(which carries many a soul away from the faith, and makes them to make a
sorrowful ship-wracke) that he could never be satisfied with silver, till he
had sold his own master, the son of God, and Savior of the world, unto the
Jews for thirty pieces of silver. Math. 27.5,
We have heard tell in our time of many treasons and traffickes; but the world
never has heard, nor shall hear tell of such a treason and traffic as this;
The son of God betrayed by his servant, whom he came to save, and sold for
thirty pence of him, whom he came to ransom and redeem from sin, Satan,
and hell, by the shedding of his blood. But behold the sequel of the attempt;
forthwith the wretch went, and first restored the money, and then hanged
himself. At the last (though too late) he began to consider with his mind,
how that he had played both the bad Merchant, and ill servant at once, in
selling the most precious jewel that ever the Sun saw, even his own master
for so small a sum; and that he had made the worst market that ever man
made, or ever shall or can make, though the world should last as many millions
of years, as there is of sands upon the shore, or of drops of water in the
maine sea.

Demetrius the siluer-smith, Act 19.24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34.
was an irregular student in the way of enriching; for he together with diverse
others his fellow-smithes, had made themselves rich by making of silver
temples, and shrines of the idol Diana; wherefore love of gain moved them to
raise sedition in the city of Ephesus, when as Saint Paul, and some others of
the godly, did endeavor to draw back the citizens thereof from idolatry.
and 16.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
Such irregulars were also the masters of the Pythonist maid, which gate her
masters much vantage with divining: who, when as the Apostle had separated the
familiar spirit from her, in the name of Jesus, seeing that the hope of their
gain was gone, they caught Paul and Silas, and drew them into the market place
unto the magistrates, and accused them of preaching unlawful ordinances.
Whereupon the people rose up together against them, and the governors rent
their clothes, and commanded them to be beaten with rods, and to be cast in
prison, and that their feet should be made fast in the stocks.

Demas and Alexander the Copper-smith, 1. Tim. 1, 20. 2. Tim 4.10.14, 15.
were likewise irregulars: the one forsook Paul, to embrace this present
world; and the other, to the end he might follow the world, forsook the
faith: and as the siluer-smith aforesaid, did raise sedition against the
Apostle: so this copper-smith did much evil unto him, and with great
earnestness withstood his preaching; whom the Lord, no doubt, rewarded
according to his works, and the holy Apostles imprecation. And the like, out
of all question, will befall unto all such impenitent resisters of verity, and
breakers of Christian unity, be they smiths in office, or in name; For our
time is not the first time, that smiths have been resisters of the truth, and
molesters of the ministry. And master John Smith, the father of the few
rebaptized Brownists, has not been the first Smith, that has proved the
perturber of the peace of Christ's Church. God grant he may make some better
use of his good parts hereafter, then to play the forger of a new faith, and of
a new Church, upon the anuill of his own wit, and that he play not the Smith
in this manner any more.

Gen 19.24, 25. Ezech. 16.49, 50. 2. Pet. 2.6, Jude, 7
The citizens of Sodom were irregulars, and neglected the study and practice
of the rules of this Art, they were proud of their prosperity, lived idly, and
gave themselves to gluttony, excess, and lubricitie, and for heap of
wickedness, were void of charity and mercy Pride (says the Prophet)
fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness, was in her, and in her
daughters, that is in her suburbs, and circumiacent towns; neither did they
strengthen the hands of the poor and needy, but were hautie, and committed
abomination before the Lord: and therefore he rained down from above fire and
brimstone upon their heads, ouerthrewe their cities, consumed all the
inhabitants of the same, and destroyed all the plain round about, and all that
grew thereupon. As it ought therefore to be the chief care of all magistrates
of cities and towns, to take heed there be no blaspheming and profaning of
the name of God, used by wearing, banning, cursing, or by vnreuerent taking of
the adorable name of God, and of his son Jesus, his wounds, body, and blood
in our mouths; nor no profaning of the Lords day, by practicing any open or
noted sin, or by following the exercises of our ordinary callings, or by
spending the day in whole or in part, in matters of worldly pleasure, and
pastime, and by absenting our selves from the congregation and house of the
Lord: (for it is an express sacrilege for a man to steal, or take any part
of the Lords day from the Lords service:) So ought they no less carefully take
heed, that none of these Sodomiticall sins of pride, insolency, idleness,
lechery, gluttony, drunkenness, and unmercifulness to the poor, have
place, or at least grow strong, and take deep root within their cities and
towns; lest in that great day, it be easier for the Citizens of Sodom and
Gomorrhe, then for them: Matthew. 11.20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
and lest great Cities that have been great in sin, and Capernaum-like,
through presumption and pride, have lifted themselves up unto heaven, be then
brought down to hell.

For though Almighty GOD is not wont now a days, to rain down fire and
brimstone upon sinful Cities and Towns, as he did of old upon the five
Cities of Sodom; yet he threatens them both with fire and water, as often as
he commands the fire to consume, and the water to ouerflow, not a few of our
houses and habitations. And though sinful Cities escape here in this life fire
and brimstone from above, yet must they remember, that God has in store,
floods and rivers of fire and brimstone below, much more durable and terrible,
wherein they must everlastingly swim after this life, except, with the City
of Nineveh, Jonah. 3.
they earnestly repent and amend their lives in this life: For either must men
here quench hell fire with the salt water of penitent tears, and with the
fresh water of a sanctified life, flowing from the living wel-spring of a
Christian belief, or else must they irrecouerably burn in hell fire
hereafter. Psalm. 11, 6.
Upon the wicked he shall rain snares (says the Psalmist) fire and
brimstone, and stormy tempest shall be the portion of their cup: Heb. 12.14.
For without holiness shall no man see God, says the Apostle. It is good for
great Cities to beware least they be given to great sins, and that to this
end, they set before their eyes always the terrible examples of Gods
judgments showed upon sinful Cities, that so they may learn to stand in awe
of God, and fear to offend him, least they draw the like indignation and
condemnation upon their heads. For as the great Apostle says: 2 Pet. 2.4.5.6.
If God spared not the Angels that had sinned, but cast them down into hell,
and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be kept unto damnation,
neither yet spared the old world, but brought the flood upon the ungodly, and
turned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrhe into ashes; condemned them and
overthrew them, and made them an ensample unto them that after should live
ungodly: shall we think that he will spare always such sinful Cities and
Citizens as do now walk after the flesh, having so many clear examples for
their instruction as they have, and having a clear light for their direction
to live godly, righteously, and soberly, in this present world then the other
had? and if the Lord plagued the City where his name was called upon, even
Jerusalem (as the Lord himself by his Prophet reasons) should we flatter
our selves, Ierem. 25.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
and think to go free? no, we shall not go quit.

The inhabitants of Babel, Ierem. 51.1.6, 7, 8, 13, 25 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39,
53, 56.57.
were not only idolaters, but also irregulars, in attaining unto riches by
covetousness, oppression, spoil, and destruction of other nations, namely of
the people of God. Wherefore the Lord speaks unto Babel in this manner; O
thou that dwell upon many waters, abundant in treasures, thine end is come,
even the end of thy covetousness. Behold, I come unto thee, O destroying
mountain, says the Lord, which destroyest all the earth, and I will stretch
out mine hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and will make
thee a burnt mountain. Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babel has devoured me, and
destroyed me, he has made me an empty vessel: he swallowed me up like a
dragon, and filled his belly with my delicates, and have cast me out. The
spoil of me, and that which was left of me, is brought unto Babel, shall the
inhabitants of Syon say, and my blood unto the inhabitants of Chaldea, shall
Jerusalem say: Therefore thus says the Lord, behold I will maintain thy
cause, and take vengeance for thee, and Babel shall be as heaps, a dwelling
place for dragons, an astonishment, and an hissing without an inhabitant: They
shall roar together like Lions, and yell as the Lions whelpe. Though Babel
should mount up to heaven, and though she should defend her strength on high,
yet from me shall her destroiers come, says the Lord: For the Lord God that
recompenseth, shall surely recompense. And I will make drunk her Princes, and
her wise men, her Dukes, and her Nobles, and her strong and mighty men, and
they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, says the king, whose name
is the Lord of Hosts.

Fly out of the midst of Babel, and deliver every man his soul: be not
destroyed in her iniquity: for this is the time of the Lords vengeance, he
will render unto her a recompense.

Babel is suddenly fallen and destroyed, howl for her, bring balm for her
soar, if that she may be healed: Forsake her, and let us go every one into
his own Country; for her judgment is come up into heaven, and is lifted up to
the clouds.

Ezekiel. 26, and 27.28,
The inhabitants of Tyrus, both Prince and people, were irregulars in the way of
Enriching: For they were so covetous, and insolent therewithal, that they were
very glad, and rejoiced exceedingly at the fall of Jerusalem, promising unto
themselves, that by the means of her desolation and impouerishment, they
should be made rich. And therefore the Lord gave them and their City over
into the hands of the Babylonians, to spoil their merchandise, to rob them
of their riches, to overthrow their pleasant houses, and costly buildings, to
seize upon their Ships, and to destroy their City. The which was most famous
for her situation, being even at the entry of the sea; for the resort of
people from so many places, Countreies and Isles; for the beautifulness of her
buildings; for the strength of her Navy; for the greatness of her Army; for
the multitude of her Ships and Seamen, and for her store of most exquisite
wares; as white Wool, fine Linen, broydred work, blew Silk, Purple, costly
clothes, Iron, Tin, Lead, Brass, Gold, Silver, Chains, Coral, Pearls,
Emeraudes, Horses, Mules, Vnicorne-hornes, Elophants teeth, Peacockes, Wheat,
Honey, Oil, Balm, Wine, Lambs, Rams, Goats, Cassia, Calumus, and all
kind of spices: For as the Tyrians attained unto so great wealth, most part by
unlawful, and ungodly means: so both the Prince and the peopple, were lifted
up in heart, because of their prosperity and riches.

Thine heart (says the Lord by his holy Prophet EZEKIEL, unto the Prince,) is
lifted up because of thy riches, and by the multitude of thy merchandise they
have filled the midst of thee with cruelty, by the iniquity of thy
merchandise have thou defiled thy self; therefore will I cast thee as
profane, out of the mountain of God. I will bring forth a fire from the
midst of thee, which shall devour thee; and I will bring thee to ashes upon
the earth in the sight of all them that behold thee; all they that know thee
amongst the people, shall be astonished at thee, thou shall be a terror, and
never shall thou be any more.

Amos. 1.6.7.8.9.10.
The inhabitants of Samaria, and head-smen of Israel in the time of the Prophet
Amos, were irregulars in the way of Enriching: for they oppressed the poor,
and destroyed the needy: And therefore, says the Lord, have I given you
cleanness of teeth in all your cities, and scarceness of bread in all your
places; yet have ye not returned to me. I have withheld the rain from you,
when there were yet three months to the harvest, and I caused it to rain
upon one City, and have not caused it to rain upon an other City: one piece
was rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not withered; yet have ye
not returned unto me, says the Lord. I have smitten you with blasting, and
mell-dew, your great gardens, and your vineyards, and your figge-trees, and
your olive trees, did the palmer-worme devour; yet have ye not returned unto
me, says the Lord. Pestilence have I sent amongst you, after the manner of
Egypt; your young men have I slain with the sword; yea I have made the stincke
of your tents to come up even into your nosthrils; Amos. 5.5.11.12.
yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord. Forasmuch as your treading
is upon the poor, and ye take from him burdens of wheat, ye have built
houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in them, ye have planted
pleasant vineyards, but ye shall not drink wine of them: for I know your
manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins, they afflict the just, they
take rewards, and they oppress the poor in the gate. They lie upon beds of
iuory, and stretch themselves thereupon, they eat the Lambs of the flock,
and the Calves of the stall, they sing to the sound of the violl, they invent
to themselves instruments of music, they drink wine in bowls, and anoint
themselves with the chief ointments: but no man is sorry for the affliction of
Joseph. Hear this, Amos 8.4.5.6.7.8.
O ye that swallow up the poor, that ye may make the needy of the land to
fail, saying: When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell corn, and
the Sabbath that we may set forth wheat, and make the Ephah small, and the
sheckle great, and falsify the weights by deceit? that we may buy the poor
for silver, and the needy for shoes, yea and sell the refuse of the wheat.
The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob; surely, I will never forget
any of their works. Shall not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn
that dwells therein?

The City of Jerusalem had many irregulars in the way of enriching, before the
time of her great desolation. Isay 1.17, 21, 22, 23.
Their Princes and Judges loved gifts, and followed after reward, (says the
Prophet Isaie) they judged not the fatherless, and 3.14, 15.
neither came the widows cause before them: they eat up the vineyard the
spoil of the poor was in their houses, they beat the poor people to pieces,
and did grind their faces. Ierem, 48.29.
And as in Moab there was stoutnesse, and arrogancy, and hautinesse of heart,
amongst their other sins, for which they were destroyed by the king of Babel;
so the people of Jerusalem were lofty, Isay 2.7.
because of their wealth, they were proud, because their land was full of
silver and gold, of treasure, of horses and chariots: and 3.16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22, 23, 24, 25, and 32 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
their women lived in ease, were idle, negligent, and careless; they were
proud, hautie, and walked with stretched-out necks, and abounded in brave
apparel, and costly attire: the men's chief care was to join house to house,
and field to field, and 5, 8, 9, 10.
to have whereupon to maintain this bravery and superfluity of their wives,
to find them the ornament of the slippers, the calls, and the round tires, the
sweet balls, the bracelets, and the bonnets, the tires of the head, the
sloppes, and the head bands, the tablets, the rings, the earerings, and the
mufflers, the costly apparel, the vailes, the wimples, and the crisping
pinnes, the glasses, the fine linen, the hoods, and the lawnes, Another of
their men's chief and ordinary exercises, and 5.11, 22.
was to rise up early to drink wine, and to show themselves strong, in pouring
in of strong drink, and to continue their tippling til the wine did consume
them. And as the Lord threatened the hauty daughters of Syon with the spoil of
their ornaments, and 3.16.24.
telling them that their silk and their satin should be changed into
sackcloth, their balls and sweet smelles into dust and ashes; and 5,
8.11.22.23
so does he by his holy prophet pronounce a woe unto these ioyners of house to
house, and layers of field to field, till there be no place but for them, that
they may be placed by themselves in the midst of the earth: and likewise a
woe unto these early vprisers to follow drunkenness; and yet a third woe unto
all unjust judges, and lawless lawyers, which justify the wicked for a
reward, and take away the right of the upright man from him, even unto such as
decree wicked decrees, and write grievous things, to keep back the poor from
judgment, and to take away their right, that they may prey upon the poor
widows, and spoil the fatherless.

Likewise the Prophet Jeremy complains, Ierem. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.25,
26, 27, 28.
that in Jerusalem justice and judgment were not executed, no not for the
fatherless, the widow, and the poor. And that their fullness was accompanied
with adultery, and whoredom: for they assembled themselves by companies in
the harlots houses; so that their young men spent the daytime in wine, and the
nighttime they spent in venerie. Also amongst them were found wicked persons,
entrappers, setters of snares, and makers of pits to catch men. As a Cage is
full of birds, so were their houses full of deceit; and 6.13. and 8.10.
and thereby they became great, waxed rich, fat, and shining. From the least to
the greatest, they were generally given to covetousness, and 9, 3.4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9.
and from the Prophet even to the Priest, they all dealt falsely. Yea, they did
bend their tongues like their bows for lies, every one did deal deceitfully,
and they taught their tongues to speak lies. Ezekiel. 22.7.12.13.27.29.31.
Also the Prophet Ezekiel complains of the like enormities, of the oppressing
of strangers, of vexing the fatherless, and the widow, of taking of gifts, of
spoiling the poor, of taking of usury, and the increase, of defrauding their
neighbors by extortion, and such other courses of their covetousness, and
love of lucre. Therefore, says the Lord I have smitten mine hands upon thy
covetousness, that thou have used, I have powered out mine indignation upon
them, and consumed them with the fire of my wrath, their own ways have I
rendered upon their heads. Ierem. 9.15. and 15.1, 2, 3, 4.
Behold, I will feed this people with wormwood (says the Lord) and give them
waters of gall to drink. Such as are appointed to death, unto death; such as
are for the sword, to the sword; and such as are for the famine, to the famine;
and such as are for the captivity, to the captivity. I will appoint over them
four kinds, the sword to slaie, the dogs to tear in pieces, the fowls of
the heaven to devour, and the beasts of the field to destroy. and 24.10. and
29.16, 17, 18.
I will scatter them also in all kingdoms of the earth. And upon them that go
not into captivity, I will send the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and
will make them like naughty figs, that cannot be eaten they are so naughty.
I will make them a terror to all kingdoms of the earth, and a curse and
astonishment, and an hissing, and a reproach among all the nations. Isay 24.
Thus the Lord for the sins of his people, made their land empty and waste,
scattered the inhabitants, and made them desolate, spoiled the rich, debased
the proud, weakened the mighty, and powered contempt upon their princes. He
made the earth to defraud them of their bread, and the vine to withdraw from
them their drink, and instead of sweet wine, and 51.17, 18, 19, 20. Habbak,
2.15, 16.
that makes the heart glad, he reached them a cup of sour wine, that makes
their hearts sad; even the vinegar of his wrath, the cup of trembling, the cup
of his right hand, that is, a cup of strong drink, which he made them to
drink out, dregs and all, in recompense of their early rising to follow
drunkenness. This cup was so strong, that it brought the strongest powrer in
of strong drink soon upon his back, and turned the drunkards glory in
drinking, into shameful spewing. Thus finally, the Lord turned Ierusalems joy
into woe, her solace into sorrow, her mirth into mourning, her laughing into
lamenting, her feasting into fasting, her fullness into famine, her abundance
into indigence, her plenty into penury, her glory into shame, her praise
into reproach, her blessedness into cursednesse, her honor into hissing, her
triumphs into terror, her stateliness into astonishment, her security into
ieopardy, her liberty into captivity. Thus, I say, he smote her gate with
destruction, and her Citizens with desolation.

Conclusion.
Thus you see, most noble Cities, what has been the fortune and fall of a
most noble City, and a city (if ever any in the wide world) beloved of God:
ye see the greatness of her desolation, and that her great sins (for
commonly in great Cities dwell great sins) did occasion the same; Considering
the which, my thrice hearty wish unto God for you is that her desolation may
serve for your edification, and her lamentable destruction may be unto you a
profitable instruction: That avoiding and shunning her sins, and all kind of
enormous and heinous impiety, all sacrilege, idololatrie, pride, adultery,
covetousness, cruelty, deceit, briberie, extortion, oppression, usury, and
unmercifulness to the poor; Finally, all profanation of Gods holy name, by
vnreuerent, and vnrespectfull naming thereof; by swearing, and forswearing; and
all unhallowing of his holy name, in whole, or in part, by flying from the
congregation, and following our own ways of profit and of pleasure, and
forsaking the Lords ways of piety and of charity, ye may likewise escape her
plagues, ye may be free from her wormwood bread, her waters of gall, her
famine, her sword, her pestilence, her captivity, her scattering, her reproach,
her astonishment, her shame, her servitude, her desolation and destruction.

That so, right noble and flourishing Cities, ye may long continue noble, and
long flourish in piety and prosperity, your Citizens and inhabitants may be
long rich, and every day more and more rich, both in goods and goodness, that
being rich in God here on earth, ye may be rich with God hereafter in heaven.
And that this Art may end whereas it did begin, even at God; who as he is the
Alpha and the Omega, the beginning, and the ending of all things: so me
thinks is it good reason, that he be the Alpha and the Omega of this Art.
Psalm. 119.36.
Let every man that desires to see good things, pray to God with good King
David: Lord incline mine heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto
covetousness. Prou. 30.8.9.
And with wise King Solomon his son: Give me not poverty nor riches too
much: Feed me with food convenient for me, least I be full and deny thee,
and say: Who is the Lord? or least I be poor and steal, and take the Name of
my God in vain. Amen.

FINJS.

