A MONVMENT of Remembrance, ERECTED IN ALBION, IN HONOR OF THE MAGNIFICENT
DEPARTVRE FROM BRITANNIE, and honorable receiving in GERMANY, namely at
HEIDELBERGE, of the two most Noble Princes

FREDERICK, First Prince of the Imperial blood, sprung from glorious
Charlemaigne, Count Palatine of Rhine, Duke of Bauier, Elector and Arch-sewer
of the holy Roman Empire, and Knight of the Renowned order of the GARTER. and
ELIZABETH INFANTA of ALBION, Princess PALATINE, and Duchess of BAVIER, the
only Daughter of our most gracious and Sovereign Lord CHARLES-IAMES, and of
his most Noble and virtuous Wife, Queen ANNE.
Both of them being almost in one and the same degree of lineall descent from
25 Emperors of the East and West, of Romans, Greeks, and Germans, and from
30 Kings of diverse countries.

By JAMES MAXVVEL.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, for Henry Bell, and are to be sold at his
shop within Bishops-gate. 1613.

A Summary view of the Historical Points, and Poetical Conceits occurring in
this present Monument.

1 THAT Prince Frederick is in one and the same degree of descent with our
most gracious Sovereign JAMES the Concorder, from 20 Emperors of Romans,
Greeks, and Germans, and from 24 Kings of diverse countries. 2 That Prince
Frederick is in one and the same degree of descent with our most noble Queen
ANNE, from four Emperors, and three Kings. 3 That Prince Frederick is in one
and the same degree of descent with Princess ELIZABETH, his spouse, from one
Emperor, and eight Kings, of diverse countries, besides the former. 4 That
Prince Frederick is descended from Edward the Elder, Edmund Ironside, Henry
the 1. and 2. and Edward the 3. Kings of England, and likewise from Malcolme
Cammore King of Scotland. 5 That Prince Charles, and Prince Frederick,
brothers in Law, are collinially descended from two borne brothers, to wit,
Frederick Prince Palatine being the elder, from Henry Prince Palatine, and
Duke of Saxe, who was likewise the elder of the said two brothers: and Prince
Charles, Duke of York, being the younger, from the younger brother Otho, once
Earl of York, and Emperor. 6 That the Pope did presumptuously and wickedly
abuse Otho Earl of York and Emperor. 7 That there have been as yet, but
only two Emperors of the Palatine family, the one a younger brother, named
Lodowicke, Duke of Bauiere; the other an elder brother named Robert, Count
Palatine: and that from both of them, and their Empresses, Margaret and
Elizabeth, Prince Frederick, and Princess Elizabeth are lineally descended. 8
That the said two Emperors, chosen of the Palatine Family, have had an
exceeding different Fortune in their acceptance toward the Pope, the one being
highly hated of three evil Auinion-Popes; the other as highly beloved of one
good Rome-Pope. 9 That the Palatine Princes have been very officious at all
times to the Kings of England, and their children: namely in electing some of
them to be Emperors, hoping that they shall yet hereafter prove more officious
and forward in the same kind, then ever they have done before. 10 That our
most gracious Sovereign, by the means of the most Illustrious house of
Lorraine, is lineally descended, as from diverse of the German Emperors, so
from one who was both Prince Palatine, and Emperor, named Robert the Noble:
and consequently, that being both of the Germane and Imperial blood, that he
is capable of the Imperial dignity. 11 That Albions Island, though it be her
fortune to be deflowred of two flowers in one year, a Lilly and a Rose, yet
must she not be altogether discouraged, so long as there remains a Lilly-Rose
behind. 12 That there have been diverse matchings of the daughters of this
Island with foreign Princes, namely of Germany, France and Spain, and the
cause why they have been all issulesse and fruitless. 13 That there have
been three diverse Vnion-endeauours of three Mary's, of three diverse countries,
English, French and Scottish; and that the third Mary was she, who with Mary
in the Gospel did choose the better part. 14 That of this late Alliance is to
be expected an Union of Northern Princes, long ago foretold, (as shall be
showed in our Sibylla Britannica) whereby the Turk must be totally
ouer-throwne; and that, as some have thought, near the River of Rhine. 15 That
among all the Prophesies or Predictions that do promise any glorious exploit
to be brought to pass by any Prince, not as yet fulfilled, that is the most
notable which has been uttered concerning a Prince of the name of Charles;
with the Authors ardent wish for Prince Charles, which is more fully expressed
is a Poem upon his hopeful Nativity. 16 That peerless Prince Henry seems
to inuit and adjure all the Worthies of Britannie, by their most ardent love
toward him dead and alive, to glorify the day of his dear sisters departure
for Germany, that her day may be as celebrious as ever Gonilda's was, and
more. 17 That Iasons Sydereall ship, which once fetched from Colchos to Greece
the Golden Fleece, looks as if she did desire to descend from her starry
Haven into our Thames, thence to transport the Golden Fleece of JAMES. 18 That
Castor and Pollux, those two loving Twins, borne in April to banish Pyracie,
do look down from their starry Tabernacle, as if they meaned to grace and
guard ELIZA'S Argo, named Prince-Henry, till she be safely arrived at the Shore
of Germany. 19 That Astraea, or the Celestial Virgin, under whose sign
ELIZA was borne, and likewise Prince FREDERICK; and who has been so liberal
of her best influences in her Graceful behalf, (as may appear more amply by
our Poem made upon her Nativity) commands two of her greatest lights to attend
Eliza to her ship, and to light her so many nights as she shall chance to stay
upon the sea. 20 That Aeolus, Neptunus, Tethys, and Doris, with the rest of the
Marinall powers, endeavor each of them to do Eliza some good office: the one
perfuming the air with Muskie-breath for her sake; the others calming and
sweetning the Seas for her sake. 21 That the loving Dolphins desire to flock
about Eliza's Argo, with many demonstrations of greatest joy, both for her own
sake, and for her Grandames sake, who was once a Dolphins dearest dear, with
Historical examples of their rescuing of many persons from Sea-danger. 22 That
Rhine begins to revel for joy of Elizaes arviuall, and the admirable nature
thereof, in discerning of such barnes as have been gotten with false play. 23
That Cybele the mother of the Gods, that is, of Kings, because she was the
first Queene-mother in the world, together with Flora Queen of May, are both
of them busied in contriuing of Aprill-carpets, and May-coronets, and
Flowry-pearly-canopies in honor of Eliza, the one to lay along under her feet,
the other to hang and bear above her head at her entry to Heidelberge. 24
That the syluane Pan, together with the dainty Nymph Deiope, are both gone to
Palestine, to fetch a Marriage-maypole for our Palatine-paire, of two loving
Palme-trees: and of the wonderful love that Histories do record to be between
the Palms, male and female. 25 That the three Graces resembling the three
faces of three famous British Queens, suited in three diverse colors, are to
present Eliza with three Roses of three diverse kinds. 26 That the Mirtle-nymph
of Heidelberge, mounted upon her crowned Lion, is to meet our Rosy Nymph at
the Citties-gate, to do their several obeysances; with diverse notable things
of the nature and Arms of the Lion. 27 That the fragrant Mirtle-tree of Egypt
is due to Eliza, no less then the Mirtle-berry-hill of Heidelberge, with the
crowned Lion thereof, as being of the Royal Egyptian blood of Osiris, Isis,
and Hercules, who first bare the Lion in his Arms. 28 That Eliza is another
Myrsina, who for her worth was once Mineruaes dear. 29 That the Matrons and
Maids of Heidelberge shall praise Eliza above all the daughters of Emperors
and Kings that have been married to their Princes in former times, and that
the Muses there are to do as much, some in Poesy, and other some in prose. 30
That the Church-Holy-Ghost of Heidelberge, founded by the Prince Palatine, and
Emperor Robert, and Elizabeth the Empress, shall exceedingly rejoice at
Elizabeth's entry, wishing withal, that she could sing as sweetly as does
Londons St. Paul's by the mouth of her Organ-quire of surplised singingmen for
sweet Elizabeth's sake. 31 That upon Pantheon hill, hard by Heidelberge, the
most renowned Persian Princess Panthaea, is to present Eliza sprung from a
Panthaea, with a Lilly-garland made of such sweet Lillies as do grow about her
Lilly-citty of Susa. 32 That Panthaea is to be honored of all Matrones and
wives, as their Patroness, most worthy of imitation: and that her dear
Abradate ought to serve for a Patron and pattern unto all husbands of loving
their wives dearly, and thinking always of them worthily; with diverse notable
examples of the fond jealousy of some husbands, how that it has turned highly
to their harm, shame, and highest dishonor. 33 That upon S. Abraham's hill,
hard by Heidelberge, Abraham and Sara seem to meet Frederick and Elizabeth,
whom they bless with the blessings of Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob and Rahel,
wishing they may long live in highest honor, besides S. Abraham's hill on
earth; and in the end be translated gloriously to S. Abraham's bosom, and Gods
holy hill in heaven. Which is likewise the ardent wish of their right denoted
and humble servant.
James Maxwell.

TO THE RIGHT ILLUSTRIOUS HOUSE OF HOWARDS, HONORED WITH THE CONFLVENCE OF TWO
AND FOVRTY STREAMS OF PRINCELY BLOOD, DERIVED FROM TWELVE IMPERIAL, AND
THIRTY ROYAL HEADSPRINGS:

HIS ESSAYS, LATIN AND ENGLISH, DONE AND TO BE DONE, IN HONOR OF OUR MOST
GRACIOUS KING and QVEENE AND OF THEIR MOST HOPEFVL CHILDREN, HVMBLY DEDICATETH]

JAMES MAXWEL.

THE AVTHOR TO THE COURTEOUS READER, TOUCHING THE REAsons of this present
Dedication to the Illustrious House of HOVVARDS.
MY Muse, courteous Reader, having meditated certain Historical and Poetical
Essays, as well in Latin, as in English, in honor of our most gracious King
James, his most Noble wife Queen Anne, and of their most hopeful children,
Prince Charles, Princess Elizabeth, and Prince Frederick her Spouse, in whose
common extraction and descent, I have remarked no fewer then 25. Emperors, and
30. Kings of diverse Countries, I resolved with my self to commend the same to
the honorable Patronage of the Illustrious house of Howard, for these reasons
following.

First, because of the singular excellency of this name, in whose extraction
no fewer then 12. Emperors, and 30. Kings of diverse Countries, are contained,
whereof most part are the same Emperors and Kings which do occur in the
extraction common to the aboue-named, two most Noble Princes, as shall be
showed, God-willing, in our Latin work: and truly it must needs be a thing
that does much illustrate and commend, the exceellencie and honor of our King
and Country, to have such Subjects as this worthy house does yield, being so
Nobilitated by the means both of their Princely descent, and of their public
deserts, as they are.

Secondly, because of a certain kind of honorable, and notable similitude,
and affinity, that the Noble name of Howard has with the Royal name of
Steward; for both names do signify, in the old Saxon tongue, as much as the
Warden, or Governor of a a Place, Fort, or Castle; both being at the first
imposed by reason of the charge, preferment and place, the two first persons,
that were so named, did bear in the Commonwealth.

So that these two Sur-names, may truly say, that which many other Sur-names
cannot say; which is, that the first two Wights, that ever bare the names of
Steward and Howard, as they were both borne in South-britanny, so were they
both men of quality, reputation and rank, and even such, as we commonly name
Gentlemen, and Noblemen.

Moreover, as both names give the Lion Rampant, though different in color,
for their badge or Arms; so both can fetch their Pedigree from diverse of the
same Emperors, and Kings of diverse Countries, and namely from Kings of
England, and Scotland. Likewise both names have been matched with the Royal
blood of England; for as Margaret, a daughter of England, was married to a
Royal Steward of Scotland, King James the 4. (in the which business a Noble
Howard had an especial employment) so Katherine, a daughter of the house of
Howard, was married to a King of England, Henry the 8. Besides, that famous
Queen Elizabeth was descended from this Illustrious house on her mothers side,
the Lady Anne Bolen, whose mother was the Lady Elizabeth Howard Countess of
Wilshire and Ormond, daughter to Thomas, the first of this name, Duke of
Norfolk. As also the foresaid two Names, have had the fortune to seek and
aim at a threefold matrimonial Union one with another. The first attempt and
design of marriage (but hindered) was between a Royal Steward, even a
matchless Queen Mary, and a Princely Howard, Thomas the third of this name,
Duke of Norfolk, brother to Henry, Earl of Northhampton, Lord Priuy-seale,
father to Thomas, Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain, and Grandfather to
Thomas Earl of Arundell, the son of Earl Phillip. The second attempt, or
design of marriage, was between the son and daughter of the foresaid two
Princes, to wit, between Charles-Iames ^ward Prince of Scotland, and the Lady
Margaret Howard, which was likewise hindered with the former. The third design
only took effect, by the vniting-meanes of our Concording-King, the Maker of
the marriage between Charles Howard, Earl of Nottingham Lord Admiral, and
the Lady Margaret Steward daughter of James Earl of Murrey.

Thirdly, it has been the common fortune of both these names to reap much
good luck, and preferment, either of them by the means of three Ladies, being
both of the same Country, and of the same names, to wit, either of them by two
Margarets and one Elizabeth. The three English Ladies, which brought good
fortune to the Royal name of Steward, were these; first, Margaret, the
daughter of Prince Edward, sur-named the Outlaw, son of King Edmond Ironside,
who being married to Malcolme Cammore King of Scotland, brought to King James,
the first right of succession to this Crown; secondly, Elizabeth, of the house
of York, daughter to King Edward the 4. married to King Henry the 7. of the
house of Lancaster: Thirdly, Margaret, their eldest daughter borne in the
blessed white-red Vnion-bed of the two Roses, who being married to James the
fourth, king of Scotland, brought the second right of succession to our most
gracious King James, the happy Uniter of the two Kingdoms. To these three
Ladies of Britanny, we may add other these of Germany, bearing the same
names, from the which King James, and his hopeful children, namely, Prince
Frederick, are collineally descended, and they are these; first, Margaret
Countess of Holland, Duchess of Bauier and Empress, wife to Lodowicke the
5. Duke of Bauier and Emperor; secondly, Elizabeth, Princess Palatine and
Empress, wife to Robert Prince Palatine and Emperor, thirdly, Margaret
Duchess of Lorraine their daughter. And it is my ardent wish that the
foresaid two Germane Margarets and Elizabeth, may prove as lucky to King
James, and his hopeful children for their Imperial preferment in Germany, as
the two English Margarets and Elizabeth have done for his Royal preferment in
Britanny.

And the three Ladies of the same names which brought good fortune and
preferment to the house of Howard, were these; first, Margaret Plantagenet
Duchess of Norfolk, the only daughter and heir of Thomas Plantagenet,
Earl of Norfolk, son to King Edward the 1: secondly, Elizabeth Lady Segraue,
the daughter and heir of the said Lady-Dutchesse Margaret, and of John Lord
Segrane; thirdly, Margaret Mowbray, daughter of the said Lady Elizabeth, and of
John Lord Mowbray, married to Sir Robert Howard Knight, the father and mother of
John Lord Howard Duke of Norfolk. So that as a Robert was the first Royal
Progenitor of the Royal Stewards, King Robert the Bruce surnamed the Noble,
being the Grandfather of Robert the first King of the Stewards; and as a
Robert Prince Palatine and Emperor, likewise sur-named the Noble, is he, from
whom King James and Prince Frederick are descended both in the 9. degree (as
our late published Pedigree does show) so was a Noble Robert the first
Progenitor of the Dukes of Norfolk, of the honored name of Howard, unto whose
worthy Patronage, we thought good, for the reasons aforesaid, and others we
might mention, to commend our Essays in Latin and English (whereof these
Presents are but a scantling) undertaken by us, in honor of a number of most
Noble Princes: And thus, Courteous Reader, craving thy favorable construction
of these our endeavors, we having no other intent, but only thereby to do
honor in a schollar-like kind, to such as are worthy of honor, we bid thee
heartily farewell.

ALBIONS Remembrance of FREDERICK and ELIZABETH.
1
SINCE Norths bright Nymph, and Albions Rosy
The sweetest, meekest of the Lady-kind
Must bound from us to build her Summers bower Flower
At Heidelberge, now in this flowery time;
And that for Rhine, she must abandon Thames,
For Germany leaving the land of JAMES:
2
And since Her presence sweet we must no more
Enjoy, (alas) which was the joy of hearts
To all Her sex, as HENRY'S was before
To those of His, men, women of all parts;
Which came to Court, to veiw the worth, and State
Which their did shine through Him and Her of late:
3
Since that, I say, now Hymen does her call
From th'Ile of IEMMES to dwell in Germans ground;
So that her face no more hence see we shall,
Her face, the grace of Country, Court and Town;
What rests? but that we wish her as much joy
As by her absence we must reap annoy.
4
For like as did dear Henry by his death
Make men to mourn, but mirth to Angels bring;
So the departure of Elizabeth
Make Britans sigh, but Germans for to sing:
Thus in one year, we drink of double woes,
By loosing first our Lilly, then our Rose.
5
Which double loss might well our Island drown
In sorrows sea, except there did remain
A Lilly-Rose with joy our land to crown,
To salve the sorrows which we do sustain:
Henry, Eliza: both their flowers bequeath,
To make for Charles a Lilly-rosie wreath.
6
Castor and Pollux of all brothers that have been were the most louingst, as
Aratus, Apollodorus and Hyginus do write, and even so loving, that the one
would needs halue with the other his immortal State. Plutarch does likewise
tell how that Cleomenes of Lacedemonia did love his brother Enclides so
dearly, that he made him his coequall in the Kingdom: and in our time or
memory, there was never one that loved his brother more dearly then our
peerless Prince Henry did his brother Duke Charles.
For like as Pollux to his brother dear
Castor by name, his glory did impart;
Haluing with him his own Immortal Sphere,
So much had Castor of Prince Pollux heart:
Even so would Henry halue his Princely State,
That his loved Charles might it participate.
7
Me thinks I see sweet HENRY with his hand
Plucking the choicest flowers of Paradise;
One day to deck this twice defloured Land
With Syons store, to make it happy thrice;
Even now he makes a Garland for the day,
That CHARLES shall bear Constantixes crown away.
8
Likewise Eliza goes to breed and bring
Forth to the light, sons of a noble kind,
Whose worth one day, shall make us Britans sing,
When they with CHARLES vnanimely combined
( This shall be showed in our Sybilla Britannica containing Prophesies in sieve
sundry Languages, which seem to promise no less.
As is fore-rold) in spite of Turkish might
Shall once regaine great Constantine his right.
9
Gonilda the fair, daughter of Canute the Danish King of England, married to
Henry the 3. Emperor, and Mathilda or Maud, the daughter and heir of Henry
the 1. K. of England, married to Henry the 5. Emperor; read hereof William of
Malmesbury, and Roger Houeden their Histories.
A better hap, we hope this Match shall have,
Then once two English-Germaine Matches had,
That to their Countries did no Issue leave;
Which made Gonilda and Mathilda sad:
Kings daughters both, the second Englands Dame,
To Emperors matched, both HENRY'S by their name.
10
And better then had once that match in France,
Twixt Francis and our Scotlands noble Queen,
That Mary hight; and yet a better chance
Then of that Match for to ensue was seen
Twixt Spain and England, when Queen Mary thought
With Phillip a great Union to have wrought.
11
Robert surnamed the Noble, Prince Palatine and Emperor, had by his wife
Elizabeth the Empress and goodly children, five sons and three daughters,
whereof read in Custinianus, Munsteru^, and Reusnerus: and from them two,
Princ^ ^dericke and Princess Elizabeth are both lineally descended, he in the
ninth, and she in the tenth degree, as may be seen in the Pedigree I have
lately published) the which numbers in them united make up King JAMES his
auspicious and lucky number of Nineteen, which is likewise the number of the
celestial Lion, according to Hyginus, and Germanicus Caesar writing upon
Aratus; as also of the Kingdoms and Prince-domes into which the I Will of
Britanny, with Ireland, in former ages, have been divided; the which are now
all happily united in One, in the person of the Lilly-Lyon of the North, and in
this united State long may they continue, aye until all the Kingdoms of the
earth be fully united in the glorious person of the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, who delights to feed among the Lillies; as it is in the Canticles.
The heavens Eliza will with Issue bless
By Frederick her Spouse from Caesar's sprung,
Such is our hope, and such shall be our wish,
That songs may be of their sweet Issue sung;
When as it shall befall them as it has
Before to * Robert and Elizabeth.
12
The two Henry's Kings of England the 1. and the 2. had either of them a
daughter named Mathilde or Maud, and both of them were married to two Henry's
of Germany: the first King Henry's Mathilde was his only daughter and heir,
and was wedded at five years old to Henry the 5. Emperor, and was crowned
Empress at Mentz, on Saint James his day, in the year 1114. being of the age
as said is of 5. who after the decease of her husband, dying without issue,
anno 1116. returned to her father King Henry, bringing with her the Imperial
Crown, and Saint James his hand, in honor whereof he founded the Abbey and
Church of S. Mary in Reading, as William of Malmsbury, William of Gemite, Roger
Houedon, and Thomas Walsingham do write. The which deed of this North-South
descended Lady (for her father was King of England, and her mother another
renowned Mathildis was a daughter of Scotland borne of S. Margaret, and King
Malcolme) me thinks did bear this good signification; that once a James, and
he the son of a Matchless Mary, both of them having in their persons united
the Royal bloods of both Countries, should even at the feast of the
Annunciation of the glorious Virgin MARY, enter to the uniting of these
Kingdoms, and that he should at the Feast of Saint James receive the Imperial
Crown of the same united Kingdoms on his happy head: Whereof there is more to
be read in our Poem, that shows both by Theology and Astrology the
auspiciousnesse of his Majesty's entry to this Crown; for whereas there have
been three diverse designs attempted before at three diverse times, to unite
this Island with three diverse Nations, Germany, France, and and Spain, by the
means of the Marriages of three Queene-heires, Maud and the two Mary's, it was
the great Vnion-Makers will to make the foresaid three Matches all fruitless,
to the end that it might be first fully and perfitely united with, and in it
own self, before any other such Union with any foreign Nation should be
made, as by those three marriages was intended and expected; and when I compare
the designs and deeds of the three Mary's together; first of Mary of England
by her Marriage with King Phillip, laboring to unite this Island in whole, or in
part with Spain; next of Mary of Lorvaine by the Marriage of her young daughter
Mary of Scotland with Francis the Dolphin, to devouring to unite it with
France, and lastly of the same Mary of Scotland, by her second Marriage with
her dearest cosen, Henry, Lord Darly, Earl of Rosse, and Duke of Albuny,
great-grand-child of King Henry the 7. intending to unite this Island with it
self, in her happy Issue, when as I compare together, I say, the foresaid
three diverse designs and endeavors of the foresaid three Mary's, I am
constrained to give out this verdite and censure concerning the same; that the
first two Mary's were with Martha in the Gospel combred about many things, but
that the third Mary, with Mary in the same Gospel, had chosen the better part,
which was not to be taken from her. The other Mathildis or Maude, married into
Germany, was the daughter of King Henry the second, wedded to Henry surnamed
the Lion, Duke of Bauier and Saxe, and bare him diverse children, namely Henry
Duke of Saxe, etc. and Prince Palatine in right of his wife Agnes, heir of the
Palatinate, by means whereof Prince Fredricke is descended from the said King
Henry the 2. in the 17. degree. Another of their said children was Otho Lord of
Brunswicke, and Earl of York, created by his uncle King Richard, sur-named
Lyons-heart, who also was chosen Emperor afterward, and from him Prince
Charles Duke of York, is both on his fathers and his mothers side descended,
in the 13. and 14 degrees, though some have written, that he left no Issue by
any of his wives. He is much wronged by Historians, for that he was an enemy to
the Popes usurped super-Imperiall power, and his. Temporal usurpations; for
when as he did feast Pope Innocent the 3. in Rome, being then his friend, it
chanced that he made a motion to have some things restored to the Empire,
which the Pope did possess, wherewith he was so highly offended, that he
presumptuously took up a sword to have stricken the Emperor, and afterward did
both Excommunicate him, and pronounce the sentence of deposition against him,
whom before he had advanced to that dignity: read Vrspergensis, Cuspinianus,
Carrion, Pedro de Mexia, and others.


Heavens her vouch safe both the Mathilda's fate
Two Henry's girls both of South-britanny,
Betrothed to Henry's, two of greatest state
They Germans both; that Britanes once may see,
When with the first Mathilde Eliza shall
Wear on her head the wreath Imperial.
13
And as the next Mathilda often was seen
To bless her Spouse with plenteous Progeny.
Both with a Caesar and a Palatine,
To rule in Brunswicke, Rhine, and Saxony:
So may Eliza with Mathilda bear
Unto her Spouse a Caesar and a Peer.
14
Iagello great Duke of Lithuany married Hedwigis heir of Poland, and daughter
of Lodowick King of Hungary
And like as once the brave Hungarian Heir,
Elizabeth did crown her Casimire
Great Polands King, when as she to him bare
Six sons, besides as many daughters dear;
So may to our Elizabeth befull,
Like fruitful fate to crown her Spouse withal.
15
Poland, on S. Valentines day; and his son Casimire King of Poland married
about the same time Elizebeth heir of Hungary, the daughter of Albert the 2.
Emperor, Archduke of Austria, and King of Boheme and Hungary, by whom he had
six sons, whereof four were Kings of Poland, Hungary, and Boheme, and as
many daughters.
That even as he from Casimire does spring,
And from his wife twice Queen Elizabeth,
So his Elizabeth may make him sing,
When he by her such hopeful children has;
Like hap to both, since both had hap to marry,
Eliza's two about mid-February.
16
Henry who did his sweetest sister love
With heart so pure, so sure, me thinks I see
How he does beg leave of the Powers above
For to come down from heaven to Germany:
Bringing with him a Garland for the day,
That Heidelberge salutes her Queen of May.
17
Abraham's hill in Dutch, named Abrinsberge, is a hill on the right hand of
Heidelberge, and is in the ancient Records of that City called S. Abrahami
Mons, as Irenicus, Leodius, and Marquardus do witness.
Me thinks I see him, from Saint Abraham's hill
By Heidelberge inspiring every wight,
How to unite their Powers, wit and skill,
Their Town to deck with greatest glory bright,
Against the day that his dear Sister sweet,
In greatest state must ride along the street.
18
But first I see him from his own Saint James,
Inspiring all the Worthies of this Isle
With greatest state to bring her to the Thames,
In such array, that twice ten thousand mile
Both tongues and Tribes may talk of that days glory,
When she departs; and put it in some Story.
19
Come Nobles all, come Worthies, Beauties bright
With your best things adorn Eliza's day,
Flock from all parts, and grace you with her sight,
Before that she, sweet one, be gone her way;
Let every wight that any honor has
Come honor all-belou'd Elizabeth.
20
William of Malmes berry and Matthew of Westminster in their Histories do make
mention of the great magnificence was used of the Nobility of England in
conueying of Gonilda the fair daughter of the Danish King of England Canute to
her ship; it was so great, that they exhausted their whole treasure for costly
apparel to themselves, and precious presents to the Bride at her departure:
The Musicians and Minstrels, at feasts and banquets, were always wont to
celebrate the stately and Princely pomp thereof in their songs, thinking that
they could never sufficiently magnify and extol the same.
Let not the glory of Gouilda's day
So much extolled in English History,
When as she did from England take her way
To her Spouse Henry into Germany:
Let not her day Elizaes day surpass,
Since she is as good, as e're Gonilda was.
21
Flock men and women from the farthest parts
To view Elizaes face, her grace, her glory;
Come and adore this worthy Queen of hearts,
And having seen her keep in memory
What once ye saw, who never shall live the hour,
To see trans-planted such a gallant Flower.
22
Ye tender Virgins come before her face,
Her face wherein all manner-worth does shine,
And with a song see ye salute her Grace,
Lauding Eliza with her Valentine;
Wishing that them as many days may crown,
As there grows Vines upon the Rhenish ground.
23
And ye bright stars extend your influenter.
And for her sake, so ye the Season frame
That it obscure not her magnificence,
But rather add some luster to the same:
Thou golden Phoebus bind thy brightest rays
To last as long, as shall her progress days.
24
That as the skies her nuptial rites did grace,
With sweetest smiles after a stor my time
Of boisterous blasts, so every time and place,
Both heaven and earth their bounties may combine,
With Flora and her Nymphs of greatest state
Beloved Eliza to congratulate.
25
But if our heavens will needs some sorrow show,
And shed some tears when as she does depart,
And weep with us, as grieuing to forgo
So sweet a wight, that cheered each eye and heart:
Yet must heavens weeping end, when she shall rise
Her cleeren esse been enough to clear the skies.
26
A Season sweet, to sweet Elizaes due,
A Beamy time befits so brave a Wight,
Fresh Flora flaunting in her garish hue
And Violet weed, must tend her day and night,
With all her train, till they Eliza crown,
Heidelberge by interpretation is as much as a Hill or Town of Myrtles, from
the which it takes the name, according to the opinion of Franciscus Irenicus,
Michael Bohemus, and Paulus Melissus, because of the great abundance of
Myrtle, berries which grow thereabout, they are called here in England
Whirtle-berries, and in Scotland Blea-berries.
With Myrtle-wreath, amids the * Myrtle-towne.
27
The Argosie wherein Prince Jason went
To Colehos ground to fetch the golden Fleece,
Once stellified amids the firmament,
After that it had long decored Greece.
This ship turned star, e'ne The Constellarion called Argo, in honor of
Iasons ship, consists of many stars, whereof 18. are of the first, second, and
third magnitudes; it does risein the Spring season according to the observation
of Astronomers; the 13. of March after Ptolomies Calendar, but somewhat sooner
according to the Ephemerides of the Modernes, and somewhat later according to
the ancient Calendar of the Romans, which places the rising thereof upon the
fifth of April: See Prolomeus, Aratus, Hyginus, Picolominaeus, Maginus,
Stadius, and others.
now she does arise
To calm the seas, and for to clear the skies.
28
When I behold the twinkling of her face,
She looks as if she had a deep desire
To leave a while her high aethereall place
Which she now holds amongst those flames of fire,
For to descend amids our River Thames,
Thence to transport the golden Fleece of JAMES.
29
Castor and Pollux were borne the seventh of April, and on the same day
anciently their birth was celebrated in honor of them, for that they did
scour the seas from Pirates and Rouers, so that after their death they were
held of Mariners and Sailers for their Patrons and Protectors from the danger
of Pirates: See the ancient Pontifical Calendar, Arotus, Hyginus, and others.
Castor and Pollux which therein did sail,
Borne in April to banish Piracie
Bid their star'd ship take down herflags and veil
To the Prince-Henry of great Britanny;
You ship (say they) it bears a better Fleece,
Then that which once our Arge fetched to Greece.
30
The Virgin-signe Of Eliza's natruity in the sign of Virgo; see more in our
Poem made upon that subject; and in a goodtime, two of the said Virgo's
brightest stars, the one called Spica Virginis of the first magnitude, the
other called Cingulum Virginis of the third magnitude, do arise at night, the
one the seventh, the other the eighth of April, as it were for Elizaes sake,
to light her all the nights of her voyage, chiefly upon the sea: See Hyginus,
Maginus, Picolominaeus.
which did Eliza bear
Bids fast arise two of her greatest lights,
Her Zona-starre, and then her Spica clear
To chase all Langour from so many nights,
As her dear daughter in her Ship must stay,
And for her sake she turns the night to day.
31
Tethis commands her daughter Doris then
Her wonted bitterness to set aside,
For fear to be rebuked of Gods and men,
If any frowns should in her face be spied:
Since heaven and earth (says she) do smile to day;
It Is meet that we put bitterness away.
32
The loving Six famous Historians Plinius, Pausanias, Plutarchus, Athenaeus,
Elianus, and Solinus do relate admirable examples, of the affection of the
Dolphins toward Mankind, and of their forewardnesse to rescue them from
dangers on the sea: It is the swiftest of all creatures by land or sea, swifter
then an arrow, or a swallow, it has no gall, it delights in Music, and
loves to be called Simon, it is always in motion, both sleeping and waking,
and so is the tongue of it moveable, contrary to the nature of Sea-creatures,
it will eat out of a man's hand; it loves to leap and play about ships on the
sea, it fore-smelleth Tempests and storms before they fall, they have borne
little boys on their backs from shore to shore, they have rescued many from
the danger of drowning in the sea, they have brought the bodies of the dead in
the sea to the shore; they have proved many ways thankful to such as have
delivered them from the hands of Fishers, as they did to Caeranus the Milesiane
whom they delivered from shipwreck when all his fellows did drown, and when
his funerall-fire was in making, near to the seaside of Miletus they were
seen in the nearest they could come to the shore, to solemnize in their manner
Coeranus their redeemers obsequies. There is such a kind of brotherly love
amongst them, that when any one of them chances to be taken, they do in great
troops repair before the Taker, making signs of entreaty for their fellows
release. Aelianus does write that there is, in diverse respects, a great
similitude and resemblance between the Lion, the King of land-beasts, and the
Dolphin the King of sea-creatures* Finally, the Ancients had the Dolphins in so
great veneration, for their admirable Mankind-nature, that they esteemed it a
thing unlawful to take them, or to do them any harm; and therefore Oppianus
exclaimeth against the Bizantins for their unkind killing and eating of so kind
a creature: the which thing learned Casaubonus has likewise observed in his
Commentaries vpo^n Athenaeus.
Dolphins they do flock apace,
From farthest coasts her Argoe to attend;
And that they may their fill behold her face
Above the Masts they often bound and bend,
Waiting if any dangerous storm should be,
Them to rescue from ship-wrackes ieopardy.
33
As once they did that loving The daughter of Smintheus loved by Aenalus as is
in Plutarch.
Lesbian Less
With her dear Lad turned over into the seas
Bring safe to shore, when greatest danger was,
And that sour death with speed began to sease
On their sweet fowls, which quite had drowned been;
If that Jove's Dolphins had not been their friend.
34
Arion the Musition his rescuage by a Dolphin is celebrated by the common
testimony of Historians, and both Herodotus and Hyginus do write, how that
Pyranthus or Periander King of Corinth, who loved Arion for his melody and
skill of Music, did rear up a stately monument and statue in honor of that
Dolphin that rescued him, and made hang the merciless Mariners which had
intended his death, before the said Monument. Finally, Stesichorus and
Plutarchus do report, how that Telemachus, the son of Ulysses, being saved by a
Dolphin from drowning, his father in remembrance thereof ever bare thereafter
the picture of a Dolphin in his Shield, Signet, and Sword pomell.
So did they once sweete-an'd Arion save
Amids the waves from Sailers hurtful hand:
Telemachus nie drowned they did not leave,
But him rescued, and fet him on the land:
The Spartane Captain Phalant they did free
From mournful shipwrackes present misery.
35
Now if the Mankind Dolphins had such care
To shield and save the persons named before,
With many others which recorded are
In Histories; would they not yet much more
Tamisis Nymph rescue from danger near,
Whose Grandame was a Dolphins dearest dear.
36
No sooner Neptune gets her in his bounds,
But with his Trident, he does calm the seas,
Tethis his Queen her welcomes to their grounds,
And in glad wise gives order for her ease:
Aeol does that, he never did before,
With musky breath he blows her to the shore.
37
So soon as Rhine receives her Rosy smell,
That pure chaste flood, wherein Eustathius upon the Geography of Dionysius,
Iulianus the Emperor in his Epistle to Maximus the Philosopher, and Politianus
in his Epistle to Iacobus Cardinalis Papiensis, with others more, doc make
mention of the River of Rhines admirable nature, in judging of Wedlocke-breach,
for if young children be set on the said water, if they have been wel-gotten,
it bears them up, and, as it were, sends them back again with her
approbation to their honest mothers; where as such as have been begotten with
any spot or blot, coming by false play, she ouerwhelmeth them, or rather
swalloweth them up in the midst of her pooles; showing thereby, that she would
be avenged in the same manner upon their polluted mothers if they were in their
place.
strange judgment lies,
And finds how much she does in worth excel;
Rhine does rejoice, and her salutes this wise:
Welcome pure Nymph, most worthy to be Queen,
Of all the shamefast faces I have seen.
38
Stately Tam-Isis might of thee be proud,
That art another Isis and That Gathelus and Scota were of the Argiuian and
Egyptian blood of Osiris and Isis, and that they were the true Progenitors of
the most part of our Ilanders, it shall be showed in our book of Britannish
antiquities. According to Strabo, Berosus, Diodorus, Plutarchus, Plinius, and
others, Isis was the daughter of Inachus the first King of Argiues, and the
wife of Osiris her own brothers son; for Phoroneus King of Argiues was his
father, who was the son of Inachus. They reigned first amongst the Argiues,
and then amongst the Egyptians, whom they taught ciuility, Arts and Sciences,
of whom they were honored as their King and Queen during their life, and after
their death as their Patrons and Gods, because of the great happiness which
they enjoyed by the means of their government so long as they lived.
her child,
For Scota was of honored Isis brood;
So was Gathele once famous in your I Will;
But look how dear thou wast to Thames before,
As dear to Rhine thou art, and shall be more.
39
In sign whereof I swear by Tethys Queen,
I Will welcome thee with greatest cheer I can;
For on thy day a wonder shall be seen,
Which never yet was seen of any man.
No wonted water shall be seen in Rhine,
For all my streams shall taste of Rhenish wine.
40
All day the Dolphins shall be seen to dance,
And cut their capers on my floting flore,
Fresh Tethys Girls shall think it a happy chance,
If they that day may fail along my shore
To view the Face, the Grace and Majesty
Of fair Tamisis Nymph of Britanny.
41
The Palsgraues ground, the first that she shall touch
At her arrival, shall be gaily spread
With sweetest flowers, with choycest posies, such
As Flora sets to make her softest bed:
The dainties of each Garden, Wood and Dale,
Shall kiss her feet, and say, Elizahaile.
42
The Heau'n-wrought-hangings of the flowery Queen,
Along shall lie the paths that she must pace;
Dame Vesta's Carpets wowne with blew and green,
With red and white, shall think it their greatest grace
Along to lie under Elizaes feet,
In every highway, and in every streeet.
43
Likewise Cybele with her holy hands,
Prepares a Garland for Eliza's day,
Of Gemmes and Flowers, the best in any lands,
For it is her mind to crown her Queen of May.
Hark how she warnes her Nymphs with siluer-bell,
To gather flowers to crown her Rosimell.
44
The musky Rose, the Mari-gold and Lilly,
The Tulipan, the gallant Gilly-flowre,
The Pinke, the Primrose, Panse and Daffadilly,
The flowery Girls fetch home unto her bower:
Each flower she sorts, as they do most excel,
To crown the head of honored Rosimell.
45
Cybele enstiled the mother of the Gods, because (belike) she was the first
Woman that ever bare Kings in her belly, was pictured sitting in a Chariot
drawn with Lions, crowned and clothed with gold and precious stones. See
Albricus in his book de Imaginibus Deorum. The May garland that she makes for
Eliza, consists of nine choice Flowers, and nine precious stones,
representing the stars of Ariadnes Northern Crown, being nine in number,
according to Ouidius, Hyginus, and Germanicus Caesar writing upon the Astronomy
of Aratus.
To every flower she ioynes an Orient Gemme,
The Diamond, the Sapphire, Chrysolite,
The Emerald, the Topaz, the Opall then,
The Turcas, lacynth, and the Margarite:
Then in her Coach, with Lions drawn, she hies
To Heidelberge, more glansing then the skies.
46
Lo how she comes, attired in greatest state,
Attended on of all the flowery crew.
The Hilly-vally-Nymphes so nice and neat,
Some in their kirtles green, some in their blew;
With violet Skarfes to veil each Lilly-face,
Till all vnuaile before Eliza's Grace.
47
The Syluan Pan is gone to Palestine
With Deiope, to bring a pair of Trees
Palms of both kinds for our pair- Palatine,
To make two May-poles to present their eyes:
Which so they plant, that their leau'd tops may meet,
And cheer each other with their kisses sweet:
48
For Heaven and Earth delight to see together
Such as they join by holy bands of love,
And would have each one for to cheer another;
Whereas sad absence does full often prove
The break of hearts, the married couples bane,
Which strongest love in many breasts has slain.
49
A sign whereof wise Nature does us show
In the Palme-trees, which being set asunder
From mutual sight, no fruit is seen to grow
Of either kind; but faint, as if some thunder
Had blasted both; they pine and droope as dead,
And have no heart once to hold up their head.
50
But look how soon that they may see each other,
Or that the wind does dust between them drive,
As soon both he and she their hearts recover,
Both flourish fast, both bear fruit and revive:
As they would kiss, their leauie lips they move;
Thus do the Palms teach married folks to love.
51
Plinius, Philostratus, Diophanes, Pontanus, and others do write, that there
is a certain secret sense of matrimonial love between the Palms, Male and
Female, and that so vehement and earnest, that they do commonly droope,
languish, and wax barren, except that they may either rouch, or at least see
one another; and Theophrastus, Herodotus, and Athenaeus do witness, how that
both fertility and maturity are much advanced and furthered in the Female-palme
by the means of the flower and fruit of the Male-palme tied thereunto, or yet
if the dust and powder of the Hee-palme be spread thereupon: and if two Palms
Male and Female be planted on the two-sides of a Brook or River, the one over
against the other, they will stretch out their boughs and branches one to
another, as if they would kiss or embrace, and therefore the learned
Egyptians and Greeks, make the Palms to be the Heroglyphicke or ensign of
love between man and wife. The Palm is likewise the Symbol of a godly life,
according to S. Eucherius, because, whereas all other Trees, are seen to be
smaller above, and greater below; the Palm contrary-wise is smaller below, and
greater above; resembling the godly and deuote man, or woman, who is always
great and strong in things heavenly which are above, but small and weak in
things earthly which are below. S. Ambrose makes the Palm to be the Symbol of
Innocence, and Saint Hierome, of our Lords Cross: Lastly, according to the
common-consent of both Philosophers and Divines, it is the symbol, or sign,
of triumphant victory, because as Aristoteles, Theophrastus, Plutarchus,
Gellius and others do deliver, it has this admirable property, that if a great
and huge weight of stones be laid upon the back thereof, it does not yield,
or bow downe-wards, as other Trees do, but it bends vp-wards, and rises up
against the weight arch-wise; of the which excellent Tree, our Poem, called a
mystical May Pole, presented to King James, makes further mention.
Philostratus does celebrate a pair
Of such kind Palms: the like Pontanus writes
Of two such other trees both fresh and fair;
Of Calabrie, which were the chief delights,
Brunduse the one, Hydrunt the other bred,
Both for their loves are highly honored.
52
The three Graces are imagined to be three young comely and graceful Goddesses,
going together, linkt arm in arm, whereof read more in Phornutus, de Natura
Deorum and others.
Near Heidelberge the Graces three together
Linked arm in arm, shall graced Eliza greet,
Blessing the day that brought her Graces thither,
(For in her face the choicest graces meet)
Which Sisters three come dansing over the Greenes,
In grace and face much like three British Queens,
53
Aglaia bright, when first I her behold,
Me thinks I see sweet Scotlands heir, Queen Mary,
Such as she was, when all decked up in gold,
The Dolphin Francis did her gladly marry
In Mary's Church enstiled Nostredame
Where first was sung their Hymen's Hymn and Psame.
54
Euphrosyne when next I her consider,
Looks like all-lou'd Eliza, Englands Queen,
When she was wooed of the other Francis brother,
Named Francis Monsieur; such as have her seen,
Do say forsooth, this land borne never has
A gracefuller then Queen Elizabeth.
55
Thalia does the face and grace present
Of graceful Anne, Queen of Great Britannie,
Such as she was when King lames to her went
Beyond the sea, to wed her solemnly:
Who as she has the first twaines Titles joined,
So their two worths she has in her combined.
56
Thus the three Graces, in most gladsome guise
In the three faces of three famous Queens;
Linked arm in arm in rosy weed them hyes
Leaping and dancing over the downs and greenes:
And thus they sing; All bail Eliza fair,
Grand-mothers, Mothers, and Godmothers heir.
57
Thrice graceful Lady welcome to our Clime,
Welcome the Flower and Rose of Britanny,
Welcome the hope and honor of our time,
Welcome the pearl and praise of Germany:
Long may thy face grace Germany and Rhine.
Both us and ours, so may thy Valentine.
58
The three Graces are brought in presenting three Roses, the first a single
white one, the second a single red one, the third a double one, white and red
together; because that the Rose is held of the learned to be the
Hierogliphicke, Symbol, or sign of gracefulness, comeliness, and love: And
the Philosophers do think that the odor, and color thereof does proceed
from the influence of the graceful Planet Venus. The Mages, or Sages of the
Indians, and Persians, did much use the Rose, with the oil and water thereof,
to conciliate the graceful and favorable aspect of Kings, Queens, Princes
and Potentates. And we read how that Aelius Verus, the Emperor, was wont to
lie on a bed of Roses, as it were to draw from thence a kind of graceful
influence, which he might afterward impart to his people. Read Orus Apollo,
and Pierius in their Hierogliphickes.
Each of the three a Rose to her presents,
The first a white Rose in milke-white array;
The next in her carnation vestiments,
A red-carnation Rose, sweet, fresh and gay;
The third, whose habit is of white-red hue,
A white-red Rose, and says: Sweet Rose adue.
59
In the ancient ensign of Heidelberge was painted a most comely and graceful
Nymph, standing on a Myrtle-hill, and at a fresh fountain there. A monument
thereof is to be seen in Marble; for a crowned Lion, or Lioness holds in its
paws a Scutchion, in the bottom whereof is the said Myrtle Nymph, painted
with a bundle of Myrtle-berries in her hand. Read hereof Paulus Melissus, and
Marquardus Freiherus
Brave Heidelbergs renowned Myrtle-Nymph,
Whose comely face all comers do behold
With much delight, at the fresh springing lymph,
That fountain fair, so sweet, so clear, so cold:
Mounted upon her Lioness of state,
Shall meet Eliza at the Cities gate.
60
The Nymph no sooner sees Eliza bright,
But all amazed she bids her Lion stay,
For I (quoth she) must from thy back alight,
Tam-Isis Nymph for to adore to day.
Stand still proud steed, for both must I and thou,
This blisse-still-day before Eliza bow.
61
Vncrowne thy head of thy gold Diadem,
Thou best of beasts, thou stately Lyon-queene,
For it is due unto a greater Dame,
A sweeter yet then ever thou have seen.
See how she does with glansing glory shine,
Go honor her, and crown her Queen of Rhine.
62
The Lion is the Symbol of our Savior, who is called the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah in the Revelation. And he is a Lilly-Lyon, because he feeds among the
Lillies, as it is in the Canticles. And the Lion environed with Lilies, is the
Royal badge of our Sovereign. The Lion rampant is likewise the badge both of
the Palatine Princes, and of the princely house of Howards, in whose
Illustrious descent I have found 12 of the same Emperors, and twice 12 of the
same Kings, which do occur in the Pedigrees common to King James and Prince
Frederick, as shall be (God willing) showed other-where. The first that ere
bare the Lion for his badge, was Hercules the Egyptian, as we may gather out of
Herodotus, and Diodorus. And Gathelus, who was of the same blood that Hercules
was of, brought this Ensign first into Britanny; and Agamemnon king of the
Argiues, who was of the same blood with Gathelus, whose father Argus Nilus was
likewise King of the Argiues, and had in him united the Arginian and Egyptian
blood, he did likewise bear the Lion in his shield, as witnesses Pausanias;
who tells how that Idomenous King of Creet bare a Cock in his Scutchion,
which is esteemed to be the Symbol of triumphant victory: for the Lion
himself, though he be the most magnanimous and strongest of all beasts, so
that S. Basil, with others, enstileth him King of beasts, yet he stands in
fear of the Cock, chiefly the white, as St. Ambrose does deliver, besides the
ancients, Zoreaster, Plinius, Lucretius, Aelianus, Proclus, with others. The
reason whereof Proclus thinks to be thus, because that the Cock and the
Lion, being both of them in a certain peculiar manner governed by the
influence of the Sun, the Cock receives more of the force thereof (which
does appear by his accurate observing of the times of the night and day) then
the Lion does, and therefore being in that respect his inferior, the law of
Nature tyeth him to reuere and fear the Cock as his superior. Others do
add, that the Cock represents the power Celestial and Spiritual; and the
Lion the power terrestrial and temporal. Moreover the Lion is the Simbole, or
Ensign, not only of magnanimity and strength, and of religious fear, but
also of vigilance and watchfulness; because that according to the common
consent of the learned, namely Aristoteles, Manethon, Plinius, Aelianus,
Plutarchus, and Macrobius, he sleeps with his eyes open, which do likewise
shine as full of light and withal stirs his tail in the mean time that
he is asleep, of which he is never overcome. The Lion is likewise the
Symbol of Clemency, because among all the wild beasts he alone spares such
persons as do prostrate themselves before him, and by signs and speeches do
pray him to show pity, as Plinius, Aelianus and others do witness. It is also
the Symbol of just revenge, because (...) the said Authors, together with
Oci^na, do deliver, he marketh most diligently such as invade him, and hurt
him; and though he be in never so great a throng, if he can, he pursues him,
and kills him; whereas he only terrifieth, or throws down the man that
had only aimed at him, but not hurt him. Hanno of Carthage was the first man
that tamed the Lion, which he used in the bearing of his baggage. Berenice
Queen of Egypt had a Lion so tame, that she would suffer him to lick her
face, and eat with her at the Table. Others have taken tame Lions to the field
to fight against their enemies. But above all, the history of Androcles,
reported by Aelianus, and Gellius, is notable, whom a Lion fed three years in
the time he was fugitive; and afterward being both taken, not only spared,
when as he was casten to him for his prey, but also protected him from the the
furious invasion of a Libbard, and folded himself at his feet, and showed all
the signs of amity that he could, though some good space had past since they
had lived together in the den. The ground and cause of all the which affection,
was for that Androcles had pulled a thorn out of the poor Lions foot, and
healed his soar, at the very first time that he chanced to repose himself in
the faid den, not caring what became of him. The which matter being signified
to Caesar, Androcles was restored to his liberty, and the Lion his old Host
given him for his guerdon, of whom it was thus commonly said when as they went
along the streets; Behold the man who was the Lions Physician, and the Lion who
was the man's Host.
The Lilly-lyon of the North to day,
Sends to our Town his only daughter dear,
Upon her Crown to bear thy crown away:
Wherefore be sure, so soon as thou comes near
To Norths great Lions bright Elizabelle,
Thou quit thy Crown, and call her Lyonnelle.
63
Come after me, and do all this and more,
For this is but the thousandth of her due,
Since that the worth of all that went before
She has in her; I tell the thing that is true,
In sign whereof I swear by Venus, the Lady of love, is the patroness of the
Myrtle-tree, and as Nicander writes, she ware a Myrtle garland the day she
wan the Golden Apple by the judgment of Paris.
Myrtle-queene,
I Will do the thing that never yet was seen.
64
For her sweet sake my well shall spring with wine,
My streaming spouts to day shall not grow dry,
But run such liquor as the land of Rhine,
Does brue for the best mouths of Majesty.
And if I had as many pearls as vines,
They should turn drink to these two Valentines.
65
The best Ambrosie ever Bacchus brewed,
Fetched from Palerme of Italy and Greece;
Those beauties bright shall be therewith bed^w'd,
Which do attend upon this golden fleece:
The strangest tun that ever wight did see,
To welcome them, shall run with Malmesie.
66
The Myrtle-bunch that I have borne so long
With great applause Eliza's lap shall fill;
For to Tamisis Nymph it does belong
Who now is the Nymph of this our Myrtle-hill:
Wherefore let Hills and Dales resound her fame,
Since all the Nymphs must her Myrtilla name.
67
Because the Myrtles of Heidelberge are but wild, low shrubs, therefore the
Nymphe to congratulate Eliza, wishes she had the Myrtle-tree, which Plinius
and others do tell once grew in old Romes first plot, and some of those Myrtles
of Egypt, which according to Theophrastus and Athenaeus are the most fragrant
of all other. The greater Myrtle grows plenteously in Spain, and in Italy,
about Naples, the smaller in Germany and France; the leaves are always green,
the flowers fair and white. It is the only Tree that yields both oil and
wine, also the Myrtle-berries of old time served in steed of pepper. It does
likewise afford a kind of sweet perfume to he burned; it was chosen to make
an atonement, and to rarefie the marriage between the Romans and the Sabins,
because Venus is the patroness thereof. Hence it is, that the wise Egyptians
and Greeks have made the Myrtle-tree to be the Symbol of matrimonial love;
and in a country of Greece called Trezenie, there is a kind of Myrtle whose
leaves are full of holes, representing the wounds and heart-holes of
languishing lovers. It is like-wise the Symbol or Ensign of such honest mirth
and gladness, as is used at Banquets and Feasts; For of old times, as
Plutarchus and Horatius do testify, at Banquets, a branch of Myrtletle went
round about the Table, whereby, each one of the Feasters was invited to sing
some honest song to rejoice the company: And the Myrtle-Nymph of Heidelberge
wishes that her Citizens should renew, or represent, this old custom at
their Feasts made in honor of Elizabeth's arrival, by making her Myrtle-berry
in steed of a Myrbranch go round about the Table to inuire them to sing their
best songs for Elizabeth's sake. The same Nymph like-wise promises that her
Myrtle-berries at Eliza's coming shall have the same virtue that the
Myrtle-rod, by Plinius and others, is reported to have; which is to chase all
weariness from folks limbs, come they never so far off to see Eliza's
solemnities.
Or if I had the Myrtle-tree that stood
In Romes first plot, hard by Mount- Palatine,
Or yet those Myrtles nie to Nilus flood
Of fragrant smell, which there are to be seen:
A Myrtle-May-pole, with a Myrtle-wreath
Should grace the gates of loved Elizabeth
68
Oh, if I had the hands for to advance
Myrtilla's state amidst as many Towns,
As their are Myrtle-trees in Spain and France,
In Italy, or yet in Germans bound;
All should be hers to twice ten thousand score;
For why, her worth deserves as much and more.
69
Yet for a sign, I wish her all the hap
Which this my Myrtle-emblems sense resounds;
Lo how I lay into her lovely lap,
As many berries as be Towers or Towns
Twixt purest Rheine, and fruitful Nilus Flood,
About whose Banks so many Myrtles stood.
70
Ye Virgin troops, which flock within our walls
From many miles to view Myrtilla's glory;
Forget not when my shoure of Berries falls
Upon her clothes to catch each Myrtle-berry:
This Berry shall all weariness debar
From your soft limbs, tho ye come near so far.
71
Each worthy Burgess of the Myrtle-towne
Keep ye a feast in honor of this day;
Call all your poor to sing and dance the round,
And strive who shall the Berry bear away:
At all your feasts, this Berry ye present,
In sign of gladness, glee, and merriment.
72
The Myrtle-bough befits The Myrtle-Tree, says D^d^naus, is called Myrsine in
Greek, because of a young Lady in Athens so named, who in beauty excelled all
the Lasses and Ladies of that City, and in strength and Actiuity all the lusty
Lads and Gallants of Greece; for the which she was tenderly beloved of
Minerua, or Pallas, the Patroness of Wisdom and Valor, who willed her to
be always present at Turney and Tilt, running, vauting, and other such
exercises of Arms, to the end that fitting as Judge of their Actiuity, she
might give the Garland-prize to such as best deserved the same. But some of
the^ which were vanquished, were so much displeased with her judgment, that
they slew her. The which thing so soon^ as Pallas perceived, she caused the
sweet Myrtle to spring up out of her blood, and called it Myrsine, in honor
and remembrance of her.
Myrsina's Peer
Eliza loved, in whom the worth does dwell,
Which once Myrsina had Minerua's dear,
That did in wit and valor both excel:
She gave the prize as judge of Chivalry
Till her sweet blood turned to a Myrtle-tree.
73
Great Jove vouchsafe us once to see the day
When we shall reap such honored victory
Upon proud Turks, that our Myrsina may
Sit down to judge of feats of Chiualry:
As once she did, at Henry's sports of war,
Reward two Wights, Montgomry, Lochinwarre.
74
When I consider the late fire-fight,
Showed on the Thames twixt Christen-men and Turks,
And how a Turk by kindled Cannons might
Lost both his hands; met-thinkes that in it lurkes
This lucky sign; th'vnited Northern States
Out of Turks hands shall wring their Towns and seats.
75
Of such Prophesies, God-willing, shall be abundantly spoken in our Sibylla
Britannica; in the mean time, it is to be noted, that Johannes Leunclauius in
the Preface of his Mussulmane History, Dedicated to the Prince-electors, does
deliver, how that old Oracles do promise that the Turk shall be finally and
totally ouer-throwne at the River of Rhine, by the united forces of three
Kings. And Michael Nostradamus tells, how that the day shall be, when the
Princes of the Pole-article, or the North, to the number of six, shall join
with the chief, or Prince of Scotland, and that they shall bring great terror
and tribulation to the Mahumetane Turks. Lastly, the most glorious Prophecy
that I find of any Prince, is of a Prince of the name of Charles, the which,
Carrion in his Chronicle has applied to Charles the fifth, King of Spain and
Emperor; but truly, that most worthy, valorous, and victorious Prince has
left the accomplishment thereof to some other Charles then himself, as the
tenure of the prediction conferred with his deeds, howsoever glorious, may
testify: and it has been always my most ardent wish ever since I began to be
somewhat curious in this kind, that that Prophecy alleged by Carrion out of
the old Chronicles of Magdeburg, might have one day his full accomplishment in
the person of Prince Charles, and that as he does Symbolize with Castriote,
alias Scanderbeg, in the common style of Prince, or Duke of Albany, so may he
like-wise with him in his Prowess against the Turks, and in his Titles of
Christ's Champion, and the terror of Turks. Whereof, who will, may read more
in our Poem made upon Prince Charles his Nativity.
No less is promised by old Prophesies,
Which we have seen in Latin, Greek, and French,
With other tongues, which promise victories
To Northern hands, how they combined shall drench
Constantinople in a foaming flood
Which shall be made of spilt Barbarian blood.
76
O happy sight to see Prince Charles one day
Together with the States of Germany,
Against proud Turks his Banner to display
That as he is named the Duke of Albany;
So men may him a Scanderbeg enstile,
Th'horrour of Turks, the Hercles of this I Will.
77
CHRIST JESUS name sweet Charles of Britanny
With Scanderbeg, thy Champion, and thy Knight,
Add unto his one Northern Albany,
Six Albanies; choose him thy fields to fight
Against Mahomet, and grant him for his hire,
Constantines Town, with the proud Turks Empire.
78
That our Myrsina may her Brother Crown
With Palmy-wreath in sign of victory,
And like Debora sing his high renown,
Thanking great love for the felicity;
It pleased him to her brother Charles to give,
In whose sweet face loved Henry still does live.
79
The Maids and Matrons shall with cheerful voice
Extol Myrsina and her honor raise
Up to the skies; both aged men and boys
Shall hop and danse, and loud resound her praise;
Agnising her to be the sweetest Wight
That ever lodged in Heidelberge all night.
80
Three Emperors 3 daughters, of the name of Mathilde or Maud, have been married
to three Palatine Princes; the first Mathildis was the daughter of Otho the
second, Duke of Saxe and Emperor, married to Siffrid Prince Palatine; the
second, was the daughter of Rodulph the first, Earl of Habspurg and Emperor,
married to Prince Lodowicke, surnamed the Severe; and the third Mathildis was
the daughter of Adolph Earl of Nassaw and Emperor, married to Rodolph Prince
Palatine: And as for Kings daughters that have been married to the Palatines,
we read in Henninges, David Rorarius, and Marquardus Freherus, how that
Blanch, the eldest daughter of Henry the fourth King of England, was the first
wife of Lodowicke the fourth, Prince Palatine, son to Robert the Emperor,
who, as Fabian and Cooper in their Chronicles do write, came here into
England, Anno, 1403, and was received of the said King Henry with great
Triumph. Our English Writers, though they agree that the said Lady Blanch was
married about this time to a Duke of Bauier, and he the Emperors son, yet
they make no particular mention of any such Match, as the above named Germans
do avouch, but rather otherwise: Ranulph of Chester, Walsingham, Fabian, and
Stow, do not express the Dukes name that married her; Polydorus erroniously
calls him John, son to the Duke of Bauier; Hal, and Hollinshed name him
William Duke of Bauier, son to Lewis the Emperor, but this could not be; for
both English and Dutch Historians and Genelogicians write, that the said Duke
William married Maud daughter to Henry Duke of Lancaster, whose other daughter
Blanch married John of Gant Earl of Richmond, and in her right, Duke of
Lancaster, and that she suruiued her husband four years, and that he died
Anno 1377. some 25. years before the marriage of Blanch, the eldest daughter
of Henry the fourth; who, according to the truth, was married to Lodowicke Duke
of Bauier, the son of Robert Prince Palatine and Emperor, who had been
chosen but a short space before, by the Electors, and came here into England,
as is said above. And as for the rest of the Kings daughters, mentioned in the
Poem, Ludomille of Boheme, was the daughter of Primislay the 2. King of Boheme,
and of Constance his wife, the daughter of Bela the third, King of Hungary,
she was married to Lodowick the father of Otho the Illustrious Prince
Palatine, and Duke of Bauiere. Beatrice of Sicilie, wife to Robert the second,
Prince Palatine, was the daughter of Frederick King of Sicilie, according to
Cuspinianus, Carrion, Rheusnerus, Marquardus and Brunnius: as for Munsterus, he
does not express his propper name, but Henninges, and Albizius make her the
daughter of King Peter. Dorothie of Denmark, the wife of Frederick the second
Prince Palatine, was the daughter of Christiern the second, King of Denmark.
Elizabeth of Hungary was wife to Heary Duke of Bauier, the younger brother of
Lodowicke called the Severe, Prince Palatine, and Daughter and Heir of Bela,
the fourth, King of Hungary. Lastly, Anne of Polony, was the daughter of
Conrade, Prince of Poland, and one of the three wives of the foresaid
Lodowicke the Severe, so called, for that out of an indiscreet humor of
iealously, he practiced a filthy cruelty upon his wife Mary of Brabant, in
causing her head to be cut off, for that she had written a letter to a
Captain of his own, named Henry Rucco, which came into his hands: for the
which abominable fact, he was so terrified with an horrible vision by night,
that his head became before the next morning as white as wool, so that he
repenting him of his iealousy and cruelty, founded the Monastery of
Furstenfield, and endowed the same with rich possessions, as Cuspinianus and
Henninges do write. Thus we see, how that it fared much more hardly with this
good Lady Mary of Brabant, then it did, with Cunegunde the sister of Henry
Prince Palatine, married to Henry the second, Emperor, who got leave to purge
her self of the like false suspicion, by going bare-foote (as she did, without
hurt) upon a number of Plough-shares red hot, as the same Cuspinianus with
Vrspergensis do write. And in William of Malmesbury, and Ranulph of Chester
we read how that Queen Emme, mother to King Edward the Confessor, being
accused of adultery with Edwin, Bishop of Winchester, purged her self in the
same manner. Semblably we read in Cuspinianus, Paulus Emylius, and Francis de
Belle-forest, how that Charles the Gross King of France and Emperor, accused
his wife Richarda, a daughter of Scotland, of playing false play with Luitwald
Bishop of Vercelle in Lumbardy, her chief Councelor, but she cleared her self
to her great honor, and her jealous, yea, impotent husbands great shame. So
did Gonilda the fair, daughter of Canute King of England, accused to her
husband Henry the third Emperor, of the like fault, who when as she could
find none to fight in the defense of her honesty against her slanderous
accuser, being so strong and of so huge a Statute, it pleased God to enspire a
little boy with David's courage, whom she had brought out of England with her,
who encountering with the reproachful Goliath, first cut his knee, and being
fallen to the ground, cut off his head, and brought it to the good Empress
Gonilda, who thanked God with great rejoicing for working such a wonder for her
sake by the hands of a boy, being of so low a Stature, that he was commonly
called Mimecan, or the Dwarf, as William of Malm^ssbury, Matthew of estminster,
and Ranulph of Chester have written.
The three Mathilda's Girls of Caesar's three
Which wedded were to Princes three of Rhine,
Had not more worth, more grace, more Majesty
Then loved Eliza Princess Palatine:
Blanch once a daughter of South-britanny
Was not her match, nor Anne of Polony.
81
Nor yet Bohemies Lady Ludomille,
Nor Beatrice the Girl of Sicilie,
Nor she of Bauier, whom they name Sybille;
No more her Match was Denmarkes Dorothy:
From Hungary and Bauier Ladies two
Eliza's both might to our Eliza bow.
82
The Muses then of Heidelberge shall come
Before her face, with Pamphlets full of praise,
Some Dutch, some French, some Latin, other some
In Greek, her name and same abroad to blase:
Some shall in Verse, and other some in Prose
Record the worth of such a gallant Rose.
83
Church-Holy-Ghost which Caesar Robert framed
Prince Palatine and King of Germany,
With his Empress, Elizabeth surnamed;
When it receives the Rose of Britanny:
Shall pray great Jove that she see never death,
Till she be styled Empress Elizabeth.
84
Me-thinkes I see how Robert from his shrine
With his Eliza sleeping in that place
Awake to welcome their sons Valentine
Wishing them both all health, wealth, hap, and grace:
That as they both do from them jointly spring,
So may them Jove to all their honors bring.
85
One thing will want, which much I wish were there
An Organd-quior of Surpliz'd Saints to sing,
Such as we hear in Paul's and Westminster,
Heavens, earths delight; but thou Concording King
To Holy-Ghost-Church help for to restore
Such holy-state as once she had before.
86
O if S. Giles which Edinburgers holds
With Heidelbergers Holy Ghost could sing
Such Organd-anthems shall be sung in Paul's
Of Londoners, the day that they shall bring
This Lady home, whose worth and dignity
Should be solemnized of these Cities three.
87
On the left hand of Heidelberge is a Hill called Heiligenberg which is by
interpretation, the Hill of all Saints, where, according to Franciscus
Irenicus, and Thomas Leodius, was anciently a Temple erected in honor of all
the Heathen Gods called Pantheon, like unto that of Rome, mentioned in Dion
Cassius, which Pope Boniface, as Platina testifies, converted into a Church
called Al-Saints.
When first Myrsina mounts Pantheon Hill
By Heidelberge, mee-thinkes a Lady-bright
Panthaea named, Myrsina comes until,
Adorned with beauty, modesty, and might:
Such as she had, when her loved Abradate
In Perse was Lord of Susas Lilly-state.
88
This Princely Dame whom Xenophon does praise
Both for her beauty and her chastity,
When to King Cyrus she a captive was,
Who had good proof of her pudicity:
As soon as she does her Myrsina meet,
She in this manner her begins to greet.
89
Welcome Myrsina to Pantheon Hill,
Welcome pure Pearl, whom I Panthaea love;
Welcome to me, and shall be ever still,
To Wights below, and unto Gods above:
Blessed be the feet that fetched this glass to me
Of thy sweet face, wherein mine own I see.
90
As ardent love may last between you twain,
As did 'twixt me, and my dear Abradate,
Jove from above his blessings power amain
Down on your heads, and make so mount your state
Amongs your Peers, as much as Juno's Lilly
Surmounts the Primrose, Panse or Daffadilly.
91
Alcestis loved so entirely and dearly her loving husband Admetus, King of
Thessaly, that she choosed to die, thereby to deliver her said husband from
imminent death, as is in Euripides, or as writes Palaphatus more probably,
that she made herself the captive of Accastus, to deliver her husband from
his captivity, who was afterward delivered by Hercules, and restored to her
loving husband. And as for Pericles, Prince of Athens, he loved so dearly his
loving Aspasia, that he never went out a doors from her, but he kissed her, as
writes Plutarchus.
Such vnquench't fire as once the breasts did burn
Of Admetus and his Alcestis dear,
Burn both your breasts till both to ashes turn,
Or both turn stars amidst pure Venus sphere:
So live, so love, that time you surname may
A Pericles, and an Aspasia.
92
Then for a token of her love so dear,
Toward Myrsina, for whose sake she came,
She her bequeathes a Lilly-crowne to wear,
And her entreates not to neglect the same:
And that this sign her grace should never leave,
For Panthaea, who her that garland gave.
93
The Lilly is the King of Flowers, in regard both of the fairness, and the
tallnesse thereof. In Salomons Canticles it is the Symbol of our Savior, In
S. Hilary it is the Symbol of the glorious Angels. It is likewise the Symbol,
or Ensign of public hope, as may appear by the Imperial Medals of
Alexander Pius, Aemilianus, Claudius, Tiberius, Adrianus, and others. Finally,
it is the Symbol of beauty and pudicity, according to S. Hierome, and great
store thereof did grow in the Persian fields about Susa, the delicate and most
sweet winter-seat of the Kings of Persia. The which Cities name is by
interpretation, a Lilly, as Athenaeus does witness, and was so named according
to the testimony of Stephanus in Vrbibus, from the abound^nce of fair Lillies
there growing. It was once the City of Abradate and Panthaea, who are so
highly praised by Xenophon, and afterward by St. Hierom. When Cyrus had
overcome the Assyrians, this Persian Princess was taken, her husband Abradate,
Prince of Susa, being then absent in Bactria, he being the most worthy and
valorous Chiefetaine of his time, and she both the most virtuous and the most
beauteous Lady of all Asia; who when as some of King Cyrus his Courtiers did
comfort her the best way they could, telling her amongs other matters, that in
steed of an Abradate, she was to be honored with the love and society of a
Cyrus, no sooner heard she these words, but she began to beat her breast, to
tear her hair, and to rent her clothes, and veil from top to toe, taking up
amids her mournful maids, a most bitter lamentation. The consideration of
whose incomparable beauty and worth, made Cyrus to forbear to come into her
sight, as fearing to be overcome with the vigor of her virtue. Her husband
being returned, and having received tokens from her, with letters, letting him
to understand, how that he should be welcome to Cyrus, he made all possible
haste of coming to Cyrus his Court, accompanied with a thousand horsemen in
goodly array. Unto whom Panthaea having made report of the religion, virtue,
temperancy, continency and compassion of King Cyrus, showed in her behalf,
when as it lay in his power to do with her what he would, Abradate replied,
saying; and what would thou (my dear Panthaea) that I did to requite these
courtesies of Cyrus? Who answered; what should thou do else (my dear
Abradate) but follow the footsteps of his virtue, in laboring to be like unto
so worthy a wight. And being come before Cyrus, he says; for the inestimable
courtesy thou have showed in the behalf of my Panthaea, thy prisoner, I can
make thee no other requital, but offer unto thee my self, my friendship, my
society and service ever hereafter, for the advancing of thine honor. And
afterward, when as Abradate was to go to fight against the Egyptians in the
cause and quarrel of Cyrus, Panthaea had prepared for him a costly Chariot,
with most gorgeous and glorious armor, which when he did put on, she exhorted
him to show himself a stout chiefetaine for Cyrus his sake, who had bin so
favorable to them. With which speech Abradate being highly delighted, clapping
her head, and kissing her lips, he cast his eyes upwards to heaven, using
these words: Vouchsafe great Jove, that I may show my self a husband worthy of
such a wife as Panthaea, and a wight worthy of the frindship of such a one as
Cyrus. Who had heard this matchless Lady encourage her loving husband to show
all possible prowess for the honor of Cyrus, or had seen her kissing the very
Chariot wherein her sweetest one did sit, would have much wondered; but much
more by many degrees, who had heard her entreating, and adiuring her Nurse by
her love toward her, to sow her up in one winding sheet with her slain
husband: Or who had seen her laying his head on her lap, and pouring her own
heart-bloud into his wounds: For when as Cyrus understanding of his most worthy
friends fall in the field, fighting most valiantly, he used all the means he
possible could of comforting and cheering up his peerless widow Panthaea,
telling her how that there should be nothing left undone in honor of
Abradate, that was due unto a most valorous and chiualrous Chiefetaine; and
praying her to persuade herself of his most fervent and constant affection,
both for Abradates sake, and her own, he likewise prayed her to tell him unto
whom she had a liking to be carried. Who answered; Do not ye trouble your
self, noble Cyrus, give me but leave a little more to be mourn my dear
husband, and ye shall know then to whom I desire to go, when I have put an end
to my mourning. And so it fell out within a few hours, that the end of her
mourning, and the end of her life was all one; Abradate was the man whom she
loved as much as her own soul, and more then all the men in the world, while
he was alive; and Abradate was the man whom she loved more then her own self
when he was dead. In one word, it was Panthaea's death to be alive without
Abradate, and her sweetest life to dye with her dear Abradate.
Panthaea thus she takes her leave, and says:
Adue dear One, more sweet then Juno's flower,
To thee most due; as many be thy days,
As once grew Lillies round about my bower
In Persian fields, and in my Lilly-towne,
As many days wear thou the Lilly-crowne.
94
When I Panthaea's Lilly-face behold,
Her rosy lips, her teeth of Iuory,
And when I look upon her locks of gold,
And how her eyes are cleerer then the sky,
I call to mind our Mary Clarabell,
The all-grac'd Grand-dame of fair Rosimell.
95
Me thinks she looks as Mary did that day
The Lilly-prince did her so lovely wed
In peerless Paris; such as saw her, say:
That nere a sweeter Saint to Church was led
In any Age, in any Land, or Clime:
For of all Princes, Mary was the prime.
96
Michael Eyzingerus in his Thesaurus principum, most worthily affirms, that
there was in this most noble Queen, a gracious kind of contention between
good Nature and Grace, which of the two should bestow most of their perfections
upon her princely person; Nature striving to heap on her head the height of
exquisite beauty; and Grace on the other part, replenishing her heroical heart
with the very comble and heap of virtue and bounty.
Nature and Grace did each of them contend,
Which of the two should most her magnify;
Both of them did their utmost strength extend
Her Mind and Body for to beautify.
But her I leave to my Muse Clarabell,
For to conclude with her child Rosimell.
97
Abrinsberg is a hill on the right hand of Heidelberg, and both in the Dutch
appellation, and the Latin records it is called St. Abraham's hill; and by
Trithemius it is named also St. Michaels mount.
Then viewes Eliza holy Abrah'ms hill,
Which men do likewise term Saint Michaels mount,
And there (me seems) an Angels quire does fill
Their ears with aires, even such as they were wont
To warble forth, when souls from sinful ways,
Turn to the path that leads to paradise.
98
Abrah'm and Sarah there do seem to meet,
Joint hand in hand as married folks befits.
Fred'ricke and his Elizabeth to greet,
And then a while both down beside them sits,
Talking of duties between man and wife,
Of the ardent and constant love that should be between man and wife, the
Author has discoursed more amply in his Golden Legends of Abraham and Sara,
Isaac, and Rebecca, Jacob and Rahel, upon which it pleased her Grace to bestow
the reading some while ago.
How they should shun all jealousy and strife:
99
Then bless they them with Isaac, and his mate
Rebecca loved, whom beauty did commend,
But bounty more; they wish a happy fate
Unto them both, with life that may not end,
Till many years them and their seed do crown,
With highest hap amidst the Mirtle-towne.
100
Live Princely-paire in health and honor still,
Live Princely-paire in concord, peace, and love,
Live Princely-paire to grace your Abrah'ms hill,
Till ye exchang't with Abrah'ms hill above.
Be honored all your days, and after death,
Be honored ay, Fred'ricke, Elizabeth. *
THE SVMME OF DIVERSE Pedigrees common to the two most Noble Princes FREDERICK
and ELIZABETH, Collected by the Author, in Honor of their Highnesses.
IT is the common consent, and constant opinion, of Hystorians, and
Genelogians, that the Palatine Princes are lineally descended from glorious
Charlemaigne, once the most Augustious Emperor of Romans and Germans, and
King of France, most Christian, and it was chiefly in consideration hereof,
that they were preferred before many other Princes, and Potentates of great
power in Germany, in the election of the Emperor, and namely before the Duke
of Saxe, a Prince of great puissance, authority and command; notwithstanding
that both Otho the 3. Emperor, and Pope Gregory the 5. which did ordain the
sanction of the seven Electors (according as Blondus, Polydorus, Bergomensis,
Nauclerus, Crantzius, Balaeus, and Egnatius do deliver) were both of them
Princes of the house of Saxe, for the said Emperor Otho, belike considering
with himself, how that he had done a greater wrong to Charlemaigne in
bereauing his race of the Golden Crown of the Empire, by the means of his
foresaid Electionary sanction or decree, the^ he had done, when as he opened
his Sepulcher, and bereft his Corpse of the Golden Cross did hang about his
neck (as Ditmarus, who lived in those days, does write) for the which it is
said that he was in his sleep visited and affrighted with a reuengefull vision
of the said Charlemaigne, menacing him with death, which shortly after did
ensue: Otho, I say, considering the wrong aforesaid, done to Charlemaigne and
his Race, endeauored by all means to yield them some competent satisfaction,
and therefore preferred the Count Palatine of the Rhine, being of the Imperial
blood, and Male Race of Charlemaigne, before the Duke of Saxe, and the rest of
the Princes of the Empire, in the foresaid Election. Besides, that the first
Emperor, which was elected by the seven Electors, which was Henry the second,
Duke of Bauier, being likewise a Prince of the Saxon blood, and afterward
enstiled Saint Henry, for his singular Piety and Chastity, as Vrspergensis,
Frisingensis, Egnatius, Cuspinianus, and others do witness, he to make yet
some further satisfaction to Charlemaignes Race, did both marry the daughter of
Siffrid, Prince Palatine, named Cunegunde, and did like-wise restore unto his
brother-in-law Henry the first of this name, Prince Palatine, the Dukedom of
Banier, as we learn out of Ditmarus and others. And it was, no doubt, in
regard of their foresaid descent from Charlemaigne, that a certain
super-Imperiall privilege was co^ferred unto the Palatine Prince, which is, as
the golden Bull of the Emperor Charles the 4. does bear, that he may, in some
case, cite and summon the Emperor to appear and answer before him Iudicially.

And because that in honor of the two most Noble Princes, lately married,
Frederick and Elizabeth, we have drawn diverse Pedigrees and descents, both
from glorious Charlemaigne, and from many other Emperors, and Kings of diverse
countries, common to them both, especially seven; therefore me thought it good,
to exhibit unto the readers a su^mary view of the same, reserving the more
special handling thereof to another labor and work in Latin. In the first
four of the said seven Pedigrees, common to both the said Princes, our most
gracious Sovereign King James, and his most Noble son-in-law Prince Frederick
are in one and the self same degree of descent from the 20 Emperors, and 24.
Kings therein mentioned. In the fifth Pedigree, our most gracious Queen Anne,
and the said Prince, are likewise in one and the same degree of Descent, From
the 4. Emperors and 3. Kings therein named: And in th sixth and seventh,
Prince Frederick, and Princess Elizabeth do happily and jointly fall into one
and the same degree of descent from the Emperor and 8. Kings contained
therein: Likewise Prince Charles, and Prince Frederick, two brothers-in-law,
are colineally descended from two-borne-brothers, to wit, from Henry prince
Palatine, and Duke of Saxe the elder of the two, from whom Prince Frederick is
in the 15. degree; and from Otho Earl of York and Emperor, the younger
brother, from whom P. Charles Duke of York being likewise the younger, of the
said two brothers-in-law, is descended, both on his fathers and his mothers
side, in the 13. and 14. degree; though, as I noted other-where, some do hold
that he had no children by any of his wives.

The first of the foresaid seven common pedigrees contains fifteen
Emperors of Romans, Greeks, and Germans, with eight Kings of diverse
Countries, as namely, Germany, Bauier, (for anciently it was a Kingdom)
Hungary, Boheme, Sicile, and England, whereof two Kings are therein specified:
to wit, Edward the elder, and Henry 2. from whom P. Frederick is descended by
both his daughters; to wit, Maude the elder, married to Henry the Lion, Duke of
Saxe and Bauier, and Leonora the younger, married to Alphonse the 8. King of
Castile, Whereby we may see that like as P. Frederick is descended from the
Kings of England, so is King James likewise descended from diverse of the
Germane Emperors, especially by the means of his most Noble mother, and the
most Illustrious house of Loraine, whence it does follow, that he is capable
of the Imperial dignity, as being of the blood of Germany, and of the Empire.

The second common Pedigree, contains five Emperors of Constantinople,
together with seven Kings of France, Hungary, Aragon, Valence, and Sicile.

The third common Pedigree contains seven Kings of England, Scotland,
Jerusalem, Castile, France, Naples, and Sicile; of which number, are Edmond
Ironside, and Henry the first Kings of England, (besides King Henry the 2.
mentioned in the first Pedigree) together with Malcolme Cammore King of
Scotland.

The fourth common Pedigree is from S. Lod^wicke, or Lewis the incomparable
King of France, from whom King James, and Prince Frederick on their most Noble
mothers side, Mary, and Lucy-Iuliane, are lineally descended in one and the
same degree with King Lodowick the 13. of this name, being all three in the 12
degree.

The fifth pedigree contains four Emperors, and three Kings of Boheme, and
Poland.

The sixth pedigree contains seven Kings of Arragon, Valence, France,
Navarre, England, Castile, and Leon, of which number are Edward the 2. and
Edward the 3. Kings of England, and John of Gant his son, Knight of the
renowned Order of the Garter, Earl of Richmond, Darby, Leicester, and
Lincoln, Palatine of Chester, Great Constable of France, and High Steward of
England, Duke of Aquitane and Lancaster, and King of Castile and Leon; from
whom prince Frederick, and princess Elizabeth are lineally descended, the one
by his son. John Earl of Sommerset, Marquis Dorset, the other by his
daughter Philippa married to John King of Portugale, and both in the tenth
degree, which is the eleventh from King Edward the 3. as the pedigree I have
lately published does show.

The seventh and last Pedigree common to both the said Princes, is from
Lodowicke the 5. Duke of Bauier and Emperor, and his wife Margaret the
Empress, and Countess of Holland; together with King John of France, from the
which Emperor and Empress they are both in the 12 degree. So that the number
of the Emperors contained in the said seven pedigrees. common to both, falls
out to be twenty and five; and the number of the Kings of diverse countries
therein specified, is thirty, and above; and even so many Kings besides 12.
Emperors, have we found in the Princely descent of the Illustrious house of
Howards, as we shall (God willing) show in another work.

One thing there is, which the special affection I do bear to the honor of
the name of James, will not suffer me to smother up, and that is; That our most
gracious Souerainge King James, the first of this name in Britanny, and
likewise the first Christian uniter of the two kingdoms thereof, and the son
and heir of a Matchless Q. Mary, together with his Noble son-in-law, P.
Frederick are both of them in the 13. degree of lineall descent from James the
first of this name, surnamed the Fortunate, son and heir of a worthy Queen
Mary, and the uniting King of Aragon and Valence, of whom six famous Spanish
Chroniclers, Rodericus Toletanus, Rodericus Sanctius, Alphonsus a Carthagena,
Franciscus Tarapha, Lucius Marinius, and Damianus a Goes make most honorable
mention. And from the same uniting King of Aragon, James the Fortunate, who was
likewise the Author of two several Orders of Knighthood (as Polydorus,
Zuingerus, and others do write) Prince Frederick, and Princess Elizabeth, are
yet another way lineally descended, and that both in one and the same degree,
of the number of fifteen. It is likewise worthy of observation, that whereas
there have been but only two Emperors of the Palatine Family he^ ^e; the one
a younger brother, and Duke of Baui^ (...) Lodowicke the 5. the other an elder
brother (...) ^ount Palatine, which was Robert, surnamed t^ (...) that the two
Princes lately married, are descended equally from them both, with their
Empresses, Margaret and Elizabeth; from the first two, both in the 12 degree;
and from the other two, He in the 9. and She in the 10 degree. And my hearty
wish is, that these two names aforesaid, Margaret and Elizabeth may prove as
lucky Imperially, for Frederickes and Elizabeth's Imperial preferment in
Germany, as the same names have heretofore done royally for King James their
fathers royal preferment in Britanny.

It is also worth the noting, that as there have been as yet but only two
Emperors of the Palatine family, so have they had a very different fortune in
their acceptance toward the Pope; for Lodowicke the 5. Duke of Bauier, and
Emperor, as is said before, from whom Prince Frederick is the 12, was highly
hated of Benedict the 12, and before him, yet more, of John the 22 (whose name
is so numerous, that he might have well said with the unclean spirit in the
Gospel, my name is Legion) and yet after him of a third pope, Clement the 6.
The which three popes (most like the three Furies) did no other thing else,
from day to day, but heap hellish sentence upon sentence of excommunication
and deprivation against the good Emperor; who not withstanding all their
Infernal fulminations, and Cerbereall oblatrations, received more honor in
Rome, at the hands of both Clergy and Laity there, then they all three did in
Auinion; and in spite of the Devil, lived longer in the Empire, then they all
three did in the Papacy. But who list to learn more of the quarrels and
contentions between the good Emperor Lodowike, and the foresaid three evil
popes of Auinion, let them read the histories of Blondus, Sabellicus, Merula,
Cuspinianus, and Thomas Walsingham, who likewise do tell, how that Edward the
third, King of England, who went over into Germany to salute the said Emperor,
and to treat of an alliance with him against France, was met of the said
Emperor at Colein, and admitted to be his Vicar general in the Empire. And
the same Lodowickes father, named Lodowicke the Severe, Prince Palatine,
together with his brother Henry, Duke of Bauier, had likewise chosen Richard,
Earl of Cornwall, son of King John, to be Emperor; like as Robert the first
of this name, Prince Palatine, (for this Title is in Aurea Bulla as well as
that of Count Palatine) did choose the foresaid King Edward the third, to be
Emperor after the death of Lodowicke the 5. though he (too modestly indeed)
refused the said dignity. By which particulars we may espy how that the
Palatine Princes have been in former times very officious to the Kings of
England, and their children; hoping that they shall hereafter prove yet more
officious and forward in the same kind, then ever they have done before, to the
end that old prophesies may take effect, which do promise, that the Imperial
dignity shall for many years continue in Britanny, as our Sibylla Britannica
shall largely show.

The other Emperor of the Palatine house, was Robert, surnamed the Noble, who
reigned in great honor, 9 years and 9 months, from whom prince Frederick is
the 9.) as the pedigree lately published does show) and who was so highly
beloved of pope Boniface the 9. that he not only furthered and confirmed his
election, but also granted him, toward a subsidy, one years tithes of the
Clergy, through all Germany, as Cuspinianus and others do write. So that this
good Pope in doing this good office, and in using so well the worthy Emperor,
did answer to his name, and was a Boniface indeed, far otherwise then did
Benedictus the 12. and Clement the 6 in the behalf of the other Palatine
Emperor named before. And for mine own part, I wish with all my heart that
many such Bishops may sit in the Apostolical Chair, as may both in their own
persons give unto God the things that are Gods, and unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar's; and with blessed S. Peter, teach all Christians to fear God, and
honor the King. The foresaid Robert the good Emperor, and who was so highly
beloved of the good pope Boniface the 9. was a prince renowned for his great
spirit, quick wit, heroical courage, for his love and study of Justice, (for
the which cause he was surnamed Robertus Iustimanus) and for his careful
endeavoring to repair the ancient glory of the Empire. He came into England
with a goodly company (as Fabian and Cooper do write) in the year 1403. to see
the magnificence of the Court, and the commodities of the Country, who of King
Henry the 4. was honorably and triumphantly received and feasted; and during
his abode lodged at S. John's by Smithfield: and lastly conveyed toward the
seaside, where either departed from other with exchange of rich and precious
gifts: for this Robert (says our said English Author) was a prince of great
bounty, liberality, and magnificence, and showed diverse effects thereof toward
the English at his departure. He was likewise the first Emperor that ever ware
S. Georges renowned order, commonly called, The Order of the Garter, as
Maximilian the 2. another glorious Emperor was the eighth. He was likewise the
first of the three Palatines, which have been honored with the foresaid noble
Order; John Casimire being the second, who received it at the hands of famous
Queen Elizabeth, about the same time of the year, and day of the month, (to
wit, the 8. of February) that P. Frederick being the third, received it at the
hands of our gracious K. James. The said Emperor Roberts wife was named
Elizabeth the Empress, and princess Palatine, and was a Lady of singular
virtue, piety, bounty, chastity and charity toward the poor; who brought
forth to her worthy husband many fine children, to wit, five sons, by the
means of the youngest whereof, P. Frederick is descended from the said Emperor
and Empres in the 9. degree; and three daughters, by the means of the eldest
whereof, named Margaret, princess Elizabeth is likewise descended from them in
the 10 degree; the which numbers in the^ united, make up K. James his luckly
number of Nineteen. Thus we see; that like as our most gracious King James,
with his hopeful children, prince Charles, and princess Elizabeth are
lineally descended from two Margarets, and one Elizabeth of Britany, being the
renowned daughters of prince Edward, surnamed the Outlaw: K. Edward the 4. and
K. Henry the 7. in whose tripled right (the two Margarets being married to two
kings of Scotland, Malcolme Cammore, and James the 4.) he does at this day
happily and rightfully enjoy this Crown. So are they likewise descended
lineally from other two Margarets and an Elizabeth of Germany, to wit, from
Margaret Countess of Holland, Duchess of Bauier, and Empress, wife to
Lodowicke the Emperor, from Elizabeth Duchess of Bauier, princess Palatine,
and Empress, wife to Robert the Emperor: and sustly, from Margaret, Duchess
of Loraine, the eldest daughter of the said Robert the Emperor, and Elizabeth
the Empress, and who was married to the most noble and valorous prince
Charles, surnamed Marcelle, or the warlike Duke of Loraine, from whom I have
derived our hopeful P. Charles his pedigree; and that as well on his noble
mothers as on his happy fathers side, and yet more from Emperors, Kings and
Princes of the name of Charles, to the number of 9. besides those of other
names, as also I have done from P. Albert, Marquise of Brandeburge, who for his
incomparable courage was called the Achilles of Germany; wishing with all my
heart, that like as prince Charles was borne on his day, and does participate
of his blood, so he may likewise inherit his heroical prowess, and so one day
be enstiled the Achilles of Britanny: the which our hearty wish is more fully
expressed in an Astrologicall and Historical poem made upon his Nativity. And
thus for the present are we contented to shut up this Genealogicall sum with
this six-line-Epigram, in honor of Frederick and Elizabeth, whom the God of
heaven prosper and preserve.

Both from Augustus and Augusta spring
Lodwicke-Margret, Robert-Elizabeth,
Both in one month Jove to the light did bring.
Augustus named, which this good presage has:
AUGUSTUS fate one day must them befall,
And him AUGUSTUS, her AUGUSTA call.
FINIS.

