THE MIRROVR of Religious men, and of godly Matrones.

EXHIBITED IN THE GOLden Legends of these six famous and faithful Persons.

Abraham and Sara, Isack and Rebecca: Jacob and Rahel.
Very comfortable to be read of all the sons and daughters of such faithful
parents according to the promise, for the rectifying of their lives and the
confirming of their faith.

By I. M. Master in Arts.

LONDON, Printed for E. White, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of
the gun, near the little north door of Paul's. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable Bruce-sprung noble Lord JOHN, Lord Harington, Baron of
Exton: and to the right noble and worthy, the Lady ANNE his wife, and the most
virtuous Gouernesse of the most graceful young Princess. Madam ELIZABETH
Infanta of Albion, all heavenly and earthly happiness.
IT is the custom (right honorable) of such as set or send out any work to
public view, to make choice of some worthy Person for the patronizing
thereof. So that I, being about the publishing of certain Essays and
Meditations of mine, moral and divine, and among others, of this present
Pamphlet, I began to bethink my self of some convenient Patron for the
countenancing thereof. And in end after that I had considered of the nature and
kind of the Subject sufficiently; and had weighed with my self the greatness
of your humanity, both toward Scholars and my Countrymen; I was emboldened so
much the more to publish it under the combined splendour of your united
illustrious names. In it one may see as in a clear Mirror or crystal
glass, a plain and lively representation of the says, piety, and devotion,
of the vprightnes, charity, and compassion; of the Temperance, sobriety, and
moderation; and of the diligence, industry and honest conversation, of the
godly Men and Women of old, and namely of the six famous and faithful
persons, therein more particularly painted out. In whose golden Legends, I hope
the sharpest-sighted shall not epsy so much as the smallest spice of any fained
fiction, falsehood or he: the which thing no doubt, many will deem and esteem
a great rarity in a golden Legend. In it one also may see a perfect patterre and
picture of a perfect Servant of God Man or Woman; together with an exemplary
proof of Gods bountiful requiting and liberal rewarding of them for their
service. Therein likewise is as it were in a visible manner expressed to the
eye, the exceeding great care that Almighty God has of his children, even of
all such as do commend their estate, and commit their affairs unto his
fatherly providence. Finally this little Mirror does afford diverse moral
observations and instructions, to the number of 68. touching the chief duties
that men and women owe unto God, and likewise one unto another: namely such as
do mutually concern husbands and wives, parents and children, masters and
Servants. Considering then that the nature of it is such and that it may serve
somewhat for the furtherance of men and women, chiefly those of the younger
sort, in the exercise of soundnes of belief, and of sincerity of life, I am so
much the more bold to implore your worthy Patronage therein, and to pray your
honors in the behalf thereof to answer unto the signification of your two
christen names, which do import Grace and gracious, and even to grace this
mean Testimony of a dutiful mind, with your gracious acceptance. The which
favor, if it shall please your honors to afford me; I shall be encouraged to
be aabout the showing of some more ample signification of mine obseruancie
toward the honor of your names. And thus wishing in the mean time unto a
graceful JOHN and ANNA such felicity, hap, and honor, as has befaln unto
ABRAHAM and SARA, ISACK and REBECCA, JACOB and RAHEL, whose godliness and
vertuousnes ye do so happily imitate: I rest

Your Honors devoted to all humble duties, JAMES MAXWELL.

A SVMMARIE VIEW of the chief contents of this present Legend-booke.
I. OF obedience unto the Lords voice. page 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. II. Of faith in God,
and of the wonderful effects thereof. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11 35. 36. 37. 38. 39.
40. 41. 42. 43. 45. 46. 47. 48. 49. 50. 51. 52. 61. 62. 63. 64. 65. III. Of the
religious care that should be in Parents for their children, and in Masters and
mistresses for their servants. p. 12. 13. 14. 139. 142. 143. 144. 145 146. 147.
148. 149. 150. 151. 152. 153. 154. 155. 156. 157. 158. IIII. Of the qualities
of a good Servant. P. 14. 15. 16. 17. V. Of the charity, pity, compassion,
equity, and peaceable disposition that ought to be in christians. P. 18. 19.
20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 70. 71. 92. VI. Of Gods blessing and rewarding of such as
serve him, and wait on him, p. 3. 25. 26. 27. 28. 57. 58. 59. 65. 66. 67. 68.
76. 107. 116. 119. 120. VII. Of Gods raising up of the despised, and of his
casting down of the despisers, p. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. VIII. Of the
subjection, modesty, and shamefastnes, that ought to be in Christian women, p.
52. 53. 79. 80. 81. IX. Of Beauty and Bounty in women. p. 54. 55. 56. 57. 71.
72. 109. 110. 111. X. Of Gods presence and assistance in the time of the godly
man's adversity and affliction. p. 66. 67. 68. 69. 101 102. 123. 124. 126. 127.
130. 131. 132. XI. Of diligence and industry that ought to be in Christian men
and women p. 73. 74. 104. 105. 106. 111. 112. XII. Of the humility and humanity
that ought to be in Christian men and women. p. 75. 133. 134. XIII. Of the
heart-fasting that ought to be in such parties as are about marriage, before
that they be hand-fasted. p. 76. 77. 107. XIIII. Of parents and friends
blessing, and well aduising of the married couple. p. 78. 79. XV. Of the
excellency of a virtuous wife, and of the great account that her husband should
make of her. p. 82. 83. 84. 88. 93. XVI. Of the fervent love that ought to be
between married folks. p. 85. 87. 88. XVII. Of the great efficacy of the
righteous man's prayer. p. 88. 89. 90. 91. XVIII. Of Gods love and favor, and
of the great efficacy thereof. p. 95. 96. 97. 124. 125. 126. XIX. Of the
patience, innocence, and modesty, that ought to be in Christians. p. 98. 99.
100. 102. 103. 112. XX. Of Gods remembering of his children after a seeming
forgetfulness, p. 113. 114. 115. 116. 117. XXI. Of the Christians patient
waiting on God, and of the good issue thereof. p. 116. 117. 118. 119. 120.
XXII. Of the thankefulnes that ought to be in Christians toward God for
benefits received. p. 121. 122. 138. 139. XXIII. Of the care and charge that
Gods Angels have of the afflicted and godly. p. 127. 128. 129. 130. XXIIII. Of
Christians acknowledging of Gods gratiousnes, and of their own unworthiness. p.
135. 138. XXV. Of the great vanity of Idols, or shop-Gods of gold and silver.
p. 140. 141. 142.
ERRATA,
Page 8. for vnfalliable, read infallible

Page 19. for unsoundly. read vnsonnely

Page 49. for deseased, read deceased.

Page 68 for bended, read bruised.

Page 90. for was, read were.

Page 100. for opens, read open.

Page 133. for blesses, read kisseth.

The golden legend of ABRAHAM and SARA.
ABraham as he was the father of the faithful, Genesis 17.4, 5, 6. Romans 4.16, 17,
18.
so was he more particularly, of all religious and godly rich men. He feared
God devoutly, obeyed his voice readily, called upon his name dilligently, lived
among men uprightly, and followed his calling carefully. Genesis 12.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.
and 15.1.2.3.4.12.13.18. and 2.17.8.
His obedience to the Lords voice was such, that he left his native country,
forsook his kindred and his fathers house, and travailed toward the land of
Canaan, Act. 7 2.3 4.5.
which the Lord promised to give him and his seed: he left a certain
possession for an uncertain, only relying and reposing himself upon the
certainty of Gods gracious promise. Yea more, when as God had given him a son,
and one only son of his wife Sara, in their old age, contrary to the common
course and ordinary ability of nature, Genesis 22.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
and 26. 5. James 2.21.
he was willing at the Lords voice to offer him for a burnt offering. So that
not without great cause is the holy Patriarks obedience so highly commended by
the Lords own mouth. By my self have I sworn (says the Lord) because thou
have done this thing, and have not spared thine only son, therefore will I
surely bless thee, and will greatly multiply thy seed, as the stars of the
heaven, and the sand which is upon the seashore; and thy seed shall possess
the gate of his enemies.

And as Abraham at the commandment of the most high, would have sacrificed
his son, yea his young son, and his only son, and the son of his
delight; and that with his own hands, and without protracting of time, (for he
rose up early in the morning to offer up his son) so the Lord in consideration
of his obedience, yea his admirable and memorable obedience, rewarded him most
amply, and blessed exceedingly not only himself, but likewise his seed for
his sake.

Hence we may learn this lesson, that whosoever he be that serves the Lord,
he shall find that he serves not a thankeles, but a most thankful
master, according to that which he said unto Abraham: Genesis 1.
Fear not Abraham, I am thy Buckler, and thine exceeding great

In Abraham's obedience in preferring the Lords voice and will before the love
of his Country and kindred, yea before the love of his only son Isack, al his
children according to the promise, but chiefly rich men, are taught to yield
obedience unto the Lords voice; and even (if the cause require it) to abandon
and forsake their dearest and most beloved things, for the cause of God, and to
prefer his will before al earthly and corruptible treasure.

Mat. 10.37 and 19 29.
He that loves father or mother more then me (says our Savior) is not worthy
of me; and he that loves son or daughter more then me, is not worthy of me.
And whosoever shall forsake houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children or lands, for my names sake, he shall receive an
hundredth fold more, and shall inherit everlasting life.

Well knew holy Abraham this, who as he rejoiced to see Christ in the flesh,
John 8.56
so he loved him far above all fleshly and corruptible things: he knew well
what it was to be worthy of Christ, and would have rather forsaken all, then to
have proved unworthy of him that made all.

This great obedience in Abraham did flow from his exceeding great faith, as
the Apostle to the Hebrews lets us to understand, By faith Abraham when he was
called, Hebr. 11 8, 9, 10 17, 18, 19.
obeyed God, to go out into a place, which he should afterward receive for
inheritance, and he went out not knowing whether he went. By faith he abode in
the land of promise, as in strange country, as one that dwelt in Tents with
Isack and Jacob, heirs with him of the same promise, for he looked for a City
having a foundation, whose builder and maker is God. By faith he offered up
Isack, when he was tried, and he that had received the promises, offered his
only begotten son. To whom it was said, in Isack shall thy seed be called,
for he considered that God was able to raise him up even from the dead, from
whence he received him also after a sort.

Genesis 15.6 and 17.11 23, 24, 25 26, 27 Romans 4.3.11.16, 17 18, 19, 20 21, 22.
Gala. 3.6 Iam. 2.23.
Abraham believed God (says the scripture) and it was counted to him for
righteousness, who above hope, believed under hope, that he should be the father
of many nations. Neither did he doubt of the promise of God thorough unbelief,
but was stre^gthened in the faith, and gave glory to God, being fully assured
that he which had promised was also able to do it.

Though Abraham had not by inheritance, so much as one foot breadth in the
land of Canaan; yet he believed that the Lord was both able and willing, to
perform his promise made to him and his seed, touching the possession
thereof. Though he knew that Sara his wife, being both barren and old, could
not by the course of nature conceive; yet he was assured that God was able to
give him a Son, even of her. Finally, though he was commanded to offer up his
Son Isack for a burnt offering unto the Lord; yet being strengthened in the
faith, he considered how that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead;
and was fully persuaded that Gods promise made to him touching Isack and his
seed, should not, nor could not fall to the ground, and want the own
performance in the own due time. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but Gods
promise is as vnfaileable and vnfalliable as God himself.

Abraham, if he had been feeble in the faith, would have said, what a kind of
a Commandment is this, for a father to be the slayer of his own Son? Have I
received a Son, and but one Son only, after so long prayer, and
expectation: and must I, and none other but I be the butcher of his body, the
spiller of his blood, and the burner of his bones? Good Lord what an hard and
heavy commandment is this? Is it possible O heavens, that God should be the
author thereof? How much more like is this son-offering voice unto the voice of
some monstrous Milcom or Molech, Leuit. 18 21.
the blood-sucking Idol of Ammon, rather then unto the voice of the most
gracious God of Abraham? chiefly, he having promised in Isacks seed to call
and bless all the nations of the earth? and must I, and none but I, who was
the instrument of his life, now be the mortal and unnatural instrument of his
death? O my beloved Son Isack, would God thou had never been borne: and
thou my sweet wife Sara, would God thou had always been barren, rather
then to have borne a son in thine old age after so long barrennes, whom thy
husband, and his father, must now in so vnfatherly a fashion, bereave of his
natural being and breath.

But Abraham was far from all such infirmity, and imperfection of faith; and
therefore believing that Gods promise should not miss of performance, but that
he was even able to raise Isack again out of his own ashes; he delayed not to
do that which the Lord had enjoined him concerning his son. Genesis 22.1. to 13.
But when as he was in heauing up his hand to give him the mortal blow with
the knife; behold the Angel of the Lord from heaven forbid him to lay his hand
upon the child. For now I know (quoth he) that thou fear God, seeing that
for my sake thou have not spared thine only son. And thus Abraham's will to
offer his only son for a burnt offering unto the Lord was accepted for the
deed.

Abraham's obedience then was correspo^dent to his faith, whence it did flow:
his faith was great, and therefore great was his obedience; Io. 8.56.
he saw Christ but a far off, and he was glad: he saw by faith, and that a
great faith, and therefore great was his sight, his gladness and his joy. And as
he had a great faith in his heart, so made he a great demonstration thereof in
the actions of his hands. Genesis 12.7.8. and 13.4.18.
For Abraham wheresoever he soiourned, erected an Alter unto God, and called
upon his name. As he forsook the Idols of his fathers, even their Gods, Josh.
24.2.3.
which were no Gods, so he acknowledged and worshipped entierly, the only true
God. Genesis 14 18 19.20. Heb. 7.4.8.
Also he paid Tithes unto Melchisedeck the high Priest of the most high.

Giving thereby an example to al his Iam. 2.18.
of showing their faith by their works: and namely unto the richer sort, of
consecrating a part of their substance to the building and repairing of
Churches, for the service of God, and of making his ministers partakers of
their goods according as the Apostles exhortation does bear saying; Galat. 6.6.
Let him that is taught in the word make him that has taught him partaker of
all his goods.

And not only was Abraham religious and godly in himself, but he was also
careful for all such as were under his charge, Genesis 17.23.24.25.26.27. Deuteronomy.
10.16 and 30.6 Ierem 4.4. and 6.10 Act. 7 51 Gen 18.19
to wit for his children and servants, that they should live before God, as men
no less circumcised in their hearts, then in their flesh. I know (said the
Lord) that Abraham will command his Sons, and his household after him, that
they keep the way of the Lord to do righteousness and judgment. Whereby the
Abraham after the promise, and chiefly all fathers and masters of families,
are taught to give diligence that their children and servants be instructed in
the knowledge of the true God, Tit. 2.12.
and of godliness, that they may live godlily, soberly, and justly in this
present world. And the effect of this his christian care for his family, may
appear, both in his Son Isack, and in his servant Eliezer of Damascus the
steward of his house: as for his son, as he was consecrated to the Lord in
his very child-hoode, Genesis 22.2.10.11.12. and 26.25. and 25.5.
so was the whole time of his life spent in a spiritual and reasonable
sacrificing of himself to the Lords service. Never was there a son begotten
of man more father like then was godly Isack, who followed the foote-steps of
his fathers faith, piety, charity, equity, and virtuous living; and
succeeded both to his goodness, and his goods: to his godliness no less then to
his gold.

And as for Abraham's chief servant Eliezer, his piety, and fidelity, are both
of them mentioned in the scripture to his praise. His piety toward God does
appear in this, that being sent by Abraham to take a wife for his son Isack
in his own kindred, Genesis 15.2.3. and 24.1.2.10.11.12.42.
he no sooner received his masters command, but as soon he commended his way
and affairs to Gods providence, and blessing by prayer: The which thing he did
likewise, when he was arrived to the City of Nahor, O Lord of my master
Abraham, (quoth he) I beseech thee send me good speed this day, and show
mercy unto my master Abraham. Such as the master was, such was the man: a
religious master and Eliezer when as he had received the sign which he had
asked of the Lord, to know thereby the prosperous success of his journey,
being arrived to the City of Nahor, Genesis 24.48.50 51.52.
where Bethuel dwelt: he bowed himself and worshipped the Lord, and said,
Blessed be the Lord God of my master Abraham, which has not withdrawn his
mercy and his truth from my master: for when I was in the way, the Lord
brought me to my masters brethrens house. The like was his religious and Godly
demeanor, when as his errand had taken the desired effect, and that he had
betrothed Rekekath, the daughter of Bethuel to his masters son Isack, to be
his wife.

Thus godly Eliezer, as he began his business, in praying unto God for good
success, so he ended it, in praising God for the good success already gotten.
The which piety of Eliezer is to be practiced of all good servants, yea, and
of all masters too. To the end that God, who is the Alpha and the Omega,
Revel. 1.8.
that is to say, the beginning, and the ending of all things, may be likewise
the Alpha and the Omega, of all our actions. Whether ye eat or drink (says
the Apostle) or what soever ye do, 1. Cor. 10.31. Col. 3.17.
do all to the glory of God, and in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks
to God even the father by him.

And as this good Eliezer was pious toward God, so was he no less officious,
and faithful toward his master the father of the faithful. For both he
would not so much as eat a crumme of bread in Bethuels house till he had said
his message, Genesis 24.33 37.54.5^.59.61.63 64.
and done according to his oath; and when as he had done the errand which he
came for, and had obtained Rekekah for Isack, he would not soiourne any longer
in Bethuels house, but departed the next morning, bringing home with him the
vertuo us Rekekah to godly Isack; who as he went out to pray in the field
toward the evening, met her coming home. And here again in this good servant
Eliezer are all servants taught to do all diligence, and to use all fidelity
and consionable carefulnes in doing of their masters affairs.

But to return from the man to the master; as Abraham's faith, was not a dead
or idle faith, in the behalf of God (for we see it wrought by obedience, Iam.
2.21.22. Galat. 5.6.
and pious living in Gods behalf) so likewise was it not dead or idle in the
regard of man, but wrought by charity, Genesis 18.1.2.3. and 4.19.3.
equity, and love. This appears by his hospitality, for he was wont to sit
at the door of his Tent to inuit strangers, and to bid the poor into his
house. So that on a time he received Angels for his guests, at unawares. And the
like did his brothers son Lot. Whereupon the Apostle to the Ebrewes, Heb. 13.2.
gives out this exhortation. Be not forgetful to lodge strangers, for thereby
some have received Angels into their houses unawares. Abraham and Lot. But
hear what our Savior says, If ye were Abraham's children ye Ioh. 8.39.
would do the works of Abraham.

Abraham was likewise full of tender hartednes, pity, and compassion, toward
the miserable and afflicted: whence it came to pass that he not only
delivered Lot from captivity, Genesis 14.12 16 and 18.23.
being taken and spoiled by Chedar Laomer in the overthrow of Sodom and
restored him again to his own; but he also prayed very earnestly unto Sodom.
Whereby the children of Abraham, are taught to comfort the comfortles, to
pity the oppressed, to deliver the distressed, to aid the weak, to ransom
and redeem the captive, and to pray for the conversion and salvation of all
men, be they never so wicked. Yea Abraham prayed also even for such men as had
don him wrong, Genesis 20.3.7.17.18.
as for king Abimelech and his household, when as the Lord had plagued them for
taking away Abraham's wife from him. Giving Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, Mat. 5.44.45.
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which hurt you and persecute
you, that ye may be the children of your father which is in heaven; for he
makes his sun to arise on the evil, and the good, and sends rain on the
just, and the unjust. If we be the children of Abraham, we will do the works
of Abraham, and if we be the children of God, we will do the will of our
Father which is in heaven.

Abraham's peaceable and mild disposition appears in that, Genesis 13.5. to 12.
when as the land was not able to bear him and his brothers son Lot to live
together, by reason of the great increase of their store; he to avoid
contention and strife, parted company very lovingly with Lot. Let there be no
strife, I pray thee (said Abraham to Lot) between thee and me, neither
between mine Heard-men, and thine, for we be brethren. Yea, Abraham to
purchase peace resigned his own right, and bid Lot choose what part of the
land he did most like. To. 12.18.
the Apostle exhorts all Christians to labor by all means to have peace
with all men. The good christian then after the example of his father Abraham
will show himself always peaceable: that is a lover, a maker, and a taker of
peace. He will cut off all occasions of contention as much as he can, and he
will say unto such a one as would be at debate with him, let there be no strife
nor debate I pray thee between thee, and me, neither between any of ours: for
we be brethren, we be Christians, even children of one father, servants of one
Lord, fellows of one Baptism, followers of one faith, and members of one
militant Church. And in so doing, we shall be called, not only the children of
Abraham, but even the sons and daughters of the most high, even of the God of
Abraham. Mat. 5.9.
As Abraham was peaceable, so was he likewise equitable and just; he would not
receive at the hands of Ephron the Hittite a field which he had offered him
freely to bury his wife Sara in; Genesis 23.
but would needs give him the price thereof, even four hundred sheckles of
Silver. What shall we then say Abraham? If they were Abraham's children, they
would not take another man's goods for naught, although being offered them by
the owner: much less would they violently bereave a man of that which is his
own, or yet with hold it from him, they having it in their hands. And if such
men cannot claim to be Abraham's children, how can they make claim to any part
or portion in Abraham's bosom? seeing the man that would repose in Abraham's
bosom after this life, Luke 16.22 25.
must here in this life harbor in his heart, and bear in his bosom Abraham's
living faith, which was made perfect through works, Iam. 2.21.22.
and wrought by obedience, equity, righteousness, charity, and love.

But did this godly and religious disposition of Abraham, want a reward? No
truly; I will make of thee a great nation (said the Lord) and I will bless
thee, Genesis 12.2, 3.7. and 15 1.2.3 4 and 17.1.4. and 18.1.
and make thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing. I will also bless them
that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee, and in thee shall all the
families of the earth be blessed: fear not Abraham, I am thy buckler, and
thine exceeding great reward. The Lord honored him often with his presence, in
appearing and speaking unto him: he made him of Abram, Abraham, of a father,
the father, even the father of many nations, and dignified him with the title
and style to be called the father of the faithful and the friend of God. Romans
4.17 Iam. 2.23
Abraham was a great father of many people (says Ecclesiasticus in) glory was
there none like unto him. Ecclus. 45 19.20.21
He kept the law of the most high, and was in covenant with him, and he set the
covenant in his flesh, and in tentation he was found faithful. Therefore he
assured him by an oath, that he would bless the nations in his seed; and that
he would multiply him as the dust of the earth, and exalt his seed as the
stars, and cause them to inherit, from sea to sea, and from the river unto the
end of the world. 1. Sam. 2.30.
Them that honor me, I will honor says the Lord. Abraham honored and
Abraham blessed the Lord devoutly at all times, acknowledging all blessedness,
to flow from him, and God crowned him with abundance, both of spiritual and
temporal blessings.

Among other, he blessed him with a virtuous and godly wife, whose faith
toward God, and obedience toward her husband, are both of them highly
extolled in holy scripture. Heb. 11.12
Through faith (says the Apostle) Sara also received strength to conceive
seed, and was delivered of a child when as she was past age, because she
judged him faithful which had promised. The tenure of which promise is set
down in these words, Gen 17.19 and 18.10.11 12 13.14 and 21.1.2.3.
Sara thy wife shall bear thee a son, and thou shall call his name Isack,
and I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with
his seed after him. And as the Lord promised her a son, so he performed his
promise, and after long barrennes, Abraham and Sara, not to tie God unto the
strict order of nature, nor to measure his power according to the ordinary
ability of natural causes, For God as he is the Lord of Nature, and she his
hand-maide, so can he work both without her, and with her, as well without
means, and contrary to means, as with, or according to means. Genesis 16.1.2.3.4


Sara was despised in the eyes of her hand-maide Hagar for her barrennes: But
the Lord at last comforted, and cheered up sorrowful Sarai, and turned her
sadness into gladness, and her mourning into mirth: he even changed her name,
Genesis 17.15.16.19.21.
and the inability of her nature both at once. Sarai thy wife, (said the Lord
to Abraham) thou shall not call Sarai (which is as much as my mistrisse or dame)
but Sarah shall he her name, (which signifies a Princess or mistress of many)
and I will bless her, and will also give thee a son of her, yea I will
bless her and she shall be them other of Nations, Kings also of people shall
come of her.

Sara, I say, was barren and despised for her barrennes, even at the hands of
Hagar her own hand-maide. But the Lord remembered her in end, and remedied both
these evils: he made her the mother of Isack, even the happy mother, of a
most happy son, (for with him the Lord did establish his covenant) and so
took away her barrennes, and reproach; yea more, he made her the honorable
Grandmother of Kings and of Queens; and so not only took away her
despisement, but also heaped much honor upon her head: and the insolent
hand-maide Hagar, who before had despised her daine was turned out a doors
with her mocking son Ismael. Genesis 16.4.5. and 21.9.10.11.12 13.14.


that they beware of despising such as God has not dealt so liberally with.
Pro. 3.34. 1. Pet. 5.5. Iam. 4.6.
For God who resists the proud, and gives grace unto the humble, will
despise the despisers, and exalt the despised: he will scorn the scornful,
and curse such as sit in the seat of the scornful. With the froward, Psalm.
18.26
the Lord will show himself froward, Prou. 3.34
says holy David: and with the scornful he scorneth, or will show himself
scornful, says wise Solomon his son. He that dwells in the heaven shall
laugh, Psalm. 2.4.
the Lord shall have them in derision. As despising Hagar together with her
mocking son Ismael were cast out of Abraham's house, So shall all proud,
despising Hagars, and all insolent mocking Ismaels be debarred from Abraham's
bosom. Wherefore seeing that (as the Apostle speaks) we are not Children of
the servant, but of the free woman: Gal. 4.28.29.30.31.
children of the promise after the manner of Isack, and not children of the
bond woman after the manner of Ismael: let us show our selves not offerers of
despisement and mockage with Hagar and Ismael, but rather sufferers with Sara
and Isack, that we may be partakers of the inheritance with him.

Abraham and Sara, are taught to commit their cause, and to commend their
afflicted, and vilipended estate unto God, who is always wont to be nearest,
then, when as his servants by reason of the greatness of their anguish and
grief think him farthest off.

David was so far despised by his enemies that he calls him self a worm,
and not a man, Psalm, 22.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.22.23.24.
a shame of men, and the contempt of the people, and one that was had in
derision of all: and his recourse was unto God, who drew him out of the womb,
and gave him hope even at his mothers breasts. Even he delivered his soul from
the dogs, and bulls of Bashan which had enclosed him about; whereupon the
holy man resolved to praise the Lord in the mids of the congregation, and to
exhort and encourage others to do the like. for he does not despise nor abhor
the affliction of the poor: neither hides he his face from him, but when he
calls unto him he hears. In one word, Psalm. 15.3.
such as hope in him shall not be ashamed. Wherefore it is good for all
afflicted persons to draw near unto God. It is God (as the holy woman Anna
sings in her song) that makes both the barren to bear, 1. Sam. 2 5 6.7.8.
and the mother of many children to be weak: he makes poor and makes rich,
brings low and exhalteth, he raises up the poor out of the dust, and
lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among Princes, and to make
them inherit the seat of glory. Thus sang Anna when as she had received a
son from the Lord; 1. Sam. 6.
being before for her barrennes, despised in the eyes of fruitful Peninnah the
other of Elcanas wives.

Thus, as the holy woman Anna after long barrennes, and much despisement and
reproach, 1. Sam 1.20. and 3.4. and 7.15.16 17 Judge. 13.^.4.5.7.24.
brought forth her Samuel to be a Priest before the Lord, and a Judge of his
people; and Manoahs barren wife her Sampson to be the Lords champion against
the Philistims; and holy Elizabeth her John to be the conuerter of the children
of Israel, Luke 1.5.6.7.13.14.15.16.17.57.60.63.76.
the Prophet of the most high, and the forerunner of the Messiah Jesus the
son of Marie the blessed Virgin; So godly and virtuous Sara after long
barrennes, and much reproach bare in her old age, with Elizabeth her Isack to
be the heir of Abraham, the seedsman of all the blessed nations of the earth,
and the figure and forefather of the Messiah according to the flesh.

Thus we see; how that faith Ephesians. 2.8.
and is not of nature, but of grace, not of man, but Gods gift, made Sara to
bear when as by nature she was barren. As without faith it is impossible to
please God; Heb. 11.6.
so without faith it was impossible for Sara to conceive and bear a Son in her
old age. And God that does unto every man according to his faith, Mat 9.29.
wrought with virtuous Sara according to her faith. As Abraham above hope
believed under hope that he should be the father of many nations, Romans
4.18.19.21.
being strengthened in the faith, and not considering the deadnes of his own
body: So his wife, Sara being strengthened in the same faith, and not
considering the deadnes of her womb, above hope believed under hope that she
should be the mother of many Nations. Both of them believed him, that had
promised to be both faithful in his promise, and powerful to perform it.

Hence we may learn of how great virtue, efficacy and force faith is. By
faith a man is counted Abraham believed in the Lord (says the scripture) and
it was counted unto him for righteousness. Genesis 15.6. Romans 4.3 9.
By faith a man has peace toward God, and pleases him, Romans 5.1.10. Heb.
11.6.
and so comes near unto him, and without faith it is impossible to please
God, says the Apostle. Act. 26.18.
By faith we are raised up from sin, and receive forgiveness thereof, and
inheritance among the Saints: Act. 15.9.
by faith our hearts are purified, and cleansed, and Blessed be the pure in
heart, Mat. 5.8.
(says our Savior) for they shall see God. By faith we are strenthened in
Gods grace, we resist the devil, 1. Pet. 1.2.5.9. and 5.9.
the world and the flesh, yea, we overcome them; Ephesians. 3.12 Galat 3.14 26.
Ephesians. 2.8, 9. 2. Tim. 3.15. 2. King. 6.14.15, 16.17
we have free access unto God, we receive his blessing, we are made his
sons, and in end we acquire the salvation of our souls. Elisha was so strong
in faith, that he feared not the troops of the King of Siria, that he sent out
to apprehend him. Fear not (quoth the Prophet to his servant being affrayed of
the mighty host of their enemies) for they that be with us, are more then they
that be with them. The City of Dothan was compassed with Horses and charets,
sent by the King of Syria to offend Elisha, and to apprehend him. But lo, the
mountain was full of horses and Charets of fire round about Elisha sent by the
King of Kings to defend his servant, and to confound his foes. The Angel of the
Lord (says the Prophet) pitcheth round about them that fear him, Psalm. 34.7.
and delivers them. 1 Samuel 6. to 24.
Jonathan accompanied with his armor-bearer, disco^fited the Philistims
through the great faith he had in God, For it is not hard for the Lord to save
with many or with few, quoth Jonathan to his man. 1. Sam. 17.26.32. to 37. and
55.
David being armed with an invincible faith in God, went out against the mighty
Goliath, and smote him first in the forehead with a stone, so that he fell
groueling to the ground; and afterward smote off his head with his own sword.
The Lord that delivered me (quoth David to King Saul) out of the paw of the
Lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hands of
this Philistim. No, the Lord not only delivered David out of his hands, but
also delivered the uncircumcised Philistim into the hands of his champion David.

The three children by their faith in God were preserved in the mids of the
fiery furnace. Dan. 3.16.17.27.28.
Behold (said they to the King) our God whom we serve is able to deliver us
from the hot fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O King!
And according to their says, so it fell out; for the fire had no power over
their bodies, no not so much as an hair of their head was burnt, neither were
their coats changed, no not so much as any smoakie smell of fire came upon
them. They were casten bound into the mids of the hot fiery furnace; but lo,
the king sees them loose walking in the mids of the fire, as if it had been
amids a glorious and a fresh flourishing garden, together with one in their
company like the Son of God. Their faith in God made the fiery furnace unto
them as a fresh meadow, when as the flame thereof consumed the Idolatrous and
faithles officers that threw them in: a wonderful work, that the fire should
forbear to burn the smallest hair of the head of such as were cast into the
mids of it, and in the mean while destroy and slay such as were without it.
The servants of God were safe in the fire because of their faith in God: but
the kings servants though being without the fire, were not yet safe, because
they were without faith in God. whereupon Nebuchadnezzer the king was
constrained to praise God, saying, Blessed be the God of Shadrach Meshach, and
abednago, who has sent his Angel, and delivered his servants that put their
trust in him. And not only did he bless God for them, but also decreed, that
whosoever should speak any blasphemy against him, that he should be drawn in
pieces, and his house made a Iakes. And withal as he honored and magnified the
God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednago, acknowledging that there is no God that
can deliver after this sort, and commanding all his subjects to do the same;
so did he promote these men that thus did honor God, to great honor in the
province of Babell. Wherein we find that saying of the Lord verified, Them
that honor me, 1. Sam. 2 30.
I will honor. The like was the efficacy of Daniels faith, Dan.
6.11.12.16.22.23.24.26.27.
the strength whereof did surmount the strength of the strongest beasts, even
of Darius his Lions. He was cast into the Lions den, for making his
supplication unto God, yet no manner of hurt was found on him, because he
believed in God: Daniels faith made him safe in the mids of the den amongst a
company of hugry devouring beasts; whereas they brake all the bones of their
accusers which wanted faith in God, or ever they came at the ground of the den.
Whereupon king Darius made a decree, that within all his dominions, men should
tremble and fear before the God of Daniel: for he is the living God, and
remains for ever (said the king) and his kingdom shall not perish, and his
dominion shall be everlasting. He rescueth and delivers, and he works
signs and wonders in heaven and in earth: who has delivered Daniel from the
power of the Lions.

The Apostle to the Hebrews painteth out at large the efficacy of the faith
of the men of God of old. Heb. 11.
Faith opened the heavens to Enoch, and freed him from seeing of death. Faith
preserved Noe and his household from the flood. Faith made the people of God
under the conduction of Moses the man of God, to pass through the red sea as
by dry land; which when the Egiptians had assayed to do, they were drowned:
for they both wanted faith in God themselves, and they persecuted such as had
faith, and believed in God. Likewise by faith the walls of Jericho fell down
after they were compassed about seven days. Thus we see, faith is stronger
then walled towns, for it makes them to fall; stronger then Lions and Bears,
for it tieth their paws, and shuts up their jaws; stronger then the raging
Sea, and the most ouer-flowing floods, for it turns them into dry land: and
stronger then the consuming fire, for it makes it cold as water, and as
refreshing as a fair flowery field. The men of God (says the holy Apostle)
through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained the promises,
stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge
of the sword, of weak were made strong, waxed valiant in battle, turned to
flight the armies of the aliants: finally, by faith the women received their
dead children raised to life. So that faith is not only stronger then walled
towns, then armed men, then roaring Lions, then the raging sea, then the
flaming fire, but also stronger then death it self: Yea, 1. Pet. 5.8.9. Ephesians.
6.16 1. Ioh. 5.4.
it is stronger then the devil, for it quenches all his fiery darts, and
makes him to fly from us, with the wings of the wind, though his strength
far exceed the strength of millions of roaring and devouring Lions. And as the
Epistle to the Hebrews sets before our face the force of faith in the holy
men of old; So does the holy Gospel afford us diverse notable testimonies of
the wonderful effects thereof in diverse persons. Mat 8.2.3.5.6.8.10.13.14.15.
The leaper that came to Christ, through faith in him, believing that he was
able to make him clean, was cleansed of his leprosy with one touch of our
Saviors powerful finger. And by the same faith and finger, was Peter's mother
in law cured and freed of her fever. And the Centurions servant was healed of
his palsy. Speak the word only (said the Centurion to our Savior) and my
servant shall be healed. Our Savior marueiled at his faith, and said unto his
followers, Verily I have not found so great faith even in Israel: and unto the
Centurion himself he said; Go thy way, and as thou have believed, so be it
unto thee. And his servant was healed the same hour. Mat
9.18.20.21.22.25.28.29.30. and 20.30.31.32.33.34.
By faith was the woman that had been twelve years sick of a bloody issue,
cured of her desease. for she said in her self, if I may touch but his garment
only, I shall be whole. Then Jesus turned him about, and seeing her, did say,
daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole, and the woman was
made whole at that hour. Her faith was great, and therefore delivered her from
a great desease, and wrought upon her a great cure: her faith was present, and
therefore was she presently cured without any protracting of time.

It was a matter of good comfort to her that she was cured of a long and
lingering disease. It was a matter of greater comfort to her that she was cured
by the great Physician our Savior Christ. And it was a matter of greatest
comfort of all, that she being a poor patient, sick in body, and sinful in
soul, became by the means of her faith, to be so much dignified as to be made
and called the daughter of the Son of God. Daughter (said our Savior unto
her) be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole. The like honor and
help, he vouchsafed upon the sick of the palsy seeing his faith, Son be of
good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee, said our Savior unto the sinful,
sick-man: whereupon he arose freed from the sickness of his body, and the sin
of his soul both at once. Iairus the ruler of the Synagogue believed that our
Savior was able to cure his daughter being deseased, yea to quicken her being
deseased: My daughter is now dead (said he to our Savior) but come and lay
thine hand on her, and she shall live: And so did the issue answer unto his
faith, for presently she revived and arose. Two blind men believed that our
Savior was able to restore them to their sight, and their eyes were opened as
soon as he had touched them, and said, Mat. 15.22 22.
be it unto you according to your faith. And unto the Cananitish woman whose
daughter was vexed with a devil, who did sue at his hands for help with great
importunity and feruencie, his answer was; O woman, great is thy faith, be it
to thee, as thou desire: and her daughter was made whole at that hour. Mat
17.14 15.18. Mat. 9 17 to 30
Likewise the lunaticke child was healed at the humble petition of his
believing father, witout any longer delay: and the Ruler of capernaum his son
being sick unto the death, Ioh. 4.47.50.53.
was healed, because of the faith of his father, who believed the word that
Jesus had spoken unto him. The holy Apostle Peter through faith walked on the
water, Mat. 14.28 29
as on the dry land. And the holy Apostle Paul, Act. 14.8 9.10.
beholding a certain impotent man which had been a creeple from his mothers
womb and had never walked, and perceiving that he had faith to be healed, said
with a loud voice, stand upright on thy feet; and he leaped up and walked.
Thus we see, how that faith is able to make the lame to go, the blind to see,
the dumb to speak, the deaf to hear, the leaper to be clean, the lunaticke
and mad to be in their right mind, and the dead to arise. No marvel then
though the same faith was able to make Sara to bear in her barren old age:
For as our Savior said unto the man whose son was possessed, Mat. 9.23.
all things are possible to him that believes: and unto his disciples; Mat
21.22
what soever ye shall ask in prayer, if ye believe, ye shall receive it.

It is not then without great cause that Moses exhorted the people going out to
battle, Deuteronomy. 30.3
to have faith in the victory promised; 1. Sam. 12.20.21.52.
that Samuel encouraged the people to trust in God, and that Iehosophat
enjoined the people to confide in God, 2. Chron. 20.20.
and to believe his Prophets: Good cause had the holy Apostles to desire of
Christ to increase their faith, Luk 17.5.
and to exhort men to stand steadfast in the faith, 1. Cor. 16.13. 2 Cor. 13.5.
and to prove themselves whether they be in the faith or no, Romans 1.17 1. Tim.
6.12.
and to grow from faith to faith: Finally, to fight the good fight of faith, 1.
Pet. 1.9.
and so to lay hold on eternal life, and in end to receive the end of our
faith, even the salvation of our souls.

And as Sara is greatly commended for her faith toward God, so likewise is she
for her obedience toward her husband, her mildness of spirit, and modesty in
attire: And therefore the blessed Peter exhorts all women and wives to
imitate the example of her excellent virtues. 1. Pet. 3.1.2.3.4.5.6.
Let the wives be subject to their husbands, that even they which obey not the
word, may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives, while
they behold your pure conversation which is with fear: whose apparelling let
it not be outward as with broyded hair and gold put about or in putting on of
apparel, But let the Hid man of the heart be vncorrupt, with a meek and quiet
spirit, which is before God a thing much set by. For even after this manner in
time past did the holy women which trusted in God ner themselves, and were
subject to their husbands. As Sara obeyed Abraham and called him Sir, or Lord,
whose daughters ye are, whiles ye do well. Ecclesi. 26.35.27
A shamefast woman (says Siracides) will reverence her husband. A woman that
honors her husband shall be judged wise of all: But she that despises him,
shall be blazed for her pride. This same subjection, shamefastnes, and modesty
of Sara in her carriage and clothing, the Apostle S. Paul recommendeth very
earnestly unto women in his Epistle to Timothy, 1. Tim. 2.9.10.11.
As our Savior said to the Jews, that if they were Abraham's children, they
would do the works of Abraham: Ioh. 8.39.
So may it be said of women and wives, as many as be the daughters of Sara,
they will imitate the modesty, Gen 12.11 14. and 24.16. and 26.7. and 29.17 1.
Sam. 25.3.42.
meeknes, shamfastnes, and obedience of Sara.

It is recorded in scripture, that Sara was a fair woman to look upon, and
very beautiful, the like is said of Rebecca Isacks wife, and of Rahel Jacobs
wife, and of the verteous and wise Abigaill David's wife, after the death of
churlish Nabal. Eccles. 36.22.23.24
The beauty of a woman (says Jesus the Son of Sirach) cheereth the face,
and a man loves nothing better. If there be in her tongue gentleness,
meekenes, and wholesome talk, then is not her husband like other men: he that
has gotten a virtuous woman, has begun to get a possession, she is an help
like unto himself, and a pillar to rest upon. As the Sun when it arises in
the high places of the Lord, Eccles. 26.16.17.18
so is the beauty of a good wife the ornament of her house: as the clear light
is upon the holy candlestick, so is the beauty of the face in a ripe age: and
as the golden pillars are upon the sockets of silver, so are fair feet with a
constant mind. The external beauty of Saras body was accompanied with the
internal beauty of her mind; and in a fair body in her person was lodged a
more fair soul.

Thus in the example of the beauteous and bounteous Sara are all matrons and
maids admonished to join bounty, meekenes and modesty of mind, to the
beauty of body, and virtuous carriage to the well-fauourednes of their outward
feature. Considering how that beauty without bounty in a woman (as the wise
man speaks) is as a Jewel of gold in a swines nose; Pro. 11.22 and 12.4.
and 31.30.
and that not the beauteous, but the virtuous woman is the crown of her
husband. For favor is deceitful and beauty is a vanishing thing, but a woman
that fears the Lord she shall be praised. House and riches may be the
inheritance of the fathers, Pro. 18.22 and. 19.14.
but a prudent wife comes of the Lord: and he that finds such a wife
finds a good thing, and receives favor of the Lord. And doubtless Abraham
who found so many good things, and so great favor at the hands of the Lord, he
found this favor, and this chief good thing, to wit, a good wife amongst many
other favors and good things. Eccles. 26.3.14.15.24
A virtuous woman is a good portion, (says Siracides) which shall be given for
a gift unto such as fear the Lord. Who feared the Lord more then did godly
Abraham? and consequently what man could there be more worthy of a virtuous
wife then he? There is nothing so much worth as a woman well instructed, and
there is no weight to be compared unto a shamefast woman's peaceable, faithful,
and continent mind: And who could be so worthy of such a worthy pearl as the
worthiest amongst men, the holy Patriarch Abraham the father of the faithful?

And as God blessed him with a virtuous and an understanding wife which proved
the joy and crown of her husband, whose death therefore he had great cause to
bewail, as he did with mourning and lamentation; Genesis 23.1.2
so did he endowe him exceedingly with temporal store ^he magnified and
multiplied him, Genesis 13.5.6 and 24.^5.36
so that he gave him in great abundance, men-seruants and maid-seruants,
silver and gold, Camells and Asses, 1. Tim 4.8
Godlynes is profitable unto all things which has the promise of the life
present, and of that which is to come. Lastly, the Lord has such an honorable
regard of Abraham that according to his promise made to him, Genesis 12.3.
saying, I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee.
He both cursed and blessed other men for Abraham's sake: As he plagued Pharao
king of Gerar together with their housholdes for offering to do him wrong: Gen
12.15 16.17.18 19.20. and 20.3.4 7.17.18. and 19.29. and 20.17. and 27 3.4.5.
so for Abraham's sake and at his entreatie, he multiplied Isack, and delivered
Lot from the destruction of Sodom, and healed king Abimelech and all his
household. So effectually was God with Abraham, that he was also with others
for Abraham's sake.

Wherein all the Sons and Daughters of faithful Abraham and Sara may behold
clearly as in a crystal glass, of how wonderful great virtue and force
godlynes is, it being able to procure a blessing at Gods hands, not only to
the godly man himself, but unto others also, even unto such as the godly man,
either prays for, or yet reapeth any benefit by. Thus God blessed and
prospered Laban for Jacobs sake, Genesis 30.37 and 39.2.3.4.5.6.
so long as he soiourned with him in his house. And thus he blessed Putiphar
the Egiptian for Joseph's sake, and made his blessing to rest upon all that he
had in the house and in the field: And thus no doubt, but he will bless all
such as the followers of Abraham's says, Iam. 2.21.22.23.
and the workers of his works (for these two God has conjoined together, and
therefore man must not sever them) shall recommend unto God in their prayers.

The golden Legend of ISACK and REBECCA.
ISack the Son and heir of faithful Abraham and Sara, Genesis 17.15.16 17 18.
and 18.10.11.12.13, 14. and 21.1.2.3. and 25 5 and 26.25.
as he was consecrated to the Lord in his very childe-hood; so was his whole
life nothing else but a real and an actual sacrificing of himself unto the
Lords service: he walked in the ways and footsteps of his father, and
followed the trace of his faith, piety, charity, equity, and virtuous
living. He succeeded as well to his goodness as to his goods: to his godliness, no
less then to his gold: wheresoever he spread his Tent, there did he not fail
to erect an Alter unto the Lord, and to call upon his name. Wheresoever he had
his chamber, there God had his Church; yea his Tent was a very Tabernacle, and
his bedchamber was as a chapel dedicated to the service of the God of his
father Abraham. Whereby all the children of Isack according to the promise are
taught to worship God not only publikly in the Church, but also privately in
their secret chambers. Both which duties the sweet singer of Israel does
jointly mention in the fourth Psalm, and recommendeth them to our practice.
The private devotion, in these words, Psalm. 4.4.5.
Examine your own heart upon your bed and be still: and the public, in these,
offer the sacrifices of righteousness, and trust in the Lord. Whereby he gives
us to understand, that no place whether private, or public, is to be thought
unfit for the practicing of holy duties: for Gods worship as it should be
publicly performed in the Church according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm.
22.22 25. and 111.1.
In the midst of the congregation will I praise thee, so must it not be
neglected privately in the chamber according to which it is written of the
Prophet Daniel that he went into his house, Dan. 6.10.
and having opened the window of his chamber that looked toward Jerusalem, he
kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed and praised his God.

These two, private devotion, and public adoration, God has conjoined, and
therefore man must not sever them. They are as the two hands of our christian
profession: the public is as the right hand, the private as the left; the
want of either makes a maimed christian: And as no place is unfit for Gods
service, so likewise no time, whether morning, or evening, night or day. It is
a good thing to praise the Lord, Psalm. 92.1, 2.
and to sing unto thy name O most high; to declare thy loving kindness in the
morning, and thy truth in the night. says devout David: Psalm, 119.62.
and again, at midnight will Irise to give thanks unto thee, because of thy
righteous judgments: Hear my voice in the morning, Psalm. 5.3.
O Lord, for in the morning will I direct me unto thee, and I will wait. And
to the same purpose Siracides says, Eccle. 2.28 and 39.5.
that we ought to prevent the sun rising to give thanks, and to salute the
Lord before the day spring. The wise man (says he) will give his heart to
resort early unto the Lord that made him, and to pray before the most high for
his sins. Psalm. 55.17
Evening and morning, and at noone will I pray, (says godly David) and he will
hear my voice.

Isack waited on God, Gen 26.1.2.3.4.5.
inuoked him, and walked with him: And therefore God was with him, and provided
for him in the time of famine which was in the land: he honored the Lord, and
the Lord honored him with his presence and appearance. For he appeared unto
him, and bid him dwell in the land of Gerer, and promised to bless him; and
not him only, but also in his seed all the nations of the earth. As he was
religious and godly far above all other, so was God with him, and blessed him
far above all other. He both preserved him in the time of famine, and
increased his substance and store. So that when as he sowed in that land, he
found in the same year an hundredth fold by estimation. He waxed mighty and
still increased till he was exceeding great. Genesis 26.12 13 14.
As he was great in faith, and in godliness grew daily, so did he increase from
day to day, in his family and goods: For he had flocks of sheep, and herds
of cattle, and a mighty household.

Gen 26.14 15.16.17.18.19.20.21.22.
And though that the Philistims among whom he lived, did envy him, and vex him
by stopping of his wells, and in end drove him away after much strife; yet the
Lord was always on his side. The Philistims were his foes, but the God of
Israel was his friend: and the man that has God for his friend, is strong
enough to withstand all his foes, be they never so furious. Isack, when as he
was resisted by men, was assisted of God: Genesis 26.23.24.
for when as he was thus afflicted by the faithles Philistims. God who is
faithful and true, and who loved faithful Abraham and his seed, appeared unto
Isack the same night in Beersheba and said unto him thus, I am the God of
Abraham thy father, fear not, for I am with thee, and will bless thee, and
multiply thy seed for my servant Happy is the man who with Isack has the
Lord with him, and blessed is he whom the Lord blesses: for he needs not to
be affrayed, neither of famine, nor infection, nor yet of foes. Who so dwells
in the secret of the most high (says the Psalmist) shall abide in the shadow of
the almighty. Psalm. 91.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.10.
The Lord will deliver him from the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome
pestilence: he shall not be afraid of the fear of the night, nor of the arrow
that flies by day. There shall none evil come unto him, neither shall any
plague come near his tabernacle. If God be on our side, what matter is it who
be against us? For what better is their oposition, then a blow with a bended
reed, or their violence, then a blast of wind? Fear ye not them (says our
Savior) which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: Mat. 10.28
But rather fear him which is able to destroy both body and soul.

And the Lord as he was ready and present to comfort and cheer up Isack in his
affliction; so was he not only his friend himself, But also he framed the
heart of king Abimelech to favor him. Genesis 26.26.27.28.29.
For the heart of the king is in the hands of the Lord, Pro. 21.1.
he turns whether soever it pleases him, says Solomon. Abimelech of a foe
was made a friend to Isack, before he vexed him, but afterward he went unto
him to visit him, and to make an alliance and covenant with him. For we saw
(quoth the king) that certainly the Lord was with thee, as if he should have
said, we saw God to be with thee, and therefore it was not fit that we should
be against thee: we saw God was thy friend, so that it was but a folly for us
to be any longer thy foes. Isack, God will also comfort and cheer us up with
Isack. Romans 8.31
So that if God be with us, we shall not need to fear who be against us. For
either God will turn the hearts of our foes, and make them our friends, as he
did here with Isacks enemies: or else they shall not be able to do us any
notable harm.

Genesis 26.30.31.
And as Abimelech together with his Philistims and friends came to treat of
peace, alliance and amity with Isack; So did he on the other part show his
peaceable disposition and gentle nature in entertaining them (for he made them
a feast) and in accepting of the offer made by the king, for they swear one to
another. And truly if we desire to show our selves the children of Abraham and
of Isack: we must behave our of a courteous, gentle, kind and quiet carriage.
In one word, the Apostles exhortation to all christians, is to have peace and
amity, To. 12.18.
if it be possible, with all men. That we may be the children not only of
Abraham and Isack, but even of the most high, Mat. 5.9.
the father of us all which is in heaven.

And as God blessed Abraham amongst many other blessings with a virtuous wife;
so did he likewise his Son Isack. For a prudent wife comes of the Lord,
Pro. 19.14
says Solomon, and a godly woman is given to him that fears the Lord,
Eccles. 16.14.
says Siracides. Of Sara it is said that she was very fair, and of Rebecca,
that she was beautiful to the eye, Genesis 12.14 and 24 16. and 26.7.
and very fair to look upon. But this is not all, the external beauty of
her body was accompanied with the internal beauty of her mind; and in both
she proved the true daughter of Sara, whose beauty and bounty are both of
them recorded in scripture to her praise. Eccles 36.22.23.24.
The beauty of a woman says Siracides, cheereth the face, and a man loves
nothing better, if there be in her tongue gentleness, meeknes, and wholesome
talk, then is not her husband like other men. As Naomi said unto Ruth, all the
City of my people does know that thou art a virtuous woman, Ruth 3.11.
So all the City of Nahor knew that Rebecca living as yet in her fathers
house, was a virtuous and a modest maid; and after she was married to Isack,
all the land of Canaan and of Gerar knew that she was a wise and a well
quallified wife. Eccles. 25.8 and 26.14.
Well is him (says Siracides) that dwells with a wife of understanding: and
well was Isack to have found such a wife as wise Rebecca. For there is nothing
(says the wise man) of so much worth as a woman well instructed. And thus in
the person Rebecca are all matrons and maids taught to join bounty to
beauty, and mildenes, meekenes, and modesty of mind, to the welfauourednes
of face and the outward feature, as I said above in the Legend of Sara.

Besides her bodily chastity and virginal purity, whereof the holy scripture
bears witness, saying that she was a Virgin, and unknown of man; her
industry and diligence is also set down to her praise: for she led not an
idle or lasie kind of life, as many maids now a days do, but she was
employed in the daily service of her fathers house, Genesis 24.16.17.18 19.20.
for Abraham's servant found her drawing water at the well for her fathers
cattle. Whereby young women and Ezech. 16.49.
This may be seen in the Sodomites, who were full of idleness and also of
unnatural lust: also in Dina Jacobs daughter, Genesis 34.1.2.
who by her idle gadding abroad lost her virginity. Likewise in David, who
being idle, 1. Sam. 11.1.2.3.4.
committed adultery with the beauteous Bathsheba Vriahs

Moreover in the person of Rebecca, women are taught to show all humanity and
courtesy toward strangers and wayfaring folks, especially those of their own
sex. For Rebccca disdained not to draw water for Abraham's servant being a
stranger to her, and not only for him, but also for his Camels; wherein
likewise her great humility and lowlines is descried. She disdained not to
serve Abraham's servant, and God in requital of this her lowly and humble
behavior, advanced her to be the mistress of the man to whom she had
formerly behaved her self as a servant. S^e humbled her self, and the Lord
honored her; she debased her self, and the Lord lift her up. Iam. 5.5.
And therefore the holy Apostle exhorts all persons but chiefly the younger
sort to humility, saying, Deck your selves inwardly in lowlines of mind, for
God resists the proud, Job. 5.11. and 22.29. and 40.6.7.
and gives grace to the humble, he abaseth and brings low the arrogant and
proud, and lifts up the lowly.

Genesis 24.49.50.51 52.57.58.
Abraham's servant having asked Rebecca of her parents to be Isacks wife, she
was granted unto him accordingly and sent away home with him to Isack with her
own consent, and without all delay. 1. Pet 5.7.
Cast all your care on him, for he cares for by their parents, before they be
hart-fasted of their own accord. No violent thing lastes long, and love that
is constrained cannot continue. True love between two parties must flow from
the heart on both hands, and the fastening of the heart must go before the
fastening of the hand. Neither can there be any true content in this kind,
except that mutual consent do go before. And the want of this has marred
many matches, and even turned marriages into marrages; for so may all
constrained conjunction be rightly called.

Rebecca being ready to depart, Genesis 24.60.
her parents and her brother blessed her, wishing that she might grow into
thousand thousands and that her seed might possess the gate of their enemies.
In like manner the people that were present at the matrimonial solemnity of
Booz and Ruth, Ruth 4.11
prayed that the Lord would make Ruth like Rahel and Leah, which twain did
build the house of Israel: and that Booz might do worthily in Ephrathah, and
be famous in Bethlehem. Likewise Raguel blessed young Tobias and Sara his wife,
Tob. 10.11 12.
saying, The God of heaven make you my children to prosper before I die. And he
said to his daughter, honor thy father and thy mother in law, which are now
thy parents, that I may hear good report of thee, and he kissed them. Edna
also said to Tobias, the Lord of heaven restore thee my dear Brother, and
grant that I may see thy children of my daughter Sara, that I may rejoice
before the Lord. Behold now I commit to thee my daughter as a pledge, do not
Wherein parents and kinsfolks are taught to pray unto God to bless their
children and friends, being about to live in the honorable estate of marriage,
and to advise them diligently, touching such godly duties as do belong unto
married folks, whether in regard of themselves, or in regard of their household.

Rebecca coming home to Isack, Genesis 24.64 65.
as soon as she saw him a far off, she lighted down from her Camel, and
covered her head with a veil, in token of shamefastnes, modesty, pudicitie,
and subjection. Eccles. 32.11.
Before ashamefast person goes favor, says Jesus the son of Sirach. And
Rebecca for reward of her shamefastnes, found favor both with God and man.
There is no ornament that so much becomes a that wants this shamefast
ensign, lacks a rare Jewel, and therefore Siracides advises parents to
have a diligent and a watchful eye over their daughters in whom this sign of
shamefastnes does not appear. If thy daughter be not shamefast (says he)
hold her straightly, Eccles. 26.10 11. and 42.9.10 11.
least she abuse her self through too much liberty, least she cause thine
enemies to laugh thee to scorn, and make thee a common talk in the City, and
defame thee among the people, and bring thee to public shame. Take heed of
her that has an unshamefast eye, and marvel not, if she trespass against
thee. The daughter makes the father to watch secretly says he, and the
carefulnes that he has for her, takes away his sleep in the house, least she
should pass the flower of her age, and when she has an husband, least she
should be hated. In her virginity, least she should be defloured in her
fathers house, and when she is in her husbands house, least she should
misbehaue her self, and prove unfaithful: she that is bold, Eccle. 22.5
impudent, and unshamefast (says the same wise man) dishonoreth both her
father and her husband, and is not inferior to the ungodly. Contrariwise, a
shamefast, loyal, peaceable woman, Eccles. 26.14.15
and of good heart (that is to say) of an honest heart, for an honest heart, is
the best heart in the world) is a gift of the Lord, and there is no weight to
be compared to her continent mind. Such a goodly gift received godly Isack at
Gods hands when as he was going out to pray in the field toward the evening.
Genesis 24.62.67.
In his prayer no doubt but he asked of God amongst other blessings a virtuous
wife; and God who has said to every believing soul, ask and it shall be
given you, Mat. 7 7
heard him and granted him his desire.

Thus Isack after his prayer found a good thing, for he that finds a virtuous
wife, finds a good thing: Pro 18.22
says Solomon after his prayer he received a gift at Gods hands and a good
portion. For a virtuous and shamefast woman is a good portion, Pro. 19 14.
Eccles. 26.14.15.24
which shall be given for a gift unto such as fear the Lord, says Solomon and
likewise Siracides: Isack after pis prayer found a possession, an heritage, an
help, and a pillar to rest upon. For he that has gotten a virtuous wife, has
gotten all these, Eccles. 36 24. and 22.4
and a wise daughter is an heritage unto her husband, says Jesus the Son of
Sirach. Isack after his prayer, found a matter of joy, gladness, and long life.
For he found a wife full of grace, Eccles 26.1.2.17.13
and the grace of a wife is the thing that most rejoices her husband, for she
feeds his bones with her understanding. Blessed is the man (says Siracides)
that has a virtuous wife, for the number of his years shall be double: an
honest woman rejoices her husband, and she shall see the years of his life
with pence. Whereas contrariwise, an evil wife is as a yoke of Oxen that draw
diverse ways, and he that has her is as though he held a Scorpion. For such a
one makes her husbands life short, for the very talk of her tongue, is like
the sting of a Scorpions tail. Isack after his prayer found an ornament of his
house, Eccles. 26.16.
for as the Sun when it arises in the high places of the Lord, so is the
beauty of a good wife the ornament of her house. Isack after his prayer in his
wife Rebecca, found a Crown: Prou. 12.4.
for a virtuous woman is the Crown of her husband, says Solomon. Finally
Isack after prayer found an inestimable treasure. Eccles. 26.14.15.
for there is nothing so much worth (says Jesus the Son of Sirach) as a
woman well instructed, and no weight to be compared unto her continent mind.
Who shall find a virtuous woman (says king Lemuel) for her price is far
above the pearls. The heart of her husband trusts in her, Pro. 31.10
11.12.28.29.
and he shall have no need of spoil. She will do him good and not evil all
the days of her life: her husband also shall praise her, saying, many
daughters have done virtuously: but thou surmountest them all.

Thus we see that godly Isack after his prayer, in one good wife found a
treasure of good things, and in one blessing received many pull down upon us
abundance of Gods good things, and as Rebecca performed the duties of a
virtuous wife in her husbands behalf: so did Isack play the part of discreet
and loving husband toward her. Genesis 24.67
For it is said that he loved Rebecca, and was comforted in her, and by her,
after his mothers death: for as I said before, out of Siracides, the grace of a
good wife rejoices her husband, Eccles. 26.1.2.13.
and doubleth the number of his days. And as it is recorded that he loved
Rebecca, so is it also, Genesis 26.8.
that he rejoiced and sported with her; according to that which the wise man
inioyneth saying, Eccles. 9.9.
Rejoice with thy wife which thou have loved all the days of the life which
God has given thee under the Sun. And the holy Apostle as he enioyneth wives
to be of holy behavior, sober, temperate, discreet, Tit. 2.2.3.4.5 Colloss 18
19 Ephesians. 5.25 28.
chaste, keeping at home subject, lovers of their husbands and of their
children; so likewise he exhorts husbands to love their wives, as their own
bodies, and not to be bitter for he that loves his wife (says he) loves
himself. If a man's wife be of a sweet and gracious disposition; then ought the
husband to join his sweetness to his wives, except he mean to show himself a
beast, yea worse then a beast, in being bitter and sour in the behalf of his
virtuous wife. And if otherwise she be of a more bitter and unpleasing
disposition then behooves, then he must show himself wise in allaying the
sowrenesse and bitterness of his wines behavior, with the sweetness of his
patient and gentle inclination: in laboring to reclaim her by all kind of
fair persuasions, and enducements of love. Thus the discreet husband may
amend that male-pleasing humor of his wife; whereas by using bitterness in her
behalf, he shall turn his wives wormwood into gall of aspes, and make her ten
fold more bitter and sour then she was at first.

Thus then in the person of Isack and virtuous Rebecca, are all husbands and
wives taught to labor by all means to be a comfort, and joy one unto another.
Wives to love in most entire manner their husbands, to reverence and obey them
with all subjection and submission of body and mind, and to be always a
matter of joy and comfort unto them: and husbands on the other part, to make
much of their wives, to love them entierly and to esteem of them as their
greatest ornament, their best portion, their dearest inheritance, their surest
help, their strongest pillar, their sweetest comfort, their richest pearl,
and in one word, as their most glorious crown.

Genesis 25.21 and 24.63.64.
Rebecca was barren for a time, but the Lord at the prayer and entreatie of her
husband Isack made her to bear. Thus Isack as by prayer he had obtained a
virtuous wife, so by prayer he purchased at Gods hands, for his wife, the
strength and ability to Iam. 5.16.
The prayer of a righteous man avails much if it be fervent. Genesis 20 17 18.
Abraham was a righteous man, and at his prayer Abimelechs wife ceased to be
barren, and Abimelech himself was healed: Deuteronomy. 9.20 21. Number. 12.10.
Moses was a righteous man, and at his prayer Aron purchased pardon for his
idolatry, and Miriam was cured of her leaprie: Number. 16.47.48.
Aron was a righteous man, and at his prayer the plague ceased from the people.
Samuel was a righteous man, 1. Sam 7.8 9.10.11.12
and at his prayer the Isralites scattred and overcame the Philistims. Eliah
was a righteous man, 1. King. 17 17.18.19 20.21.22.23. and 18.45.
and at his prayer he obtained rain after the drought of three years, and
restored his hostess son to life. Likewise at his prayer the two captains
over fifty with their fifties sent by Ahaziah to apprehend him, 2. King.
1.7.8.9.10 11.12.13.
were devoured by fire from heaven, and the third captain with his fifty at
the Prophets desire were preserved. Elisha was a righteous man, and at his
prayer, the Shunamite conceived and bare a son to her husband being old, 2.
King. 4.12.13.14 15.16.17 31.33.34 35.36.
and that after long barrennes, whom afterward he also restored again to
life being dead: likewise at his prayer, the men that the king of Sirya had
sent to apprehend him, 2 King. 18 and 2.23.24.
was smitten with blindness. And the 42. children that mocked him, were torn in
pieces by two Bears out of the Forest. The Prophet sent by God to Jeroboam to
reprove him, was a righteous man, and at his prayer Ieroboams hand being first
dried up was restored: 1. King. 13 6
So great is the force of a righteous man's prayer. It opens the windows of
heaven to give rain after long dryness, and the womb of women to bear after
long barrenness. As the Apostle says, through God I am able to do all
things: So through prayer is the righteous man able to obtain all things.

And as Isack had his recourse unto God by prayer, Genesis 25.22.23.28.
to make his wife fruitful; so She having conceived, and feeling the children
in her womb to strive together, it is said that she went to ask the Lord
concerning the meaning of Jacob should be more acceptable unto God then Esau,
and therefore the holy woman loved Jacob more then Esau: Genesis 27.6.10
and by her counsel and prudence, he got the blessing from his brother Esau;
for whom the Lord blesses and loves, shall be blessed and loved of the best
men likewise. And when as Esau in revenge had intended to slay Jacob, Rebecca
(which by interpretation is as much as contention hindered) did indeed and in
effect answer unto her name: and therefore to Jacob away to Haran to her
Brother Laban there to tarry until Esaus fiercenes were assuaged. Genesis 27.41
42.43.44.45.
In which doing, Rebecca as she bewraied both her wisdom and her peaceable
disposition, So has she left unto all women, wives, and mothers, an example of
imitation to preserve peace, and to prevent strife and contention amongst her
children and servants. Happy then was godly Isack to have received at the
Lords hands such a virtuous wife and peaceable wife as was Rebecca, for a
peaceable woman and of gaod fear (says Siracides) is a gift of the Lord,
Eccles. 26.1.14.
and there is nothing so much worth as a woman that is well instructed, and
blessed is the man that has a virtuous wife says the same wise man.

The golden Legend of JACOB and RAHEL.
JACOB whom the Lord loved eue^ before he was borne, Malach. 1.2 Rom 9.13.
Genesis 25.21 22.23.28.
and of whom he had foretold that his elder brother should serve him, was
borne of Rebekah, after that God at the request of her husband Isack had taken
away her barrenness. As God loved him before he was borne, so his mother loved
him more then her elder son Esau when he was borne. So that by Gods
providence who loved him, and the counsel of his mother who tendered him, he
obtained of his father the blessing which by the law of birth was due unto Esau
as being the elder. God give thee of the dew of Heaven and the fatnes of the
earth and plenty of wheat and wine, Genesis 27.6.7.8.9.23.28.29.3^.37
(said Isack in blessing of his son) let people be thy servants and nations
bow unto thee: cursed be he that curses thee and blessed be he that blesses
thee. So that when as Esau did complainningly expostulate in the presence of
his father, against his brother, Isacks answer was, I have blessed thy
brother, therefore he shall be blessed: behold I have made him thy Lord, and
Wherein we may learn first, whosoever is beloved and blessed of God as Jacob
was, shall also be beloved and blessed of all godly men and women, such as
Isack and Rebekah were. And next that, such as honor the Lord, and serve him
as Jacob did, the Lord will honor them with Jacob Esau to serve his younger
brother Iaccob, according to that saying uttered by the Lords own mouth. 1.
Sam. 2.30.
Them that honor me, will I honor, and them that despise me shall be despised.

Jacob got his fathers blessing in his elder brothers clothes; Genesis 27.15 16.
and we christians which be Jacobs children, Mat. 22.11 Genesis 25.27
Jacob was a plain man, that is, he was harmles Mat. 10.16
and innocent as Doves. Jacob to shun and eshew the fury and fierceness of
his brother Esau fled from his fathers house in Beersheba, Genesis 27.43.44.45 and
28.10.
to Haran to his Uncle Laban the brother of Rebecca.

When they persecute you in this City, Mat. 10.16.23,
says he, then flee into another. Christians must carry themselves toward
their persecuters, as sheep in the midst of Wolves; their surest defense
stands in flight: for nothing becomes christians better, then patience and
suffrance of wrongs. And it is the most essential property of a true
christian not to offer, but to suffer injuries. Jacob being in his journey,
came unto a certain place, Gen 28.11.12.
and tarried there all night, and took of the stones of the place, and laid
under his head, and slept. Young Jacob had but a very uneasy lying, when as
he laid his head upon the hard stones. Genesis 28.20.21.22 and 32.10.
He went out only with a poor staff in his hand, and begged of God but bread
to eat, and clothes to put on together with preservation and safety in his
journey, going and returning home again. Whereby christians are taught till at
what time God opens his hand, in a more liberal manner for our relief. Jacobs
greatest desire unto the Lord, was that he would be with him, and so he was
according to his wish. And even the same night that he did lie so low and so
hard, the Lord with his holy Angels came as it were to see his servant lying
on the ground, Genesis 28.12.13.14 15.
with his head upon the hard stones. Jacob saw in his sleep a ladder standing
upon the earth, and the top of it reaching up to heaven. And lo the Angels of
God went up and down by it, and the Lord stood above it, and promised to give
him the land upon the which he then lay, even to him and to his seed; the
which should be as the dust of the ground, and be spread abroad even to the
four corners of the earth. Moreover, that he would be with him, and keep him
whether soever he should go, yea and bring him again into that land, and
never forsake him until his whole promises were performed.

Whereby we are taught that Gen 21.16
Jacob being awake out of his dream, said, Surely the Lord is in this place
and I was not aware. And so the godly man may say, when as in his greatest
exigents and extremities, he finds and feels Gods providence for his good:
surely the Lord has been with me, though not in a visible manner. Jacob had
under his head hard stones, but above his head was God standing, and the Angels
walking up and down by a Ladder. Whereby we are let to understand, Jacob we
overcome adversity, and the hardness and harshnes of affliction here below, by
the means of a christian courage, that in end we shall be rewarded with the
society of God and his Angels above. Take my brethren (says S. James) the
Prophets for an ensmple of suffering adversity, Iam. 5.10.11
and of long patience, which have spoken in the name of the Lord: Behold we
count them blessed which endure. It is thanks worthy (says S. Peter) if a
man for conscience toward God endure grief, 1. Pet. 2.19 ^0.21. and 4.13
suffering wrongfully, for Christ also suffered for us, leaning us an ensample
that we should follow his steps: wherefore rejoice, in as much as ye are
partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall appear, ye may be
glad and rejoice. Heb. 12.1.2.
Let us run with patience (says S. Paul) the race that is set before us,
looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that
was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the shame, and is set at
the right hand of the throne of God. Hence it is, that we also rejoice in
tribulations, Romans 5.3.4.5.
knowing that tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, and
experience hope, 2. Tim. 2.12
and hope makes not ashamed: for if we suffer with Christ, we shall also
reign with him: If we bear the Cross here with him on earth, we shall also
wear a crown hereafter with him in heaven. Jacob lying upon the stones, found
notwithstanding rest to his Body: and if we repose our selves wholly upon the
Rock, 1. Cor. 10.4. Genesis 49.24. Dan. 2.34.41
Christ Jesus whom Jacob calls the stone of Israel; and Daniel, the the
stone cut without hands; we shall not fail to find rest to our souls. And
Christ shall be unto

Jacob being come unto his Uncle Labans house, entered into service with Laban,
in which his service he was so exceedingly blessed of God, Genesis 30.27.43.
that he became very rich, and got many flocks, maidseruants, and men servants,
Camels and Asses. Moreover Laban confessed that the Lord had blessed and
enriched him likewise for Jacobs sake. Whereby the children of Jacob Jacob
brought up his own children in the occupation of sheepe-heardes. Genesis 46.34.
and 47.3
And Saul was taken from seeking of his fathers Asses, 1. Sam. 9.3 and
16.11.12.19
and David from keeping of his fathers sheep, to feed and rule the people of
Israel: and the Apostle Saint Paul as he wrought with his own hands, 2. These.
3.7 8.9.10 11 Act. 20.34
so he commands that the man that will not work, should not eat. And
therefore he exhorts idle men to work with quietness, and to eat their own
bread, and withal, recommendeth unto them his own example for imitation, how
that he took not bread of any man for naught, but wrought with labor and
travail, night and day, because he would not be chargeable to any of them.
Pro. 5.15. and 12.11 14 and 14.23. and 20.4. and 21.17.
Drink the water of thy Cisterne and of the rivers out of the midst of thine
own well says Solomon: insinuating thereby, how that men ought to live of
their own labors. He that tilleth his land shall be satisfied with bread, but
he that follows the idle, is destitute of understanding: the recompense of a
man's h^^as shall God give unto him, and in all labor there is abundance. The
slothful will not plowgh, because of winter, therefore shall he beg in
summer but have nothing: he that loves pastime shall he a poor man, and he
that loves Wine and Oil, shall not be rich.

Jacob then who was so exceeding rich, was no doubt very free from the vices
of idleness, superfluity and excess, And yet it was Psalm. 1 27.1.2
Except the Lord build the house (says the Psalmist) they labor in vain
that build it; except the Lord keep the City, the keeper watches in vain.
It is vain for you to rise early, and to lie down late, and to eat the bread
of sorrow, but he will surely give rest to his beloved. As if he should say, it
is in vain for a man to toil and moyle day and night, except the Lord bless
his business as he did Jacobs, and Labans likewise for Jacobs sake, and as he
did Iosephes affairs and his three masters for Iosephes sake, first in
Potiphars house, Gen 39. and 40. and 41
then in the prison, and lastly in the Princes Palace. Jacob served twice
seven years, his Uncle Laban for his daughter Rahel: For it is said that he
loved her and even so earnestly and fervently, Genesis 20.18 28.30.
that so many years did seem unto him but a few days. Whereby such as are
about Genesis 25.23 25.26.27.28
As Jacob being the younger of Isacks two sons was more beloved of God, and of
his mother Rebecca then the elder son Esau: So of Labans two daughters being
Jacobs two wives, the younger was more loved of Jacob then the elder, Genesis
29.16 17.18.19.20.
even fair Rahel more then tender-eyed Leah. As of the two brethren the Lord
made choice of the younger; Mat. 1.2. Rom 9.13.
Jacob have I loved: so of the two sisters, Jacob made choice of the younger,
for Rahel he loved and served twice seven years for her.

It is said of Rahel that she was beautiful and fair; the same is said of
Sara, and of Rebecca, 1. Sam. 25.3.
and likewise of Abigail who was both beautiful and singularly wise. Abigail
is as much by interpretation as fathers joy; and such a one was Rahel, even the
joy of her father Laban, and likewise of Jacob her loving husband, Pro. 10.1.
Eccles. 26.1.2.13.
for as a wise daughter is the joy of her father, so is a wise wife the joy of
her husband says the wise man. And Rahel Labans daughter, and Jacobs wife
Abigail, like was both. The greatest glory of a daughter is to be called her
fathers or her mothers joy; And the greatest glory of a wife is to be
accounted the joy of her husband. And here all daughters Rahel and Abigail
were. Jacob loved Rahel for her beauty, but yet more for her bounty and
gracious behavior. For favor is deceitful, Pro. 31.30.
and beauty is euanishings, but a woman that fears the Lord, she shall be
praised says Solomon and such a one was Rahel, who was not so fair in body as
she was in mind, and therefore worthy to be loved of her husband, and landed
of men. The beauty of a woman cheereth the face (says Siracides) and a man
loves nothing better, Eccles. 36.22.23.24
if there be in her tongue gentleness, meeknes, and wholesome talk, then is not
her husband like other men. Eccles. 26.16 17 18.
as the candle light in the Temple, Eccles. 22.4 and 36.24
or the Sunne-light in the heaven, says Siracides. But the wisdom of a woman
is the heritage and heartes-case of her husband. The beauty of a wife is the
ornament of her house; but the bounty and wisdom of a wife builds the
house. Prou. 14.1
for a wise woman (says the wise man) builds the house, but the foolish
destroys it with her own hands. Prou. 31.10.16.26.
And king Lemuels virtuous woman as she opens her mouth with wisdom, and
has the law of grace in her tongue, so she considers a field and gets it,
and with the fruit of her hands she planteth a vinyard.

Likewise it is recorded of Rahel and Leah that they twain builded the house
of Israel: Ruth 4.11
Rahel then did not eat the bread of idleness, neither when she was married, nor
yet when she was a maid: she was not like those careless women described by the
Prophet Isay, Isai. 32.9.10.11.12 13.14. Pro. 31.10. to 31.
but rather like the virtuous woman described by Solomon. Being married, she did
take pains, in ouerseeing the work of her servants, and disdained not to
work cheerfully with her hands: and being a maid, she was employed in keeping
of her fathers sheep, leaving an example Christ does compare often his
followers to sheep. Unto his Disciples he says, Mat. 10.16.
behold I send you as Sheep in the midst of Wolves: be ye therefore wise as
Serpents, and innocent as Doves. Ioh 10.1.2.3.4 11 14.15.
And of al his elect children, he says that his sheep hear his voice, and
that he calls them by their name, and leads them out, and goes before
them, and that they follow him, and know his voice, and that he himself is the
good shepherd that gives his life for his sheep.

Rahel and Leah, Jacobs two wives were barren for a time, but it is said that
in end God remembered and heard them: God may seem for a time to forget his
children, and not to hear them, but in end they may be sure to be both
remembered and heard. Not that God does at any time forget his and feeling, as
one that is subject to forgetfulness, and not willing to hear what we say or
sue for at his hands, and that he does even for our good: for so it pleases
him to exercise us and to stir us up to greater feruencie and earnestnes in
prayer. Likewise the delay of a benifite, sweetneth the same, when it is
obtained. That good thing which has been gotten with great difficulty, with
much ado, and after long delay, is by many degrees more dear unto us, then if
it had been gotten with ease and at an instant. Genesis 29.31.32. and 30.17.22.
The Lord at last remembered and heard Rahel and Leah which did both of them
beg children at his hands: For it is the Lord that opens the windows of
heaven (being shut) to give rain, 1. King. 18 1.41.45.
to make the earth fruitful: and it is likewise the Lord that opens the
barren woman's womb to make her the joyful mother of many children, 1. Sam.
2.5 Psalm. 113.9 and 128.3.
so that she is made as the fruitful vine on the house sides, and her children
stand like Olive plants round about the Table.

And as it is said that God remembered Rahel and Leah when he delivered them
from barrennes, so is it also said that he remembered Noah, Genesis 8.1.
when as he made the waters to cease upon the earth, and he remembered Abraham
when as he delivered Lot at Abraham's request, Genesis 19.29
from the destruction of Sodom: and he remembered Ismael, Genesis 21.17
when as he delivered him from extremity of indigence, and nourished him in
the wilderness, being cast out together with his mother Hagar out of Abraham's
house. And he remembered Jacob being in tribulation Genesis 35.3.
by reason of his brother Esau, and delivered him from his hostility and
fear. Lastly, thus he remembered Anna when he delivered her from barrennes, 1.
Sam 1 11.19. Job 14.13 and 42.10.11.12.
and made her to bear. So we see that the Lords remembrance is always
conjoined with deliverance from some Job. So that whosoever he be that serves
God, and sueth unto him, he may assure himself, at first or last to be heard,
and not to begotten for ever. Princes may sometimes forget their servants and
suitors; but God never forgeteth his, Psalm. 22. and 25. and 27.2.8.9.10.11.
and 28 6.7. and 30.10 11 and 31.12.14.16.21.22.23.24 and 32.6.7.10 11 and 33.18
19.20 21. and 3^.4.5.6.15.17.18.19. and 37.6.7.34. and 40.1.2.16, 17.
only it behooves us with godly David to wait patiently upon the Lord, and
to hope in him: and though for a time we seem to be forgotten with David as a
dead man out of mind, yet we shall find by experience with David, that the
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears open unto their cry:
That he is near unto them, that are of a contrite heart, and will save such as
be afflicted in spirit; And that though he hide his face from us for a while,
so that we say in our have, lo we are cast out of his sight; yet ere it be
long he will turn our mourning into joy; Loose our sack, and gird us with
gladness; hear the voice of our petition, and show us his maruailous kindenes;
deliver us from our troubles, and compass us with his mercy; establish our
hearts, Job. 8.21.
and fill them with his good things, Psalm 27.10.
with gladness and joy. For though our fathers and our mothers should forsake
us, and forget us, yet the Lord will gather us up, says the Psalmist.

O how much better is it then, to trust in the Lord, rather then in Princes, or
yet in our natural Parents! Let each one say then with David. Psalm.
130.5.6.7.8.
I have waited on the Lord, my soul has waited, and I have trusted in his
word: my soul waitch on the Lord more then the morning watch watches for the
morning. Let Israel wait on the Lord: for with the Lord is mercy, and with
him is great redemption. Psalm. 118.8 9.
As it is better to trust in God, then in Princes, so is it better to wait on
God, then on Princes. For want who will, Gods waiter shall be sure not to want
his rewards. Psalm. 37.34
Wait thou on the Lord and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee, and thou
shall inherit the land, says that good waiter on God, godly David, Psalm 78.70
71.72.
who waited so well on God that of a fillie shepherd he was made a mighty
monarch, and a glorious king. So that he had good cause to say, it is good for
me to draw near to God to trust in him, Psalm. 33.20 and 40.1. and 73.28.
and to wait patiently on him. A king is able to make his waiter, of a mean
man, a mighty man; of a Lad he is able to make him a Lord: but God can easily
if he please, make his waiter, of a contemptible castaway, Psalm. 113.7.8.
Eccles. 11.1.
a puissant Prince and a crowned king. It is he that raises the needy out of
the dust, and lifts up the poor out of the dung, That he may set him with
the Princes, even with the Princes of his people. Yea, not only sets he
such as wait on him, with the princes, but also sometimes sets a crown
upon their heads, Job. 36 7.
and makes them Princes; not only does he place the righteous with kings in
the throne, but also makes them sometimes kings, Eccle. 4.14
and (as Solomon speaks) brings them out of the very prison to reign. And
therefore godly David acknowledges that God did prevent him with liberal
blessings, Psalm. 21.3
and that he set a crown of pure gold upon his head. So then, as I said
before, be forgotten who will, the man that fears God and waits on him
shall not be forgotten, but shall be b th remembered and remunerated with an
ample reward, greater then any mortal king can give.

Rahel and Leah as in their barrennes they prayed unto God for to give them the
ability to bear children; so having received at Gods hands the thing they did
ask, they praised him for the same. Now will I praise the Lord, Genesis 29.33 35
said Leah when she had borne Judah: and Rahel having borne Joseph reioycingly
praised the Lord for taking away her rebuke. Genesis 30.23
1. Sam. 2.1 to 11.
So the holy woman Anna having received a son of the Lord, praised him in a
song. The like did religious Zachary having received a Son by his wife
Elizabeth in her barren old age. Luke 1.68. to 80.
Whereby both women and men give thanks always for all Eccles. 5.4.20.
things unto God, even the father, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. And
the Prophet Moses warns the people that they do not forget to bless the
Lord for their habitation and food, Dent. 8.10 11.12.13 14.15.16.17.18.
and for the increase of their flocks, and of their silver and gold. Remember
the Lord your God says he, for it is he which gives you power to get
substance. And therefore let every one that has received any good thing at the
Lords hand, or yet looks to receive more, say with holy David; What shall I
render unto the Lord for all his benifites to me, Psalm. 116.12.13.14.
I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. I will
pay my vows unto the Lord even now in the presence of all his people. Psalm
103.1 2.3.4.5.
My soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me, praise his holy
name. My soul praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits, Which
forgiueth all thine iniquity, and heals all thine infirmities; which
redeemeth thy life from the grave, and crowns thee with mercy and
compassion; which satisfies thy youth with good things, and thy youth is
renewed like the Eagles.

But to return from Jacobs wives unto himself, Jacob was envied of his own
Cousins, Labans children, which did murmr mightily against him for his great
wealth. Yea, Labans own countenance began to be changed, so that he was less
kind unto him, then he had been before.

It was no doubt an affliction, and that a bitter one too, for him to be envied
of his own near Cousins and allies, yea of his own Uncle and father in law
Laban, and that his good and long services were not better considered upon by
him and his children, and how that the Lord had for his sake prospered them
all. But though his nearest kins-men and allies, were thus changed in their
affection toward Jacob, yet in the mean time, God who is unchangeable in his
love (for whom he loves, Ierim. 31.3 Ioh. 13.1.
he loves with an everlasting love) did never alter his countenance and
affection in his behalf. When Jacob was most crossed of men, then did God show
himself most kind. And the frowardnes of his friends was not of so great
force to cast him down, as the present favor of God was to hold him up.
fail us and forsake us; Psalm. 27.10 and 125.1. and 146.3
yet the Lord will gather us up. They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount
Sion, which cannot be removed, but remains for ever. Put not your trust in
Princes (says that godly Prince) nor in the son of man, Ierem. 17.5.6.7.8.
for there is no help in him. Cursed be the man (says the Lord) that trusts
in man, and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the Lord, for
he shall be like the heath in the Wilderness, and shall not see when any good
comes, but shall inhabit the parched places in the Wilderness, in a salt land
and not inhabited. But blessed be the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose
hope the Lord is, for he shall be as a tree planted by the water, which
spreads out her roots by the river, and shall not feel when the heat
comes, but her leaf shall be green, and shall not care for the year of
drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit. Such a well rooted, green,
and fair branched tree was Jacob, who trusted in the Lord and not in man, and
therefore when as man frowned on him God favored him, Gen 31.3.13.17.18 24.
and bid him leave his Uncle Laban and return into his own land: Where he
pro^ised to establish him and his seed, and to make them in number as the dust
of the earth, and as the stars of the heaven. And such was the care of the Lord
for his servant Jacob that when as after his departure he was pursued by his
father in law Laban, God did admonish him by a dream that he should Jacob so
much as one evil word. Wherein all faithful folks are instructed to commit,
and commend their ways and estate unto the gracious providence of God, who
will both help us himself, and hinder others from doing us any harm.

Moreover when as Jacob was in his journey, Genesis 32.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.
and was greatly affrighted and troubled, because of his brother Esau, the Lord
sent his Angels to meet him, and to accompany him for his preservation and
safety: accordirg to the saying of the Psalmist, Psalm. 34.7. and 19.11.
The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about all them that fear him, and
delivers them. He shall give his Angels charge over them to keep them in all
their ways. Thus we read that the Lord comforted Hagar by an Angel, Genesis 16.7.
to 15
when she fled from her mistress Sara, for using her roughly. Thus an Angel
stayed Abraham at the Lords appointment, Genesis 22.11.12.
from sacrificing his Son. Thus an Angel conducted Eliezer Abraham's servant
to find a wife for Genesis 24.7.12.27.40
Isack. Thus an Angel comforted Eliah and nourished him when as he fled from
Iezebell. 1 King. 19 5 6.7.
Thus an Angel comforted and encouraged Joshua being about the besieging of
Ierico. Josh. 5.13.14.15.
Thus an Angel appeared unto Gideon, Judge 6.11. to 28.
to appoint him to be the savior of Israel, out of the Midianites hands. Thus
the Angel Raphael was sent of God to guide Tobias in his ways, Tob 5.6. and
1.3.14 15.18.19 20.21.22 Act 1^ 7 8 9 10 11 12. and 27.23.24
and to prosper his business. Thus the holy Angels delivered the Apostles out of
prison, and another Angel showed Saint Paul that none of them with him in the
Ship should perish. Also the Angels ministered unto our Savior Christ in the
Wilderness after his forty days fasting. Mat 4.11.
Luke. 22.4.5.
And another Angel comforted him in the garden before his apprehension. Mat.
29.24 53.
He might likewise have had legio^s of Angels to deliver him from the violence
of the Jews, but he would not. Also the Angels did tell the Mary's and the
rest of the devout women, Mat. 28.5.6.
the news of our Saviors resurrection. In one word, Luke 15.7.10.
as the Angels rejoice at the sinners conversion, so are they appointed of God
for the faithfuls protection, and consolation; according to that saying of the
Lord unto his people: Exodus 23.20.23. and 32.2
Behold I send an Angel before thee to keep thee in thy way, and to bring thee
to the place which I have prepared. Finally, our Savior teaches us in the
Gospel, Mat. 18.10
that the Angels are appointed of God to be gardians of little Children. Jacob
prayed unto the Lord to deliver him from the hand of Esau, Genesis 32
9.10.11.24.25.28.
and the Lord heard him, and in token that he should overcome his brothers
anger, made his Angel to wrestle with him, and in the wrestling strengthened
Jacob, so that the Angel could not prevail. Thereby giving him to understand,
that if an Angel was not able to vanquish him when as God was on his side to
strengthen him, how much less should his brother being a mortal man be able
to give him the foil? And therefore the Angel said unto Jacob, thy name
shall be called Jacob no more, but Israel, because thou have had power with God,
thou Jacob, praying him to deliver us from the hands of our enemies that are
stronger then we. This has allwaies been the custom of the men of God,
namely of Godly David. Lord how are mine adversaries increased? Psalm.
3.1.3.4.5.6.7.
(said this holy man when as he fled from his son Absalon) How many rise
against me? But thou Lord art a Buckler for me: my glory, and the lifter up of
mine head. I did call unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his
holy mountain, I laid me down and slept, and rose up again: for the Lord
sustained me. I would not be afraid for ten thousand of the people that should
beset me round about. O Lord arise, help me my God, for thou have smitten all
mine enemies upon the cheeke-bone: thou have broaken the teeth of the wicked.
The Lord was David's guard against the insurrection of his Son, and likewise
against the persecution of Saul. Psalm. 18.32 to 42.
God girded him with strength and taught his hands to fight, so that he not
only wounded his enemies that they were not able to rise, but also consumed
them, for he beat them as small as the dust before the wind, and tread them
flat as the clay in the street.

And as God consumed David's enemies, so he changed the hearts of Jacobs
adversaries. This great King of hearts softened Esaus heart in his brothers
behalf, for no sooner came he into his brothers sight and had done obeisance
in humble manner before him, but as soon, God touched Esaus heart with a
correspondent affection, so that he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and
fell on his neck, and they wept for joy out of a kind tenderness of heart.
Thus Esau that once hated his brother mortally, now loved him exceedingly; and
he that once intended to kill him, now blesses him; and he that once did
banish and chase him away, now runs to meet and to embrace him in his
arms. Esaus demeanor we are taught to overcome all carnal desire of revenge,
though we have power to be avenged on such as have either crossed us, or yet
done us any wrong. Romans 12.19.20.21.
Dearly beloved (says the Apostle) avenge not your selves, but give place
unto wrath, for it is written, Vengeance is mine: I will repay, says the Lord.
Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink; for
in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head. Be not overcome of
evil, but overcome evil with goodness. Again, in Jacobs humble behavior
toward his Brother (for it is said that he bowed himself seven times to the
ground before his brother whom he called his Lord, and that he sent him a
present of his goods that he might find favor in his sight:) In Jacobs
humility, Jacob sent unto his brother Esau, he calls his blessing;
insinuating thereby that as it was a blessing from God unto him: so should it be
a blessing to his brother from God by Jacobs hands. And it is very likely that
the Lord blessed Esau for Jacobs sake, for being appeased toward his brother,
and for using him so kindly as he did, as he likewise had blessed Laban for
the same Jacobs sake.

But the piety and religion of Jacob is notable: Genesis 33.5 11
God (says he) has had mercy on me, and therefore have I all things. First
he acknowledges his children to be Gods gift, they are the children (quoth he
to his brother) whom God of his grace has given thy servant. Gen 48.8.9
The like said Joseph of his sons to his father Jacob. Then his goods he
acknowledges to have them, and hold them of God. Genesis 32.10
I am not worthy (says this worthy man in his prayer unto God) of the least
of thy mercies, and all the truth, which thou have showed unto thy servant: For
with my staff came Iouer this Jorden, and now have I gotten two bands. He
acknowledges Gods mercy and free favor, and not his own merit, or any
worthynes flowing from his nature to be the fountain of his good Fortune, and
the wel-spring of all his wealth. Luke 21.36 Revel. 3.4. Ephesians. 4.1.
And whatsoever worthiness there is in us, it is not of us, but of him and from
him, who has called us and translated us, into the kingdom of his Son, and
made us partakers of his rich grace: 2. Cor 3.5. Act. 17 25.28.
For our sufficiency is of God, and in him we live, we move and have our being
says Saint Paul. Omne bonum Dei donum. Every good giving (says S. James
another Jacob) and every perfect gift is from above, Iam. 1.17
and comes down from the father of lights.

But Jacob thought it not enough to be religious in a private manner, but he
would also make an outward demonstration of his piety and faith in the sight
of those amongst whom he lived, and that both for the edifying of men, and for
the more celebrious glorifying of God. And therefore as soon as he had bought
a parcel of ground in Schechem to pitch a Tent upon, he also set up there an
Alter, and called it the mighty God of Israel. The same was the pious practice
of his religious forefathers, Isack and Abraham. Jacob by the erection of this
Alter and by giving it this name, Genesis 33.18.19.20.
would show to the whole world in a most public and open manner, that he did
confess and profess that all his might, strength, power, prosperity and hap,
was the mere gift of God who loved him before Let your light so shine (says
our Savior) before men, Mat 5.16. Philip. 2.15
that they seeing your good works may glorify your father which is heaven.
And therefore we see that devout David, Psalm. 22.22 25 and 116.12 13.14.17
18.19
says not only that he would praise God publicly in the midst of the
congregation, but also that he would perform his vows in the sight of them
that fear him, even in the presence of all his people.

Likewise when at the Lords appointment godly Jacob went to dwell in Bethel,
Genesis 35.1.2.3.4.5.
there he also erected an Alter unto God that appeared unto him when as he fled
from his brother Esau, and heard him in the day of his tribubulation, and was
with him in the way which he went. And not only this, but he also commanded
all those of his household to put away all strange Gods from them, and to cleanse
themselves, and to change their garments. For it does appear that there were
some of his servants which had been brought up in Idolatry in the land of
Haran where he had served his uncle Laban. Genesis 31.19.30.
Who likewise him self was not free from that sin: as may appear by that it
is recorded how that Rahel Labans daughter, and Jacobs wife stole away her
fathers Idols, the Laban calls his Gods. Wherein may be espied the great
madness and blindenes of men, in making unto themselves such Gods as are not
able to keep themselves from the stealing hands of thieves. Psalm.
115.4.5.6.7.8.
Their Idols (says the Psalmist) are silver and gold, even the work of men's
hands: they are golden Gods, made of gold, not able to make gold: made by men,
not able to make a man: no nor yet the least worm creeping upon the earth: all
which, the true God does. They are dumb Gods, for though they have a mouth,
they cannot speak, much less are they able to make the dumb to speak. They
are blind Gods, for though they have eyes, yet they cannot see, much less are
they able to make the blind to see. They are deaf Gods, for though they have
cares, yet can they not hear, much less are they able to make the deaf to
hear. They are senseles and dead Gods, for though they have noses, yet they
cannot smell, though they have hands, yet can they not touch, though they have
feet, yet can they not walk, though they have a throat, yet make they no
sound: and in one word, though they have the whole lineaments of a man, yet
have they no sparkle of the life of man: how much less have they of the life
of the everliving God? They that make them are like unto them: so are all that
trust in them. Even more senseles and blockish then stocks or stones. Isai.
44.9.10.11.12.13.14.15 16.17.18.19.20.
And therefore the Lord by his Prophet promises to confound these shop-gods of
stone and timber, and these forge-gods of gold and silver; even all these
vain hand-made Gods, together with the fond and foolish Godmakers.

Thus in the person of Jacob are all masters of families taught to take care,
that the only true God be acknowledged and worshipped of their whole household.
For it is a very hard thing me thinks that the man that worshipeth a false
God, should prove a true servant in his masters behalf. It ought then to be
their chief care to see that their servants be such as serve God, and fear
him, by the means both of a pious and christian profession, and of a virtuous
and honest conuersasion. For if they fear God sincerely, it can not be but
they will serve their masters likewise for Gods sake, and in him, conscionably
and carefully. Thus the Lord who loved Jacob before he was borne, was feared,
loved and honored of Jacob after he was borne: and not only of him, but also
of his whole household. And therefore the Lord not only honored him with his
presence in appearing unto him, Genesis 35.9.13.15.22.
and blessing him, but he also blessed his seed for his sake. I am God all
sufficient (says the Lord unto his servant) grow and multiply, a nation and a
multitude of nations shall spring of thee, and kings shall come out of thy
loins. Also I will give thee the land which I gave to Abraham and Isack, even
unto thee and thy seed after thee. The Lord blessed him likewise with a great
issue, and gave him twelve Sons, for whose virtuous education he was
exceeding careful. For he took order that they should not spend their young
years in idleness, but should be occupied about cattle even from their
childhood. And as he did with great diligence encourage them to virtue, so did
he not fail to correct them, and sharply reprove them when as they did offend,
or fall into any vice: as he did Reuben for his uncleanness, Genesis
34.1.7.25.26.27.28.29.30.31. and 35.22. and 49.4.5.6.7.
and Simeon and Leui with the rest of their brethren for their revenge wrought
upon the Shechemites for Shechems deflowring of their sister Dinah.

And herein are all fathers and mothers taught, to be very watchful and
careful for the virtuous education and honest conversation of their children.

Thus we read how that Abraham commanded his children to keep the way of the
Lord. Genesis 18.19
And how that Moses did exhort the people of Israel to teach their children
how they ought to understand and keep Gods ordinances: and because that Eli
the high Priest and Judge of Israel did not correct his sons more sharply
then he did for their sin; Deuteronomy. 4.9 14.20. and 32.46.
and took not so great pains as he ought to reclaim them from their lewd
and wicked ways, therefore the Lord said thus unto Eli. 1. Sam. 22.31.32 33.34
Behold the days come that I will cut off thine arm and the arm of thy
others house, that there shall not be an old man in thine house for ever. And
this shall be a sign unto thee, that shall come upon thy two sons Hophni,
and Phinehas: in one day they shall both die. And afterward the Lord showed
Samuel what should become of Eli and his house. 1. Sam. 3.11.12 13 14.
I will judge his house for ever, for the iniquity which he knows, because
his sons ran into a slander and he stayed them not. And behold the issue of
the Lords commination and threatening! 1. Sam 4 11.17.18.19.20.21 22.
In one day Elies two insolent sons were slain of the Philistims in the
field. And old Eli hearing of his sons death, and of the taking of the Ark of God (the tidings whereof grieved him most) fell from his seat backwards by
the side of the gate, so that his neck brake, and he died. Besides that which
befell unto his daughter in law, who no sooner heard the report that the Ark of God was taken, and that her father in law and her husband were dead, but she
was stricken with such a sorrow, that she travailed before her time, and died
when as she had named the child Ichahod, saying, The glory is departed from
Israel; for the Ark of God is taken. So great is the anger of God against
Parents for their negligence in correcting and directing their children as they
ought; and therefore wise Solomon does double and treble his admonitions and
exhortations to Parents, that they neglect not this great duty. He that spares
his rodd, Pro 13 24 and 19.18. and 22.15. and 23.13. and 29.15.
hates his son: but he that loves him chasteneth him betime. Chasten thy
son while there is yet hope, and let not thy soul spare for his murmuring.
Foolishnes is bound in the heart of a child, but the rodd of correction shall
drive it away from him, withhould not therefore correction from the child, for
if thou smite him with the rodd, he shall not die. The rodd and correction give
wisdom, but a child set at liberty makes his mother ashamed. The sum of
all is this, that the rodd has a certain efficacy to drive away foolishnes
and fondnes out of the heads of children, and to drive in wisdom and virtue
into their hearts. And that if the father smite his childs body with the
birchen rod of temporal correction, Satan shall not smite his soul with the
bruising, iron rod of eternal destruction. To the same purpose Jesus the son
of Sirach in his wisdom exhorts Parents not to bring up their children
delicately and wantonly, nor to give them too much liberty, nor yet to
withhould from them due correction. Eccles. 30.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10 11.12.13.
He that loves his son (says he) causes him often to feel the rodd, that he
may have joy of him in the end. He that chastises his son shall have joy in
him, and shall rejoice of him among his acquaintance. He that teaches his
son, grieueth the enemy, and before his friends he shall rejoice of him.
Though his father die, yet is he as though he were not dead: for he has left
one behind him that is like him. In his life he saw him, and had joy in him,
and was not sorry in his death, neither was he ashamed before his enemies. He
left behind him an avenger against his enemies, and one that should show
favor unto his friends. He that flattereth his son binds up his wounds,
and his heart is greiued at every cry. An untamed horse will be stubborn, and
a wanton child will be wilful. If thou bring up thy son delicately, he
shall make thee afraid: and if thou play with him, he shall bring thee to
heaviness. Laugh not with him lest thou be sorry with him: and lest thou gnash
thy teeth in the end. Give him not liberty in his youth, and wink not at his
folly. Bow down his neck while he is young, and beat him on the sides while
he is a child, least he wax stubborn and he disobedient unto thee, and so
bring sorrow unto thine heart: chastise thy child, and be diligent therein,
least his shame grieve thee. And the same wise man in another place, Eccles. 7
23 24.^5.^^.27.28.
as he exhorts the child to honor his father with his whole heart, and not
to forget the sorrows of his mother, but to remember that he was borne of
them, and that he cannot recompense them the things that they have done for
him: So he advises parents to instruct their children, and to hold their
neck from their youth: to keep their daughters body, and not to show their
face cheerful toward them, and to marry them to men of understanding.
Finally (says the wise man) if children live honestly, Eccles. 22.8 9.
they shall put away the shame of their parents: But if children be proud with
hautines and foolishnes, they defile the nobility of their kindred.

Thus we see then the great virtue of the rod in a discreet parents hand. Moses
Rod lifted up, Exo 14 10 21.22.
divided the waters, and made dry ground to appear in the mides of the Sea, to
give the children of Israel passage to the land of Canaan. And the fathers or
mothers rod being lifted upon their children, will be a means to divide the
waters of the waywardnes and wantonness of their young years, and to calm the
raging sea of their unruly passions, and fleshly afflictions. Whereby their
soul may walk as it were on dry ground securely, and safely, without any
impediment toward the land of the heavenly Canaan. Exodus 17.5
And as Moses rod brought forth water out of the hard Rock being smitten
therewith: so shall the parents rod not only bring forth of the rockie nature
of their children, the tears of Lamentation; but also turn the stony hardness
and obstinatenes of their stubborn inclination, into the streamie softnes of a
docible disposition. The Rod or tree which Moses did cast into the waters of
Marah, Exodus 15.23.24.25.
made the bitter water sweet. And the rod of Correction will turn the
bitterness of the childs nature into the sweetness of a dutiful behavior.
Finally, as Aarons rod budded, Number. 17.8
and brought forth blossoms and bear ripe Almonds: So the teaching Rod (for
Aaron signifies a teacher) of fathers, mothers and Schoolmaisters, will make
children to bring forth the buddes and blossoms of an hopeful behavior in
their young years; and to bear the ripe Almonds of honest and religious
actions in their riper years.

Let not Parents then spare the rod; for the rod used with discretion, is a
means to bring children unto God. I say, with discretion; because Parents and
preceptors must not kill children with cruelry, but correct the^ with lenity:
they must not ouercharge them rudely with the blows of indignation; but
chasten them ruthfully with the stripes of compassion. In one word, corrections
must not serve for the destruction of the body, but for the instruction of the
Soul. And if it chance that a child be of so gentle and generous a disposition
that he may be reclaimed or won with fair persuasions, and gentle
enducements and allurements, then were it but mere madness to use any roughnes
or austere sharpnes in his behalf: And therefore as children must harken
diligently unto the exhortation of the Apostle; Children obey your parents in
the Lord: Ephesians. 6.1.2.3.4.
For this is right; honor thy father and thy mother (which is the first
commandment with promise) that it may be well with thee, and that thou may
live long on the earth. So must parents listen unto the admonition of the same
Apostle thus, and ye fathers provoke not your children to wrath: but bring
them up in instruction and information of the Lord.

Neither must they fail to bring them up in some lawful calling, and rather
in some mechanical trade and manual occupation, then that they should live
idle: for so did Jacob bring up his Sons. So that when as Pharao said unto
them, What is your trade? they answered the king, Gen 47.3.
Thy servants are sheep-heards, both we and our fathers. Prouer. 27.23.24.25
26.27.
Be diligent to know the state of thy flock, (says Solomon) and take heed to
the heardes, for riches remain not always, nor the crown from generation to
generation. The hay discovers it self, and the grass appears, and the
herbs of the mountains are gathered. The Lambs are for thy clothing, and
the Goats are the price of the field. And let the milk of the Goats be
sufficient for thy food, for the food of thy family, and for the sustenance
of thy maids. Hate not laborious work (says Jesus the Son of Sirach)
neither the husbandry which the most high has created. Eccles. 7.15 22.
And if thou have cattle, look well to them. Neither let a man be ashamed of
a mechanical trade, for we see that Joseph the husband of Marie, Mat. 13.55
Mar. 6.3. Luke 2.51. Mat. 4.18.19.20.21. and 8.23.24. Luke 4.4.5 Act. 18.1.2.3.
Exodus 28.3 and 31.2.3.4.5.6. and 35.30.31.32 33.34.35.
and Jesus the Son of Marie, yea, the Son of God disdained not to play the
Carpenter. And the Apostles were fishermen, and St. Paul was a maker of Tents.
And it is recorded of Bezaleel and Aholeab two Tradesmen that God gave them
much knowledge in mechanical things, even filled them with an excellent spirit
of wisdom, understanding, and knowledge in all work-manship, to work
curiously in gold, silver, brass, in grauing, and setting of stones, in hewing
and caruing of wood, in working of broydred and needle work in blue Silk, in
Purple, in Scarlet, and in fine linen: finally in weauing and working of all
manner of curious work man-ship. Let no man I say then be ashamed of a
mechanical Trade or craft, seeing it is a gift of Gods spirit, and that (as
Siracides says) in the hands of the crafts-man shall the works be commended.
Eccles. 9.19


Moreover, Gen 36.7.
the Lord blessed Jacob with abundance of substance and store; with cattle,
Sheep, Beeues, Camels, and Asses in great number, as he had done his father
Abraham and Isack before. Genesis 41. and 45. and 46. and 47.
And in the time of the great and long famine of seven years that was
throughout the world, God provided for Jacob and his household by the hand of
Joseph his son, whom the Lord unwitting his father and brethren, had
preferred to be ruler over all Egypt next under the King. Thus the holy man as
he was blessed of God for his godly living, and spent his days in blessing of
God: So he ended them in blessing of God, and in blessing of his children in
the Eccle. 44.23.24.
even unto him who (as Jesus the Son of Sirach speaks in Jacobs praise)
caused the blessing of all men to rest upon the head of Jacob, and made
himself known by his blessings and gave him an heritage, and divided his
portions, and parted them amongst the twelve tribes.


