A CONTINVATION of Lucan's Historical Poem till the death of JULIUS CAESAR By
T M

London Printed for James Boler at the Sign of the Marigold in Paul's
Churchyard. 1630



TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY MONARCH CHARLES BY THE GRACE of God, King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, etc.
SIR,
I SHOULD have taught my humble labors a lower presumption than to have
approached your sacred hand, if I had only weighed mine own weakness and
disabilitie; but the dignity of this subject did somewhat encourage me, being
a remainder of that great History, whose former part was so richly dressed in
the happy conceits, and high raptures of that Noble LVCAN: of whose ability
in writing I was not so ambitious in emulation, as officious in desire, to
continue so stately an argument for your Princely ear: with what success I
have performed it, your MAJESTY'S acceptance only can determine; to whom if
it present but the least delight, my end is accomplished, for which I have
run so great a hazard, as (perchance) to be censured a foil only to Lucan's
luster; and chose rather to fall under the weight of a great argument, than to
present a mean one to so high a hand: your Majesty's renowned worth, and
Heroical virtues (the perfection of mind meeting in you with the height of
Fortune) may make you securely delighted in the reading of great actions; to
whom I humbly present this weak Work, beseeching Almighty GOD long to
establish your MAJESTY'S Throne upon earth, enriching it with blessings of the
right hand and the left; and after to Crown you with incorruptible Glory: So
prays

Your Majesty's most humble subject THO. MAY.

IOHANNIS SVLPITII Verulani querela de interitu Lucani, opere nondum perfecto.
HAEC cecinit vates, scripturus plura: sed illum
In medio cursu iussit mors dira silere.
Accidit vt cigno, qui fixus arundine, carmen
Mill modis querulum, quod caeperat, interrumpit.
Nec Phaenix aliter, cum sese imponit in altum
Quem struit ipse, rogum, cantus dulcedine mira
Nondum perfectos plaudenti morte relinquit.
Nec secus Ismariis vates oppressus in oris
A Ciconum nuribus, Superum dum cantat amores,
Brutaque cum syluis, and saxa sequentia ducit,
Haud potuit moriens medios absoluere cantus.
Proh scelera! Oh superi, cruciat quae poena Nerone^?
Number rota, number saxum, number stagna fugacia vexant?
An vultur, pendensue silex? an feruet in vnda?
Illum comburat Phlegeton, lacerentque Cerastae:
Hydra voret, raptentque canes, semperque flagellis
Torua Megaera secet, nec sit requiesque modusque.
Quanto fraudata est tua gloria plena nitore
Corduba! quamque minus te Mantua docta veretur*
Mantua, cui primae fulget nunc gloria palmae;
Sed contenta tribus long lacteris alumnis.
Tu vero O nostrum vates divine laborem,
Quem pro te subij, non auersate probabis.
THE COMPLAINT OF CALLIOPE AGAINST THE DESTINIES.
TOO cruel Sisters, why again am I
Enforced to weep, and tax your tyranny?
Was not my Orpheus death (though long ago)
Enough for me to bear, for you to do?
Orpheus so much by all the graces loved,
Whose charming skill, and matchless Musi^ke moved
The savage beasts, the stones, and senseless trees,
Yet could not move the harder Destinies.
J saw his limbs (alas) scattered abroad
On Hebrus banks, while down the silver flood
His learned head was rolled, and all along
Heard the sad murmurs of his dying tongue.
No other Tragedy but Lucan slain
By your untimely stroke could thus again
Revive my grief: Oh could you not prolong
That thread awhile, until the stately song
Of his Pharsalia had been finished quite?
What savage bird of prey, what murdring Kite
Could, in the midst of that melodious lay,
Ravish the charming Nightingall away?
Thou sung'st no lusts, no riots, nor made known
(Corrupting others manners with thine own)
New crimes, nor with lascivious wantoning
Did thou defile the sacred Thespian spring.
Thy verses teach no foul adulteries,
Nor rapes committed by the Deities,
Which may from guilt absolve the worst of men;
But actions great and true: thy happy pen
Adorning History with raptures high,
With quick conceits and sound morality
Condemned the strong injustice of that age,
And reins too much let lose to civil rage,
When Rome the strength, which she had made, did fear,
No longer able her own weight to bear,
Taxing bad greatness, and in deathlesse verse
Bestowing fame on Noble Sepulchers;
And had enobled more; but woe is me,
The untimely stroke of death did silence thee.
Of which the grief not only us inuades,
But dives into the blessed Elysian shades,
Sadding the worthies there, that so did long
To fill a room in thine eternal song.
There Cato thinks (and grieves it was denied)
If thou had lived, how great he should have died:
The Roman Scipio, did disdain a Tomb
On Libya's shore, in hope to find a room
Within thy stately Poem, well content
Save there, to have no other Monument,
Those stately Temples, where Great Caesar's name
Shall be by Rome adored, wanting the fame
Which thy high lines might give, in time to come
Shall envy Pompey's small Egyptian Tomb.
Had Iuba's Tragic fall been sung by thee
'T had eased the loss of his great Monarchy*
But that to them and us did Fate deny
That we the more might wail thy Tragedy.
A CONTINVATION of the Subject OF LVCAN'S HISTORICAL POEM till the death of
Julius Caesar.
The first Book.
The Argument of the first Book.
Th'Aegyptians sue to Caesar for a peace,
Excuse their crime, and crave their King's release:
The King restored by Caesar to his state,
Reuolts again: Euphranor's noble fate.
Ptolomey's vision from Serapis sent
Foreshews the change of Aegypts government.
The war in Delta; Caesar's victory.
The overthrow and death of Ptolomey.
THe threatening Ocean now had spent in vain
His swelling spite, and from the watery maine*
From Aegypts feeble Treason, and the band
Of Pharian slaves is Caesar safe at land
Filled with revenge and scorn, armed with a rage
Greater than Aegypts ruin can assuage.
His war is now made just; but that great mind
Too much disdaines so just a cause to find
From such a State, grieved that they durst afford
Wrongs proud enough to call on Caesar's sword,
Or provocation to his fury lend,
Whom Rome it self had trembled to offend,
And ru'd his anger at no cheaper rate
Than Pompey's fall, and ruin of the State.
How well could Rome excuse the gods above
For Caesar's late-wrought safety, and approve
Their favor in it, if no other State
Had felt the force of his revived fate
But Aegypts guilty land? in that war naught
But just revenge for Pompey had been wrought.
The willing Senate had with joy decreed
Honors for such a conquest; for that deed
From every Town the Italian youth in throngs
Had met his Chariot with triumphall songs,
Nor had great Pompey's spirit from the sky
Repined at sight of that solemnity.
That act had reconciled the Conqueror
To Rome again, had not the fatal war,
Which straight in Afric, and in Spain ensew'd,
His conquering army with first guilt embrew'd.
The treacherous band of Aegypts Soldiers now
That chose Arsinoe Queen, began disallow
The pride of Ganymedes, and disdain
A feeble woman, and base Eunuchs reign.
All murmur, all to muteny inclined,
Yet each afraid to sound each others mind:
Till one at last more venturous than the rest
Thus with his own the thoughts of all expressed.
What end have these our arms? Why do we make
Tumults in stead of wars? If arms we take
To free Niles fruitful regions from the yoke
Of Romes ambition, why do we provoke
The strength of Caesar at a time when he
Detaines our King within his custody?
The King as hostage for our truth does lie
We hazard not the war but Ptolomey.
Though our attempt against Caesar should succeed
We stain the honor of so great a deed
Wanting a lawful chief; and twill be thought
Rebellious tumults not just wars have wrought
Rich Aegypts freedom: More may be obtained
By peace, than can be by such hazards gained.
Then let us sue for Ptolomey's release:
Caesar (though now incenst) will grant us peace
On easy terms; and think it better far
Then to be here entangled in a war,
Whilst yet Pharsalia's relics do remain
To join their strength, and try their fate again:
Whilst the dispersed not conquered powers of Rome
Are gathering head, and furious nations come
From Iuba's kingdom, Ammons farthest sands,
And where Spaines Calpe bounds the Western lands
To cross his growing fortunes: But if we
Tender the state of young Arsinoe,
(Because descended from great Lagus race,)
Why do we wrong her brother, and misplace
Our duty so? Preposterous loyalty
It is, to honor Lagus family,
And therefore Lagus lawful heir depose.
A general shout, which through the Camp arose,
Shows their agreement too too great to be
Suppressed now, or termed a muteny.
That even Arsinoe seeing this consent
Is forced to be, or seem (at least) content.
Ambassadors to Caesar they address
To beg the King's enlargement, sue for peace,
And pardon for their treachery to him:
Which they excused at large, and all the crime
Upon Photinus and Achillas laid:
Whose lives (say they) have for their treasons paid.
Caesar, though once enraged, admits their low
Submissiue prayers, and smooths his angry brow,
Scorning to lose so proud a wrath upon
Such worthless objects; or intent alone
On civil wars, reserues his fury all
To wreake in nothing but his countries fall.
Naught but so hard, and so abhorred a crime
Had guilt and danger great enough for him.
He breefly grants them their desired ends,
And Ptolomey back to his kingdom sends.
Poor boy, what fatal freedom have thou gained?
Thou to thy ruin have thy wish obtained.
It Is Caesar's cruelty that sets thee free,
To make thee guilty and then punish thee.
Thine innocence did guard thee, whilst by him
Thou were confined, and could not act a crime
That might deserve thy death; but well knew he
Thy ages weakness, and the treachery
Of thy perfidious and unconstant men
Would draw thee to offenses, and thou then
By fair pretense of justice might be slain
A sacrifice to Cleopatra's a reign,
And his desires, who means thy crown shall buy
Or pay the hire of his adultery.
Caesar's surmises find a true event;
For Ptolomey back to his people sent
(Whether that falsehood were the nations vice,
Or else by nature or bad nurture b his,
Or he by others easy to be swayed)
Forgets the oath that he to Caesar made.
And filled with vain and flattering hopes, calls on
The forward fates to his own destruction.
A well rigged fleet of Ships he forth does send
In ambush near Canopus to attend
(An I Will that East from Alexandria lies)
To cut off all provision and supplies,
That might by Sea to Caesar's camp arrive.
To this his first attempt does Fortune give
Some seeming favor; for while there they lie,
Euphranor's Ship, seuer'd unhappily
Alone from all the rest of Caesar's fleet,
By this Egyptian Navy is beset.
c Euphranor's valor, that had never found
The fates but friendly, and so often renowned
With Caesar's fortune had for Caesar fought,
This change affrights not; his undaunted thought
Not fear but rage possesses; and though there
Beset, he plays the assailant every where.
They fear to join with him, and evermore
Fly from his grapple; as a chafed Bore
The following hounds avoid, so Aegypts fleet
Surprises danger which it dares not meet.
But being so many Ships they cannot all
Escape from him; some, though unwilling, fall
Upon Euphranor, and are forced to buy
With their own loss their fellows victory.
Some vessels bored twixt wind and water sunk,
And drinking waves into the waves were drunk.
Against others from the Roman vessel fire,
Wrapped up in balls was thrown; whose active ire
The Ocean could not quench until too late,
And did not succor then, but change the fate.
Some dead, some living float in Neptunes flood
The Sea discolored with the victours blood.
Had but one more of Caesar's Ships been caught
The Egyptian fleet a fatal prey had sought,
And learned then how they deceived took
But Fortunes bait, which hid a mortal hook.
But when at last those few Caesarians
Were spent with wounds and toil, and that their hands
Could for that endless task no more suffice
Euphranor weary with subduing dies,
Leaving the rest of those Egyptian powers
Suruiuours rather than true Conquerours.
Now Ptolomey was leuying strength by land,
When Mithridates with a warlike band
Of men, from Syria, and Cilicia came
Raised from thence by him in Caesar's name.
And marching swiftly ore the land, at last
Arrived where strong Pelusium's fitly placed
Upon the continent, and on that side
The Egyptian bounds from Syria does divide:
Pelusium's strength is thought by land to be
Aegypts defense as Pharos is by Sea.
But now (alas) too weak it proves to stay
Fierce Mithridates course, who in one day
(Though there Achillas left a Garrison)
Summons, assaults, and wins by force, the Town;
Nor stays he there, but marches speedily
To join his strength with Caesar's power, whom he
Of this exploit before had certifi'd.
This Mithridates, who on Caesar's side
So well had served as to deserve from him
After this war, the Thracian diadem,
Of great and royal parentage was sprung,
And trained up in princely arts, when young,
By that great King, that Asian Conqueror,
Who forty years withstood the Roman power,
And in so many honored fields did fame
Lucullus, Sylla, and great Pompey's name.
The King, that now besides Canobus lay,
With all his power, intends to march away
With speed through Delta, where the Fates decree
To seat the war, and his sad tragedy.
Rich Delta, Aegypts pride the flower alone
Of all the Pharian Kings dominion;
Upon whose fertile breast a thousand ways
In winding tracks the wanton Nilus plays,
And with his amorous folding arms does seem
TO embrace small Islands, whilst his silver stream
From several channells often it self does meet,
And often it self with wanton kisses greet.
So those fair riuolets, which for the food
Of living bodies, bear the crimson blood
To every part, within the liver meet,
And there with kisses number less do greet
Themselves; and as they through each other glide
Make many knots, as if they took a pride
In their strange foldings, and themselves did please
In those admired Anastomoses.
This fertile region, whose extension makes
A just triangle, from the letter takes
Delta for name, whose basis is the Sea,
Whose two sides Niles two widest channells be.
For all the other five within those two
Into the Northren Sea through Delta go.
Down from the lesser cataract Nile flows,
And in one single channel Northward goes
From Elephantis I Will the ancient bound,
Twixt th'Aethiopian, and Egyptian ground
Four thousand furlongs to that spacious plain,
Where Memphis stands, so famed for the vain,
And misspent labor of so many men,
Her wondrous Pyramids; which had not been,
If natures bounty, and the wealthy soil
Had not too much excused the Plowmans toil.
So many hands (as there were vainly found)
Had been enough to have made the barren'st ground
Of Ammons deserts, or the Libyan sands
Fruitful by working, to have entrenched whole lands,
And fenced their Aegypts often conquered Towers
From Persian, Grecian, and Italian powers.
At Memphi^ Nile his channel does divide:
That branch that flows along the Eastern side,
Into the Ocean rowles his curled waves
At strong Pelusium; the other channel laues
(A thousand furlongs distant thence, as he
Into the Ocean falls) the regions nigh
To fair Canobus, which (by ancient fame)
From Menelaus Pylot took the name;
Who dying there, was buried on the shore,
When Aegypts Crown that just King Proteus wore:
Who took from Priam's wanton son away
Atrides beauteous wife, his ravished prey,
And to her husband after her restored
When Troyes sacked towers had felt the vengefull sword
Of armed Greece. That region, which between
Those two the widest arms of Nile is seen,
Is Delta, which so plentifully yields,
Ceres and Bacchus, rich in pasture fields,
And flowery meadows, where the bleating flocks,
And horned herds do graze; the laboring Ox
Wearied in those fat furrows, nere deceiues
Hopes which the greediest husbandman conceiues.
There lofty Cities stand, and Towns of fame,
Lakes flow, which from those Cities take their names.
Butum enuiron'd with the Buticke lake,
Where once her Oracles Latona spoke:
There fair Diospolis, Lycopolis,
Hermopolis, and Leontopolis
Proud Cities rise: There does Busiris stand
Fatal to strangers, that were forced to land
Upon her bloody shore; until the hand
Of great Alcides freed the grieved land
From that fell Tyrants reign, whose name the town
Yet bears; near that is that fair City known
By Venus name; there fair Panephysis,
Tanitis, Xois, and Cynospolis,
And Sais chief of all the region,
In which Minerua's stately Temple's shown,
Where famed Psammiticus entombed lies.
There also Mendes famous walls do rise,
Where Pan The Arcadian god is worshipped,
And goats adored; there goats (as we have read)
Do mix with womankinde; so got was he
That loved the boy turned to a Cypress tree.
But now to know the future wars success,
The King advised by Dioscorides
Ere from Canobus he through Delta pass,
(Since there Serapis stately Temple was)
Resolved to crave that Oracles advice
Commands the Priests prepare a sacrifice.
This snake-like god Serapis seated there,
Whom all rich Egypt, and the nations near
Devoutly worship, and from every port
To his undoubted Oracle resort,
Speaks not to men, like other gods, nor snewes
His truth by voice, as horned Ammon does;
Norlike their Apis, fore-declaring good
Or bad, by taking or refusing food;
Nor like the Delphian Phoebus does possess
In killing rage, a wretched Prophetess,
Making sad death the punishment or hire
Of every soul his fury does inspire;
But gently glides into a sleeping breast,
By dreams instructing our repose and rest,
In truths that can be by no labor gained:
There only knowledge is with ease attained.
To this renowned Temple far and near
The Egyptian Lords and Princes come to hear
Truth without help of senses, and to know
By dreaming there their future weal or woe.
Why should this god his knowledge then declare
To men, when men least fit for knowledge are?
And choose to come to them at such a time
When they no duties can return to him?
Is it his bounty or his power to show,
That men so taught may plainly see they owe
Nothing at all to studies of their own,
But to his bounty and his power alone,
That then can make them understand aright
When they are rest of understanding quite?
Or else the god, when men can exercise
Their powers and intellectual faculties,
Will not descend with their weak thoughts to join
Commixing human reason with divine.
Within the Temples inmost room, a bed
Of richest purple wrought with gold was spread;
To which the King was by the Priests conuay'd,
And there, to take his dreaming vision, laid.
No dreams at all within that sacred room
But such as were divinely sent, might come.
Others, which from complexions difference
Or natural humors flowed, were banished thence;
And those which from the studies of the day,
Or cares arose, in the outward Temple stay,
And there together fly in companies
Of different colors, shapes, and qualities.
Fair sanguine dreams, that seem to cheer the night,
With beauteous shapes, and rosy wings, as bright
As is the morning, or those flowers, that grace
In midst of spring, the painted Flora's face,
Within the Temple merrily do sport;
To whom the little Cupids often resort;
The little Cupids from fair Venus grove
Stealing by night, do thither come, and love
With those bright sanguine dreams to pass away
The hours of night in sport and amorous play.
There dreams of choler in a flame-like hew
Through the air, like little fiery Meteors flew
With swift and angry motion to and fro,
As if they sought within that place a foe.
Sometimes up to the Temples roof on high
They soar, as if they meant to scale the sky,
Or some impossible atchieuement sought
TO allay the thirst of an aspiring thought.
But down below with sad and heavy cheer
On dead men's Tombs, and every Sepulcher,
The duskie dreams of melancholy light,
With sable wings like Bats, or birds of night.
Fluttering in darkest corners here and there,
But all alone, and still each other fear.
Courting dead skulls, and seeming to inuit
The dismal ghosts for company by night.
There all along the Temples whited wall
Phlegmatic lazy dreams, not winged at all,
But slow, like slimie Snailes, about do crawle,
And evermore are thence afraid to fall
And so be drowned; for on the floor below
They do suppose deep pooles of water flow.
But swift as thoughts can fly, as winds do blow
Or winged lightning, in a moment go
The flatuous dreams through the air; sometimes with noise
Like the farre-off affrighting thunders voice.
Besides a thousand other companies
Of dreams, which do from daily cares arise,
From thoughts and deeds of men; which do appear
In forms as many and as different there
As all the world has objects, or is filled
With deeds: All these to dreams diuiner yield,
And fly aloof without; nor dare they come
Into the Temples inward sacred room.
The dead of night had closed every eye,
And sleep now seized the breast of Ptolomey,
When lo a vision from Serapis sent
To his affrighted fancy did present
The changed state of Aegypts hapless land,
Which now by fates appointment was at hand.
A large-siz'd Ox, into that sacred room
With sad and heavy pace did seem to come,
And lean he was, as if he had not eat
Of long, or wanting, or refusing meat;
Save two white spots, his color wholly black,
One on his forehead, the other on his back:
And passing by he seemed to wail and moan,
From his black eyes the tears fast trickling down.
After a woman came of stature tall,
Of presence stately and maiesticall;
High Towers, and Castles on her head she bare,
But loose, as if all torn, hung down her hair.
Strong chains did seem her naked arms to tie;
With that arose a dismal shreeke and cry,
As it had been from ghosts infernal sent,
Whose fury rent the regal monument:
And from their opened tombs he saw arise
The ghosts of all the buried Ptolomeys,
From Lagus son the first, in order all,
Who following, seemed to wail the woman's fall.
With that cold chilling horror from the breast
Of sleeping Ptolomey had banished rest,
Who with amazed thoughts looked up and down*
But when his eyes were open, the sight was gone.
The Priests approach, and hearing him relate
His doleful dream, lament the wretched State
Of Aegypts kingdom, and with one consent
Foretell the approaching change of government:
Yet to appease the gods, by their advice,
The King commands a solemn sacrifice.
But nearer miseries by far than those
Do threaten thee, poor King; the god foreshowes
Thy Countries future dangers, and from thee
Conceales thine own approaching tragedy.
To meet with Caesar then he marched away
Through wealthy Delta, and encamped lay
Upon an high and spacious hill, which round
About commands the lower champian ground;
From whence the Country he afar descri'd.
A place by nature strongly fortified
Three several ways; the ascent so steep and hard
To climb, as seemed impregnable, did guard
One part alone without the aid of men:
Unto another part a spacious fen
And lake did seem to give protection:
To guard the third a river swiftly run.
Betwixt the lake and which alone did stand,
To lend some passage, a small neck of land:
That little Isthmos seemed alone to stand
In need of guarding by a soldiers hand
Against the foes assault. But in that place
The King supposes, twere too much disgrace
To be assaulted first, and would dismay
His soldiers hearts, for Caesar there to stay;
Or else not safe in what defense the lake,
The river, hill, or his own works could make,
To hinder Caesar's coming he intends
Far off; and most of all his forces sends
To guard a river where his passage lay.
That bank, on which the Egyptian soldiers stay,
Was high, and far from water, and might well
Keep the Caesarians off, or them compel
To fight on wondrous disadvantage there.
But Caesar's troops incapable of fear,
At first approach, resolve, viewing the place,
In spite of disaduantages to pass.
And whilst the legionary soldiers throw
Against the other side, to busy there the foe,
Thick storms of winged piles; whilst some of them
Strive to lay trees, for bridges, ore the stream,
The German cohorts up and down do try
The rivers depth, and where most easily
They may or swim, or wade the channel through;
And make as boldly their attempts as though
They went against no enemy at all.
Whilst the Egyptians do securely gall
Down from above their laboring enemy,
And on the place, not their own worth rely:
For all the weapons, which from them are thrown,
Require no strength, but by descent alone
Bring wounds to the Caesarians, who, enraged
To be against such advantages engaged,
Sigh, that their valor they must vainly lose
Not to subdue, but to approach their foes,
And must contend as eagerly to gain
A fight, as erst a conquest to obtain.
Against the river and the banks they go:
And in this war the foe is least the foe.
Caesar perceiues in what distressed plight
The legionaries are enforced to fight,
And therefore straight commands his lightest horse
To wheel about, and with a speedy course
Far from that place to cross the river ore.
Which they performed swiftly, and before
The Egyptian Soldiers their approach could fear,
Behind they charged them in a full carriere.
Whose force whilst they, turning about, withstood,
The legionary Soldiers past the flood
With greater ease by bridges which they made,
And through the shallowest fordes the Germans wade.
And now at last the Egyptian Soldiers
Are forced, though loath, to enter equal wars.
But fear made them unequal, and subdued
As soon as fought with, by the fortitude
Of Caesar's men, who else had sought in vain
By so much sweat and labor to obtain
A battle, had they not a conquest had:
And now a slaughter, not a war was made.
The King from out his lofty Camp beheld
His slaughtred Soldiers bodies strew the field,
Which late they stood upon: for scarce by flight
Were any saved; the Caesarian spite
Pursued the conquest which they had obtained
With such a fury, that the fields distained
All ore with blood, might let the Egyptians see
How they before had fought unequally.
He viewes how few returned, that news to tell,
Which he had seen, and knew too sadly well.
But to the Camp those, that escaped were
Brought nothing but astonishment and fear.
The encamped find in them no aid at all,
But see the greatness of their fellows fall:
Whom Caesar's men so swiftly follow home,
That to the trenches, and out-workes they come.
Caesar, that never in his battles, held
A foe subdued, till from his Camp expelled,
Exhorts his Soldiers to forget their pains
And freshly force the works, whilst fear there reigns,
To end this war, and with the wealthy spoil
Of Aegypts King to recompense their toil.
Nor need the Soldiers be encouraged
To seek their wages for the blood they shed.
They first invade that little neck of land
Which twixt the river and the lake did stand.
But that the Egyptian Soldiers most do guard;
When on the passage there begins a hard
And bloody conflict; one side fight to make
Their conquest perfect, and the fruit to take:
The Other despair in stead of courage arms;
For vanquished they fear the worst of harms.
From either side the passage where they stood,
The lake and river are distained with blood.
Down half dead bodies they precipitate,
Who drowned in water taste a double fate.
There often together, as they fighting stand,
Egyptians and Caesarians hand in hand
Do grappling fall into the crimson lake;
Nor there (alas) their enmity forsake:
But weakly try the combat out, where he
That conquers can no long suruiuour be.
Whilst on that side the Camp, both parties fought
So furiously, and all hands thither brought;
Caesar perceived on the other side,
That seemed enough by nature fortified,
Where the ascent was craggie, steep, and hard
To climb, that Ptolomey had left no guard;
Or those that had been left, from thence were gone
To the other side, as aid, or lookers on.
Thither his lightest cohorts he commands;
Bold Carfulenus leads those active hands,
Who straight, as Caesar gave in charge to him,
With those light-armed cohorts gins to climb.
Th'ascent so steep and hard, that to the foe
Did seem impregnable, but proved not so,
Brought on their ruin; death there entered in,
From whence with greatest ease he might have been
Repel'd by them. But Carfulenus now
Entering th'Aegyptian Camp, with small ado
Kills or repells his few resisting foes,
Fear and distraction through the Camp arose.
The works, whilst to and fro the amazed run,
On every side by the Caesarians won:
To whom for mercy now they sue in vain,
Nor does the General their swords restrain;
But bids them kill, and in their slaughter free
The world from so much fraud and treachery.
Part of th'Aegyptian-Campe had been before
Romes legionary Soldiers, and brought ore
Under Gabinius, there in Egypt left
Were by her pleasures softened, and bereft
Of military virtue, and became
Degenerate stains unto the Roman name.
Like the Egyptians they were grown to be
In manners, baseness, fraud, and treachery.
Not far from thence, unto the river side
A little vessel by a rope was ti'd:
Whither the King in this tumultuous heat
Of flight, escaped from the Camp, does get;
And now aboard, commands his slender train
With all their strength to launch it forth amain.
His purple robe upon the shore he throws
To fly disguised; but cruel Fate allows
No flight nor safety to him; naught at all
Gains his disguise but a Plebeian fall.
For lo the flying multitude espied
(That from the Camp pressed to the rivers side)
That bark, contending all to get aboard
To save themselves, respectlesse of their Lord.
He cries, the King is here; do not intrude;
There is no safety for a multitude
In one small vessel; why should you destroy
(Losing your selves) the life of Ptolomey?
Though Fortune work my ruin, do not you
Murder your King: but Caesar's men pursue,
Amazement stops their ears, and fear of sword
Had banished all allegiance to their Lord:
Till, the ore-laden vessel sinking down,
Themselves together with their King they drown.
Mixed with Plebeian deaths a Monarch lies
The royal race of the ancient Ptolomey's
Under no covert but his Nile's cold waves,
No Pyramids, nor rich Mausolean graves,
Nor sacred Vaults, whose structures do excel:
As his forefathers ashes proudly dwell,
And dead, as living, do their wealth express
In sumptuous tombs as gorgeous Palaces.
Unhappy Ptolomey, how short a date
Have Fates allotted to thy kingly State?
No otherwise did thou a Crown obtain
Than sacrifices, crowned to be slain.
Happier might thou have di'd, before thy reign
(Though short it were) had left that lasting stain
Of Pompey's death upon thy name, and showed
To future times thy foul ingratitude,
Depriving him of breath, that did before
Thy banished e Father to a Crown restore.
And now to that dead Roman worthyes Tomb
Art thou enforced a Sacrifice to come
To Appease his Ghost, and offered up by him,
In whose behalf thou did that heinous crime.
Who chooses rather to revenge, than owe
To thee, so base a ruin of his foe.
Caesar, possessed of this great victory,
By land, through Delta marches speedily
To Alexandria; but supposing there
How much the City his just wrath might fear,
He sends before to comfort them, and free
The inhabitants from fear and jealousy.
To be with joy received, he declares
That all his wrath is ended with his wars;
That he, as Romes Dictatour, would preserve
Their lives and liberties, and still reserve
The Crown of Egypt free, rightly to place
Upon the next of Lagus royal race.
And that no other now was his intent
Than to confirm f Auletes g Testament.
Annotations to the first Book.
a Thus Dion; Caesar believed that the Egyptians had truly desired peace,
disheartened with their designs not succeeding (for he had heard they were a
people by nature timorous and unconstant;) but howsoever their intentions were,
he resolved to grant their request, lest he should seem to withstand an
offered peace; he sends therefore their King to them; for by his presence he
knew there was no increase of strength brought to them, considering his age and
bad education: by this means he supposed he might afterward conclude a peace
with the Egyptians upon his own terms, or find a just pretense of
conquering the Country, and giving the Kingdom to Cleopatra: for he was not
at all afraid of their strength now, having received his army out of Syria.
Dion. lib. 42.

b The young King educated in false and deceitful disciplines, that he might
not seem to degenerate from the manners of his Nation, weeping entreated
Caesar that he would not send him from him; for enjoying of a Kingdom could
not be to him so pleasant as the presence of Caesar. Caesar moved with his
tears comforted him, and promised if there were need shortly to visit him;
but Ptolomey at liberty, began immediately to war against Caesar with so
fierce and eager a desire, that the tears which at the parting he shed, might
seem to be tears of joy. Hirt. Commen. de bello Alexan.

c None of the Roman ships came at all to the succor of Euphranor, either
bacause they durst not partake of the danger, or because they had a strong
confidence in the great virtue, and extraordinary felicity of Euphranor, which
in all his other fights had ever attended him: so that he only at that time
behaved himself well, and perished alone with his victorious Galley. Hirt.
Commen. de bello Alexan.

d Of this town Canopus, and the Temple of Serapis there, thus Strabo speaks
in his seventeenth book; Canopus distant from Alexandria an hundred and
twenty furlongs by land, was so called from Canopus Menelaus his Master of his
ship, who was buried there: in it is the Temple of Serapis, with great devotion
honored amongst them, insomuch as the Noblemen put great affiance in that god,
and come thither to take dreams both for themselves and others: some of them
have written of diverse cures which have been there wrought, and many miracles
in several kinds: but above all other things, wonderful is that number, who
upon Festival times come down thither by the Lake from Alexandria: for night
and day is that Lake full of boats, in which men and women with songs, and
gestures of all manner of Lasciviousness do recreate themselves; and in
Canopus it self, diverse Jnns there are upon the Lake side to entertain
passengers with such leuities and vain delights. Strabo lib. 17.

e This young King Ptolomeus Dionysius son to Ptolomeus Auletes the last of
all the race of Ptolomey's, by the wicked counsel of his followers, as
Photinus the Eunuch, Achillas Captain of the guard, and Theodorus Chius the
Rhetorician, had unthankfully slain Pompey the great flying to him in his
necessity, who before had been the greatest means of restoring his father
Auletes to the Crown of Egypt. Dion. Plutarch. Appion.

f Auletes Ptolomeus the ninth Ptolomey from the son of Lagus, who after the
death of Alexander the great possessed Egypt, was a man (says Strabo) of most
dissolute and wicked manners, for which he was expelled his kingdom by the
people of Alexandria; who made the eldest of his three daughters Queen over
them; his two sons being both infants had by this means lost all hope of
succession in their fathers Kingdom: the Queen elected was married to one
Cybiosactes of Syria, who derived his pedigree from the ancient Syrian Kings:
but the Queen within few days strangled her husband, not able to endure his
sordid and base nature; and married her self to Archelaus, who fained himself
the son of Mithridates Eupator; but was indeed the son of that Archelaus,
who had warred against Sylla, but was afterward h^noured by the Romans, and
grandfather to him who reigned last in our times over Cappadocia: this
Archelaus living then with Gabinius, whom he promised to aid in a war against
the Parthians, was by some of his friends (unknown to Gabinius) brought unto
the Queen, and declared King: at that time the banished King Ptolomeus Auletes
was fled to Rome, and there kindly entertained by Pompey the Great, and by him
commended to the Senate: Pompey advised them to restore Auletes to his Kingdom
and put to death those Ambassadors that were come thither to plead against
their Prince, of which Embassage Dio the Academian was chief. Auletes
therefore brought back to his Kingdom by Gabinius overcame, and killed the
Queen his daughter, and Archelaus his son in law; dying sh^rtly after he
left behind him two sons and two daughters. Strabo lib. 17.

g Ptolomeus Auletes by his testament had willed (according to the incestuous
custom of that family) that his eldest son Ptolomey should marry his eldest
daughter Cleopatra, and with her enjoy the Crown of Egypt: the procuration of
this testament was by him assigned to the people of Rome, which Caesar as
Dictator had power to execute. Dion. lib. 42. Hirt. Commen. de bello Alexand.

FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK.
The Argument of the second Book.
Fair Cleopatra is espoused, and led
A wife in name, to her young brothers bed:
Great Caesar's heart her tempting beauties fire,
Who reapes the wanton fruit of his desire.
The scattered relics of Pharsalia
Scipio unites again in Africa.
The strength of Varus there; each nations name,
That under Iuba's royal standard came.
Caesar from Egypt against Pharnaces goes,
And vanquishes, as soon as sees, his foes:
Erects a trophee there; and crossing ore
More swift than thought, arriues on Libya's shore.
THe Alexandrian Citizens releast
From all their fears by Caesar's pardon, feast
With joy; extol his goodness to the skies,
And to their gods devoutly sacrifice
With usual rites: Alas, you do not know
Fond Alexandrians, to whom you owe
Your Cities safety; not those deities,
That you with vain and barbarous mysteries
Adore, have wrought it; nor could all your Towers,
Your stately Temples, Tombs of Conquerours,
Nor Alexander's buried dust, which more
Than your religion Caesar's thoughts adore,
Prevail so much in purchasing his grace,
As beauties charms in Cleopatra's face.
It was the glance of her bewitching eyes,
Had power to help your helpless deities:
Nor was it fit such people, rites, and laws
Should owe their safety to a better cause.
Great Cleopatra mistress of the State,
To give the conquering author of her Fate
High entertainment, to his eye displayes
The Egyptian wealth in such luxurious ways
As might excuse even Rome, and make the riot
Of her degenerate Senate seem the diet
Which the ancient Curii, and Camillus used,
Not what her Asian victories infused.
The gorgeous Palace with such luster shone
As wealthy kingdoms near their ruin grown
Use to express; which show the present crimes,
And speak the fortune of precedent times.
But Caesar's eyes in all that wealthy store,
Which he so lately had beheld before,
No pleasure find, nor with delight viewes he
The golden roofes, nor precious imag'ry,
Rich Eben pillars, boords of Citron wood,
Which on their carved Iuory tressells stood:
Nor curious hangings do his eyes admire.
For Cleopatra's beauty, and attire
Did quite eclipse all objects, and outshone
All other splendours; on her looks alone
His eyes are fixed; which, though beheld before,
The more he viewes, do ravish him the more.
All other objects lose at second sight;
But woman's beauty breeds the more delight
The ofter seen: he viewes that snowie neck,
Those golden tresses, which no gems can deck.
The wealth, she wore about her, seemed to hide,
Not to adorn her native beauties pride.
Though there bright Pearls from the Erythraean shores,
From all the Assyrian lakes, the wealthy stores
Of silver Ganges, and Hydaspes shone;
From Aegypts Eastern Isles the gold-like stone,
And cheerful Emeraulds gathered from the green
Arabian rocks were in full splendor scene.
Pale Onyx, Iaspers of a various die,
And Diamonds darkened by her brighter eye.
The Saphires blew, by her more azure veins,
Hung not to boast, but to confess their stains.
And blushing Rubies seemed to lose their die
When her more ruby lips were moving by.
It seemed (so well became her what she wore)
She had not robbed at all the creatures store,
But had been natures self, there to have showed
What she on creatures could, or had bestowed.
But Caesar's heart enflamed long before
Burns with fresh fury, and resolves no more
Now to conceal, but feed the pleasing flame.
What power (quoth he) controules my wish, what fame?
What would the sowrest seeming virtue do
Armed with a power like me, and tempted so?
By such a beauty as from guilt would free
A Rauisher, and make adultery
No crime at all, but such a piece of vice
As former times unto the Deities
Did often impute; had Cleopatra been
By those renowned Grecian writers seen,
Whose deathlesse Poems in the skies above
Have fixed so many paramours of Joue;
Before the daughters of fair Pleione,
Atlanta, Maia, and Taygete, she
Had there been graced: her Tresses far more fair
Had showed in Heaven than Berenices hair.
Calistho's Waine had not in skies been set,
Nor Ariadnes shining Coronet,
Till Cleopatra's Star had found a place,
And chose what part of Heaven she meant to grace.
Let Jove my warrant be; whom powerful love
So often has forced from Heaven; or let it prove
The Thunderers excuse to future times
That Caesar now partakes the Thunderers crimes.
There is no cause thou should misdoubt thy suit,
No waking Dragon keeps that golden fruit
Thou mean to taste, nor need'st thou fear to find
That beauty guarded by too chaste a mind.
Yet wanton love, and Cupids childish fires,
Which warm Plebeian hearts, and move desires
In rural Girls, and lowly Shepherds swains,
Aid not thy suit, Oh Caesar. She disdaines
That common cause should make her beauty yield
To thy embraces; her proud breast was filled
With higher thoughts; desire of Sovereignty,
Aspiring hopes of State and Majesty
In Cleopatra's breast had now controlled
All other passions; had her blood been cold,
Yet when ambition pleaded on thy side,
Her chastity had yielded to her pride.
That reason Caesar, that did first subdue
Thy loyalty to Rome, made thee embrue
Thy parricidall hands in her sad wounds,
And die with blood Thessalia's guilty grounds,
Proves now the self same cause that conquered
This Queen, and drew her to thy wanton bed.
Let not the guilty greatness of thy mind
Be by vain men extolled; since here we find
A woman's breast the same impressions move:
Ambitious pride, and Soueraignties dire love
Alike in thee and Cleopatra placed,
Made thee disloyal prove, and her unchaste.
Caesar, lest Rome should judge he first did move
This war alone for Cleopatra's love,
To win for her, not for his Countries sake,
(For conquered Egypt he intends to make
No a Roman province) and on the other side
Too much suspecting that the Egyptians pride,
His bountious favor would far less esteem
If that a woman wore their Diadem,
Whilst yet a male child lived of Lagus blood;
Thus cleares both doubts; to make the action good
One color serves: young Ptolomey, whom he
Before had married to Arsinoe,
A child of eight years old, must now supply
The room of his dead brother Ptolomey,
And wear two shadows both of love and State,
Of Aegypts King, and Cleopatra's mate.
What more than names, poor boy, do thou obtain?
As vain thy marriage is, as is thy reign,
And but in title nothing is thine own:
Caesar thy bed possesses, she thy Crown.
Nor can thou yet so much as rival prove
In Cleopatra's reign, or Caesar's love.
Yet happy art thou that thy tender age
Cannot enjoy the incestuous marriage:
For if the match for thee had been more fit,
Thou had contracted greater guilt from it,
And with foul Incest stained a brothers name;
But whilst thou want the fruit, thou want the blame.
Now without care thou do a Crown obtain,
And an Incestuous marriage without stain.
Now nights black mantle had the earth ore-spread,
And all the host of Stars in Phoebus stead
(Though with less light) adorned the spangled sky:
When Caesar fired with love, and raised high
With M^roes sparkling wine, pursues his suit,
And soon obtaines the wished and wanton fruit
Of his late wars and toiles; his fame and glory,
His power, and gifts the strongest oratory
Had wooed, and won the Queen to his delight,
Within whose arms he spends the wanton night.
Nor, Cleopatra, was 't a crime in thee;
The incestuous custom of thy family,
Where sisters wives on brothers are bestowed,
And mixture of the nearest names allowed,
Makes this a virtuous love: thou had been led
With greater guilt to such a Nuptial bed;
And it is thy fate, thy beauty cannot be
Better enjoyed than by adultery.
Yet from the burden of her fruitful womb
Both hers, and Caesar's punishment come.
For young b Caesario, whom their loves short joy
With adverse Fates begets (unhappy boy)
Untimely slain, shall be in future time
Augustus Caesar's parricidall crime,
And Caesar's house with Caesar's blood shall blot;
Thy guilt, Augustus, is that night begot,
Which shall hereafter those rich triumphs stain,
Which thou from Aegypts conquest shall obtain;
Unless that flattery be taught for thee
To wrest all natures laws, and policy
Of State, together with the peace of Rome
Alleag'd to justify thy bloody doom.
Whilst Caesar thus a wanton Conqueror
In Egypt stays, the Senats scattered power
And flying legions from Pharsalia
Scipio again unites in Africa,
'Great Pompey's father in law, who now ore all
Is by consent elected General.
Stout Labienus most engaged of all
In hate to Caesar, (though against the Gaul
He under Caesar's colors often had fought)
Serves under him; and matchless Cato brought
By no engagement of a private cause,
But for his Countries liberty and laws.
d Petreius falsely there takes arms again
Against Caesar's side, by Caesar once in Spain
Pardoned before; there Attius e Varus stands,
Who all the Roman Provinces commands
In Afric, once proud Carthage feodars:
Who brings his Punick forces to the wars,
Subtle in warlike slights, with Targets light,
Short swords, and breasts unarmed they use to fight*
And still in battle wear their Cassocks red
To hide the color of the blood they shed.
Dry Barces scorched, and euer-thirsting sands
Send men to Varus; there the warlike bands
Of hot Cyrene stand, the progeny
Of Pelops stained and tragic family,
That from Mycena came; there the Aaeans stood
Mixed of Libyan and Sicilian blood;
And those of Tabraca, the old Tyrians brood.
The men of Leptis, and at Hippo bred,
Where the Phaenicians first inhabited
When they to Afric came; Hippo, whose site
Made it the ancient Libyan Kings delight.
And there in arms the men of Thapsus be,
That from the Latins draw their pedigree.
Juba to these his mighty army brings,
Juba the greatest of all Affricks Kings,
Who had already given a fatal blow
In Curio's sad and mortal overthrow
To Caesar's side: No Libyan King alone
Commands so large and vast a region.
The extent of his dominion lies as far
As Thera's plains, and horned Ammon are
From Mauritania's farthest Western lands,
Where near the Gades heauen-propping Atlas stands.
With whom to war so many nations went
Of manners, rites, and habits different;
Fierce Mauritanians, which derive their race
From the ancient Medes, who peopled first the place.
The Nasamonians ever bare and poor
Till wrackes at Sea enrich their fatal shore
With mankindes ruin; the scorched swarthy bands
Of Garamantians, on whose barren sands
No shady trees ere spread, no flocks do feed,
Nor ought but serpents, and dire monsters breed.
With these Marmarians march, whom nature makes
As antidotes against those mortal Snakes.
Then march the vagrant bold Numidians
On well-rein'd Steeds; and light Massylians,
Who evermore their Horses bitlesse ride;
And them alone with slender wands can guide*
The strong Getulians, that no dwellings know,
But with their herds do wander too and fro;
That in no sports but dangerous delight;
And singly dare with raging Lions fight.
The light Autololes, whose winged speed,
In running, far out-strips the swiftest Steed,
Equals the winds themselves, and, as they pass,
Scarce bend the standing corn, or slender grass.
The cole-blacke Mibian next, upon whose brow
And curled-lockes the scorching Sun does show
His lasting Tyranny; who to the war
Does lightly go, his breast and body bare,
And never iron nor brass armor wears;
Great linen Turbants on his head he bears
In stead of helmes: his arrows mortal points
With venomed juice he treacherously annoints.
Shaggie Cyniphians too were armed there
Who Goats rough skins upon their shoulders wear,
Their beards oregrowne and horrid: near to these
With painted shields the Adyrmachides
Armed on the left side only, not the right;
And swords, like sickles, crook'd they use in fight.
Of diet course and rude; their meat upon
The sands is roasted by the scorching Sun.
Besides the troops that were from Vaga sent,
That from Ruspina and fair Zamah went.
From all these several places Iuba draws
A royal Army to aid the Senates cause,
Joining himself with Roman Scipio.
With all these forces they intend to go
When first the spring her verdant face shall show,
And comfortable gales of Zephyre blow,
TO invade their native Country, and set free
Subjected Rome from Caesar's Tyranny:
And this their great design from the event
Of old examples found encouragement.
Since sad experiences did often show
Romes strength, near Rome, 't was easiest to subdue.
They knew the barbarous Cimbrian, furious Gaul,
The force of Carthage led by Hannibal
Beat often in foreign parts by Roman powers,
In Italy proved easy Conquerours.
With these they sadly call to mind how soon
Cinna, Sertorius, Carbo, Marius won
Rome by surprise, though beat in foreign lands
With ease by Sylla, and great Pompey's hands.
And last of all, when this sad war begun,
And Caesar first had crossed Rubicon,
Pompey without one conflict fled away,
And Rome to him became an easy prey.
But Caesar's fortune frustrates their intents;
His wonted speed and strange success preuents
Their expedition; and, as every where
He had before, so plays the assailant here.
Too soon, alas, shall you in Afric see
Whom you intend to seek in Italy.
But Caesar plunged in Aegypts soft delights
Ensnared by beauty, and the charming slights
Of Cleopatra, could almost forget
How many armed foes, and forces, yet
Oppose his growing fortunes, and remain
Threatening the height of his usurped reign.
As when Alcides with ill fate had seen
The tempting beauties of the Oechalian Queen*
His brawny shoulders straight forget to wear
The lions skin, his awful hand to bear
The monster-taming club; from his rough head
The poplar garland falls; no tyrants dread
That world-auenging strength; which had well nigh
Been sunk into a famelesse lethargy.
And Juno's hopes of great Alcides fall
A woman's beauty furthered more than all
Those monstrous plagues, which she had power to invent,
Or could from air, earth, seas, or hell be sent.
But Fortune finds alarums to awake
The soul of Caesar from this dream, and make
Complete for him the work she had begun,
Whither she hastened Romes sad ruin on;
Or rather blushed such liberties and laws,
Should owe their safety to so base a cause
As Caesar's sloth; and judged it better far
Than keep it so, to lose it by a war:
That war alone, which built up Romes high reign,
Should now have power to ruin her again.
Nor were the Fates pleased that the wanton love
Of Cleopatra should more helpful prove
To Romes affairs, than all those iust-drawne swords,
Which once Thessalia, Libya now affords.
Yet was it now no strength, no arms of Rome,
No part of Civil war drew Caesar from
Aegypts delights; f Pharnaces feeble power
Prouok'd him first to make him Conqueror
Of greater forces than his own; as when
A sleeping Lion's couched in his den,
The horned herds securely graze along
The verdant pastures; till that Lion stung
By some presumptuous little Gnat awake,
And wanting there his full revenge, does make
Those cattle feel his wrath; whose lives anon
Do rue the little Gnat's presumption.
This false Pharnaces, who from Pompey's hand
Received (as price of parricide) the land
Of rich Cimmerian Bosphorus, was son
To Mithridates, whose feared power had won
From Nicomedes his Bithynia,
Conquered Armenia, Cappadocia,
And wealthyest Grecian Isles, whose swelling fame
Began to rival Romes victorious name,
And long withstood her growing Fate; at last
By Pompey's force from all his kingdoms chased
He fell by treason, to increase the shame
Of his false son, and lessen Pompey's fame.
Pharnaces now with vain ambition swelled,
Deceived by flattering hopes, when he beheld
Romes broiles, and saw how her divided bands
Against themselves employed their conquering hands,
Sought to regaine what once his father had,
And began the Roman provinces invade:
In Asia minor, (his first enterprise
Fortune beholding with propitious eyes)
Domitius fall, who with ill Fate employed
The swords of Caesar, raised his boasting pride.
Nicopolis, whose lofty walls were there
Founded as Pompey's Trophies, still to bear
Name of his Conquest, and the place to show
Of Mithridate^ final overthrow,
Beheld the slaughter of Domitius hosts
A parentation to the Ponticke ghosts.
Nine times had Cynthia now restored again
Light to her waned horns, when Caesar chained
In Cleopatra's wanton arms, had stayed
On Aegypts coast; her swelling womb displayed
At last the effect of an adulterous bed.
Whom Caesar thus departing comforted:
Fair Queen, sole mistress of thy Caesar's State,
The fate of him that rules all other fate,
Pharnaces cruel to himself and me,
With his own ruin parts our company.
His treasons, Love, now call my vengefull steel.
Do not thou grieve; the conquered foes shall feel
Our parting grief, and in their slaughter see
With how much anger Caesar goes from thee.
But that poor King dares not my force withstand;
He only draws me from this happy land,
To make a journey rather than a war,
For he at first will fly, and easier far
May I obtain a conquest than a fight:
His dastard troops my name alone shall fright.
And easy triumph comes; but I from thee
Go grieved to triumphs, sad to victory.
From thee, whose eyes make Aegypts swarthy face
Brighter than that white path the gods do trace*
Without whose light no land breeds my content*
And Rome it self to me is banishment.
But Fate to us far greater conquests owes:
How much, alas, would Cleopatra lose
If Caesar stayed at home? we have not yet
Fully attained that world-commanding height,
That must enthrone thy beauty in a State
High as it self, for all to wonder at
Like some new Constellation: those that near
The Antartick pole, never see the Northren Bear
Descend into the Ocean; those that lie
(Enduring winters lasting tyranny)
Under the frozen wa^^e, and lose the sight
Of bright Canopus, whose desired light
Cheeres this Horizon still, shall both adore
Fair Cleopatra's name; the farthest shore
That Peleus siluer-footed wife does know
Shall honor thee; even Rome her self shall bow,
And with her Eagles shall thy State maintain,
Whilst Kings do wait in Cleopatra's train.
For such effects, fair Queen, (if Caesar know
His Fate aright) shall this our parting now
Return to thee when I in triumph come:
By this dear part of Caesar, which thy womb
Encloses here, thou shall engage our speed:
Therefore farewell; we must pursue in deed
Our consultations, swiftly as we thought.
But Cleopatra, whom loves Queen had taught
All winning wiles; and blessed with such a face
As tears became, and grief it self did grace,
Thus with a seeming grief, and tears replies:
I dare not hope to change the Fates, or prize
My worthless prayers at so high a rate,
As to have power to change at all the State
Of Caesar's great resolves, on which depend
All nations Fates, and all the Stars attend.
If by their prayers frail Mortality
Should hope to alter what the gods decree,
'Twere a proud piety. I Will rather lose
My suit, and check my love, than interpose
It so; and rather to my self deny
The happiness of Caesar's company,
Than love it with so great presumption,
As, for mine own delights, to hinder one
Of his resolves; yet pardon, mighty Lord,
If to mine own desires I do afford
One place in love: cannot Great Caesar thrive
In these his wars, if Cleopatra live
Near to his person? Can it overthrow
His fortune to procure my safety so?
There Is no retreat in all the world for me,
So safe as thy victorious Camp will be.
But I am pleased to stay at thy command
In Egypt still, and still suppose this land
Within Great Caesar's reach; whose powerful hands
From silver Ganges to the Baetick sands,
From Pole to Pole extend their conquering force:
No distances of place can long divorce
Us two, if Caesar in his love can be
As speedy as in war and victory,
And march as far to find his friends as foes*
This pledge, which I within my self enclose,
Assures my longing mind against delay,
That Caesar long will not protract his stay.
Then with a kiss he bad the Queen adieu;
And winged with haste into Armenia flew
Swifter than lightning, or the Southern wind
Along through Libya's yielding air, to find
Pharnaces out; whom he (past thought) oretooke
Near Zela walls, and vanquished with a look.
Soon beat, he left behind him naught at all
That might deserve a mention, but his fall:
Nor can there ought of this short war be said
But Caesar g came, and saw, and vanquished.
How much did Pompey's honor suffer there*
When Caesar's troops beheld that nations fear?
And saw how easy 'twas to conquer them?
How undeserved did his great triumph seem
Ore Pontus and Armenia? More was lost
Than poor Pharnaces Crown, and feeble host;
The fame of Pompey was orethrowne that day,
When Caesar boasting could find cause to say;
Oh Pompey; happy thou, that by defeat
Of these base nations, got'st the name of Great;
Whilst I subduing the fierce Ganles, deserved.
No name, enjoyed no triumph: had thou served
Beyond the frozen Alps, or past the bound
Of Rhenes swift stream, the big-bon'd Germans found,
A difference twixt our acts thou then had seen;
Our Civil wars perchance had never been.
Yet ere that he from thence to Afric pass,
Though haste important urge him, in the place
A stately Trophee he erects to show
To future times Pharnaces overthrow,
Not far from that proud Trophee, which before
Great Mithridates for his Conquest ore
Triarius, had erected: that this story
Might quite eclipse old Mithridates glory,
Or please his Manes, that the field there won
Took punishment of his unnatural son.
But greater wars call Caesar thence away;
Scipio not far from Adrumetum lay
With all the power of Rome, but did not h now
Since Winters fury raged, expect a foe.
For Phoebus lamp, to our Horizon low,
The shortest days, and coldest did bestow
From Capricorn, cold Winter glazed the floods,
And pur^'d with frost the fields and naked woods.
But Caesar's heart, admitting no delay,
Whose speedy march no season ere could stay,
When he his third Dictatorship at Rome
Had taken, and thence to Sicily was come,
Lest any time should to his fame be lost,
Even then the Seas from Lilybaeum crossed.
And sailing by the Libyan shores, espies
Great Carthages halfe-ruin'd edifice;
And Clupe as fatal station passes by
With grief remembering how unhappily
Bold Curio there did with his legions land,
A woeful prey to Juba's barbarous band.
Then from this ominous place he sails away
Westward along; and leaving Vri^a
(Where Cato then in Garrison did lie;
Cato the soul of Roman liberty,
Who from that Town must shortly take a name,
And leave the Town, in lieu, eternal fame)
At Ad^umetum lands; upon which coast
Scipio encampes with all his Roman host.
Annotations to the second Book.
a Dion relates it thus; Caesar having subdued Egypt, would not subject it, as
a Province to the people of Rome, but bestowed it wholly upon Cleopatra, for
whose sake he bad made the whole war in Egypt; yet fearing lest the
Egyptians under the reign of a woman would rebel again, and that he might
perchance alienate the hearts of the Romans from himself by reason of this,
and the familiarity, which he was known to have with Cleopatra, he gave her
in marriage to her younger brother, and confirmed the Kingdom to them both;
which was indeed but a show, for Cleopatra wholly possessed the power; her
husband being a child; therefore under a pretext of marriage, by which she
should join with her brother in the Kingdom, she both reigned alone, and
enio^ed the bed of Caesar. Dion. lib. 42.

b This Caesario, both Dion and Plutarch report to be the son of Julius
Caesar by Cleopatra, when after the Alexandrian war, and before his
expedition against King Pharnaces, he stayed in Egypt (according to Dion) nine
months: after the victory of Augustus Caesar against Marcus Antonius and
Cleopatra, this Caesario being sent away for safety into Aethiopia (says
Dion) was intercepted in the journey and slain by Caesar's command: the
reasons that moved Augustus to this cruelty were partly the Counsel (according
to Plutarch) of Arius the Philosopher, his Tutor, who told him it was not s^fe
to suffer too many Caesar's: partly the remembrance of what Antonius had done,
who before had commended this Caesario to the old Soldiers, aduising them
rather to honor the true and natural son of Julius Caesar, than Octauius
who was but an adopted heir.

c Scipio was chosen General of all the Roman forces in Africa that meant to
continue the war against Caesar, partly by reason of his dignity, and partly
by an absurd persuasion (says Dion) that no Scipio in Afric could be
unfortunate: which thing when Caesar perceived might encourage the enemy, and
disharten his Soldiers, he took along with him a certain obscure man
descended of the ra^e of the Scipios, and of that name (but his surname was
Salatto) and with him to thwart the other superstitious fear, he landed at
Adrumetum before the enemy expected him, it being then an vnse^sonable time of
year. Dio. lib. 43.

d Varus so long had governed those Countries, and was so puffed up by the
victory of ^uba (says Dion) that he contended with Scipio himself for the
chief command: but by the authority of Cato it was swayed on Scipio's side.
Cato, when all the Soldiers offered to him the chief command, or at least to
be joined General with Scipio, refused both; accounting it just that he which
by the laws had attained the highest dignity, should have now the greatest
command; but he himself had never attained to so much dignity in Rome as
Scipio; to him therefore of his own accord he yielded place, and gave him also
that army which he had brought into Afric. Dion. lib. 43.

e Petreius had before been vanquished by Caesar in Spa^ne. Lucan. lib 4. He
was th^n pardoned and set free upon oath never to war against Caesar again;
which oath here he violated.

f Cleopatra (says Dion) had stayed Caesar longer in Egypt or else
accompanied him to Rome, if Pharnaces had not been the hindrance: this
Pharnaces the son of great Mithridates was King of Bosphorus Cimmeriu^; but
m^ued with an ambitious desire of recovering all his fathers Kingdom, while
Rome was entangled in Civil war, he had rebelled: and during the time of the
Civil and Egyptian wars had with small ado subdued Colchis, and all
Armenia in the absence of Deiotarus, besides many Cities of Cappadocia, Pontus,
and Bithynia. Caesar busied then in the affairs of Egypt, and hoping to
subdue Pharnaces by a Lieutenants hand, sends Domitius Caluinus to that war,
commanding him to take the regency of Asia, and of those armies which he found
there. Domitius joining the Kin^s Deiotarus and Ariobarzanes to him, marches
directly against Pharnaces, who was then at Nicopolis, where in fight Domitius
was vanquished. Dion. lib. 43.

g Those three words Veni, vidi, vici, did afterward in Caesar's triumph
express his sudden Conquest of Pharnaces, and that then he uttered such a
speech concerning Pompey, Appian is ^y authority.

h Caesar in the midst of Winter sailed into Africa; by which speed of his
(says Dion) in coming unawares upon his enemies, he had often prospered in
his greatest affairs: nor was there any other so great reason, why Caesar so
much excelled all other Generals of those times, as his wonderful speed in
all expeditions. Dion. lib. 42.

FINIS.
THE THIRD BOOK.
The Argument of the third Book.
Iuba from Scipio to his Kingdom goes.
Caesar escapes the ambush of the foes,
And till the arrival of his full supplies
Himself within Rhuspina fortifies.
Sage Cato's counsel to great Pompey's son.
Iuba's return; the whole war meets upon
Vzzita's plains, and is removed from thence
To Thapsus fatal fields: what dire ostents
Foregoe the battle; Caesar's victory.
To several coasts the vanquished Princes fly.
NOw near this mighty war began to draw:
Those blood-stained swords, which dire Pharsalia saw,
With no less guilt in Libya meet again,
To draw that little blood that did remain
In Romes afflicted State: Why did you spare
It then, oh gods, to make a second war?
Was it cause one, though never so great a blow,
The Roman Empire could not overthrow?
Or must more lands behold her fall? more grounds
Drink in the blood of her unnatural wounds?
Or must this second war declare to all
The State subsisted after Pompey's fall,
And once again her freedom might have seen
Had Caesar's war alone against Pompey been.
Rome now in Afric is; those scorched grounds
That once her Conquest saw, now see her wounds.
Where once the Scipios with triumphant Fate
Advanced her Eagles against a rival State,
This Scipio now, in stead of barbarous foes,
In Romes behalf against Romes Dictator goes.
But Fate a while, content with meaner play,
Respi^s the trial of so great a day.
So many lives, as there resolved were met,
Must not be thrown into the hazard yet.
Nor must sad Thapsus give the fatal blow
Of Juba's fall, and Scipio's overthrow,
Until Rhuspina, and Vzzita's walls
Have felt the force of both the Generals,
And other parts of Afric have beheld,
Some bloody Prologues to so great a held.
Fortune a while from helping Scipio,
Diuerts King Juba's strength, enforced to go
With speedy marches to his Kingdoms aid;
Which a Sittius now and Bocchus did invade.
And Caesar's troops remaining on the shore
Of Sicily, himself had crossed ore
Into a land possessed by his foes,
With one weak new-fill'd legion; nor to those
That stayed behind, could he appoint the port
Where they should land, or whither to resort,
(As be in former wars had ever done)
Committing all to Fortunes rule alone.
So much on her protection he relied;
Nor had she ever failed his greatest need.
Could it not seem to thine ambitious thought
Caesar, enough, that Fortune ever wrought
The Accomplishment of all thy highest hopes
When ere in field inuiron'd with thy troops
Thou foughts against the greatest foes; but she
Without an army too, must succor thee?
And all thy rash adventures rectify?
Was not thy escape from Aegypts treachery,
Thy safe arrival on Brundusiums shore;
(The stormy Seas so boldly ventured ore
From Greece by night) enough for her to do?
How often shall Fortune more her favor show
From private dangers in protecting thee,
Than in bestowing the earths sole Monarchy?
From Adrumetum, where in Garrison
Confidius lay, whose truth could not be won
From Scipio's side, does Caesar march away
With his small army, but in fair array.
Since now his highest hopes were not to get
The Town, but thence in safety to retreat.
Nor was that granted him; Confidius horse
With furious sallyes often molest his course,
And vex his Armies rere: to encounter those
Assaults, does Caesar in the rere dispose
The ablest men, and marching slowly on
Safe to Rhuspina brings his legion.
Nor did that act of war, though seeming small,
But well become so great a General.
From thence removing, Leptis him receives,
In which a little Garrison he leaves,
And to Rhuspina marches back again;
That only Town in Afric did remain
A safe retreat for Caesar's feeble power:
Nor thither then, unless a Conqueror,
Could he arrive; danger beset the way.
Pierce Labienus and Pacidius lay
In ambush there: in which, though timely spied,
Was Caesar's skill, and Fortune wholly tried.
He breaks with conquest through the adverse troops,
Fortune but mocking Labienus hopes.
Who now with loss forsakes the field, and bears
To Adrumetum his hurt Soldiers.
Caesar returning with his little band
Unto Rhuspina, takes a work in hand
Of wondrous toil, (since now resolved no more
To march from thence, till on the Libyan shore
His legions all arrive; whom every day
Chiding the Winds, and Fortune for their stay,
His eager thoughts expect) two trenches down
To the Seashore he draws, one from the Town,
Another from his Camp; on either side
With sharpened stakes, and engines fortified
So well, as that, without the Garrison
They might by land secure both Camp and Town,
And make the shore between at his dispose:
But there enclosed by his insulting foes
(For Scipio now with his great strength drew nigh)
He pays, in wants, for that security.
Nor can his men from out their Trenches go
To fetch provision in by land; the foe
Cuts off all passage there; and in disdain
Of Caesar's weakness, on the spacious plain
Scipio often sets his Battles in array,
Who amongst themselves in wanton skirmish play,
And exercise their Elephants, in sight
Of Caesar's trenches, and unusual fight
In Roman armies; those beasts never had been
Till Pyrrhus warred with Rome, by Romans seen;
Nor ere in Triumph to the people shown,
Till the Dictator Curious had orethrowne
The Samnites, Sabines, and King Pyrrhus power:
The like Metellus Cretes famed Conqueror,
From his Sicilian Victory did bring,
And Pompey's Triumph ore Numidia's King.
Uncertain aids in war they ever prove,
And with like danger to both armies move,
As well their own annoying as the foes,
Fitter for other labors (sure) than those;
Nor, though their strength be wondrous, for that end
Did prudent Nature those great beasts intend.
The Nabathaean lands, where they are bred,
Are recompensed with those rich teeth they shed.
Through all the world a wealthy merchandise,
Which on their deaths often sets a greedy price.
But greater far the Eastern country yields
Than those within the Mauritanian fields,
And far more fierce; such as in India
Great Alexander's frighted Soldiers saw.
These mighty beasts, as they in bulk exceed
And pass in strength all other far, that feed
On earths vast bosom, do as far excel
(If ancient authors have observed well)
In apprehension, and large faculties
Of soul; amongst beasts they only exercise
Those qualities (or like to them) which we
In men style virtues; perfect equity
They keep, and laws of justice have in use;
To which all moral virtues we reduce.
Nor are these creatures thought by some to be
Quite void of the intellectual faculty.
But that they can discern and understand
The language spoken in their native land;
And might discourse, if to so strange a wit
Nature had pleased to lend them organs fit:
Not speak as Crows and Parrats often have done
By imitation of a sound alone.
If we so much to Elephants should give,
Why should we call them creatures sensitive?
We must extend the faculty of sense
To larger bounds; and put less difference
Twixt that and reason; or betwixt the two
Find out a middle region to bestow
Their knowledge in; as to some things that live
We place twixt sense and vegetation give.
But in a higher kind (as some relate)
Do Elephants with men communicate.
(If you believe it) a religion
They have, and monthly do adore the Moon.
Beside the lofty Nabathaean wood
Of vast extent, Amylo's gentle flood
Gliding along the sandy mould combines:
Thither, as often as wexing Cynthia shines
In her first borrowed light, from out the wood
Come all the Elephants, and in the flood
Washing themselves (as if to purify)
They prostrate fall; and when religiously
They have adored the Moon, return again
Into the woo is with joy. Nor half so vain
Is this devotion which these beasts present,
As that which men more brutishly invent;
Nor (as the mad Egyptians used) do they
To Dogs and Snakes, and vilest creatures pray*
Nor to the senseless Leekes and Onyons bow,
Such gods as yearly in their Gardens grow;
Nor yet to wood or stone devotion do,
More senseless than the stones they bow unto;
A far more glorious creature they adore.
Should this be true of Elephants; far more
Wise in Religion are those beasts than men*
But if that this a fiction be, why then
Did men's invention feign a beast to be
Wiser, than are themselves, in Piety?
While at Rhuspina both the Generals
Encamped rest; in Vtica's strong walls
Cato remains with Pompey's eldest b son,
Whom thus sage Cato sharply sets upon*
Awake young man, and now in time redeem
Thy youth from sloath-bred scorn; from disesteeme
Go vindicate the name of Pompey now:
Go try all Kingdoms, search all Seas to know
How great thy father was; what fame he won,
How strong he leaves thee in thy name alone:
Try if the Seas, which his brave hand did free
From Pirates, can deny a fleet to thee.
That stock of glory, which thy father won,
And left behind for thee to spend upon,
Arms thee with strength enough (though naught beside
So good a cause could lend) against Caesar's pride.
Go try the farthest West, solicit Spain;
The name of Pompey is enough to gain
Those Nations to thy side: if naught at all
Thy groaning Countries sufferings, nor the fall
Of Roman liberty affect thy mind:
Although thou could endure a Lord, and find
Content in serving, yet the wrongs, which thou
Alone from Caesar suffrest, were enough
To rowze thy spirits, and stir thine enmity.
If thy great Father for Romes liberty
And Laws alone fought in Pharsalia,
As great a Fortune did thou lose that day
As on a private Citizen could light:
But if thy Father for himself did fight;
Thy loss was more, and Caesar then from thee
By Conquest took the Worlds sole Monarchy.
But would thou know the true inheritance
Which he did dying leave thee, to advance
The name of Pompey; which may ever be
Thine own, in spite of Caesar's enmity,
Which honor bids thee claim, and Rome now needs?
The imitation of his noble deeds
Is thine inheritance: 'twas his brave Fate,
When great bad men had seized the afflicted State,
When Marius faction did the walls invade,
And Rome it self a slaughterhouse was made,
To save his Country bleeding then, as now,
And not so much in debt to years as thou.
When he no honors yet, no titles had,
No power at all but what his virtue made,
He raised an army, rescued Italy.
By him did Carbo in Sicilia die;
By him did Spain behold Sertorius fall:
And then in triumph to the Capitol
He, but a Gentleman of Rome did bring
Hyempsal vanquished the Numidian King.
All this before he had attained unto
Thy age, young Pompey, did thy father do;
Which to his future greatness made the way:
And sleep'st thou here? What help in Africa
Lend'st thou to Rome more than one private hand?
Go gather forces in another land;
Repair the ruins of thy house, or die
Great as thy birth has made thee. No reply
Young Pompey made at all; but, as if from
Some sacred Oracle the speech had come,
Or Romes own voice from Cato's breast had spoke,
His modesty obeyed, and straitway took
A long c farewell, never to meet again;
But find a Tomb in Europe, and to Spain
Carry as great a part of Romes sad wounds
As dire Thessalia's blood-distained grounds,
Or fatal Thapsus saw. Though destiny
Have not allotted, brave young man, to thee
So great and long a race of happiness
As to thy Father, yet thy fall no less
Than his shall be in weight, nor shall the field
Of fatal Munda to Pharsalia yield.
Caesar supplied with strength from Sicily
Marches away, to take and fortify
Those lofty Hills (in spite of enemies)
Which from the champian, near Vzzita, rise:
Which Hills he takes and fortifies with ease:
Though Labienus vaine-lay'd ambushes
To their own ruin did molest his way,
By Caesar's Scouts discovered where they lay
Too soon; and so by changed Fate, called on
In stead of his, their own destruction.
So a Getulian Lion when beset
By weake-arm'd Hunters, whose vain force does whet
Not daunt his courage, with collected ire
Breaks through, and makes his wounded foes retire:
His seeming danger naught but anger moves,
And fatal only to the Hunters proves.
Juba returned and joined with Scipio,
With all their forces to Vzzita go:
Now the whole war was met; Vzzita's walls
Beheld the Camps of both Romes Generals.
Thrice there did Scipio his whole strength display;
Thrice Caesar set his battles in array
Eager of fight; and thrice prouok'd his foe,
To trial of the day; but Scipio
Would not the advantage of the place forsake.
Nor did the Destinies intend to make
Vzzita guilty of so great a stain,
Which did for Thapsus fat all fields remain.
Whither, dislodging from his Camp by night
(When Scipio could not be prouok'd to fight)
With prosperous Omen, Caesar marches on:
There then Virgilius lay in Garrison,
Faithful to Scipio and the Senates side,
The place by Nature strongly fortified.
Scipio and Iuba follow, though the air
Gave sad presages of the future war,
The Earth and Skies the like; his mourning face
The Sun with clouds obscured: in whose place
Ruin portending Comets did display
Their blazing Lamps, and made a dismal day:
And lightning through the uncertain air gave light
More full of horror than the shades of night.
The Thunders voice was heard there where the air
From clouds was free; and the horrid noise of war
From thence resounded: Helmes of Brass did sweat,
Some Piles and Swords did melt; nor could they get
By strength their heavy Standards from the ground:
Which swarms of Bees orespread; a hollow sound
Of Lions sadly murmuring was heard
About the Camp: the Mountains all appeared
To move, which did about Vzzita stand.
And from the farthest part of Libyan land
The Mauritanian Atlas seemed to shake
His skie-supporting top: Birds seemed to take
Unusual flights; sad entrails did appear,
And filled the sacrificing Priests with fear:
Nor mean the gods, when these portents they show,
To teach frail mortals to prevent the woe,
But fear it only. The unhappy troops
To Thapsus march distraught twixt fears and hopes,
Where this great war shall shortly find an end,
On which so many ruins do depend.
The Libyan Thapsus a Sea-bordering Town,
An I Will almost by situation,
Is by that Sea, which Afric does divide
From Sicily, enuiron'd at one side;
The other side a spacious fenne oreflowes,
Guarding that part from all approach of foes:
Betwixt the Sea, and that great fenne, does stand
(The only passage to the Town by land)
A little Isthmos, which (although not wide)
A standing lake does in the midst divide,
And makes two narrow passages of one:
Within these straits, not far from Thapsus Town
Caesar is entered now with all his troops,
And with strong works; and deepe-digg'd trenches stops
All means of sallies from the Town, that might
Perchance infest his armies rere in fight.
Scipio encamped there where the Isthmos ends
Within the continent, with speed intends
To draw a trench down to the shore, and so
Within that neck of land shut up the foe:
But till the work be perfected, to hide
What he intends, or battle to abide,
In fair array he marshalls all his bands:
Himself with his Italian legions stands
In the mid-battell; Iuba's legions
Mixed of so many several Nations
Make the right battle; on the left does stand
Stout Labienus with a warlike band
Of Gauls, which he had from Brundusium led,
And German troops, which from Pharsalia fled.
Old foes to Caesar: thither Varus brings
His Libyan cohorts: but before both wings
The mighty Elephants are placed, to fright
The foes first onset; and by them the light
Numidian horse, and Mauritanian too:
Behind the beasts the light-armed Soldiers go,
His poisoned Quiver the black Mibian bears,
The strong Mazacians their well-brandish'd Spears
Of aim as sure as Parthian Shafts; by these
With crooked Swords the Adyrmachides.
But seeing Caesar's army in array,
And now not likely to protract the day,
Thus Scipio speaks: True Romans, if a cause
So just, so great, as to this battle draws
Your farre-engaged hands, could need at all
Any incitements from a General,
The wrongs of Rome, the foes impiety
Afford too large, too sad a scope for me
To play the Orator: and though the fall
Of our sad State and Laws in general
Should not affect your minds; cast but an eye
Upon those blood stained fields of Thessaly,
Think on Pharsalia's slaughter, and learn there
What each man suffers in particular,
Beside the public loss: let every ghost
Of friend or kinsman, that that day was lost,
(Yet unrevenged) excite your valor now:
On us the gods and Fortune here bestow
A iuster cause than there, for Caesar's guilt
Was not so great before that blood was spilt;
Nor could that honor, Soldiers, have been gained
In Thessaly, that may be here obtained
By Caesar's fall; now his esteem is more,
Although his strength no greater than before,
And we are bound to Fortune, who in this
On equal hazard sets a greater price.
Nor need you fear that she should now forsake
Her Romes defense, whom she has toiled to make
Head of the World so long, because you saw
Caesar subdued Rome in Pharsalia.
The date of Pompey's fortune was expired,
His many triumphs, which her favor tired,
So long had lasted, as it had been thought
(Had Caesar fallen when that great field was fought)
Not Romes, but Pompey's fortune had prevailed:
And Rome then only her long favor failed,
As loath a private man should think her his,
And she deprived of public sacrifice.
But think not, Romans, the rebellious Fate
Of one proud man shall still outweigh the State:
Nor does the anger of the gods appear
(If this good Omen we may trust) that here
On Affricks Sunburned face you meet the foe
Under the conduct of a Scipio.
I need not boast, what every Nation knows,
With what triumphant Fate the Scipio's
In Afric have advanced Romes power and fame,
How well her Fortune pleased her in that name?
And what forbids us hope the like, since we
As lawfully are armed here, and he,
Whom now our loyal valor copes withal,
As great a foe to Rome as Hannibal?
Into your hands the gods have put their doom;
Naught but your virtue can restore to Rome
Her Laws, and banished Citizens again:
For banished are you, and must remain
For ever so, unless you conquer here:
He that would see his native land, his near
And dearest pledges, by the Sword must now
Redeem them all in Caesar's overthrow.
Their spirits were rowzed; and the Roman troops
Inflamed with love of fight, and filled with hopes;
No less did Iuba's barbarous Nations,
With rude and different acclamations
Desire a signal, and precipitate
With eagerness their own unhappy Fate.
Caesar perceiving that the gods gave way
To his desire, and now the wished for day
Of fight was come, aduances, and thus cheeres
With confidence his forward Soldiers.
The time is come, brave Soldiers, that must crown
And guerdon all the service you have done,
That must conclude the labors of the Sword,
And (maugre envy) to your heads afford
All those triumphant Bays, which hitherto
Have been deferred, deserved so long ago,
For conquered Gallia, Britain, Germany,
Treacherous Pharnaces, and false Ptolomey:
All these has Fortune but deferred till now,
To join with them proud Iuba's overthrow
Great as the greatest; and this held, when done,
Confirms, or loses all that we have won:
But 'twere a crime to doubt it, since I see
Those looks that never failed of victory.
Let you torn remnant of Pharsalia know
Their Conquerours. More would he say, when lo
From the right-wing, not staying his command,
The Trumpets sound a charge, and from their stand
(Although the Tribunes, and Centurions strive
To keep them back) the Soldiers rush to give
The onset straight; nor them in vain to stay
Does Caesar strive, but gives their courage way:
As when two Charriots are prepared to run,
And one too hasty from the list is gone,
In vain the Charrioter their course would stay,
The vngouern'd Horses hurry him away.
Then with a rage as great as if two Seas
(Some god removing, for the Sailers ease,
The long Malaea) should each other meet,
Both hosts encounter, and begin the fight
With horrid showts, that all the Mountains nigh
Resound aloud, and back from Sicily
High Lilybaeum to the Libyan shore,
Returns again their echoed clamours ore,
As much afray'd to harbor but the sound,
Of such a war within that quiet ground:
Their noise not that of Thracian Boreas
Among the Pines of Ossa, can surpass,
Nor that which Nilus falling water makes
Precipitated down the Cataracts,
When with his foame he seems to laue the sky,
And strikes a deafness through the dwellers nigh*
Mischief and fury rage; revenge does one
Excite, the other indignation:
That after Pompey's death the war at all
Should last, and find another General.
Blood all the adjoining fenne discolours ore,
And makes a flood, where never was flood before,
And from the moisture of so many wounds,
Combines the mould of Affricks thirsty grounds*
Through both the hosts Enyo's blazing light
Like fatal lightning flashing flies to excite
Their thoughts to fury; the Tartarian god
Set open the vaults where Libyan ghosts abode,
And from the infernal cauernes set them free
To view a while this fatal Tragedy.
And glut their dire revenge with Roman blood:
Upon the Mountains gloomy tops they stood,
Blasting the day, and round about the hosts
Making a balefull ring; the cruel ghosts
Of Iugurth, Syphax, and Great Hannibal;
Who for their own, and Carthages sad fall
Did then excuse the gods, when they beheld
The Roman fury in that mortal field.
Yet in Romes ruin Libya suffers too:
More wrack, alas, shall this sad battle do
Than after-ages can repair with ease.
More desolation now, more wilderness
The wasted face of Afric shall orespread,
And beasts possess the seats of Nations dead:
Where feared Monarchs once gave Laws to men
Shall Lions reign, and Tigers make their dens;
The slimy Serpents all alone shall crawle,
And wanting men, shall be no plague at all.
Caesar foreseeing th'Elephants, that were
In front of Iuba's battle, would strike fear
Into his troops, does such a cure provide
As quite conuerts upon the other side
The Fate that threatened his; to the right wing
His choicest bows, and missile arms he brings,
And sets them, at fair distance, opposite
To the Elephants; who there begin the fight
With such success, as makes those beasts to be
The only cause of Caesar's victory.
For gaull'd with shafts, confusedly they run
In spite of their distracted guides, upon
Their own unhappy troops, to sudden rout
Putting all Iuba's quarter round about,
And bearing down all that before them lay
To Caesar's conquest make a speedy way;
Their mighty strength, since now ungoverned,
Is by the hand of Fortune only led,
And brings advantage to that side alone,
Which she is pleased to bestow it on.
The Mauritanian, and Numidian Horse,
Which there were placed, by the Elephants rude force
Orethrowne, were crushed to death, or headlong down
Into the trenches with their riders thrown,
Some few escaping by disordered flight:
The light-armed Soldiers mixed with these to fight
Reft of their shelter, now by heaps are slain,
And to the foes a prey, no war, remain;
And tire (as standing not to fight but die)
With their bare throats the murdring enemy:
Naught there, alas, can weak Bamurians do
With their fire-harden'd Darts; naught can the Bow
And poisoned Shafts the coale-blacke Mibian wears
Avail their Master; vain those brittle Spears
Are in the hands of light Autololes,
And crooked Swords of the Adyrmachides:
The weak Cyniphians find that skins of Goats,
Are too light armor to protect their throats;
When Brass, and Iron no defense affords,
Against the force of the Caesarian Swords.
The purple field so great a slaughter strowes,
Blood from so many different people flows,
That while King Juba takes a sad survey
In how great breadth his Empires ruin lay,
No private deaths distinguishing at all,
He scarce can count how many Nations fall:
Nor does he think, his Camp, after so great
An overthrow, can be a safe retreat;
But leaving that to greedy enemies
A wealthy spoil, he with Petreius flies.
King Juba's Camp by the pursuing foe
Is soon possessed, and the Caesarians know
Before their victory be fully done,
How great a prize their bloody toiles have won.
But Fortune, where the Italian legions fought,
And Scipio stood, had not so quickly wrought
Her Caesar's ends: there strength by strength repelled,
And fury joined with equal fury, held
The balance straight, whilst doubting victory
Seemed, not, a while, resolved whose to be;
Or else deferred it only to declare
That highest fury reigns in civil war,
That country men in fight are cruell'st foes,
Or greatest courage from worst causes grows.
On equal hopes they both engaged were,
And in no quarter of the war but here,
Did it at all into a question come
What should be Romes estate, or Caesar's doom.
Nor was the question here determined,
Till with his Libyan cohorts Varus fled,
And Labienus too, when he beheld
His slaughtered Gauls, and Germans strew the field,
Reserved a while by Destinies to see
Another ruin great as this, to be
A bleeding part of Romes third mortal wound;
And lie enterr'd in Munda's fatal ground:
As long meant Fortune to prolong their fall
As Rome with Caesar could contend at all.
Scipio perceiues his army overthrown,
And now the loss irreparable grown:
Horror distracts his thoughts; what should he do*
Survive this battle? and not rather go
Upon the Swords, and there in height of all
His honor die as Romes chief General,
And by the ruin of so great a name
Enoble Caesar's conquest? Or give fame
To Thapsus fatal field? For what has Fate
Power to bestow on such a wretched State,
That can at all his mind to live inuit?
With this resolve in fury of the fight
Had Scipio died; but flattring hope withheld
(Even such as from Pharsalia's mortal field,
Made Pompey fly to meet a sadder Fate)
His eager soul, that the afflicted State
Though seeming dead, after this fatal hour,
Might once more struggle against Caesar's power:
Then mounted on a Libyan Steed he flies;
And ore the field his routed companies,
Mixed with the Horsemen take disordred flight;
Some legions hoping to retire from fight
To Juba's Camp, and it to fortify,
And finding that seized by the enemy,
After the usual manner, casting down
Their arms, they tender a submission.
But all in vain; no safety at the hands
Of the enraged, and fierce Caesarians,
(Oh shame of war!) could their submission get,
Although that Caesar did himself entreat,
Grieuing that in his power it lay not then,
To save from death his wretched country men*
And by his speech and actions did declare,
That he was then no part of civil war.
He cries aloud, Oh spare the yielding foe,
They are no longer foes, but Romans now:
You more than lose your valor, and to me
Do purchase envy here, not victory:
They, that in conquest of so many lands
Nere disobeyed his most severe commands,
Nor ere refused what he would put them too,
In this alone their disobedience show
Now his commands are good: all ore the plain
Are Scipio's Soldiers miserably slain,
That, to this Tragedy compared, light
Were all the slaughters of the former fight.
And now the mourning fields with slaughter strow'd
And covered ore with horrid ruin, showed
A full and perfect conquest was obtained
That for the sword no farther work remained;
When Caesar master of his highest hopes,
From the pursuit calls back his weary troops,
And recompenses, with the wealthy spoils
Of Kings and Nations, their successful toiles.
Annotations upon the third Book.
a Caesar having but a small force in Africa, and much troubled at the report
of the great army of his enemies, that all King Iuba's forces joined with
Scipio, found help from an occasion little expected: for (as Dion relates it)
Publius Sittius (if we may attribute it to Sittius, and not rather to Fortune)
brought unto Caesar not only a timely safety, but a great victory: this
Sittius expelled before out of Italy, and joining to himself some other
exiles, passed over into Mauritania; there obtaining an army from King Bocchus,
he resolved to aid Caesar in this war: though he had neither received any
benefits from him, nor was at all known to him: but because he heard that
Caesar was far from him, and could then give him no great help (for Caesar's
forces in Afric were then but small) watching the time when King Iuba drew
his army out of his own Country, he invaded Numidia, and Getulia another
part of Iuba's Kingdom, wasting and spoiling both the Countries: by which
accident King Iuba was forced to omit his expedition, and march back again
with the greater part of his forces to the rescue of his own Kingdom; for he
had sent part of his strength to Scipio before: so that it is certain if King
Iuba by Fortune had not then been diuerted from joining with Scipio, Caesar
had not been able to have stood against their united forces, nor maintained
himself then in Africa. Dion. lib. 43.

b The Roman army remaining in Africa, hearing that Spain was vexed with
dissentions and seditions, sent thither Cneius Pompeius the eldest son of
Pompey the Great, as thinking that he for his Fathers sake would be received in
Spain with greatest honor; aduising him that when he had settled his affairs
there, he should march to Rome; and they themselves intended with all their
forces to meet him there, and make the war in Italy, this counsel was had
while Caesar as yet lingered in Egypt according to Dion. lib. 42. but Hirtius
in his Commentaries relates it after that time.

c Cneius Pompeius chid by Cato, and advised to go into Spain and raise
forces, with thirty Ships of all sorts, putting to Sea at Vtica, sailed to
Mauritania, and entered the Kingdom of King Bogud: there setting his army on
shore, which consisted of about two thousand slaves, and Freemen, part armed,
and part unarmed, he marched toward the Town of Ascurum; in which Town there
was then a Garrison of the Kings: the Garrison suffering Pompey to pass
quietly till he approached the very walls of the Town, sallying out then, on
the sudden overcame them, and some they killed, some they forced into the Sea;
Pompey himself with a few of his men getting to their Ships sailed away; after
which he never more arrived on the shore of Afric, but went to the Balearicke
Islands, and from thence to Spain. Hirt. comment. de bello Affricano.

FINIS.
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
The Argument of the fourth Book.
To his imperial Zamah Iuba flies,
And thence excluded, with Petreius dies
Amidst their banquets bleeding. Scipio slain
By his own hands, within the watery maine
Intombes himself: The death of Cato fames
Old Vtica; Caesar laments, and blames
His wilful Fate; and from the Libyan coast
Is shipped for Rome with his victorious host.
But all the wrack, that Thapsus fields had made,
The fields could not contain; nor could so sad,
And great a ruin in such narrow bounds
Be circumscribed: the high Imperial wounds
Which there were given, in other regions bled:
And those great names, which from that battle fled,
As loath to mix with vulgar Funerals,
Must bear the fame of their renowned falls
To other lands, lest this great loss should be
In story told as one calamity.
With winged speed by nights obscurity
From Thapsus Iuba and Petreius fly,
To reach strong Zamah the Imperial seat
Of Iuba's Realm, a City fair and great;
In which, when first the war began, he laid
His wealth, and dearest pledges had conuey'd:
But now the gates were shut; the men denied
Their King an entrance; and with scoffs deride
His threats and prayers, for his changed Fate
Now gave them leave freely to show their hate;
And all too late is Iuba forced to see
The cursed effects of former tyranny.
Oh wretched State of Tyrants that nere see,
Until their sight in vain and bootlesse be,
Their just esteem: nor ever till too late,
Can know what men deserve their love, or hate.
In wretched times your friends are only known;
But when that knowledge comes, the power is gone.
Your State requital, or revenge denies,
And Fortune, but to grieve you, opes your eyes.
The King oppressed with grief, and filled with ire
Unto a Country Palace does retire,
Not far from thence; with him Petreius goes,
And a small troop of Horse: there they repose
Their weary bodies and vexed minds, until
A great resolve their breasts with comfort fill:
Then he commands his servants to prepare
Forthwith a stately banquet, and with rare
And sumptuous cates a full repast they take;
When thus King Juba to Petreius spoke;
Roman, thou see how Fortunes utmost spite
Pursues our actions, and has rest us quite
Of any future hopes; nothing can be
Safety to us but Caesar's clemency.
But thou and I in all this Civil war
Against Caesar's side, have been engaged too far
To hope for mercy; which, if I might have,
By all our gods I should disdain to crave:
For love of Pompey I was Caesar's foe,
And in the great'st extreme dare still be so.
Had he prevailed, a welcome friend to Rome
With greatest honor Iuba might have come:
Nor shall she now behold me captive there,
And led as Syphax and Iugurtha were,
Like slaves through her proud streets, to grace the power
Of an insulting laurell'd Conqueror:
No, let Rome rather hear how Iuba died,
Disdaining Caesar's pity, or his pride.
I do not want a Hand, a Heart, a Sword,
Or whatsoever else may death afford;
But do inuit Petreius as my friend,
To share in this last act of fame, my end:
Our cause, our Fortunes are alike in all;
Then like our selves, brave Roman, let us fall,
But use each others help: vnsheath thy Sword,
And let our friendship strive who shall afford,
First freedom to his friend; love shall engage
My valor against thee, as much as rage
Against a foe. Petreius draws his Sword,
And thus in short returns: brave Libyan Lord,
Worthy whom Rome with honor still should name,
To whom Petreius gladly owes his fame;
Nor (though a Roman General) do I
Blush to be taught by Iuba how to die:
It was the Roman g^nius prompted thee
To this, lest Rome should be enforced to see
That King a captive, and in triumph brought,
That had for her, her laws, and freedom fought,
That had with Scipio and the Senate stood;
And thy disgrace prove Caesar's conquest good
Against his Country: No, great King, of thee
Rome still shall hold a dearer memory;
With Massanissa shall thou ranked stand,
When our sad Annalls Caesar's deeds shall brand,
And mark his party with as black a stain
As Catiline, and his rebellious train.
The rest my Sword shall speak for me, and prove
How much thy freedom, and mine own I love.
With that they both in equal fury meet,
And with such fierce assaults each other greet,
As who had seen the combat, might suppose
That so much valor had not fought to lose,
But guard by conquest a desired life:
At last to end this hot despairing strife,
Iuba a bootlesse conquest did obtain;
Under whose force was weak Petreius slain:
Keep in (quoth Iuba) life a while, and see
A life let out to bear thine company:
If not, before thou cross the Stygian lake,
My fleeting soul thy ghost shall overtake.
Farewell you fading glories that attend
A kingly State, too feeble to defend
Your proud possessours from the storms of Fate:
What rest upon the slippery heights of State
Finds man? What stay on Fortunes restless wheel?
Oh treacherous Zamah, may thy false neck feel
Romes yoke as hard, as thou to thy true Lord
Disloyal prou'st: then falling on his Sword,
From forth his struggling breast his Spirit flies,
And night eternal closes up his eyes.
But see, from Thapsus fatal overthrow
A nobler death draws near, Great Scipio
Romes General, that had so lately led
The Senats war against Caesar's fortune, fled
From that sad battle in a poor disguise,
And one small bark, the Seas of Libya tries,
To find from thence safe passage into Spain,
Where Pompey's sons with all their strength remain.
But by a storm was driven into the Bay
Of Hippo, where the Ships of Sittius lay,
Left there in Caesar's name to guard the coast.
Scipio perceiues himself and Bark are lost,
The weather cross cuts off all hope of flight;
The winds (quoth he) and Seas for Caesar fight:
Why did I escape the stormy maine? Oh why
From Thapsus fatal battle did I fly,
And not in height of all mine honor fall,
Fighting for Rome to die her General?
Oh would Pharsalia's battle had destroyed,
This ill-kept life, before that here employed,
The Senats war with ill success I led,
And Afric saw a Scipio vanquished.
You noble Souls of my dead ancestors,
That hither often have led the Roman powers
With glorious fame, as Carthages great fall,
As captive Syphax, vanquished Hannibal,
And saved Rome can witness, blush not now
At this your Nephews hapless overthrow;
No Libyan forces, but the strength of Rome,
Has Rome it self, and Scipio overcome;
By her own strength subdued, with her I die,
To wait upon expiring liberty.
By this occasion Fate with kind intent,
To me necessity of death has sent,
Lest I my freedom might perchance out-liue;
Nor could the gods a fitter bounty give.
Let Pompey's sons now try their Fate, and gain
Our Laws and State again, or lose in Spain
As much from Rome, as here in Afric I,
Or their Great Father lost in Thessaly;
My course is run; and, though this armed hand
Shall testify I could have died by land,
The Ocean likes me best, within the maine
Unknown for ever Scipio shall remain:
Oh let my floating carcass never come
To land, lest Afric should bestow a Tomb,
And to her sons in after-ages show
A monument of vanquished Scipio:
With that a Poniard in his hand he took,
And with a strength and aim so certain s^rooke
His willing breast, that thence the gushing blood,
Made on the Deckes a crimson precious flood:
But he, while yet his vital parts retain
Some spirits, leaps into the curled maine;
And her blew waves with purple staining, dies:
Vnbury'd Sc^pio's noble body lies
Within the Seas deep bosom; the Oceans fry
Devour the flesh of that brave family,
In which great Rome may make her iustest boast;
If all her actions, all her fame were lost,
If all those several virtues, piety,
True fortitude, admired constancy,
Impartial justice, frugall temperance,
That through the World her honor did advance,
In all names else had been forgot and gone,
In this renowned family alone
All might be found; nor did the Roman fame
Ere shine, more bright than in a Scipio's name:
Why did thy Country want an vine for thee?
Ore which the peoples untaught piety
Might truly mourn, and pay the tears they owe
Unto the ruined race of Scipio.
By this the flying companies, that were
From that sad battle escaped, had every where
Filled Libya's Towns with terror and dismay:
At V^ica the noble Cato lay
In Garrison; who free from private fear,
Not for himself dismayed at all, to hear
The fatal news of Scipio overthrown,
Exhorts his Soldiers to defend the Town
Against Caesar's entry; but perceiving then
The astonishment, and faintness of his men,
He with the same unshaken constancy
Forgiues their fear, and counsels them to fly;
Prouides from all the neighboring ports a fleet
Using his utmost diligence to get
Them safely all aboard, and timely gone,
Careful for every safety but his own.
The Citizens of Vtica he cheeres
With hope of Caesar's clemency, and cleeres
All dismal clouds of fear and iealousies,
That might within their fainting breasts arise:
And such to them with cheerful looks (although
Resolved to die) did Cato strive to show,
As if himself had not at all disdained,
To beg, or take a life at Caesar's hand.
He, whose austerer virtue nere before
Had given him leave to hide, or color ore
His least intention, whom no fear had taught
How to dissemble, or once swerue in ought
From his professed, and rigid path of right,
For love of death now prays the hypocrite.
Nights silent reign had robbed the World of light
To lend, in lieu, a greater benefit,
Repose and sleep; when every mortal breast
Whom care or grief permitted, took their rest.
But Cato's breast was not alone set free,
From perturbation and anxietie,
By virtues constant use, for soft repose
Or sleep, the common end, but to compose
And raise it self unto an act more high
The contemplation of eternity.
In contemplation the untroubled Soul
Parts from the bodies bonds, free from control
Of fleshly passions, by no cares distracted,
(Not as in sleep she does, to lie contracted
Within her self, and from all action cease)
But to employ her purest faculties
At nobler distance, where no sense of sight,
Or outward organ can direct her flight:
There by her self the Soul can take survey
Of those high glorious bodies, which display
(Objects too bright for sense) in their own light
Some beams and glimpses of that infinite
Eternal essence, from whose fullness they
Derive their beauties: there the Soul would stay,
Or wishes that from lets corporeal free,
She might (what now she cannot) plainly see
Those forms; and does in that desire imply
Her own undoubted immortality.
But ere the mind of man can fitted be,
To search the depth of true Philosophy,
It must be purged by moral rules, and freed
From impious lusts, from vice of thought and deed.
And as a wise Physician ever gives
Before his medicines, clean preparatiues,
So let no Soul contemplate, till it be
Prepared, and purged by sound morality.
First let it practice virtue here, before
With contemplations wings it dare to soar
In search of that, which is the perfect'st good,
And height of all that can be understood;
Lest, as in Physic, the vnpurg'd humors may
Distract the medicines working force; so they
Not purged from vices through false glasses see,
And often deceived in speculation be:
Unto thy self first moral Physic give,
And then securely be contemplative.
So cleans'd was Cato's soul; and fit was he
For strictest precepts of Philosophy,
Since virtues paths, which rough to others seem,
Long use had made habitual to him.
To whom the Fates present, as now on high
His thoughts were soaring to eternity,
An object fit; casting his eye aside
Diuinest Plato's Phaedon he espied.
Oh welcome Book sent from the gods (quoth he)
To teach a dying man Philosophy;
And though thou can not further, or control
The resolution of my fixed soul,
Since Fate has doomed my end, yet may thou give
Comfort to those few hours I have to live.
Man's Soul immortal is; Plat. Phaed.
whilst here they live
The purest minds for perfect knowledge strive;
Which is the knowledge of that glorious God,
From whom all life proceeds: in this abode
Of flesh, the Soul can never reach so high;
So reason tells us; if the Soul then die,
When from the bodies bonds she takes her flight,
Her vnfulfill'd desire is frustrate quite,
And so bestowed in vain: it follows then
The best desires unto the best of men,
The great Creator did in vain dispense;
Or else the Soul must live when gone from hence:
And if it live after the body fall,
What reason proves that it should die at all?
Since, not compounded as the body is,
And mixed of euer-fighting contraries,
But one pure substance, like it self, and may
(By reasons rules) subsist alone for aye.
And though we yield that God, who did create,
Can, if he please, again annihilate
The Soul; and nothing in that sense can be
Indissoluble, save the Deity,
Yet Souls, which in their nature do agree
So near with that, shall nere d^ssolued be,
Till they at last their wished end attain,
And so immortal by themselves remain.
True grounds (quoth he) divine Philosopher:
Else what were virtue, or true knowledge here
But waking dreams? Why, more than beasts, should we
Oblige our selves to Laws of piety,
Or curb our lusts? Oh why should virtue be
Judged, by the wisest, true felicity
Before wealth, honor, pleasure? Virtue here
Does not (alas) so beautiful appear,
But poor, and wretched rather; nor is she
(Unless, which in this life we do not see,
Some fairer substance or true form she have)
Ought but an empty name, or Fortunes slave.
The wisest men are glad to die; no fear
Of death, can touch a true Philosopher.
Death sets the Soul at liberty, to fly,
And search the depth of that Divinity;
Which, whilst imprisoned in the body here,
She cannot learn: a true Philosopher
Makes death his common practice, while he lives*
And every day by contemplation strives
To separate the soul, far as he can,
From off the body: (what is the death of man
But separation of those two?) Should he,
That every day did strive in some degree
To gain this freedom, fear it at the time
When nature has allotted it to him?
Would birds incag'd, that with all motions try,
And seek all ways to gain their liberty,
The cage set open, refuse to fly from thence?
Nay more, have lovers in impatience
Forced out their lives, and violently fled
Into the other World, to find their dead
Dear loves? And should the Soul, which here below
Closed in the body, every day did woo,
And court that knowledge, which is perfect bliss,
Refuse to go, and find it where it is,
Then when the gods have opened her the way?
But here, till then, the Soul is bound to stay;
Nor must she leave her station, till that God
Dee call her hence, that gave her this abode.
Here Cato stopped and paws'd; is death (quoth he)
Unlawful then till rude necessity
Enforce a man to taste it? And must I
Wear this loathed life, till Caesar bid me die?
Is not the fatal overthrow so late
In Thapsus fields, and ruin of the State,
Necessity of death enough for me?
May I not think the gods in that decree
The death of Cato? But must hold my hand
Expecting till the Conqueror command?
And give more power to him, whose lawless might
Already has usurped above his right?
Or beg for life, acknowledging him so
My Lord, whom justly I adiudg'd Romes foe?
So save my life by sinning, or el^e die
With one sin more, if mercy he deny?
But this sure hand shall save that hazard now*
Plato, and all diuinest Laws allow
Rather than act a crime, a man should die.
Should I take life from Caesar's clemency,
It would be judged by all (what ere were meant)
I did approve of Caesar's government.
How great a crime might mine example prove?
How great a wrong to Rome, and all that love
Her Laws and liberties? Great Pompey's sons,
That now do arm the Western regions,
And for their Country yet intend to fight,
Might think themselves excused if I submit,
And from their iustest resolution swerue
When old free Cato were content to serve.
I Will try (since most assured the Souls do live)
What Laws to us the other World will give:
For sure the gods, amongst Souls departed hence,
Twixt good and bad will put a difference.
Those happy Souls, that while they lived here,
By pure and perfect contemplation were
Abstracted from the body, that with true
Desires did often the heavenly beauties view,
Shall thither go, when they from hence are fled,
To have their joys and knowledge perfected.
Within the Heavens shall they for ever be,
Since here with Heaven they made affinity.
But those dark Souls, which drowned in the flesh
Did never dream of future happiness,
That, while they lived here, believed, or loved
Nothing but what the bodies taste approved,
When they depart from hence, shall fear the sight
Of Heaven, nor dare to approach that glorious light;
But wander still in dismal darkness, near
Their bodies, whom alone they loved here.
Those sad, and ghastly visions, which to sight
Of frighted people do appear by night
About the Tombs and Graves, where dead men lie,
Are such dark Souls condemned to accompany
Their bodies there; which Souls, because they be
Gross and corporeal, men do therefore see.
How different shall the Souls condition be,
If this (quoth he) be true Philosophy?
As true it is, nor do I think it less;
If virtue be the way to happiness:
And that be virtue, which we men have thought,
What inbred reason to our Souls has taught,
And Laws commanded us; if such thou be
Oh virtue, Cato still has followed thee;
And never from thy hardest precepts sweru'd;
Nere has this Soul the bodies pleasures served.
What doubts can shake my long security?
But doubts, where frailty is, will ever be:
Farewell, frail World; what here we cannot see,
I go to find, clear truth and certainty:
Then with a fatal stroke he pierced his breast;
At noise of which his servants vainly pressed
In, to prevent the Fate; nor could they lend
Help to his life, but trouble to his end:
Who sadly showed, death could not be denied,
And rending wider his large wound, he died:
The Citizens with honor did inter^e
That spotless mansion of a Soul so clear.
Caesar from Thapsus, now secured from foes
By that full conquest, to Vzzita goes,
With ease possessing there all Scipio's store
Of corn and arms; and where the Sword before
Threatened his march, where horrid dangers lay
And ambushes, he now finds quiet way
To Ad^umetum back; where he bestows
A cheerful pardon on his yielding foes,
Since now all Affricke from his fears was free,
And Fortune had secured his clemency.
Marching away to Vtica from thence,
Humbly received by all the Citizens,
Who then solemnized Cato's funeral;
He sighed, and thus complained; Why did thou fall
Oh envious man? Rather than not deprive
Caesar of honor, Cato could not live.
How sadly cruel have thou been to me,
Against thy self to wrong my clemency?
And show thy death a greater enemy,
Than all thy living power or arms could be.
To kill my joys thou dy'st, choosing to be
Lamented rather than embraced by me:
It is my sorrow not my love is sought.
What strange rewards have all my mercies got,
That greatest Romans rather chose to fly
To death it self, than to my clemency?
So hapless Pompey, while he fled from me,
Durst rather trust the Egyptian treachery,
And there to perish by ignoble hands,
Than live with Caesar, thinking barbarous lands
Better than Rome with us: but he again
Hoped to repair his strength; thou in disdain
Of Caesar dy'st; but yet my goodness shall
Overcome thy envy, and qui^e frustrate all
Thy scope in death; I Will give all dues to thee;
Thy son in honor shall remain with me,
And to the World shall witness, thou did die
By thine own envy, not my cruelty.
Then to his grace he takes the inhabitants
Of Vtica, and for his armies wants
Commands provision, and, while there he stays
The Cities walls, and fortresses suruayes.
Walking not far from off the Town, he saw
Upon the sandy bank of Bagrada,
Which slowly there his muddy waves does move*
(Within that Country rare) a stately grove
Not wide in circuit, where an awful shade
The meering boughs, exiling Phoebus, made:
That shady grove, whilst with a curious eye
Caesar suruey'd, he chanced to espy
Within, a deep and vast descent of ground;
The jaws of Taenarus, that balefull bound
Twixt earth and hell, is not a blacker room;
To which, they say, the ghosts infernal come.
A Cave there was, in which no cheering light
At all ere peeped; but sad and drery night
A squallid filth, and mouldinesse had made,
From whence exhaled stinches did invade
The upper air, Whilst Caesar in amaze,
Does nearly view the horror of the place
His longing thoughts a Libyan standing by
(Taught by tradition) thus does satisfy.
This den, Oh Caesar, which for many a year
Has empty stood, and freed the land from fear,
A monstrous Serpent, by Heavens vengeance bred
The plague of Afric, once inhabited.
The earth a greater monster never bare;
Not Hydra might with this dire Snake compare,
Nor that great Dragon, whose still waking eyes
Medea charmed, when Colcho's golden prize
The venturous Jason bore to Thessaly;
Nor that, as great and watchful too as he,
Whom great Alcides conquered to possess
The glittering orchard of the Hesperides;
Nor, though the Sun that mighty Python slew,
Did ere the Sun a greater Serpent view.
The several Snakes, that out of Libya's slime
Are bred, might all have been combined in him;
Nor could Medusa's head, had all the blood
At one place fallen, produce a greater brood.
A hundred else in length was his extent;
When he upon this side the river went,
With his long neck stretched out, what ere he spied,
With ease he seized from the other side.
With Lions here he filled his hungry maw,
That came to drink the streams of Bagrada,
And fiercest Tigers all besmeared with blood
Of cattle slain, became themselves his food.
When first the Roman armies sailing ore,
And threatening Carthage on the Libyan shore
Were led by Regulus, whose tragic fall
Sadly renowned the Spartan General,
Here then this hideous monster did remain:
The army marching on you spacious plain,
Three Roman Soldiers, by ill Fate, drew near
To quench their fiery thirst, the river here,
And tempted by these shady trees, to shun
A while the scorching fury of the Sun,
Entering the wood, down to the stream they stoop,
And take in helmets the cool liquour up;
When suddenly surprised with chilling fear,
A horrid hissing through the air they hear,
And from the den the Serpents head appears,
At once amazing both their eyes and ears.
What should they do? For help they could not call;
The Serpents hissing loud had filled all
The wood; nor strength, nor hearts had they to fight,
Nor scarce did any hope appear by flight.
Nor could their trembling hands the helmets hold;
When straight the Serpent from his scaly fold
Shot forth, and seized one, who calling on
His fellows names in vain, was swallowed down,
And buried in the Monsters hungry maw,
His horrid destiny when the other saw,
They leapt into the stream to save their lives:
But that (alas) to them no safety gives;
For forth his long twined neck the Serpent stretched,
And swimming Havens in the river reached;
Who, though too late he striued to be drowned
In Bagrada, a fate more cruel found.
Marus at last, while Havens death did stay
The Monsters speed, had time to escape away;
And to the amazed General relates
The Serpents greatness, and his fellows fates.
But ere his faultring tongue had fully told
The tragic story, they from far behold
The scaly Monster rolling on the sands
In spacious windings: Regulus commands
The army straight their piles and spears prepare
To charge, and march against it as a war,
And ready all their battering engines make,
That strongest walls and bulwarks used to shake:
The Trumpets then, as to a battle, sound;
Which noise the Serpent hearing, from the ground
Where he in spacious rings infolded lay,
Aloft his head aduances to suruay
The Champion round, and to their eyes appears,
Long as that Dragon twixt the heavenly Bears.
Fire from his threatening eyes, like lightning, shot,
And Stygian blasts exhaled from his dire throat;
While he advanced, you would suppose from far
A moving Castle made offensive war:
And shooting forth he in a moment flew
Upon far distant faces; at whose view
The starting Horses could no more be held
By bits, but snorting flew about the field;
Whilst this dire Serpent sad massacres makes
Among the men, some twixt his jaws he takes,
And crushes there, some into air he flings,
Who falling die: and while his spacious rings
He does unfold with fury, sweeping round
The sands, he beats whole cohorts to the ground.
The army now gave ground, and began reti^e,
When noble Regulus inflamed with ire
To see that shame, cries out, Oh stand the field;
To Libyan Monsters shall Romes virtue yield?
If so, I singly will the combat try,
And expiating Romes dishonor die:
Then all alone, deuoide of fear, he goes,
And his strong pile against the Serpent throws
With well taken aim, whom not in vain he struck*
In his tough forehead the steeled Iauelin stuck.
The hideous Monster, whose long age before
Had nere felt steel, sent out a yelling rore,
And shooting forth, impatient of the wound;
With his long tail he lashed the suffering ground.
A shout the Soldiers raise, encouraged now,
And altogether storms of Iauelins throw;
Some harmless lighting on his scaly back
Such noise, as Hail on tiled houses, make;
Some pierce his breast, and softer belly wound;
Those parts alone they penetrable found.
Black gore from thence distaines the swarthy sand;
At last two Iauelins sent from lucky hands
In both his fiery threatening eyes did light,
Depriving him, though not of strength, of sight:
Whose yet blind rage draws many a ruin on,
Until at last a huge, and massy stone,
Shot from a bulwarke-battring engine, stroke
His bowed back with such great force, it broke
That many-ioynted bone; nor then could he
Lift, as before, his speckled crest on high;
But while he struggling lay upon the plain,
Another stone dashed out his poisonous brain;
The sands discolored with black filth appear,
And that so lately feared Serpent there,
Stretched out at length his balefull life expires;
His vast extent the General admires:
But straight a groan the mourning River gave,
A doleful noise the Wood, and hollow Cave
Resounded forth; the Naiades, that kept
Slow Bagrada, for their dead servant wept;
Nor did the augurs then forbear to show,
The Roman troops his death should dearly rue,
And Regulus become a captive prey
To his insulting foes; on whom (said they)
The Nymphs, and wrathful Naiades would take,
That dire revenge for their slain Serpents sake.
Caesar enough delighted to behold
The Cave, and pleased with what the Libyan told,
Returns to Vtica; thence marching on
With speed through Iuba's lost dominion,
Arriues at wealthy Zamah, Libya's pride,
Where late a powerful Monarch did reside*
And hearing there of Iuba's wretched fate,
Laments the frailty of man's highest state:
Then he commends the Citizens, and ore
The Country leaves Sallustius Governor,
Which from a Kingdoms State is now become,
A subject Province to Imperial Rome.
Then marches back to Vtica again,
And lanching forth his fleet into the maine
Sailing by Sardos, on the Italian coast
He safe arriues with his victorious host.
Annotations upon the fourth Book.
Lucius Scipio, General at Thapsus, perished at Sea by the report of all that
write that story, but the manner of his death, as J have here related it, is to
be found only in Appian, which I have read, that first he wounded himself
with a Sword, and afterward leaped into the Sea, as loath that his dead body
should either suffer despite, or receive favor from his enemies. Appi. lib.
2. de bello civilly.

FINIS.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
The Argument of the fifth Book.
What vnaccustom'd honors by decree
The Senate gi^e to Caesar's victory.
His four rich triumphs showed ore Gallia,
Conquered Pharnaces, Egypt, Africa.
Whose pompous shows display the captived fate
Of several Princes: Caesar's high estate
To throw into the hazard once again,
Great Pompey's sons revive the war in Spain.
WHen Caesar's conquest borne by winged Fame,
Had entered Rome, and to the Senate came,
The affrighted Fathers in pale haste declared
Their forced joy; and while the Priests prepared
For Sacrifice, officiously decreed,
(Though Rome it self in that days fate did bleed)
That Supplications to the gods should be,
Twice twenty days for Caesar's victory;
Through all the Roman Temples they inuoke
The gods for him, and all their Altars smoke
With thankful incense, more than when the fall
Of Carthages so feared Hannibal,
Or that defeat of all the Cimbrian powers
By Marius hand, that saved Quirinus Towers,
First pierced their joyful ears; no vanquished foe
Ere caused such seeming joy. Rome's forced now
To thank the gods for her subjection more,
Than all the greatness she had won before.
To that great Triumph, which so long before,
His ten years labor had deserved, ore
The conquered Gauls, and well deferred till now,
The forward Senate grant three Triumphs more,
TO express more pompous State than ere before
The people saw, or lawrell'd Roman bore;
That all the several vanquished Nations
From East and West, from both the Poles at once,
By his triumphant Chariot might combine,
The yellow Germans with black Libyans join,
Gauls with Armenians meet, the Sunburned bands
Of Meroe with cold Pannonians,
The painted Britains, curled Sicambrians
With coale-blacke Mibians, and Mazacians.
Those that at farthest distance never yet
Each other viewed, at Caesar's Triumph met,
Might there acquainted in sad bondage grow,
And wail in chains their common overthrow:
That the Imperial Tyber might at once
All floods, that bless so many regions,
In Caesar's rich Triumphall tablets see
Displayed, bewailing their captivity.
And bridled there by his proud conquest, join
Seuen-channell'd Nilus with the German Rhine,
The swift Danubius with slow Bagrada;
And all those winding streams, which every way
From North to South into the Ocean roll,
Twixt fardest Thule and Tritonia's poole;
From whence Minerua deigned her name to take,
When first within the quiet Crystal lake
Come down from Heaven, she viewed her virgin face.
Nor ever so did any Triumph grace
Romes power (as this had done;) nor yet in all
Those former Bays, which decked the Capitol,
If here her self no part at all had been
Of the subdued, had she more glory seen.
But lest these honors should not seem to be
Enough for Caesar, by a new decree
The Senators, before he enter Rome,
Make him Dictator for ten years to come,
And three years Censor; that it might be shown
How Caesar's conquering power had overthrown
Their liberties, together with the fall
Of barbarous Nations: In the Capitol
He in a Chariot was advanced to sit,
To Jove himself directly opposite:
A Globe terrestrial not far from thence,
Displayed in short the vast circumference
Of all the earth; on which his Statue trod
With this inscription, He Is a demy-god.
Swelled with the Senates flattering decrees,
And fortune of so many victories,
Does Caes^r now in Pomp triumphant come,
His lofty Chariot through the streets of Rome
By snow-white Horses drawn, more bright by far
Than those famed Steeds, which in the Trojan war
From slaughtered Rhesus tent Tydides took,
Before they drunk of Xanthus Crystal brook,
Or cropped the Trojan pastures, a vain aid
To falling Ilion, the first night betrayed.
Declare, ye sisters of the Thespian spring,
(For you remember well, and well can sing,)
In those four Triumphs, which the people saw
Ore Egypt, Pontus, France, and Libya,
How many captived people sadly went
In habits, tongues, and visage different
Before Great Caesar's Chariot, showing there
With different gestures their disdain, or fear.
How many lands and stately Cities there,
Displayed in his triumphall tables were,
Where skillful hands had wouen to delight,
So many Nations several kinds of fight,
With his proud conquests, and succesfull toiles;
By which were borne the arms, and wealthy spoils
Of vanquished Princes, Crowns of burnished gold
For all the wondering people to behold.
But if ye Muses in so high a State,
Disdain to mourn for each plebeian Fate;
Yet pass not slightly by that princely Gaul,
Stout Vercingetorix, for whose great fall
Some hearts relented there; whose stubborn thought,
Could not at all in nine years war be taught
To brook with patience the proud yoke of Rome:
Who now reserved for death by Caesar's doom,
Before the Chariot a chained Captive went,
Striving in vain to overcome the discontent
Of that days shame; and, though his hands were tied,
Shaking his black curled locks, he sought to hide
His angry front, whilst his undaunted look
Seemed more to wish than fear deaths fatal stroke.
Another object, though unlike to this,
Yet fallen alike from height of worldly bliss,
Moved the beholders hearts; they earned to see,
The tender beauties of Arsinoe
A virgin a branch of Lagus royal Stem,
That once had worn the Egyptian Diadem,
By Fortune thrown into so low a state
Of bondage now; pitying her changed fate:
Those snow-white arms, that did a Scepter hold,
(Oh mock of Fortune!) manicled in gold:
Although for her a gentler doom then death
Remain, and Caesar's pity spare her breath,
Or else his ends in love restore her back
Again to Egypt for her sisters sake:
How much (alas) had there her blood been spilt,
Had Fortune taken from Cleopatra's guilt?
For all the favor, which to Arsinoe
Rome showed, repriu'd her but a while, to be
In aftertimes her sisters crime, and die
By Cleopatra's foul impiety.
But that in Libya's triumph, which above
All other objects might deserve to move
A just compassion (if true innocence
In misery may justly move the sense)
Was young Prince Iuba, led in chains, the son
Of that great Juba, whose dominion
From Mauritania's farthest Western end,
To Thera's sands so lately did extend:
Whose puissant hand a prouder Scepter bore,
Than ever Libyan Monarch did before.
This poor b young Prince by Fortune seemed to be
Brought as a spectacle of misery,
Deprived so lately of so many lands,
And, ere his years could act a crime, in bands.
But Oh (how blind are mortal eyes?) that day
Of seeming woe, first made the glorious way
To Iuba's future happiness; and he
Was far more blessed in that captivity,
Than if his Fathers greatness still had stood.
Trained up at Rome he gained a truer good;
And freed from barbarism, was taught to know
What Rome, or learned Athens could bestow:
Adorning so his mind, as wisest men
In every age admired his happy pen.
So that to grace his future prosperous reign,
(For great Augustus hand restored again
This captive Iuba to a kingly Throne)
A lasting name his Histories have won,
And fame unto his native Libya give;
Where with himself those mentioned Kings shall live,
When brazen Monuments are eat with rust.
And marble Columns time shall bruise to dust.
And had the Ponticke King c Pharnaces been
In person there and by the people seen,
That object well had balanced with delight
The others ruth; but he was escaped by flight:
Whose absence one proud sentence must supply,
J came, I saw, and vanquished the enemy.
But those sad stories, which the tables show,
More than the living spectacles could do,
Affect the peoples hearts: for there (although
No vanquished Roman might a captive go)
The bleeding wounds of Rome it self are spread;
And each man there his own dear loss may read.
For mixed with foreign conquests, with the falls
Of barbarous Captains, Princes of the Gauls,
With dying Juba, drowned Ptolomey,
Those envious tables to the eyes display
Domestike loss; and in sad figures tell,
By Caesar's Sword what vanquished Romans fell.
Here with King Iuba old Pe^reius dies,
Here slaughtered Sylla, there Afranius lies:
There Damasippus and Torquatus fall;
And here (Oh woeful sight!) Romes General,
The Noble Scipio by his own hand slain,
Falls bleeding down into the watery maine;
And sinking leaves a Noble crimson dye
On Neptunes face: but what true Roman eye
Refrained from tears, when he beheld the fall
Of matchless Cato, who, in spite of all
His friends prevention, died, and wider tore
With his own hands the wounds he made before?
Yet amongst so many woeful stories shown,
One Noble name was spared, one Fate alone
Was thought too sad; nor to the peoples eye
Durst they present Great Pompey's tragedy,
For fear so great a sorrow might outweigh
The pompous joys of that triumphant day:
But that concealed, which most of all was sought,
Remained more deeply fixed in every thought*
And they, without a picture, can supply
Each part of his lamented History.
What tongue, what pen can at the height relate
Each sumptuous part of that so enuy'd State?
The public feasts, rare spectacles devised,
And games by all the people exercised;
Who without number flocked to do him grace:
When all the Senate from the Julian Place
Waited him home, and seemed not then to be
The Worlds high Lords, but Caesar's family.
And as they pass, to gild their pompous way,
Numberless lights the Elephants display
Upon their captive backs, and moving through
The streets, like heavenly Constellations show,
Like those great beasts, which in the Horizon placed
Through every part with glorious Stars are graced.
Nor in vain shows was this Magnificence
Alone consumed, but real Monuments,
Which his great power to after-ages praised:
A stately Temple he to d Venus raised,
Or in Devotion, or in pride to grace
That Deity from whom he drew his race,
That now the Paphian Queen, by Caesar's reign,
Might seem a truer conquest to obtain,
Ore blew-ey'd Pallas, and the wife of Jove,
Than when they for the golden Apple strove,
And Paris fatal judgment did bestow,
The prize on her to Iliums overthrow.
For Rome and all the conquered World far more,
Are forced now to honor and adore
Her name than theirs, so much it was to be
The original of Caesar's pedigree,
More than the daughter, or the wife of Jove:
The Temples structure in rare beauty strove,
With what the height of fancy could express,
Or any pens most graceful happiness
Describe aright: upon the walls did stand
In Parian marble wrought with curious hand,
That amorous story where the Phrygian boy
The beauty of a goddess did enjoy:
The vale of Ida there was shadowed such,
As Poets made it, Ida vale so much
Indebted to the Muses, seemed now
Unto a Painters hand as much to owe:
The bower of Love was richly carved there,
That happy bower of bliss and pleasure, where
Venus descended from the Crystal sky,
To generate the Julian family;
Was as a Bride in all her glories led,
To fill with beauty young Anchifes bed.
Near them their Noble issue, in whose blood
A Goddess mixed with man, Aeneas stood;
Such was his shape, so shone his cheerful face
As young Apollo's, when he goes to grace
His native Delos, and in height of State
That Festival intends to celebrate,
Or Bacchus, when from conquered India,
The yoked Tigers his proud Chariot draw,
Trojan Aeneas, whose famed History,
Great Maro's Muse did after raise as high,
As the old Maeonian did Achilles fame.
But that most pious posture more became
Aeneas far, when at the fatal sack
Of Troy, he stooped, and on a willing back
Flying from thence, carried his aged Sire
From the Greeks Swords, and all-deuouring Fire,
Together with his gods, whom he prized more
Than Priam's wealth, and all Troyes burning store.
Behind was young Iulus, and did seem
With short unequal steps to follow him,
That Prince, from whom the Julian family
Derive their name as well as pedigree,
Who the foundations of long Alba laid,
And ore that land a powerful Scepter swayed.
By him the Sceptered issues of his blood,
In their successiue order carved stood;
Till Alba was destroyed by Tullus doom,
And all her people were transferred to Rome:
From Alba's sack the pedigree went on,
And was deduced lineally down
To Caesar's time; in whose success and reign
Alba had seemed to conquer Rome again.
But into the hazard once again to throw
A State so strong, so sure as Caesar's now
Seemed to the World to be, a furious e war
More full of threats, of doubt and danger far
Than ever had as yet opposed his reign,
The two young Pompeys raise in farthest Spain
There where the Great Alcides pillars stand,
And proudly boast to bound the farthest land.
That part of Spain must prove the third sad stage
Of Civil war, and Romes selfe-wounding rage.
Those, that inhabit that far Western shore,
Vainly suppose that they alone, before
The setting Sun forsake this Hemisphere,
Do view his face at nearer distance there
Than other men, than other Countries can;
And that he falls into their Ocean
As Poets taught; or else his lofty Sphere
Bows down more near the Globe terrestrial there,
Because his beauteous Orb, before the set,
Unto their eyes appears more large and great.
Those mistie fogges and vapors that arise
From that great Sea, which interposed lies,
Breaking diffuse the rays, from the eyes that went,
Or else enlarge the objects figure sent,
And make the setting Sun seem greater so,
As bright things largest in the water show:
Whence they scarce any twilight have at all,
Either at Phoebus rising, or his fall;
Day breaks together with the rising Sun,
And day together with the set is done.
All Spain, in figure of a bullockes hide,
Is by the Ocean washed on every side,
And made almost an I Will, save where her ground
The Pyrenaean hills from France do bound:
From whose East end (for old description makes
Five sides of Spain) the first beginning takes,
And Westward thence unto the Gades extends,
But by the way to South obliquely bends;
And is inuiron'd by the mid-land Seas,
Where stand those Islands Balearides,
From whence Metellus took his famous style,
Fair Ebusu^, and that small snaky I Will.
The second side from Gades, (of small extent)
Is to the sacred promontory bent;
In which short space two rivers, of no small
Account in Spain, into the Ocean fall,
Baetis and Anas; far their channells spread,
And from the silver Mountains both take head:
Both their great channells do at last divide,
And make two Islands by the Oceans side:
From thence the third side in a line extends,
And at the Nerian promontory ends,
From South directly North it goes; this bound
Of Spain does Westward know no further ground:
That all along the boundless Ocean laues;
Thither the golden Tagus rowles his waves,
Winding through Lusitania, and into
That Ocean does in one great channel flow:
From thence the Northern side of Spain extends,
And at the Pyrenaean Mountains ends,
Bounded along by the Cantabrian Sea;
Within those shores the wildest Nations be
The barbarous Celtae, rough Asturians,
And (those that name the Sea) Cantabrians*
But last of all, the fifth, and North-East side
The Pyrenaei make, which do divide
Gallia from Spain, which by their wondrous height
Might seem to threat the Skies, and once more fright
The gods with a Gigantike war: that side
Of those high Mountains, which surueyes the pride
Of wealthy France, does bare and barren show,
Clothed with no grass, no trees at all there grow*
The other side, which barren Spain oresees,
Shows like a fruitful Summer, clothed with trees
Which never do their verdant color lose:
And so to both the adjacent Countries shows,
As if to clothe himself, he had robbed Spain,
And lost his own, to make France rich again.
That lofty Mountain (if we trust to fame)
Did from the fair Pyrene take his name,
When Great Alcides moved by the fame
Of King Geryon's stately cattle, came
From Greece, to fetch that wealthy spoil away,
Entering the bounds of Spain, he there made stay.
King Bebrix then ore all those Mountains reigned,
And there with Feasts Alcides entertained:
The conquering guest, by Fate unhappy, spied
Pyrene daughter to the King, and fried
With inward flames; at last, while there he stayed,
His charming words had won the royal maid:
He vows his love still constant shall remain,
And, when with Conquest he returns again,
Espousall rites: But cruel Fates deny,
And make Alcides slow in victory,
Too slow, alas; nor could the fight be tried
Ere fair Pyrene miserably died.
Her swelling womb now began the fact reveal,
Nor could she longer her stoll'n love conceal,
When fearing her stern Fathers wrathful spite,
Into the woods she takes a secret flight:
There all alone to caves and senseless trees
She wailes her Fate, and calls Great Hercules,
Or false, or slow; till some fell beasts, that were
More savage than their kind, had seized her,
And whilst in vain, alas, she did implore
Her absent lover, her to pieces tore.
Seven times had Cynthia filled her waned light,
When he returned with Conquest from the fight;
And laden with G^ryons wealthy spoils,
The recompense of his successful toiles,
Sought for Pyrene, but enforced to find
What often before his sad misgiuing mind
Made him suspect, distraught with grief and woes
Among the woods, and craggy hills he goes
In search of her, and with a mournful sound,
Calls his Pyrene; all the hills rebound
Pyrenes name; the hills themselves did shake,
The savage beasts, and mountain robbers quake;
No Tigers preyed, nor Lions durst to move,
Whilst Great Alcides sought his wretched Love.
But wandering through the solitary wood,
When he had found her limbs, and understood
Pyrenes wretched Fate, Oh love, (quoth he)
'Twas my accursed absence murdered thee:
What savage beast durst this? What power above
Suffered so much against Alcides love?
Oh would Geryons spoils had all been lost,
And I nere stirred from this beloved coast:
Then gathering up those sad dear relics, there
Within the Mountains side he did interre
His love and sorrow. This small Tomb (alas)
When Times strong hand (quoth he) shall quite deface,
Thy state shall greater be, and time to come,
Shall reckon all these hills Pyrenes Tomb:
The Fates consented, and by lasting fame
Those Mountains ever bore Pyrenes name.
The two young Pompey's with their powers, not far
From Gades now marching, meant to seat the war
In that rich Country, where fair Baetis flows,
And on the region his own name bestows,
(Though Turdetania, from the men that came
To plant it first, be yet another name.)
There they the fatal Munda do possess,
A Town yet famous for their dire success,
With other Towns not far, A^egua,
And Vcubis, and stately Corduba
That old Patritian colony, whose name
The births of great and learned Romans fame.
The Turdetanian region may for rare
And wondrous gifts of nature well compare,
With any piece of earth; no other soil
Does more reward the industrious plowmans toil
With rich increase; no other pastures keep
More horned herds, more wealthy-fleeced Sheep,
Those many branches, which from Baetis flow,
Such wealth on all the neighboring fields bestow;
Whose yellow banks, no less than Tagus is,
Are stored with metalls of the highest price
In every place; more gold no barren ground
Affords, than in that wealthy glebe is found:
Which nature seldom does together give;
And happy might the Turdetanians live,
But that their Country too too happy is,
And on their conquest sets too high a price.
Their wealthy grounds are often the seat of war,
And prey to every powerful conqueror:
There Rome and Carthage fought, and did maintain
Their rival forces with the wealth that Spain
Afforded there, while Fortune doubted yet
Which land to make the Worlds Imperial seat.
When like to Titius fruitful liver, they
Sustein'd those birds, to whom they were a prey;
And suffering Spain by those great factions rent,
That Vultur fed which did it self torment;
Nor lies the gold of that rich region
Deep in the bowels of the earth alone,
Thence to be dug up with a toil as great
At is the value; there they need not sweat
In gathering wealth, nor need they far to fire
From day, or threaten Pluto's monarchy
With their deep labors; the rich metall's found
Upon the glistering surface of the ground,
And lies on rivers banks commixt with sand,
Or else with dust upon the drier land,
And Mountains tops: what reason can be found
Should so enrich the upper part of ground
Unless you trust a tale? When Phaeton
Did erst misguide the Chariot of the Sun,
And scorched the earth; the nature then of all
These grounds Sulphurious was, and Mineral,
The metalls melted by the Sun, fried up,
And so with ease are gathered at the top.
To Pompey's army, while they there remain,
The several nations from all parts of Spain
(Besides those scattered troops, from Thapsus fled,
Which Labi^nus there and Varus led)
Adioyne themselves; the fierce Cantabrians,
That think it base to yield to Natures hands
Their lives, as if bestowed for war alone;
Gallecians skilled in divination;
The Callaicians too, whose men intend
Nothing but war, and still in rapine spend
Their ventrous lives, using the women's hands
To all works else, to sow and plow the lands:
From old Ilerda, that so lately tried
Romes Civil wars, comes aid to Pompey's side:
From Minius banks come bold Asturians,
From golden Tagus Lusitanians;
Fierce Ceretans, Alcides Soldiers,
The light-armed Vascon, that no helmet wears:
And Concani, that in their drink express
Themselves derived from wild Massagetes,
Their greatest thirst with horses blood they slake.
The Celtiberians, that mixed birth did take
From Gauls and Spaniards; who do ever burn
Their friends dead bodies, and extremely mourn
(Accounting it the worst unhappiness)
If Wolves, or Vulturs their dead limbs should seize.
From Sucro's banks come Hedetan supplies,
And from the lofty Towers of Serabis:
The Vettones, the Oretanians too,
And the ensigns of Parnassian Castulo,
With all the Spanish Nations else, whom love
Of old dead Pompey to the war did move.
Annotations upon the fifth Book.
a This Arsinoe, which had in the tumult of Egypt been saluted Queen by the
Soldiers (as was before declared) and afterward by Caesar apprehended, and
here led in Triumph (according to Dion) and released at the suit of her sister
Cleopatra then Queen of Egypt, was afterward murdered by the same Cleopatra
(as Josephus reports) for Cleopatra in the time of Marcus Antonius the
Triumuir, did by her cruelty extinguish the royal blood of the Ptolomeys, and
impatient of any that might afterward prove riualls to her in that government,
did not only poison yo^ng Ptolomey, her brother, whom Caesar had made her
husband, but caused her sister Arsinoe to be murdered as she was at her
Devotion in the Temple. Josephus lib. 15. de antiquitat.

b This Iuba (says Plutarch) was happy in his captivity, and loss of his so
great an inheritance, for at Rome he obtained happy education, and in stead of
a barbarous Prince became a learned and judicious writer: he is mentioned by
diverse of those ages; he wrote Commentaries of the Libyan Kings, and diverse
observations of his own times; he was industrious in the study of natural
Philosophy, and searching the natures of herbs and plants: he was the first
that found out the virtues and malignitie of the herb Euphorbium, and called
it by the name of his chief Physician: he served Augustus Caesar in his wars
against Marcus Antonius, and was afterward by his bounty restored to a Crown
(though not to all the Dominions of his father) and married Cleopatra the
daughter of Marcus Antonius and Cleopatra. Strabo. lib. 17.

c Pharnaces had escaped by flight, and was slain by Asander, who rebelled
against him, to whom he had committed the government of Bosphorus in his
absence: so that his Person was not led in Triumph; the conquest of Pharnaces
(says Dion) though it were not glorious by reason it was so easily obtained,
yet Caesar much gloried in it by reason of the speed, and that he might carry
those three words in Triumph, Veni, vidi, vici. Dion. lib. 42.

d Caesar was especially magnificent in doing honor (says Dion) to Venus,
whom he accounted, and desired to have it generally believed, the original of
his pedigree; from her also (as Appian reports) he would glory that he had
received beauty of body, she being the Queen of Love and Beauty.

e Caesar after all these Triumphs, and assurances of greatness was yet
threatened by a third war in Spain: a war (says Dion) not to be contemned;
nay, far greater and more full of danger than all his former wars: the
battle of Munda (says Florus) for fury, slaughter, and cruelty as much
exceeded Thapsus, as Thapsus did Pharsalia, etc.

FINIS.
THE SIXTH BOOK.
The Argument of the sixth Book.
Varus by Didius on the stormy Maine
Js vanquished: Caesar arriues in Spain,
And raises Pompey's siege from Vlla's walls;
He takes Ategua: both Generals
Removed from thence, the war to Munda bear*
Caesar's despa^re; his men's vnsuall fear;
A bloody conquest they at last obtain,
Young Pompey, Varus, Labienus slain.
But ere the Tragic war arrived in Spain,
And did with blood the continent distaine,
The Ocean bore it, and was first the Stage
Of this third fury, and revived rage:
There where the extended Libyan coast does meet
Almost with Spaines Tartessus, Varus Fleet
Guarded the straightened Sea in Pompey's name;
Thither for Caesar Didius Navy came:
Two shores their fury at near distance saw,
Fearing to whether land the war would draw;
But Afric bled before; what did remain
Of Romes dissentions, Fates decreed to Spain:
That narrow point of Sea on all four sides
Great Lands from Lands, great Seas from Seas diuides,
In breadth the Libyan continent and Spain,
In length the Iberian and great Western maine.
The Nauies scarce their furious fight began,
When all in waves the threatening Ocean
Swelled up; and they encountered from the Sea
As great a danger as the war could be.
The Southern wind from Tingitania blows;
And from the Western Ocean Corus rose;
Fierce Boreas met them from the Spanish coast,
And now the Sea on every side was tossed:
Their several waves the different winds did move,
As if that Aeolus and Neptune strove
A war so sad and wicked to prevent,
Or drown both Fleets while they were innocent.
But greater was their dire desire of fight
Than was the Oceans rage, or winds despite:
To impious war through storms as rough they go
As would the greediest venturing Merchant do
For Parma's wealthy fleeces, Spaines rich ore,
Or brightest gemmes from the Erythraean shore.
But when no space almost at all diuides
Both eager Fleets, the rowers take their sides,
Tugge at the oar, and (though the Ocean raues)
With arms vnweary'd cut the curled waves:
The horrid showting of the Soldiers drowned
All noise of rowing and shrill Trumpets sound.
Yet all these sounds, and all the noise of war
The winds, and louder storms out roared far,
With which, and Darts, the air is darkened round;
Ships against Ships, beakes meeting beakes resound:
Some by their own endeavors meet their foes,
Others the winds and stormy Seas expose
Before they thought; to trial of the war,
Dashing together with more fury far
The adverse Ships, than else they would have met;
Now grew the horror and confusion great:
Their fears were different; some, while others fought,
Repaired those ruins which the storm had wrought,
And stopped their leaking Ships, preventing so
The certain danger of a nearer foe:
Nor could stout Didius now his Soldiers cheer,
Or guide his Fleet; the tempest every where
Is only heard; but leaving his commands
Puts all into the winds and Fortunes hands;
No more could Varus for young Pompey do:
Guided by chance against each other go
The amazed Fleets; some vessels sides bored through
By sharp and brazen stemmes; nor do they know
Surely to whom they do their ruin owe,
Whether the weathers fury or the foe.
Nor did confusion of all sounds affright
The ears alone; but through that horrid night,
Which showre-black clouds, and skies tempestuous brought,
With no small terror the winged lightning shot:
No other light to them the day could give;
No other fire in such a storm could live.
Some Ships now almost taken by the foes,
The swelling Sea with violence orethrowes,
And vindicates their honor from surprise;
Some sink, when boorded by the enemies,
Drowning the victors, and the vanquished see
A quick revenge of their captivity.
Fortune did seem against both sides to fight
A while, and wreake in common her despite,
But long it held not; She at last decided
The day, and showed for whom she had provided
So great a labor of the troubled Maine;
And Caesar's forces a full conquest gain:
Though Didius blush it should be thought that he
Owed to such aids as those the victory.
Varus perceiues the Fates themselves conspire
On Caesar's side, and forced to retire
When now be saw part of his hapless powers
Orewhelm'd, part seized by the conquerours,
With his poor remnant flies, and gets into
Carteias harbor; thence by land to go
To Pompey's Camp; Pompey at Vlla stayed,
And siege in vain to that strong City laid.
Caesar with more than his accustomed speed
(By which his great designs did still succeed)
Hasts to the war in Spain, and gone from Rome
In seventeen days was to Sagunthus come,
That true Sagunthus, whose so Tragic fall
Did once vpbraid the Heavens, and envy call
Upon their Justice, till the offenders fate,
And small ruin of the Punike State
Absolu'd the gods again: with Crystal waves
The Cities Western side fair Dur^as laues,
Clothing with verdant grass the adjoining plain,
And gently slides into the Iberian Maine.
His quick arrival, unexpected there,
With sudden joy did all the Soldiers cheer:
With speed as great from thence he marches on
Thorough the Celtiberian region,
Nor Duria's stream, nor mount Idubeda,
Nor Sucro's rapid flood his course could stay,
Nor that high glittering Mountain, that for fame
Of his great wealth retains the silver name:
From whose descent rich Baetis takes his head;
Along, the shore of Baetis Caesar led
His cheerful Soldiers on to Corduba;
Either to take that wealthy Town, or draw
Pompey from Vlla's siege; the first in vain
Caesar assayed, the last he did obtain:
For Pompey straight, although within the Town
His brother Sextus lay in Garrison,
Abandons Vlla, and against Caesar goes;
Who from the walls of Corduba arose
Before his foes approach, loath there to try
The utmost hazard of a war so high.
But passing thence ore Salsus stream, does lay
With more success, siege to Ategua,
And winnes the Town, maugre the feeble aid
Munatius brought: but there while Caesar stayed,
A fair ostent the gods were pleased to show,
A towering Eagle long ore Caesar flew
Till seeming weary, with a fair descent
It gently pearch'd on young Octauius tent,
Who followed then his Father to the war.
A good presage the augurs all declare,
And not alone to show the wars success,
But young Octauius future happiness:
But not so soon, alas, could they foresee
The full effect of this fair augury:
How many civil wounds did yet remain
Ere Rome with patience brook a Caesar's reign,
And for her safety be enforced to fly
To Great Augustus happy Monarchy?
For thee, great Prince, and thy ensuing State
Was Rome oppressed, and Julius fortunate;
For thee were Marius crimes, and Sylla's wrought:
For thee was Thapsus and Pharsalia fought,
That Rome in those dire Tragedies might see
What horrid dangers followed liberty:
And thou at last a welcome conqueror,
Might those high titles without envy wear
Which mighty Julius with a toil so great,
With so much blood and envy strived to get.
Thou then anew that powerful State shall mould,
And long the Worlds high Scepter safely hold,
Above all Riualls placed; thy god like State
No force shall shake; when shutting Janus gate,
Thou shall set open the sacred Thespian spring,
And there securely hear the Muses sing,
Whose stately lays still keep thy deathlesse fame,
And make immortal Great Augustus name:
Nor ever did the Arts so truly reign,
Nor sung the Muses in so pure a strain
As then they did, to grace thy glorious time;
As if the Muse before lacked power to clime,
Or else disdained her highest notes to raise,
Till such a Monarch lived to give the Bays.
Grieved for Ategua's loss, and fearing now
That other Towns would, following Fortune, go
To Caesar's party, and his cause forsake,
Pompey resolves with all his strength to make
A speedy trial of a war so great,
And on one hazard his whole Fortune set.
To Munda's fatal fields was Caesar gone;
Thither young Pompey's army marches on:
The Town was his; and near the Town, arose
An high and spacious hill; where Pompey chose
T'incampe his men; from whence he might suruay
The plains below where Caesar's army lay.
No prodigies forespake the black event
Of that days wondrous battle, no ostent
At all was showed from seas, earth, air, or skies,
No entrails spoke, no birds gave auguries:
Those sad protents, that used to strike a fear
At other times in men, were spared there.
Yet were their fears far greater; they suspect
The silence of the gods, loath to detect
So great a ruin as did then ensue:
Horror inuades their breasts; although they knew
No cause from whence those strange amazements grow,
No outward signs appeared, their threatenings now
Were inward all; they make, by sad surmise
Within themselves a thousand prodigies.
In Pompey's camp the amazed Soldiers
Sad silence kept, distraught twixt desperate fears,
And tragic hopes; pale horror to their eyes
Seems to present the future Tragedies,
And the dear ghosts of slaughtered friends appear:
Yet know not they whether themselves should fear,
Or hope their hands should make the ensuing Fate.
On one side Caesar's Fortune does abate
Their confidence too much; on the other they
Resolve, overcome, not to out-liue the day:
But (Oh strange Fate!) the bold Caesarians
Grow faint and heartlesse; and those active hands,
That had so often drawn their Countries blood,
And against all Laws for Caesar's fortune stood;
That had before to their successful toiles,
Promised the Worlds sole sway, and wealthy spoils
Of every nation, quake, and faulter here,
Nor from each other can conceal their fear.
How dear this field would cost, what 'twas to go,
Against the fury of a desperate foe,
Their trembling thoughts reuolue; nor to their friends
Shame they to utter it; those dauntlesse minds,
That met with joy Pharsalia's dreadful day,
Those that at Thapsus battle could not stay
The Generals command; preventing there
The signal, now both fight and signal fear.
But that the fear, which did his Camp invade
Might not seem strange, Caesar himself was sad
Before the battle, and that cheerful look,
That usual vigor, whence his Soldiers took
Happy presages still, was changed there;
Nor did his wonted confidence appear:
Perhaps reuoluing the uncertain Fate
Of things, and frailty of man 's highest state,
And how incessant storms do beat upon
The lofty Cedars, learnes to fear his own
By other mighty falls so lately wrought;
Or Fortune else presenting to his thought
Her many favors, and his long success,
He weighed the time of Pompey's happiness,
Who in her favor claimed as great a share
As he could now, before Phar^alia's war.
That he arrived now as high in State
As Pompey was; might fear Great Pompey's Fate:
Whose fall (though wrought for him) had let him see
Fortunes great power, and strange inconstancy*
But lest his sadness should too much dismay
The Soldiers hearts before so great a day,
He recollects himself, and with feigned cheer,
And forced looks, taught to dissemble fear,
Thus to his army speaks; Victorious troops,
On whose known valor more than Caesar's hopes,
His certain State depends, see here in Spain
This fainting Hydra yet shoots forth again
His last weak heads; let that Herculean might,
That lopt the first, and strongest off in fight,
Make perfect your great labor, which requires
The last hand here: of all your large desires
You are free masters, when this field is fought,
Though all the World for fresh supplies were sought,
In Fortunes power it lies not to expose
Your quiet State again, or find you foes.
But what are these that once again should dare
Molest our peace with unexpected war?
What can these barbarous halfe-arm'd Nations do?
Or what unfeigned affection can they owe
To Pompey's side? or do they fear his name,
And have not heard enough of Caesar's fame?
Have not the wars by old llerda taught
Our strength to Spain? what Roman powers are brought
Thither, but young raw Soldiers, and vnskill'd
In Military arts, that nere beheld
A foe before? and those poor few that know
The war, are such as have been beat by you;
And bring more fear than help unto their side:
Will Varus troops your well-knowne strength abide?
Or that so often vanquished runnagate
False Labienus, long maintain the Fate
Of his young General? Brave Soldiers on,
Perfect that work that is so nearly done.
His speech no shouts, no acclamation finds,
Nor could it raise their sad dejected minds:
And though, the signal given, all Trumpets sound,
And Pompey's army from the upper ground
Make down to charge, the cold Caesarians
Dare not approach, nor follow the commands
Of their great General; when Caesar filled
With grief and rage, seizing a Spear and Shield,
This day, quoth he (no more my Soldiers)
Shall end the life of Caesar, and your wars;
Remember whom you leave; then forth he flies
Alone to charge the amazed enemies;
Who, till their wonder was expelled by hopes,
Awhile made stand; at last from all the troops
Against Caesar's head whole storms of Iauelins come;
Some in his shield he does receive, and some
Auoids, declining of his body down
Till shame not courage brought his Soldiers on
To save their General; and against the foe
They do begin a fight so a furious now,
As if with this new rage they would appear
To recompense their ignominious b fear.
Th'auxiliary troops on either side
Gave back, and left the battle to be tried
By none but Roman hands; who man to man,
And foot to foot a constant fight began
With so great horror, as who had beheld
Pharsalia's fight, or Thapsus bloody field,
Would have esteemed those furies light, and thought
He nere saw war till Munda's field was fought.
Both Generals alike twixt hope and fear,
With needless speeches their fierce Soldiers cheer,
Till wearied with the toil, they both retire,
And from two little hills behold the dire
Encounter of their men; when Caesar's eyes,
That dry, had viewed whole Nations tragedies,
Began to melt; and whilst bright victory,
Ore both the armies houer'd doubtfully,
Caesar and Pompey had forgot their hopes,
And only pitied their engaged troops,
Fearing both armies in the place would die,
And leave no conquest, but one tragedy.
A balefull silence on the sudden then
Possessed the field; no showts of fighting men
Were heard; as if they labored to keep in
Their spirits for action; hands alone were seen
To move, and write in bloody Characters
Their deep resolves: young Pompey's Soldiers
Beyond this day disdain to hope at all;
And Caesar's men promise, in Pompey's fall
To all their toiles a rich and quiet close,
And that the World no more can find them foes*
At last the battles fortune seemed to lean
To Pompey's side, and Caesar's fainting men
Gave back apace, nor scarce with all their might
Could the Centurions stay their open flight:
When Caesar armed with high despair, preparing
The fatal Poniard, which he wore, and baring
His manly breast, thus speaks; Oh Fortune, now
I see thou wants not power to overthrow
What ere thou build'st: but I accuse not thee;
Enough already have thou done for me:
Enough have thy transcendent favors graced
My lives whole course: should thou not change at last
Perhaps the erring World might censure me
More than a man, and thee no Deity:
I that so long have thy high favors known,
Can thus securely entertain thy frown.
There had he died; but as kind mothers do
Often let their children near to dangers go,
That then, when they perceive them most afraid,
They may the more endeare their timely aid:
So Fortune finds an unexpected way
To save his Fate; whilst yet his men made stay
And kept the field, King Bogud, that without
The battle stood, wheels suddenly about
To seize young Pompey's Camp; which to prevent
Leaving his station Labienus went,
And with him drew five cohorts from the fight:
Which action changed the battles fortune quite;
Whilst hapless error through both armies flew,
And Pompey's battle suddenly orethrew;
For misconceit that Labienus fled
Had quite disheartened his own side, and bred
In Caesar's Soldiers most assured hopes:
Nor could young Pompey stay his flying troops,
Too late (alas) it was to make them know
What hapless error caused their overthrow*
For routed once ore all the field they fly
A prey to the pursuing enemy.
Unhappy Attius Varus, where he stood
Enuiron'd round with carcasses, and blood;
Varus, that twice before a war had led
Against Caesar's fortune, and twice vanquished,
When he had labored long in vain to stay
His flying men, loath to out-liue the day,
Or longer keep that often conquered breath,
Now rushes boldly on, to find a death
Amid'st the thickest of his enemies,
And gladly there on all their weapons dies.
But when (alas) sad Labienus viewed
How great and swift a ruin had ensued
Upon his hapless action, cursing Fate
And his own dire misfortue, too too late
Seeking to ralley his disordered troops,
He cries, it is I, that have undone the hopes
Of wretched Rome; it is I have lost the day:
Through this dire breast take your revenging way,
And expiate this fatal overthrow,
Or Caesar's swords shall take revenge for you:
Then (like a Libyan Lion round beset,
Armed with a high despair and rage as great)
Careless of wounds or weapons forth he goes
To sell a loathed life dear to his foes:
Till by a thousand swords at last he dies,
And to the shades his angry spirit flies.
Pompey perceiues his army overthrown,
And now the loss irreparable grown,
And though he see no cause that should inuit
Him to out-liue the fury of the fight,
His own fresh youth persuades him to entertain
A future hope to raise his State again:
High mounted on a Spanish Steed he flies
(Leaving in field his routed Companies)
With speed, Carteia's harbor to attain,
And sail from thence: but to disastrous Spain
Stern Fates the death of this young man decree
And he ere long the self same destiny
Forced to endure on Spaines unhappy ground
That his great Father in false Egypt found.
His brother c Sextus escaped from that sad day
Fortune long hides in Celtiberia
To raise his State again, again to breathe
Fresh war and ruin after Caesar's death,
And once again with faction rend the State
In that sad time of Romes Triumuirate.
The fight was done, and nothing now ensued
But impious rage, and murder; the pursued
To Pompey's Camp and Munda's walls (alas)
For refuge fled, but vain that refuge was*
So horrid now was the Caesarians rage,
That neither pity could their heat assuage,
Nor strength defend their wretched enemies
From their dire force; on every side the cries
And groans of dying men are heard alone.
Never so savage cruelty was shown
Against the worst of foreign foes, as then
The vanquished felt from their own Countrymen*
Which most appeared, when to surprise the Town
(A thing among'st Barbarians never known)
The works they raised against it to maintain
The siege, were carcasses of Romans slain.
Caesar, that nere before did truly see
How hard it was to gain a victory,
(Since Fortune still his wish with ease had wrought,
And he for glory, not for life had fought
Till Munda's field) recounts what he had lost,
Grieuing to find what this sad conquest cost,
He sometimes wail'd his own slain Soldiers then,
Sometimes the slaughtered foes, as Countrymen,
And wishes some, to whom he now might show
His mercy, had suruiu'd the overthrow;
And almost taxes Fortune, who that day
Had wrought his ends by such an enuy'd way.
Never till now did Caesar's pensive breast,
Truly reuolue how tragical the best
Success will be that Civil war affords,
And how deep wounds his sadly conquering swords
Had made in the entrails of afflicted Rome.
Now Thapsus battle, now Pharsalia come
Into his sad remembrance; and almost
He wishes all his Triumphs had been lost,
Rather than with such horrid slaughter won,
And that he nere had crossed Rubicon:
Scarce can the glories, that it brings, outweigh
The inward sorrow for so black a day.
While thus Great Caesar's troubled thoughts were led,
Cenonius enters and presents the head
Of Noble Pompey, whose now pitty'd state
Called to remembrance his great Fathers fate,
In treacherous Egypt; and no less than his
Enforced tears of ruth from Caesar's eyes.
How did he die (quoth he) relate to us
His tragedy: when thus Cenonius;
When Munda's fields strewn with his slaughtered troops
Young Pompey saw, and void of present hopes
Fled to Carteia, to embarque from thence
For foreign coasts, fearing the Citizens
And our pursuit, he left the Town again,
And quite bereft of all his scattered train
Wounded and lame, retired into a wood,
That not far distant from Carteia stood,
Hoping the covert of that shady place
A while might yield him shelter from the chase*
We entered in, and long the wood suruay'd
With curious eyes, and long in vain we strayed:
But far within a spreading Beech there stood,
Where wearied now, and faint through loss of blood
Alone he sat; he that had fought so late
Against thee, Oh Caesar, with long doubtful fate;
He whom so many Roman legions
Did lately guard, so many nations
Obeyed and served, now all forsaken fate
A sad example of man's frail estate.
When I approaching bad him yield to me
In Caesar's name: never alive (quoth he,)
Let Caesar see my head, for nere can that
Be my disgrace, that was my Fathers fate*
By this unhappy token let him know
The heir of Pompey, and perceive a foe
That might have proved worthy of his fear
So let me go to him, rather than bear
A conquerours disdain, or blushing be
The pitty'd subject of an enemy:
Nor shall you find I prize, so cheap a life
(Though vanquished) as without any strife
To send it him: Then with a courage high
Above his strength, above the misery
Of his forsaken state, among us all
He flies; or to prevent, or sell his fall
Dear as he could; alas, for victory
Fortune forbid him hope; nor did it lie
Within the power of his unwilling foes
To save that life which he resolved to lose;
But meeting wounds away at last it fled:
Caesar, with sighs, beholds the Noble head,
Pitying his fall, and bids Cenonius bear
It thence, to find the body, and interre
Them both in such a manner, as became
The unhappy ruins of so great a name:
And thence, secured from fears, marches away
By Baetis stream, to stately Corduba,
Now the Herculean Gades, fair Hispalis,
Munda, so lately fatal, Vcubis,
Ategua, and all the other Towns
Which fence the wealthy Beticke regions,
Breathe naught but peace, nor longer to oppose
Caesar's prevailing Fortune, harbor foes*
Nor do these only their subjection yield
To Caesar, but the farthest, the most wild,
And savage Nations, rough Asturians,
Fierce Callaicians, bold Cantabrians
From all the farthest distant shores of Spain
Do humbly sue his favor to obtain:
The love they bare to Pompey's name before
Was quite oreborne by Fate, and could no more
Maintain a faction against Caesar's power;
Who now a sole vnriuall'd conqueror,
From that subjected coast hasts to be gone
To visit Rome, which now was his alone,
And there in fearelesse Triumphs to display
The woeful glories of black Munda's day.
Annotations upon the sixth Book.
a How truly the manner of this battle is here expressed, or how far it may
be lawful for one writing by the way of a Poet to digress, I leave it to the
judgment of the Reader: and that you way briefly see it without the labor of
searching Books, thus the cruel battle of Munda by two Historians of credit
is described (to omit others for brevity sake.)

Dion Cassius lib 43. thus: At the first conflict the auxiliaries on both sides
fled away; but the Roman forces encountering fiercely continued the fight long,
not regarding at all what became of their associates, every man thinking that
the whole victory depended upon his hand: they gave no ground, nor left their
stations, but killing, or dying made good the place: there were no clamours nor
military showtes heard, nor hardly groans, only these speeches, strike, kill.
Caesar and Pompey both on horseback from two hills beheld the battle, and
knew not what they should resolve, but were equally distracted between fear
and confidence. And afterward thus: so long and fiercely with equal hopes
both armies fought, that unless King Bogud, who stood with his forces without
the battle, had turned about to surprise the Camp of Pompey, and Labienus had
left the battle to prevent him, they had all without doubt died in the
battle, or night had parted them upon equal terms.

Florus relates it thus: Doubtful and sad was this battle, Fortune seeming to
deliberate, and not resolving what to do: Caesar himself was sad before the
battle, contrary to his custom, either considering the frailty of mankind,
or suspecting the long continuance of his prosperity, or else fearing the fate
of Pompey being now grown to the height of Pompey: but in the battle it self
(what never before had been known to happen) while both the armies were in
their height of fury, a sudden silence, as if by consent, was throughout the
field: and last of all (a thing not usual in Caesar's army) the old Soldiers
began to give ground, and that they did not absolutely fly, it seemed to be
shame, not valor that withheld them: Concerning the despair of Caesar, and
this his action Appian is my warrant, and Florus partly testifies as much.

c Sextus Pompeius did long lurk in Celtiberia, till after the death of Julius
Caesar he levied forces, and surprising the Island of Sicily, he commanded the
Seas in those parts, and saved many Romans that fled to him from the
proscription of the Triumuiri: he was at last vanquished at Sea by Marcus
Agrippa the chief General for Augustus Caesar, and slain in Asia by the
Soldiers of Marcus Antonius the Triumuir.

FINIS.
THE SEVENTH BOOK.
The Argument of the seventh Book.
What different passions amongst the people rise
At Caesar's new transcendent dignities:
He, to decline the Envy of his reign,
Designs a war against the Parthian.
Cassius consults with Brutus to set free
The State again by Caesar's Tragedy.
The Lords conspire: unto the Capitol
Caesar securely goes (though of his f^ll
By fatal prodigies foretold in vain)
And entering there is by the Senate slain.
THat civil fury, that so long had torn
Romes state, and through so many regions borne
Her bleeding wounds, it self had wasted now;
And longed-for peace did seem again to show
Her cheerful face; the people hoped for rest,
Since now vnriuall'd Caesar was possessed
Of all the honors, Rome could give, alone,
And the World knew no other power but one.
The ore-ioy'd people wish it ever so:
(His power was grown above their Envy now)
And to the gods they willingly forgive
The loss of that unsafe prerogative
Their liberty, and gladly would adore
A safe and peaceful Scepter; for the more
His might in war their terrors did increase
The more his virtues now secure their peace:
No better guardian, wish they, to the State
Than mighty Caesar, whose unconquered Fate
So long prevailed against all opposing powers,
And crushed so many great competitours.
Nor do the poor plebeians wish it so
Alone; these hopes the wearied Senate too
(Except some few) do harbor with delight,
And gladly give consent to Caesar's height:
They most of all desire a calm, since most
The highest Cedars by rough storms are tossed;
They wish the shadow of that freedom gone
Whose substance long ago was overthrown.
For what since Marius times, since Sylla's reign
Did they of ancient liberty retain,
But the bare name? For which so dear a price
They paid, and saw so many Tragedies:
And therefore not alone from flattery,
But from true joy to Caesar they decree
More height of honor, and more state than can
Fit the condition of a private man,
Left he perchance might seem in his own eyes
Less than a Monarch: to those dignities,
Which after the defeat of Scipio
He had received, they add far greater now,
Divine and humane; that throughout all lands,
And all the kingdoms which great Rome commands,
Not only Sacrifices should be had
For him, and offerings in all Temples made,
But Temples to himself they do decree
To consecrate as to a Deirie:
But one more sumptuous than the rest, and high
Erected is to him and Clemency
Joining their Deities, where hand in hand
Does Caesar's image with the Goddess stand:
And (as his Countries savior) every where
His rich-wrought Statues oaken Garlands wear*
They style him Consul for ten years to come,
Dictator ever, Father of his Rome;
And that in every cause, for ample State,
He, as Supreme, and Sovereign Magistrate
Should judgment give from a Tribunal high
Of burnished Gold and polished Iuory.
That those chaste maids, which keep the Vestall flame,
And all Romes Priests should vow in Caesar's name,
And for his safety offer every year,
And he himself a robe Triumphall wear
At public Sacrifice; that thanks should be
Given to the gods for his each victory,
And the days sacred. Who could ere have thought
That day, on which Pharsalia's field was fought,
Or that of Thapsus, or sad Munda's war
As holidayes should fill the Calendar?
And Cato, Scipio, Pompey's tragic falls
Be kept with joy as Roman Festiualls?
The month Quintilis, to his lasting fame,
(Which gave him birth) must bear great Julius name.
What more deserved honor could there be,
More fit, more grateful to posterity
For Caesar's future memory to wear,
Than mention in his own amended year?
That he, whose wisdom from confusion
Had freed the accounts of time, and to the Sun
Had squared his year, from all those errors freed
Which negligence insensibly did breed,
In that should live, while people every where
Throughout the World observe the Julian year.
And more to heighten his transcendent State,
They make decree, that every Magistrate
Shall (when elected) swear not to withstand
What ever Caesar's edicts shall command,
Making his power so great, there is nothing now
But he himself may on himself bestow.
What now should Caesar fear? What ill success
Can shake so strong a grounded happiness?
Or what should Rome now in a State so blessed
Suppose can rend her peace, or reaue her rest?
Asks it a greater virtue to maintain
A settled fortune than at first to gain?
Or is it easier to the powers on high
To give, than to preserve prosperity?
Or would the gods else let proud mortals see
By this so fatal mutabilitie,
Their frail estate, and find the distance so
Betwixt Celestial powers and powers below?
Caesar to mould the State a new begins
With wholesome Laws, and by his mercy winnes
(If mercy could such Envy overcome)
The peoples hearts, calling from exile home
Those banished Lords that had against him fought
To make all hatred, with the war, forgot:
And through the Empires wide circumference
Extends his bounty and Magnificence;
Carthage and Corinth he re-edifies,
And plants them both with Roman Colonies,
And not detracting from the old founders fames,
Lets them both bear their first renowned names.
But yet suspecting (what the sad event
Proved true) how hardly his new government
Will at the first be brook'd, till time allay
That Enuies heat, that does as yet outweigh
His lenity, and nothing more than rest
Matures the plots of discontented breasts,
Caesar resolves with speed to entertain
An honorable war to wipe the stain
Of civil blood, by foreign deeds, away,
To fetch again from conquered Parthia
(Which yet secure did of Romes Trophies boast)
Those captive Eagles which slain Crassies lost.
His fixed thoughts on that high action set,
Unto a great and frequent Senate met,
Thus Caesar speaks; Fathe^s Conscript, had I
Meant to abuse my power in cruelty,
As Cinna, Marius, and dire Sylla did,
What closest vizour could so long have hid
My nature from you? You had found ere this
Some fatal signs: but I, that still did wish
Power, for no other end than to secure
The use of virtuous deeds, and put in ure
Nor what my passions but true reason taught,
In all these wars have for the public fought,
To make my self a Guardian, not a Lord
Of Rome and you, and with a conquering Sword
Keep out all Tyrants, that might else intrude,
Working your safety, not your servitude.
What can this Senate, or the people fear
From Caesar's power, whose mercy every where
So many pardoned enemies have tried?
And, save in battle, none by me destroyed:
Let those suruiuing witnesses relate
How I in war have used my prosperous Fate;
Let Scip^o's papers burned, unread by me
(After the field of Thapsus) testify
How loath I was to find in Rome a foe*
And rather chose my dangers not to know,
But still to live in danger, than to be
Secured by slaughter and severity:
Nor, but enforced, witness ye gods of Rome,
To this sad civil war did Caesar come,
And was compelled (though loath) to conquer more
To purchase that, which I deserved before,
For which ten years successefully I fought
Against the Gauls, and all those regions brought
Under the power of Rome, which lie between
The Pyrenaean hills, the German Rhine,
And British Seas; nor did the German Rhine,
Or British Seas my victories confine,
Which flew beyond them both, and crossing ore
(Where never Roman Eagles pearch'd before)
I taught the Germans there our yoke to carry,
And made the painted Britains tributary:
For which my Triumphs Envy did deny;
To win for Rome was made a crime in me.
Had not my foes ungrateful injury
Turned back those conquering arms on Italy
They had, perchance, Fathers, by your command
Ere this subdued the farthest Eastern land.
Our name the Indians, and tamed Medes had known*
The Persian Susa, and proud Babylon
Had felt our strength, nor on the Parthian coast
So long had Crassus unrevenged ghost
Complaining wandered: That design for me
Rests now to act (so you the war decree.)
When first the Spring dissolues the mountain snow,
And Western winds upon the waters blow;
When with his golden horns bright Taurus opes
The cheerful year; shall these victorious troops
Advance against the Parthians, and there die,
Or fetch those Eagles home with victory
Which Crassus lost: till then you need not fear
The insolency of the Soldier,
That their disordered license here at home
May any way disturb the peace of Rome.
My care already has (besides the spoils
Of foreign foes) rewarded all their toiles
With those great sums, which here so lately I
(Perchance much enuy'd) raised in Italy
To keep them still, and did not fear to buy
With mine own Envy your security.
Then, Conscript Fathers, if your wisdoms shall
Esteem of Caesar as a General,
Fit to revenge the Roman infamy
Against Parthia's pride, decree the war to me:
I am your Soldier still; nor ere has ought
But Romes renown by all my toiles been sought:
You shall perceive that Caesar's Soldiers are
Not only fortunate in Civil war.
Caesar had ended; when the Fathers all
To such a war, and such a General
Give glad consent, and with one voice decree
The Parthian war to Caesar's auspicie.
But Fates deny what they so much desired;
The date of Caesar's glory was expired,
And Fortune wearied with his Triumphs now
Reuolts from him; more ruin and more woe
Was yet behind for wretched Rome to taste*
Nor can their quiet happiness out-last
The life of Caesar, whose approaching Fate
More Civil wars and wounds must expiate*
No virtue, bounty, grace, nor clemency
Could long secure usurped Sovereignty:
For more that power to Citizens borne free
Distasteful was than benefits could be
Sweet and delight some: which soon hastened on
The untimely death of Caesar; Nor alone
To this conspiracy did hatred draw
His ancient foes* as Pontius Aquila,
Bucolianus, and Cecilius,
Ligarius pardoned once, and Rubrius,
Scruilius Galba, Sextus Naso too,
Spurius, with many of the faction more:
But even amongst Caesar's friends dire Envy wrought;
And to his slaughter bold Trebonius brought,
Casca, and Cimber, and Minutius
His seeming friends; nor thee, Oh Cassius,
Could Caesar's favor, nor thy Pretorship
Of Rome obtained, from this dire murder keep.
Decimus Brutus too, so highly graced,
And in so near a rank of friendship placed
With Caesar, to whose trust and governance
The wealthy province of Transalpine France
Caesar had left, envying his Patrons power
Among the rest is turned conspiratour:
Nor seems the knot of this great faction yet,
To be of strength enough, unless they get
Young Marcus Brutus in, who then did sway
The Province of Cisalpine Gallia,
Colleague with Cassius (as Romes Pretors) then,
And high in Caesar's grace: this brave young man
For his known virtues and admired parts,
In all the peoples discontented hearts
Did seem most thought of, and marked out to be
The vindicatour of lost liberty:
Nor did they hide it, but in libells wrote
On his Pretorian cell, expressed their thought,
Taxing his courage as degenerate
From the ancient Brutus, who first freed the State
Of Rome from Monarchy; as if the fame
Of such an act could suit no other name,
And he by fatal birth condemned to be
An Actor now in Caesar's Tragedy.
Now had Rh^m n^sian Nemesis possessed
In all her blackest forms, the vengefull breast
Of fiery Cassius, and did wholly sway
His eager thoughts, impatient of delay:
Who, by nights silence, enters Brutus house*
Him there he finds alone, and anxious,
Wailing his Countries Fate, and sadder far
Than when the fear of this great Civil war
First seized the peoples hearts, and frighted Rome
Was filled with fatal prodigies: to whom
Cassius begins: Oh why should Brutus spend
That precious time in thought, which he should lend
In active aid, to his sad Countries need;
That would again by Brutus hand be freed.
See what the peoples longing thoughts expect
That thou should work for them; mark the effect
Of what they write on thy Praetorian Sell:
There may thou read that (though contented well)
They looked no farther than for vain delights
(As Libyan huntings, and Circensian sights)
From other Praetors, they expect from thee
A benefit, no less than liberty:
Can Brutus think that Caesar, while he lives*
Will ere resign so great a power, who strives
To make it more his own; and not content
With a Dictator's name and government,
An office often bestowed, while Rome was free,
Aims at more certain marks of Monarchy
The Regal Crown and Scepter, thinking all
The Senate gives, cause they can give it, small?
Why were the Tribunes else, for taking down
From Caesar's Statue, late, a golden Crown,
Deposed? Or what could he by law allege
Against their persons sacred privilege?
Did lewd Antonius put a Diadem
On Caesar's head, to be refused by him
In public only, and not there to try
How we would all allow his Monarchy?
Besides a thousand more ambitious arts,
He daily finds to sound the peoples hearts.
His death the period of his pride must be,
And must with speed be wrought: for if, till he
Return triumphant from the Parthian war,
We should delay our vengeance, harder far,
And with more envy must it then be done,
When he more honor and more love has won.
To shake off Caesar's yoke this is the time,
Or make it not our own, but Fortunes crime:
The Noble Brutus sighed; Oh Cassius,
If Heavens (quoth he) have not allotted us
A longer date of freedom, how can we
With feeble arms control their high decree?
They, that in Affricke, Spain, and Thessaly
Condemned the cause of Roman liberty,
Will not protect it now: and better far
It should be lost in fair and open war,
From whence at first it sprung, and grew so high,
Than to be saved by secret treachery,
Such as the ancient Romans scorned to use
Against worst of foes. Noble Fabritius,
When conquering Pyrrhus threatened Rome, disdained
To free his Country by a traitors hand,
Aduenturing rather Romes sad overthrow
By open war: nor against a foreign foe
Were these respects observed alone by us:
What greater traitor than Sertorius,
And foe to Rome? Yet he by treason slain
On base Perpenna stuck a lasting stain:
What hope was there that one so deep in blood
As was that Butcher Sylla, ever would
Resign his reign to be a private man?
Yet who against Sylla's life attempted then?
Twixt whom and Caesar was as great an ods
Almost, as twixt the Furies and the Gods.
As much as those then living Romans were
Too timorous, too base, and prone to bear
A Tyrants yoke, as much, for this, shall we
Be judged ingrate to Caesar's clemency:
And those old men will more accuse our crime,
That can remember Sylla's bloody time:
But I (of all accursed) that so much owe
To Caesar's favors, am condemned now
To be a subject, or from servitude
To free my self by foul ingratitude:
Oh what a torture my distracted breast
Suffers, twixt two such sad extremes oppressed?
Oh why, when dire Pharsalia's field was fought,
And I disguised in common armor sought
To reach his life, before I was descried,
And saved by Caesar, had not Brutus died,
And free descended to the shades below?
Or if my aim had hit, one happy blow
Had rescued Rome from thrall without a stain
(Unless Great Pompey had usurped a reign)
And had not left our liberty to be
Thus poorly wrought by secret treachery:
Oh, stay awhile our vengeance, Cassius,
See what the gods, and Fate will do for us*
Or what ere long our fatal enemies
The Parthians can do. Cassius replies,
Could Brutus then be pleased, the Parthian foe
Again should triumph in our overthrow?
To have, with public loss and infamy
That wrought for us, which may with honor be
(And Rome yet safe) by our own hands atchieu'd.
In all thy reasons, yet, thou art deceived,
Mistakinq grounds of things, thou do conclude
Impartial Justice foul ingratitude:
For if the deed be just, no benefit
Received, should hinder thee from acting it;
That were corruption, not true gratitude:
The greater favors Caesar ere has showed
To thee, the more thy Justice will appear
In that the public good thou do prefer:
'T would take much honor from a deed so high,
If Caesar had been known thine enemy:
Nor could an act, wherein thy private hate
Had borne a share, so much oblige the State:
To purchase honor, and our Countries good
Private respects of friendship or of blood
Must be forgot and banished: is that old
Brutus through, all succeeding times extolled,
By whose strict Justice his own sons did die,
That sought again to bring in Monarchy?
And art thou bound to suffer Caesar's reign?
What would old Brutus do, if here again?
Or unto thee can Caesar's favor seem
A greater bond than nature was to him?
Nor can thou term it secret treachery
If by our hands usurping Caesar die;
Since Fate of warlike power has us bereft,
And no means else to work our freedom left.
Should we a while defer the action,
It cannot be, perchance, hereafter done
But with dishonor and base Treasons stain,
When we before have both approved his reign:
For in the Sibils books 'twas lately read,
The Parthians never can be vanquished
But by a King: which in the peoples ears
Is told already; and his Flatterers
By them would have it publicly desired;
Our voices, Brutus, will be then required;
Which we with greatest peril must deny,
Or else for ever lose our liberty.
When Cassius had with his persuasiue art
Fully confirmed young Brutus wavering heart
To this sad deed; a noise at door they hear;
Decimus Brutus now was entered there,
And all the rest of that conspiracy:
Where amongst themselves the fatal knot they tie,
By mutual oaths; striving (alas) in vain
By Caesar's death that freedom to attain,
Which was for ever banished by the doom
Of Fate, and never to return to Rome
Though often sought; in stead of freedom now
More desolation, Tragedies and woe
After this slaughter must again ensue;
And all the people that dire action rue
Which they desired. Philippi's balefull day,
Perusia's siege, and fatal Mutina,
With Leuca's fleet shall make afflicted Rome
Truly lament ore slaughtered Caesar's Tomb.
The balefull Ides of March approaching nigh
Ordained by Fate for this great Tragedy,
The Etrurian Augurs, who divine by sight
Of slain beasts entrails, and the various flight
Of Birds, in Caesar's danger were not dumb,
But boldly told what they foresaw to come.
The Ides of March Spurinna bids him fear:
Nor did the Earth, the Air, or Skies forbear
Presaging signs (if any signs could lend
Means to prevent what destinies intend:)
Affrighting voices in the Air were heard;
The Sun himself in threatening forms appeared,
Sometimes, as if he wept, his glorious head
With a blew Rainebow round environed;
Sometimes quite dimmed, as if he fled the sight
Of men, and meant to make eternal night.
The windy Spirits through earth's torn cauernes break:
Floods change their courses: beasts against nature speak*
The swelling Poe oreflowes the adjoining plain,
And to his channel suddenly again
Retiring back, thousands of monstrous Snakes,
Which he brought forth, upon dry ground forsakes.
The Sea, that had orewhelm'd a part of land
By Tyber's mouth, retiring, on the sand
As many fish did in like sort forsake:
But nearer signs great Caesar's death fore-spake.
Those stately Steeds, which, when the war begun,
He crossing ore the stream of Rubicon
Had consecrated, and for ever freed
From future service of the war, to feed
At liberty along the Crystal flood,
And quiet wander through the shady wood,
For many days before their Lord was slain,
Did, of themselves, their pleasant food refrain:
Their mourning eyes presaging sorrow showed,
And all the pasture fields with tears bedewed.
The little regal Bird, the day before,
Flying along, a sprig of Laurel bore
Within her mouth; whom straight a multitude
Of Birds from out the neighboring wood pursued,
Till she had entered Pompey's Court, and there
The Laurell'd Bird did all to pieces tear.
That night, that vsher'd forth the fatal day,
Was come, and with her darkness did display
Prodigious fears, bringing, in stead of rest,
A sad disturbance to each wakefull breast:
Throughout the Palace, where great Caesar slept
His last, the arms of Mars, which there were kept,
Were heard to yield a horrid rattling sound,
Clashing together of themselves; and round
About the house the doors flew open at once:
The air of night was filled with dismal groans;
And people often awaked with the howles
Of Wolves and fatal Dogs: ill boding Owls,
Night-iarres, and Ravens with wide-stretched throats
From yews, and holleys send their balefull notes;
The shrieches wailings, and all cries were heard
Of every fatal and affrighting Bird.
Shape-faining Morpheus, in the dead of night,
Sent from the King of rest, with speedy flight
Entering the Palace, to Calphurnia,
Who sleeping in her Lords embraces lay,
Presents his slaughtered figure in such wise
As unto all the amazed peoples eyes,
The next day's Sun must show; all stained with blood
Before the bed she dreamt her Caesar stood,
His visage pal'd with death: that robe of State,
Which never foe before could violate,
All torn, through which his gaping wounds appear:
Calphurnia weeps, then shriekes aloud for fear,
And stretching ore the bed her loving arms
TO embrace the flying shade; though free from harms
She find her Lord, who was awaked now,
Scarce dares she trust her waking senses so
As she believes the vision; in her thought
So much that too prophetike dream had wrought.
Caesar with kisses wipes away her tears,
And asks the cause of her so sudden fears:
She trembling yet, the fatal dream declares
Which had disturbed her sleep (nor could the cares
That rose from thence, be banished) with the story
Mixing fresh tears, and loving oratory,
Persuades her Caesar to remember now
What the Augur's skills so lately did fore-show,
And what the learned Spurinna bad him fear
From the Ides of March, which now (ill) present were:
She begges of him he would forbear to go
That morning to the Senate, and bestow
That one poor day, if not upon his own
Dear safety, yet upon her fears alone:
And grant to her as much, as to a wife
Was due, of interest in a husbands life.
That he those Spanish guards would entertain,
Which had so lately been dismissed, again:
That safe prevention of a danger near
Was Noble still, and could be styled fear
No more than scorning the gods threats could be
True fortitude or magnanimity.
Caesar replies; Ah dear Calphurnia,
Dearer to me than that life-breath I draw,
Would thou forbear thy grief, it could not lie
Within the power of any prodigy
To make this day a sad one: should I here
Begin to learn that superstitious fear
Of fatal days and hours, what day to me
Could ere hereafter from such fears be free?
I only should my wretched life torment,
And not my destined time of death prevent,
But live for ever with vain fears diseased
When ere Astrologers or Augurs pleased:
Every beasts entrails were a care to me,
And flight of every bird a malady.
If Caesar's danger grow from discontent
Of Rome, not one days absence can prevent,
Nor scarce repriue my Fate; and once to die
Better than ever fear conspiracy:
What good can strongest guards on me confer
But make me live perpetual prisoner?
Why should I fear the peoples discontent,
Who now enjoy under my government
More wealth, more safety, and prosperity
Than by my death they could? The death of me,
That have already reached the height of all
Glory and State that can to man befall,
And wrought my farthest ends, can never be
So much mine own as their calamity;
Who will again with Ciu^ll iarres be rent,
And wish a safe and settled government:
Oh do not fear thy dream, Calphurnia,
Nor sad presages from such trifles draw:
If dreams were fatal, Love, sleep were not rest;
Since most our cares would be by sleep increast:
But if they were presages, tell me then,
For our two dreams to night have different been,
Which should prevail? Me thought I flew above
The lofty Clouds, and touched the hand of Joue,
And to my self did seem more great and high
Than ere before: what but felicity
Should this portend? I dare not now suspect
In calmest peace, those powers, that did effect
My roughest wars; Oh let no sad surmise
With causeless grief distaine Calphurnia's eyes.
Aurora now from T^thon's purple bed
Arose, and the Eastern sky discolored
Gave cheerful notice of the approaching Sun;
When forth, through Rome, the officious clients ^unne,
The Palace all with early visitants
Was filled, to wait when Caesar would advance
Forth to the Senate; striving to be seen
Near the earthly Sun, and in his rays to shine:
Some to do grace, and grace receive from him,
Some, like malignant clouds prepared to dim,
Or in eclipse eternal bury quite
Before the set of Phoebus, Caesar's light.
Among the rest did Decimus attend
With fained service, and the name of friend
To Fatal ends abusing, hastened on
Persuaded Caesar to destruction;
Though, ere they go, the Sacrifices all
Threatening and black appeared, and did appall
The fearful Priests, who from those entrails show
Portent of dire calamity and woe:
Some Bulls they could not at the Altar stay,
Who breaking thence fled through the streets away;
In others, which were slain and opened there,
None but the infernal gods deigned to appear:
The hearts were perished, and corruption flowed
Through all the vital parts, black was the blood.
The burning entrails yielded only fume,
No flame at all, but darkely did consume
Mouldring away to ashes, and with black
Unsavory clouds through the air a darkness make.
But Caesar, maugre what the entrails threat,
Undaunted passes on (how wondrous great
Is Destiny?) and as he goes, neglects
That Scroll presented to him, which detects
The whole conspiracy: which, as of small
Import, he pockets up not read at all,
And enters Pompey's bloody Court, led on
By powerful Fate to his destruction:
Where ominously received, he mounts his high
Dictator's Sell of Gold and Iuory:
The Lords obeisance make in humblest wise,
When different passions in their breasts arise;
Even those bold hearts that vowed his Tragedy,
Almost relent: the man's great Majesty,
That awful Fortune, that did still attend
His deeds, in all extremes a constant friend
Produce a fear to encounter discontent:
Nor do their fancies only him present
Invincible in open field, as when
He stood enuiron'd with his armed men:
But such as when alone he wrought his ends,
Aided by none but Fortune, as his friends,
As when he escaped the Egyptian treachery,
When he appeased his Soldiers muteny,
Or when the stormy Seas he crossed ore
By night, and safely reached Brundusium's shore:
And why should not that friendly Fortune now,
As then (think they) prevent his overthrow
And to their ruin quite defeat the plot.
But shame forbid them to relent; the knot
Among too many conscious breasts was tied
To let them start; and on the other side
Revenge encouraged by the multitude
Of Actors, entered, and all fears subdued,
First to his Sell bold Cimber made approach,
And seized his Purple robe; at whose rude touch
While Caesar's wrath together with amaze
Began to rise, the rest from every place
Drawn near, no longer hiding their intent
The fatal Ponyards to his breast present:
The first wound on him Casca did bestow,
Whose Poniard Caesar wresting, to his foe
Returns a stabbe back for the stabbe he gave,
Striving in vain with one poor strength to save
A life assaulted by so many hands;
No succors could approach, no guard, nor bands
Of aiding friends were nigh; that courage quite
Was lost, that nere was lost before in fight;
Until enfeebled by a deeper wound,
And by inuading death enuiron'd round,
Hopeless he hides his face, and fixed stands
TO endure the fury of revenging hands
Repressing groans or words, as loath to shame
His former life, or dying stain the fame
Of those great deeds through all the World expressed,
These silent thoughts reuoluing in his breast:
Yet has not Fortune changed, nor given the power
Of Caesar's head to any Conqueror;
By no Superiors proud command I die,
But by subjected Romes conspiracy:
Who to the World confesses by her fears,
My State and strength to be too great for hers,
And from earths highest Throne, sends me to be
By after-ages made a Deity:
Through many wounds his life disseized, fled
At last; and he, who never vanquished
By open war, with blood and slaughter strewn
So many lands, with his own blood embrew'd
The seat of wronged Justice, and fell down
A sacrifice to appease the offended gown.
FINIS.

