EPIGRAMS DIVINE AND MORAL.

By EDW. MAY, Gent.

Non illum praemia tant um quam labor ipse juvat.

Claudian. De Laudib us Stiliconis. Lib. 3. LONDON: Printed by I. B. for John
Grove, and are to be sold at his Shop, in Chancery Lane, near the Rowles, over
against the Suppery-Office. 1633.

EPIGRAMS, DIVINE AND MORAL.
1 On Christ, and the Virgin Mary.
A Virgin pure a Mother to become,
That Mother still a virgin to remain,
Wonder it self at this is stricken dumb,
Which our belief makes manifest and plain;
Nay more, the Father came from daughters womb:
And the Creator say in the creatures tomb.
(2) On Adam *, Eve *, and Christ *.
COme hither Oedipus, for I thee summon,
A man is brought forth with out man or woman
And three and thirty years then reckon can *.
A woman without woman, out of man *.
A child without a Man, borne of a Maid *.
Tell me how this may be? truth I have said.
(3) On Joseph's begging of Christ's body of Pilot.
A Gift there was and a good man did crave it,
More worth the^ all the world, a bad man gave it.
(4) On Christ.
IF e're the midst were good, my soul believes,
It Was then, when Christ was hanged betwixt two thieves
(5) On Christ.
THere is a thing, the strengest e're was known,
Which is it self the Temple, Priest and Stone,
Or Altar; and the offering likewise;
And he to whom was done the sacrifice.
(6) De eadem.
What might he be, that never had a Brother,
And was a great deal elder then his Mother?
(7) De eadem.
THe wound that Adam did by eating give,
Christ cured by dying, through whom we live.
(8) De eadem.
Who dies in Christ, eternally shall live,
Who lives in him, him death, no death, ca^ give,
Where Christ is present, death away shall fly,
For then we live, when here we seem to dye.
(9) On Lazarus.
KNow Reader, underneath this stone there lies,
He that was borne but once, and dyed twice,
(10) Of Abraham.
SInce when we dye, our bodies loose their breath
What man was he that spoke after his death?
(11) On Christ's Cross.
OF Cypress, Pine, and Cedar, was that Cross,
By which the world most gained; yet was it loss
For there to give us life, Christ lost his breath
The C^presse being an emblem of his death:
The Cedar of his Immortality,
The navigable Pine did signify,
That death had lesser power to weigh down
His Godhead, then the water that to drown.
(12) To Hypocrisy.
CAn Giant greatness cover guilt? it may,
And painting hide and trim deformed clay;
But draw those curtains, and there will be found
A rotten poast a conscience most unsound.
(13) De eadem.
A Candle is most like an H^pocrite,
That unto others gives a glorious light,
But wastes himself unto the ^ockets snout,
There stinkes, is smelt, and so is trodden out.
(14) De eadem.
AS Venison in a poor man's kitching's rare,
So Hypocrites and Usurers in heaven are.
(15) On an Hypocrite.
It Is said that every Hypocrit commands,
The voice of Jacob, Esaus ^ea^ and hands,
And like the cursed fig tree seem to flourish,
But with leaves only, and no fruit does nourish.
(16) To the Proud.
LEt him whose vast ambition strives to rear,
His altitude of thoughts above the sphere,
Measure his shadow and hel'e find no more,
Is added to the length it had before.
(17) On Mortality.
THose days we had are past and gone,
Of those to come, we are not sure,
Our present time we think not on,
How can so fine a thread endure?
Happy art thou that relyst,
In that short minute on thy Christ.
(18) A caveat?
LEt these three things be in thy heart inrold,
That there is an Eye above does all behold;
An Ear that no word can be kept from it,
And last a Book where all our faults be writ.
For he which oftentimes remembers this,
Shall seldom speak, or think, or do amiss.
(19) All Is vanity.
FOr every day in the year, we have a vein,
And each thing in our eye, or ear, is vain;
For every harvest ear, a thought we feign:
As mutable how e're, as is a phaine.
(20) Saint Anselmes memento on the last day.
REmember this thou ashes, dust, and clay,
What will thy faultring tongue have then to say?
When at thy right hand sins accusing be,
And at thy left, Devils expecting thee;
Beneath thee, hell belching continual fire;
Above thee, a just Judge incensd to I^e;
Within thee, thy bad conscience weak and lame,
Without thee, all the world of one bright flame,
Where as the just shall only saved be,
Whence it will be impossible to flee,
Though to remain most grevious; then alas,
Prevent in time, what time will bring to pass.
(21)
So learn as if thou never should decay,
So live as if thou were to dye to day.
Look up to Heaven, count that thy friend,
Despise the world respect thy end.
(22) On a Toade.
ONe that was walking in a sunshine day,
Seein^ an uglie Toade lie in the way,
Fell passionately a weeping, his friend by,
Inquired the cause, he sadly made reply,
How that the sight of that same loathsome thing,
Did to his conscience, the remembrance bring
Of his ingratitude to God, that he
Had never given thanks for th'exellencie,
Of his creation, being made, and framed,
Like his own image, by his breath inflamed,
When he being in the Potters hands as clay
Within his power instructable it lay
To fashion, and bestow, on him the feature,
Of that some Toade, even the most deformedst creature,
Thus basest things heaven makes an instrument,
To humble those are willing to repent.
(23) To the Adulterer.
HE that does break his holy wedlock band,
But t^^s another ground and plowes the sand
Leaving his own field unmanured, if then,
He finds s^ed sown there, may thank other men.
(24) On Death.
A Thousand ways we dye, though borne but one
As mame strange diseases there are known,
Thus diverse paths death on us makes his stealth,
And to resist him we have but one health.
(25) On Sin.
HVge frames and buildings, of a po^derous weight
The earth can bear with a digested freight,
And all but sin, that all things does excel,
It weighes down, to the deep abisse of hell.
(26) On Justice.
Four things true Justice, never will come near,
The which are fat gifts, favor, hatred, fear.
(27) Of men tunes.
TO these two pronounes, all things still are tide,
For Men's tunes do the world divide,
Yet be thou Craesus rich, I Codrus poor,
Not worth a mite compared to thy store,
The time shall come I truly do divine,
When naught shall differ betwixt mine and thine.
(28) To Superbus.
HVge frames and lofty buildings thou do raise
Unto the clouds to win the worldly praise,
Thy corn and oil, increases, and thy rent,
Thou do receive in state, to thee are sent
Rich gifts, and presents; and Superbus crave
Kindred of thee, no want of friends can have,
Rich syndon, Syrian silks, and ungvents rare,
Deck up thy body, and perfume thy hair;
The Swannes of silent Lyris, yield their down,
To stuff thy couch, thou fearst not fortunes frown
Wines of high prise; Iovicke Partriges,
And Affricke Qua^les, do thy rich pallat please;
No cost upon thy self thou spar'st to spend,
But I will tell thee, that am more thy friend,
How thou may better spend thy wealthy stoore;
Prithee Superbus, spend it on the poor,
For when thou think thy self safe and well,
Thy soul may be snatched, from thee into hell.
(29)
AS two and twenty letters our speech has,
So two and twenty books contain our faith.
(30) A Microcosme
THE Body is the mansion of the soul,
Where Emp^^s;se like each part it does control,
The eyes its Crystal mirrours; and the brows,
To be the portall fair, the mind allows;
The ears are the interpreters of sounds,
The lips the leaves are of the mouth, or bounds,
The worke-men of the body are the hands,
The heart the custody of life commands,
The lungs the bellows moving speech and air,
The stomach of the meats is orderer;
The bones the bodies strength in great or small,
The legs the columes that support up all.
(31) De eadem.
COr sapit, and pulmo loquitur, Fell commouet Iram
Splen ridere facit, cogit amare Iecur.
Englished.

Wisdom the heart, lungs speech the gal has wrath;
Laughter the spleen, and love the livor has.
(32) To Extortioners.
IF Dives circled with hels flaming fire,
A little drop of water did desire
To cool his heat, yet never from the poor
Did he extract, to add unto his store,
As ere I red, whilst he on earth did live,
But his offense was only not to give,
If he such pains endured, what will become
Of them, at that black dreadful day of dome
That never give, but griping do oppress,
The poor, the Widow, and the Fatherless.
(33) On Almesdeeds.
THou that do fear Gods anger, or that he,
Should turn away his bl^ssed face from thee,
Then from the poor turn not thy face away,
For God will, like for like, for ever pay.
(34) To Disimulation.
Would thou that al men honest thee esteem
Strive the^ to be, what thou desir'st to seem.
(35) Of Codrus.
IN rags and tatters Codrus did resort
And would have gone into the Emperors Court,
The surly Porter beat, and thrust him by,
Saying so naked he should not enter; why?
Quoth Codrus then, the Gods are naked I troe,
And none but naked must to heaven go.
(36) Or a Dwarf.
A Dwarf upon a Mastives back did ride,
He cockt his hat, and set his arms aside,
And boldly then he began to boast and vant,
As if he had bestride an Elephant,
At last using his spur the Dog turned round
And with great violence cast him to the ground,
The Dwarf unhorst, each laughed, why laugh you al
(Quoth he in rage) wha^? Phaeton had a fall.
(37) To old Omelia.
THou wondrest why no men do sue to thee,
Omelia thy hu^band for to be.
Should any marr^e chee, thou would be took,
Not for his wife, but mother, by thy look.
(38) To Flora.
FLorae the fairest creature that does breathe
Ot draw this air, to which she does bequeathe
More oderifferous balm, then bruised gum,
Of happy Arrabie prized at might^e sums,
So fair a forehead, Eyes so bright and clear,
Do only in chaste Cynthia appear,
You two are so alike that I should miss,
Were you together, and Diana kiss
Instead of you, or you instead of her,
And only this a difference does prefer,
Hearts wild she killed with Arrows she let fly,
Hearts mild thou kilst, with gla^ces from thine eye.
(39 To Clara.
CLara, I do not grosely wish thee send,
Or gold, or Jewels unto me thy friend,
Or other presents which high prises sings,
For I can read thy love in humble things:
May I presume, I only would command
A blushing Rose, that kissed thy lilly hand.
(40) To Vesbia.
THere but three furies usd to be in hell,
But Vesbia being there now four do dwell.
(41) To a covetous Churl.
ALthough thy blood be frozen, and thy scalpe
Exceed the whiteness of the sowie Alpe;
Though thy few teeth can hardly chew the crum,
Though to the stygian lake thou now art come,
And though one leg is now within the grave,
Yet still more gold thou do desire to have:
What do thou mean? know Charon does not care
For all thy wealth, one penny is his fare.
(42) Loves remedies.
TO quench loves fires three good spoonfuls take
Of Stygian water, or of Laethes lake,
And drink it fasting when thou go to bed;
Then in the morning wash thy face and head
With such a woman's tears who constant loved,
For these are excellent, and have bin proved;
But least these chance to fail thee, to be sure,
Take then a roape, for that is a present cure.
(43) Beauty and virtue seldom meet.
Seldom is beauty with fair virtue crowned,
The Canker in the sweetest Rose is found.
(44) To Slander.
TO bite with teeth does to all beasts belong,
But thou more beast, bit'st worser with thy tongue
(45) A Rule.
THree things feed life and keep the body quiet,
A glad heart, mind content, and moderate diet.
(46) To rich Cressus, and poor Codrus.
THou art not Cressus rich, though thou have store,
Nor art thou Coarus that have nothing poor;
Rich Cressus precious stones and sewels does need,
And ^^^ike white horses of the Thrasian breed,
(...) does of Tissue wrought in Tyrean loomes,
(...) o^les and Arromaticke fumes;
(...) Codrus only meat and drink does lack,
And rusticke clothing for his naked back;
Thou since both want, as I do here express,
Be frolic Codrus, for thy need is less.
(47) On the Eyes.
WHat man would secret keep, the Eyes expres;
Two things they are, called love, and dru^kennes.
(48) On a blind Man.
ONe askd a blind man in what place his eyes
He lost, he in a merry vain replies,
Sir, you can see the truth, but I suppose,
That they were lost, from either side my nose.
(49) To Claudia.
SEven years did Claudia live her husbands wise,
And all that time did lead an honest life,
But whether 'twas her or her spouses crime,
She could not bear a child in all this time,
Physicians skill she used, but all in vain,
At last she to a friar did complain,
Who shriv'd her so, that in three quarters after
She was delivered of a son and daughter.
(50) To Drusius.
DRusius I met and kindly did demand
Whether his wife were on the mending hand?
Oh, yes, quoth he, and I do trust in God,
That she will shortly now come well abroad.
Sure Drusius is a Prophet, for next day
His wife was brought forth dead, and cold as clay.
(51) On a woman burned in Smithfield the 20 of April 1632. who dyed a Wife, a
Widow, and a true maid, by her own free confession.
When all in white pure as her qu'et thought
She to her journies end was easly brought
How sweetly then she on her deathbed lay,
How cheerfully her eye did dart its raye,
What crimson blushes in her cheeks were spre d
And how the snow strove gently with the red;
All this I law and thousands more beside,
Whose Eyes flowed over, it was so high a tide,
That had the fires then bin kindled round,
They had bin quenchd, and she in tears bin dround
How quickly up the nimble flame did skip
And ^ike glad lovers, fed upon her lip;
K^st her fair eyes and with such fervor strove,
That they destroyed what they so much did love:
Impartial death thy skill is strange and great
Thou wound'st with frost, but here thou kil'st with heat,
And she like gold thou have in fire tried,
And her bright soul thou now have purifide;
For 'twas unfit the greedy worms should tare
Such dainty flesh, or such a banquet share,
That was ordained by the destinies,
For a burnt offering and a sacrifice.
Yet with my self when I thy case do try,
Me thinks it is injustice thou should dye
A Wife, a Maid, a Widow, can this be?
The Law condemned only one, not three,
And if the Wife the Jury guilty found,
Why was not she alone with fires cround?
Or if ^he Widow did the offense commit,
Why was not then the innocent Maiden quit?
It Is strange no drop of mercy could be shown,
But let three suffer for the fault of one;
Yet of that one this might be truly said,
She did^ a Wife, a Widow, and a maid.
Thus did this Phoenix, Phoenix like Expire,
(Not three but one; not one but three) in fire.
(52) To Flora.
THree graces were there, but when Nature made my Flora fair,
Then there were four, and now in earth she is laid but three they are.
(53) To Venus.
HO! fire, fire, this way, this way turn,
Ye wanton streams fall here, I burn, I burn,
My bosome's all on flame, if Cytherea
Great Queen of love and beauty, of the sea,
Was borne, why burns she so? we water bring
Fire to quench, yet love from thence did spring,
And turns my breast to Etna; silly wretch,
From Icie streams thou scalding flames do fetch;
Naught but a diamond can a diamond wound,
And naught but love, to cure loves heat is found.
(54) To Critticus.
CRitticus, about to kiss a maiden throng,
He happened first on one whose nose was long,
He flouting said, I feign would kiss you sweet,
But that I fear our lips will never meet,
Your nose stands out so far; the maiden died
Her cheeks with crimson, but soon thus replied,
Pray sir then kiss me in that place where I
To hinder you, have neither nose, nor eye.
(55) To Flora.
IN my fair Flora's breast two Apples grow,
Whiter than Ivory or Sythian snow,
Which common people call her breasts, where be
Nipples more red then blushing Strawberrie.
Being unlac'd to take the silken air,
Cupid, a hungry, flew to suckle there,
And having sucked, mother, quoth he, farewell;
Your dugs have milk, but these with Nectar swell.
(56) On marrying a Widow.
I Rather had to lead a single life,
Then to enjoy a widow for my wife:
For being dry, 'twere better keep me fasting,
Then drink that spring another died by tasting.
In qua quis perijt non bibo, dixit, aquam.
(57) On a Wife.
A Wife is of best use, and has most room
Within a bed of Down, or in a Tomb:
But he that to a scoulding queen is wed,
Had rather have her there then in his bed.
(58) Of marrying twice.
THe Seaman tos'd upon the raging wave,
That every rude gust does expect a grave,
His Ship being split, and lost, and himself cast,
By help of some small board or piece of mast,
Upon a neighboring shore, forgets his pain,
And dares to venture on the Sea again;
Such is his case that is once from wedlock free,
And yet a second time will married be.
(59) On a Strumpet.
NO leacherous Goat, that climbs the craggy hill
Or sparrowes that upon the house-tops bill,
No beast, or satire overgrown with hair,
With an insatiate woman may compare:
One Cock suffiseth twice five hens it is common,
But thrice five men can hardly please that woman.
(60) To a Foot man.
I Musd why Iockie troubled with the Gowt,
Did talk so much, at last I found it out;
His footmansh pand dancing days being done
He now took pleasure with his tongue to run.
(61) To Madam Non-such.
A Lady askd a spark, why beggars wives,
Were still most fruitful, yet lived poorest lives,
Madam (replied he) they are still assured
To have their ground well tilld, and well manured
And if your husband cannot take the p^ine,
You should do well to try another grain;
Well Sir, quoth she, since you such skill have shown
By you my garden shall be tild, and sown.
(62) To Catro.
CAtro resign thy government, give over,
The Commonwealth thou now shall rule no more,
Thy wife is chosen governor to be,
For thou the people rulst, but she rules thee.
(63) On one that would pay money in the evening
ONe being at a scriveners to be bound,
For the sure payment of a hundred pound,
Being more nise, then wise, would not agree,
The time of payment on the day to be,
Why, quoth the notarie, our bonds do run,
For moneys payment betwixt Sun and Sun.
I but quoth the other this I dare to say,
The Evening Sir, was made before the day,
And therefore in the night it shall be paid,
The scrivener purst his gold, and laughing said,
Farewell to ye Sir, and when of me you borrow,
You shall give eldership unto the morrow.
(64) Of good Wine.
GOod Wine should unto every sense appear,
Unto the fight fair color, pure and clear,
To the ear a sparkling noise being powered fast,
A sweet, and pleasant relish to the taste,
The touching, rockie couldnesse should assume,
And the sweet smell an arromaticke fume.
(66) On a Painter.
ONe asked a Painter, seeing that he drew,
Such rare proportions to the life so true,
Why such deformed Children he begot;
He straight replyde, good Sir mistake me not,
The one I lim and fashion in the light
With my best art, the other in the night.
(67) On a bald knavish Fool.
DIogenes at supper sat one night,
By chance a bald man was his opposite,
To whom he jesting said, my honest friend,
I Will not disgrace thee, only I commend
Thy hairs that flew away from such a head,
For oftentimes I thus have heard it said,
More hair then wit, but thou most right and fit
Have not a lot of hair nor any wit.
(68) On man and woman.
When man or woman dies, as Poets sung,
His hart's the last that stirs, of hers the tongue.
(69) On Marriage.
When a man weds she he affects most,
He fetches back the rib which first he lost.
(70) Of Physicians.
When help's promised by a Physician,
He comes ith likeness of a skillful man;
And when he it performs he does appear,
In a blessed Angels shape most bright and clear;
But when he comes demanding his reward.
He Is like a Devil and has no regard:
Therefore I count them wise to take the fee,
Whilst that the sick hand will the giver be.
(71) To a notorious Liar.
HAd I a secret that I would commit
To anies bosom, I should think it fit,
To tell it thee, for thou art truly known,
So great a liar, and so common grown,
That should thou swear and dam thou speakst good sooth,
Not any would believe thou telst a truth,
(72)
THe Hebrews at the sacred fountains quaft,
The Grecians at the Rivers take their draft,
The Latins at the silver brooks do drink,
English, and others, at the lakes small brinke.
(73) Of a Witch.
A Certain VVitch condemned to be burned,
Seeing her Son stand by, to him she turned,
And earnestly desired some drink to have,
Which he denying, she the more did crave,
Swing, Dear Son I am exceeding dry,
Give me one draught of drink before I dye*
For that quoth he, if I remain your debtor,
No matter Mother, you will burn the better*
(74) On a Gull.
A Worthy Lady Mounsier Gull did meet,
As he with awicke gesture passd the street,
At fight of her off went his hat and feather,
And bowed that chin and knee even kissed together;
She g^ve him the salute, being Nobly bred,
And asked, When shall your wife be brought to bed:
H^ answered from the abundance of his wit,
Even when your Ladyship shall think it fit.
(75) On money.
THe form of money round at first began,
Because it is to run from every man.
(77) On captain Sharke.
ONe askd a friend where Captain shark did lie
Why Sir quoth he at Algate at the pie,
Away, quoth the other, he lies not there I know it,
No says the other, then he lies in's throat.
(78) On Signeor Vapor?
Sweet Signeor Vapor a late cast commander,
Boasts in the wars he was a Sallamander,
And livd in flames it might be true he spoke,
For now in peace, he only lives by smoke.
(79) To Camelion.
VVAlking in Paul's I met Camelion there,
Who told me he had bin to take the air
In The Temple Cloisters when I did repair,
Him did I find being come to take the air,
Trasing the fields, the weather being fair,
He told me then he had been to take the air,
And the other day I heard him deeply swear,
The music played a sweet and dulcet air;
Another dancing he esteemd most rare,
And vowed he moved his body like the air:
He talks so much on it that I think in troth,
The air is unto him meat, drink, and cloth.
(80) To Spend-all.
SPend all to grace and guild his cunning shifts,
Swears by new coind oaths he lives by his wits,
They are wondrous sharp indeed, for I have known
When with Duke Humphrey he has fed on stone.
(81) An Aerosticke on Canary Sack.
C Come, come ye powerful raptures, sisters nine
A And bathe your spirits in this spring of mine,
N Nectar, Ambrosia, nor Nepenthe can
A Afford more immortality to man,
R Rich blood it makes, comforts the heart and brain
Y. Your noblest balsum for all grief and pain.
S Sack, why it is only Agauippes well,
A And much it does P^rnassus fount excel,
C Crown me with chaplets of this clustring grape
K Kindle about me flames, draw swords, I Will escape
E Even through the heart of danger, Sack as free
From thunder keeps me, as the Laurel tree.
(82) To Women.
THe sword and sea ruins so many men,
That for one man you may find women ten,
But were they few as good, the tailor knows,
His bill would be but little for their clothes.
(83) On a Sheep that gave a Wolf suck.
A Sheep (a Wolf) did suckle with her teat,
And when the Wolf was Iustie grown and great,
He in requital slew the silly sheep,
Thus kind from kind, no love nor cost can keep.
(84) To Cornutus.
Happy art thou Cornutus, for to thee
All things are proper that may proper be,
Thy fat Sardinian Corn, and Indian Gold,
Thou truly proper to thy self do hold,
To thee is proper thy most lussius Vine,
Which proper yields to thee old Massique wine,
Thy grateful flocks are proper too, to thee,
Yielding free offerings of fertillitie;
Thy wondrous wit, thy heart, and courage stout,
All that thou have is proper thine no doubt,
Yet if I say so, I shall say amiss,
Thy wife's not proper, for she common is.
(85) To Claudius.
SEven wives of thine are laid within the ground,
The earth so kind, but thee, whoever found?
These in short time thou had, and now have none,
I have a longer time bin vexed with one.
To Philenis. (86)
PHylenis, do not ask me why I wear
A plaster on my lip, thou need'st not fear,
I do not mean to kiss thee when we meet;
Phylenis, no, thy breath is not so sweet.
(87) To Lalia.
Four teeth had Lalia, which did grieu her much,
She durst not freely cough, her fear was such,
At length upon her it so fiercely grew,
That one sore cough did force her spit out two:
So half her fear was past, to quit her doubt,
Another hawk expelo the other out:
Now she may dreadlesse spit, hem, spue, and spaule,
For now she'as none to cough away at all.
(88) To Venus.
Venus one time got Mars his armor on,
His sword, his shield and javeling, whereupon
Quoth Pallas, come let us fight, let Paris be
An umpire now betwixt thy self and me;
Fie, fie, quoth Venus, when I naked stood,
Thou know I conquered thee in Idas wood,
(89) To the same, otherwise.
PAllas in arms before the gods once stood,
And challenged Venus then to try her might:
Quoth Citherea, naked in Idas wood
I conquered thee, and therefore scorn to fight.
(90) To an inconstant Mistress.
FAlse one, farewell, Man's woe, and therefore mine,
Stringst thou thy vows upon so weak a line
That they are broke and lost? Noune adiective,
That can not stand without a substantive,
And then art falling too, weak feminine,
What gender art thou? or who can decline
Thy heart, it is the common of two, else, either
The doubtful, or the Neuter; true it is neither,
Nor proper is it to one, but like thee woman
Takst part with homo, unto all men common:
Forth of my hearts true Grammar thee I Will taire,
So foul a lease shall stand no longer there:
It Is blotted so, that I no word can see,
Only thy characterd inconstancy;
Adrew changing Camelion, that do live
By air, and that, my numerous sighs do give
Farewell thou various rainbow, which appears
More glorious, after my sad shower of tears,
Those sighs, and tears I Will in the balance lay,
With the light Creature whom they shall outweigh
Oh but thou will not tarry in the scale,
There is so much quicksilver in the tale,
Thy wanton friskes I tell thee will be little,
When thou art temperd well with fasting spittle:
And since thou will be changing, change then all,
And take a lodging in the hospital,
Then change thy daubing next, another place,
Is fit for plasters better then thy face,
When thou vowst love again, change not, it is evil,
For should thou, who'd believe the next, the devil
Why Counsel I in vain, for it is known,
True love has rules prescribd, but lust has none.
(91) To Flora.
When dusky clouds do snake their dewy plumes
And the sad earth exhales her mistie fumes,
When pearly showers fall, the Sun is fled,
And each thing droopes, the violet hangs her head,
Then muse not, Flora, why I sad remain,
My flowing eyes distill soft showers of rain,
And all my powers melt for lack of thee,
For thou, my Sun, art gone away from me.
(92) To Callus.
GAllus finds fault with such as do indite
In a new phrase, when they do letters write:
The reason why he thinks this an abuse is,
He keeps an old one, serves him for all uses.
(93) To Lupus.
THe garments of S. Francis, Papists say,
Will keep 'vm safe, and fright the fiend away;
And therefore Lupus, when that he is gone
To commit theft, or mischife, gets them on:
But although he a Friars habit have,
The devil sure will know him for a knave.
(94) Who are most merry?
THe Popish Priests most mirth do keep,
For they do sing whilst others weep.
(95) Who most free?
PHysicians are most free, for they have leave
To kill, and yet no punishment receive.
96 Who most mad?
NIice scholars are most mad, that fight and swear
Only 'bout vowels, and for sound and air.
97 Who most blessed.
THe poor are blessed that are content
With whatsoever God has sent.
98 Of Marriage.
THe quietest Marriage that I e're could find,
Is when the Husband's deaf, and the wuc blind.
99 To Vacera.
IF Vacera you strictly do behold,
You by her face would judge her to be old:
But if you by her hairs, her years do scan,
I do confess she is but an Infant than.
100 To Zoylus.
Here Is several baits, then Zoylus come and bite;
Alas, poor fool, they do not term thee right
That term thee vicious, thinking so to gall thee,
For thou art vice it self, and so I Will call thee.
The end of the first Century.
1 A Comparison betwixt a Ship and a Wife.
A Ship and a good wife should thus agree:
That being the greatest moveable, we see,
Man can enjoy; and yet our art does learn
To rule and guide it by a little stern:
So should a woman with obedient will
Be ruled, and governed by her husbands skill:
And as it sails by sounding, compass, care,
To judgment and discretion must prepare
Her ways, and actions; that though envy blow,
She may resist, and triumph over her foe:
Here must she differ, and be thus unlike,
For as one Vessel may her top-sayle strike
To many Merchants, so there must be none
Have any share or right in her but one:
Then as a ship, of all goods man can have,
May not be housed; a wife should never crave
To gad, or lie abroad: and to conclude,
Ships may be painted, women never should.
2 On the Eyes.
THe eye-lid's the least member, yet it car,
And has the power to darken the whole man.
(4) Mors vltima linea rerum.
THe Clergy prayers for all to heaven sends,
The bold and valiant soldier all defends,
The rusticke Clown does nourish all, and feed,
And last comes death, devouring all with speed.
(5) On Manuscripts.
THough the word spoken live, the written dye;
Yet that shall end, this live eternally.
(6) On a Cutpurse.
A Cutpurse is the best trade in the land,
For his work done, his mony's in his hand.
(7) On a she Papish.
A Young she Papist asked best was which,
To wed a young man, or an old man rich:
Quoth one, the old; so thou't be sure to keep
Enough of fasting days, and little sleep.
(8) ^n Mr. Robert Cromwell, who for poisoning his Master, was executed at
Tiburne, on Saturday, June 2. 1632.
IT is a common weakness in our blood,
To loath that Potion which may do us good;
But in diseases dangerous, it is fit,
To use like cure that may remedy it.
And, Cromwell, though the Law was unto thee
A bitter pill, yet did it purge thee free:
Neither could upright Justice more express,
In way of pity, or in right do less.
Astrea weighed thy crime with even hand;
And though thy piece was fair, wherein did stand
A perfect Image; yet to light it was
By many grains, and could not rightly pass,
Not with allowance; but again thou must,
(Being cast, and filled anew) resolve to dust:
Yet though thou were condemned by the reverend
(Big with thy guilt) thy happy soul did draw
The breath of Innocents, which perfumed thy path
To heaven with sweets, more then Elysium has:
And sacred Priests to thousand weeping eyes,
Acknowledged thee a destined sacrifice.
What revelation, or what holy flame
Mounted thy drooping thoughts, so young, so lame
(As thy fault made thee) swan-like at thy end
To chant such divine Anthems? Did attend
Legions of Angels on thee, at that time
Thou were to suffer? did thou hear the chime
Of the Celestial spheres, that thy glad spright
Seemed to be ravished with such free delight?
Thou hopd'st more Angels were attending on thee,
Then at thy death were eyes to graze upon thee.
The good sold Judges, most uprightly gave
Thee guilty for the offense, due to the grave;
And thou a fellon were at thy last breath,
Like the good Thief thou stoll'st heaven at thy death
Justly the Law condemned thee, and thy spot
Was plain and evident, yet that gross blot
Divinity has wiped out, thou now art even,
The Law of man's fulfilled, and will of heaven.
We must nor say it is pity thou didd'st dye,
Because we all are mortal; nor will I
Say thou art guilty of that vild offense
Thou suffer'dst for, nor crown thy innocence,
Only to this an answer Me receive,
Shall we the Gospel, or the Law believe?
On two Lovers, George and Besse.
MY better fate, my sight, blessed with a pair
Of young and gentle lovers, both so fair,
That in my ravished thoughts the tale did move,
Of young Adonis and the Queen of love:
But here this Adon wooed one of such price,
That had frail man another Paradise,
One Necter'd Cherry from her tempting lip
Would make him lose it: did he but sip
Some of her precious and preserving breath,
He could not dye, despite of fate or death.
The rugged Air grew gentle at her sight:
Ten thousand stars, as she did walk by night,
Hasted to see her; e're the Moon could rise,
And did receive bright luster from her eyes,
To guild the gloomy Eve, Nature must seek
Some quainter name: the pure flood in her cheek
Does cause the Roses blush; her virgin hue
Makes Lilies droop their heads, and shed their dew
Instead of tears, grow pale with shame, and dye,
When they are called by some over hasty eye
To match those milky paths, which seemed to trace
Along her snowie bosom, from her face:
Her lips, a pretty bird, upon a day,
Mistook for Cherries; and had pined away
For want of food, but that her balmine breath
Preserved the innocent from cruel death.
And ever since, scorning all other fare,
It Is a Camelion called, and lives by Air.
Oh Nature, wherefore when thou first made woman
Made thou not all alike, or else all common?
But blessed art thou, fair youth, that do possess
So rich a beauty; nor thy self art less
In excellence of feature: for what she,
I lent in praise, I borrowed first from thee:
And should I vindicate thy blessed for me over,
I shall but speak what I have said before:
So thou art nothing, George, without thy Besse,
And she without thee, must be needs much less.
On his Mistress a little wavering.
(1)
Have thou power to soften hell?
And the stubborn furies quell?
Can thou Beasts and Satyrs move
By thy art? and quicken love;
Much thou may, yet fail to find
The center of a woman's mind.
(2)
For though some in stories stood
Excellent for fair and good,
Constant in their loves, and wise,
Whose examples might suffice,
Yet beleeue'^ blind Nature spent
So much in wast, she did repent.
(3)
And therefore with the Fates agreed,
To spring such fruit, but spoil the seed.
Then thou fond man, call home, call home
Thy wandering heart into it is room:
Live at peace, and never trust
Women fa^re, and so unjust.
On a handsome Maid, who loved an ill-shapen dwarf, called the Lo. of
Portsmouth.
CAn this report be true by love? it is rare,
And pitiful, a Maid so young and fair,
To dote upon an Vrchine: how can she
Look on the ruiner of her Chastity,
And not dissolve in tears? will not the Rose,
Blown in her Lilly cheek, grow pale, and close
When he climbs up to kiss it? and the white
Be soyl'd and blasted at the loathed sight?
Shall I blame thee, oh love! no; for I fear
The monster Lust has usurpation here:
Sh' has heard, it may be, how a Queen of Creet
Did love a Bull, and held the dalliance sweet;
And therefore hopes to prove at least the half
Of those delights and pleasures, by this Calfe;
Who with her help (though he be Natures scorn)
May grow a Beast, yet of a larger horn*
Or shall the Serpent watch th'esperides,
And guard her golden fruit; yet Hercules
Can charm him, enter in, and shake the tree,
Taste all, and leave the passage after free.
What is her rebel blood so wanton grown,
She Is sick till the fools babble be her own,
And such a cramped Monkey: but it may be
She is ambitious to be stild a Lady,
To be of kindred to the Pharie Queen
(For so her changeling is) and on the green
With them to trip in ring-lets, and be made
A gentle faye, and Madam of the shade.
She ne^de not fear, as common mortals do,
The pinching of her white arms black and blew,
Her cozen Elues and Goblins will dispense
(For her dear spouse sake) with her offense.
Then Hymen snuff thy torch, lead on the way,
The Bride does with her crooked Bridgroom stay,
Whose humble dwarfe-ship may meet this ecclips,
To kiss her tail, when others reach her lips.
(9) To Fabulus.
I asked Fabulus why he had no wife,
Quoth he, because I Would live a quiet life.
(10) To Momus.
Why Spanish-leather on thy head do wear
Oh, now I know, it is cause thou have no hair.
And I commend the workman did it do,
Thy pate is clouted neater then thy shoe.
(11) To Balde pate.
With curious Iuorie comb why art thou sped,
When not a hair does grow upon thy head.
(12) On a Ram.
O Cruel Butcher, of a bloody mind,
How can thou be so wicked and unkind,
With thy sharp knife to cut his tender throat,
That oftentimes has given thee his coat.
(13) Against praying for the dead.
THou sowest in sand, or anglst in the air,
That think to help a soul deceast, by prayre.
(14) To Cotta.
COt knows his wife's a whore, and says it is right,
One lamp may give a score of men good light.
(15) To Callice.
Were virtue, goodness, and plain honesty
But half so dear as is thy drink to thee,
Then would the virgin Lilly, not the Rose,
Spread it self gently in thy face and nose.
You Are rich enough, for pearls and rubies store
Grow in thy nose, then say thou art not poor.
(16) To Phylaene.
PHylaene lets tears but from one eye fall,
The reason is, she has but one in all.
(17) On Hermophroditas.
PArthia* great with child, to the Temple came,
And offering Incence with religious flame
Unto the gods, for her the ^^^est inquired
What 'twas she went withal, this she desired;
A fire flew over the Altar, and devoured
The sacred Wine, and Oil which she had powered:
This promised speedy answer, and with joy
She listening lay; quoth Phoebus, it is a boy:
Mars said it was a girl; Juno replied,
'Twas neither girl not boy: her cheeks late died
With crimson b^ushes, now waxt wan and pale,
That hardly could the aged Priest prevail
To keep life in her: but being safe and well,
At length came home; she straight in labor fell,
And was delivered as the gods said, right,
Boy, Girl, yet neither an Hermaphrodite;
Her time of lying in being over past,
She to the former Temple hyes in have;
And having done her holy sacrifice,
She does again request the deities
With prayers, o^ humble knees pressing the earth,
What fate should follow her prodigious birth.
Mars said she should be hanged Phoebus said no,
But he by water should his life forgo:
Quoth Juno, as he is neither, so this death,
Nor that, but his own sword shall end his breath.
Parthia amazed at this, aloud she cried,
Either too cruel; so went home and died.
Hermophroditas grown to man's estate,
Being one time put to a dangerous strait
By a pursuing wolf; flying, espied
A thick branched tree grown by a river side;
Whose spreading arms at such a length were laid.
That they the gliding brook did ouershad^.
Seeking to climb the tree, his foe to shun,
His sword fell out, and in his belly run:
Thus wounded, down he fell; the boughs did meet
Him in his falling, and held fast his feet:
H^s head, the murmuring waves (that seemed to chide
The fates) received, and thus he stringely died.
And so this man, maid, neither, here was found
To suffer all three deaths, hanged, killed, and drowned.
(18) To Flacca.
I Love thee not, yet know not what should move me,
But only this, in troth I cannot love thee.
(19) To Appricius.
MVch do thou project, much do thou begin
But naught do finish thou have entered in;
And so when into drinking thou do fall,
Appricius thou can make no end at all.
(20) To Cinna.
It Was Mithridates use, and his intent,
Still to eat poison, poison to prevent:
So because hunger Cinna shall not kill,
He uses much to fast against his will.
(21) To Laelius
When others speak, thy tongue apace does walk,
And then beleeu'st that thou do wisely talk
The arrantst fool that is, may prattle so,
And yet no stander by his folly know;
But now the rest are silent and give ear,
Now Laelius speak, thy wisdom let us hear.
(22) To Elisia.
ELisia sent to me a Hare, and writ
I should be fair seven days after it:
If thou say true, Elisia, then I swear
In all thy life thou never did eat a hate.
(23) To Thraso.
Vicious, and evil minded men there be,
But, honest Thraso, this is naught to thee;
Castor keeps whores, who will feel^ ^he smart but he,
And honest Thraso, etc.
Gnat^o a dice consumes his state we see,
But honest Thraso, etc.
He sits up la^e, and vainly watch does keep,
T^ou in thy bed all nigh dest^oundly sleep:
C^luns from Lu^u^ d^ but never free,
But honest Thraso, etc.
Thou nothing ow'st, nor none can do thee wrong,
Yet there are some things do to thee belong;
Thy c^oaths are pawned, set them at liberty,
This, Thraso, only does belong to thee;
Not one will trust thee for a doyt again,
This, Thraso, unto thee does appertain:
Thy wife does give thee horns; and this great wrong
Does most my Thraso, unto thee belong.
Much more there is, but what belongs to thee,
Does not, good Thraso appertain to me.
(24) On Arria and Paetus.
Paetus commanded by the Tyrants will,
With his own sword his own dear blood to spil,
His chaste wife Arria, being present by,
First took the sword, and with a scornful eye
Beheld the Tyrant; saying, Monster know,
Though it is in thy power, at one blow
To kill two bodies, yet our souls shall fleet
Hence, spite of thee, and in Elysium meet:
Thy cruel doom pronounced, shall make us blessed,
And saying so, she pierced her noble breast;
Then drew it forth, and gave the bloody blade
Unto her dearest husband, and thus said,
My faithful Patus, what I now have done,
Does grieve me not, but when the sword shall run
Through thy heart, that heart I loved so well,
The thought of that to me alone is hell;
Yet sweet make have to overtake: her breath
Flew with that word; her self o'retane by death.
(26) To Luper.
LVper, when late I did thee sitting see,
Me thought I saw three men, which cousen'd me;
Thy bald patc 'twas, where stood one patch of hair,
Another here, likewise another there,
Afraid of one another; and so seen,
As if in facions they had parted been:
Thy Crown was bare, where many an ally was
In which there grew not half a blade of grass
Yet thy head yields unto thee profit: when
The Emperors dole is given, other men
Only one basket have, but thou have three,
But have a care, if thee Alcides see
Before grim Pluto's gate, thou art but dead,
So like to three-chapt Cerberus is thy head.
(27) On Leander.
LEander sinking, cried unto the waves,
Spare me you seas, spare me you liquid g^aue^,
Until my Hero I have seen; be still,
And spare me now, then drown me if you will.
(28) To Flora.
MY dearest Flora, it is wondrous strange,
That one so fair should subject be to change,
For in an April day there cannot be
More change of wethers, then there is change in thee
Sometimes thou full of pleasure do appear,
And then thou swear'st thou only hold'st me dear
Straight, in a frantic vain, thou fl^'st away,
Nor have I power to entreat thee stay:
Again, that humor off thou art more kind,
Then loving Turtle, or the Southern wind;
Now thou ma^'st much of me, and now again
Thou break'st thy vows, and put'st me unto pain:
Would Tantalus my case were like to thine,
Thy punishment's to be in waves and pine:
Bu^ it is a greater plague to be a dry,
And yet not drink, when Nectar stands by:
(29) To a naughty Lawyer.
THou do the Court with noise and business fill,
And pra^'st and talk, as if thou had great skill
In The Law; yes faith, thou have as much as need,
Need has no Law, nor thou have none indeed.
(30) To Labine.
THou married have a wife deformed and black,
And yet no wealthy substance did she lack:
Her did thou choose, wisely, to set thee free,
For hands to feel, not for thine eyes to see.
(31) To mark a Usurer.
Mark, miserable wretch, as I hear say,
Would needs go hang himsefle the other day,
But thus he was deceived of his hope,
F^^ under three pence he could buy no rope:
Oh sie, quoth he, the price amazed the Elfe:
Two pence half penny he gave, and hanged himself.
(32) To Marcus.
MArcus being drunk over night,
his bed does keep,
Till noone next day, dots Marcus soundly sleep
And being bid, by some that do him know,
To yield a reason why he sleeps so,
He makes reply, why does not David say,
It Is vanity in man to rise e're day,
(33) The Lovers Enigma. Sum sine Deo sum sine te, sum sine me.
WHat power shall I inuoke,
and to whom turn me,
To thaw my Ice, or quench the fire does burn me;
I see my folly, count it worthy blame,
And yet have no fig-leafe to hide my shame:
Is there an Art unto our memory set,
And can we not as well learn to forget?
Oh no, for trifles we estreme as rare,
When they are purchased with much cost and care:
Like Tantalus I only feast mine eye,
And court my shadow that does from me fly:
As the poor Moath, my funeral flame I fan,
In loving thee, I leave to be a man,
And what a man should be, and am become
Bankrout, in paying unto thee a sum
Of faithful tears, and constant vows; nay, more,
I am without God; for I do adore
And seek thee more then him: for thee I pine,
Yet am without thee, 'cause thou art not mine:
And what most weighes me down into my grave,
I am without my self, being thy slave:
Judge then my case, how strange it is, and odd,
Without thee I Am without my self, and God.
(34) To his Mistress who found fault with him.
AS your bright eyes discover my amiss,
So your fair lips may cure me with a kiss:
Then if I am not good, the fault's in you,
That spaire your kisses and to mend me too.
(35) To his cruel mistress.
Fair cruel Mistress, since nor prayers, nor tears
Can move your pity, nor my tender years,
Yet since your heart is stone, oh give give consent
To let it be my true hearts monument.
(36) To Lacon.
I Asked Lacon, that was lately wed,
Why such a little wise he had chose to bed?
Oh friend, quoth he) I hold it for the best,
Still, of all evils, for to choose the least.
(37) To a Braggart.
SInce, Sturdy, thou can better fart then fight,
Take S away, and thou art such a wight.
(38) On a woman and a ship.
A Goodly ship, a fair and wanton woman,
For man's use both created, and both common;
Such is their natures, their condition such,
That they can never be tricked or trimd too much.
(39) On the Sun and man's thought
WHat in the world is swifter then the Sun,
That in a day the orbed round does run?
The thought of man, whose quick and fleeter force
Does in a moment circle the same course.
(40) On the Pope.
A Glorious seat, and most imperial state,
The Pope has purchased after this life's date:
For heaven he does continually sell,
And with those sums has bought a place in hell.
Vendidit et Coelum Romanus et Astra sacerdos:
Ad stigias igitur, cogitur ire domus,
(41) Truths above all.
King, wine, or women, which is strong'st of these
But I say Truth's above al, say which you please.
(42) On a little Boy, who wore a sword.
I Saw a little yongster wear a sword,
The other day, and strut it like a lord:
I smiling, asked him who it was that tied
Him to his weapon? the poor vrchin cried,
(43) On small Beer.
ONe did commend the pureness of his Beer*
Indeed, Sir, wet't a little thought more clear
(Q^oth on, on whom he freely did bestow it)
Surely from water one should hardly know it.
(44) Qui mocat, mocabitur.
THe Salamander, ready ^o expire,
Wanting his natural Element, the fire;
Being got into a barn, frighted the Mice
Wi^h his strange uncouth noise, that in a trice
They take 'vm to their holes, and there they peep,
Wondering what Monster did their dwelling keep;
But knowing who it was, they boldly came,
And with their jeeres and mocks, they lend a flame
Unto his frozen heart; but 'twas in vain
For him to vex or raise, for still his pain
Increased, and their flouts and mocks grew greater,
Making his woes, and their delights compleater:
At length, by some mishap, or want of care,
The Barn was all on fire; the vermin stare,
And muse to see such light, away they run
Toward their Cells, the greedy flames to shun;
But those are grown too hot, and back amain
They poast, the flames possession there had taken:
No harbor find they, each one madly seeks:
The heat does parch 'vm, and their cries and shreeks
Is music to the Salamanders ears,
Who now recouer'd, at 'vm laughs and jeeres:
Plays with the wanton flames, and leaps, and turns,
Whilst the poor Mice consume, and the Barn burns,
But now no fuel left for flames to eat,
They famish now for want, and make retreat;
Leaving the Salamander as distressed,
As at the first; who being ouer-prest
With killing cold, casting his dying eye
Where the sad ruins of his enemies lie,
Quoth he, I gladly now resign my breath,
In that I am revenged before my death.
(45) To Priscus and Ga^la, man and wife; Who never agreed in all their life.
PRiscus loves wine, Galla does not despise it,
He uses to be drunk she never flies it:
Priscus spends all, all Galla does consume,
He loves Tobacco, she delights in fume:
Priscus does keep a whore, Galla a knave;
He gallant goes, and she is very brave:
Priscus is black, and Galla is not fair,
He meager is, and lean, and she is spare:
Since that both wicked, both so like we see,
I wonder why they never do agree.
(46) To Spurius and Stella.
STtella does bury all her husbands still;
And Spurius with his wives the vault does fill;
Whom they do marry dye: good Hymen light
Thy Saffron Torch, let it burn clear and bright,
And grant these conquerors may have the lot
For to be knit in sacred nuptial knot;
That at one time they may together have
One solemn funeral, one knell, one grave.
(47) To Crispus.
When I dine with thee, look upon thy wise,
Tho frownst, and in thy trench^^ stabst thy
Prithee what fault is this? the sun, the sky,
The stars, and things more glorious to mine eye, knife:
I may behold. what, should I turn aside?
Or veil me with my hand, as if I spied
Some ugly object? if no guest shall see
Thy loving wife, let me then counsel thee,
That none at meals may ever thee molest,
Good Crispus let some blind man be thy guest.
(48) To Castellus.
Grieve not, my friend, because thou art backbited
But let that ill, be with thy good requited.
For name of wretch, does unto him belong
That slanders thee, not thou that have the wrong.
(49) To Drusus.
THou art proper, hansom, and well shaped, we see,
Yet many people take me still for thee;
Would I were like one soul^, so good he were,
For now thy faults about me I do bear.
(50) To his Mistress, because he came not in the daytime, as he promised.
What though I did not come by day,
according to my vow?
Must I for that endure the raye
of thy incensed brow?
No, rather crown my head with bays,
and kiss me with delight,
For love has not such sport by dayee,
as pleasures in the night.
(51) To Flora, that unseen took his handkercher out of his pocket.
A Lovely beauty, that did owe
A hand more white then falling snow,
To make her sport with others grief,
Pleased to play the beauteous thief;
And whilst I with various thought,
Still at fleeting shadows caught,
On my Elbow careless lay,
Stoale my handkercher away,
Unfelt of me; but 'twas her art,
She might steal this, who stole my heart,
(52) On a Heart sent to his Mistress.
SWeet, if you can think what pain
A heart thus wounded, may sustain,
I need not then to you impart,
The anguish of my bleeding heart;
Enough I feel, yet cannot dye,
Because my life's fed from your eye:
By you I have or woe, or bliss,
This the poor hearts evil is;
And such a one do I endure,
Which no King alive can cure,
Nor Physic help; only you,
Heaven has lent this power to:
Then since you all evils check,
Hang like an Angel 'bout my neck.
(53) To Torpetus.
A Fruitful wench God send me, when I wed,
I hate these barren dames: Torpetus sed
He married Frank, and so he had his prayer,
For the next day she brought him forth a pair.
(54) To such as paint themselves.
Who love to paint their face, this hope have they
That God shall not know them at the later day:
But they which use such colors, but foretell,
How they shall show when they are damned in he^.
(55) To his Picture.
MY face the Painter has expressed by Art,
But God does know the secrets of my heart.
(56) To Sixtus.
Sixtus, thy wife is fair, that is not amiss:
But she is a scold; tell me how like thou this?
(57) To an unskillful Physician.
AChilles with his spear his foes did spill;
Thou with more ease, with a small herb do kill,
Thou art more worthy then Achilles found,
Only his spear could cure as well as wound.
(58) On a Drunkard.
Within this grave he chok'd with dirt does ly
That in his life time was but once adry.
(59) Five things white.
Four things are white, the fifth exceeds the rest,
Snow, silver, ceruse. age, and a chaste breast.
(60) To Torpetus.
THy wife is barren, what is the reason trow?
Why I will tell thee, if thou do not know;
Plants will not thrive, except they well are set,
And she bears naught, 'cause thou naught can beget.
(61) To Aulus.
What Aulus does, not now do I demand;
But which of these, I feign would understand,
Or drink, or sleep, pray whether of these two,
For nothing else I know does Aulus do.
(62) To Callus.
GAllus, the dreadful thunderclaps to shun,
Down to some Cellar in all have does run;
And there he counts himself both safe and well,
He thinks in Cellars God does never dwell.
(63) To one that bragged he was nosd like K. Cyrus.
THou say thou art hawk-nos'd as Cyrus was;
Have Myda's ears, and then be like an Ass.
(64) Of money and land.
What Is coin, or gold, or silver, naught but rust;
What Is land and great possessios? noght but dust
(65) To a Prodigal.
IN brave Outlandish, and in strange attire,
Thou please thy fantastical desire:
Sometimes the roaring French, the Spaniard than,
And other while the spruse Italian:
But now at last in rags, all rent and torn,
What fashion's this? is it Beyond Sea worn?
(66) A verse of Homer.
What crimes soever great Princes do commit,
The Commonwealth is sure to pay for it.
(67) Of him that is in debt.
Who owes much money, shuns all company,
Like to the Owl that in the night does fly.
(68) On a Fool bitten with Fleas.
A Fool extremely troubled with the Fleas,
By no means in his bed could take his ease,
But rising up with speed put out the light,
Saying you shall not see me now to bite.
(69) On a Drunkard.
A Drunkard fell into a fever sore,
Whereby his thirst grew greater then before
Physicians came, who promised to cure
His Fever, and the thirst he did endure:
To whom the Patient spoke, Phisicians see
You cure my Fever, leave my thirst to me.
(70) On a young man, and an old man.
A Young man, and an aged man of late,
Being in a Tavern, fell at great debate*
The youth thinking the testy sire to cool,
Said, turd in the thy teeth, thou crabbed do^ing fool,
At this the old man laughed, and made reply,
Turd in his teeth that has teeth, none have I:
So showed his gums, which made
the young man laugh,
They both grew friends, and drank their liquor off.
(71) When Women profit.
ALthough all women are reputed bad,
Yet two good days by them are ever had;
That happy day she does thee husband call,
And day of death, when she does leave thee all.
(72) To Flora.
SNow held unto the fire, dissolues, we see,
So they consume that burn in love with thee.
(73) To Claudia.
Claudia delivered of a chopping lad,
The Midwife swore it was as like the dad
As could be possible: tell true, quoth she,
Has he a bald crown? prithee let me see.
(74) To Callice.
CAllice I met, whose nose being richly spread
With Oriental pearls, and rubies red:
I asked him when he with the Goldsmith was:
Why Sir, quoth he? because that be in brass
Has set those stones, which should have bin in gold:
And therefore Callice, if I might be bold,
The knave has cozened thee, as I suppose,
To give thee, instead of gold, a Copper nose.
(75) To Furnus.
FVrnus takes pains; he needs not, without doubt;
O yes, he labors much; how? with the gout.
(77) To a covetous Miser.
THou say al things are dear, wine, corn and oil,
Yet thou well stored, live in a plenteous soil,
And wretch to no man dear, thou dear do sell:
Alas, all is dear, and therefore thou do well:
Sell as thou may, and fly extortion,
So thou't be dear to all, yet dear to none.
(78) To one that painted Echo.
PAinter forbear, a madness it is in thee
To draw my form, whom never man did see:
I only daughter am to Air and noise,
Without the bodies help I am a voice,
For my Narcissus loss, the world I hate,
And the last words I still reuerberate,
In mocking sort; no farther then proceed:
But would thou draw my counterfeit indeed?
( Eccho's my name, my dwelling under ground)
And Painter, thou must only paint a sound.
(79) To her Love.
BEhold, my dearest, how the fragrant Rose
Is fresh and blown, whilst on the tree is grows*
But being by some rude hand plucked away,
Loses its sweetness, and does soon decay:
Even so poor I, or live, or dye by thee,
I am thy Rose, my dear, and thou my tree
(80) To Scatter-good.
SCatter-good going to his bed, with sorrow
In mind, what he should wear, or eat next morrow
Found in his house a thief; who every way
Had searched, yet could not meet with any prey;
He laughing said, away thou foolish wight;
Do thou come hither in the mask of night,
To look for ought? thou art deceived, quoth he,
For when it is day, my self can nothing see.
(81) To one fickle minded.
Were thou as light of foot as light of mind,
Thou would outstrip the stag, the hair, or wind.
(82) To his Picture.
HOw well, my Picture, thou resemblest me,
Thou art pale and so am I; thou can not see,
And I am blind: ay me, to well I find,
Thou have no thought, and poor I have no mind:
I have no life, no breath does from thee break;
Thou speechless art, ay me, nor can I speak:
Thy bosom does no heart at all contain,
And hartlesse I, without a heart remain:
Alone thou dwell'st, vncompanied of any,
And so am I, though gazed upon by many:
Of fading colors thou, wilt soon decay;
As I, of brittle and unconstant clay:
Thou as my shadow, for a time shall be;
A^ weak a shadow still does follow me:
Thou weak, must fade; long cannot I remain,
To dust and ashes both must turn again:
Both thus are like, yet happier thou then I,
Thou do not love, I love and wish to dye.
(83) To the Reader.
REader, if nothing please thee here, begone;
I writ them for to please my self alone.
(84) To Swillus.
WHen the parched earth, made thirsty with the rays
Of scorching Phoebus, cleaues in several ways
To quaffe the wished showers; Swillus gapes,
Bring hither, boy, the pleasant juice of grapes:
Now is the time to drink; and still his eye
Beholds the earth, and still he is adry.
Then when the heavenly fluccs up are taken,
And freedom given to gushing stoods of rain,
Now, now quoth Swillus, fill with nimble hands,
Th'exhausted cups, for heaven now commands
Us to carouse; his drink is never forgot,
And somewhat still he will say to toffe the pot.
(85) To Cornutus.
COrnutus twits his wife and says, that he
Can have no child by her sterrillity:
Before a year was past, she was so sped,
That with two children she was brought to bed;
He musing asked her if those Babes were his?
Lord, husband (quoth she) what a question's this?
I have resolved you this, and let me dye,
These babes are yours; with you I did not lie.
(86) On a Thief.
A Thief condemned for a heinous crime,
Was for to lose his tongue at that same time,
But he the Court entreats with fained tears,
To spare his tongue, and cut off both his ears:
To this the Judge, and all the Bench agreed,
And for the Executioner sent with speed;
Who being come, and searching, there was found
No ears, but hairs; at this all laughed round:
Says Judge, thou have no ears; Sir, quoth the wight,
Where there is naught, the King must lose his right
(87) To Barba.
Have I the power to bid the frost not melt,
Or Alpine snow, when it the Sun has felt?
Or can I stay the falling showers of rain,
When springy Exhalations drop again?
Or may I mask the stars, or Cynthia bright,
In a fair Evening, and a frosty night?
No more have I the power to enforce
Thy constancy, for lust will have its course.
(88) On Love.
A Salve for every sore is to be found,
But there is no balsum that can cure loves wound
(89) Sent to his Mistress in a Lemon.
FAirest, if you do not find
Natural substance in this rind,
Be not angry: what you do
See enclosed here, grows in you.
Purest colors would you seek?
Go no further then your cheek:
Or would you Nepen the sip?
Taste your own soft melting lip.
The juice of Lemon well may prove
Cooling, but the flames of love
In my breast, no Iulip, no
Nor cakes of Ice, nor falling snow
Can quench 'vm; you have only power
To slake them with a gentle shower:
I in your lips the cordial see,
Cupid made to comfort me.
From your charm my pain will run,
Say you love me, and it is done:
It Is the heart-ake which I have,
You can ease me, help I crave.
For which, to Love and you, I Will bound become,
Till for the cure I have discharged the sum.
(90) On a fool that found a Crab-fish.
IN midst of Summer when the radiant Sun
In all his glory, through the Zodiac run;
A Crab-fish crawling from the scorched sea,
Came on a verdant bank to sport and play;
And as he frisking lay upon the grass,
A certain Idiot by that place did pass,
Who having* e're before a Crab-fish seen,
In haft to catch it, thrust his hand between
His griping claws; the Crab did pinch him sore,
And made the simple fellow cry and rore;
Who to renenge himself of this fell spite,
Took up the Crab-fish, and with all his might
F^ung i^ into the sea; saying, I trow
I Will teach you sirrah to pinch strangers so.
The Crab amongst the waves does leap and friske,
fl^ppeth his tail apace, is wondrous brisk:
S^, quoth the Innocent, alas dumb thing,
The pangs of death, how sharp and sore they sting.
(91) To Petrus and Critticus.
Men's faces differ, and so does the heart,
Nor can the eye the hidden thoughts impart:
This man in outward show does gentle seem,
And for a Demon we do him esteem,
When in his heart he does a Demon prove;
So although Criticus profess thee love,
Believe me, Petrus, trust him not, I know
Him for to be thy deadly private foe.
(92) To Zoylus.
TO answer she, I lately did refuse,
About Religion; know, I do not use
To give to dogs things holy and divine:
Thy carping currish nature does repine
At all that is good; thus to a curre I write,
That still will bark, although he cannot bite.
(93) On a Surgeon.
A Skillful Surgeon does these three command,
A Lions heart, Hawks eye, and Ladies hand.
(94) To his truly virtuous Mistress.
MY Mistress breast more beauty shrines within,
Then can be fancied on an outward skin:
Let fools their wantons court, their face compare
To Roses mixed with Lillies, and their hair
To Sunbeams, gold, or down, when it is known
To be another's comings, not their own;
And that pure red and white, so highly graced,
Was there by Art and not by Nature placed:
Shall this draw my affection? shall my last
Write my despised memory in dust?
No, I am mounted on a nobler wing,
I can behold a painted vrne, and sing
No Anniuerse; no charm the face puts on
Can move me, it is the mind I dote upon:
The Superficies of the earth contains
Not half the treasure is within its veins:
The curled waves upon 'vm cannot keep
The moy'tie of that is hid in the deep;
Nor can the outward face of heaven,
(As unto what is within) such praise be given.
Where am I? from the heavens, earth, and sea,
Return I back, my dearest unto thee:
Thy inward beauty is to thee more grace,
Then Hellen's, which was only in the face,
Thou never need'st despair, there shall not grow
One wrinkle in thy virtues Iuory brow:
The elder that thy graces grow, the more
They shall to thee renew rich beauties store:
Thy wisdom, and thy noble soul I love,
That know affection, and how far to prove;
Here will I build, here my foundation lay
On rocky virtue, not on painted clay.
(95) On Mistri (* Westbe.)
Would you know what is more sleeke
Then the smooth and glassie cheek
Of bladed grass? or would you know
What is purer then the snow?
Would you learn what is more soft
Then the down that grows aloft
The blow-ball? or what is more sweet
Then hunger, or the wedding-sheet?
Would you know what blushes be,
Besides the Rose, or blossem'd tree?
Or all delights, if you would read 'vm,
And would know what could exceed 'vm,
Look on her, for none but she
Can their true Elixar be.
Touch her skin, and you shall feel
It slipperer then the glass, or Eele;
View it well, and then your sense
Will judge it pure as Innocence;
Softer far then true loves kisses,
Sweeter then the choycest blisses;
More red, more white, more sweet delight
Yielding, then or day, or night,
Can boast of; oh, who would not be,
To such a Saint, a Votarie?
Why should then the spiced East
Be famous for the Phoenix nest?
Since there may in the (* West be) found
One in whom more sweets abound.
(96) On a Lover.
I Freeze in fire, and I fry in frost,
Unhappy I, that love with labor lost.
(97) To certain Maidens playing with snow.
YOu tender Virgins, fairer then the Snow, with which you play,
Note how it melts, think how the Roses grow, and how decay,
Just so does beauty fade, and age draw on,
Winter makes have, and Summer's quickly gone.
(98) To Sixtus.
SIxtus the tooth-ake troubles thee insooth,
That neither day nor night no rest can take,
Yet with a good tongue do but lick thy tooth,
And suddenly thy pain will thee forsake.
(99) On a Beggar.
Alive I had no house, now dead, a grave;
I lived in want, now I do nothing crave:
A perrigrine I lived, poor, and distressed,
But weary death has signed my Quietus est:
Alive I naked went, but now I am
Clad in rich robes, for Caesar wears the same.
(100) To his wife, which set a pot of Flowers in the window.
Fair flowers thou do in thy window set,
And stinking dirt to make them grow, do get.
Good wife cast all away, I thee desire,
The flowers smell sweet, but worser stinks the mire.
To Zoylus.
Why are thy brows girt with a laurel wreath?
Apollo such does to his Sons bequeath:
But to thy Tribe, that stingest with thy tongue,
A garland made of Nettles does belong.
Virtus post funera viuit.
THough flames do dye, yet embers live,
And grief and sorrows usher joy;
Perfumes, when burnt, the smoke does give
A comfort, does bad scents destroy:
So, if in vtrtues path we tread,
That will survive when we are dead.
He that is deemed an honest man,
Whilst that he lives, no envy can
Blot the fair story of his life:
When he is dead, his virtue shall
Long out-liue his funeral;
Though all the world be at strife,
To make his Tomb more lasting then
The large remembrances of men.
To his worthy friend, Mr. John Hall, going to travel.
ANd must we lose what other Realms shall find?
Is England grown to narrow for thy mind?
Cannot the impetuous periil of the maine,
Or Silla, or Caribdos, thee restrain?
Or, if not these, the dangers of the land,
Which thou shall find waiting on either hand?
If none of all, thy forward thoughts can bar,
Prove both a wandering, and a fixed star.
FINIS.

