THE TRAGEDY OF JULIA AGRIPPINA; Empress of Rome.

By T. M

LONDON, Printed by Ric. Hodgkinsonne for Thomas Walkly, and are to be sold at
his shop at the Flying Horse near York house. 1639.

The Speakers.
Claudius Caesar. Nero Caesar. Britannicus. Seneca. Burrhus. Vitellius. Pollio.
Crispinus. Geta. Otho. Montanus. Petronius. Pallas. Narcissus. Anicetus.
Agrippina. Octavia. Poppaea. Fulvia. Act. Locusta. L.
ACTED 1628.

OCTOBER. 26. 1638. Imprimatur,

MATTHEW. CLAY.

MEGAERA ascends. Megaera. THus to the Roman Palace, as our home
And proper mansion, is Megaera come
No stranger to these walls: not more in Hell
Then here, do mischiefs, and we Furies dwell
Let the unenvied Gods henceforth possess
Poor Peasants hearts, and rule in Cottages;
Let Virtue lurk among the rural Swains,
Whilst Vice in Romes Imperial Palace reigns,
And rules those breasts, whom all the world obeys.
What though the Gods and Virtue first did raise
Rome to that height it holds? they did but make
An Empire large enough for us to take,
And build a strength for us to manage now,
Though Virtue made the Roman greatness grow:
She now forsakes it at the height: the Powers,
And fruits of all her diligence are ours.
But to preserve that interest, and keep high
Our hold in this commanding family,
A blacker Fury then my self must rise,
To fill these roofes with fresh Impieties.
Rise cruel Ghost, ascend Caligula,
That lately did the worlds proud scepter sway
Beyond our wish; who though an Emperor,
In wickedness were greater then in power;
And clothed with flesh among mankind did dwell
A Fiend more black then any was in Hell.
From those dark vaults ascend; to blast this fair
And gorgious Palace, like that poisonous air,
Which Earthquakes from the grounds torn entrails breath
To fill the world with pestilence and death.
He comes; He comes: the very house begins
To shake with horror of approaching sins.
The night grows blacker then before, and I
My self am filled with new Impiety.

CALIGULA'S Ghost. Why am I raised from the vaults below?
What mischiefs can an aerie shadow do?
What can a naked Ghost perform? In vain
Are all intents, unless I reigned again
Obeyed by all the Roman power, and wore
That wicked body which I had before.
What then I did you know, and if your power
Could have maintained me longer Emperor,
I had outdone your wishes, and given birth
To such new mischiefs, as the suffering earth
Had groaned to feel: what my intentions were
Did to the world in those black books appear,
When all Romes Senate were to death designed,
And chests of poison that I left behind,
Which since my death into the Ocean thrown,
Poisoned the waves for many leagues, and on
Poor fishes wrought that execution,
Which on mankind I meant they should have done.
What can I now perform alas?

MEGAERA. Enough. With thy contagious presence blast this roof;
Infect the Imperial House with all the ill
That Hell and thou can bring. Let mischief still
Reign here, and keep out banished Piety,
Justice, and Conscience; let no sacred ty
Of Nature, or Religious laws restrain
Their Parricidall hands: all names be vain
Of brother, child, or parent. let the wife
With impious rage destroy her husbands life,
The brother kill the brother, and the Son
Rip up his parents bowels.

GHOST. 'Twill be done.
The actors are my kindred, and like mine
Must play their parts: ambitious Agrippine,
Pursue thy cruel projects, and upon
A husband's murder raise thy Impious Son,
That he may play the Parricide again,
And murder thee, that gav'st him life and reign.
That all the world astonished at so high
Ingratitude and foul Impiety,
May fear the Monsters reign, yet suffer more
Then they could fear, or ere was felt before.
Let what no foes, no furies durst conspire
To act against Rome, nor I my self desire
When I was Prince; be cursed Nero's crimes.
Let his dire story in succeeding times
From all earths Tyrants elfe the wonder draw,
And men almost forget Caligula.

MEGAERA. The Fates consent; that thunder, which we hear
From Acheron, confirms the Omen there.
Down wicked Ghost into thy ^ell below,
We must no longer bide; the Cocks do crow,
The twinkling stars begin to hide their heads
The day would dawne, and from Auroraes bed
Would Titan rise, but that he fears to see
Such instruments of Hells impiety.
The Gods themselves forbid our longer stay,
For fear our presence should retard the day. Exeunt.

A Tragedy.
ACT. I. SCEN. I.
PALLAS, VITELLIUS, POLLIO. Pallas. NOw is the time noble Vitellius,
For you, and you most honored Pollio,
To make that service you have done complete
To royal Agrippina; briefly thus:
The two commanders of the Praetorian camp
Crispinus Rufus, and that Lucius Geta
Must be displaced, and some of nearer trust
To her designs advanced in their room,
Or else our power will nere be full, they love
Britannicus too well, this is the thing
The Empress wishes; let your eloquence
And wisdom further it in Caesar's ear.

Vitelli. Fear us not Pallas; but what successors
Have we to take their charge?

Pallas. One must take all.
You may pretend the inconvenience
Of two commanders, and so take from Caesar
All jealousy of the plot.

Pollio. Who shall it be?


Pallas. Burrhus Afranius a wise valiant man,
Beloved and honored by the soldiers.
None can except against him, and the change
Will not displease the camp: nor can his merit
Make him less thankful to her; knowing well,
'Twas in her power to make it otherwise.
But the advancing of such able men
As Seneca and Burrhus will take off
All envy from the Empress and our selves.
Then we with praise have wrought our purposes,
And made our party strong, while Seneca
Shall sway the Senate, Burrhus rule the camp
To her designs: but I Will presume no farther
T'instruct your wisdoms, or much less to doubt
Your true affections to the state and honor
Of Agrippina, who will then have power
To make more large requital to her friends,
In which most high and happy rank, you two
Are chiefly seated: she acknowledges
Her self indebted to your eloquence
Noble Vitellius, who in Senate lately
You proov'd her marriage lawful* and being Censor,
Deposed Silanus from his Praetorship,
Who should have married young Octavia.
To you, brave Pollio, whose persuasions
Have been the cause young Nero now enjoyes
That happy marriage, which Silanus lost.
But most of all she owed to both your pains
In causing Caesar to adopt her Nero.

Vitellius. 'Twas hard to work at first. Caesar stuck at it,
Alleging that the Claudian family
Never adopted any, and besides
When Lucius Geta and Crispinus Rufus
In love they bore to young Britannicus
Told him that that adoption to the world
Would be ridiculous: by president
We did refute it, showing how Tiberius
Having a Son and Nephew both alive,
Adopted the issue of Germanicus.

Pallas. My Lords, 'twas nobly carried; this design
That now we have in hand, though not so hard
To work, will prove as advantageous.
Be you with Caesar; I Will go satisfy
The Empress of your loves.

Vitellius. Pollio. Farewell brave Pallas. Exeunt Vitel. and Pol.


Pallas. Farewell my Lords. Go flattering Senators,
Go use your best persuasive eloquence,
Whilst I alone upon your envy rise,
Whilst I enjoy in Agrippinaes love
The fruit of your obsequious diligence.
What though my birth be humble, and my style
But one of Caesar's freed-men, though I boast not
Patritian blood, nor in my galleries
Display old ranks of nose-lesse ancestors,
Or eare-cropt images, if I enjoy
What ever high Nobility can give
Respect and power: the state can witness it.
The Senate fear me, and in flattery
Have su'd to Caesar to confer on me
Praetorian and Quaestorian ornaments.
Which I at last vouchsafed to accept.
When my command alone has doomed to death
The noblest of that order; men whose names
Old Rome has boasted of, whose virtues raised
Her to that envied height that now she holds.
Their murders stupid Caesar rather chose
To take upon himself, then question me.
Let dull Patricians boast their aerie titles,
And count me base, whilst I commend their lives,
And for the furtherance of my high intents,
Make noblest men my hated instruments.
Enter NARCISSUS. But ha! Narcissus? yes; there comes a man
That was my rival once, whom I feared more
Then all the Lords of Rome, my fellow freed man,
That knew our ways of power; that not the Senate,
But Caesar's chamber did command the world,
And rule the fate of men: but Fortune 's turned,
And he not worth my regard or fear.
In mastring him I feel my greatest strength exit.

Narcissus. Not look upon me! am I fallen so low?
Did I in equal place with this proud man,
Nay far above him, sway the state, and rule
Great Caesar's heart, while Messallina lived,
And was not there content (Oh punishment
Of my ambitious aims) but caused the death
Of that loose Empress to bring in the expulst
Aelia Petina, and instead of her
Have let this Tygresse Agrippina in
This dragon spirit to devour us all
Except proud Pallas her adulterer?
What unavoided dangers every way
Threaten this life? For if young Nero reign,
I dye, that sought to cross his mothers match:
If ere Britannicus do reign, I dye
That caused his mothers death. What shall I do?
Where shall I lean for safety? better trust
The innocent goodness of Britannicus
Then Agrippinaes feirce and cruel nature;
Nor can I hope more goodness from her son.
That may give longer respite to my fear.
Besides it bears the greater show of justice,
And honest service to my Royal Master.
Since we must fall, it is some happiness
To fall the honest way, if we may call
That honesty at all, or real virtue
To which necessity enforces us,
And we by fortune not election practice.
Enter GETA, CRISPINUS. Here comes two friends of young Britannicus*
Hail Lucius Geta, hail Crispinus Rufus.

Geta. Narcissus hail.


Narcissus, Brave Romans your are come
Fitly to ease my overburden'd breast
Of weighty thoughts, which I dare freely trust
Unto your noble ears.

Geta. You may Narcissus
Trust truth with us.

Crispinus. Or any honest secret.


Geta. What is it you would with us?


Narcissus. You know my Lords,
(And I must needs confess) I was a means
Of Messalinaes death; but all the Gods
Can witness with me how unwillingly
I lent a hand to that sad action;
And but for Caesar's safety, which I prize
Above my life and fortunes, and which then
I thought endangered much by her hold act,
Naught in the world could ere have moov'd me to it.

Crispinus. What hence would you infer?


Narcissus. Then Know my Lords,
How little I respect my private ends
To do the public service, and can loose
My self for Caesar's good: it may be thought
When the most hopeful Prince Britannicus
Shall wear that wreath which all the world adores,
To me it may be fatal, as a foe
Unto his mother: but I rather wish
My self for ever lost, then that brave Prince
Should not succeed his father.

Geta. How! succeed?
What fear is there of that?

Crispinus. What power on earth,
Can bar his right, whilst we command the camp?
I Would rather see (which all the Gods avert)
Rome rent again with civil broiles, then he
Should loose unjustly the Imperial throne.

Narcissus. Y' are true and Noble friends; and here I vow
To join with you, and use my uttermost power
TO advance the honor of Britannicus.

Crispinus. What danger threatens it?


Narcissus. Do you not know
To whom the Son of Agrippina's married;

Crispinus. Yes.


Narcissus. And that honor were enough for him.
Without adoption too, were his aims private,
And that his crafty Mother did not cast
A way for him to the succession.

Crispinus. 'Twas strangely done of Caesar I confess.


Narcissus. They make the faction strong, and cunningly
Increase the train of Nero, and displace
The faithful servants af Britannicus.
Wise Seneca's recalled from banishment
By Agrippinaes means, not for the love
She bears his virtue; but to make him hers,
That Seneca's authority may gain
The peoples love to her ambitious son,
Of whose young years he takes tuition.

Crispinus. I think no less.


Geta. Besides to make the match
For her young Nero with Octavia.
Noble Silanus died, who might have proov'd
A faithful prop to Claudius family.

Narcissus. In blood that fatal marriag^ was begun,
I fear the Omen; Agrippina's feirce
And cruel nature has too much been seen
In this short time. Lollia Paulina, Niece
To Cotta Messalinus, and late wife
To Caius Caesar, for no other cause
Then aiming once at Claudius marriage
Is banished Italy; her goods are seized,
And but five millions of Sesterces left her
Of all her great estate; but there the malice
Of this fell woman stays not: now we hear
A Tribune is dispach'd away, to kill
The banished Lady, and bring back her head.

Crispinus. Oh barbarous cruelty!


Narcissus. Yet more I fear,
Since her Domitius is adopted now.
I fear she will shortly aim at higher blood.

Geta. We Will guard the life of young Britannicus.


Narcissus. And I Will be vigilant for Caesar's safety.
When all her ends are wrought his death is next.

Enter BRITANNICUS. Geta. Here comes the youthful hope of Rome and us.


Britanicus. Tell me, my friends, am not I Caesar's son?


Crispinus. My Lord, who dares to question it?


Britannicus. I Am sure,
I was his eldest son, and whilst I lived
I thought that Caesar had not lacked an heir
But I at last have found an elder brother,
Domitius is adopted Caesar's son
His name is Nero now. I cannot tell
What is my fault.

Geta. Excellent youth, how much
Beyond his years he apprehends his wrongs?

Crispinus. Fear not sweet Prince, though Agrippinas son
Be two year elder then your self, the Senate
Will never judge that an adopted Son
Shall in succession be preferred before
The true and natural heir.

Britannicus. You ever loved me,
Pray do so still.

Geta While we have breath, my Lord,
you shall command our lives.

Crispinus How unawares
Has feeble Caesar wrought a snare to catch
His own unhappy life in! grow sweet prince,
Grow up to strengthen the Imperial house,
And Curb the furious malice of thy foes.

Enter NERO, PALLAS. Nero. Brother Britannicus hail.


Britannicus. Hail to you
Domitius Anobarbus.

Nero. Do you scorn
My salutation, or not know my name?

Britannicus. That was your fathers name; and why not yours?


Nero. How Is that? Proud boy. Exeunt Brit. and reliq*


Pallas. Well, let them go, my Lord.
'Twas not the brain of young Britannicus
That could give birth to this minurious scorn,
Though for his years, the boy be capable.
But riper heads then his: there went his counsel
Crispinus Rufus, and that Lucius Geta,
Who swell the youth with boasting hopes, and think
Their power can give protection to his pride.
I Will make them see their error, and perceive,
One breath of mine can blow them from their strength
This news I Will bear to Agrippina straight.
Come Prince; Britannicus shall find anon
What feeble props his pride has leaned upon. Exeunt*

AGRIPPINA, SENECA, VITELLIUS, POLLIO. Agrippina. You are my Judges.


Seneca. Your poor servants, Madam.


Agrippina. Nay that must be your office; you have read
My Commentaries over, and I look for
A faithful censure: I am sure, my Lords,
You have both learning able to discern,
And such integrity as will not flatter.
Speak Seneca; I see they look on you:
How do you like them?

Seneca. Royal Agrippina,
Such, and so good they be, that ablest men
May boldly speak, and not offend the truth,
Nor you at all; the style is full and Princely.

Vitellius. Stately and absolute, beyond what ere
These eyes have seen; and Rome, whose majesty
Is there described, in after times shall owe
For her memorial to your learned pen,
More then to all those fading monuments
Built with the riches of the spoiled world.
When rust shall eat her brass, when times strong hand
Shall bruise to dust her marble Palaces,
Triumphall Arches, Pillars, Obeliskes,
When Julius Temple, Claudius Aquaeducts,
Agrippa's Baths, and Pompey's Theater,
Nay Rome it self shall not be found at all,
Historians books shall live; those strong records,
Those deathlesse monuments alone shall show
What, and how great the Roman Empire was.

Pollio. The act is Noble; not the present world
Alone shall owe to Agrippinas worth
(As for her gracious government it does)
But future ages shall acknowledge more
To the rich labors of her Royal pen.

Agrippina. The wisest Princes never sought to raise
Their present state alone, but to preserve
Themselves immortal by an endless fame.
For memory of me, besides these books,
If that our Augures fail not in their skill,
Or flatter not, that German Colony,
Which I of late deducted over the Rhine
To Ubium, for evermore the name
Of Agrippinaes Colony shall bear.

Vitellius. That act, though great, declares your power alone,
Your wealth and greatness: but these learned books
Express your wisdom, and for these you owe
Nothing at all to Fortune.

Agrippina. Thus I mean
To spend all time which from affairs of state,
And business of our Empire can be spared.

Seneca. Is she already turned our Emperor?


Agrippina. Those wretches have too narrow souls, who think
That persons great and eminent in state
Can spare no time to purchase same by writing,
But what they steal from action and employment,
As if no mind were large enough for both.
Who was more full of action, and more fit
To rule, nay rule the world, then Julius Caesar?
Yet he was of my mind.

Seneca. Oh strange male spirit!
Can there be found no other parallel
But Julius Caesar to a woman's mind?

Agrippina. Yet Julius was too blame, he toild too much
To get his honor, and too much debarred
His nature the free use of Princely pleasures.
Sure Lucius Sylla had an ample mind;
It Is Syllaes Character, that Salust gives him,
A free and great enjoyer of his pleasures,
Yet how industrious his actions speak,
He found fit time to rule the Roman world,
And write both Greek and Latin Commentaries.

Seneca. The souls of Sylla and of Caesar both
I think have entered her.

Agrippina. Well worthy friends,
You do approve my way of writing then.

Seneca. Yes gracious Madam; and because you named
Great Julius to us, I was thinking now
That as in blood, so in your styles of writing
There was some neerenesse.

Agrippina. Seneca, I thank you;
But I confess your positive approbation
Pleased me as well as that comparison.

Seneca. Does not your Majesty esteem his book?


Agrippina. Indifferent well; a good loose careless way.
I think directly with Asinius Pollio,
Had Caesar lived, he would have mended it;
The man had far more in him then that shows.

Seneca. Yet under favor, Madam, some have thought
Those Commentaryes hardly could be mended,
A style so strong, naked, and beautiful,
Free from affected words, and from all gloss
Or dress of Oratory, as in stead
Of leading others in a way to write,
It quite discourages the ablest men.
So Hirtius thought, and that famed Cicero,
The greatest master of Romes eloquence.

Agrippina. Are those your authors then? that Hirtius
Was Caesar's servant partial in his heart,
Or else he flattered him; for Cicero,
They were so far out of his tedious strain,
He could not censure them.

Seneca. Yet able men
Can truly censure of another style
Then what themselves have used.

Agrippina. He was not able,
No, not in Oratory; had I ruled
Rome and her Senate then, as now I do,
Not all the Orations that e're Cicero
Made in the Senate, should have saved one hair
Of an offendour, or condemned a Mouse.

Vitellius. How confident she is in censuring!


Seneca. I am amazed: but let her have her way.
Forgive my silence noble Cicero;
Here thy defense is vain; but what I spare,
The tongues of all posterity shall speak.

Enter PALLAS, Tribune. Pallas. Lhe Tribune, Madam, is returned and brings
Lollia Paulinaes head.

Agrippina. Let him come in.


Tribune. Your pleasure, great Augusta, is performed.


Agrippina. Let me peruse this face: ha! it is much changed.
Her teeth shall make me sure, they did not grow Dio.
The common way; I am confirmed; it is she.
Reward him Pallas.

Tribune. The Gods preserve
Augusta Agrippina.

Agrippina. O pale death,
Thou mock of beauty, and of greatness too:
Was this the face, that once in Caesar's love
Was Agrippinaes rival, and durst hope
As much against me, as my unquestioned power
Has wrought on her? Was this that beauty, once
That wore the riches of the world about it?
For whose attire, all lands, all seas were searched,
All creatures robbed? This! This was that Paulina,
Whom Cajus Caesar served, whom Rome adored
And the world feared.

Seneca. Such a sight me 'thinks
Should make her sadly think of humane frailty.

Agrippina. Take hence the head, least in her death she gain
A greater conquest over me, then her life
Could ever do, to make me shed a tear.
I would not wrong the justice I have done
So much as to lament it now: You know
My friends, she had a spirit dangerous.
And though my nature could have pardoned her,
Reason of state forbade it, which then told me
Great ruins have been wrought by foolish pity.

Seneca. Would she had such a nature! but it is now
Too late to give her counsel.

Pallas. So let all
That dare contest with Agrippina, fall. Enter servant.

Servant. Caesar is come to visit you.


Agrippina. Now friends,
Vitellius, Pollio, Pallas second me.

Enter CAESAR, ANTISTIUS. Caesar. How fares my Agrippina?


Agrippina. Wondrous well,
When I am blessed with Caesar's company.

Caesar. That shall be often, my love, when Romes affairs,
And public business will give me leave.

Agrippina. I would partake my self of those affairs,
Rather then want your presence

Pallas. I believe it.


Caesar. Thou shall; it is only for thy dearest sake
I love my fortunes, thy sweet fellowship
Makes light the burden of my government.

Agrippina. To ease great Caesar's care, shall ever be
The height of my desires: before you came
My heart was sad. I sent for these my friends
TO impart the reason to them.

Caesar. Sad; for what?


Agrippina. Weighing the troubles of a Princely state,
And all the dangers that still threaten it.

Caesar. Dangers!


Pallas. She strikes upon the fittest string;
No passion reigns in him so much as fear.

Agrippina. We were devising of the fittest means
To give your state security: you know
Your strongest guard is the Praetorian camp.

Caesar. Most true.


Agrippina. That camp commanded now by two,
May be by Captains too ambitious strife
Divided into factions, and so made
Less serviceable, should your safety need them.

Vitellius. Caesar remembers when that bold attempt
Of Silius was, how the Praetorian camp
Was by their general strife in mutiny,
And had not one been chosen for that day
To rule them all, Caesar had not been safe.

Pollio. Wise men in calmes provide for storms to come.
None knows how dangerous the times may prove,
Though now the state be safe, and may the Gods
To Caesar's honor long preserve it so.

Seneca. What new design is this, that all of them aside.
^econd so readily, and I was not
Acquainted with it? If It prove mischievous,
I thank the Empress for my ignorance.

Agrippina. Burrhus Afranius is a worthy man,
Fit for the place, and faithful, well-belov'd
By all the soldiers: such a change, my Lord,
None can except against: Let him take all.

Seneca. What ere her ends may be, this proposition
For noble Burrhus sake, I must approve.

Caesar. It Is true, my love, I make no question
Of Burrhus worth, and fitness for the place:
But what offense have Geta and Crispinus
Been e're accused of? Or what just suspicions
Are there of them?

Agrippina. I will not be unjust,
To accuse guiltless men, although I price
Thy safety, Caesar, equal to my life.
I know no crimes of note they have commit.

Vitellius. Caesar, it is no loss to them at all;
They both have plentious fortunes to retire to.

Pollio. And in so near a cause, who dares examine
Great Caesar's counsels, or enquire the reason?

Agrippina. Shall Burrhus have it Caesar? speak thy pleasure.
Or if my care offend, I shall hereafter
Forbear to meddle.

Caesar. No, sweet Agrippina;
Since thou will have it so; go Pallas, draw
The warrant straight, and seal it in our name:
Let Geta and Crispinus be remoov'd,
And Burrhus take possession presently.
This day, my love, the Britane prisoners
Sent from Ostorius Scapula, and late
Arrived at Rome, shall be in public showed.
There thou shall see that brave Barbarian Prince,
That bold Caractacus, whose stubborn spirit
So many years contemned the Roman power.
He now is taken.

Pollio. 'Twas a victory
Sent from the Gods to honor Claudius reign.

Agrippina. Had he been basely taken, or at first
Yielded himself, as he had got no honor,
But been forgotten in his fall, and naught
Had e're been mentioned of him but his death:
So had thy glory Caesar been far less.

Vitellius. Not warre-like Syphax the Numidian King,
Stubborn Jugurtha, nor great Perseus
Ere brought to Rome by their captivity
More real honor then this Britane Prince.

Caesar. Nor do we price our name Brittannicus
Fetched from that Island, less then Scipio
His honored name of Africanus prized.

Pollio. Thy style, O Caesar, is the greater far
Drawn from the conquest of another world,
Which nature meant by enterposing cold
And stormy seas, to guard from Latian arms.

Vitellius. Great Julius Caesar did but only show
That land to us, whose conquest was reserved
By heavens decree to honor Claudius name.

Agrippina. Caesar, let us sit together; one Tribunal
Will hold us both.

Caesar. It shall be so, my love,
Thou, as my self, shall pardon or condemn.

ACTUS II.
POPPAEA, OTHO. Poppaea. MY love, dear Otho, feign would bid thee stay:
But danger now forbids it, for my Lord
Returns by this time homewards from the Palace.

Otho. We must obey the times necessity
Sweetest Poppoea, though I part from thee
With such a sad'nesse as will loose by all
Comparisons and cannot be expressed
But by it self, to say that Otho parts
From fair Poppaea, is more tragical
Then soul from body, honor from a man.

Poppoea. I could, me thinks, flatter my fears, to keep
Thee ever here.

Otho. And I can scorn all fears,
And dangers too, if thou command me stay.

Poppaea. No, go, my Love, and warily let us meet
That we may often meet: but why should still
Our highest bliss want freedom?

Otho. It Is my fair one,
The envy of the Gods, who think the state
Of men would aequall theirs, if greatest joys
Were easyest to obtain, and therefore still
In horrid dangers wrap their dearest gifts,
As all the Poets ancient fables taught.
Fire-breathing Bulls did guard the Colchian fleece;
A waking dragon kept the golden fruit.
But thou, Poppaea, in my thoughts a prize
Of greater value, and more luster far
Then that which drew the bold Thessalian forth
So far from Greece, or made Alcmenaes son
Invade the Hesperides, art kept from me
By stronger guards, the awful Roman laws,
Those laws resist our love.

Poppaea. Oh where was Otho
Then, when my virgin blossom was the hope
Of thousand noble youths? had thou been seen
Poppaeaes bed and beautyes had been thine,
And with a lawful uncontrolled flame
Had met thy wish in those delights, which now
We are enforced to steal.

Otho. Must it be so
For ever then?

Poppaea. It must while Rufus lives.


Otho. Nor can I blame blessed Rufus, if he strive
To keep that wealth, which if it lay beyond
The Indian Ganges, Scythian Tanais,
Or horned Ammons scorched and thirsty sands,
Would draw the Roman Monarch to forsake
His worlds Imperial seat there to enjoy,
And think those banished that remained at Rome.
If I were Caesar, and condemned by fate
To want Poppaeaes love, I should be poor.
No other dear prerogative could that
High wreath bestow, but only power to make
Thee mine without a rival: I might then
With boldness take thee from Crispinus arms.

Poppaea. But could that act be lawful?


Otho. Can thou doubt it?
Where two loves meet can marriage be unlawful?
Of which love is the soul, the very form
That gives it being no dead outward ty,
But natures strong and inward sympathy.
Can make a marriage, which the Gods alone
Have power to breed in us, and therefore they
Have only power to ty so sweet a knot.
I am thy mate; nor did thy father, when
He gave that snowy hand unto another,
Ought but rebel against the Gods decree.

Poppaea. Thou art to good an advocate, and I
Too partial for a judge.

Otho. Be constant to me
Till fortune give a bolder privilege.
And warrant to our love, of which I have
Received such fair presages, as I cannot
Despair; mean while by stealth I must behold
Those starry eyes, and think my self most happy
In that, though no man know my happiness.

Poppaea. Can men count those delights a happiness
Which they conceal?

Otho. Yes, those that truly love. Enter Fulvia.


Fulvia. Madam, my Lord is come.


Poppaea. Farewell dear Otho.


Otho. Farewell: love guard thee till we meet again. exit.


Enter CRISPINUS, GETA. Crispinus. Come Lucius study to forget it now,
And let us be truly merry; my Poppaea
Bid' Lucius Geta welcome, my colleague
That was, but still my friend.

Poppaea. You are most welcome.


Geta. Thanks fairest Lady.


Poppaea. ^ut my Lord, what means
That speech of yours, that Lucius Geta once
Was your colleague and is not.

Crispinus. I tell thee,
^reat Agrippina has commanded Caesar
^o command Pallas to command us two.
(...) quit our charge and suddenly resign
^he government of the Praetorian camp
(...) Burrhus hand; at which he storms; but I
(...) merryer far, and lighter then before.
^ee may live freely now; Caesar has taken
(...) weighty burden from my weary neck.
^hanke his goodness.

Geta. Thank his sottishness,
It Is that has pleasured you. ah friend it needs
Must grieve all noble hearts, that can love justice,
And pity suffering innocence, to see
The harmless years of young Britannicus
Exposed to all the malice of his foes,
And stupid Caesar made the instrument
To ruin his own son: whilst his great power
By others is abused against himself
And his posterity.

Crispinus. I do believe it.


Geta. His servants all, that to himself were true,
Or faithful to his son, are murdered now,
Or else displaced by her: our truth's the cause
That we have lost our places.

Crispinus. It Is no matter;
We loose no honor by our truth; and since
While we had power, we faithfully discharged
Our trust to Caesar, let us no longer stirve
To guard him against his will; but take his gift.
He gives us ease, and freedom, to retire,
And taste the sweetes of privaty, and there
Enjoy our lives free from the glorious noise,
And troubles of a Court; instead of waiting
On Caesar now, on thee I will bestow
That time, my fair Poppaea, and attend
On thy delights; thou will not cast me off
As Caesar does.

Fulvia. She cannot promise you
I know her heart better then you in that.

Crispinus. None can describe the sweetes of country life
But those blessed men that do enjoy, and taste them.
Plain husband men, though far below our pitch
Of fortune plac,d, enjoy a wealth above us.
To whom the earth with true and bountious justice
Free fhom wars cares returns an easy food.
They breath the fresh and uncorrupted air,
And by clear brooks enjoy untroubled sleeps.
Their state is fearlesse, and secure, enriched
With several blessings, such as greatest Kings
Might in true justice envy, and themselves
Would count too happy, if they truly knew them.

Geta. It Is true, Crispinus, greatest Monarchs often
Have in the midst of all their careful gloryes
Desired such lives as those plain people lead.

Crispinus. Let us enjoy that huppinesse then Lucius
The country sports and recreations
And friends as innocent as we, with whom
We need not fear the strength of richest wine
In drawing out our secrets: but well filled
At suppertime may hold a free discourse
Of Caesar's weakness, of the wealth and pride
Of his freed'men, how lordly Pallas rules;
How feirce and cruel Arippina is,
What slaves the Roman Senate are become,
And yet next morn awake with confidence.

Poppoea. All this, my Lord, you may discourse at Rome
^f you can wisely choose your company.

Crispinus. Well said Poppaea, thou art a woman right
Thou love the city well.

Geta. I cannot blame her,
Such beauty seeks no corners, but may well
Become the Imperial city of the world.

Crispinus. Come Lucius Geta, let us go in and laugh
At our proud enemies, enjoy their malice,
And drown our cares in rich Falernian wine
As ancient as Opimius Consulship.

Enter to them NARCISSUS. Geta. Here comes a man, Crispinus, I believe
Is sorry for this change.

Crispinus. I think so Lucius.


Narcissus. Hail noble Romans.


Crispinus. Hail to you Narcissus.
How dare you venture a salute on us,
Or make a visit to such guilty men?

Narcissus. Guilty my Lord, in what?


Crispinus. In being wronged.
Those that are wronged in Court, are made offenders*

Narcissus. I must confess, my Lord, it was a wrong
To you and your Colleague to be displaced,
But you have spirits great enough to scorn
That injury, and pity him that did it,
I mean that suffered his proud foes to do it
Rather against himself then you; the wrong
Must fall on Caesar, and his hapless house.
Blinded by fate, and near his fall, he throws
Away the best supporters of his state.

Geta. The thought of that as I am true, Narcissus,
Afflicts me more then mine own loss can do.

Crispinus. For me, I think my self well freed from trouble
Were It not for fear of poor Britannicus.

Narcissus. I do believe it, noble Lords; but you
Are now dischar'gd, and may retire with safety.
My part is yet to play, a part of danger,
And I will act it bravely: here I vow
By all the Gods, no fear shall make me shrink
Till I have once more righted Claudius
Against the lusts and treasons of a wife.
Nor do I boast of Messalinaes death.
It was the times necessity, that made
Me then to show my power: that power perchance
Is yet as much; nor shall the Lordly Pallas,
Though swelled with Agrippinaes lustful favors,
And backed by her authority, he think
Himself sole ruler in the Imperial house,
Find that Narcissus is so fallen in spirit
But that I dare attempt as much as then.
Great Caesar's safety is as much in danger
As then it was, his nuptial bed as stained,
And I will die, or take the same revenge,
That then was taken; all their plots and treasons
Will I reveal to Caesar, and pursue it
With such a dauntlesse constancy, that if
The Gods forget not to be just, this day
Proud Agrippina, and her minion fall.
The young Britannicus shall stand secure
In his high birthright; Messalinaes ghost
Shall then perchance, although she hate me now,
^orgive the hand that caused her overthrow,

Geta. Bravely resolved, Narcissus.


Crispinus. You shall do
An act that all good men shall thank you for.
Will you go in, and taste my wine'.

Narcissus. Not now.
I came but only to reveal my purpose
To you, whose noble wishes may befriend it,
And when occasion serves, may truly witness
My just intents; this hour I am expected
By* Caesar in his gardens; there I Will put
My life upon the hazard; every minute
May breed a change, and all delays have danger.
For Caesar upon those discoveryes
That I already have made to him, uttered
Some words last night at supper in his wine.
Of which I fear that Agrippina took
Too great a notice; therefore speed must help us.
Farewell my Lords.

Ambo. Farewell: the Gods assist thee. Exeunt.


OTHO. Otho. So rich a bondage is Poppaeas love,
That I were base if I should with for freedom,
Nay more, ingrate, should I desire to change
So sweet a care for quietness it self;
Should I suppose that state, which some dull souls
Call calm content, were half so rich, so free
As are these pinings, this captivity.
Were there in love no cares, no sighs, no fears,
There were in love no happiness at all.
What bliss, what wealth did e're the world bestow
On man, but cares and fears attended it?
Yet who so base, as, to be freed from those,
Would throw away the highest bliss on earth?
Let silly shipheards, whose poor narrow souls
Not much exceed the beasts they tend and feed,
That know, like them, no farther regions
Then some few feilds, no larger bounds of pleasure
Then satisfaction of bare natures needs,
Be still secure since they have naught to loose,
And rest content because they never knew
What cities were, and gorgeous Palaces.
Should Monarchs, who are taught to know the extent
Of natures wealth, and what the world affords,
Forgo their glorious fortunes, cause they want
That wretched thing, which only ignorance,
And low contempt can give, Security?
Should I forgo my fair Poppaeaes love
Because some cares, some fears* and sighs attend it:
When every smile of hers can recompense
A thousand such? were too much poorness in me
Had I nere seen those starry eyes of hers
More hapless far my ignorance had been.
I had, like wretched men, that are borne blind,
Nere known there was a Sun to guild the world.
But to enjoy her love without all fears,
Without all rivalls, were a bliss beyond
Mortality: the Gods would envy me.
She Is now another man's: that may be thought
The greatest bar to Otho's happiness.
But I have framed in my jealous thoughts
A greater barrethen that: young Nero Caesar,
In whose acquaintance I of late have found
So near a room, as fair presages tell us,
Is like to weareth' Imperial wreath: his power
May take her for me from Crispinus arms.
But then perchance I loose her more then ever.
Or should he see her now to rival me
I were undone: he is amorous, and often
Sollicites me to let him see my Mistres.
I for that friendship, which I dare not loose,
Dare not deny his importunity.
And therefore to prevent what may ensue
(For yet he never heard Poppaeas name)
I have made love to the fair freed woman
Young Act of mean rank, but such a face,
As whosoever had not seen Poppaea
Would think this Act natures Masterpeice.
On her will I divert young Nero's love.
And to that purpose I have got her picture.
But here he comes. Enter Nero.

Nero. What Otho, still retired?
Where lives the face that breeds this melancholy?
There is no other cause can do it: I know
Thou art not busied with affairs of state.
I prithee let me see her: a friends counsel
May ease thy passion.

Otho. It Is not fit a Prince
Should stoop so low as to the passions
Of privatemen.

Noro. The name of friend admits
Of no such distance.

Otho. Sr. no man, whom you
Are pleased to call a friend, deserves that name,
Unless he know himself to be your servant.

Nero. Come prithee leave thy fooling, and be plain.
Where there is no familiarity
Society is lost: why art thou fearful
To let me see her whosoere she be?

Otho. Sr. I could give you a plain common reason,
If she be foul, she is not worth your sight.
If fair, you are too great a rival for me.
But yet, know Sr. I am so free from those
Unworthy fears, that I dare trust my life,
My love, and all I have into your hands.

Nero. Spoke like a friend, and thou may safely do it.
Then first behold her picture, and by that
Find whether she be worth the sight or no.

Nero. Can any mortal beauty be so sweet?


Otho. I would there were not.


Nero. Sure the painter flatters.


Otho. Oh no, he had not art enough to reach
The glory of it; were the substance here
How dull would this now lovely table show!
See how his greedy eyes devour the picture.
He Is caught, he is caught; Cupid' I thank thee now.

Nero. I never saw true beauty till this hour.
But wherefore did thou wish there were no substance
So sweet as this? why would thou be deprived
Of such a happiness? but I perceive
It is thy fear: come, let it not be so.
I but desire to see whether the painter
Have erred or no: and do not think, my Otho,
That I will wrong thy love so much, or make
My wife Octavia jealous.

Otho. Sr. how ere,
My life, my love, and fortunes all are yours. Exeunt.

CLAUDIUS, NARCISSUS. Narcissus. Your Majesty may yet prevent it all,
And justly throw upon the Traitors heads
That ruin which so boldly threatens you,
And your too much abused family.
Yet Caesar may be safe, if he will use
That power the Gods have put into his hands.

Caesar. What course, Narcissus, can we run, to make
The people sensible of our estate,
What danger threatens us, and how our Justice
Is forced to meet the treasons of a wife?

Narcissus. Let not too vain a care of popular breath,
Or what the Vulgar may surmise, outweigh
The safety of your person' and your house.
But I am most assured that all the world
Except your self, have long observed their plots,
And if they see your wakened Justice now
Arise to censure Agrippinaes death,
They will not think the execution done
Too soon on her: these humble knees, Oh Caesar.
Which for your safety I so often have bowed
Before the Gods, now to your sacred self
I bow, entreating that you would be safe,
And not believe the Gods by miracle
Will work for you whilst you neglect your self.

Caesar. Arise Narcissus, it is the unhappy fate
Of Princes ever (as Augustus Caesar
Was wont to say) the people never believe
That treasons were complotted against their persons
Until those treasons take effect, and then
Too late perchance they pity and believe.

Narcissus. But was the wise Augustus therefore slow
Or timorous to cut offenders off?
Feared he the peoples whispers? Caesar, no.
He well knew to use the sword he had.
He had not else lived till times gentle hand
Dissolved in peace his long felicity,
And made the world by such continuance
Of power, believe he was a God on earth.

Caesar. But some offenders are too great to suffer
The common course of Justice: against such
Wise Princes have forborne to draw the sword,
And rather sought some ways of policy
How to ensnare them.

Narcissus. Caesar, those are ways
As much unfit for Princes as unsafe.
As many Monarchs have in dangerous times
Been ruined quite by going ways too low
(Though they have seemed subtle) as proud subjects
Have been undone by playing Princes parts.
And as this high, and open way befits
The power and person of earths greatest Monarch:
So it befits the times necessity.
You have already, Caesar, showed your sword,
And if you strike not now, you do not right
Your self at all, but only arm your foes
With plots of mischeife to prevent their own,
And hasten on your quick destruction.
You have already threatened, and those speeches
By Agrippina, and her minion Pallas
Were overheard; who, like seen snakes will now
Bestirre themselves in a more desperate fury.
I have already cast mine own poor life
Into the utmost hazard: but alas!
That is a thing not now considerable.
The Gods above can tell how willingly
For Caesar's safety I would sacrifice
This life; make me the chiefest instrument
Impose what part of this exploit you please
Upon Narcissus hand, and if I fail
To execute, I Will not refuse to die.

Caesar. Oh my Narcissus; I have found thy faith
In other services: it is resolved,
Their pride shall feel my justice; thou shall see
How soon I will secure my self and thee. Exeunt.

AGRIPPINA, PALLAS. Agrippina. We are discovered Pallas: all our drifts
Are sounded by Narcissus, and by him
Laid open to Caesar, who dissembling yet
The knowledge of it, seeks a sudden way
To ruin both of us: nor had we feared
So soon as felt his fury, had not wine
Betrayed his thoughts to us; you know last night
What speeches Caesar in his drunkenness
Let fall before us; and it was lately told me
That meeting young Britannicus he wept,
Confessed that he had wronged him, and there vowed
A quick redress: what counsel shall we take?

Pallas. We have no time for counsel: but must act
As soon as think: we go not now to work
But to prevent a mischeife, and our cure
Must be as strong, and quick of operation
As our disease is dangerous and sudden.
That bird, that sees the snare, and will be caught
Deserves his death: and since that Caesar knows
His purpose is discovered (as Narcissus
Has before this informed him that we heard it)
He Will quickly act what else he had deferred.
No way is left us but to meet the danger,
And for prevention first attempt to do
That which we fear to suffer.

Agrippina. By what means
Shall we procure his death? for poison slow
Perchance may fail to lend a timely help
Unto our safety; and too quick a venom
May make the fact supected.

Pallas. Should the fact
Be nere so much suspected, your estate
Would be more safe then now it is; but who
Would dare to utter it when Caesar's dead,
And your own Son the Emperor: for so
My confidence assures me it will be.
Therefore be speedy, Madam; for your danger
Where fame, where life, and Empire all are threatened,
Gives you no nice election. So't be done
No matter how.

Agrippina. Thou have confirmed me, Pallas.
The way's resolved already; there were lately
The fairest mushromes sent from Lybia
That ere these eyes beheld, a meat which he
Affects with greediness; in one of those
Caesar shall meet his death; if that should fail
His chief Physician Xenophon is mine.
But are things stong, and ready to confirm
The Empire upon Nero.

Pallas. It Is the best
And happiest time, before Britannicus
Be grown to riper years, while yet he wears
His childish robe, and Nero has been shown
To all the people in triumphall weeds.
But when the deed is done, place warily
Your guards about the Palace gates, and keep
Britannicus within; whilst Nero backed
By Seneca and Burrhus, by the camp
And Senate be saluted Emperor,
And all be settled sure.

Agrippina. How fit a time
To work his own destruction Caesar chose
To tempt with threatening Agrippinas fury!

ACTUS III. SCENA. I.
PETRONIUS, OTHO, MONTANUS. Petronius. Is Nero fired?


Otho. Extremly. I at first
Seemed melancholy to loose Act so,
And he seemed loath to wrong me; but at last
When his desires were high, I cunningly
Withdrew my interest, and gave way to his.
Which he has taken for the greatest favor
That ever man could do him and I hope
It has endeared him strongly.

Montanus. Thou will grow
A happy man.

Petronius. It Is the best way to rise.
The wench is fair, and of behavior
Wanton enough to make the arrantst novice
A perfect scholar in the school of Venus.
Seneca himself rather will give way
That he should satisfy his lust on her
Then seek th'adulteries of noble women.

Montanus. But gentlemen, have you not heard the news?
There is a great combustion in the Palace
As I have been informed, thieves are fallen out.
The two proud freemen Pallas and Narcissus
Are clashing against each other.

Petronius. I am glad ont.
I hope some curious rogeries will come on it.
Those are the fellows that have ruled the state
These many years, and trampled on the lives
Of noble men Caesar's credulous weakness.
But yet me thinks Narcissus should not dare
Now to contest with Pallas he has got
Too great a start of him, and is too near
Acquainted with the empress.

Montanus. So they say.


Otho. Has a fine time on it who would think the rogue
Sold be so ambitious as to court an Empress?

Petronius. 'Twas her ambitions to be made the wife
Of Claudius, that first made her prostitute
Her self so low, and court this fellows love,
Whom she perceived to have a ruling power
Over his doting master, to ambition
She sacrificed her honor it is well known.

Montanus. And he by doing of the Empress, takes
The surest way of keeping Caesar's love

Petronius. Yes, there is no doubt of that. You know the proverb.


Enter to them ANICETUS. Anicetus. Well met my Lords; I come to find you out.


Otho. What Is the news Anicetus?


Anicetus. Great my Lord.
Caesar, is wondrous sick; it is thought to death.
The Pallas is by soldiers guarded round.
A great and frequent Senate is assembling.
The Consuls and the Priests are making vows
For Caesar's safety.

Montanus. Claudius is old

Petronius. There have been other ways to end a Prince
Besides old age. But what is that to us?
Come let us away and show our forwardness
To joy or mourning as occasion serves.
I am prepared for both.

Montanus. And so am I.


Otho. Both must be done, if Caesar dye, our grief
Must last but till the successor be known;
And then we must rejoice.

Petronius. It Is true.


Otho. But I
Shall have true cause of joy if Nero reign, Exeunt.

BRITANNICUS, OCTAVIA, XENOPHON. Britannicus Shall I not see my father ere he
die?


Octavia. Good Xenophon.


Xenophon. Good Madam pardon me,
Nothing is now so great an enemy
To his disease as noise and company.
He Is lately fallen into a gentle slumber.
Deep sleeps his fever will not let him take.
I Will certify your highness when he wakes.
And wait upon you.

Octavia. Thanks good Xenophon. Exeunt.


AGRIPPINA. Agrippina. I long to hear what favor Nero finds
In the Pretorian camp, how Caesar's death
Is by the soldiers and the Senate taken.
Enter PALLAS. Welcome my dearest Pallas What Is the news?

Pallas Madam, as good as Jove himself could send,
No sooner in the camp was Caesar's death
Divulgd, but Burrhus enters to his charge,
And Nero with him, who by all the cohorts
Was presently saluted Emperor.
Only some few were silent, and a while
Stood still expecting young Britannicus;
But when they saw their expectation
Was all in vain, and none but Nero came,
Fearing at last to loose the Donative
Which Burrhus promised them in Neros name,
They joined themselves unto the greater part.

Agrippina. Britannicus within the Palace here
Is safe enough for coming forth to day.
The Senate have scarce heard of Caesar's death
For we concealed it till all things were ready.

Pallas. Now in a Princely chariot mounted high
Guarded by Burrhus and the soldiers
Nero sets forward to the Senate house.
But having past the camp, you need not fear
The Senate, Madam.

Agrippina. Pallas thou were ever
A messenger of lucky news to me.
A safe contriver of the highest plots,
A happy instrument thou have deserved
What ere thou have enjoyed, though thou have tasted
That which a Caesar su'd to taste, and bought
The world in recompense.
Pallas. If ever Pallas
Had any fire that could advance his thoughts
To high and great exploits, he kindled it
At your caelestiall beauty, as from heaven
Prometheus stole that active fire, by which
He durst himself adventure to create
The noblest creature man. What act on earth,
What undertaking should he tremble at
Whom Agrippinas favors animate?
And what had I been but a piece of earth
Cold, dull, and useless, had I not been quickn'd
By your aetheriall touch. Agrippina.
The happiness.
Of this high day has made thee eloquent

Pallas The love of royal Agrippina can
Inspire the dullest Soul with life and language.
When the Idalian Queen was pleased to grace
A shepherds boy more then his humble thoughts
Could hope or wish, the ravished tongue forgot
That rural language which before it used.

Agrippina. Ah Pallas what a glorious change is here!
How is the lowness of our late despair
Turned to the height of joy and happiness?

Pallas Quick resolution well pursued will cure
The saddest state.

Agrippina. Go thou and hear more news,
Whilst I dispose of things about the Palace Exeunt

A SENATE, POLLIO CONSUL, VITELLIUS, SENECA, OTHO, PETRONIUS, MONTANUS. Pollio.
May all the Gods accept our sacrifice,
And be propitious to the vows, that we
Have vowed for Caesar's safety.

Vitellius. Let the great
Divine and sacred Nero Claudius
The care of heaven, sole ruler of the earth,
And Romes high Father not forsake his world
So soon to increase the number of the Gods,

Enter BURRHUS. Burrhus. ^^ile to the Consul, and this sacred Senate.
^^eat Claudius Caesar's dead, in whose high throne
With one consent the soldiers have agreed
To seat young Nero his adopted son;
And do by me entreat your suffrages
Fathers conscript; to ratify their choice.

Seneca. Let not young Nero's years disparage him,
Nor trouble you, since happy presidents
May well be shown, grave Fathers. Great Augustus
Of glorious memory, no more in debt
To years then he began to rule the state,
With what success not one in all this noble
And great assembly can be ignorant.
But weigh with me the difference of the times.
The state is settled, and has flourished long
In peaceful government; no civil rents.
No factions now, nor armies are a foot
To stain with Latian blood Philippi plains,
To dye the Actiak and Sicilian Seas,
And through all regions bear the unnatural wounds
Of bleeding Rome. No such affrighting names
As Marcus Brutus, Cassius, Lepidus
Great Pompey's son, or feirce Antonius
Armed with the power of half the Roman world
Stand to oppose him. Oh ye Gods how great!
How many dangers had beset the state
When young Augustus managed it! yet he
Withstood and vanquished all those difficulties.
And why should Nero our elected Prince
Aged like Augustus, not be able now
To sway a peaceful scepter? for the right
To this high, wreath although Britannicus
Were borne the natural son of Claudius,
A Prince of hope enough, and may by some
Be thought much wronged in this election,
Yet weigh it rightly, and no wrong is done.
For Nero was adopted. But besides
The claim of his adoption, he is borne
A truer heir to our Imperial house
Sprung up from the loins of great Augustus Caesar.
Britannicus from Liviaes sons alone.

Vitellius. Nor are the years of young Britannicus
So ripe as his to govern.

Pollio. Seneca,
Has wisely showed his undoubted right,
And I with joy approve the soldiers choice.

Octavia. The Gods preserve Nero our Emperor.


Otho. Now is the height of all my wishes reached.


Enter NERO with TRIBUNE. Tribune. Room for Caesar.
He goes on, and takes his state.

Pollio. Hail Nero Caesar.


Seneca. Hail great Emperor.


Vitellius. Ever Augustus.


Otho. Most invincible

Petronius Most sacred Tribune

Montanus. Holiest highest Priest.


Pollio. Father of Rome

Nero That honorable title
Is yet too weighty for my tender years.
Then let me wear it, fathers, when my pains
My toil and travel for the public weal
By aid and favor of the Gods have made
Me worthy of it. But your free consent
Fathers conscript, your powerful suffrages
Powerful and honored as the voice of heaven
In confirmation of the soldiers choice
Fills me with joy immortal, and shall bind
My best endeavors to requite that love.
My heart is clear, my education
Was not in factious, in tumultuous times,
Or civil broiles, my former life has been
As free from doing as receiving wrong;
And therefore bring I to the Imperial Throne
No fears, no grudges, hatred or reveneg.
This sacred Senate, which the world adores,
Shall still retain her old prerogative
While Nero lives. My private house affairs
Shall from the free Republicke be divided,
And never turn the course of common Justice
No public Office shall be bought for gold.
The sacred Consulary power shall judge
As heretofore, the affairs of Italy
And foreign provinces. My care alone
Sall be to rule and lead the Soldiers.
And such to all the people will I be
As I would wish the immortal Gods to me.

Vitellius. Oh speech most worthy Jupiter himself!
Worthy for ever to be registed
In brazen Pillars for the world to read.

Pollio. Let public thanks by Senate be decreed
To Caesar's grace and goodness.

Nero. No Asinius,
Let me deserve them first, first give me leave
What I have promised to perform in deeds,
That then if thanks or praises be bestowed
They my be judged as due, and better Crown
Your own true justice, and the Princes merits.

Pollio. Oh happy Rome in such an Emperor!
Long may he reign on earth, and late, oh late
Become a glorious star in Heaven

Tribune. What word.
Will Caesar give the watching soldiers?

Nero. The excellent mother, Tribune, is their word.
Your company, noble Consul, we will entreat
Home to the Palace.

Pollio. I Will attend on Caesar.


Exeunt. Manent OTHO, PETRONIUS, MONTANUS. Montanus. The Prince has promised
fair.


Petronius. Life Seneca.,
That made the speech for him had been too blame.

Otho. Well, let him speak as Seneca instructs
^n public still say I, I know his heart
And secret thoughts better then Seneca
shall ever do; and there are Joviall days
^ coming, gallants, say I prophecy.

Montanus. Will it be lawful to eat Lybian mushroms,
And British oysters without being cited
Before the censor?

Otho. Yes Curtius, and to whore
^or vacuation after them; those gifts
Will be Court virtues. Come, the Prince is hopeful.

Petronius. Would I might have the bringing of him up.


Otho. If I can help it, thou shall have a share
In his tuition. Welcome Anicetus, Anicetus
Is it to me you come?

Anicetus. To you, my Lord.
Caesar desires your company at the palace.

Otho. Caesar's desire, is a command, which I
With joy obey* return my humble duty
Good Anicetus, I Will attend him strait.

Exit Anicetus. Otho. Now my mad shavers, do you know me yet?


Petronius. Yes, very well; the question is if thou Will know us now.

Otho. Tut man, Nero shall know you.
I Will bring you both into his near acquaintance.
Now fair Poppaea's mine and mine alone.
Caesar must grant my first petition,
Or else deny the love he swore to me
If ere he wore the worlds Imperial wreath.
His power must fetch Poppaea from her husband.
Nor is the deed so envious. Other Princes
Have done the like, and yet not taxed in story.

Petronius. Besides, he knows Crispinus never loved him,
And was an enemy to his adoption.
Against him perchance he will the sooner grant it.
Exeunt* Agrip. This is the day that sets a glorious Crown
On all my great designs this day declares
My power, and makes the trembling world to know
That Agrippina. only can bestow
The Roman Empire, and command the wheel
Of suffering Fortune, holding in her hand
The fate of nation. Is there not a name
Above Augusta to inform the world
How great I am? What Roman Deity
Shall I assume? the petty Goddesses
Would all resign; but that they blushing think
Their styles and altars are too mean for me.
^acinion Juno shall be proud to share
Her gloryes all with me, and think her power
Graced with my fellowship would brighter shine;
Or leave her name, and be adored by mine.

Enter NERO, POLLIO, SENECA* Burrhus. My Nero is returned, hail Nero Caesar.


Nero. Hail great and dear Augusta, best of Mothers.
To whose sole care and goodness Caesar owes
All those rich honors that he wears to day,
And will ackowledge ever

Agrippina. Brighter still
For many years let this blessed day return,
That does bestow for my dear Lord and husband
The never enough lamented Claudius
^o true a solace on my greiv'd Soul.
This is that Caesar now, on whom my hopes
And comforts all rely.

Nero. This is that Caesar.
Who in obedience and true filial love
^o Agrippina will for ever strive
With virtuous aemulation to excel
Her most admired and exemplary goodness.

Pollio. How well this piety becomes them both.


Pallas. Enter Pallas Long live great Nero Caesar.


Nero. Thanks good Pallas.
We are indebted to thy faithful service;
And therefore till we find some greater means
To make requital, still retain that office
Which in our father Claudius time thou held'st.
Be still our steward of the Imperial house.

Agrippina. He has deserved it.


Nero. For the funerals
Of our dead father, in what state and order
They shall be celebrated, we refer
To you dear Mother.

Agrippina. Let the order of them
Be like Augustus Caesar's. Let him have
A Censors funerals with divine honors,
And put among the number of the Gods.
Nor shall our grandmother great Livia
With her Tiberius to Augustus show
More piety, or more magnificence
Then we to our divinest Claudius. Exeunt

ACTUS IIII.
NARCISSUS, GETA. Narcissus. If we be bound to think the Gods consider
This humane world, why are we not as well
Bound to believe the greatest members of it
On whom the fates of all the rest depend,
Should be their greatest care? why should the Gods
Extend their narrow providence, and show
Their power in woods and rural villages,
Yet think the Imperial family of Rome
Not worth their care at all? for if they had
Where slept their justice, when great Claudius
Was murdered by his servants and his wife,
And they adored, and honored by the state
For acting that accursed deed! what right
Can all the subject world receive from thence!
What good can dwell upon the earth with safety?
Proud Pallas, thou have got the victory
Over poor Narcissus, and may safely triumph
With thy false Empress; for no law can reach
The height you soar at now but yet take heed
That very crime, the same Impiety
That aided you in your foul enterprise
To vanquish me and justice on my side,
May one day pull you down.

Geta. Alas Narcissus!
Too truly Rufus, thou, and I foresaw
This fatal storm against Claudius woeful house.
Britannicus is now the object grown
Of all men's pity.

Narcissus. In the wrong he did
Into his hopeful son he needs must see
His own destruction woven. But if Claudius,
When I detected all their plots to him,
Had been of nature quick and resolute
He had prevented all, and escaped his murder.
It Is certain he was poisoned

Geta. Rome it self
I fear will rue that sad adoption,
And in the wrongs of young Britannicus
Will bear too deep a share. while the firce rule
Of Agrippina lasts.

Narcissus. What better hope
Does Nero promise us?
Those that are near, Xiphilin
And inward with his nature, do suspect
In him all seeds of vice and tyranny,
Though smoother'd for a time, at least, not hurtful
While he refraines from meddling with the state
That his night rambling revels, drinking feasts,
And cruel sports that he is delighted in,
Are vices of his nature, not his youth.

Geta: It Is true, Narcissus, I of late have heard
Many begin to fear the prophecy
of Aenobarbus his detested sire Xiphilin.
That nothing good could be begot twixt him
And Agrippina. Too too true alas!
Such prophecies of some of our late Princes
Have proved to Rome, as that Augustus made
Of the slow-jaw'd Tiberius, and Tiberius.
Of his successor Caius, whom he named
A Phaeton to the unhappy world.

Narcissus. All that I hope for is a wretched life,
If that be not too much for me to hope.
Into Campania will I go, but there
If death pursue me, Caesar's arms are long,
And I am armed for any accident.
Let none, but with a spirit prepared to dye,
Dare to adventure on prosperity.

Geta. Rufus and I are both resolved to leave
The city too, we are not safe within it.
But far perchance, removed from her sight
We may escape fell Agrippinas spite.

Enter to them CRISPINUS. Crispinus. Ah Lucius Geta, I am now enforced
To that retirement, which we lately talked of.
Because my danger moved me not before,
Fresh cause is given me. Now I would not breath
The air of Rome for all the wealth within it.

Geta. What cause is that Crispinus? speak

Crispinus. Poppaea,
That was my wife is carried from my house,
And divoc'd from me by command from Caesar,

Narcissus The Prince begins his reign most hopefully.


Crispinus. Do you not wonder how I bear it thus?


Geta. I must confess the loss is wondrous great.


Crispinus. True, had she been my chaste and faithful wife,
The loss had been beyond all aestimation.
Nor could a manly spirit have borne the wrong.
But she was none of mine, her heart, my Lucius.
As I have since discovered, long ago
Was given to wanton Otho, and with him
It Is thought she stole her close adulterous hours.
For on that Otho, Nero has bestowed her. Xiphilin ex Dione
Wanting her heart, that gaudy piece of Earth
That men call beauty, I should soon have scorned,
Though Caesar's warrant had not come at all.
Shall we be gone, my friend?

Geta. With all my heart.
It was my fear Poppaea would have caused
Your stay too long.

Crispinus. I Will put her from my thoughts.


Narcissus. Farewell my Lords, all happiness attend
Your Country life, though I can hope for none.

Crispinus Farewell Narcissus may the Gods protect thee. Exeunt. Otho,


Otho, Poppaea. Thus greatest Monarchs often have given away
What they themselves never saw, nor e're knew how
To value truly. Nero has bestowed
A gift unknown on me, which I, that taste
How sweet it is, would not again forgo
For all his Empires wealth.

Poppaea. Nor would I change
My Otho's love for great Augustus state.

Otho. There to enjoy where both extremely love
Is such a happiness (as I have heard
Some do observe) it seldom does befall
A married pair, or if it do, that bliss
Endures not long, so envious are the fates.
But that is a dream, my love, I do not fear.

Poppaea. Thou need'st not fear Poppaeas constancy
Though Caesar were thy rival,

Otho. Sweet I do not;
I dare not wrong thy truth, or take so much
From mine own happiness, as to suspect
Thy constant mind at all: but Caesar's power
Is of extent as large as man's desire.
'Twas that, that made thee mine; and naught but that
That gave, can take my happiness away.
Thou have a face, Poppaea, that would clear
A ravisher from guilt, that would excuse
The treason of a friend, and make my wrong
No stain to' Caesar's honor, though the Gods,
Or Cato were his judges.

Poppaea. Caesar would not;
He loves thee well besides a noble mind
Would scorn to taste the fruits of forced love,

Otho. A long beseidging is as forcible
As an assault, and wins the fort as sure
Though not so soon.

Poppaea. Nay spare your arguments.
I can look through them; thou art fearful, Otho,
That I should long to see the Court: alas
I have no such ambition to be known
To Agrippina or Octavia.

Otho. Mistake me not, sweet love, I am so far
From jealousy of thee, that 'twas my purpose
To make it my request that thou would go
And see great Caesar's Court: nor do I think
Octavia would be jealous, or that danger
That once befell the fair Calphurnia,
Whom Agrippina banished Italy
Because that Claudius Caesar praised her beauty,
Should fall on thee.

Poppaea. It shall not fall on me,
I will noe see the Court: fie Otho fie
How wretchedly in striving to conceal
Thy jelousy, thou do betray it to me!
Why do thou tell me so of Caesar's power,
Octaviaes wrath, Calphuniaes banishment
Through Agrippinaes envy? it is thy love
Better then all these subtle tricks will keep
My thoughts at home.

Otho. It shall appear to thee
I do not fear at all; or if I did,
It Is not the failing of thy constancy.
Enjoy what freedom thou desir'st, Poppaea.
Now for a little while excuse my absence,
I must for sake thee, though unwillingly.
Caesar, I fear, expected my return
Long before this love has beguiled the time,
And made my stay seem shorter then it is.
But I shall think till I return again
The hours are long, till then farewell Poppaea. Exit.

Poppaea. I find his fears already, my estate
Was better far before Rufus Crispinus
Was grave. and knew not wantonness enough
To make him jealous as this Otho does
That too unlawful love, which then I showed
To Otho, is the mother of these fears.
Is old Seleucus the Magician come; Enter Fulvia

Fulvia: Madam he waits without,

Poppaea. Go call him hither.
Seleucus is the master of his Art.
All his praedictions hitherto have proved
Most true and certain. why should I desire
To know my future fate; and hasten woe
(Should it prove ill) before the time of woe?
But it is a longing that I cannot check Enter Seleucus.
Welcome Seleucus, have you found it out?

Seleucus. Madam, your scheme is drawn, and there I find
The stars alot another husband to you

Poppaea. Another after Otho?


Seleucus. Yes, a third.


Poppaea. What shall he be?


Seleucus The greatest Prince on earth.

Poppaea Ha, Caesar?


Seleucus. Yes; it must be Caesar, Madam.
And it is as true as if the oracles
Of Jove and Phoebus had foretold it both.

Poppaea. This Caesar that now lives?


Seleucus. I can no further
Instruct you Madam; what you hear is true.

Poppaea. Drink this Seleucus for my sake. Farewell.
Exit Seleucus To be Augusta is the greatest gift
The fates can give; nor does it seems to me
A thing so much unlikely. Otho's fear
Perchance was fatal. If it were, in vain
His care will be, nor can he then accuse
Me, but the fates that overrul'd my love.

AGRIPPINA, PALLAS. Agrippina. It is decreed, Silanus must not live.
The Imperial blood, that runs within his veins
Were there no other cause, is crime enough.
He is descended in the same degree.
That Nero is from great Augustus loins.
And some have lately whispered that his age
Is more mature for sovereignty then Nero's.
Besides thou know his brother Lucius,
That should have married young Octavia,
By us was hunted to his death; and he
May meditate revenge.

Pallas. You need not fear
A spirit so sluggish as Silanus is.
Your brother Caius Caesar, in the amidst
Of all his fears and jealousyes to which
He sacrificed so many noble branches
Of your Imperial house, contemned Silanus
As one in whom there was no spirit, or danger,
And called him nothing but the golden beast.

Agrippina. We cannot tell, if times of trouble come,
How much that beast by courage of attendants
And confluence of soldiers may be changed.
He is Proconsul now of Asia,
And may here after, if the people should
Malign our government, bring power against us.

Pallas. If you will have it so Publius Celerius
And Aelius now going for Asia
Have undertaken there to poison him.

Agrippina. Let it be done. But Pallas, first of all
Let a centurion be dispach'd into
Campania, to kill Narcissus. there Xiphilin.
He must not live, that did contrive our ruin
And knows, I fear, the means by which we escaped it.
By our command it shall be warranted.
But tell me Pallas, ere thou go, are all
The German soldiers come?

Pall: Madam they are.
You have a royal guard.

Ag: Go dearest Pallas,
Dispatch Celerius into Asia,
And the Centurion to Campania. Exit Pallas
Now Agrippina is her self, and all
The power and dignity she holds, her own.
I do not owe it to a marriage bed,
Or poor dependence on a husbands love,
Where every minion might have rivaled me.
There is no power, no state at all, but what
Is undependent, absolute and free.
Besides my proper and peculiar guards
Two lictors by the Senate are assigned
Distinct from Caesar and the Consuls state
To wate on me, that all the world at last
The Imperial power may in a woman know.
I was an Empress but never reigned till now. Exit

A banquet. Enter NERO, BRITANNICUS, OTHO, PETRONIUS, MONTANUS, ACT. Ne. Come
sit my friends, they here are freely welcome
That bring free Joviall hearts far hence be all
Sad looks, sower gestures, and Censorious thoughts.
They fit not Nero's table. kiss me Act,
And smile upon the feast.

Act: Caesar's command
Is warrant strong enough.

Nero. And thou shall find
No rigid Catoes here.

Petronius. True, great Caesar,
Let such sour Scauri sit at home, and write
Against the pleasure of this happy age
Dull satyrs, such as water, or the lees
Of Tuscan wine beget, let them admire
Those old penurious times. when Curious fed
On leekes and onions, when Fabritius
Feasted the frugall Senate with hung beef
And rusty bacon, and in earthen pots
Drunk small Etrurian wine, let them be still
Such as themselves would make themselves, unworthy
To taste the plenty that Rome now enjoyes.

Nero. Why did our famed ancestors so far
Extend their conquering arms, and strive to get
The riches of the world, but that their Nephews
Might now enjoy them? twere ingratitude
To their rich labors, should we scorn to use
What they have got: or if the use of it
In us be riot, sure 'twas avarice
In them, that toiled so much to purchase it.

Otho. Which of those rigid Censors, that declaime
Against the vices of the times, and tax
Rome as luxurious now would call it virtue
In a rich Citizen, whose storehouses
Were fraught with the best provisions, his chests crowded
His cellars full of rich Campanian wine
Yet he himself to drink the coursest lees,
To feed on ackornes, pulse, and crabs, to wrong
His nature, and defraud his Genius?
It Is said the Furies keep pined Tantalus
From tasting those delicious fruits he sees.
Such would the Roman virtue be, should she
Affright her sons the masters of the world
From tasting that which they themselves possess.

Petronius. It Is true; those former ages were most frugall;
We thank them for it, the better is our fare.
Let those that list, now when they have no need,
Still imitate, and boast their hungry virtue,
Whilst we poor sinners are content with pleasants,
Numidian hens, and Lybian purple wings
Wild goats, bores, hares, thrushes, and musheroms,
Oysters, and mullets, and such vicious meats.

Nero. Fill me some wine. Montanus melancholy,
And silent now?

Montanus. Caesar, I was but listening
To hear Petronius good morality,

Nero. Otho I know cannot be melancholy,
He is a bridegroom, and but new possessed
Of that fair treasure he has courted
So long, well Otho, I must have a sight
Of fair Poppaea,; such I know she is.

Otho^ She is unworthy of great Caesar's sight.


Nero. A round, go Anicetus bring the lots;
Because that no respect of power shall let
The freedom of our mirth, who ever draws
The longest cut shall be our King to night,
And be obeyed what ere he shall command.
I will resign my chair to him. Com draw. Enter Anicetus they draw.
It Is I that am your King.

Montanus. I shall believe
That Fortune has her eyes.

Britannius In getting Crowns
Nero, thy fortune is too good for mine.

Nero. I know none envy me.


Britannicus No envy can
Redress my wrongs.
I will begin with Otho.
I do command thee send by Anicetus
Some trusty token that immediately
May fetch Poppaea hither to the banquet.

Otho. It shall be done, this ring will fetch her hither,
Exit Anicetus. I ever though 'twould come to this.

Petronius. Thy plot
Of bringing Act in, I see has failed.

Otho. I care not much; he would at last have seen her.


Nero. Thou will not frown my Act, though thou see
Another beauty here.

Act. No royal Caesar,
Nor shall you hear me envious, or detracting,
Although I know Poppaea is a Lady
Whose beauty does as far excel poor Act
As Cinthia does the lesser stars, or Venus
The other Sea-nimphs.

Nero. Freely spoke, fair Act.


Act. Here you shall find the saying does not hold
That women are detractors from each other.

Nero. Mean time begin a health.


Montanus So please it Caesar^
To great Augusta, Agrippina's health.

Nero. Let it go round. And now Petronius
I come to thee, I do command thee write
A Satyr presently against those pleasures
Thou did so lately praise, against the attire,
And costly diet of this notorious age.
This is thy Task.

Petronius. I must obey the King:
And now is the fittest time for such a satyr.
I never find my virtue of that strength
As to contemn good Victuals, but upon
A well filled stomach.

Nero. Give him wine to heighten't.


Petronius. I Have writ already a Satirick Poem
In a grave angry way, where I complain
that Romes excess, corruption, luxury,
^uin'd the present government, and twixt
Caesar, and Pompey caused a civil war.
Listen, and hear my castigations.
Now all the world victorious Rome had won
All lands, all Seas, the morn and evening Sun,
Nor was content; the Ocean's furrowed ore
With armed ships; if any farre-hid shore,
(...) land there were, whence burnished gold was brought
It was their foe: by impious war they sought
(Fates fitted so) for wealth, old known delight
They scorn, and Vulgar bare-worne pleasure slight.
Pearls in the Assirian lakes the soldiers love.
Bright polished earth in hew with purple strove.
Numidia marble brings the Scythian yields
His early fleece, the Arabs spoil their fields,
But see more ruin yet, and greater wounds
Of injured peace, the Mauritanian grownds
"And Libyan Ammon's farthest woods, to get
"Wild beasts are searched whose teeth a price must set
"Upon their death, fierce Tigers fetched from far,
"And stalking stately on the Theater
"Are fed with humane slaughter to delight
"The peoples eyes: after the persian rite
"(Alas I shame to speak it, and display
"The ruine-threatning fates) they cut away
"Manhood from growth spoiled youths, for Venery
"Softning their nature, to keep back thereby
"In spite of time, their age her self in kind
"Abused nature seeks, but cannot find.
"They dote on Catamites, weak bending hammes,
"Uunerved bodies, and a thousand names
"Of new attires, loose hair of men, in whom
"All man is lost! lo slaves from Afric come,
"Rich Citron boards, bright purple, which to view
"Cousening the senses bear a gold like hew.
"A wanton train, in wine and surffets drowned
"The far fetched table do encompasse round.
"The wealth that all the spacious world contains
"By lawless arms the roming soldier gains,
"Their gluttony grows witty; guilt-heads caught
"At Sea, alive are to their tables brought.

Nero. No more, my furious Satyrist, thou have chid
The times sufficiently.

Petronius. If you be pleased
I have obeyed.

Nero. Well, I perceive Petronius
A man may write a Satyr, and yet be
No Scaurus, Curious, or Fabritius.

Petronius. A Satyrist should be the contrary,
And know those vices, which he means to tax.

Nero. Brother Britannicus thy task is next,
Stand up and sing a song.

Britannicus Give me some time:
I cannot do it extempore, what subject?

Nero. Choose that your self.


Britannicus. Then give me leave to sing
Mine own misfortunes, how I came to loose
The Roman scepter.

Nero. How! that will not fit
A feast of mirth.

Britannicus. No, let them laugh that win.


Petronius. A good smart youth.


Nero. This must not be endured.
I must be freed from this continual fear:
Then be excused, be merry Gentlemen,
I wonder Anicetus stays so long.
Enter ANICETUS with POPPAEA. But see they come, is this Poppaea, Otho.

Otho. It Is she great Caesar.


Nero. Wonder of her sex!
Bright paragon of Rome! all beautyes yet
That I have seen, have been but foiles to set
A greater luster on this star of light.

Otho. His eyes are fixed; his changing looks do speak
A depth of passion, or my jealous fears.
Dazzle mine eyes too much.

Petronius. It Is so; she is lost.
If ever Lady were a tennis ball
It Is this, she is bandy'd so from one to the other.

Nero. Must then another reap the envied fruit
Of my injustice? must Poppaea be
My crime, that took her from her other Lord,
To be his pleasure?

Otho. Is great Caesar sad!


Nero. No Otho, still she shows more fair and fair.
I cannot check my love; sit fairest Lady.
And with your luster grace our feast. I see
Thou art a most incomparable judge
In beauty, Otho, and were I to choose
A wife again, I Would trust no eye but thine.

Otho. Would I might serve you Sr. in any thing.


Nero. But tell me thy oppinion in one question.
Which do thou think the noblest in a Prince,
If he would use his power, and do an act
That may be thought unjust, to do it for friendship*
Or satisfaction of his own delight.

Otho. Sr. had you made the case a private man's
(For the delights of Princes, as themselves,
We must count sacred) I could soon resolve it.

Nero. Let it be so for it is the same in justice.


Otho. I think it noblest then to do it for friendship.
For friendship ever was held honorable,
But satisfaction of our own delights
A thing of weakness rather then of honor*

Petronius. I see his drift.


Nero. Augustus Caesar then
And I by power have done the self same act.
But in the cause I have excelled Augustus,
For he to satisfy his own hot love
From Claudius Nero took fair Livia.
I from Crispinus took a brighter beauty
To show my self no lover. but a friend.
Do not mistake me Otho, and suppose
I do repent the favor I have done
I know it is well bestowed.

Otho. It Was such a favor
That I confess, great Caesar, as no tongue
Can be enough expressive; so it is hard
To find a heart that is large enough to pay
Sufficient thanks in thought, but pious men
Have still acknowledged that no thanks of ours
Can aequalize the bounty of the Gods.
And Princes are like them, should I think less
I should both wrong the giver, and the gift.

Nero. In valuing her aright thou show thy self
As wise as just. I wish thee joy of her.
But fairest Lady, since it was so late
Before you graced our feast, I cannot think
That I have entertained you yet at all.
The scene shall therefore change, another room
Shall bid Poppaea welcome to the Court.

Exeunt. VITELLIUS, POLLIO. Vitellius. Yet Caesar and his mother well agree.


Pollio. The Gods continue it, but Vitellius,
I fear the sequel. Agrippinaes fierce
And haughty disposition will too much
Provoke her son it is thought; and he too forward
To throw all nature off.

Vitellius. I think so too.
And therefore I could wish that Agrippina
Would go a gentler way, she must not build
Too much upon her merits, though we know
It Was she that put the scepter in his hand.
For vicious natures, where they once begin
To take distaste, and purpose no requital,
The greater debt they owe, the more they hate

Pollio. Besides she will find it harder far to work
Her ends upon a son then it was to rule
A doting husband.

Pollio. Time will show it all,
And we ere long shall know which way to lean.

Exeunt. BURRUS, SENECA. Burrhus. Will Agrippina sit to day with Caesar
On his Tribunal, to give audience
To those Armenian Ambassadors?

Seneca. There is no doubt she would; but I have spoiled
That state I hope; for I have counseled Nero.
That if she come, he shall arise and meet her,
As if he did it in respect, and duty
Deferring th'audience of th'Embassador,
I hope she will not understand our drift.

Burrhus. Pray heaven she do not, for you know her fircenesse.


Seneca. It would be Romes disgrace, the Senates shame
And my great crime if the Ambassadors
That come to plead their countries cause at Rome,
Should see a woman perching up with Caesar
Into the chare to give them audience.
And sit commanding ore the Roman ensigns:
It Was not the custom of our Ancestors
To see such sights.

Burrhus. True Lucius Seneca,
Our Ancestors had no such kind of women,
She in her heart's a man, and you mistake
If you esteem her only Caesar's mother;
Not his Colleague, and partner in the Empire
Or more then so.

Seneca. I am not so ungrateful
To hate the woman, since I know it was
Her favor, that repealed my banishment.
But I dislike these things, that foreign states
In her unseemly carriage should behold Xiphilin.
The shame of Rome, and would she keep a temper
Fitting the quality of her sex and place,
I should admire the bravery of her mind.

Enter NERO, VITELLIUS, POLLIO, NERO, takes his state, after them the
Ambassadors. Ambassadors. Long live great Nero Caesar, the chief care
Of heaven, and highest Souveraigne of the Earth,
The Princes of Armenia, Vologeses
And Tiridates greet your Majesty
By us, and do congratulate the honor,
Which since divinest Claudius left the earth
To make a God in'heaven, is fallen on you.
And to your high Tribunal do refer
The controversy that is now betwixt them.

Nero. Enter Agrippina. My mother's come, defer th'Embassadors
As it was appointed Seneca.

Seneca. I will.


Nero. Hail dearest mother.


Agrippina. Wherefore rises Caesar
From his Tribunal when affaiers of state
Are brought before him?

Nero. No respect can be
Too much for me to give great Argippina.

Agrippina. Excuse me, Caesar, if it be respect,
It Is now unseasonable, take your seat,
I Will fit with you my self, and here the affairs
Of these Armenian Ambassadors.

Nero. We have deferred the business a while,
And thought upon a fitter time to hear it.

Agrippina. If you arise because the audience
Is ended or deferred upon just reasons,
It Is not respect to me that made you rise,
As you alldg'd at first, but I have found it,
The reason that deferred this audience
Was Agrippinaes coming.

Burrhus. This I feared.


Seneca. It Was carried ill of Caesar at the first.


Agrpppina. I see thou blushest, Nero, and may justly,
To call that reverence, which was affront,
Was a dissembling not befitting Caesar.
And to affront a mother so deserving
Was not the duty that befitted Nero.

Nero. Can nearest Agrippina. think her Nero.
Will ever do an act that may be judged
Affront to her

Agrippina. This was thou know it Nero.
And so does thy adviser Seneca
From him it came, no other Senator
Durst to have counseled my disgrace but he

Seneca. Never will Seneca, so much obleidg'd
To Agrippinaes royal favor, wish
Or council her disgrace.

Agrippina. Oh Seneca.
Philosophy nere taught ingratitude.
If you had thought the place unfit for me,
You might have told me privately before,
Not used this trick which how so ere it hold
In Stoticisme, I Am sure is naught in state.

Vitellius. She pays him home.


Pallas. Her spirit cannot brook
The least appearance of an injury.

Agrippina. Caesar, I Will leave thee now, nor shall my presence
Be any hinderance to thy state affairs.

Nero. I Will go a long with you.


Agrippina. For Seneca
I Will shortly teach him new Philosophy.

Exeunt. manent. BURRHUS, SENECA. Seneca. She Is full of anger; but it moves
not me,
Since what I did was just, and for the honor
Of Rome and Caesar; honest actions
Will be enough protection to them selves.

Burrhus. Take the best courses to prevent her fury.


Seneca. Ah noble Burrhus, it must be hereafter
Our greatest care to curb that woman's pride,
And what we can remove her from all rule
And government of state, for Agrippina
Is of too hot and fierce a disposition.

Burrhus. What should we do? twere pity to incense
Her son against her.

Seneca. The Gods forbid that we
Should stirve to make the Prince unnatural.
But to prevent this inconvenience
I will persuade young Caesar not with purpose
To wrong his mother, somewhat to abate
Her dangerous greatenesse, to remove from her
Part of her guard of German soldiers,
And to displace her wicked counselor
That insolent and Lordly free'dman Pallas.

Burrhus. You need not use persuasions to your Pupil
(The Gods forgive it if I judge amiss)
To stand against his mother, I much fear
He will too quickly hate her, for no reason
To state belonging; but because she grows
Imperious over him, and strives to curb
His lust and riots, those, those Seneca
I fear are seeds of future tyranny
And for his love (as if the fates decreed
To make his passions all preposterous)
His virtuous wife noble Octavia
The only instance in this wicked age
Of women great and good, is loathed by him.

Seneca. That most afflicts me: could we find a cure
For that disease, all other maladyes
A riper age will in some part redress,
And I will strive to change them by degrees,
And get him to forsake his loose associates.
But let us first endeavor to remove
Fierce Agrippina from all rule of state.

Burrhus. I Will join with you, and use my best endeavors.


Exeunt. NERO. Nero. Shall I that am an Emperor, be checked,
Controlled and baffled in my Palace thus?
I will remove this mother far from me,
And give command to Burrhus to provide
That house that was Antoniaes for her.
The Palace shall be free to my delights,
I make no doubt but that the people know,
And hate her pride, and will the less repine
At what I do against her, I have told her
(For she provoked me past all patience)
Part of my mind already, she shall rue
Perchance too late the fierceness she has showed

Exit. AGRIPPINA. Agrippina. Ungrateful Nero, is thy mothers power
So soon offensive grown? can thou so soon
Cast off all filial duties, and forget
What I deserve from thee? would thou deprive
Me of all power that gave all power to thee?
Did I so wickedly for thee procure
The height of human state, that thou should take
All state from me with greater wickedness?
Oh wronged Claudius, this sad punishment
My bloody treason, and ingratitude
To thy offended Manes justly pays.
By the most loving, and most injured Lord,
The worst of wives was more beloved then now
The best of mothers by a wicked Son.
I Will make him know what hand it was that raised
His fortunes to this height: but wherefore weeps
Enter Octavia. My dear Octavia?

Octavia. What accursed fate
Pursues the woeful Claudian family?

Agrippina. Dear daughter speak thy grief.


Octavia. Was I bestowed,
Or rather lost in marriage, to advance
Upon my brother's ruin, Nero's state
To be by him despys'd, hated and made
A base freed-womans slave?

Agrippina. What freed woman?


Xiphilin. Octavia. Act thy Nero's concubine my mistress
That dares within the palace to contest
Nay to revile Octavia.

Agrippina. She dares not,
Nor shall she do it, I Will slit the strumpets nose,
If she dare speak against thee.

Octavia. You cannot mother.
Nero delights in none but her, his soul
In Act lives; on her he does bestow
That love, that is due to me: But me he loathes;
Oh dismal love, Oh fatal marriage!

Agrippina. Take comfort sweet Octavia, I Will redress
Thy wrongs, or venture mine own fall with thee.

Enter Nero. Nero. You have complained I see, Octavia.
Is there a chiding toward?

Agrippina Has thy guilt,
And the unkind wrongs thou have already done
Unthankefull Nero, to thy virtuous wife.
Xiphilin. Armed thee with such an impudence, that now
Thou can prevent her just accusing thus?

Nero. How Is this?


Agrippina. Me thinks although thou hadd'st no spark
Of goodness left thee, yet in Policy
Thou should not dare maintain a base borne strumpet
Against thy lawful wife great Claudius daughter.

Nero. Me thinks in policy you might remember
You speak to Caesar, not a child.

Agrippina. It Is true,
Thou have forgot the duty of a child.

Nero. I will be better known; if I be Crossed
In my delights, I will be bold to cross
You in your pleasures too

Agrippina. Oh heavens, what pleasures
What joys or studies have I ever had
But to prefer thee Nero? are my cares
And all my labors thus requited now?
Let not too vain and foolish confidence
Of what thou art, make thee presume to wrong
Thy mother and thy wife; or thou shall know
The Empires lawful heir is yet alive.
The wronged Britannicus is growing up
To take his right, and to revenge the wrongs
Which he and all his family sustain Xiphilin.
I Will go my self to the Praetorian Camp,
And plead his cause before the Soldiers.
There let one-handed Burrhus, and that base
Unthankefull exile Seneca, appear
Against the daughter of Germanicus.

Nero. Yes plead the cause of young Britannicus;
And when y' have done, provide an advocate
To plead your own.

Exeunt Nero. Agrippina. Gone so abruptly from us!
Slights he mine anger so?

Octavia. Madam I fear
You took too harsh a way; his looks were wild
And full of rage; my sad misgiving soul
Tells me some mischeife's working in his thoughts.

Agrippina. Fear not, Octavia, weell take the best
And surest courses to prevent the ill
That may ensue: and if mature advice
And council cannot bridle him, we will use
Another means to curb his insolence:
I have already by my bounty made
Most of the Tribunes and Centurions.
My guards are strong, and shall be vigilant
Over the safety of Britannicus,
As mine own person, there is no open act
Of mischief can be on the sudden wrought.

Octavia. The Gods I hope will guard our innocence.


Exeunt. NERO solus. Nero My fears have been too slow, and it was high time
That Agrippinaes thundering threats had waked
My sleeping mischeefes; which shall now no more
Study disguises, but appear in bold
And open acts with Caesar's stamp upon um,
Feirelesse of vulgar whispering jealousyes.
Upon thy death, Britannicus, a price
No less then Romes imperial wreath is set.
The deed, when done, will privilege it self,
And make the power of Nero strong enough
To warrant his misdeede, who dare revenge
Or blame the offense that frees me from a rival?
But I shall leave a worse, and nearer far
Behind, my mother Agrippina lives;
She lives my rival, nay my partner still,
Nay more then that my Queen and Governesse.
I am no Prince, no man, nothing at all
While Agrippina lives, must (...) then live
To make me nothing? must the name of mother
Outweigh a scepter? could the name of husband
Protect her Claudius? no; her own example
Shall teach me state: but first Britannicus
Must be removed; his death assures my state,
And makes me able to contest with her.
That gentle poison, which Locusta gave him,
If poison 'twere, whilst we did vainly fear
The peoples talk, has kept my fears alive.
Where is this hagge?

Enter Locusta. Locusta. Caesar.


Nero. Witch. beats her.
Feind, fury, devil.

Locusta. Mercy, mercy, Caesar.


Nero. I Will hew thy cursed carcass into atoms,
Thou gav'st Britannicus an antidote
In stead of poison.

Locusta. It Was a gentle poison,
And such as you commanded me to make;
Hold Caesar hold; I will redeem all yet.

Nero. Do it or die, make me a poison strong,
A quick and speeding one.

Locusta. It shall be done.
No sooner tasted, but it shall destroy.

Nero. I Will see the trial of it, and reward
Thy service well; but if Britannicus
Out live this day, this day shall be thy last.

Exeunt ACTUS V. SCENA. I.
BURRHUS, VITELLIUS, ANNICETUS, Soldiers Burrhus. It is the will of, Caesar,
soldiers
You must be all discharged from guarding her.
But you shall have allowance, and thus much
I Will promise for your comforts, you shall be
The next that are ascribed into the list
Of the Praetorian camp.

Soldiers. Thanks noble Burrhus.


Burrhus. Go Anicetus, give command that straight
That house, which was Antoniaes be prepared
For Agrippina, and her family.
Caesar will have the Palace to himself.

Vitellius. Does Agrippina know it

Burhus. Not yet I think.
Is there displeasure then 'twixt her and Caesar?

Burhus. I know not. you will excuse my have, my Lord
I must take leave.

exit Burhus. Vitellius. I like not these new turns.
I came to visit her: but now I Will spare
My hail this morn. whither so fast my Lord?

Pollio. To visit Agripina.


Vitellius. Stay, I Will tell you.
There is some diffrence twixt her and Caesar.
Her guards are taken away. I parted now
From Burhus, who discharged them. she her self
Shall be removed from the Imperial palace.

Pollio. I like not that; I Will spare my visit then.


exeunt PETRONIUS, MONTANUS. Montanus. Otho will loose his wife then.


Petronius. Yes, no doubt;
And I believe must leave the City too.
Nero's extremely fired, and he will have her
Alone; poor Otho must not rival Caesar
Nor indeed is it fitting that the husband
Should make th'adulterer a cuckold.

Montanus. Do thou believe, Petronius, that this change
Pleases Poppaea?

Petronius Yes, I warrant her.
She thinks her beauty never could have done her
A greater service.

Montanus. But she seemed to love
Otho extremely.

Petronius. I confess Montanus
I think her appetite stood well to Otho;
For it is a rascal of a winning carriage
And curious feature; but she has enjoyed him
Sometime already, and that passion
Which you call love, does move in a degree
So low, and feeble, it is soon swallowed up
In the deep torrent of ambition.
Poppaea's proud; nor can that breast of hers
Harbor a love so strong, but it must yield
To pride her quality praedominant.

Montanus. What can she be but Nero's concubine?
I see not what high honor lies in that.

Petronius. You cannot tell what she may be in time.


Montanus. She cannot be Augusta; that high name
Octavia, while she lives, will keep, he dares not
Forsake that wife (how e're he do affect her)
To whom he may be said to owe the Empire.

Petronius. For mine own part, I know not how twill go.
But I dare swear Poppaea e're this time
Has asked and heard what the Chaldaeans say
About her fortunes: our fine dames of Rome
Must still be tampering with that kind of cattle.
Their dogs, their monkeys, and themselves do nothing
Without the advise of such a cunning man,
Have thou seen Otho lately?

Montanus. Yes to day:

Petronius. How does he look upon the business?


Montanus. Faith somewhat sad; but Caesar seems to use him
So wonderful kindly that he cannot think
He Is wronged at all.

Petronius. Prithee let us find him out. Exeunt*


PALLAS solus. Pallas. No longer steward of the Imperial house!
Are greatest benefits so soon forgot
By wicked Princes? it is and ever was
The fate of Courts, Monarchs unjustly hate
Acknowledgment: what power, what honor now
Does Nero, hold but what he owes to me?
My merit, nay my wickedness, which did
To him increase the merit, for this heart
Has bled the more for my ingratitude
To my best master Claudius, his sad wrongs
Another now revenges! oh Narcissus,
Perchance the conquest that I got ore thee,
When we two strove about the successor
To Claudius Caesar, will hereafter prove
More fatal to the conqueror, then him
That lost the day, thou in Campania
Di'dst happily, though hunted to thy death
By us; and carry'dst to thy grave the honor
Of ayding the just side, oh Royal Empress,
Enter Agrippina. I fear our care to raise unthankful Nero
Will prove at last our own destruction
My places loss I weigh not, but for fear
It prove a step to your dishonor, Madam.

Agrippina. It Is for my sake that thou have lost it, Pallas,
With me my friends are hated. Oh sad fate
That follows impious actions! well perchance
And happily might I have lived if wronged
Britannicus had reigned! Oh would the loss
Of this unworthy life could yet procure
That injured Prince his due.

Pallas. Can fortune turn
The course of things so strangely, that you Madam,
The Prince his mother and his raiser too
Should wish the others reign

Agrippina. It can, it can.
This is the power and justice of the Gods,
That when we think our selves most safe in ill,
Can frustrate all our confidence, and make
That power, which seemed to be our prop, to be
Our only cause of ruin, we are children,
Vice makes us children, like to them, we cry
For Knives to hurt our selves with, and the Gods
To punish us often grant what we desire.

An horse brought in OCTAVIA. following. Pall. What doleful noise is this?


Agrippina Ay me, I fear.


Octavia. Oh dismal day! Oh wretched family!
Fly back bright Phoehus to the Eastern shore,
Or hide thy head; thou have at Rome beheld
A feast more black then ere Mycenae saw.
(...) dearest brother, sweet Britannicus.

Agrippina. Britannicus.


Octavia. Murdered Britannicus,
Poisoned at Nero's table.

Agrippina Break my heart
The greatest woe, that could befall, is come.
Forgive me, gentle Soul, it was I that gave
That viper life, and rule to ruin thee.
Thou need'st not curse me; the impiety
Of him that killed thee, will revenge thy death.

Pallas Fair hope of Rome, sweet flower untimely cropped,
What parentasion shall sad Pallas make
To Appease thy wronged ghost, and expiate
My foul offenses? to the King and Queen
Of fable night I Will build two grassey altars;
And yearly there, if any years at all
I have to live. with sad libations
Invoke the manes of Britannicus,
Thou from the groves of fair Elysium
For ever wail'd for ever honored Prince,
Deigne to accept my humble sacrifice.
Or if those rights be too too mean for thee,
Perchance the Genius of afflicted Rome
Shall weep hereafter ore thy grave, and wail
The untimely death of her Britannicus.

Agrippina. Gentle to thee let earth and water prove.
Exit Octavia, This woeful murder of Britannicus.
and funus. Bodes ill to me, and my presaging soul
Is filled with ghastly fears. Ah Pallas, Pallas,
This is the entrance into Paricide,
And but the Prologue to a mothers death.

Pallas. Would I could speak to your destresse and fears
A true and real comfort, such a one
As might not flatter your estate, and make
You weaker then before, by taking from you
All study of prevention.

Servant. Servant. Caesar. Madam,
Is come to visit you.

Agrippina. Pallas farewell. Enter Nero.


Nero. What weeping Madam? what unworthy cause
Dares force a tear from great Augustaes eye
While Nero lives: if 't be my brother's death,
That caused this sorrow, I could join in tears
Had not that tragedy already robbed
Mine eyes of moisture,

Agrippina. This hypocrisy
Makes me less trust his nature then before.

Nero. The Gods have robbed me of one comfort now
The fellowship of sweet Britannicus,
That all my piety may be confined
To you, dear mother, you contain alone
Within a Parents sacred name, all styles
Of kindred now, all bonds of pious love.
Fear not a change in me.

Agrippina. I do not Caesar.


Nero. Minarvus feast is celebrated now

Nero. Minervaes feast is celebrated now
Five days at Baiae thither you shall go Xiphilin.
And feast with me dear mother, there forget
All jealous fears, and you shall never more
Complain of Nero. If the stratagem aside.
Of Anicetus prosper, her complaint
Shall be to Pluto, and the Ghosts below. exeunt.

OTHO with his Commission. Otho. The Government of Lusitania.
By Nero's grace and favor is bestowed
On me! Oh glorious name of banishment!
Yet welcome now, since fair Poppaea's lost.
I thank thee, Nero, thou provid'st a brave
And honorable cure for that sad wound
Thou have inflicted on my love-sicke Soul.
How great a torture had it been to me
To live in Rome divorced from her, and see
That beauty folded in another's arms!
Hence wanton thoughts; fond love for ever vanish,
Collect my soul what ere thou have within thee
Of Roman left, and answer to the call
Bright honor makes, some favorable God
Pitying the lusts and riots of a youth
So much misled, has sent this seeming loss
To wake me from so base a lethargy.
Employed in foreign action, I shall live
Free from rh' infectious vices of this Court,
And far from seeing the abhorred effects
Of future tyranny, which needs must break
From Nero's vicious nature. At my birth
The Augures promised high and glorious hopes.
This is the way to bring them. Spain shall find
Another Otho then was sent from Rome.
Poppaea promised here to meet, and take
Her last leave of me. why should I again
Renew my passion by the sight of her?
But't is but one poor look. and so farewell.

Enter SELEUCUS. Seleucus. Hail Marcus Otho Emperor of Rome,
Caesar that shall be.

Otho. Ha!


Seleucus. It is thy fate,
Which shall not be prevented.

Otho. Tell me father
(For your predictions ever have been true)
Shall I behold Poppaeaes face again,
When I have left the City?

Seleucus. Never more. Exit Seleucus.


Otho. Never! a heavy doom yet I in lieu
Of her shall gain the Empire of the world.
Juno will heal the wounds that Venus gives.
Enter POPPAEA. See, there she comes; her beauty waxes still,
Or else the sad concit of never more
Seeing that face, makes it appear more fair.
How dull the edge of Honor grows already!
Here could I stay, and like the Trojan Prince
Locked in fair Diodes arms forget forever
The Italian land, and all my future fame.
Him Jove admonished to depart from thence.
Me the command of Caesar forces hence,
And leaves no power in my election.
Farewell Poppaea.

Poppaea. Oh hard fate in love
Is mine, whose joys were never lasting yet.
Speak not so soon that killing word farewell.

Otho. What gain, alas, can one small minute be?
Or if twere gain to me, to the Poppaea
Twere loss to keep thee from thy Caesar's sight.
He is thy servant, whom the world obeyes.

Poppaea. Ah Otho, love can witness that this fortune
Was never sought by me.

Otho. Thou were too great
A treasure for a private man to keep.
No; live still happy with thy Caesar here
And grant me one request; if of that love
Which once we vowed so dear, there yet remains
So small a part as may deserve the name
Of common friendship, use thy power with Caesar
My government may be continued long.

Poppaea. Rather let me entreat the contrary,
And keep thee hereat Rome.

Otho. It must not be.
Never while Nero lives, and lives with thee.
It must be love no more, but friendship now
Twixt us Poppaea, which may still be kept
In absence by good wishes, and without
Those nearer comforts which fond love requires.
But who shall teach me to forget that sweet
Delicious lesson which loves school did teach,
When thy admired beauty was the book,
And I a Scholar too too forward then?
Oh would great Caesar's power to cure my wound,
Could but bestow so privative a good
As loss of memory. but that, alas,
Were too unjust a cure, and I could wish
Rather to suffer still then quite forget
That I was once Poppaeaes envied love.
I Will rather strive to solace my sick soul
With contemplation of past happiness,
And by recounting ore our former joys
Deceive those hours of sorrow I must pass.

Pop. And I for comfort of our absent love
Will cherrish hopes that we shall meet again.

Oath. No, think me dead, bright love, and I Will enforce
My imagination to believe that thou
Translated by some amorous Deity
Have left the earth to beautify the sky,
And turn Astronomer in love, to find
Thy figure out among those radiant lights
Which Joves transformed Paramours have made.
Amongst those I Will seek for fair Poppaeaes star,
And swear I see it, rather then believe
Thou liv'st on earth debarred from Otho's sight.
I must begin to part, I see; for thou
In modesty art loath to chide me hence,
And bid me quit the place. Farewell Poppaea.
Such height of happiness may thou enjoy
As Caesar's constant love can bring to thee.

Pop. As much good fortune follow Otho still
It Is power that parts us. all the Gods can tell Exit Otho
How well I love thee Otho. but those Gods,
That have ordained another fate for me
Must be obeyed yet Nero must be wrought
With cunning to my ends, or else my fortune
Is low and poor, my title naught at all.
It Is not the love of Caesar, but the honor,
And that high title which attends his love
That is Poppaeaes aim, Octavia
Debarres me yet from that, and Agrippina
Is fierce, and keeps her son in Pupillage.

Enter NERO. Nero. Now fair Poppaea, thou art mine alone;
Otho's removed, embrace the happy change
That fortune brings thee, thou have found instead
Of him, a Caesar, who besides his state
Has brought a heart as true to thee, and love
As strong and fervent as poor Otho's was
Thou were before a diamond coursly set,
A clouded star. the Fates did pity thee,
And would no longer let that beauty ly
Ecclippsed in a private family
No seat but Romes Imperial throne, no sphaere
But Caesar's arms were fit for these bright eyes
To shine in, and the subject world to adore
Their luster, like some constellation
New risen to amaze mortality.
Not Rome alone, but all the farthest shores
That Peleus silver-footed wife ere knew
Shall call Poppaea mistrrsse.

Poppaea. Those are honors
Caesar, too high, too great for me to hope.

Nero* To hope, my love, they are thine own already.


Poppaea. Caesar, thou know it cannot be; and I
That might have lived content with Otho's love;
And there enjoyed the honored name of wife,
Must in the Palace find a baser style.

Nero. Thou wrong'st my power, Poppaea, if thou think
I cannot give the highest style to thee:
And if thou think I mean it not, thou wrong'st
My truest love

Poppaea. Octavia is alive
No love of thine can bear Augustus state
But only she

Nero. She shall be soon removed
To make a room for fair Poppaeaes honor.
Nor will the Senate dare to grumble at it.

Poppaea. Though all were silent else, fierce Agrippina Xiphilin.
Would in that act control thee, and think me
To mean for Caesar's wife, though I am sprung
(For I may speak a truth that Rome can witness)
From noble and triumphant Ancestors.

Nero. There, love, thou strik'st upon the truest string.
That Agrippina was my greatest fear,
Though now she is not; for I Will tell it thee,
If Anicetus stratagem have taken,
Ere this she wanders on the Stygian shore.
Weary I was of her imperious pride,
And feared her cruel plots. How that succeedes
Is now my greatest expectation.
Nor do I live till Anicetus come
And bring my safety in that woman's death
Enter ANICETUS.
Poppaea. See, Anicetus is returned

Nero. Speak man
What is my fate? thou carriest in thy voice
The life and death of Caesar

Anicetus Your command
Was done, great Caesar, but your mother escaped.

Nero. Escaped? how could it be, but you were false,
And all conspired together to betray Xiphilin.
My life in saving hers? how could she escape?

Anicetus. We chose the night to act it in; but night,
Proved not so black as night; the stars gave light,
No wind at all blew as we lanched forth Xiphilin
Down in the Galley Agrippina lay,
And at her feet lay Aceronia
With joy discoursing of your courtesy,
And favor lately showed her, but when I
The watchword gave, the covering of the place
Laden with lead fell down, and pressed to death
Her servant Gallus. But when the other part
By fortune stronger, broke not, nor the vessel
Was loosed asunder, all being in amaze
The rowers straitway thought it best to weigh,
The galley at one side, and sink her so
There Aceronia floating in the waves
Faining her self to be the Empress, cried
Help, help the Prince his mother. But the rowers
With poles, and oars straight killed her as she swamme,
But Agrippina in a silence caused
By policy or fear, swamme to the bank,
Having received but one wound, and there
Succored by little barks, through Lucrine lake
To her own house was carried at the last.

Nero. Oh, I am lost and dead; I shall be straight
Surprised and killed; she will arm her slaves, and stir
The soldiers up, or to the Senate house
Complain, and show the wound she has received
And tell the story there. What shall I do?
Advise me, my Poppaea, Anicetus,
But yet advise me nothing but her death,
No other course is safe Nero. must die
If Arippina. live, call Burrhus to me;
Send forth the soldiers to dispach her straight.

Poppaea It is no action for a soldiers hand
Nor will the camp for brave Germanicus,
Her father's sake be drawn to butcher her
Let Anicetus. finish the exploit
He has begun.

Nero. It must be so; go on
With thy religious act, good Anicetus.
Thou art obleig'd to finish it; or else
What thou have done already, will procure
My ruin rather then security
Choose thee what aid thou will.

Anicetus I have them ready.
Fear it not Caesar, Agrippinaes dead.

Nero. Oh comfortable voice' thou art the man
Thou only Anicetus, that bestow'st
The Empire upon Nero. to thy gift
I will acknowlegd it, and celebrate
This as my day of coronation.
What plot shall we invent to hide the deed,
And put the intent of murder upon her?
To bring you news of her escape, I Will find
A way to do it, it is strange none yet come from her.
See Agerinus comes Enter Agerinus.

Agrerinus. All health to Caesar
Augusta by the favor of the Gods
Has lately escaped a strange and wounderfull
Danger at Sea.

Any. Caesar when any of her servants come
What means this poniard Anicetus lets fall a poniard behind Agerinus.
In Caesar's presence, Agerinus?

Nero. Treason. Ziphilin.
She sends to murder me; dragge hence the slave,
And torture him to death.

Agerinus. I am as free
From guilt in this as innocence it self.

Nero. Hence with the villain to his death, and thou
Dear Anicetus, forward with thy plot. Exeunt

AGRIPPINA, brought in by Mnester, and Seleucus, she sits. Agripina. Leave me
alone; but be not far from me. Exeunt.
Who would rely upon the gratitude
Of men? or trust the fruit of benefits,
That now behold, or shall hereafter read
My woeful fortune? I, that have bestowed
What ere the world contains, to be possessed
By impious Nero, in reward, expect
Nothing but bloody death it was too too true
That strange deceitful galley was a plot
An impious engine made to murder me,
As by the fierceness of the slaves, my wound,
And Aceroniaes death it did appear.
Can I expect that Nero should relent?
Or that the tyrant in a brothers blood
Embrew'd already, should not rather think
No mischeife can be safe till fully done?
Oh had his thoughts been good, had my escape
Been grateful to him, all the house ere this
With visitants, and clients had been filled
To ask and see how Caesar's mother did
Where now are all the hailes the bended knees,
Low prostrate faces, and officious tongues,
That strove in honoring Agrippinaes name?
Vanished alas, and naught but solitude,
Ill-boding silence, and neglect remain
In this forsaken Palace. But too soon
Ay me, I fear the approach of vilany.
What noise is that at door! where are my servants?
Mnester, Seleucus, Galla, Xenophon.
No answer made! are they departed too!
Then vanish all my hopes false world farewell
With all thy fading glories. But alas,
Whither from hence shall Agrippina fly?
What regions are there in the other world
But my injustice has already filled
With wronged Ghoasts? there young Silanus wanders,
Lollia Paullina and great Claudius
My murdered Lord, yet those sad spirits perchance
Abhorring Nero's base ingratitude,
And glutted with revenge, will cease to hate
At last, and pity Agrippinas state.
Enter ANICETUS, OLOARITUS, and others Ay me, is Anicetus. come again?
Then I am dead past hope, murder, help. help Xiphilin.

Anicetus. You guess our business right but it is in vain
To call for help, your guards are far enough.

Agrippina. Oh hold your hands a while; hear me but speak
Consider with your selves before you act
A deed so execrable as will stick
A lasting brand on your abhorred names.
This murder will be famous through the world.
All men will fly your hated company.
Like birds of night shall you for ever hide
Your guilty heads; or, which is worse then that,
Nero himself, who did command the deed,
(As you pretend) shall guerdon you with death,
And quit himself by punishing of you.
O rather venture Neros frown, and keep
Your innocence.

Anicetus. Can they be innocent,
That disobey their Prince his will?

Agrippina But sure
You did mistake the Prince. I am his mother.
It Was I that gave him birth; nay more, that put
Into his hand the scepter of the world.
Could he command my death?

Anicetus We did not stand
Examining the cause.

Agrippina. Then strike this womb
This tragical, and ever cursed womb,
That to the ruin of mankind brought forth Xiphilin.
That monster Nero, here, here take revenge.
Here Justice bids you strike. let these sad wounds
Serve to appease the hatred of the earth
Against Agrippina for dire Nero's birth.

she dies. FINIS.

