THE TRAGEDY OF ANTIGONE, The Theban Princess.

Written by T. May.

First Edition.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Benjamin Fisher, and are to be sold at
his shop, at the sign of the Talbot, without Aldersgate. 1631.

TO THE MOST WORTHILY HONORED, ENDYMION, PORTER Esquire one of his Majesty's
Bedchamber.
SIR.
THis Tragedy of Antigone may perchance (considering the subject of it) be
thought a Poem too sad and balefull to be read with pleasure, or presented
with delight upon any Stage. I confess the sadness of it; but if it suffer
for that, it will raise a question more general; Why tragedyes have at any time
bin allowed? Why the ruins and calamities of some men have been represented
as a delightsome pastime to other men? Why those ancient wits, whom Greece in
her learned times did highly admire, have chosen for their deathlesse Poems
almost no other arguments then those calamitous stories of Thebes, Mycenae,
Troy, and, most of all, this very discourse of the fatal and incestuous family
of Oedipus? where almost all the passages are so far (a man would think)
from delighting men, that they might move a suffering even in the furyes
themselves? and why the greatest Princes, both Grecian and Roman, in their
highest iollity have not only beheld with delight the presentation of them:
but for their own exercise (as many of them as have had the itch of writing)
have chosen these arguments, and made them into Tragedyes? Why this has been
generally so (though the cause need no Apology, at least not mine) I will
venture some few conjectures. All the spectatours are either wretched or
fortunate; the wretched in sad stories are in some sort eased by fellowship in
woe, or delighted with tragical expressions, as being somewhat of kindred with
their own thoughts; those that are fortunate, are affected, in such shows,
either with delight, or wholesome sorrow; if they be delighted, it is in the
taste of their own prosperity, which appears greater, set off by an object of
such contrariety* and this delight is not out of malice (as pleased with the
woes of others) but acknowledgement to those high powers which made the
difference; if they be sorrowful, their sorrow is wholesome; for as in
melancholy diseases merry tales are used to assist nature: so in too great a
joy, and wantonness of the soul, such sad representations are as a good allay,
depressing the leuity of their thoughts to such a mean, as is fit to
entertain the best contemplations. Moreover Tragedyes (besides the state of
them) are pleasing in the expression, forasmuch as sadness does usually
afford the best strains of writing: to omit other instances, love it self
(the usual argument of our new Comedy) is there best written, where it is most
distressed, and in despairing passion; that part of the Comedy seeming best,
which is nearest tragedy, in that strain also go most, or the best of
loue-sonnets that noware made. But I wander too far in this theme; excuse me
(noble Sir) for pressing so much upon your patience, the work it self, did it
not more trust ot your goodness then it is own worth, would think it self
too long to be read by you. If you accept it, it seeks no farther. To speak
of you as you deserve, I dare not, since your known modesty would check my
pen: but this I dare say; there are no arts or arms, or any other
trueabilities, that ever had the happiness to know you, but will sprea^ your
worth, and think you most worthy to stand (as you do) in the presence of a
King, wishing you long blessed in his Majesty's favor, and the King blessed with
more such servants as you are. God, after all, grant unto you his blessed
presence; and so I rest

Ever to be commanded by you, Tho: May.

A short argument of this Tragedy.
ETeocles and Polynices sons to Oedipus by that incestuous marriage with his
mother Iocasta, having slain each other in a single combat, Creon is crowned
King of Thebes. Creon denies to the Argiue bodies funeral rites, which among
the heathen, was therefore esteemed a cruel punishment, because they thought
the souls of them, that were unburied, wandered an hundred years before they
could be transported by Charon into Elysium. Aemon the son of King Creon
falling in love with Antigone, the pious daughter of Oedipus, cannot obtain
his fathers consent to mary her. Antigone, contrary to the Kings command, goes
by night to bury the body of her brother Polynices, and there meets with Argia
the widow of Polynices, and daughter to king Adrastus. They are surprised:
Aemon attempting their rescue is wounded, and lies a while concealed. Antigone
by Creon is doomed to death. Aemon kills himself. Theseus kills Creon, and
gives funeral to the Graecians bodies.

THE TRAGEDY OF ANTIGONE The Theban Princess.
Actus Primus,
scena prima.
Oedipus led by Antigone. Oedipus. LEt go this wicked hand; oh daughter leave
me,
Leave me while thou art virtuous, before
The infection of my crimes do blast thy goodness
Or draw some plague upon thee; this dire head
Abhorred by heaven and earth, living in Thebes
Brought forth a pestilence, which help of art
Could never cure, until, by heavens decree,
Most hateful I was banished from the City.
Oh Daughter leave me.

Anti. Never, never Sir.
While you are here, Cythaeron's craggy mount
Is my abode, and far prefern'd before
Labdacus stately palace, or the towers
Of wealthy Thebes, for which my brothers strive,
What there I loved, I am possessed of here,
My Father's presence; do not banish me
Thither again; that place is banishment,
While you are here; what but impiety,
And brothers hatred shall I there behold?

Oed. Thou art too good, Antigone, thy birth
Would make me Jove my crimes, but that all sense
Of virtue, as of light, is dead in me.
If thou will guide me, guide me to that high
And fatal cliffe, from whence unhappy Ino
Pursued, leaped down into the seas, and met
The danger which she fled, there let me ly
Concealed for ever from the eye of heaven
Ah could I kill my memory as well,
That no succeeding ages might relate
The name and story of sad Oedipus!

Anti. Be not unjust unto your self to think
You have deserved death; the gods call that
Mis-hap and error, which your cruel self
Against your self call crime; love would not hold
His vengefull thunder, if he judged it so.
The age were good, were men as penitent
For true and real faults, as you for that,
Which ignorance has wrought, and was the crime
Of fate it self, not yours: you could not think
That Theban Laius and Iocasta were
Your happlesse parents; and too great a fear
Of being guilty, made you what you feared.
Remembering what the oracle foretold,
You left a Kingdoms glory, and forsook
Good Polybus and loving Merope,
Your then supposed parents, and betook
Your self unto a willing banishment.
What more then this could you have done? to keep
Your goodness, you forsook a crown, which others
Strive to attain by all impiety.
Yet cruel fate pursued you still, and made
Your virtuous mind the way to your offense;
As if the Gods themselves had punished you
For striving to be innocent, when they
Had-fore decreed your guilt, take comfort Sir,
No man offends, but where the will consents.

Oed. How well can thou, Antigone, that bea^'st,
A Magazen of virtuous thoughts within thee,
Speak words of comfort, but accursed I
Am most incapable, there is naught in me,
But horror, grief, despair and misery.
Show me some way of death, or let me go.

Anti. I cannot leave you Sir, nor show your death,
But where I mean to bear you company.

Oed. I never should have had a virtuous child
But to afflict me more; nature will work
A miracle to make my sufferings greater.
The Sun shall bring black night, the Evening star
Usher the day, and seas shall meet the sky
To make addition to my misery!

Anti. good Sir, go take some rest; do not destroy
That life, on which another life depends.

Oed. There Is none but thou, has a commanding power
Ore Oedipus, if thou command me leap
Into Sicilian Aetna's scalding throat,
I Will gladly do it; if thou will have it so
I will, like Titius, with my liver feed
A tiring vultur; more, I will take rest;
Nay, most of all, I Will live at thy request.

Anti. I see some signs of rest upon him now. Exeunt.

Scena secunda.
Aemon. Aemon. How well this sad and solitary place
Suites with my thoughts? these unfrequented woods,
Where nature void of artificial robes
Presents her naked and vngarnish'd face.
In such abodes as these dwelt piety,
White innocence, and spotless chastity
In that first golden age when Saturn reigned.
And still me thinks within these woods he reigns,
Though banished quite from all the world beside,
Here lives the soul of virtue; here abides
The fair Antigone, whose matchless goodness
Vpbraides, and expiates this ages crimes,
And quite our-weighs th'impiety of Thebes,
This place the Gods, disdaining other sights,
Behold with wonder, when Antigone
With pious hands directs her blinded sire
The woeful Oedipus; hither the Graces,
The chaster Nymphs, and harmless Dryades
Leaving their bowers of pleasure, all resort
To wa^te on her, and bear her company.

Antigone, Aemon. Anti. My father is asleep; you powers above
Send sweet refreshment to his wearyed soul.
Oh pity him, and punish not too far^e
That crime which fate and you your selves have made.
He has already been himself a judge
Too cruel to himself, to expiate
His fatal errors, left a crown and scepter,
Fled men's society, and day it self,
Torn out his innocent unhappy eyes.
Now since he wants the comfort of your light
Grant him a quiet undisturbed night.
Young Aemon here?

Aem. Pardon me royal virgin,
Think it not rudeness in me thus to press
Upon your priuacyes; but call it service,
Or zeal to wait upon you, and behold
What I do most admire.

Anti. Sir, it is no fault
That I can apprehend; or if it be,
It Is such a fault as punishes it self.
This is the house of sorrow; naught is here
That can inuit or recompense your coming.

Aem. To visit you, so you be pleased to grace
That visit with a welcome, is a blessing
No place has power to lessen, it would make
Hells saddest cave a fair Elysium.

Anti. You come from Court, and speak as that has taught you.
This place knows no such language.

Aem. Aemon never
Was taxed of flattery, nor will your worth
Admit it; gentle Lady, be but pleased
To think my heart speaks in my tongue to you.
Oh give me leave but to confess my flame,
Which never can be hid; a better fire
More chaste, more true, and full of constancy,
(I dare maintain it) warmes no breast on earth.
No earthly power but sweet Antigone
Can sentence me to bliss or endless woe.
Oh save that creature that depends on you.
Make me immortal by a fair return
Of grace from you and favor.
Anti. Noble Aemen, (That title, though I hated you, your worth
Would challenge from my truth) I love you better
Then so to work your ruin; Love and wed-locke
Have still been fatal in our family.
The balefull owls and croaking ravens sing
Our Hymenaean songs, and furies light
Their brands for torches to our bridal bedds.

Aem. No, wondrous maid, you bear a heaven about you,
A heaven of virtue, that is proof against
The furies rage, and fortunes utmost spite:
You are above them all. Oh take me to you,
And by conjunction of your goodness, make
Me higher then the power of fate can reach.

Anti. These are no times for Hymen, when the frown
Of all the gods lies heavy on our house.
Oh move that suite no more; but yet as far
As my chaste sorrow can admit of love,
Let this suffice you, I do love your soul.
And if this storm should clear, and I have power
To marry ever, Aemon is the man
Of all the world I choose.

Aem. Oh heavenly voice!
This promise from divine Antigone,
More then fruition of the proudest beauty
That ere mortality could boast, reuiues me,
And makes me ever happy; all the hours,
That from my countries cause, and from the war
I can be spared, I Will keep as holy ones
To pay devotion here, here I Will relate
What ever fortune throws on doubting Thebes.
But one chaste kiss and so farewell.

Anti. You have it.
Ye powers of love, be all auspicious now.
Hymen redeem the wrongs that thou have done
Our house already; had I never seen
Young Aemon's face, nere known his matchless worth,
No other man or mind had ere had power
To warm Antigones cold breast with love.
Prosper that flame that you your selves did move.

Dircus, Ianthus. Dir: It Is so, Ianthus, Aemon is in love
With fair Antigone; no other passion
Could make so fresh a youth and spirit as his
To seek such sad retreats; from that dark grove,
Which clothes Cythaerens rough and craggy top,
Where far from sight and company of men
The woeful Oedipus laments alone
His happlesss;e errors fault, unseen by any
But good Antigone his pious daughter,
How often of late brave Aemon has been met!
What but her love had power to draw him thither?

Ian. She is an object worthy of Aemon's love.
The mirror of her sex, a lassting pattern
Of piety to all succeeding times.

Dir. As much true wortha nd manly virtue lives
In noble Aemons breast, he is the true brother
Of brave Menaeceus, whose devoted head
Saved Thebes from ruin.

Ian. True, if Thebes be safe,
As never fairer were her hopes then now;
Th'Argolian forces are disheartened quite,
And of their seven proud leaders, which of late
Beset the gates of Thebes, but two are left
Only Adrastus, and our banished prince.
If we, I say, be safe, we owe that safety
To Creons sons, to brave Menaeceus death,
And Aemon's living valor; one by death
Gave life to thousands; the other noble life
Deserved an easier way to fame then death.

Dir. But I have heard news from the enemies camp,
Alls quiet there, and it is supposed they mean
To fight no more, but secretly dislodge,
And fly away by night.

Ian. It Is like enough,
And would the King be ruled by my advice
He should not follow them, there has been spilt
Already blood enough in that unjust,
Unnatural cause. Those brave Argolians,
Whose virtues we, although their enemies,
Must needs acknowledge, and lament their deaths,
Besides those dearer funerals, which Thebes
Has mourned already for, to justify
The broken faith of King Eteocles.
But who is that makes to us so speedily,
Thy looks speak news, what are they man? be brief.

Nuntius, Dircus, Ianthus. Nun. The King was walking round the city walls,
When straight a parley sounded from the foe,
And Polynices our exiled Prince
Himself appeared, who from below complained
So many noble funerals had paid
The forfeit of his brothers perjury;
Defied him then, and challenged him alone
To end the difference in a single combat.

Dir. Oh horrid monstrous challenge?

Ian. Has the King
Accepted it?

Nun. Yes, with a seeming joy,
And did complain alone that he himself
Was not the challenger.

Dir. Unnatural!

Nun. Though many that were by, persuaded him
He need not answer it at all; his strength
Was great enough to keep the crown without it.

Ian. But piety how ever should forbid it.

Nun. It did not move his breast; thou shall (quoth he)
Immediately at head of all our troops
Find us prepared to answer, and to take
Mistake away, we will wear our royal crown*
It grieves us only it was thy motion first.
And one of us, when this black fight is done,
Shall without rival keep the Theban crown.

Ian. Come Dircus, let us away, and or prevent,
Or see the issue of this dire intent.

Exeunt. Chorus Thebanorum. Cho. Can Thebes yet find no peace, nor see
A period of her misery?
What booted brave Menaeteus death,
Who gave up his devoted breath
To save his Country? what the falls
Of all those worthyes, whom the walls
Of our sad Thebes late trembled at?
Bold Capaneus, whose strange fate
No human strength, but from above
The thunderbolts of armed Jove
Could work; the stout Hippomedon,
And Meleager's beauteous son;
Apollo's sacred Prophet too.
Quick to Auernus forced to go
Amphiaraus, to prevent
The fates, by his so strange descent
Frighting the Ghosts that dwell below.
Nor could the fatal sisters know,
Before they saw him amongst the dead;
That they should cut his vital thread.
These, and a thousand worthyes more
Are fled down to the shades below,
And yet the wicked part of war
Does still remain; the Princes are
Both yet alive, and yet do hate.
What end can be composed by fate?
Their hate is impious, but to try
The cause, were more impiety.
Our fears do still increase, the skies
Are filled with naught but prodigyes
Which woes and ruins do display.
I long to hear what fate to day
The field affords; relate to us
How black so ere and ominous.

Nuntius, Chorus. Nun. Then hear a story that might make
Amazed natures self to shake
The Princes both are slain (alas).

Cho. What guilty hands could act such tragedyes?

Nun. Nay there is the sorrow of it, and a grief
Worse then their death's are, in a single combat
They slew each other.

Cho. Oh black family?
But yet relate the manner of their death.

Nun. When this great war of one divided womb,
Two brothers met, both armies stood at gaze,
Amazed both; the greiued gods of war,
Withdrew their presence from so black a fight.
Bellona broke her lance, the blew-ey'd maid
Fled from the field ashamed, and Mars drove back
His Thracian chariot; in whose stead the furyes
Marshalled the field, and all the Ogygian ghosts
In a black ring beset the combatants
Blasting the day with dampes of Acheron.
No Trumpets sounded, nor shrill cornets pierced
The wounded air; for these the nights sad King
Thrice thundered from Auernus; thrice the Earth
with mournful groans gave signal to the fight.
Old men complained that they had lived too long.
To see that horrid sight; the women shreik'd,
And weeping mothers from the walls forbad
Their children to behold it, but the Princes
With such a furious hatred both encounter
As if the souls of all their slaughtered friends,
And both the armies, whom their cause engaged,
Had lived in them, till fate so cruelly
Balanced their strength, that both were slain, yet both
were guilty conquerours.

Cho. But did they die
Together then.

Nun: Eteocles fell first;
Ore whom, before death closed up his eyes,
Bloodlesse and feeble Polynices stood,
And from his head taking the imperial crown
Empal'd himself therewith; at last (quoth he)
Thou art mine own. oh do not close his eyes
Pale death, till he have seen me wear the Crown.
But I must leave it too; Oh short short reign.
If there be justice in the other world,
Before great Minos vrne, it Minos vrne
Be not a fable, will I summon thee,
Nor shall this combat end our enmity.
Then on his brother falling down he died.

Cor. Oh horrid fight! bright Phoebus hide thy head,
Wrap up the day in foggy clouds, and make
An endless night, to hide this tragedy
From human eyes; a blacker deed then this
Thy light did nere discover, here let all
The prodigyes that threatened us, have end.

Nun. The Argiues all with winged speed are fled,
And Thebes once more has peace; but that, I fear
Long cannot last.

Chor. What storm can threaten now?

Nun. Creon no sooner was saluted King
(For so he was since both those Princes fell)
But he commanded (Oh fond tyranny)
No man on pain of death should dare to bury
One body of the Argiues, they (alas)
Remain exposed in the open field
To feed the fowls, or perish in the air.
Nor must the Argiues only want the rites
Of funeral; but Theban Polynices
Because with them he fought against his country,
Remains exposed as the Argiues are
In the open air, who ere shall bury him,
His own dead carcass shall supply the place.

Cho. Thebes will, I fear, incur the enmity
Of nations by this act, and we shall wish
(If Creon so begin his froward reign)
The unhappy house of Oedipus again.

Finis actui primis
Actus Secundus.
Ornitus, Argia, Deiphile. Arg. WHere shall we vent our griefs? what power on
earth
Can lend our woes redress?

Deiph. Accursed Thebes,
Is It not enough thy guilty soil has drunk
So many princes bloods, but after death
Unto their Ghosts thou still should prove a foe,
And bar what nature, and all laws bestow?

Ar. Whither is goodness fled from humane breasts?
Tigers themselves, if tigers could perform
These rites of funerals, would now correct
The malice of mankind.

Arg. What shall we do
To Appease the ghosts of our vnbury'd Lords?

Deiph. Go sue to Thebes, perchance the sighs, and tears
Of weeping queens may move the tyrants heart:

Or. No, royal Ladies, banish from your breasts
That flattering hope; no tears, nor prayers can move,
The ruthlesse tyrants mind; an impious oath
Has bound his cruelty; his watchmen tell
The carcasses, and guard the place, to keep
Sad friends from thence: no creatures have access
To that dire field, but beasts, and birds of prey.
His hate is constant, sooner hope to appease
Busiris altars, or the fiends themselves,
Then savage Creon; venture not to Thebes.

Dei. What other course is left us?

Orn. To perform
To their dear names such empty funerals
As fortune will allow; or if that that
Will not suffice, go speedily to Athens;
Thither all conquering Theseus is returned,
Triumphant now from the Amazonian war,
Whose mighty arm all sauadge tyrants dread,
Whose high Heroike thoughts were never auerse
From suppliants, and for encouragement
To all that come, in amidst of Athens stands
A gracious altar, where white mercy dwells,
The poor man's goddess, shaded with a grove
Ofsuppliant Olives, and chaste Laurel trees.
None are denied to enter, but the rich,
And fortunate; poor wretches, night and day,
Find free access, and there have leave to pay
Their cheap devotion; no slain bullocks blood,
No Frankincense, nor rich Arabian fumes
Do feed that altar* sighs, and floods of tears
Are all that goddess craves; no gold adornes
Her humble roofes, as those proud temples raised
By happy Monarchs, and great conquerers,
Instead of trophies, and triumphall robes,
Torn hair, and widows mourning garments hang
About the temple, thither from all coasts
Unhappy souls repair, sad folk subdued
In war, or banished from their native soiles,
Or those, whom happlesse error has made guilty.
There they implore, and there obtain their peace.

Arg. Go you to Athens, sister, and entreat
Great Theseus aid, whilst I, whose fatal quarrel
Was cause of all this dire and mournful war,
Will try what mercy can be found in Thebes.

Deiph. Do not expose your life to such an hazard.

Arg. What mischeife can an humble suppliant fear?
Besides my suite to Creon will in Thebes
Be seconded by Polynices friends.
Go you with speed to Athens, if I fail,
That your petitions timely may prevail.
And all the gods prosper your pious suite.

Arg. May Thebes prove gentle when Argia enters.

Exeunt. Manet Argia, Menaetes. Arg. Now I am free to act what I design.
Shall I expect the doubtful grant of Creon,
Or Theseus lingringe aid, whilst thou, dear Lord,
Art food for Vulturs? whilst thy funeral
Decreases daily, and thy wandering Ghost
Perchance complaining to the infernal gods
Cal'st me unkind, and cruel? I will lose
No longer time, no danger shall withstand
That act, which love, and my chaste fires command.

Exit. Creon, Eurydice, Ianthus, Aephytus. Cre. Move me no more in that, can
Aemon find
No match'mongst all the noble Theban Maids,
Nor foreign Princes, but Antigone?
To mix the fortune of our house with that
Incestuous, dire, and fatal family?
Move me no more I say.

Eury. but good, my Lord,
Weigh not alone her hapless parentage,
(Though that were royal, and allied to you
In near degrees) but her admired virtue,
In which the general voice of people speaks her
As much excelling, as the worst of all
Her wretched race were infamous for vice.

Cre. What real virtue ever could proceed
From such an impious stock? or being borne,
Could ever prosper?

Eury. Do not tax so far
The justice of the gods, that they should punish
In good Antigone her kindreds crimes:
They have already with dire punishments
Paid for their proper guilt; and her rare virtues
By the same law may challenge, as a due,
The greatest blessings that the gods can grant.

Cre. No act of hers can recompense the guilt
Her birth alone has brought into the world,
And now we'll purge the city, Aephytus,
Go find out Oedipus, and in our name
Confine him to Cythaeron; speak it death,
If ere he show within the walls of Thebes
His ominous head.

Aeph. That banishment, my liege,
Is come too late, he is confined already
Unto his latest home, grief for his sons
Has broke at last his great and stubborn heart.

Ian. The queen Iocasta hearing that sad news
Beating her breast, tearing her hoary hair,
And uttering sad complaints against the gods,
And fates severe decrees, at last espied
That fatal sword by which old Laius died
On which she fell, and ended her sad life.

Cre. We have no tears for her, although our sister;
Let all the plagues, that Thebes so long has felt,
Take end with them. None but Antigone
Is now remaining of that family.
Go thou, Ianthus, in our name command her
To keep her house in Thebes, nor stir from thence,
Until our farther pleasure shall be known.

Exit Ian. Eury. Be good to her, my Lord, for Aemons sake.
What ere mishap befall Antigone
He Will deeply share in, for I fear his love
Is too too constant ere to be remoou'd.
Rather then loose him, grant his lawful suite.

Cre. I Will rather grant him death then marriage there.

Eur. Remember he is our son, our only son,
And virtuous too, of whom the Kingdom boasts.
Blast not their hopes in him, the fate of love
Is irresistible.

Cre. Let Aemon know
We Will be his fate. No more Eurydice.

Ianthus, Creon, Eurydice. Ian. Antigone was lately met alone
Without the city. None of all her servants
Were privy to her going, nor yet know
Whither their Lady went.

Cre. Ha! I suspect
What she intends to do. If I guess right
She goes upon her ruin. Aephytus,
Double the watch, and with a careful eye
Ore look the knaves; this night shall be thy charge.
Perform it well, and thou shall find reward
Beyond thy wishes; let no negligence,
No gifts, no favor, nor respect to any,
How neereso ere to us, make thee or them
Slack in your charges, as your lives shall answer
Our strictest justice.

Aeph. Do not fear me Sir.

Cre. I Will be at hand my self to make all sure.

Exeunt. Antigone sola: Ant. Poast to the West, bright Phoebus, and thou night,
That robb'st mortality of light, to lend them
A greater blessing, rest and sweet ropose,
Spread thy black mantle ore yon mourning fields,
Which those dead Grecians strew, where too too long
My wronged brother Polynices lies
Barred by unnatural, and injurious Thebes,
Dead from a tomb, as living from a Crown.
This wrong must I redress, assist me virtue,
And all ye gods, that favor piety.
I have at last escapt the curious eyes
Of all that watched my actions, and expect
Naught but the safe concealment of the night:
Were but these rites performed, not Creons spite,
Nor racks, nor tortures should my soul affright.

Chorus Thebanorum. 1 What could the Argolian ghosts, though once our foes,
Deserve so much from us, as thus to lose
The rites of funeral, which all mankind
Justly expect from greatest foes to find?
Why should the land that gave them death, deny
Them sepulture? pursuing enmity
Farther then that? why with so black a stain
Do thou pollute the entrance of thy reign
Unhappy Creon, thwarting natures law,
Upon thy self and fatal Thebes to draw
The hate and curse of nations, who will make
The quarrel theirs; Pluto himself will take
Revenge for this great loss, that must befall
His Monarchy, whilst these Argolians all
Unburied lie, wandering a hundred year
Exiled from him for want of sepulcher.

2 Thine anger boots not, Creon; it is all one
Whether the fire or putrefaction
Dissolve them; all to natures bosom go,
And to themselves their ends the bodies owe.
If now the Argiues bodies be not burned,
They shall when earth and seas to flames are turned.
Earth will, inspite of thee, receive again
What ever she brought forth; and they obtain
Heavens couerture, that have no graves at all.
Thou that deny'st these people funeral,
Why do thou fly those slaughter-smelling fields?
Breathe, if thou can, the air this sad place yields.
Those vanquished carcasses alone possess
The ground, and bar the conquerours access.

3 When that annoyance shall be vanished quite,
The wandering ghosts will still remain, and fright
The bafefull place; plowmen shall fear to toil
In furrows of this ill-manured soil.
This ghostly land of ours perchance shall be
Taken for Avernus by posterity,
And claimed by Pluto as his monarchy,
Where thousand wandering souls together fly.
Clear Dirce shall be made the Poets theme,
Instead of muddy Styx, whose fatal stream
The ghosts so strive to be transported ore
By churlish Charon to Elysiums shore:
And rather then so great an host should seem
Exiled from thence, it will be thought by them
Another Acheron shall here be made,
And they possess their own Elysian shade.

1. What shall we do to cure this fatal stain
Upon our nation?

2. Nothing but complain.

Actus Tertius.
Aemon. MY fears have brought me early to this place.
The night is young; No watches yet are set.
How sad and deep a silence does possess
These mourning fields! but why should that seem strange!
Why shake I thus? Why do my coward thoughts
Tell me it is ominous? is it not night?
And who dares tread on this forbidden ground?
The Ravens, Wolves, and Vulturs here have filled
Their hungry mawes, and now are gone to rest.
What noise should I expect, unless the Ghosts
Of these dead Greeks with querulous cries should fill
The air of night? what horror thus inuades me?
Is it because the Schreich owl cried about me
Passing the gates of Thebes? because to night
I have so often stumbled on dead men?
Tut; these are toys for children, let not fear,
That ever was a stranger to this breast,
Reign in it now. But it is Antigone,
Whom cruel virtue will command to night
Into a world of danger, is the cause
Of all my fear. Oh fair Antigone,
Why art thou good? so excellently good,
To make me more then wretched? you bright stars,
That do alternallie with Phoebus rule
And measure time, if virtue be a kin
To heaven and you, if your fair influence
Govern this lower world, let not the night,
Which is your time of reign, give privilege
To murders, witchcrafts, and infernal arts,
Whilst virtue suffers, and white innocence
Is made a prey. I Will watch the fields to night;
But not be seen, till time require mine aid.
Secretly shrouded in yon Cypress grove
I Will watch what fortunes do attend my love.

Exit. Menaetes, Argia. Men. Madam, the place is near; the noisome air,
Which those unburied carcasses exhale,
Grows stronger still, and from that feeble shine,
Which to the night halfe-clouded Cynthia lends,
How large a shade the lofty Theban walls
Spread ore this field of death! those twinkling lights,
Which we from hence discern, burn in the tower
Of Creon's cruel watch.

Arg. Oh Thebes, a name
Once dear to me, but now a word of horror,
And endless sorrow! yet give leave to enterre
My husbands hearse, and I will love thee still,
And leave my heart for evermore to dwell
On thy dear ground, behold with what attendance,
What state the great Adrastus daughter comes
To claim her right at Thebes; how poor a claim
The wronged wife of Polynices makes.
It Is not thy wealth, nor Cadmus stately throne,
Nor crown, nor septer that Argia claims.
I crave but mourning free, but death and dust,
And such abhorred dust, as thou disdainst
To harbor lovingly, bestow but what
Thou hat'st on me, and take the greatest thanks
A queen can give; and thou beloved ghost
Of my dead Lord, if through these fields thou wander,
And love the rites that I perform to night,
Direct me where thy wronged body lies.

Men. Madam this way, nearer the city walls
My Lord was slain, and there perchance he lies.

Exeunt*, Dircus with a Torch. Dir. Prince Aemon is abroad, and woe is me
Gone with too great a confidence I fear
Upon my plot, which is defeated quite.
The watch is doubled, and more strictly kept
Then heretofore, no possiblity
To lay them all asleep, what he intended
To work upon it, is quite frustrate now.
Oh could I meet him but to let him know
What has befallen. I Will range these fields to find him.

Exit. Menaetes and Argia with the dead body. Arg. Was this the sight was
promised me at Thebes?
Are these the triumphs of my dearest Lord?
Thus to thy native country do thou bid
Argia welcome? thus do thou requite.
The entertainment, that kind Argos gave
To thee a stranger? why prepar'st thou not
The Theban palace to receive thy queen?
But why complain I vainly? thou alas
Art held a stranger to thy native Thebes,
Nay more, a foe, to whom the cruel ground
Denies that common bounty, which in death
The meanest creatures challenge at her hand.
But woe is me, it was I that caused thy fall,
It Was I that moved my father to this war,
And all those Grecian Princes; happy else
Might thou have lived at Argos still with me,
And never set foot on this accursed ground.
Did I for this entreat those valiant Greeks
To war with Thebes, to see my dearest Lord
Thus all deformed with gore, trod down in dust,
And covered ore with filth?

Men. See, Madam, see
The mortal wound yet gaping on his breast.

Arg. Was this a brothers hand? but in that name
I find thy guilt as much; I Will rather think
Thou nere hadd'st any kindred, never brother,
Nor other name of blood, which nature meant
A name of love. For where are all their tears?
Where is their sorrow now? if not in Thebes
Where have thou kindred? none laments but I;
To me alone is Polynices dead.
Where is thy mother, and thy sisters now?
Where is that good Antigone, so famed
Forpiety, whom thou so often would praise,
And tell such pleasing stories of her virtue?

Antigone with a Torch. Ant. About this place he lies, dear Ghost forgive
Thy Sisters slacknesse, and with favor now
Accept these loving, though late rites I do.
A Grecian Lady? (so her habit speaks her)
Some pious sorrow brings her to this place:
Lady the gods assist your piety.

Arg. Are you a woeful widowed Lady too,
That come to break dire Creons savage law?
But yet you seem a Theban; all their bodies
Have rites of funeral performed already.
Or does your too too charitable grief?
Extend to some unhappy Grecian soul?

Anti. I know not how to answer you; the man
Whose hearse I seek, was once a Thebes, prince;
But since his native soil did prove to him
So cruel, and unnatural, I dare
Not call him Theban. Gentle Argos proou'd
A kinder home to him, and freely gave
What Thebes, though due, denied, a princely state
With royal nuptials; now among the souls
Of those vnbury'd Graecians wanders he,
And still perhapps desires to be esteemed
One of their company, hating for ever
(Ah woe is me) the memory of Thebes.
His name was Polynices, my unhappy,
Though dearest brother.

Arg. Oh my heart? are you
That good Antigone, whom I so long
Have wished to see?

Ant. I am that woeful maid.

Arg. Then see your brother my dear husbands hearse
Your grief is mine.

Ant. Pardon me royal sister,
Are you Argia great Adrastus daughter?
Let me adore the best of woman kind.
Has your most faithful unexampled love
Brought you so far, and on so cruel hazards
To my dead brother? was it not enough
That first so great a princess as your self
Advanced a banished man, and freely gave
That love to him, which happyest princes sought?
But that his dire misfortunes evermore
Should make your virtue wretched?

Arg. Dearest sister,
Whose knowledge I am proud, though thus, to meet,
By this true knot of everlasting love
Our sorrow ties to night, I here protest,
No grief, no loss that banishment could bring
Did move so much sad Polynices heart,
As parting from thy dearest company.
No name to him was half so dear in Thebes,
No name so often as Antigone
Would his sad tongue to me alone repeat.

Antigo. And witness all ye sacred deities,
Though Polynices from his native Thebes
Were banished long, yet from a sisters heart
The love of thee could never be exiled,
Nor Thebes without thy presence pleasing to me.
How often have I upon Cytherons mount
Appeased my fathers anger toward thee?
And do thou thus visit thy sister here?
Oh my wronged brother?

Arg. Oh my dearest Lord!
When first at Argos I beheld thy face,
It was deformed with blood, and wounded then,
Yet then I loved it; fortune to my love
Showed thee at first a pityed spectacle
As now at last, dearest Antigone;
My brother Tydeus met him then at Argos,
Both strangers there, before affinity
Had made them brothers, in a mutual rage
They fought; but all the blood that then was drawn
Seemed but a sacrament, that did confirm
Their after rare and unexampled love.

Anti. Ay me, how different was i^ from the love
Which here a natural brother showed to him!
Argos, how far do thou disgrace our Thebes
In nature and in honor!

Menae. Royal Ladies,
The night grows old, and danger threatens us.
Be speedy now: these obsequies performed,
You may with more security enjoy
Each others mutual love, and then discourse
Of Thebes, and Argos; danger, and the time
Will not permit it now; not far from hence
Are many fragments left of funeral fire,
Where Thebans have been burned; those let us use,
And then retire from this unhappy place.

Aephytus with the watch. Aeph. Where did thou see those lights? 1. About
the place
Where Polynices body lies.

Aeph. If any
Have there performed forbidden obsequies,
They cannot far escape; pursue with speed;
Spare none; you know your oath, and penalty.

Aemon, and Dircus. Aem. The watch is up, and with a winged speed
Pursues those lights, which my presaging soul
Tells me attend on fair Antigone.
Should what I fear prove true, they must not seize her,
If all persuasions, promise of reward,
Nor gold prevail not, the dear cause will lend
This arm a strength above mortality.

Exeunt. Creon, Ianthus. Cre. The watch is diligent; they do not know
That I am in the field.

Ian. No sure, my Lord.
For your disguise is perfect, and no notice
Was given from me at all.

Cre. What things are these?

Two haggs pass over the stage. Ian. Witches, my Lord, that come to exercise
On these dead bodies that bestrew the field
Their damned arts; here in the depth of night
With incantations, and abused herbs
They turn the dead's pale faces to enquire
And hear the horrid oracles of death.
The infernal gods ore mastered by their power,
Or else persuaded by some piety
Which pleases them, deny these witches nothing
Which they request, the souls of those dead men
Are forced to obey their charmings, and return
Back to their ancient prisons, to reveal
To these dire haggs the secrecies of fate
And things to come.

Cre. I Will follow them Ianthus,
And know what fortunes shall attend my reign.

Ian. Ah good my Lord use not so bad away,
You have at hand, a nobler means to know
The truth of all; the old Tiresias
Taught from the wisdom of the gods above,
Who by a magike more divine and pure
Surueyes the course and influence of the stars,
And in that glorious book reads the event
Of future things, rather repair to him,
Let him prepare a sacrifice, and ask
The pleasure of the gods.

Cre. Tut tut Ianthus,
Astrolog'is uncertain, and the gods
In mystike riddles wrap their answers up.
But he that dares with confidence to go
Enquire of deaths black oracles below
In plainest terms the certain truth shall know.

Exeunt 2. Haggs. 1. We come too late, nor can this field
To us a speaking prophet yield.
The carcasses, whose cold dead tongues
From whole, and yet vnperish'd lungs,
Twixt hell and us should hold commerce,
And be the black interpreters
Of Stygian counsels to relate
The hid decrees of death and fate;
Those carcasses I say are grown
Corrupt, and rotten every one,
Their marrow's lost, their moistur's gone,
Their Organs parched by the sun,
That there the Ghost drawn up from hells
Dark entrance, naught, but broken yells,
And dismal hizzings can afford,
Not one intelligible word.

2. But from this field of slaughter I
Have gathered up a treasury,
As dead men's limms wet in the rain,
Cold gelled tongues and parched brain,
The slime that on black knuckles lies,
Shrunk sinnews, and congealed eyes,
Bitt from their fingers nails ore grown,
And from young chinns pulled springing down.
Flesh bit by Wolves I took away,
And robbed the vultur of her prey.
Where Thebans funeral pyles had made,
I did the mourning fire invade,
And there black rags with ashes filled,
And coals on which their fat distilled,
I gathered up, and took from thence
Halfe-burnt bones, and Frankincense,
And snatched the fatal kindling brand
From out the weeping parents hand.

1 Once more lett's trott the fields about
To find a fresher carcass out.
And speak a charm that may affright
All pious love from hence to night,
Lest we by funeral rites do loose
What Creons cruelty bestows.

The 3 Hagge with a carcass. 3 By Creons trembling watch I bore
This new slain carcass, but before
I brought him thence, I gripped him round.
The filletts of his lungs are sound.
His vitalls all are strong and whole
To entertain the wretched soul,
Whom forced furies must affright
Back from hell to us to night.

Enter Creon, Ianthus. Cre. You wise interpreters of fate, that look
With just contempt down on that small allowance
Of knowledge, which weak human breasts possess.
Whose subtle eyes can penetrate the depth
Of dark Auernus secrets, and from thence
Enforce an answer from the obeying finds.
Let me from your deep skill be guided now
To know the assurance of my future state:
It is a King that craves your aid, a King
Whose power has given your art this furtherance,
By my command these carcasses have lain
Vnburled here for you to practice on.
If Creon then deserve it at your hands,
Resolve me of my fate.

3. You have your wish.
This carcass shall relate it; do not fear
To hear him speak: what herbs have you prepared?

1. I here have gathered, all in one,
The poisonous gelly of the moon,
Mixed with sulphur of the night,
Libbards bane, and Aconite,
Dew gathered, ere the morn arose,
From nightshade, henbane, Cypress boughs.
Amongst living creatures I have sought,
And from each banefull brood have brought
What ere could aid to our work give,
Skinns stripped from horned snakes alive,
The Lynxes bowels, blood of froggs,
The Schreichowles eggs, the foame of Dogs,
The wings of Batts, with Dragons eyes,
The Crows black head, the stone that lies
In Eagles nests, and pebbles round,
That when the Ocean ebbs are found:

3. Enough; but I to add to these so known
And vulgar helps of our great art, have gone,
And found such simples, whose concealed aid
No witch ere used, or trembling god obeyed.
Thessaliaes valleys, Colchos famed shore,
Nor Libyan squallid sands with Gorgont gore
Bedw'd and sprinkled, nere produced juice
That could so much enthrall the deityes.
When first I plucked them in yon gloomy vale
The furies shreik'd, and Hecate grew pale,
As loath to have (in that abhorred ground)
The power of simples, and their weakness found.

2. Then let us now employ their powerful help.
What place do we design for our black work?

1. There is within Cithaerons hollow side
A dark, and squallid cave, where day nere peeped,
Nor ever light, but light by magike made
Shot through that dismal air; pale moldy filth
Bred there by drery night orespredds the place.
The mouth of Taenarus, that balefull bound
Twixt heaven and hell, appears not half so black.
To this sad caueth' accustomed fiends ascend,
And think themselves still in their proper place.
But Ghosts, that newly past Auernus lake,
Shun the ascent, and though by us inuok'd,
Tremble to enter to that place unknown,
And find a hell more horrid then their own.

2. Then thither let us bear this carcass hence.

3. No, no, we scorn the helps of that dark place;
Nor is it honor to our art to find,
But make a darkness fit to serve our ends.
We that can forcea Magike light to glide
Through closest vaults, can force in spite of day
A mist of night to rise, which all the rays
Ofburning Phoebus shall want power to scatter.
Oh would it were not night, but that the sun
Rode in his height of strength; how proudly then
Might we perform our rites, and make it known,
We use not natures darkness but our own.

1. Lett's go no further then; this place shall serve.

3. 3. Apply your ointments to the body, whilst I
Prepare, and speak a charm shall quickly call
The affrighted soul back to his mansion.

Cre. My joints begin to tremble, and I fear
As much the means of knowledge, as the event
Of what I came to know.

Ian. How full of black
And balefull horror is this art of theirs?
Would I were well from hence; let me hereafter.
Rather remain in endless ignorance
Then purchase knowledge by such means as these.

3. Sad King of night, whose balefull Monarchy
The still repaired ruins of mankind
Through every age increase; that greiu'st alone
To see the heavenly gods for ever free
From death's assaults, and thy subjection.
Old formlesse Chaos, thou that would deface
Natures whole beauty, quite disioint her fabrike,
And swallow up in dark confusion
Ten thousand worlds; thou squallid ferriman
Of still Auernus; thou three-headed porter;
You snake-hair'd sisters, punishers of guilt,
As you would gain our aid, or fear our threats,
Whip back againeinto this upper world
That new-fled soul, which did of late inhabit
This pale and ghastly seat, but if in vain
On you I call, thou wretched wandering Ghost,
Not yet transported ore the burning stream,
But doomed to exile for an hundred years,
If true rewards can tempt thee, once again
Enter thy ancient prison, and in lieu
Of that shore penance, I will make thee free
(Releasing all thy tedious banishment)
Of fair Elisium; with such powerful rites
I Will give thee buryall, as no Magic spells,
Nor incantations shall for ever call
Thee bakce, nor trouble thine eternal rest.
Relate to Creon King of Thebes the fate
That shall attend his reign.

Ian. The carcass stirrs.

Cre. The face retains pale death; yet seems to live.

The carcass speaks. Thy death is near; yet ere thou die
A great and strange calamity
Shall seize thy house, and thou in woe
Shall think the fatal sisters slow
In giving death, desiring then
Thy reigns short date had shorter been;
Yet thou at last in death shall have
(Though thou denid'st it us) a grave.

falls. Cre. Shame on your damned arts; it does not ly
Within the power of fate to work this mischeife.

Ian. Believe it not, my Lord; lett's quit the place,
And from the wise Tiresias seek advise,

Exeunt. Aemon, Dircus. Aem. Dircus, she is gone, and I am worse then dead,
Oh would the villains arms had had the power
To have dispatched me quickly.

Dir. Good my Lord,
Take fairer hopes, and live; cast not away
The Kingdoms joy; what cruelty can touch
So sweet a virtue as Antigone?
Retire with me into yon little house;
I Will there bind up your wounds; you bleed too fast,
And needs must faint before you reach the walls.
The wounds I took are scratches.

Aem. Honest Dircus,
What care can ere my body have without
The presence of my soul?

Dir. Delay not Sir.
Their goodness will protect them: what other Lady
Was that with her?

Aem. It seems it was Argia
Dead Polynices wife, Adrastus daughter,
Or else some grace or goddess in that shape
Came to consort with good Antigone.

Dir. Wandering about the fields to find out you,
I met with witches, impious haggs, that came
As I suppose, for execrable ends
There to abuse the bodies of the dead.
Oh partial fates, oh too injurious night,
Can these escape, when piety must suffer?

Aem. A saintnesse seizes me, I prithee Dircus
Let me have speedy news.

Dir. You shall my Lord.
When I have dressed you, I Will to court, and thence
Bring you a true and swift intelligence.

Exeunt. Chorus Argiuarum, Deiphile. Cho. By what new ways of grief shall we
Our widowed losses signify?
What strange expression can become
A woe so strangely burdensome?
No howles, no shreikes, no voice of woe,
Not such as widowed turtles show,
Nor such as Philomel, when she
High seated on a poplar tree,
Sends sweet sad notes through the air of night,
Wailing the husbandman's despite,
That reau'd her of her dearest nest.
Our loss cannot be so expressed.
No, nor by actions, such as are
The rending of disheuel'd hair,
Or beating of our breasts; these all
No more then death and funeral
Can show; but in our husbands we
Receive a greater injury
Then death had done; the common rite
Of funeral barred in despite.

Deiph. Cease widows longer in that strain
To wail, or against the fates complain
For funeral rites; but understand
Great Theseus, whose victorious hand
In conquests never yet has faild,
Is he, with whom we have prevailed
For aid; and think what action
He undertakes, already done.
He will revenge on Creon's head
The wrongs that we have suffered.
Our dear Lords Ghosts shall righted be.
Then join your voices all (...) me,
And in triumphant songs let us
Renown the noble Theseus.

Cho. Theseus is he, whose warrelike hand
Defends mankind in every land
No less by tyrants feared and known
Then was the fair Alcmenaes son.
It Was he, whose just revenging steel
Subdued, and made dire Schinis feel
The selfe-fame torture in his death
By which he took from others breath,
When trees together bowed were,
And parted thence again, did tear
Poor wretches, but by Theseus he
Was forced to taste that Tragedy.

Deip. Procrustes that inhuman thief
(Monster of nature past belief)
That made all passengers, whom he
Surprised within the woods, to be
By an unheard of cruel sport
Stretched longer out, or else cut short,
To fit their stature to his bed,
By Theseus hand was conquered,
And doomed then himself to die
By the same kind of cruelty.

Cho. 'Twas he alone that did set free
Athens from that sad slavery
Which Minos fury, for the loss
Of his beloved Androgeos,
Had brought them to; when w ith clew
He escaped the Labyrin^^, and slew
Fierce Minotaurus, that had been
The monstrous issue of the Queen
Pasiphae, Whom unnatural
Prodigious lust had made to fall
Before a Bull; the monster held
Both shapes, and her foul guilt revealed.

Deiph. Against a far worse monster now
The noble Theseus arms to go,
Inhumane Creon, that denies
To worthiest souls due obsequyes,
And, what those monsters would not do,
Does after death his hate pursue.

Cho. Oh let that still victorious sword
Be now as prosperous, and afford
To wicked Creon the just meede
That is deserved for such a deed.
But it is against all holy laws
To doubt success in such a cause.

Actus Quartus.
Aephytus, Creon, Dircus, Antigone, Argia. Aeph. PRince Polynices body is
enterr'd
By these two Ladies, whom I apprehende
Just as the deed was done; nor did themselves
Deny the fact.

Cre. One I suspected still,
And I am glad I have her, what is the other?

Arg. The woeful widow of that wronged Prince
Who stayed behind my countrymen, to do
Those rites, which love, and piety required
To my dead Lord; if that be judged a crime
It Is such a crime as I profess, and boast.

Cre. Are you Adrastus daughter then?

Arg. The sam^*

Cre. You are our prisoner now, take her, Ianthus,
Into your custody: this falls out fittly,
The ransom of this Princess will come well
To fill our now-exhausted treasury.
But thou a Theban borne, bound to obey
Our crown and laws, what fury moved thy brea^^
(Disloyal maid) to scorn our edict so?

Anti. No other fury then the love of virtue,
And reverence of the gods, moved me to this.
Which were to do again, not all the power
Of hell, and tyrants should affright me from it.

Cre. Has guilt emboldened thee? is this the excuse
Thou make to me?

Ant. Creon, Let impious acts
Seek for excuses; I nor can, nor will
So wrong the cause of heaven and piety,
As once to plead a fond excuse for that*
Which is my merit, for that act I say
Which by direction from the gods themselves
I have performed.

Cre. Is disobedience merit?
Or do the gods command subjects to break
The laws of Princes?

Ant. Yes, their wicked laws,
Which thwart the will of heaven, the rule of nature,
And those pure principles, which human breasts
Did at their first original derive
From that Celestial essence: Such a law
Was this which I have broke, in giuinge rites
Of funeral to Polynices hearse,
My dearest brother, this disobedience
Thy servants (durst they speak) would justify;
But foreign nations, and all future times
In spite of tirants threatenings shall commend
What I have done, and though I die for this
Unjustly now, yet the infernal judges,
Whose sentence no mortality can escape,
But must to all eternity sustain,
Shall from their just impartial vrnes bestow
Endless rewards beyond my sufferings far.

Cre. To those infernal judges shall thou go,
And thank my charitable doom, that sends
Thy soul to such great happiness, if thou
Esteem it happiness, and do not fear
What thou would seem to wish.

Anti. No, tyrant, no;
Death cannot prove a punishment to me,
Whose life was naught but sorrow; freed from this
Unhappy world, in the other I shall come
Most wished, and welcome to my fathers sight,
And that dear brother, for whose sake I die.

Creo. Thou shall be banished from the light of day,
Nor then shall thou immediately have power
To see that other world thou so desir'st.
Ianthus, till our farther pleasur's known
Guard safe Argiaes person; Aephytus;
See present execution done upon
Antigone; without the city walls
There is a new dug tomb, where never yet
Lay any funeral; in that enclose
Antigone alive, and bar it fast
As thou entend'st to live, there let her pray
To those infernal gods she so adores,
To keep her there, or take her quickly thence.

Exit Cre. Dir. Oh black accursed doom; oh my sad fate,
That must report this news to noble Aemon,
And with that breath destroy the best of men.

Exit Dir: Argi. Furyes have left their dark abodes, to dwell
In human shapes on earth; there could not else
Live such a monster, one so opposite
To heaven and goodness, as cursed Creon is.
Ah dearest, dearest sister, did the fates
Differ so long our wished acquaintance here
To make us meet so wretchedly at last?

Anti. Weep not dear sister; your calamity
Adds to my sufferings more: why were not all
The miseries of Cadmus woeful house
Confined within our selves, and bounded here
In fatal Thebes? why spread they so, to make
The best of souls partaker? happy else,
And safe for ever had your virtue lived
Admired in wealthy Argos, had you nere
Nere known the sad affinity of Thebes.

Arg. Why did the tyrant thus divide our sufferings?
The tomb, where thou art closed, had been to me
More pleasing then a palace.

Anti. Heaven forefend;
May the just gods hereafter recompense
Argiaes virtue with a happyer love
Then Polynices was, and happier friends
Then Thebes can give, do not lament for me,
Not fear the torments of my lingering death.
I am provided of a remedy
That shall delude the cruelty of Creon.
Farewell my dearest Aemon, whose loved presence
More then the sight of day afflicts my soul
To loose so soon, farewell where ere thou art,
Till in the other world we meet again.

Exeunt. Aemon. Aeem. No news of comfort, or discomfort yet?
Forgive me faithful Dircus, if my soul
My loue-sicke soul unjustly do accuse
Thy diligent care, and think thee slack; my heart
Till thy return is stretched upon the wrack,
A rack of torturing thoughts, more painful far
Then tyranny could wish, or foes invent
To punish foes, do thou delay, because
The news thou bring'st is ill? if my fair love
Be dead, or doomed to death, why doo'st thou keep
My soul from her Celestial company?
If all be well -- but oh presumptous soul
Check that too happy thought again; I know
My fathers nature is vnmoouable
In all resolves, and this bound by an oath
So deep, so solemn, and inviolable
As ere't be broke will break this heart of mine.

Enter Dircus See here he comes, speak man, what news? Ay me,
Thy very looks have blasted me before
Thy tongue can be their sad interpreter.
No news but black could force a soldiers tears.
Antigone is dead.

Dir. Not dead, my Lord,
But lives among the dead.

Aem. How man? Expound
This Aenigmatike sorrow.

Dir. In a tomb,
Where never more she shall behold the day
Nor Phoebus splendor, by the Kings command,
Is fair Antigone enclosed alive --
To famish there and die.

Aem. Enough, enough.
Shut up alive to starve, oh horrid doom!
As if that death alone, though nere so gentle,
Had not been punishment enough for her
For such a cause as that; but yet this sentence
Gives respite to her death, and leaves a way
To our prevention; I must spend no time
In thinking now; all action is required.
Thus it must be; be speedy faithful friend,
Run to my mother, and with all the vows,
And vehement protestations that thou can
From me assure her, if Antigone
Be not releast in time, it shall not ly
In all the power of earth to save my life.
Her love I fear not, though my father now
Have cast his frown upon me, to this place
Return again with all thy speed, whilst I
Devise some other means if that should fail.

Dir. Fear not my care, my Lord, but let me crave
(By your own worth I beg it, and that favor
Which you were ever pleased to reflect
On my poor services) till I return,
Attempt no other course, I will be speedy,
And if persuasions of the queen do fail;
We Will find a way to save the princess life,
But it is a desperate way, and must be used
The last of all.

AEm. Oh comfortable Dircus,
Do but assure me that, and I shall owe
More then my life, and all my fortunes to thee
Upon mine honor, I Will not stir from hence
Till thou return, nor stay thee now t'enquire
More of the plot.

Dir. I will out-fly the wind.

Exit. Aem. Closed up alive within a tomb to starve!
Oh horrid cruelty, I would I could
Forget whose crime it were, that my free hate
Might not be checked by duty to a father.
Should I approve his action, 'twere a sin
So great against virtue, as no time could pardon;
Should I condemn it, I must then abhor
The offender, and that piety forbidds.
Oh why should piety, and virtue strive?
That piety, which I so much admired
In fair Antigone, my self transgress
In loving her cross to my fathers will.
Yet in obeying him I must approve
Her piety, or else condemn mine own.
What thoughts will reign in this divided breast.
Till Dircus do return? but courage heart,
More strong is he, that can his doubts defer
Then he that known calamities does bear.

Exit. Chorus of old men.
1: Oh smooth thy frown at last, great queen of heaven,
Let not unhappy Thebes for ever feel
The dire effects of thy too mindful wrath:
What could the wretched Semeles offense,
Or poor Alemenas error more deserve,
Then they themselves have suffered from thy hand?
Or if succeeding branches needs must bleed
For parents faults, before a goddess wrath
Can be appeased, could not Actaeons wounds
Athamas madness, Inoes woeful death,
Nor pitti'd Oedipus his fall suffice?

2. Could not the actions of great Hercules,
Nor Bacchus glorious deeds, which all mankind
For ever shall renown, weigh down the crimes
Of their unhappy mothers, and such crimes,
As only Jove's resistlesse power could force?

3. A feircer war by far now threatens Thebes
Then that which old Adrastus with the aid
Of all his rash confederates could make.
The mighty Theseus, whose all-conquering hand
No Kingdom yet with safety could withstand,
Armed with a cause, in which the prayers and wish
Of nations join, is marching toward us.

1. In vain, alas, did we expect an end
Of this dire war, when both the princes died,
When the Argines fled, must out own victory
Become our grief? and draw upon us now
A greater ruin then our foil had done?

2. It must, it must, since Creons cruelty,
Most unexpected, barbarous cruelty
Will have it so, oh friend, I could believe,
Were not the noble Aemon Creons son,
And heir apparent to our Diadem,
We had been happyer far to have been subdued
Then brought by victory to such obedience.

3 True friend; there is all out trust, the gods in naught
But that brave Princes life, have left us hope
Of any future fau^^r to redress
The miseries, which we so long have felt.
But for this imminent, nay present danger
What were we best to do?

1. Advise the King
Rather to change his purpose, then expose
His weakened Kingdom to great Theseus fury.
Though he should prove never so obstinate:
Better that any one for good advice
Should suffer from his fury, then the land
In general should smart.

2. You counsel well,
But who should be the man?

3. There Is none so fit
As old Tiresias, that most holy man,
Taught from the gods above, whose words by all
Our Theban Princes have been long esteemed
As oracles, him Creon will obey.

1. Then thither let us, and with him advise
How to redress our present miseries.

Actus Quintus.
Euridice, Dircus. THat was my fear before, I thought my son
Too far in love to bear, with patience,
His Ladies death, and therefore did entreat
The King with tears, and sighs, that would have moved
A rock of flint, but he more hard then rocks,
Deafer then Northern winds, with rage repulsed
My often repeated suite, and now, ay ^e,
What most I feared is proou'd, my son will die;
For he has vowed never to pardon her.

Dir. Must I return the Prince this killing news?

Eur. No gentle Dircus, stay a little while,
Twill not be long before the King return,
I Will move him once again.

Dir. Your highness pardon,
Not for the world would I delay the time --
Upon uncertainties; I fear I have
Already stayed too long. My quick return
Is the only means to keep the prince alive.
Please it your highness then when I am gone
To move the King, and fear not, gracious madam,
The Princes life a while how ere.
Exit Dircus.
Eur. Farewell,
True faithful Dircus, all the gods assist
Thy good entents, and bless thy loyalty.

Enter Creon. Cre. What, weeping still?

Eur. Would I could weep my self
Like Niobe to marble, and become
A woeful tomb to Aemon, whom my womabe
With fates disastrous brought into the world,
My virtuous Aemon,

Cre. Why, is Aemon dead?

Eur. Why do you ask, that mean to murder him?

Cre. How? murder him?

Eur. Yes in Antigone
His most inseparable love.

Cre. Must then
Th'audacious giglot, live unpunished,
To brave a King?

Eur. Were kings ordained to kill
Virtues true servants, and control her laws?

Enter Tiresias, Chorus senum. Tir. Where is the king?

Cre. He Is here. What mischief now
Come thou to utter, never from thy tongue
Flowed any good to me.

Tir. A guilty man
Was never pleased with truth, but hear me,

Creon. I come to thee sent from the wrathful gods
To let thee know thy guilt, and punishment.
Great plagues from heaven, if Tiresias
Truly divine, are threaten'd'gainst thy house.
When I for thee unthankful man prepared
A sacrifice within, the opened beast
No signs but sad and fatal did afford.
None but the infernal gods deigned to appear.
The blood was black, the burning entrails gave
No flame at all, but darkely did consume,
Mouldring away to ashes, and with black
Unsavory smoke clouded the fearful air.
Unto our augury no birds at all
But sad, and balefull birds of night appeared.
Nor to our orizons would th'inuoked gods
Vouchsafe an answer, but in signs alone
Declared their wrath. The cause of these their threats
Against thy house is for thy cruelty
To good Antigone, and if she die
These plagues will surely fall.

Eur. Can we avoid them.
By sparing her?

Tir. The gods above relent
At humane penitence, and hear their prayers,
Nor like the fiends are they inexorable.

Eur. No longer,

Creon, shall thou now deny me
Since heaven is joined with my petition.

Tir. You are not constant in persisting thus,
But obstinate.

Eur. Now I renew my suite.

Cho. In which we bend our knnes, release, O king,
For Thebes, for Aemons sake, that virtuous maid,
And to prevent a feirce and cruel war,
Vouchsafe to grant our suite, and give us leave
To bury those dead Graecians in the field.

Cre. No more of them; that last must not be granted,
For our command is past too far already,
And must be iustifi'd, not changed now.
But for the life of that Antigone,
Although it cannot suite well with our justice
To pardon her rebellious stubbornness,
Yet she is thine Eurydice, to thee
Do we refer her wholly; take this ring,
And absolute power to dispose of her,
Either to pardon, or to punishment.

Eur. The gods reward thee for it; I Will go my self
And bring her out with speed from that sad place;
Heaven grant that grief have not already killed her.

Nuntius, Creon. Nun. To arms, my Lord, if any arms so soon
Can rescue Thebes from quick destruction.
The mighty Theseus threatens you at hand.

Creon. Why let him come: Should I esteem the name
Of Thesous such a buggebeare it should fright
Me from my constant resolution?
Have our late conquests, have the overthrows
Of Argor and Mycenae taught the world
Nothing of us? look on you purple fields
With slaughter died, and learn what Thebes can do,
Where Capanaeus, and stout Tydeus
Parthenopaeus and Hippomedon
Ly weltring in their gores, and should we then
So tremble at the threats of Theseus?
No power must daunt me; it is not Kingly now
Upon constraint to change my rough decree.
Though I relented now, though my soft breast
Were moved with piety, yet thought of honor
Would conquer that, as now it conquers fear,
The fear of Theseus hand; nor have I left
A place for wisdom now; it comes too late;
I must prevent or meet my instant fate.

Dircus Aemon. Dir. Yonder Is the tomb, my Lord, which though it seem
Too hard, and solid for our strength to force,
I know a place will open presently.

Aem. Then let us break this wealthy Cabinet,
And take from thence a jewel, which the ransom
Of all the Kings on earth would be a price
To poor to purchase: Knew'st thou, happy cave,
Or knew the world what true vnualew'd wealth
Thy bare vnpolish'd bosom did contain,
Thou would despise the richest temples reared
On Marble Columns, and high-roof'd with gold;
To thee would men with adoration come
As to a place more sacred then the cave
That nourished Cretan Jove, then Bacchus Nisa,
Or the Oetaean Mount, from whence in flames
The great Al^ides mounted to the sky.
But I forget my self, I first must know
Whether I live or no; for in that cave,
Not hee^e does. Aemon breath. Antigone.

Anti. Who calls Antigone? is it my Aemon?

Aem. Dircus I live; heardst thou that heavenly voice
Which has inspired a happyer life into me
Then my creation did. Lets loose no time
In this sweet business.

Dir. I Will open the tomb
Immediately, my Lord.

Aem. Sad Thebes adieu,
I Will find some happyer country to convey
My enuy'd treasure to. Possessed of her
I shall be richer then the Theban crown
Can make me; speak how fares my fairest love;
Shall we be gone?

Ant. I would, my dearest Aemon,
Begone with thee rather then live; but fate
Too cruel, fate preuents it.

Aem. How? what fate
Can let our journey, if thy love consent?

Anti. I love thee, Aemon, better then my life,
And never truly wished to live till now,
But now I cannot live.

Aem. Oh do not mock
My joys, Antigone, or if thou do not,
Tell me what sad disaster can befall.

Anti. That sad disaster is befallen already;
Fearing the pains that such a lingering death
Might bring upon me, I have taken already
A gentle poison down, which long before
Against some such dire occasion I prepared,
I feel it work; my vital spirits fail.
My dearest love farewell. Live long and happy;
Let fate hereafter recompense to thee
What ere her cruelty against me has wrought.

Aem. No fate can make me happy, I am lost
Beyond her cure.

Dir. What end of tragedyes
Can woeful Thebes for ever hope to see
After this sorrow. Oh I more then fear
The Princes fury;

Aem. Her white soul is fled.
What vnsubstantiall bubbles are the best
Of humane joys? how from the top of all
My hopes and comforts in one fatal minute
Has envious fortune thrown me down again
Into the depth of misery, and woe.
Oh fortune how extreme thou art in all
Thy favors and thy frowns!

Dir. Most noble prince,
Collect that strength of man, which all the world
Expects from you, and arm your self to bear
With fitting patience this calamity.
The passive fortitude is great and noble
As is the active.

Aem. Strike that string no more,
Do not in vain torment a desperate man
With thy dull counsel: It Is as possible
Thou should persuade a dead man to arise
After his soul is fled, as me to live.
Now she is dead, I do conjure thee Dircus
By all the love thou bearst me, by that faith
Which I have ever found and prized in thee,
To leave me here.

Dir. My Lord, I will obey;
And thus I take my leave.

Dies. Aem. Too cruel Dircus.
Was I not miserable enough before,
But thou must load my sufferings with thy death?
What cause hadd'st thou to die? thou have not lost
A love, why should my loss extend so far
As to the ruin of so brave a friend?
Thy death has injured fair Antigone,
And made a strange Division in my grief.
For all the sorrow which this breast could hold,
Was due to her before. I must encroach
Upon her right in spending tears for thee.
My breast's too narrow for so great a grief,
And must be quickly opened. Thou pure soul
Of my Antigone, which still suruiu'st,
Though this fair palace be demolished quite
By deaths ungentle hand, thou heavenly substance,
True object of a chaste, and spotless love,
Thy Aemon comes; and from these bonds of nature
Flies forth to meet thee in the other world,
To wedd thee there; to finish there the rites
Of long-cross'd love, and taste eternal sweetes.

Dies. Ianthus, Aephytus, Eurydice. Ian. Oh horrid spectacle! see Aephytus,
The Prince, Antigone, and Dircus dead.

Aeph. All dead?

Eur. Ay me.

Ian. Look to the Queen, she sownes

Aephy. Alas, it is more then so; cold death has seized her
I fear, beyond recovery, Lett's in,
And certify the King, who now may see.
The dire effects of his rash cruelty.

Theseus, Chorus Thebanorum. The. Our warre's already ended, and the death
Of savage Creon, whose dire soul is fled
To pacify the Argiues wandering ghosts,
Has satisfied our justice, here we sheath
Our sword again, and free your town from fears.
And now enterre with fitting obsequies
The Carcasses of all your slauter'd foes.
Let cruel Creon too, though he at all
Deserve it not, have rites of funeral.

Cre. Those pious rites will we perform with joy,
And thanks to mighty Theseus, may the Gods.
Assist thee ever; and great Hercules
Beholding thy brave actions from the sky
Rejoice, and not disdain at all to be
Esteemed thy aequall by posterity.

The. Send back Argia to her father's court
With fair attendance; and it is left to you
To place the Theban scepter where it is due.

Cho. Thebes humbly bows to mighty Theseus,
And lays her crown and seepter at his feet.

The. No; still let Thebes be governed by her own;
It Was not our wars intention to enthrall
Your land, but free it from a tyrants yoke;
And to preserve the conquered, not destroy them.
We drew the sword of justice, not of conquest,
Ambitiously to spread our Kingdoms bounds,
But to avenge the laws of nature broke;
This act being done, Theseus is peace again.
Soldiers march on to Athens. Thebes adieu.
Now let mankind enjoy a happy peace;
Oh let no monsters breed on earth, to glut
Themselves with human slaughter, let no thieves
Infest the woods; no tyrants stain the cities
With blood of innocents? but if such monsters
Must needs be bred to plague the wretched earth,
Against nature, and her holy laws to strive,
Let them appear while Theseus is alive.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Benjamin Fisber, and are to be sold at
his shop, at the sign of the Talbot, without Aldersgate. 1631.


