THE NAME ALTAR, OR THYSIAST'PION, anciently given to the HOLY TABLE. A
Commonplace, or Theological Discourse, in a College Chapel more than two
years since. BY JOSEPH MEDE B. D. and Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his Shop under
S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. MDCXXXVII.

GENTLE READER,
ALong Preface would not become a Treatise of so small a bulk. Only therefore,
in a word or two, thou art desired to take notice, that this Discourse was a
private Exercise, delivered in a College Chapel, above two full years since,
and so before the present controversy about that subject, whereof it treats,
was commenced by any public writing: and therefore not to be suspected to aim
at, or to have relation to any man's opinion or person since interessed therein.

That it was never intended for the public view, but, as thou may easily
perceive by the form it still carries unaltered, fitted properly to that
private Auditory and time, wherein it was uttered. But when, by occasion of the
late polemicks, it was copied out, to communicate to some friends, for their
better resolution in the controverted point: it chanced to fall into the hands
of some, who so well liked it, as that they thought, the time of its composure
especially considered, (which by way of caution was then prefixed in the front)
it would, being made public, conduce to peace, and settling of men's minds and
judgments in this question.

The hope of so desirable a good prevailed with the Author (otherwise the most
unwilling of any man to come abroad) to permit it to the Press. For whom would
it not grieve to see, that the very NAME of That, the approach whereunto, was
wont, and still should, dissolve all differences, Matthew. 5.
should now become the occasion of so much quarrel?

Thus much I thought good to admonish thee: and so hoping thou will make a
favorable and candide construction of what is presented unto thee, with no ill
meaning (I dare assure thee) I bid thee Farewell.

PErlegi eruditum hunc Tractatum, cui Titulus est [The Name ALTAR, or
THYSIAST'PION, anciently given to the HOLY TABLE] in quo nihil reperio sanae
doctrinae, aut bonis moribus contrarium, quo minus cum utilitate publica
imprimatur, ita tamen, ut si non intra tres menses proxime sequentes typis
mandetur, haec licentia sit omnino irrita.

Ex aedibus Lambethanis 17. Calen. Junii, 1637. Rmo in Chro Patri, and Dno D.
Arch. Cant. Sacellanus Domest. GUIL. BRAY.

Of the Name ALTAR, OR THYSIAST'PION, anciently given to the HOLY TABLE. A
Chapel Commonplace. An. 1635.
SECTION I.
HAVING made so long a Tractation about the Eucharist or Christian sacrifice, I
hold it not unfit, before I pass to another Theme, to speak somewhat of the
seat or raised fabric whereon this holy mystery has been celebrated; as an
appendix to my former discourses thereof: And the rather, because some
questions and scruples are moved thereabout. And though others commonly
pronounce of these things according to vulgar opinion and hearsay, without
further search and enquiry; yet it becomes not us, who live in the Schools of
the Prophets, to do so; but to give our verdict, when we do give it, out of
judgment and due examination.

To come then to the matter; The seat or raised fabric, appointed for the
setting and celebration of this holy mystery, was The HOLY TABLE or ALTAR: for
by both these names has that sacred Biere (as I may call it) of the body and
blood of Christ bin ever promiscuously and indifferently called in the Church.
Of the name TABLE there is no question; it is granted by all: But concerning
the name THYSIAST'PION, or ALTAR, many will not believe it. Let us therefore
see, what may be alleged for the antiquity of the use of it, as well as of
that of TABLE. And take notice, that I speak not here, either of the matter or
form (wherewith men are wont to entangle this question) but of the name and
notion only, whatsoever the form or matter were.

I will begin with Tertullian, Tertullian An. 200.
the most ancient of the Latin Fathers now extant; who flourished about 100.
years after the death of St John the Evangelist, and 200. after the birth of
Christ. He in his book De Oratione, in fine, See also c. 10.
reprehending their scrupulosity, who thought it not so lawful to partake the
Eucharist upon their station or weekly fast-dayes, lest their fast thereby
should be dissolved, expresses himself after this manner.

Similiter de stationum diebus, (says he) non putant plerique sacrificiorum
orationibus interveniendum, quod statio solvenda sit accepto corpore Domini.
Ergo devotum Deo obsequium Eucharistia resolvit, an magis Deo obligat? Nonne
solennior erit statio tua, si and ad ARAM Dei steteris? Accepto corpore Domini
and reservato, utrumque salvum est, and participatio sacrificii, and executio
officii.

De exhortatione castitatis, c. 10* endeavoring to prove (though erroneously)
that a soul conscious of the act of the marriage bed, could not be fit for the
duties of prayer and devotion, he speaks thus; Si spiritus reus apud se sit,
and conscientia erubescit, quomodo audebit orationem dicere ad Altar?

These two places show, that in Tertullians time, as the name sacrifice was
used for the Eucharist; so was that of ALTAR for the HOLY TABLE: Besides that,
the prayers of the Church used there to be offered up unto God.

Within 50. years after Tertullian lived St Cyprian, Cyprian An. 250.
BP of the same Church, where Tertullian was Presbyter: To whom this language
was so familiar, that I have observed it ten times at least in his Epistles
only: but whether he ever uses the name TABLE, I know not. I will recite
only 5. or 6. of the most pregnant and evident places, and not easy to be
eluded.

Ad Cornelium; where, to show, that he favored his part against Novatianus, at
the beginning, though he was not fully informed then of the lawfulness of his
election; he relates, That, having read his letters in the Church assembly, he
refused to publish those Libellous criminations against him, which Novatianus
had sent by his messengers to be there read. Honoris (says he,) communis
memores, and gravitatis sacerdotalis ac sanctitatis respectum tenentes, ea quae
ex diverso in librum ad nos transmissum congesta fuerant, acerbationibus
criminosis, respuimus; considerantes pariter and ponderantes, quod in tanto
fratrum, religiosoque conventu, considentibus Dei sacerdotibus, and ALTARI
POSITO, nec legi debeant, nec audiri? It Is a description or periphrasis of an
Ecclesiastical assembly, or, as he calls it, religiosus conventus.

and the satisfaction accustomed; he speaks on this manner: If such insolency
as this be tolerated, and those who sacrifice unto Idols, once come to be
received again into the Church, without due satisfaction; Quid superest, quam
ut Ecclesia Capitolio cedat, and recedentibus sacerdotibus, ac Domini nostri
ALTAR removentibus, in Cleri nostri sacrum venerandumque CONSESSUM Consessus
here notes the place as in Greek (...).
(i. e. in Presbyterium, seu (...)) simulachra atque Idola cum ARIS suis
transeant?

Fortunatianus a Bishop, who having lapsed in the time of persecution, would
nevertheless return to the office of a Bishop, he has these words: Cum
debeat satisfacere and ad Dominum exorandum diebus ac noctibus, lachrymis and
orationibus and precibus incumbere; audet sibi adhuc sacerdotium, quod
prodidit, vindicare, quasi post ARAS Diaboli accedere ad ALTAR Dei fas sit.
And in the same Ep. Ne tales ad ALTARIS impiamenta and contagia fratrum denuo
redeant, omnibus viribus excubandum est. In these two last places note, 1. The
name ALTAR used for the HOLY TABLE. 2. That those Fathers, when they would
distinguish between the ALTAR of the true God, and the ALTARS of Idols, do
usually call the one ARA, and the other ALTAR; of which more hereafter.

ad Ianuar. and caeteros, where to prove that Heretics cannot give true
Baptism, he reasons thus; Porro autem (says he) Eucharistia, and, unde
Baptizati unguntur, oleum, in ALTARI sanctificatur. Sanctificare autem non
potuit olei creaturam, qui nec ALTAR habuit nec Ecclesiam. Vnde nec unctio
spiritalis apud Haereticos potest esse, quando constet, oleum sanctificari, and
Eucharistiam fieri apud illos omnino non posse.

Ad Caecilium, where he says, Sed and per Salomonem Spiritus sanctus typum
Dominici sacrificii ante praemonstrat, immolatae hostiae, and panis and vini;
sed and ALTARIS, and Apostolorum faciens mentionem. Sapientia, inquit,
aedificavit sibi domum, and subdidit columnas septem, mactavit suas hostias,
miscuit in cratera vinum suum, and paravit mensam suam, and misit servos suos,
convocans cum excelsa praedicatione ad crateram, dicens, etc.

Testimoniorum adversus Iudaeos, Lib. 2. c. 2. Quod sapientia Dei Christus, and
de Sacramento incarnationis ejus, and passionis and calicis, and ALTARIS, and
Apostolorum qui missi praedicaverunt [Testimonium extat] apud Salomonem in
paroemiis: Sapientia aedificavit sibi domum, and subdidit columnas septem,
mactavit hostias suas, miscuit in cratera vinum suum, and paravit suam mensam,
etc.

By which two passages it appears, that the name Altar was so familiarly and
ordinarily used of the Holy Table in his time, that he interprets Solomon's As
Athanasius likewise does D^spu^. c^nt. Ar^ium in Con. Nic. p. 30. To. 1. (...)
(inquit) (...).
Mensa by that name, tanquam per notius, as by the better known. Otherwise
what need he have expounded Solomon's mensa by Altar Christi? Mensa Christi
would have served the turn. I have deduced these testimonies of Cyprian the
more at large, because of those objections wont to be alleged out of Arnobius
to the contrary, who notwithstanding lived 50. years after him. And out of
Lactantius, who being Tutor to Constantines son Crispus, was younger then he.

Not long after Cyprian, Zeno Veronensis An. 260.
about the year 260. lived Zeno Veronensis, as appears by himself in his book
De Continentia. Casaubon calls him Scriptor vetustissimus and elegantissimus.
This Author in the 9. of his Paschal Sermons Ad Neophytos, Invitatione ad
Fontem tertia, says of the Church, then a childbearing mother unto God of
many sons by Baptism, that she broughe forth far cleaner children, than a
natural Mother uses to do, being her self non faetidis cunis, sed suave
redolentibus SACRI ALTARIS faeliciter enutrita cancellis. Here it is not only
ALTAR, but ALTARIS cancelli, the septs whereby it was separated from the rest
of the Church, or place of sacred assembly.

And for the days of Constantine (whose reign began some 50. Eusebius.
years after) Eusebius has left us a copy of a panegyric Oration made at the
dedication of a sumptuous and magnificent Church at Tire: Sacrarium or Quire,
for the honor (as he speaks) (...), of the Prelacy, and Priestly Order, he
adds, (...), and sacrosancto ALTARI in medio collocato; ista rursus, [(...)] ut
a multitudinis accessu prohiberentur, (...), reticulati operis cancellis ex
ligno fabricatis circundedit, adeo ad summum solertis artificii elaboratis, ut
mirabile intuentibus praebeat spectaculum. Lo here again, ALTAR, and
cancelli ejus.

Eusebius in his book De laudibus Constantini, versus finem, has a more full
passage, and which shows this language to have been at that time common and
usual. For there, magnifying and setting forth the stupendous and
unparalleled power of Christ our Lord and Savior, testified abundantly by that
wonderful and never before exemplified change, which he had then wrought in
the world; amongst other instances he has this passage; Quis alius, solo
Servatore nostro excepto, coepulonibus suis incruenta and rationalia sacrificia
precibus and arcana (...) peragenda, tradidit? Gr. (...).
Quorum causa tum ALTARIA in toto terrarum orb constituta sunt, tum
Ecclesiarum dedicationes factae: solique omnium moderatori Deo, divina
sacrificiorum, sola mente and ratione obeun^orum, ministeria ab omnibus
gentibus exhibita; sacrificia vero sanguine, cruore, and fumo peragisolita --
vi quadam occulta and invisibili, deleta and extincta sunt. Lo here ALTARIA in
toto terrarum orb constituta, for the offering of the Christian sacrifice.

Where I thought not good to omit, In Demon adv. Iudaeos and Gent. (...)* Edit.
Sa^il. Tom. 6. p. 635.
that what Eusebius speaks here of the world in general, St Chrysostom
affirms in particular of our British Islands; (...) (says he) (...). The
British Islands, which lie out of this sea, and are in the Ocean it self, have
felt the power of the Word: for even there also Churches and ALTARS are erected.

SECTION II.
BUT will some say, It Is true indeed, that from 200. years after Christ, and
forward, the name of ALTAR was much frequented, but before that time it cannot
be showed to have bin used by the testimony of any Authentic writer; and
therefore nothing so ancient as that of TABLE. So some of ours affirm indeed;
but they will be tried by no other Authors, and records of those times, than
such only as themselves hold for genuine, as Justin Martyr, Theophilus
Antiochenus, Irenaeus, or it may be another small Tractator or two (with whom
this name is not found.) Of whom the works of the two principal, Justin and
Iren. the most likely to have informed us, are near the one half perished.

But before I make further answer to this exception, I would know, to what end
it is made, and what advantage the Authors thereof do hope to gain by it. For
the reason, I think why the name ALTAR is so much scrupled at, is, because it
is thought to imply sacrifice. But Justin Martyr and Irenaeus are well enough
known, to call the Eucharist both an oblation and sacrifice: yea the latter to
dwell upon that theme. What gain is there then, that the name ALTAR is not to
be found in those works of theirs, which remain, if that of oblation and
sacrifice (for which the name of ALTAR is disliked) be? Besides, what
likelihood, that those who conceived of the Eucharist under the notion of a
Sacrifice, should not call the place thereof, as well as their Successors did,
THYSIAST'PION?

Secondly, I would know of the Authors and users of this exception, whether in
those Writers and Fathers before the 200. year after Christ, which they
acknowledged for genuine, the name of TABLE be to be found, or not, given to
that, whereon the holy Eucharist was celebrated. If it be not, then this
exception of 200. years after Christ, (which yet is but 100. after the
Apostles) makes no more against the one, than the other, if neither be to be
found in the works extant of the Fathers, which then lived For by this it will
appear, they had no occasion to mention this sacred BOARD either by one name or
other in those works of theirs which are left unto us. Now for my part, though
I have with diligence sought to inform my self herein, yet hitherto it has
never been my hap to find the Name of TABLE in any of them more then of ALTAR.
I have enquired of others, and yet they have not showed it me. And therefore
till I see it, I will believe it cannot be shown.

But perhaps you will say, What matters it, whether the Fathers, we speak of,
have it, or not, if the Scripture has? For does not Saint Paul say, You cannot
be partakers of the Table of the Lord, and of the Table of Devils? It Is true.
There is this only place to be alleged to that purpose: I know no other. And
yet this too, if the judgment of some of our own Expositors be taken, is not
sufficient to prove it neither. For Table here might signify, not the
instrument or seat, but the Epulum, or meat it self; it being the use of all
Languages (I am sure of those learned ones) to express diet by Table; yea
whether it be set thereon, or not. And the matter of the Apostles discourse
seems to require this sense: For he speaks of Idolothyta, or meats sacrificed
to Idols. And not to be out-vyed with Antiquity, I could likewise (as some do)
parallel this place for TABLE, with another, of a much like nature, for the
name ALTAR; namely, that Heb. 13. where the Apostle says, We (i. e. we
Christians) have an ALTAR, whereof they have no right to eat which serve at
the Tabernacle. I know what you would be ready to except; namely, That by the
ALTAR here named, is meant Christ, which I for my own part should willingly
admit, so it be understood with this caution; Christ as he is to be eaten in
the Eucharist. For the Apostle speaks here of an ALTAR to be eaten of; which
is not the material instrument, or seat, but the sacrifice used thereon. Thus
if these two places capable of, if not requiring the like interpretation, be
set the one against the other, we have not all this while found one jott more
for the Antiquity of the name TABLE than of ALTAR.

Canones Apost.
But now to answer more directly to the Question, Whether the name of ALTAR were
used in the Church before 200. years after Christ or not? I answer, It was. For
proof whereof, why may I not allege the Canons called the Apostles? Which
though the Apostles compiled not, yet are more ancient sure (at least many of
them) than 200. years after Christ, being not improbably to be thought to have
been the Codex Canonum, whereby the Church in those first ages (especially of
the Orient) was ordered and governed. And in Questions of use and custom (such
as this is) not genuineness of Titles only, but whatsoever Antiquity, though
masked under a wrong and untrue name, may be admitted, I think, to give
evidence according to the age thereof. Besides, If it be credible, that the
Apostles, or those to whom they committed the Churches, Apostolical men, might
leave unto the Church some rules of Order and Discipline, besides those
mentioned in Scripture, (and whence otherwise should those Catholic and
generally received traditions of the Church be derived?) why may not some of
these, which bear that name, be of that number? And if any be, then none more
likely then those which are first in order: namely, because collections of this
nature are wont in process of time like snow-balls to receive increase by new
additions ever and anon put unto them, and yet notwithstanding continue still
the name and Title of their first Authors; though sometimes not the one half
of the contents will be owned by them. Upon which supposition we have, for the
resolving of the present question, as much advantage as can be; considering,
that the Canon we are to allege, is the second, or at the most (according as
some others divide them) but the third in order from the beginning; and so
(howsoever the collection has in time been increased) one of the first and
most ancient of them. Let us therefore hear how it speaks.

CANON APOST. II. Si quis Episcopus aut Presbyter praeter Domini de sacrificio
ordinationem [.i. praeter panem and vinum] alia quaedam [(...)] ad ALTAR
attulerit, sive mel, sive lac, sive vini loco liceram studiose consectam, vel
aves, vel animalia quaevis (praeter ordinationem) deponatur. Praeter Gr. (...)
tritie g^ana sricta aut tosla Latini Grancas d^xere. De significatione (...)
vid. LXX. Lev. 2.14.16. Et ca. ^3, 14 Casaub. in Athenaeum lib. 14.16. Mele hic
balsamon et alij, Legu^ina. Confer Can. Syn. Carthag. que hab^t* (...).
nova farra, aut Vvam tempore opportuno, non licitum esto aliud quid ad ALTAR
(quam oleum ad luminare, and incensum) tempore sanctae Oblationis offerre.

Here the name THYSIAST'PION or ALTAR is twice used for the HOLY TABLE. The
latter part of the Canon the Greek has thus: (...). Where consider, whether it
might not be read, (...), that is, sive oleum ad luminare, sive incensum:
implying, that at another time they might be offered there, but not tempore
sanctae Oblationis, at the time of the holy Eucharist. For the better judgment
whereof, and of the right meaning of the Canon (because the readings,
distinction, and translations somewhat vary) take also a Canon of the Council
of Carthage under Aurelius (Anno 397.) very like unto it, and made undoubtedly
in imitation thereof.

SYN. CARTH. CAN. APUD BALSAM. XL. Non licere praeter panem and vinum aqua
mixtum, quidquam in sanctis mysteriis offere. Vt nihil amplius, quam Corpus and
Sanguis Domini offeratur, quemadmodum Dominus ipse tradidit, hoc est, Panis and
vinum aqua mixtum. Primitiae autem, sive mel, sive lac, offerantur, ut moris
est, uno die consueto, ad Infantium mysterium ( puta in Baptismo.) Etsi enim
maxim ad ALTAR offerantur, propriam tamen suam habeant benedictionem. Nihil
autem amplius in primitiis [nimirum ad Altar, in sanctis mysteriis] offeratur
quam ex Wis and frumento. Which only were permitted to be offered at the time
of the Eucharist (as may seem) because Bread and Wine are made of them.

But I will not set my rest upon a Pseudepigraphall Testimony, but allege a
witness past exception, and for antiquity beyond them all. And that is, that
holy and blessed Martyr Ignatius, Ignatius Ep. Antioch.
Bishop of that City, where the name of Christians was first given to the
Disciples of Christ; who lived and saw the latter end of the Apostles times.
This blessed Martyr in those Epistles of his (which none that are learned or
judicious now make question of) thrice uses the name THYSIAST'PION or ALTAR
for the Lords TABLE, in his Epistles Ad Philadelphenses, Trallenses, and
Ephesios. In the first whereof Ad Philadelph. he speaks thus: CALIX, qui
omnibus distributus est; unum ALTAR omni Ecclesiae, and unus Episcopus cum
Presbyterio, and Diaconis conservis meis. In this place P. 236 E^e^. 6. in
Epist Ad Ephesus.
Vedelius expressly acknowledges the name ALTAR to be used by Ignatius for the
HOLY TABLE (though otherwise he be no friend to that name) because he knew not
how to elude it. I thought good therefore to put it in the head of the file, to
lead on the rest which follow. Whereof

That Ad Ephesios shall have the next place; where exhorting them to be
subject, and at unity with their Bishop and Presbytery, he enforces it thus;
Nemo erret, (says he) nisi quis intra ALTAR sit [Gr. (...)] privatur pane
Dei. Si enim unius aut alterius precatio tantarum virium sit, ut Christum inter
illos statuat, quanto plus Episcopi and totius Ecclesiae oration consona ad Deum
ascendens ( for this used to be presented at the Altar) exorabit, ut omnia quae
petiverint in Christo, dentur ipsis? As if he had said, Be not deceived, but
take notice, that as every one who is not at peace with his brother, is
excluded from the Altar, [Mat. 5.] so much more, he that through disobedience,
is in schism and discord with his Bishop and spiritual Fathers, is excluded
thence; that is, has no right to offer his gift thereat; and consequently is
deprived of the Bread of God (the holy Eucharist) and of the benefit of those
precious and efficacious prayers therewith offered up to God by the Bishop and
Priestly Order, in the name of the whole Church. Which, how great a benefit it
is, may appear by this, That if the prayer of one or two be of that efficacy,
as to place Christ in the midst of them; how much more shall the united prayer
of the Bishop, and the whole Church be of force to prevail with the Divine
Majesty, to grant them all they shall ask in Christ's name? It follows, Quis
quis igitur ab his separatur, neque concurrit cum (...), and Ecclesia
primogenitorum conscriptorum in coelis, Lupus est sub ovina pelle faciem
mentiens mansuetam: That is, An Infidel in a Christians coat. Where by (...),
Concilium or Senatus sacrificiorum, he understands the Bishop and his Clergy,
who are Senatus rei Divinae, or sacris faciundis. Therefore Vedelius, who will
needs here, without reason or copy, in stead of (...) read (...) (the better
to make way for his conceit, that the body of the Church in general should be
the Altar Ignatius here speaks of) did but correct the Magnificat, and pervert
Ignatius his meaning, which he understood not. For that this which I have said,
is the meaning of Ignatius in this place, appears more plainly by the third
testimony I am now to allege of his, viz.

Ex Epist. Ad TRALLENSES ante med. Reveremini (inquit) Episcopum vestrum sicut
Christum, quemadmodum beati nobis praeceperunt Apostoli. Qui intra ALTAR est,
mundus est; quare and obtemperat Episcopo and Presbyteris. Qui vero extra est,
hic est qui sine Episcopo, Presbyteris and Diaconis quippiam agit, and talis
inquinatam habet conscientiam, and Infideli deterior est. i. He is a woolf in a
sheeps skin, as he said in the other Epistle. The places are twins, and the one
is a gloss unto the other.

Now, by warrant of these testimonies, I think I may safely conclude, that the
use of the name THYSIAST'PION or ALTAR (for ought that any hitherto has showed
to the contrary) is no less ancient in Christianity, then that of (...), of
the Holy TABLE or TABLE of the Lord. And that both have been promiscuously
used from the Apostles times.

Nor is it any marvel it should be so; for these names are of an equivalent
notion, and signify one and the self same thing. For what is an Altar, but of
those kind of things we call Tables? what Genus else can we refer it to? The
difference is, That an Altar notes not a common, but an Holy Table, a Table for
an Holy Feast, such as I have heretofore showed a Sacrifice to be, Epulum ex
oblatis, or a Feast of an Oblation made unto God. That is, there is no more
difference between a Table and an Altar, then between another cup and a
Chalice. An Altar is not every Table, or a Table for a common feast, but an
Holy Table, and an Holy Table is an Altar. The difference is not (as many
suppose) either in the matter, as of wood or stone: For an Altar may be of wood
(as both the golden Altar, and that of burnt offering were in the Tabernacle,
namely of Shittim wood) and a Table may be of stone: nor in the posture or
manner of standing, whether in the middle, or against a wall; (for the Altar of
burnt offering stood in the midst of the Priests court, and the Altar of
Incense up against the vail) but this is the true difference, that a Table is a
common Name, and an Altar is an Holy Table. This Holy Altar ( says Gregory
Nyssene, Sermon de Baptismo) whereat we stand, is by nature a common stone,
nothing differing from other slates -- but being consecrated to the service of
God, and having received the benediction, it is (...), an Holy Table, an Altar
inviolable. See he makes one to be the exegesis of the other. For in times
past (when men perhaps were as wise, as we are now) it was thought fit and
decent, that things set apart unto God, and sacred, should be distinguished,
not only in use, but in Yea and in form and fashion too. See Maimon. apud
Ai^sworth upon Lev. 19.30. For both sanctity and sanctification consists in
Discrimination.
name also from things common. For what is a Temple or Church, but an House?
Yet distinguished in name from other Houses. What is a Sacrifice, but a Feast?
yet distinguished in name from other Feasts. So what is an Altar, but a Table?
yet distinguished in name from other Tables.

Well; let all this be granted, may some man say, that there is no greater
difference between these two names, than as you affirm; yet ought the
language of the Church to be conformed to the style of the New Testament. But
where in the New Testament should those Ancients find any Text, whereon to
ground the application of this name to the Holy Table? I answer, There, I am
prone to believe, whence they derived the Oblation of the Bread and Wine in the
Eucharist, and that Rite of Reconciliation at their entrance thereunto; (where
the Deacon was wont to proclaim (...), Ne quis contra aliquem, or in some
other words to like effect; and then every one to salute his brother in token
of reconciliation and peace) and that was from that Ordinance of our blessed
Savior in his Sermon upon the Mount, viz. If thou bring thy GIFT unto the
ALTAR, and there remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee, leave thy
GIFT before the ALTAR, and go first, be reconciled to thy Brother, and then
come and offer thy GIFT. Which Scripture they took to be an Evangelicall
constitution, wherein our Savior implied, by way of Anticipation, that he
would leave some Rite to his Church, in stead, and after the manner of the
Sacrifices of the Law, which should begin with an Oblation, as they did; and
that to require this proper and peculiar qualification in the Offerer, to be at
peace, and without enmity with his brother: in so much as Irenaeus seems to
place that purity of the Evangelicall oblation, prophesied of by Malachy, even
in this requisite. Vide l. 4. c. 34. c. 1.11.
Hence also they may seem to have learned to call the Bread and Wine (in
respect of this oblation) (...), the holy Gifts, from the word our Savior here
uses.

For that they derived from this text that Rite of Peace and reconciliation
before the Offertorie, appears expressly out of Constit. Apost. l. 2. c. 57.
Iren. lib. 4.34. Edit. Fevar. Tertull. De Oratione c. 10. Eusebius De vita
Constantini, Lib. 4. c. 41. Cyril of Jerusalem Catech. Mist. 5. Why then may I
not believe as well, that they might derive from the same text the Offertory it
self, and the application of the name Altar to the Holy Table, seeing all
three in the Text depend one upon another; and that there is not in the N.
Testament any other passage of Scripture, whereon so ancient and universal a
practice of the Church, as was in all these three particulars, could expressly
be grounded. And, besides that the primitive practice of the Catholic Church
is a good rule to interpret Scripture by; there may be good reasons found, from
the circumstances of the text, and Sermon it self, to persuade it to be an
Evangelicall Constitution.

1. Because there was no such thing commanded in the Law to such as came to
offer sacrifice; nor any such deuterosis to be found amongst the traditions of
the Elders. Now it is altogether improbable, our Savior would then annexe a
new Rite to the Legal sacrifices, when he was, so soon after, to abolish them
by his sacrifice upon the Cross; yea (if the Harmonists of the Gospel are not
deceived) within less than two years after. For they place this Sermon between
his second and third Passover. Ergo he intended it for an Ordinance of the
Kingdom of God (as the Scripture speaks) that is, for the Church of his
Gospel.

2. Because the Sermon, whereof this was part, is that famous Sermon of our
Savior upon the Mount; which he read as a Lecture to his Disciples, to
instruct them in the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, a little before he sent
them out to preach; and so, in all likelihood, contained the sum of that they
were to preach; which no doubt was Doctrine Evangelicall. In all other parts of
the Sermon we find it so: wherefore then should we not so esteem it, even in
this also?

3. Because it is brought in (and that in the first place) as an
exemplification of that righteousness, wherein the Citizens of the Kingdom of
Christ were to outgoe the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees: I say
unto you (says our Savior) except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Then follows this text, showing how far we are to
outstrip the Scribes and Pharisees, in our obedience to the precept, Thou shall
not kill.

4. This passage should be Evangelicall, forasmuch as it seems, together with
the rest that follow it, to be a part of that (...) or complementum legis,
whereof our Savior spoke a little before, saying, Think not that I am come to
dissolve the Law and the Prophets, (i. to abolish or abrogate the observation
of them in my Kingdom) (...), but to accomplish, supply or perfect them. For
this to be the meaning of that (...), the whole discourse following it, seems
to evince: wherein namely our Savior puts in practice, and makes good de
facto, in several particulars, what he formerly said, he came to do.

SECTION III.
BUT there is one thing yet behind, by no means to be forgotten in this
Argument. That what I have hitherto spoken of the name Altar, is to be
understood of (...), not of (...). For these two are not the same.
THYSIAST'PION is the Altar of the true God; OOS the Altar of an Idol. Wherefore
the ancient Fathers and Christians (which spoke the Greek tongue) never used to
call the Altar of Christ (...) (though it were the usual word in that
language) but ever (...). Which difference they learned out of the Greek
Bible; in all which the Altar of the true God is Except only (...) the ^. Book
of Ma^c. whose st^^^ gentiliseth.
no where termed (...), but always (...). On the contrary, (...) never used
(when it is used) but of an Idolatrous Altar, or Altar of an Idol. This
difference of these two words may be evidently seen and confirmed by one
passage in the first Book of Maccabees, c. 1. v. al 62.
59. where concerning the Ministers of Antiochus Epiphanes, who had erected an
Altar to Jupiter Olympius, upon the great brazen Altar in the Temple of the
Lord, and sacrificed thereon, the Greek expresses it in this manner: (...),
They sacrificed upon the (...), which was upon the (...),which our Translation
rightly renders, They sacrificed upon the Idol-Altar, which was upon the Altar
of God; the circumstances of the place leading them thereunto. And that this
testimony may not go alone, take with it a like expression or two in Saint
Chrysostom, who in his 24. Homil. in 1. Ad Corinthios, brings in our Savior
thus speaking; (...)^ If thou desire blood, make not the Idols (...) ruddy
with the slaughter of Beasts, but my (...), with my blood. It Is upon that
passage, The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the
blood of Christ? with the same style in the Hom. a little before quoted [
demonstrat quod Christus sit Deus] he magnifies the speedy propagation of the
Gospel, that in so short a time (...) ( Bomoi and Simulacra) were abolished,
and (...) were erected throughout the Roman Empire, yea among the Persians,
Scythians, Mores and Indians. To all which add another observation, That (...)
is a word not used by any Pagan Writer, but is a mere Ecclesiastical and
Hellenisticall term, first devised, (as De vit. Mosis l^b. 3. (...) (Moses
^e^pegraecissans) (...).
Philo in his Vita Mosis would give us to understand) by the LXX. to express
the Hebrew word (...), and to distinguish the Altar of the God of Israel from
the Altars of the Idol-gods of the Gentiles.

But you will ask me now, wherein the real difference between these two
consisted, which made them so nice to call the one by the name of the other? Or
was it verbal only? I answer, It was real. For the Altar of the true God,
(...), was only (as the name implies) a Table for sacrifice; viz. in the law,
of those bloody sacrifices which were then offered to God by fire and Incense:
in the Gospel, of the reasonable and spiritual sacrifice, sent up unto God
(...), only by the word of thanksgiving and prayer. But (...), or the Altars
of the Gentiles were suggesta, or Scabella sculptilium and simulacrorum;
Idol-stools, or foot-stools of their Images, in respect of the accommodation
the one had to the other; Mark here, who they are, that have turned the
Christians (...) into the Gentiles (...).
which was such, as their Idols were placed before, upon, or above their
Altars. This may appear in some sort, by those passages of St Chrysostom,
which I now quoted; especially in the latter. And by that of St Austin, Hom. 6.
de verbis Domini, where he proves from this posture, that the Gentiles took and
worshipped their Idol-statues for Gods, because they placed them upon their
Altars. Nam illi (inquit) quod Numen habeant and colant illa^ statua^, ^ra
testatur. And this also the name (...) fitly intimates, as properly importing a
Basis, whereon something stands, quasi (...), of the word (...), as
Eustathius notes; and accordingly used by Homer for the Bases, whereon stood
the gilded statues of boys holding lights at a banquet; (...)
(...).
So 2 Chronicles. 34.4. we read, That Josiah caused the Altars of Baalim to be
broken down, and the Images that were on high above them. Aaron when he set up
the golden calfe, is said in like manner to have built an Altar before it,
Exodus 32.5. This connection between the Gentile-altars, and Idol-statues or
Images, may also be gathered out of that forecited passage of S. Cyprian,
Epist. 55. where declaming against some lapsed Christians, who having in time
of persecution sacrificed unto Idols, would for all that, be admitted again
into the Church, without due satisfaction; If this be suffered (says he) Quid
superest, quam ut ECCLESIA capitolio cedat, and recedentibus sacerdotibus, ac
Domini nostri ALTAR removentibus in Cleri nostri sacrum venerandumque
consessum (i. in sacrarium nostrum, seu Or, as this part of the Church is
termed in a story of the same time in Eusebius. (...) the name whereby the LXX.
call the Sanctuary in the Old Test. Hist. Eccles. l. 7. cap. 18. de Marino
Martyr, Adductum ad Ecclesiam statuit intus prope (...).
(...)) SIMULACRA atque IDOLA cum ARIS suis transeant? In this not long passage
are many things worthy observing. 1. Ecclesia used for the place of Holy
assembly, and opposed to Capitolium, which stands here for any Gentile Temple.
2. The place of the Clergy next the Altar, and distinguished from that of the
Laity. 3. The coupling of Simulacra and Idola cum Aris suis, as individui
comites, and the opposition thereof to Altar Domini nostri, i. Christi. 4.
That the Latin Fathers sometimes imitated the Greek, in distinguishing as well
as they could, the names of the Altars of Christ, and the Altars of Idols,
calling (...) ALTAR, and (...) ARA. Which the Author of the vulgar Latin so
far observes, that, throughout the canonical Scripture, he never calls the
Altar of the true God ARA, but the Altars of Idols only, as the LXX. uses the
name (...).

I have prosecuted this observation of the difference between (...) and (...)
the more largely, because it will help us through those doubtful and stumbling
passages, which are found in Origin, Minutius Felix, Arnobius and Lactantius,
in their disputes against the Gentiles. Who although they lived, the two first
in the 3. Century (after Tertullian) the two later about the beginning of the
fourth seculum, in the days of Dioclesian and Constantine, 50. years after S.
Cyprian: during all which time, it is apparent, confessed, and may be
invincibly proved against such as shall deny it, that Christians had Oratories
and Houses of worship to perform the Rites of their Religion in; as also (by
those testimonies alleged) that they usually called the HOLY TABLE there
placed, by the name of ALTAR and (...): yet these Authors aforementioned, when
the Gentiles object Atheism to the Christians, as who had no Temple, no Arae,
no Simulacra, are wont in their Apologies to answer by way of Concession; not
only, that they had none; but more, that they ought not to have. What should
this mean? why this: They answer the Gentiles according to the notion, wherein
they objected this unto them: to wit, that they had no (...), no Idol-stooles,
or Simulacrorum scabella; not that they had no (...). (...). Therefore the word
which Origin there uses is (...). And in all those passages you shall ever
find Arae and Simulacra to go together. Origin, (...)^ Celsus ait, nos Ararum
and statuarum, Templorumque fundationes fugere. Minutius Felix. Cur nullas Aras
habent? Templa nulla? nulla nota simulacra? Arnob. In hac consuestis part
crimen nobis maximum impietatis affigere -- Quod non Deorum alicujus simulacrum
constituamus aut formam, non Altaria fabricemus, Perhaps he adds this by way
of correction of his word Altaria.
NON ARAS. Lactantius. Quid sibi Templa, quid Arae volunt, quid denique ipsa
simulacra, etc.

And as for Temples, their meaning was, they had no such claustra Numinum, as
the Gentiles supposed Temples to be, and to which they According to which style
St Hierome Ep. ad Riparium says de Iul. Apostat. Quod sanctoru^ Basilicas
destruxerit, aut in Templa converterit. Ep. 10
appropriated that name; viz. Places, whereunto the gods, by the power of spells
and magical consecrations, were confined and limited; and, for the presenceing
of whom a statue was necessary; places wherein they dwelt, shut up as birds in
a cage, or as the Devil confined within a circle, that so they might be ready
at hand, when men had occasion to seek unto them: That Christians indeed had no
such dwellings for their God as these; for that their God dwelt not in Temples
made with hands: but not, that they had not Galienus in ed. ap. Eus. l. 7.
(...), no Apud eund. Hist. l. 7. c. 1, 2.
(...), or Ibid. cap. 3.
(...). For such the stories and monuments of those times expressly inform us,
they had; and the Gentiles themselves that objected this defect, knew it too
well, as may appear by their Emperors Rescripts for demolishing them, and
sometimes for restoring them, when the persecution ceased. All which he that
will, may find in Eusebius his Ecclesiastical History, before either Arnobius
or Lactantius wrote: Whither I refer them that would be more fully satisfied;
yea to Arnobius himself in the end of his 4. Book adversus Gentes, where he
speaks of the burning of the Christians sacred Books, and demolition of their
Places of assembly. And thus I conclude my Discourse.

FINIS.

