A SERMON OF fasting, and of Lent, and of the antiquity, dignity, and great
necessity thereof; Preached upon the 14. of February, anno 1607. at
Shaftesbury.

By IO. MAYO.

Daniel 9. 3. And I turned my face unto the Lord GOD, and sought by Prayer and
Supplications, with fasting, and sackecloth, and ashes.

LONDON. Printed by W. Hall, for John Helm, and are to be sold at his shop,
in S. Dunstones Churchyard. 1609.

To the right Worshipful WILLIAM WILKS Doctor in Divinity, and one of his
Majesty's Chaplains in ordinary: And to the Worshipful Mayor and Recorder of
the Borough of Shafiesbury; and to the Masters and Burgesses of the same.
THere was never any age that bragged more of knowledge, and yet, never any
that had less soundnes. For as the hearts of men were never more empty, and
their hands never more idle: so their tongues were never more stirring, and
their brains never more stuffed: not so much studying to do what they know,
as to find what they may believe: being like to those Pyrronian Philosophers or
Scepticks of whom A. Gellius writes Lib. 11. Cap. 5. who would always seek
and consider, but never decree, appoint, nor comprehend any thing; but only
according to their own fantasy, and the depth of their own capacity. Some
think, that Gods school is more of understanding than affection; and they
endeavor to have much knowledge though it be without zeal, and to get much
skill, though it be without loyallobedience and good government. It is not
sufficient for such to be of Gods court, but they will be of his counsel
also. They will needs pry into his Arc; inquire into things not reveled; and
be puffed up, and be wise in themselves; teaching, preaching, and persuading
that, which tends rather to liberty, fancy, and self-will, than to prayer,
fasting, alms and mortification of the flesh. Yea, and not content with that,
they deprave and traduce others that follow not their own humors and opinions
therein; and speak of them, not humbly as Judah said of an offender Genesis 38.
10. She is more righteous than 1: but hatefully and without peace, as Joseph's
brethren did of him. Genesis 37. 4.

The reason and occasion why and wherefore I write this, may soon be
understood, both of you, who are a teacher in the Church, and have had great
experience of this creeping and encroaching evil: and of you also, who bear
public office and authority in the commonwealth, having seen the pangs and
practices of these kind of people, still murmuring and muttering against
princely proceedings in eccleasticall government, and against things in
themselves indifferent, but by authority necessary, as commanded by his
Majesty. It is charities precept to speak well of all; and Ciuilities rule not
to backebite the absent. And yet we see, that some of them consider of other
men's doings, that tend to form, order and decency, As Satan considered of
Job, and his actions, when God said unto him; Have thou considered my servant
Job? And he signified yea, but it was to belie and calumniate him. And although
we now see the staff of our bread broken, and the evil arrows of death and
famine sent amongst us, to make us humble our selves before the almighty God of
heaven, with fasting, prayer, and repentance: yet they can not be brought to
observe and keep any time and season of abstinence and fasting, commanded by
authority, but they will rather hazard an opposition to the peace of the
church, and to the good of their country, than suffer their appetites to be
bridled, and their zeal to be guided by the limits of any good laws.

The consideration of this matter has moved me to publish this Sermon, and to
dedicate it, both to you, whom for many causes I respect and reverence, and
whose favor and kindness I have found in no small measure; and to al you also,
who have showed your love and countenance toward me, not only in hearing
patiently, but in construing courteously, that which is now come to the
general view of others. Accept of it I pray, and take it as coming from him,
who wishes you all increase of happiness, and all grace mercy, and peace in
Christ JESUS.

Shaftesbury the 28. of November. 1609 Your Worships most assured to be
commanded IO. MAYO,

Psalm. 69. 10. I wept, and chastened my self with fasting, and that was turned
to my reproof.
THE book of the Psalms is a book Sapientall: set forth unto us by the holy
Ghost, and does serve for many and diverse purposes. Someof the Psalms serve
formusicke, as we may know by their title. Some for Prayers, some for
Thanksgiving, some for Consolation, some for Doctrine, some for Prophecy, and
some for Story. All to this end and purpose, to give unto us present remedies
against troubles and temptations of the mind and conscience, and to make us
live in the true faith, fear and love of the Lord.

David the son of Ishai, a man according to Gods own heart, was called the
sweet Psalmist of Israel; who not only made Psalms himself, but ordained
wise and skillful men to make Psalms, and to prophecy with all kind of
instruments, as Asaph, and his sons: Corah, and his sons: Heman, and his
sons: Ieduthan, and his sons. Which Psalms, or praises according to the
Hebrews, were chiefly ordained to praise God, and to give him thanks for his
blessings and benefits; and are called the Psalms or the songs of David,
because the most part of them were made by him.

This Psalm, in which my text is contained, was made by David, and is called
(...), a wishing song or Psalm: and of Apollinarius, (...), a song of a
converted heart; and it does contain specially two parts: First, a Petition
from the 1. verse to the 30. Secondly, a praise-full conclusion from the 30.
verse to the end of the Psalm. For the Prophet David being atype of Christ
given of God, does seem to have written this Psalm in the name of Christ and
of his Church, even as the Evangelical history does show it; and as the
Apostles themselves do apply it.

These words which I have read unto you being written in the 10. verse, do
contain in them two parts, 1. An Aaction of David. 2. A construction of that
Action by others. An action of David, consisting of his Passion and
Mortification. Of his passion, in these words, I wept. Of his mortificatio^, in
these words, And chastened my self with fasting. The construction of the
Actio^, in these words; And this was turned to my reproof.

I wept (says David). He wept not here as he did for Abner, or as he did for
the death of his son Ammon. He wept not here as he did when he fled from his
son Absolon, or as he did for the death of his son Absolon* He wept not
here as Jacob did for his son Iosep, or as Ezekiah did when he heard he
should die; but he wept here as Peter did when he had denied his master, and
as Josiah did when he heard the words of the book of the Law. He wept with
care, with compunction, and with contrition of heart, for his sins and
offenses committed against the Lord, even as he did in Psalm. 6. 6. where he
says: Every night wash I my bed, and water my couch with my tears.

I wept, says David, being a Prophet, a Prince, and the servant of the Lord. A
thing not unfitting, nor unseemly for a Prophet, a Prince, and the servant of
the Lord in such a case. Because such kind of waeping is a sign of true and
hearty repentance; It is the fruit of passion, a token of a broken heart, and
(as S. Basil says,) the food of the soul. And therefore the Lord himself
says by his Prophet Joel 2. 12. Turn unto me (says he) with all your heart,
and with Fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning. And our Savior Christ
himself says Luke 6. 21. Blessed are ye that now weep, for ye shall laugh.
And the Apostle S. James says to the wicked rich men, Chap. 5. 1. Go to now,
ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you.

And chastened my self with fasting* Insome translations, I wept, and my soul
fasted: as it is in Psalm. 35. 13. Leuit. 23. 27. And as Apollinarius upon this
Psalm says:

(...) I have broken or subdued my soul with the labors or sweates of
fasting.

The Propher David not only wept, and showed his passion, but chastened
himself with fasting, and showed his Mortification. So did the Apostle S.
Paul, as he himself writes, 1. Cor. 9. 27. But I do chasten and beat down
this my body, and bring it into subjection: why? Lest when I have Preached to
others, I my self should be reproved. So did the Prophet Daniel, as we may
read, Cha. 10. 3. where he says: I was in heaviness for three weeks of days.
I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine into my mouth. So did that
blessed Hilarion, as S. Hierom writes in his life, who would say unto his
body, thus, as S. Hierom there relates: Ego (Asine) faciam te vt non
calcitres. O thou Ass, (said Hilarion to his body) I will make thee that thou
kick not. I will feed thee, not with barlie, but with chaff. J will tire thee
with hunger, J will load thee with great thrist, I will bring thee over heats
and coldes, that thou shall rather think upon thy meat than wantonness.

Wherewith did the Prophet David chasten himself? with fasting. I wept, and
chastened my self with fasting. So he did in Psalm 109. 23. where he says:
My knees are weak through fasting, and my flesh is dried up for lack of
fatness. So did the children of Israel in the house of the Lord. Judge. 20. 26.
So did Anna the daughter of Phanuel in the Temple of the Lord. Luke 2. 37. So
David and his men wept and fasted till even, for Saul and for Jonathan his
son, for the people of the Lord, and for the house of Israel, because they
were slain with the sword, 2. Sam. 1. 12. And so David himself fasted,
prayed, and lay all night upon the earth for the child's life. 2. Samuel 12. 16.

Some think that abstinence and fasting are one and the same, because they are
both employed about the same matter, and many times the one is taken for the
other. And some think that to fast, is nothing else but to live soberly and
conveniently to nature. Abstinence even as temperance, does bind every man to
keep and observe it. For as it is not sit for any man at any time to live
intemperately, so it is not meet for any man to admit that which is against
true abstinence, because we ought to eat and drink no more than reason
wills, or necessity of nature requires.

Fasting does not bind all, nor always, but some only in their time and
place. For most certain it is that our Savior Christ and his Apostles, with
many others both before and after them lived soberlie and conveniently to
nature, and yet they not always fasted. For if they had always fasted, our
Savior Christ would never have said: The bridegroom Luke 3. 25.
shall be taken away from them, and then shall they fast in those days.

And that was turned to my reproof, Here is the Construction. David was
reproved for his weeping, and for chastening himself with fasting. By whom? By
his enemies, who would destroy him guiltless, and were mighty. Psalm. 69. 4.
By his enemies, who spoke against him, tested upon him, and being drunk, made
songs upon him. It has not always been a fault, but a fashion for wicked men
to reprove and reprehend virtue and verity in good men. And therefore Judas
grudged at Mary Magdalen for breaking of the bore of ointment, and for pouring
it on Jesus head Mark. 14. 4. The Pharisees reproved Christ's Disciples to his
face for plucking the ears of Corn upon the Sabbath day, Matthew. 12, 1. And
our Savior Christ himself was mocked, scoffed at, scorned, scandalized,
reproched, reproved and reviled by the Jews, by the Scribes, and others, and
told that he was a friend to Publicanes and sinners, and that he had in him
Beelzebub the prince of the Devils. Mark 3. 22.

In the time of the heathen, the Cynicke Diogenes despised all things: the
Philosopher Democritus laughed at all things: the Philosopher Heraclitus wept
at all things: the Philosopher Aristotle thought he knew all things: and the
carping god Momus blamed and reproved all things. Envy and reproof do
always wait at virtues elbow. For Isboseth shall never want a man in his own
camp, Elah a servant in his own house, and David a son from his own
loins, besides Achitophels, Doegs, and Shimees, not only to reprove him and
reprehend him, but to work treason and treachery against him. And therefore
the Orator says well in his first Paradoxe, Ista omnia talia videmus: We see
all such things, that also wicked men have wealth, and do hurt the good. And
the Prophet David says truly, Psalm. 11. 2. The ungodly bend their bow, and
make ready their arrows within their quiver, that they may privily shoot at
them which are true of heart. Thus much of the Phrase. The Matter, as I said
before, is an Actio^ of David consisting of his Passion, and his Mortification:
and a Co^struction of that Action by others. In the Actio^, I have thought good
to observe these five particulars.

1. What Fasting is. 2. How many sorts of Fasting there are. 3. The effects of
Fasting. 4. The causes of fasting. 5. The antiquity, dignity and necessity
of Fasting.
In the Construction of the Action I have thought good to observe three
Particulars, and two Questions.

The 1. Particular, what Lent is. 2. By whom it was first ordained. 3. To what
end and purpose it was ordained.
The 1. Question; Whether set days, and times of abstinence and fasting, ought
to be commanded by authority.

The other Question: Whether it be a sin wilfully to break and to despise
set days and times of abstinence and fasting commanded by authority.

Fasting (as some define it) is a proper act of Abstinence, or a certain
peculiar manner of Austinence. As other some define it, It is a Parsimonie of
living, and an Abstinence of meats. Tertullian says: That it is a work of
reverence toward God.

Gregory lib 5. Moral. says: That it is, Quando quis pro amore Dei, etc. When
any one for the love of God and his own health does abstain, not only from
things unlawful, but from things lawful and granted.

That reverend Bishop Jewel of Salisbury of famous memory, says: That it is a
religious work ordained to testify our humility* and to make the flesh the
more obedient to the Spirit, that we may be the quicker to Prayer and to all
good works. A late excellent and exquisite Divine of ours, says: That it is an
help and furtherance Perkins Reform. Cathol. page 222.
to the worship of God, and a good work if it be used in a good manner. For
(says he) it is a work allowed of God, and highly to be esteemed of all his
people and his servants. The Greckes will have it to be called (...), of (...)
and (...) of not eating, or of eating nothing at all. And the Latins will have
it to be called Ieiunium, ab intestino ieiuno, because with hunger the bowels
are void and empty.

In the holy Scripture we find 4 sorts of fasts.

1. A miraculous fast. 2. A fast from evil works. 3. A penitenciall fast. 4. A
fast from surfeiting,
Moses, Elias, and our Savior Christ himself used the Miraculous fast; for
they fasted 40. days and forty nights.

Of the fast from Evil works, the Prophet Esaias writes, Chap. 58. 5. Nunquid
est tale ieiunium quod elegi, etc. Js it such a fast that I have chosen, that a
man should afflict his soul for a day, and to bow down his head? etc.

Of the Penitential fast, we read in the third Chapter of Jonas, the seventh
verse: where the king of the Ninevites at the preaching of Jonas proclaimed a
fast in these words, Let neither man nor beast, bullock nor sheep taste any
thing, neither feed nor drink water.

Of the fast from Surfeiting, our Savior Christ himself speaks Luke 21. 34.
Take heed (says he) to your seiues, lest at any time your hearts be
oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness.

Some there be that make two sorts of fasts.

A Public fast. And a Private fast.
A Public fast, is that which is performed and used according to the
Prescription of law, the Commandment of the superior, and the Custom of the
country.

A Private fast, is that which is done voluntarily without any constraint or
compulsion of the Law.

Some there be, that make 4. sorts of fasts.

1. a Mosaicall fast. 2. An Evangelical or Ecclesiastical fast. 3. A covetous
fast. 4. A Philosophers fast.
Some there be that make 4. other sorts of fasts.

1. A Spiritual fast from sin. 2. A corporal fast from eating and drinking.
3. A fast of necessity. 4. A Christian and Religious fast.
Of the Spirituali fast from sin, we do read in the 7. Chap. of the Prophet
Zachary, the 5. 6. 7. verses.

A Corporal fast from eating and drinking, is of 3. sorts.

1. Natural. 2. Super-naturall. 3. Civil or Politic.
Natural is that, which is prescribed by Physic, for healths sake.

Super-naturall, is as the prohibition of Saul, which Jonathan was angry with,
because the people waxed faint.

Civil or politic, is that which is for the general good and benefit of the
whole Common weal.

A fast of Necessite, is that which we cannot avoid, as in the time of dearth.
That great Schooleman Aquinas does call this fast, Ieiunium ieiunij, a fast, of
a fast: because the earth forbeareth her fruits, we forbear food, and would
eat, if we had it.

A Christian or Religious fast, is either Common, or ordinary; Special, or
extraordinary.

Some there be that make seven sorts of fasts, which be these.

1. A Pharasaicall fast. 2. A gluttonous fast. 3. A deceitful fast. 4. An
inordinate fast. 5. A superstitious fast. 6. An heretical fast. and 7. a
devilish or satanicall fast.
A Pharasaicall fast, is to fast with hypocrisy and dissimulation, to get an
applause and opinion of holiness among the people, of which Christ himself
speaks in Matthew. 6. 16. Moreover when you fast, look not sour as the
hypocrites, for they disfigure their faces, that they might seem unto men to
fast.

A Gluttonous fast, is not to keep the laws of due temperance in fasting. Of
which S. Hierome writes in his 2. lib. against Iouinian: where some (says
he) which were to fast, the Dinner or Supper before they began their fast,
would eat so much that they were not well able to digest it in two days after.

A Deceitful fast is to use wine, or any other meat or drink before or after
meals, vt fallamus ieiunium, that we may deceive or cosen our fast.

An Inordinate fast, is to keep no order of Christian charity and wisdom,
but to pass over the mean of reason, as well in keeping it, as in leaving it.

A Superstitious fast, is to apply ones self rather to the manners of the
Jews, the Saracens and the Mahumetans, then of the Christians; or to think
one self not well to have fasted, if one break his fast before the stars
appear in the night. Or to fast in days exempt from fasting by the laws and
custom of this Land, not with any good or godly cause, but with contempt and
disdain of them.

An Heretical fast, is to fast with the custom and mind of the Manichees,
Nouatians, and other Heretics; or doubtfully to observe times which they out
of a certain error have consecrated to fasting.

A devilish, a satanicall fast, is to obey the law of fasting, and yet to make
no end of sinning, but to continue and persevere in the wicked custom and
delight thereof.

A rare and renowned Divine of ours, whose judgment is best to be followed in
this matter, does make three sorts of fastings:

1. A Moral. 2. A Civil. 3. A Religious fast.
Moral fasting, is the practice of sobriety and temperance: when as in the
use of meats and drinks, the appetite is so restrained, that it does not
exceed moderation.

Civil fasting, is when upon some particular and politic considerations, men
abstain from certain meats. As in this our common weal, the law does
enjoin us to abstain from flesh meat in this time of Lent, upon Fridayes and
Saterdayes, and other times of the year.

A Religious fast is, when the duties of Religion are practiced in fasting; as
the exercise of Prayer and humiliation.

The effects of Fasting, are either special for our selves, or general for
the whole Commonweal. Special for our selves; to bridle the wantonness of
the flesh, and to make it the quicker to Prayer, and to all good works.
General for the whole Commonweal, to preserve the breed of cattle, to
maintain the Princes navy, and the Calling of the Fisherman.

And the like is affirmed by our modern Divines, that the Principal and right
ends of fasting are three.

1. To make the mind the more attentive in the meditation of the duties of
godliness to be performed.

2. That the rebellion of the flesh may be subdued: For the flesh bebeing
pampered, becomes an instrument of all, and all licentiousness*

3. To profess our guiltiness, and to testify our humilation before GOD, for
our sins and offenses committed against him.

This is proved by many places of Scripture, as Numb. 30. 14. Esaias 5. 11. Romans
14. 21. where the Apostle says: Non est bonum, It is not good, neither to eat
flesh nor drink wine, whereby thy brother stumbleth or is offended.

This is proved by many examples of the Scripture, as of David, Daniel, Tobias,
Cornelius, Paul, and others.

This is proved by the testimony of the ancient fathers, and especially these:
of that learned father Saint Austin, lib. 3. Chap. 5. against Faustus, where
he says: Non ideo carnes prohibentur quia malae sunt, sed quia illarum epulae
carnis luxuriam gignunt. Flesh is not therefore Ser. 66. sup. Cant.
forbidden because it is ill, but because the banqueting thereof breeds
riot. Of S. Bernard, who says: Abstineo a carnibus, etc. I do abstain from
flesh, lest whiles I do too much nourish the flesh, I do also nourish the
vices of the flesh. And of Chrysostom in his seventh Homily upon the first
Chapter of Genesis, toward the latter end of the Homily, where he says:
Abstinentia propter hoc recepta est. Abstinence is for this cause received,
that it may bridle the wantonness and riot of the flesh.

The causes of fasting are many, and specially 4.

1. The Holy Ghost. 2. The Commandment of God. 3. Faith. 4. Repentance.
The Holy Ghost is the cause, for three reasons.

1. Because by Nature we are given to gluttony and drunkenness, which
natural vices we do not leave without the grace of the holy Ghost.

2. Because it is not sufficent to abstain from gluttony and drunkenness,
unless the heart does also consent thereunto. 3 Because Fasting is a good
work, and all good works are the fruits of the holy Ghost. Gal. 5. 22.

The Commandment of God, is the cause, for 2. reasons. 1. Because it is
expressed in the Commandment of the Lord, that we should abstain from
gluttony and drunkenness. 2. Because the Lord by his commandment does require
of us such Abstinence, and forbids the contrary.

Faith is the cause; because without faith it can not be well done, nor
acceptable unto the Lord. For whatsoever is without faith, is sin: and
without faith it is impossible to please God.

Repentance is the cause: because fasting is a true sign thereof, and an
outward means whereby we do acknowledge our guiltiness and unworthiness of
the least benefits of Almighty God. And therefore the fasting of the Ninevites
was a sign of their repentance; and their repentance a sign and fruit of
their faith, whereby they believed the preaching of Jonas.

Thus much what fasting is: How many sorts of fastings there are: Of the
Effects of fasting: and the Causes of fasting. Now of the Antiquity, Dignity
and Necessity of fasting.

Fasting is no new invention, nor any late vpstart. The Antiquity of it does
make it venerable; and the Perpetuity of it until this day does highly grace
it. Some have derived it from Paradise, and made it as ancient as the first
man Adam. For the forbidding of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, they
say was a law of Abstinence.

The Stories of Gentilitie and Poetry, do show the Antiquity of fasting most
plainly. For Ceres had her fast, Jupiter his fast, and Priamus in Homer
bewailes the death of his son Hector with fasting, and in dust. Besides, the
Patriarchs used it, the Prophets forsook it not, and our Savior Christ and
his Disciples departed not from it.

The Dignity of fasting is great, eminent, and very excellent: for it is the
exercise of nature, thepractise of Gentilitie, and the Law and the Gospel of
Christ himself. It is comfortable, Divine, Medicinable, Spiritual, wholesome,
and an instrument to every good work. It does administer wisdom, it does
extinguish the wicked desires of the flesh, does lift up the mind to heaven,
it does unit man with God, and as Tertullian says, It does cast out devils.
Nay our Savior Christ himself so says, as we may read in Matthew. 17. 21.
where it is said; This kind of devils is not cast out but by Fasting and Prayer.

It is strange to see what the ancient fathers have written of fasting, and how
much they have attributed thereunto. Athanasius says, Lib. de Virg.
That it is the meat of the Angels, and that he who does use it, is to be
thought of Angelical order: Great (says he) is the force of Fasting. Great
things and excellent things are done by it. Basil says thereof thus: Ieiunium
Ser. 1. de Ieiu.
Prophetas ingenerat, etc. Fasting does breed Prophets, and does add
strength to the mighty. In wars it does add fortitude: in peace, it does
teach quietness.

And that I may speak in a word, as many holy Fathers as have been, thou
shall find them all to be directed and guided to lead a life worthy of God,
by abstinence and fasting. Isydorus says of it thus: Est res sancta, opus
coeleste, etc. It is an holy thing, an heavenly work, a gate of the kingdom,
a form of the kingdom to come: and he that does it well and holily, is
alienated from the world, is made spiritual, and is joined to God.

The Necessity of fasting is such and so great, that in this our common weal,
set days and times of Abstinence and fasting, are appointed for civil and
politic respects; and (as I said before) to maintain the Princes Navy, to
preserve the breed of Cattle, and the calling of the Fisherman.

Of this, I will say even as a zealous and Religious Divine of ours says in
the conclusion of the 12. point of Fasting: It were (says he) to be wished,
that fasting were more used of all Christians, in all places: considering the
Lord does daily give Perkins Refor. Cathol. page 231.
us new and special occasions of public and private fasting. These words of
our Divine we find to be true: for the All-great, and Euer-gratious GOD of
Heaven, has of late given unto us new and special occasions of both private
and public fasting.

You know, how after the death and dissolution of our late Sovereign of happy
memory Queen Elizabeth, we all feared great trobles and tumults to arise
amongst us: And yet we saw that our peace and prosperity was not eclipsed, by
reason of our good and godly King, whom the loving Lord of Heaven has placed
upon the seat of this kingdom, to rule his people with a wise and prudent
heart.

You know, how the Almighty Lord has shaken the sword of the devouring Angel
many years together upon the City of London, and upon most cities, towns,
and villages of this Land, to rowse us up (if it might be) from the sleep of
sin and security, and to make us humble our selves unto him with fasting,
prayer and repentance. You know how mightily and miraculously the same Lord
has delivered us out of the very jaws of death and destruction; and from a
treason, What treason? A treason of such horror and monstrous nature, that the
tongue of man never delivered the like, the ear of man never heard the like,
the heart of man never conceited the like, and the malice of any earthly and
infernal devil never practiced the like.

And you know also, how this great Lord has made the seas and the waters but
this last year to rage and to rore upon this Land, with unheard and unseen
flowings, inundations and risings, to the drowning of Corn and Cattle, Men,
women and children, yea, and of whole Parishes. If now we do not convert from
our wicked ways, and give our selves to fasting, prayer and amendment of our
lives, surely, surely, some heavy, yet just judgments, yea, some great and
grievous plagues and punishments are like to come upon us; which God for his
mercies sake, Christ for his merits sake, and the Holy Ghost for his Names
sake, withdraw, withhold, and keep from us. Thus much of the five Particulars
observed in the Action. Now of the three Particulars and the 2. Questions
observed in the Construction. What Lent is. The name of Lent was not at first
idely given, nor without great reason and grave consideration. For it does
signify a time of forty days, according to the Greek and Latin denomination.

Men in ancient times have reverenced this number of 40. with so great
observation, that they celebrated a feast thereof which they called (...), a
feast of forty days. This number of forty has not lightly been neglected,
nor lewdly, nor loosely been rejected, because it was thought a mystical and
wholesome number, and very significant in the religion of expiation,
penitencie and great mysteries. For forty days and forty nights the Genesis 7. 4.
rain was upon the earth. After forty days the waters ceased, and Genesis 8. 6.
Noe opened the windows of the Ark which he had made. Moses was in the mount,
how long? 40. days Exodus 24. 18.
and 40. nights. The destruction of the Ninevites was deferred, how long? till
after forty days.

The children of Israel had 40. mansions in the wilderness. The children of
Israel were 40. years in the wilderness, and before the time of that
mystical number was out, they could not enter into the land of promise. Moses,
Elias, and Christ Of this number see, Genesis 6. 3. and 18. 29.
himself fasted 40. days and forty nights. Our Savior Christ was forty
weeks in the womb of the blessed Virgin. Forty days from Numb. 18. 34. and
33. 38 and 13. 26.
his Nativity he remained in Bethleem, because he was offered in the Temple.
Forty months he Leuit. 12 4
preached publicly. Forty hours he lay in his Sepulcher, and the fortieth day
after his Resurrection he ascended into Heaven.

Al which, some Divines in times past have written not to be done without the
secret mystery and propriety of this number. Also, this number of forty, is a
number of affliction and repentance, and therefore the Prophet Ezekiel slept
forty days upon his right side for the tribe of Juda.

S. Austen does call the time of Lent, tempus venerabile, a venerable Ezekiel. 4.
6. Ser. in Sab. ante Quadrag.
time. S. Bernard does call it, tempus Christianae militiae, A time of a
Christian warfare. Gratian and others of the Ser. 1. de Quadrag. Part 3.
distinct. 5. fol. 579.
ancient fathers do call it, Decima dierum, the tenth of the days; Or the
imitation of Gods conversation: because in it we do pay unto God the tenths
of the year.

Some of the ancient fathers have gone so far, that they have thought Lent
not to be an humane institution, but a divine and Apostolical tradition, and
first brought into the Church by ye Apostle Peter. Where as likely and somewhat
probable it is, that the first Institution of Lent was by Telesphorus, the 6.
Pope in Rome, as some do reckon him, a thousand four hundred and three score
years since and more. For this Telesphorus first Platyna in vit. Telesphori.
ordained that full seven weeks before Easter all Clerks should fast from
flesh, because (as they then thought) there ought to be a difference in
fasting, even as the life of the Clergy ought to be differing from the life
of the Laity, which time was called Quinquagesima, as Gratian writes, 1.
part. distinct. 5.

This time of Lent in ancient times has been diversely begun, diversely
observed, and about it there have been diverse tontentions and controversies.
The Eastern Church began their Lent on Quinquagesima. Other some began it
on Sexagesima, as in the time of Bid. Some other on Quadragesima, as
Mediolanum, and all Greece. Some upon Ashe-wensday, and some upon an other time.

This time, in times past also has bin diversely observed. Some in this time
have abstained from all things which had life in them, as Pythagoras did. Some
have eaten only birds. Some have eaten only fishes. Some have abstained from
eggs and all kind of flesh meat; And some have eaten nothing but dry meat,
as Socrates does write, lib. 9. Chap. 38.

There have been also diverse contentions and controversies about the
continuance of this time how long it should be fasted: when some would fast but
one day, some two days, some a week, some 2. weeks, some more, and some 40.
days as Ierenaeus writes, lib. 5. Chap. 24.

By reason of these differences and diversities about this time of Lent, and
because this time was first ordained and confirmed in the Church of Rome, and
yet is specially observed therein: some there be that count this time a time of
superstition, and would have no Lent at all, scorning in very lawful policies
to be imitators of the Papacy; and like self-witted Captains disdaining to
use any stratageme used before of the enemy, although the putting of it in
exploit might give them assured victory.

To such kind of people, that may well and truly be said, which our Kings most
excellent Majesty spoke at the conference at Hampton Court. No Church (said
his Majesty) ought farther to separate it self from the Church of Rome, either
in doctrine, or in ceremony, then she has departed from her self, when she was
in her flourishing Or that which reverend Hooker does write in his 5. lib. of
Ecclesi. Poll. It is not our best policy (says he) for the establishment of
sound Religion, in all things to have no agreement with the Church of Rome,
although unsound.

The end and purpose why and wherefore Lent was first ordained, was, not only
to preserve the breed of Cattle, to maintain the Princes Navy, and the
Calling of the Fisherman, but especially for the worthy receiving of the
blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist (...).
or Lords Supper. For in the beginning of the primative Church, many came to
the holy mysteries promiscuously without any preparation. Which when the
ancient fathers understood, and saw the great harm and hurt that did arise of
that negligent coming to that holy Table, they established a Preparation or
Correction, and decreed forty days of fasting, praying, hearing of the Word of
God, and coming to the Church: that in those days the people being diligently
purged by prayer, by fasting, by reares, by compassion, and by other such
means, they might come to these holy mysteries with purer consciences and
better devotion.

The time of Lent was ordained at this time of the year, in the Spring time,
for three reasons.

1. By reason of heat increasing, and abundance of humors or moisture growing
or coming on.

2. To preserve breed and increase: because at this time there is a general
breed and increase of all things,

3. Because of the feast of the Lords Resurrection, which requires a peculiar
Preparation. For the general receiving of the Eucharist or Lords Supper, did
always fall out in the spring time.

I might speak more and much of these Particulars, but I will conclude them
with the saying of a worthy and praise* worthy Knight in a book which he
writes of the relation of the religion of the west parts of the world, where
he says thus: I am so far off (says he) from thinking the instutition of Le^t
to be superfluous, or the restraint in it unprofitable, that I rather incline
to the custom of the Greek Church, who besides their great Lent, have three
other Lents also in the year, though the other neither so long, nor in them so
strict an observation. Thus much of the 3. Particulars. Now of the two
Questions. The first Question.

Whether set days and times of abstinence and fasting ought to be commanded by
authority.

Fastings are either of men's own free and voluntary accord, as their particular
devotion does move them thereunto; or else they are publicly enjoined in the
Church, and required at the hands of all men, Montanus (as Eusebius writes)
was the first author of these appointed times of fasting, and of this (...), of
this set lawe-making of fasting. For which cause many there be that reject
and renounce the same. But most certain and assured it is, that set days and
times of fasting appointed in spiritual considerations to be kept of
Christian people, took not their beginning either from Montanus, or from any
other whose heresies may prejudice the credit and due estimation thereof, but
have their ground in the law of nature; are allowable in Gods sight, were in
all ages heretofore used, and may till the worlds end be observed, not without
singular use and benefit.

They have their ground in the law of nature, because they teach us to keep
order and moderation, sobriety and temperance in our meats and drinks. For
nature does content her self with a little. Nature is our best guide, which if
we follow, we shall never go astray. And therefore Cyneas the Philosopher was of
this opinion, that when the gods framed Nature, they went beyond their own
skill, why? because the maker (quoth he) is subject to ye thing made. They are
allowable in Gods sight, because they are days partly of pe^siue humiliation
and sorrow, and partly a sign of duty, devotion, and reverence toward God.

They were in all ages heretofore used for prevention of disorders and riot,
for the preservation of Cattle, and the maintenance of Seafaring men, because
the decay of the one, and the waste of the other, could not well be prevented
without such politic order and consideration.

They may till the worlds end be observed not without singular use and benefit,
because they draw men to penitency, to temperance, to sobriety, to all
Christian duty and devotion, and to the general good, and public profit of
the whole Commonweal.

Some there bre that would prove set days and times of Abstinence and fasting
out of the Scripture, and specially out of these places; Leuit. 16. 29. The
tenth day of the seventh month, ye shall humble your souls. Leuit. 23. 27. The
tenth day of this seventh month, shall be a day of reconciliation. And Zach. 7.
5. When ye fasted and mourned in the 5. and 7. month.

Truth it is, that these set and prescribed fasts in Leuiticus were commanded
of God, as a part of a legal worship, which had their end in the death of
Christ. And truth it is also that the fasts spoken of by the Prophet Zachary
were appointed upon occasion of the present afflictions of the Church in
Babylon, which ceased upon their deliverance. But our set days and times of
Abstinence and fasting are appointed and commanded to be observed, not for
conscience or religions sake, but for Civil and Politic regards; and not for
the private good, but for the general good of the whole Commonweal. Which if
they were left to the peoples own choice, liberty and will, it may soon be
coniectured what would follow thereof: because the corruption of the time is
such, and the wickedness of man's nature is so exorbitant, that it is a hard
matter to hold the ordinary sort of people within the lists of duty,
obedience, and good order, without the commandment of the superior, and the
severity of good laws. For which cause very necessary it is, yea a good and
godly thing it is, that set days and times of abstinence and fasting should be
appointed and commanded by authority. Which no one will dislike or disdain,
unless he be like unto Aerius, who opposed himself against fasting, and
said: These set fasts away with them, they are Ephipha. haer. 75.
Jewish, and bring men under the yoke of servitude. If I will fast, let me
choose my time to fast, that Christian liberty be not abridged.

I might prosecute this Question more at large, but I hope every charitable
Christian, and equally-minded man and woman is herein satisfied. And therefore
I will conclude it with this argument or this syllogism.

Whatsoever is for the general good and public profit of the whole
Co^monweale, that ought to be appointed and commanded by authority: But set
days and times of Abstinence and fasting are for the general good and public
profit of the whole Commonweal. Therefore they ought to be appointed and
commanded by authority.
The other Question.
Whether it be a sin wilfully to break and to despise set days and times of
Abstinence and fasting commanded by Authority.

To hold this question affirmatively, may peradventure seem unto some a
Paradox, or rather a gross error and grievous absurdity. But seeing Kings and
Princes are Christ's deputies here on earth to govern the world, and in the
Scripture are called gods: Seeing Christ willed his disciples to beware of
offenses; and seeing S. Paul willed ye Corinthians to give no offense neither
to the Jews, nor to the Grecians, nor to the Church of God; I can not choose
but believe and say, that it is a sin wilfully and without cause to break
and despise set days and times of Abstinence and fasting commanded by
Authorite; and this shall be proved unto you by 6. special arguments.

1. By the fifth Commandment. 2. By the testimony of S. Paul. Romans 13. 1. 3. By
the definition of Sin. 4. By Examples, 5. By the Ancient Fathers. 6. By
general Councels.
This is proved by the fifth Commandment. In the 5. Commandment, which is the
first Commandment of the second Table, we are commanded to honor our Parents:
where, by honor is meant, love, fear, and obedience; and by our Parents not
only our natural Parents, but all Kings, Princes, Governors, and Superiors
which do rule us. Well then, if we wilfully break and despise set days and
times of Abstinence and fasting commanded by Authority, we do not honor our
Superiors. If we do not honor our Superiors, we break this Commandment.
If we break this Commandment, I hope none will deny but we sin.

This is proved by the testimony of S. Paul, Romans 13. 1. where the Apostle
says: Let every soul be subject to the higher power. Why? because there is no
power but of God. We must not (says he) resist the power: for if we resist the
power, we resist the ordinance of God. They that resist, what shall they
receive? They shall receive to themselves judgment. Heerehence I frame this
argument. Whosoever does resist the power, does resist the ordinance of God.
But they that wilfully break and despise set days and times of abstinence
and fasting commanded by Authority, do resist the power. Therefore they do
resist the ordinance of God. If therein they do resist the ordinance of God,
who can deny but that they sin?

This is proved by the definition of sin. To sin, as S. Austen says, is
facere quod non licet, to do that which is not lawful to do. Heerehence I
draw this argument: Whosoever do that which is not lawful, do sin: but
they which wilfully break and despise set days and times of Abstinence and
fasting commanded by Authority, do that which is not lawful; therefore they
do sin:

This is proved by Examples. Adam in Paradise was commanded Genesis 2. 17.
of the Lord not to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil: If he
did, he should die the death.

Aarons sons were commanded Leuit. 10. 9
of the Lord, not to drink wine, nor strong drink in their ministry: which
commandment because they brake, they were slain. The man of God, that came
out 1. Reg. 13.
of Judah was slain by a Lion, because being seduced by the false Prophet, he
did eat bread, and drank water in his house, contrary to the Lords
Commandment.

Saul would have put his son 1 Samuel, 14.
Jonathan to death, because ignorantly he took a little honny contrary to his
commandment. If Adam, Aarons sons, and the Prophet of God were punished of
the Lord for their not abstinence: and if Jonathan was in so great danger, for
breaking his fathers commandment in eating a little honny: Is it not a sin
before God for us, wilfully to break and to despise set days and times of
Abstinence, and fasting commanded by Authority, seeing we are commanded of
the Lord to submit our selves to our Princes ordinances; and bound in
conscience truly and unfeignedly to obey them?

Let us yet go further. The noble kings Ezekias, Iehosaphat and Josias, made
laws for the exercise and the recalling of Gods service. That Christian and
religious Emperor Constantine made laws also in things pertaining to holiness
toward God and toward his Church. Theodosius his successor, took the same
course. King Alured or Alfred appointed and commanded set days and times of
Abstinence and fasting. And so did king Edgar, Anno Dom. 958.

Had it been a sin for people in those days to have broken these their
Princes laws and ordinances, wilfully, wantonly, and without cause? and shall
we think that it is not a sin for us in these days to do the like?

This is proved by the testimony of the ancient fathers. Most certain and
assured it is that Austen, Ambrose, and other of the ancient fathers were of
this mind, and thought it a sin wilfully to break and to despise set days
and times of Abstinence and fasting commanded by Authority. S. Austen de temp.
Ser. 62.
calls them new teachers that shut out the merit of fasting, and asks what
salvation we can obtain if we blot not out our sins by fasting, seeing
(says he) the Scripture says, that fasting and almesdeeds does deliver from
sin, Alijs diebus ieiunare (says he) remedium est aut praemium, etc. To fast
on other days is a remedy or reward: but not to fast in Lent is a sin. S.
Ambr. in ser. 25. de Quadrag. says thus among many other things, Non leave est
peccatum. It is no small sin to break a fast that is commanded.

Although these two ancient fathers had their errors, and in some sort thought
corruptly of fasting: yet I will say of them and of their opinion concerning
fasting; as reverend master Hooker says, lib. 5. Eccle. pol. lib. 5. page 208.
Ecclesiast. Poliicie. Concerning every man's duty herein (says he) that which
Austen and Ambrose are alleged to have done, is such, that all men favoring
equity must needs allow, and follow it also if they affect peace. Well then,
if according to master Hookers judgment al men must needs allow this opinion
of these two Fathers, if they favor equity and affect peace: then I hope I
may say, that it is a sin wilfully and without cause to break and to despise
set days and times of Abstinence and fasting commanded by Authority.

This is proved by general Councels, and specially by that of Chalcedon held
in the year of our Lord 454. to confound the error of Eutiches, who held,
that in Christ, God and Man make but one Nature.

The Council of Mentz under Canon 35.
Charles the great, made this decree. Si quis indictum ieiunium super biendo
contempserit, etc. If any one shall with pride contemn fasting commanded, and
will not observe it with other Christians, let him be accursed.

The like was established by the Council of Carthage in their 63. Canon, By
the Council of Laodicen in their 50. Canon, and by the Council of Toletan in
their 7. Canon.

If those Councels thought them fit to be accursed and excommunicate, that
would not observe fasting commanded by Authority; shall not we think, that
they thought it a sin in them that did wilfully break and despise the same?

I might stand longer, and much longer upon this question, but I will conclude
it with the saying of the Apostle S. Peter, and say unto you even as the
Apostle Peter said to the Jews, 1. Epist. 2. 13, and 14. Submit your selves to
all manner of ordinance of man, etc.

But some peradventure may say, you have spoken nothing of Imber Fasts, and
Fasts on Saints Eues. What can you say of them? are not they altogether idle,
superstitious, and to be abolished?

I pray you give me leave and I will speak somewhat of them also. And 1. I
will show you why they were so called. 2. By whom they were first ordained. And
3. the occasion why they were ordained.

They were called Imber-daies upon no other reason and occasion, but of eating
bread baked under Imbers or ashes. Whosoever does say otherwise, says it
either of malice or ignorance. For the people upon those days used to fast,
and to eat nothing but bread baked under Imbers. Which they did for two
causes. First, to pay unto God at such times, the tithes of their souls and
bodies, in thanksgiving for the fruits of the earth, and the fruits of his
grace. Secondly, that the holy Ghost might the more plenteously be powered
down upon them which receive holy orders. For the Sunday after these
Imber-fasts, and at no time else, always has been, and yet still is the
ordering of ministers by the Bishops.

Some refer the first institution of these Imber-fasts to Pope Vrbanus Some to
Calixtus the 2. And some say, that they were first confirmed in the Counsel of
Mentz, held under Charles the great, of which I spoke but now, for this intent,
that people upon those days should come to the Church, should fast to the 9.
hour, and abstain from flesh and all things else.

But most certain it is, that these Imber-fasts are most ancient, have been
most common, and in all the Christian world most religiously observed four
times of the year: and therefore they are called Ieiunia quatuor temporu^, the
fasts of the four times, because of the four special turnings of the sun,
the first about the Spring Equinoctial, the second about the Summer Solstice,
the third about the Equinoctial in Autumn, and the 4. about the winter
Solstice. And upon these three days of the week, the Wensdaies, the Fridaies,
and the Saterdaies: because our Savior Christ was sold upon a Wensday,
crucified upon a Friday, died upon a Saturday, and rested in his sepulcher.
These reasons have been alleged heretofore for the institution and
observation of these Jmber-fasts.

The eues of Saints-daies are called in Latin Vigiliae, which is, watchings;
because in the time of the Apostles, and alo^g time after, watchings, prayers,
and almesdeeds, were accustomed to be joined to fastings. These fasts on saints
eues were not at first idely invented, and have not in times past been fondly
nor foolishly observed. And they have been set (as master Hooker writes, as
vshers Eccle. Pollib. 5. page 214.
of festival days for prevention of disorders as much as might be: which may
be kept not without great good to the keepers, and singular use and benefit
to the whole Commonweal.

Concerning which, as the Apostle S. Paul said to the Corinthes, so say I unto
you: Let all things be done honestly and according to order. Great is the
dignity of order, and therefore the Apostle says, Let all things. Great is
the necessity of order: and therefore the Apostle says, Let all things be
done. Great is the eminency and the excellency of order; and therefore the
Apostle concludes his Chapter with the same.

Will you have common duty kept which Nature requires? then let all things be
done honestly, and according to order. Will you have common law regarded which
Policy wills? then let all things be done honestly and according to order.
Will you keep your goods, your houses and all things that you have, in peace,
quietness and prosperity? then let all things be done honestly, and
according to order. Will you be faithful and firm, loving and loyal subjects
to our gracious Sovereign? then let all things be done honestly, and
according to order.

And will you have all things to go well with you, and to prosper well with you
in this world: then let all things be done honestly, and according to order.
Without this order, there is no duty, no devotion, no charity, no concord, no
law, no love, no peace, plenty nor prosperity, no grace, goodness, nor any
godliness, although we hear never so much, know never so much, talk, debate
and dispute of divinity never so much. Thus much of the 2. Tim. 3. 16
matter: Now of the application and the uses.

Because all Scripture is given by inspiration, and is profitable (as the
Apostle Paul tells us) to teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness; we ought here to follow the example of David, and to chasten
our selves with fasting as he did, although by some it be turned to our
reproof. Of which his fasting, Humiliation was the cause, even as divine
speculation was the cause of Moses so long fasting in the Mount.

For in the holy Scriptures we read how not only Kings fasted, as David and
Iehosaphat, but Prophets fasted, as Moses, Elias and Daniel: women fasted, as
Anna, Hester, Judith and Sara Raguels daughter: the children of Israel fasted,
the inhabitants of Gabish Gilead fasted: the Apostles fasted: Saints, Fathers
and Confessors fasted: yea, the very heathen (as we read) fasted, as Jupiters
priests in Create; with the greatest Philosophers Antisthenes, Pythagoras, and
Socrates. But in these our days it is strange to see, the scorn and the
scandal, the contempt and the disdain which many make of fasting: in so much
that if a man or a woman does but for civil and politic respects observe and
keep set days and times of Abstinence and fasting commanded by Authority, he
shall be of some reproched and reproved for it, and he shall be of some thought
to be popish and superstitious. We are all now grown to excess and to
extreamities, to lust, liberty, and licentiousness. We are all for the most
part given to gluttony and gourmandice, to security, sensuality, and
surfeiting. We are all now grown to be Epicures, to be Sibarites, and to love
the two daughters of the horse-leach, although they suck out all the blood of
our bodies.

The best feastmaker, is thought with some to be the best Christian, and the
least faster, is thought with some not to be the least professor. We care
not for the preservation of the breed of Cattle, the maintenance of the Kings
Majesty's Navy, or the Calling of the Fisherman. We care not for any good
Laws or Statutes whatsoever, that enioine us to Abstmence and fasting, but
like Heliogabalus, we will be our own heirs, and make an end of all things our
selves: like the children of Israel when they were without Kings, we will do
that which is good in our own eyes: and like the two sons of Aaron, Nadab
and Abihu we will offer strange fire, although we be burned in the flames
thereof. Worshipful, and beloved in the Lord, Men, brethren and fathers, I
pray you give me leave to say thus much unto you: The wisest and the worthiest
men of this Land are persuaded, that the not Abstinence, fasting, and mean
diet, is the occasion of so many great, grievous, and outrageous sins which
are committed amongst us. There was never more teaching, more preaching, more
laws and more Statutes, and yet never more excess, more intemperance, more
riot, more surferting, more hypocrisy and dissimulation, and never worse and
worser living. The world is bold to surfeit, and has taken an habit to fry in
words, but to freese in deeds; and to be rather a disputant than an agent in
Religion, and to count sins, no sins, but to turn them from sins, to
trades and occupations.

The world does blush, and does scorn to fast, because it thinks it to be
an abridgement of Christian liberty, to be Jewish, a Montanizing, and rather
the bewraying of a disease then the exercising of a virtue. And therefore some
say as they did in the 2. Chap. of Wisdom: Come, let us enjoy the pleasures
which are present, and let us cheerfully use the creatures as in youth, etc.

Some say as they did of whom the Poet writes: We are a number, Horat. ad
Lollium epistol. lib. 1.
and we are borne to consume, and eat fruits, and fill our bellies.

Some again will fast, but when? when they list themselves, and not otherwise.
For when we fast, they will feast: and when we feast, then they will fast; And
out of Lent they will eat flesh meat, though not upon other days, yet upon
Fridaies and Saterdaies; and in the time of Lent, they will eat flesh-meate
seven days in the week: behauing themselves therein much like unto them, to
whom it was said by our Savior Christ himself: We have piped to you, and ye
Mat. 11. 19
have not danced: we have mourned to you, and ye have not wept. Some again
will keep extraordinary fasts; but how? without the knowledge and authority
of the Maiestrate, to prevent his decree, and control his government. To such
kind of persons, that may well and truly be said which a reverend and learned
Doctor has written: A wilful law-breaker, would Of obedience or
Ecclesiastical union. sect. 19. fol. 62.
willingly break the lawgiver: that is, he that is not a friend and welwiller
to the Princes laws, can not be a friend and welwiller to the Prince himself.
Many good and wholesome laws and Statutes have been made and enacted to
bridle the lust and liberty of people in this point, as in the 5. and 13.
year of our late Queen ELIZABETH, and in the first year of our now gracious
dread Soueraign King JAMES; which Act, because it specially concerned this
matter, and is fit and necessary to be heard, known and understood of all
here present, I will read unto you as it is set down in the book.

You which are now in place and authority, look to this good Act, and to the
due execution thereof, as you ought to do. First you your selves, give good
examples thereof in your houses, to your children, to your servants, and in
other places also where you come, Look to those Butchers, and that without all
favor or partiality, that shall offend herein, and to those Tauerners,
Inne-keepers and Ale-house-keepers, which make a common course and custom of
offending herein, and that without any fear or intermission.

You which are Parents, give good examples thereof to your children: and all
you which are masters, mistresses, and dames of houses and families, give good
examples thereof to your servants, to your apprentises, and to others that are
with you.

Let the superior sort give good examples thereof to the inferior, the richer
to the poorer, and the elder to the younger, without the honny of hypocrisy, or
the leaven of maliciousness, contempt or wilfulness; that we may all live in
the fear, die in the favor, rest in the peace, rise in the power, and remain
at last in everlasting glory with Jesus Christ our Savior, to whom, etc.

FINIS.

