THE HISTORY OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND.

Compiled by Venerable Bede, Englishman.

Translated out of Latin in to English by Thomas Stapleton Student in Divinity.

You being sometimes strangers and enemies in understanding etc. Coloss. 1^
He has now reconciled in the body of his flesh through death etc. If yet ye
continue grounded and steadfast in the Faith, and be not moved away from the
hope of the gospel, which ye have heard, which has been preached among all
creatures under heaven.

SPES ALIT AGRICOLAS


Imprinted at Antwerp by John Laet, at the sign of the Rape: with Privilege.
Anno. 1565.

E. R.

God save the Queen.



TO THE RIGHT EXCELLENT AND MOST GRATIOVSE PRINCESS, ELIZABETH BY THE GRACE OF
God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defendour of the Faith. (^^)
IF THE mind of man (most gratiouse Souuerain) in respect of which we are
made after the image of the highest, excelled not in passing degrees, the lump
of mortal flesh, by means whereof it utters his natural functions, if
the qualitees of the one surmounted not infinitely the conditions of the other,
neither should it seem worth the while to set pen to paper for defense of
true religion, in these perilous times of schism and heresy, neither would it
be sitting for one of my calling to commend such labors to the view of your
Majesty. For, as in the vvriting I have good cause to remember that Truth
purchases hatred, so in the commending of the same I can not forgett that a
young scholar, and base subject attempteth to talk with a right mighty
Princess and his learned Souuerain. Notvvithstanding, considering the inward
man and better portion off my self, I have to comfort me both in the one,
and in the other. In the one, respect of the profit which may arise hereby to
the deceived consciences of my dear countreme^, your highness subjects, my
regard to Gods honor and zeal to the truth do make me less to fear the
displeasure that may ensue. In the other your highness most gratiouse Clemency,
and known good affection to be informed of the truth, enboldeth me to present
particularly to your most Royal Majesty, that which I publish to the whole
Realms commodite. For as that which the body receives, the Head first
vevveth and considers, so thought I most convenient, that the general
history of the realm off England should first be commended to the princely
head and Souuerain gouuernour of the same. Again, the history in Latin being
dedicated by the Author to a king of this realm, one of your most Noble
progenitors, it seemed no less then duty, that the translation and new
publishing of it ought to come forth under your highness protection succeding in
the Imperial Crown of the same.

The matter of the History is such, that if it may stand with your Majesty's
pleasure to view and consider the same in whole or in part, your highness
shall clearly see as well the miss informations of a fevve for displacing the
ancient and right Christen faith, as also the way and mean of a spedy
redress that may be had for the same, to the quietness of the greater part of
your Majesty's most loyal and lowly subjects consciences. In this history it
shall appear in what faith your noble Realm was christened, and has almost
these thousand years co^tinevved: to the glory of God, the enriching of the
crown, and great wealth and quiet of the realm. In this history your highness
shall see in how many and weighty points the pretended refourmers of the
church in your Graces dominions have departed from the pattern of that sound
and catholic faith planted first among Englishemen by holy S. Augustine our
Apostle, and his virtuous company, described truly and sincerely by Venerable Bede, so called in all Christendom for his passing virtues and rare lerning,
the Author of this History. And to thentent your highness intention bent to
vveightier considerations and affairs may spend no long time in espying out
the particulars, I have gathered out of the whole History a number of
diversities between the pretended religion of Protestants, and the primitive
faith of the english church, and have annexed them straight joining to this our
simple preface. May it please your most gracious highness to take a short vevv
of it, and for more ample intelligence of every particular (if it shall so like
your highness) to have a recourse to the book and chapter quoted.

Beside the whole history of holy and learned S. Bid, I have published a short
and necessary discourse to mete with the only argument of such as will
pronounce this whole book to be but a fardle of papistry, a witness of
corrupted doctrine, a testimony of that age and time which they have already
condemned for the time of no true Christianite at all: of such I say as have
altered the faith we were first Christened in, condemning our dear
forefathers of almost these thousand years, the Christen inhabitants of your
graces dominions. This I have done principally in ij^ parts. In the first by
express testimonies of holy Scripture, the psalms, the prophets, and the new
Testament, by removing the objections of the adversaries taken out of holy
Scripture, by the glorious success of these later 900. years in multiplying
the faith of Christ through the world, last of all by clear and evident
reasons I have proved that the faith of us Englishmen all these ix c. hundred
years, could not possibly be a corrupted faith, traded up in superstitions,
blindness, and idolatry, as it is falsely and wickedly surmised of many, but
that it is the true and right Christianite no less then the first vj. c.
years, and immediate succession of the Apostles. In the second part, where we
gather a number of differences in doctrine, in ecclesiastical government, in
the order and manner of proceeding, in the course and co^seque^ces of both
religions, that first planted among us and so many hundred years co^tinevved,
and this presently preached and pretended, I have shevved by the testimonies of
the most ancient and approved Fathers, of the Councels and histories of that
time, that in all such differences our faith first planted and hitherto
continevved among us, agrees and concurreth with the practice and b^elefe of
the first vj. c. years, the time approved by all men's consent for the right and
pure Christianite. If it may stand with your Majesty's pleasure to weigh
this double truth so clearly proved first out of Gods holy word and evident
reason, then out of the assured practice of the primitive church, your Grace
shall quickly see a ready redress of present schisms, a compendious quieting
of troubled consciences, and an open pathe to return to the faith, without
which is no salvation. As we know right well, the meaning of your
gracious highness to be already seriously bent to have the truth tried and to
be sincerely published through all your Graces dominions, so to the end that
this godly zeal may in your Majesty's most Princely heart the more be kindled
and confirmed, most humbly and lowly I beseech the same, to behold a fevve
examples of the most puissant Princes that have been in Christendom, which in
that singular virtue have principally excelled.

At what time Princes and Emperors (having certain hundred years fought and
striued all in vain against the light of the ghospel and publishing of
Christen religion) began at length them selves to take the svvete yoke of
Christ, to submit their Sceptres to his holy Cross, and joining devout
humilite with worldly policy began to procure their soul health, and to
provide for the world to come, then the prophecy of Esaie was in them
fullfilled saying to the church of Christ. Behold I will stretche out mine
hand to the gentiles, and set up my token to the people. Esaiae. 49.
They shall bring thee thy sons in their lappes, and carry their daughters
unto thee upon their shoulders. For kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and
Queen's shall be thy nursing mothers. They shall fall down before thee: etc et.
Then their chief endeavor and principal care has been to maintain the only
Catholic faith in their dominions, and to chase eftesoones all schisms and
heresies that from time to time sprange up among. Constantin the great
(vvorthely so called for sundry respects) the Arrian heresy under him arising,
labored by all means possible and semely to his princely vocation to que^che
the same. For this purpose, first he directed that learned and virtuous Father
Osius bishop of Corduba in Spain, Niceph. li. ^. cap. 12.
to the churches of AEgypte where the terrible tragedy of that heinous heresy
began, with his letters of exhortation to reconcile them again which were
divided in matters of the faith. Cap. 13.
He vvrote also to Arrius him self and Alexander the bishop of Alexandria,
persuading with them to come to agreement and accord. After (all this
fuffising not) at the motion and order of the virtuous bishops of that time and
by their ordinary means, In praefat. Nic. Con.
he caused the truth of the controversy to be enquired, examined, and
discussed in a full and general Council held at Nice, where he presented
him self bearing the charges of the bishops that dvvelled far of. Nicep.
lib. 8. cap. 14.
After this council according to the determination of those holy Fathers, for
quieting the church, he banished Arrius, Theognis, Eu^ebius of Nicomedia, and
other masters of that sect. He talked also and commoned with Acesius a
bishopp of the Nouatians, laboring to win him to the Catholic church
again. Being troubled also with Donatus and his accomplices breding then a
nevve sect in Christ's church, against Caecilianus their lavvfull bishop, he
vvrote unto Miltiades then Pope of Rome to decide the matter, Idem li. 7. cap.
42.
and directed a commission out of his own Court for the better expedition of
the same. Thus labored that virtuous and Christen Emperor Constantin the
great to maintain the unite of Christ's church, and to abolish all heresies in
the provinces of the whole world then subject unto him. This glass he left
to his posterite other Christen Princes to look on.

Valentinian the first, the next catholic Emperor of any continuance after
Constantin, Hist. tripart. libr. 8. c. 13.
so earnestly t^^dred the catholic religion, that when Vale^s his brother the
Arria^ Emperor of the East, demanded aid of him against the Gotthes, then
breaking in to the Romain empire, he ansvvered that being an heretic, it could
not stand with his conscience and religion to help him: 2. par. 19^ and. 25.
fearing vvorthely the check that God by the mouth of Iehu gave to Iosaphat
king of ^uda, for aiding the Apostata and Idolater Achab, king of Israel.
Theodosius successor of Valens in the East called also the great for his
worthy and princely qualities, for the maintenance of the catholic faith of
Christ's church, published an edict against the Arrians and the Manichees,
vvherby he imbarred them all manner of assembles, L. Omnes Vet^^ae. cod. de he.
et Manich.
preaching or teaching, banished the^ out of cites and places of resort
commanding also no man should company with them. Again the same Emperor
after much disputations and conferences had with the Arrians, perceauing at
lenght by the advice of Sis^nius, that they agreed not among them selves, nor
approved the learned vvriters in Christ's church before their time (both
which great faults are evident in the principal promoters of this new
pretended religion) utterly to extinguish all heresy, and for a final
extirping of schism, Socrates li. 5. c. 10. S^zomenus lib. 1. c. 17.
he with Gratian commanded expressly, that such doctrine and religion only
should take place, as Damasus, then Pope off Rome, taught and allowed.

Honorius and Arcadius sons to Theodosius, followed the godly steps of the
virtuous Prince their Father. Thereupon Arcadius by the stout advise of
Chrisostom would not grant to Gainas a famous Scythian Captain under him one
poor corner in all the East to practice his Arrian profession in. Niceph. li.
13. c. 5.
Honorius likewise having information of the horrible schisms of the
Donatistes in Afrike, directed in commission thither Marcellinus to be present
at a general assemble in Carthage of the caholike bishops and the Donatistes,
Tom. 7.
as it appears by the conferences of that assemble yet extant in the works
of S. Augustine.

How diligent Theodosius the second next successor to the foresaied Emperors
was in extirping the heresy of Nestorius, and in setting forth the right
doctrine touching the godhed of the holy Ghost against Macedonius and his
scholars, the vvritings of Cyrillus ad Reginas, and to Theodosius him self do
evidently declare.

After these Marcianus the Emperor with that virtuous princess Pulcheria
labored diligently to extinguish the heresy of Eutyches, as it may appear by
sundry epistles of learned Leo then Pope of Rome soliciting eftsoons the
Emperor thereto, and by the Acts of the fourth general council of
Chalcedon. Which not long after him Justinius the Emperor, Niceph. li. 17. c.
2^
with such Christen zeal defended that he caused Seuerus the schismatic
bishop of Antioch to have his tou^g cut out for the daily blasphemies he
uttered against that council. Cap. 9.
Justinian also his successor caused all the heretical books and writings
of the said Seuerus and other to be burned and made it death to any that kept
or used any such books. The Christen zeal of this Emperor tovvard the
maintenance of Christen religion is declaredin the fifth general counsel kept
at Constantinople against sundry heresies. Cap. 27.
Procopius commending the earnest and virtuous zeal of this Emperor, De ^ello
vandalico. lib. 4.
vvriteth that he would never admit Gelimerius a valiant Captain and one that
had done him noble service joining with Belisarius in the vvarres against the
VVandalls, unto the order of his Nobilite, because he was infected with the
Arrian heresy.

Such has alvvaies be^ (most gracious Souuerain) the virtuous zeal of the
vvisest and most politic Princes to extirpat heresies and false religion out
of their dominions, knovving right well, that none are better subjects to the
Prince than such as most devoutly serve almighty God. And again that nothing
more highly pleases God tha^ that a prince do farther and set forth the true
service and worshipping of him. Such a one was king David, of vvho^ therefore
God said. I have found David a man according to my hearts desire. Act. 13.
And these Emperors here specified, as they te^dred most the setting forth of
true religion, and abolishment of the false, so prospered they most of al other
in vvorldly respects. For as under Constantin the great first by us mentioned
the empire most flourished, and was the^ first placed in the East, the cite of
Byzance being then magnificently enlarged, and called Constantinople of that
most mighty Emperors name, as he had diverse and most glorious conquestes
against the tyrans, Maxentius, Licinius, and other foreign barbarous enemies,
Pr^copius lib. 1. 2. 3. and. 4.
so (to let pass the other) Justinian the last of us mentioned was he that
most gloriously restored up again the Majesty of the Romain empire then
almost fallen flatt down, chasing the VVandals out of Afrike, clearing Italy
and the west empire of the Gotthes, extinguishing utterly the Hunnes in
Graece, and having most noble victories against the Persians.

Long it were particularly to discourse upon the Princes of every singular
province in Christendom, and to notise unto your hignes, the zeal, diligence,
and endeavor of each one in extirping haeresy and schisms. Yet to thentent it
may appear that the one Imperial Crown of Christendom being parted in to
several realms and dominions, the zeal of each one in the particular
provinces was no less to maintain the unite off Christ's church, then when
the whole was under the monarchy of one Empire, may it please your most
gracious highness to call to remembrance that this Christen and godly zeal
has been in the Princes of several countrees so glorious and evident, that in
respect of the same, most honorable titles have been appropriated to the royal
Crowns of such personages.

To the Imperial Crown of your Majesty, the Noble and glorious title of
Defender of the faith has been of late years annexed and perpetually given by
the S^e Apostolic, for the most godly and learned work of your highness most
noble Father, our late dread Souerain, in defense of the seven holy Sacraments
of Christ's Church (off which the scholars of Geneua have taken away five)
and against the wicked heresies of that lewd Apostata Martyn Luther. To the
crown of Spain for the great zeal of king Alphonsus in extirping the
Arrian heresy, Michael Ritiu^ N^a politanus.
above 800. years past, the title of Catholic was annexed, and continues
yet hitherto unblemished. To the crown of the french king for the passing
zeal of those princes (namely of Clouis the first Chrsten king, of
Charlemain, of Philippe surnamed Auguste) in extirping heresies from time to
time out of their dominions, Les annal^s de Fia^ ^
the title of Most Christian, has also ben appropriated from the time of Pipin
and Charlemaign his Son hitherto.

Though I abstain (to avoid prolixite) the farther recital of particular
Princes, yet may it please your most excellent Majesty favorably to attend to
one or two examples more for the extirping of the heresies of John vvicleff
and the Bohems, containing in many points the doctrine now preached for the
very true word off God.

In the history of Polidore we read of that Noble prince and of most worthy
memory Henry the fifte one of your highness most noble lineall progenitors,
Lib. 12.
that having called a Parliament, and decreed therein a voyage in to France for
recovery of his right, the money being gathered, souldiars pressed, all things
prepared for that enterprise, yet the general Co^ncell of Constance then
being appointed, he stayed his pri^at quarrel for Gods cause, directed his
lega^s unto the Council, expected the fine thereof, and in the mean while
appeased the rebellion of John Oldecastle laboring by force and disobedience
against his Souuerain (as the new VVicleffs do presently in France and
Scotland) to maintain the heresy of VVicleff, and pronounced trait^u^s all the
adherents of that wicked sect. By this speedy diligence of that gracious
Prince, both that heresy was then quailed in your highness dominions, and (as
Polidore notes) the Noble victories of that valiant prince ensued: God
undoubtedly prospering his affairs, who had preferred the quarrel of him,
before his own prepared viage.

It is now a hundred years and more sense the time that the kingdom of
Bemeland being grievously mangled and almost destroyed with civil sedition
through the schisms and heresies planted there by the same VVicleff and Huss,
Cromerus i^ e^ist. ad Proceres Poloniae.
was offered of the people it self to the king of Poole Vladislaus to have and
rule it as his own, setting among them some quiet order of government. But
because of the heresies then praeuailing, it was of that virtuous Prince
utterly refused. Yea war also was threatened them unless they agreed and
reconciled them selves to the Catholic church.

If it may like your most excellent highness after the pattern and examples of
these most puissa^t and virtuous Princes to proceed in your most gracious
meaning to the publishing of the true christen faith (which is but one, and
not new) through your graces dominions, as al Christendom heartily vvissheth,
the view and consideration of this present history, a worthy and most
authentike witness of the first and true Christen faith planted in your
Graces dominions, with that which is annexed to prove it a right and
uncorrupted faith, shall not a little (I trust in God, in whose hands the
hearts of Princes are) move and farther your highness virtuous intent to the
spedy atchieuing of that it desires. For faith being one (as the Apostle
expressly says) that one faith being proved to be the same which was
firstgraffed in the hearts of englismen, and the many faithes of protestants
being found different from the same in more then forty clear differences
gathered out of this present history (which reports not al, but a fevv by
occasion) it must remain undoubted, the pretended faith of prote^tants to be
but a bastard slip proceeding of an other stock (as partly of old renewed
heresies, partly of new forged interpretations upon the written text of Gods
word) and therefore not to be rooted in your graces dominions, lest in time,
as heresies have done in Greece and Afrike, it ouergrovve the true branches of
the natural tree, consume the spring of true Christianite, and suck out the
ioyse of al right religion: leaving to the realm the bark and rine only, to
be called christians. Which lamentable case the more every Christen heart
abhors, and your highness most gracious meaning especially detesteth, the
more it is of us your highness most lowly and loyal subjects to be wished
and daily to be prayed for at the dreadful throne of Gods deep mercy, that it
may please his goodness so to direct the heart of your highness, so to inspire
with his heavenly grace the most gracious meaning of your Majesty, that it may
wholy and perfectly be bent to the restoring of the one catholic and
Apostolical faith of Christendom, to the extirping of schism and heresy, and
to the publishing of Gods true service. Al to the honor of almighty God, to
the contentatio^ of your Majesty's pleasure, and to the wealth of your graces
dominions. The which God of his tender mercy, through the merits of his dear
Son, and intercession of all blessed Saints in heaven, grant. Amen.

Your highness most lowly subject, and bounden orator, Thomas Stapleton.
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE PRIMITIVE FAITH OF ENGLAND CONTINEVVED ALMOST THEse
thousand y^res, and the late pretensed faith of protestants: gathered out of
the History of the church of England compiled by Venerable Bede an English
man, above DCCC. years paste.
BEcause if the says first planted among us englishmen, was no right Christen
faith at all, then protestants (if their faith be right) are n^w the Apostles
of England, let us consider what Apostolical marks we find in our first
preachers, wan^ing in protestants.

Signum Apostolatus sui in omni pa^ientia in signis and prodigijs: ^. Cor. 12.
the token of his Apostleship in all patience, in signs and miracles, as S,
Paul writes of him self to the Corinihians, whose Apostle also he was. And
of such miracles wrought by our Apostle S. Augustine, and how Eth^lbert the
first Christen king of englishm^n, was thereby induced to the faith, the first
book, the xxxvj. and the xxxi. chapters, Item the second book, the second
chapter do evidenly testify. Miracles in confirmation of their doctrine
protestants have yet wrought none.

Creden in^ erat cor vnum and anima vna. Act. 4.
The multitude of them that believed, were of one heart and of one mind. How
much our Apostles tendered this unite, it may appear in the second book, the
ii. Chapter, where they labor to reduce the old Brittons to the unite of
Christ's church. Nothing is more notorious in protestants, then their infamous
dissension.

10. (...). 20.
and of him the Apostles. The history reports their vocation in the first
book, the xxiij. Chap. Protestants have first preched their doctrine without
vocation or sending at al, such as the church of Christ requires, as it is
other where at large proved.

If this enterprise be of men said Ga^aliel of the Apostles preaching, Act. 5.
Our faith of England has continued 900. years and upward. The protestants
faith is already changed from Lutheran to sacramentary in the compass^ of
less then 20. years, and their primitive faith is lost, Luther being now
accounted a very papist.

S. Paul s^ieth. Fides est sperandarum substantia rerum. Faith Heb. 11.
And again, that the Just man lives by his faith. Romans 1.
Such faith puts things by the belefe and practice where off we may be
saved. Such a faith our Apostles taught us. Our Creed, our sacraments, our
laws and Canons ecclesiastical received of them do witness. The faith off
protestants is (as I may so say) ablatarum substantia rerum. A substance or
mass off things taken away and denied. It is a negative religion. It has no
affirmative doctrine but that which catholics had before. All that is their own,
is but the denial of ours. This other where is proved, and may also presently
appear by the differences which follow in doctrine between them and us.

Differences in doctrine.
Our Apostles said mass. In the first book, the xxv. Chap. it is mentioned.

In the Mass is an external sacrifice offered to God the Father the blessed
body and blood off Christ him self. In the fi^fe book the xxij.

This sacrifice is taught to ^e propitiatory in the iiii. book, the xxii.

Off confession off sins made to the priest the fourth book does

Satisfaction and penance for sin enjoined, appears in the fourth admits
not.













lib. 4. cap. 24.

lib. 4. ca. 3. and 24. Protestants under pretense of a communion do wickedly
bereue christian folcke thereof.



Commemoration of Saints at Mass time. In the fourth book the

Pilgrimage to holy places especially to Rome a much wount matter iiij. book
the 3. and xxiij. chapter. Item in the v. book, the vii. chap. Nothing
sounds more profane or barbarous in the religious ears of protestants then
such deu^tion.

Of relikes of holy men, of the reverence used tow^rdes them and off iiij.
book, the 6. chap. Nothing is more vile in the sight of protestants, then
such reverence of Christians.

Blessing with the sign of the Cross, accounted no superstition but iiij.
book the xxiiij. chapter: and in the v. book the ij. chapter. In the devotion
of protestants it is esteemed for magic.

Solemnites of Christen burial protestants despise and set light by, iij.
chap. the third book the viii. chap. and otherwhere.

Benediction of the bishop, whereby the superiorite of the spiritual Hebr. 7.
in the iiii. book, the xi. chap. Protestants confounding all good order, do
scorn at this also.

The service of the church was at the first planting of our faith in the xxix.
chapter and the iiii. book the xviii. chap. This protestants have altered
both against due or^er, and condemning wickedly other parts of Christendom
for the contrary.

Aultars protestants have plucked down contrary to the order of our primitive
faith, as this history witnesses in the first book, the xxix. chap. And in
the second book, the xiiij. chap.

xxix. chap.

xxix. chap. and in the second book the last chapter.

xxix. chap.

xxii. chapter, toward the end.

ii. chap. the fourth book the v. chap. the xvii. chap. and xxviii. chap.
Protestants have called the determination of ecclesiastical matters from
thence to the lay Court only.



xiii. and xxii. chapters of the third book.

iiii. the xvii. and the xx. chapters. Item in the fifte book the xx. chap.
How far that See is now detested by the sober religion of protestants, all
men do see.

To note how differently the Catholic faith of al Christendom was first
planted in our country, and the parted faith of protestants has corrupted the
same, the first difference is clear herin that our first Catholic faith we
received of the Sea of Rome. This heresy has begone

Again our faith was first preached with Cross and procession.

Our first Apostles were monks. See the first book, the xxiii. chap. iii.
chap. The first preachers of protestants have been Apostatas. Luther,
Oecolampadius, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Barnes, Barlow and other.

The first impes off our faith, the first scholars off our Apostles In
postilla magna in Dom. ^. Ad.
The brood of protestants in the very first issue has been so enormous, that
Luther the holy Father thereof confesses his scholars to be under him far
more wicked, then they were before under the Pope.

The first preaechers of our faith lived Apostolically in voluntary

As touching the effect and consequences of both religions, our faith

By the first Christians off our faith, God was both served day and devil a
most acceptable sacrifice.



Li. 2. ca. 3. lib. 4. ca. 3. and 16.
The loose lewdenes off protestants have stirred Princes to take from the
church possessions so given.

Li. 2. ca. 4. li. 3. ca. 25.
This late alteration has removed them from unite to schism.

All these differences touching doctrine and ecclesiastical government, are
proved to concur with the belefe and practice of the first vj. C. years, in
the second part of the Fortress of our first faith set forth presently with
the History.

ET Priuati and Braba^tici Regiae Maiestatis Consilij diplomate cautum est ne
quis infra quadriennium proximum Historiam ecclesiasticam gentis Anglorum,
Authore Venerabili Beda Presb. a Thoma Stapletono in Anglicum sermonem versam,
per omnes Burgundicae ditionis regiones imprimat aut alibi impressam distrahat
aliter quam eidem Thomae videbitur, sub poena in Diplomate constituta.

Datum Bruxellae. 20. and 23. Iunij. 1565. Subsig. Bourgeois. Facuwez.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe kingdom of heaven is compared in holy scripture (christen Reader) to a
merchant aduenturer, which seking and travailing to find precious stones,
Matt. 13.
having at length found out one of singular and most excellent value, goes
and sells all that he has to bye that one. What this singular and most
excellent perle is, whereunto the kingdom of heaven is compared, if we weigh
and ponder diligently, we shall find it to be no other thing, then the Faith
in Christ Jesus, whereby the kingdom of heaven is undoubtedly purchased. This
perle is of price so singular, and of value so excellent, that to get it we
sell all that we have, we renounce the world, the flesh and the devil with
all the pomp thereoff, we cleave only to this, we profess to live and dye in
it. This precious pearl off Faith, this singular jewel of true belefe, this
heavenly treasure off the right knoweleadge off God and off his commandments,
as all nations at one time received not, Act. 14.
God off his secrett and right justice sufferring the Nations to walk on their
ways, but in several ages, and by several means, as and when it pleased God
was opened and made manifest, so have al nations not only for that, sold all
which they had, yelding and submitting them selves only and wholly thereto, but
also have steadfastly and assuredly cleaued unto it, have by long succession
preserved it, and enjoyed it. If any have in time utterly lost this most
excellent and rare jewel (as we see, alas, all the Southe and all most all the
East part of the world has) the cause thereof has been the alteration, and
new devised furbishing of that perle from the former and natural shape thereof,
first and formest received. Such nations and parts of the world as have in
many ages and, do yet keep and enjoy this rich and princely treasure, do
therefore yet keep it and enjoy it because they continue and remain in it
after such order and manner only, as they received it: because they keep it as
they found it, because they continue it, as they begone it. Of the first if
we remember the breaking in of the Wandals in to Afrike about the year of our
Lord 400. men soon after infected with the Arrian haeresy, if we call to
mind the great rage and tumult of heresies, in the Greek Church, Arrians,
Macedonians, Eutychians, Monothelites, and a number of such other, if we will
trust the report and course of Hystories thereof, we shall evidently see,
that this inestimable jewel off the Christen faith has in Afrike and Greece
utterly ben lost, because they departed from the first pattern delivered unto
them, because they altered the faith first received among them, brefely
because they yielded to heresies. Of the later if we have an eye to the
vniformite of the Christian faith first received in all such countres as yet
remain Christians, with the faith first planted and graffed among them, if we
look to Italy, to France, to Spain, to the catholic territories of Greece,
of Germany, of Suicerland, to the kingdoms of Poole, of Portugal, and of
other maine lands in other places off the world dispersed, where the precious
jewel of this faith is known and enjoyed, we shall find that all those
countres have and do therefore yet continue in the same, because they vary not
from the first faith received, because they mangle not the jewel given unto
them, neither alter the natural shape thereof, brefely because they believe al
one thing and after one sort as their first teachers and Apostles believed and
taught them. For why? They have well remembered the admonitions of S. Paul to
the Corinthians converted by him to the faith of Christ, when he wrote unto
them and said, Vigilate and state in fide. Wathch and stand in the faith^ 1.
Cor. 16.
Also to Timothe by him in like manner christened, writing unto him and saying.
O Timothee depositum custodi, deuitans prophanas vocum nouitates. 1. Tim. 6.
O Timothe keape well that is committed to thy charge, avoiding profane
novelties of words. And again to the Colossians, praising them for the faith
received, if yet (says he) ye continue steadfast and grounded in the faith, if
we waver not from the hope of the gospel, which ye have heard, which has been
preached in all the world. Colos. 1.
Al Christened Catholic countrees have well remembered these lessons of the
Apostle. And as many as have remembered and followed them, have remained and do
yet remain in the faith of Christ, have long enjoined and do yet enjoy this
rare and inestimable jewel compared to the kingdom of heaven. As al other
countres have so done, so have we englishmen also these many hundred years kept
and preserved sound and whole the precious perle of right faith and belefe, as
long as we remained steadfast in the faith first planted and graffed among us,
as long as we kept that which was committed unto us, as long as we wauered not
from the gospel first received and universally preached through all the
world, as S. Paul wills us. But after we began to alter and poolish after
our own new devises this ancient perle so long kept among us, so
universally made of and esteemed, after we forsook the first pattern off the
Christen faith delivered unto us, we have fallen in to plenty of heresies, from
one heresy to an other, from Luthera^ to sacramentary, and so forth, we stand
also in danger to fall (as other countres have done before us) from a false
faith to no faith, from heresy to paganism.

The which lamentable and dreadful state to the intent we may by the example
of other countres, and by the advertisement of the Apostle beware and eschew^,
to the intent we lose not utterly in time this inestimable treasure off our
Christen faith, that we may remember vnde exiderimus, from whence we have
fallen, I have thought good to put thee in mind, Christen Reader) of this
precious jewel of our faith in Christ, what and of what manner it was, when
wefirst received it, how and when we came by it, what force and authorite it
ought to bear with us, and last of all how far and wide it varieth from the
pretended false faith of these wicked days. As touching the former points,
what the faith first planted among us englisshme^ was, how and when we received
it, because it is a matter historical, in an History'ye shall read it. As
concerning the later points, of what authorite the faith then planted ought to
be, and how notoriously the false faith of this time pretended, differs from
the same, because it is a matter of doctrine, a matter to be tried by lerning,
in a treatise by itself as far as our abilite serves, it shall be proved
and tried. The history which must report the faith first planted amongevs,
shall be no story of our own devising, no late compiled matter, where both for
vncertainte of things so long paste, we might be much to seek, and for the
case of controversies now moved, partialite might justly be suspected, but it
shall be an history written in the fresh remembrance of our first Apostles,
written above 800. years past, written of a right learned and holy Father of
Christ's church, of a countreman of ours living and flourishing shortly after
the faith so planted among us. Of the Author of this History and of the matter
thereof we shall presently speak, if we first admonish thee, gentle Reader,
that touching the treatise to fortify this faith, and therefore called, A
Fortress of the faith first planted among us englishmen etc, and concerning all that therein shall be treated, you take the pains to readethe Introductio^ or
first chapter thereof. In it you shall see what the whole contains, what is of
you to be looked for and of me to be performed.

Touching the Author of this History, he was a countrema^ of ours borne in the
North country, by Weimouth not far from Dyrrha^. Of the Author of this
History.
He flourished in the year 730. He was a man of great lerning and virtue, much
reuere^ced not only at home, but also through out al Christendo^ eue^ in his
life, time and much more after his death. Of his rare lerning and knowleadg his
writings yett extant, Of his lerning.
are a clear and sufficient testimony. The protestants of Basil have of late
years set forth his whole works now extant, in eight tomes containing four
great volumes. In them it appears that S. Bid was a man universally seen in
all good lerning, as well of humanite and philosophy as of divinity, expert
off the tounges, ready in holy scriptures, perfectly conversant in the old
fathers. He was so great a follower of S. Augustine, the worthyest pillar of the
church sense the Apostles time, that his commentaries upon holy Scriptures
both of the old and new Testament, are almost word for word out of S.
Augustine. He was so diligent a reader of that learned Father, that whereas in
the words of S. Augustine no perpetual commentary upon the epistles of S.
Paul being extant, and yet that worthy Fathers in diverse places of his learned
works having by occasion touched and expounded every text of those epistles,
Venerable Bede for the great profit of his posterite, as a man borne to edify
Christ's Church, has so gathered those scattered places out of the main sea
off S. Augustins works, that placing them in order and facion, he made a just
and full commentary upon all the epistles of S. Paul with S. Augustins own
words, noting to the reader allwaies the book and chapter of S. Augustine,
from whence he had taken those places. This work is entitled Collectanea
Bedae. In which worthy work, we may doubt whom to marvel more at or
commend. S. Augustine which had so often in his works treated of S. Paul, and
omitted no one sentence vnexpounded, or S. Bid which so gathered into a just
commentary the sayings of S. Augustine, meaning no such thing. As S. Bid was
a great writer, so he was a continual preacher. His homelies yet extant do
testify, made not only upon the ghospells and epistles of the Sondaies through
out the year but also upon the festival days of Saints. They are to be read
in the seventh tome of his works. These homilies of his were so highly esteemed
that (as Trithemius reports) they were openly read in churches, Lib. de scri.
ecclesiasti.
while he yet lived, through out our country. Even as we read of holy Ephrem
that learned deacon of Edessa, that his writings also were openly read in
churches, Hieron. in Cata. vir. illust.
next after holy scripture. After his death they were received of other parts
of Christendom, France especially (as Platin notes) and are to this day read
in principal festes with no less authorite and reverence then the homilies of
S. Ambrose, In Joan. 6.
S. Augustine, S. Gregory, and other. Briefly the whole occupation and
business of this learned man was, to learn, to teach and to write, as in his
own words placed after the end of this history he records him self.
Again for the more commendation of his lerning, it is to be remembered what
learned scholars he had. Among the rest the most famous were (as Polidore
specifieth) Rabanus, Lib. 5. Histor.
Alcuinus, Claudius, and Ioannes Scotus, not the scholeman but an other of S.
Benets order. These were all famous and learned writers, as in Trithemius who
has written their lives the learned may read. Alcuinus S. Bedes scholar being
sent of Offa king of the middleenglishmen in embassage to Charlemain the first
and most glorious Emperor of the Germans, was for his virtue and lerning
retained with the Emperor, and became his scholemaster and instructor in all
kind of good lerning. He taught after at Paris, and persuaded the Emperor
Charlemain to erect there an university: which beginning with that virtuous
fountain S. Bedes scholar and our country man, we see now to what a great
river it has multiplied, and how many learned men these vij. hundred years and
upward have from thence ben derived. To return to S. Bid, he had two learned
brothers, Strabo, and Haymo both famous writers and lights of the church, as
in Honorius, Trithemius, Platin, In Joan. 6.
and other ecclesiastical writers it may be seen. And thus much of his
lerning, which who list farther to try, he may read his learned works, lately
set forth (as I said) and much commended by the protestants the^ selves of
Basil. For more satisfying the english reader, I will after the preface place
his whole life shortly written by Trithemius, with the enumeration of certain of
his works in his time known.

As touching the virtue of holy S. Bid, Of his virtue.
which properly commends an historiographer, and discharges him from all
surmises and suspicions of false reporting or poetical fayning, yt may be to
any well meaning man a sufficient argument that even from the age of seven
years (as he writes him self) he lived in cloister and served allmighty God
day and night in religion to the last hour of his life, which was the
continuance of lxv. years. All which time he so attended to prayer, to daily
and howrely serving of God in the church, to private meditations, that (as one
writes) if ye consider his life, ye would think he had studied nothing, and
again if ye behold his study, ye would suppose he had spent no time in
prayer. For his great virtue and modesty he was in his life time called
Venerable Bede, In vitae Bedae.
as Trithemius notes, of whom also Platina in that sense speaks, saying. In
Joan. 6.
Beda praeter graecae atque latinae linguae doctrinam qua^ non mediocriter
tenuit, ob religionem e^iam atque modestiam Venerabilis cognomentum adeptus
est. Bid was surnamed the Venerable for his religion and modesty: beside that
he was learned in the Graeke and Latin tongue. Lib. 1.
Polydore alleging Bid in the history of our country, cites him with these
titles. Beda homo Anglus, quo nihil castius, nihil melius, nihil verius, and
caet. Bid an english man, then whom none more chaste, none off more virtue,
none of more truth, etc. With like commendation and reverence he is alleged of
his learned posterite in all ages. In his life time not only at home with his
own countremen for his virtue and learning he was in high estimation, and in
great credit with the Nobilite of our country, but also he was abroad with
other Christen princes (being but a monk by profession) in great estimation
and much reverenced. Therefore like as we read of S. Antony, S. Hierom,
before his time, Tripart^ hist. lib. 1. cap. 1. In Epist.
off S. Bernard and other after him, all monks and religious men, that in
their private celles they had yet a care of public quiet, and like counselors
of the whole world they moved princes to their duty, so of holy S. Bid we
read the same. For thus Platin reports of him. In Ioanne vj. (...).
Cum Africa and Hispania a Sarracenis occuparetur, Beda, qui eisdem temporibus
fuit, hanc calamitatem literis ad Principes Christiani nominis scriptis,
lamentatus est: quo bellum in hosts Dei atque hominum susciperent. When Afrike
and Spain was taken and held of the Sarrazens, Bid which lived in that time,
l^mented this calamite in letters written to Christen Princes, to the intent
that they should make wars against the enemies of God and men. Wherein both
the virtuous zele and religions care of common quiet in holy S. Bid appears,
and the authorite also which he hadd abroad with other Christen princes is
signified. Unto whom also a little before his death in familiar letters he
prophesied of the great waste of Europe and the West church, which soon after
his death ensued by the Sarazens. For as Afrike by their means lost the faith
and lacks it yet, so Spain off late only recovered the faith again. Thus
much off his learning and virtue. Other especialls of his life, as where he was
borne, how he lived and dyed, ye may partly read in his life written by
Thrithemius, which we have translated and placed a part after the preface,
partly in his own words following after the end of this history.

The Author of this history being a man of such lerning and virtue, a
countreman of ours, one that writes the history of things done at home, done
in his life time, or in few years before, the memory of them being yet fresh
and new, it shall not need I trust to persuade the Reader in many words to
give credit unto him in such things as he reports. Neither may I fear to
prefer his authotite before the authorite or report of any man that now lives.
For beside his lerning and virtue, it is to be considered that he lived in a
quiet time, Why the Author of this history^s to be credited.
before these controversies which now so trouble Christendom, were moved. He
is an indifferent reporter. There is no suspicion of parts taking, no
prejudice of favoring either side, no fear of affection or misseiudgement to
be gathered upon him. We have good cause to suspect the reports of Bale, of
Fox, of Beacon and such other, which are known to maintain a faction and
singular opinion lately spronge up, who report things passed many hundred
years before their days. No such suspicion can be made of S. Bid, who lived
above eight hundred years paste, and reports the planting of Christen
religion among us englishmen, partly by that which he saw him self, partly
by the report of such who either lived at the first coming in of Christendom
to our country them selves, or were scholars to such^ Who also was no
maintainer of any sect or faction, but lived and died in the known common
faith of Christendom, which then was, and is now but one.

In this history therefore vewe and consider the coming in of Christen faith
in to our country, Of the matter of the history.
the heavenly tydinges brought to our Land, the course, increase, and
multiplying thereof. The virtuous behavior of our forefathers the first
Christen englishmen. Peruse and mark the faith which they believed, the hope
wherein they continued, the charity whereby they wrought. Their faith taught
them to submit them selves to one supreme head in Christ's church the
Apostolic Pope of Rome, Peter's successor, to whom holy Scripture tells us
the kayes of the kingdom of heaven were given. (...) 16.
Their faith taught them all such things as are now by protestants denied, as
for the more part we have out of the history gathered by a number of
differences, placed in the second part of the Fortress. Their hope and charity
so wrought, that our dear country of England has been more enriched with places
erected to Gods honor, and to the fre maintenance of good lerning, then any
one country in all Christendom beside. Gather honny like bees out of this
comfortable history of our country, not venim like spiders. Read it with
charitable simplicite, not with suspicious curiosite, with virtuous charity,
not with wicked malice. As for example. The fact of Saint Gregory described in
the second book the first chapter of this history reporting how that holy man
seeing in Rome certain of our countremen set to be sold in the market, moved
with their outward beauty, began to pity and lament their inward foul
infidelite, holy S. Bid writes diligently as an argument of his great good
zele and tendering of Christ's religion, and construeth it to the best, as no
honest Reader can other wise do. But baudy Bale according to the cleanes of his
sprit and holy gospel, like a venomous spider being filthy and unclean him
self sucketh out a poisonned sense and meaning, charging that holy man with a
most outrageous vice and not to be named. Sueton in Neron^.
So like an other Nero (who living in lewd lechery would not be persuaded
that any was honest,) this old ribauld, as in other stories he practiced,
makes this history also, ministering no dishonest suspicion at al, nor giving
any color of unclean surmising, to serve his filthy appetit and bestly
humor. It will better become the godly reader, and Christen heart to interpret
al to the best. For in deed, none can think evil of other, which is not evil
him self. ^. Cor. 13.
Charity, says S. Paul, thinks no evil, reoyseth not of iniquite, but is
delited in verite. Such charity if it had been in Bale and his fellow
protestants, we should not now have had so many lewd lies and malicious
surmises upon the lives of holy men, as are to be seen in the works of Bale,
Fox, and other.

In this history it shall be no loss time to peruse the learned, virtuous, and
zealous epistles of certain Popes of Rome after S. Gregory, as of Bonifacius,
Honorius, Vitalianus, and other to the kings of our country as well for the
increasing of Christen faith, as for the extirping of Pelagians heresy, for the
due observation of Easter, which al Christendom hitherto keeps, and other like
matters. While ye peruse this, ye may remember the lewd lies and slanderous
reproaches of protestants daily preaching and writing that after S. Gregory al
faith was lost, Gods honor was trod under foot, all right religion was
ouerturned and that by the Popes them selves. Better to bestow idle hours in
such virtuous lessons as this History gives, and more charitable to note the
godly writings of the Popes here also comprised, then to pry out with baudy
Bale the evil lives of our superiors. Who were they as badde as the Pharisees
or worse, yett they are to be obeyed by the commandment of our Savior in
such things as they say, though not to be followed in their doings. Truly
monasteries being now thrown down, no examples of virtue and and perfection
appering in such as now preach and teach, all remembrance of Christen
devotion would be forgotten, if the help of stories were not. Of the miracles,
reported in this History.


As touching the manifold miracles mentioned in this history, note the person
that reports them, and the time they were done in, to wit, in the primitive
church of the english nation. At the planting of a faith miracles are wrought
of God by the hands of his faithful for more evidence thereof. Good life in
such as newly receive the faith is more fervent. Visions and and working of
miracles accompany those as live in such fervent goodness and perfection. We
have therefore rather more cause to lament the corrupt state of our time, and
the kaye cold devotion of this age, then to miscredit the perfect behavior of
our primitive church, and the miracles wrought therein. Tobi. 12.
Opera dei reuelare and confiteri glorio sum^est. It is an honorable thing to
reuele and confess the works of God, says the Angel to Tobias in holy
scripture. Such therefore as will think the miracles of this history here
reported either incredible, either unprofitable and such as might have been left
out, truly either they must deny the author, or envy at Gods honor. Such as
deny the author we will not force the^ to believe him. We make it not a matter
of such necessite or importauuce. Yet this I think I may be bold to require
them that they believe as far S. Bid, as they do the Acts and monuments of
Fox, the story of Bale, and such other. I think it no sin to match
Venerable Bede with any of them in any respect either off lerning, honesty or
truth. It may rather savor of sin or at lest off wrong judgment, and
great partialite to believe Bale and discredit Bid: the one being notoriously
bent to one side, the other without al suspicio^ off favoring any side: the
one a late known naughty man, the other a confessed holy man of all the Latin
church. Last of all the one thought learned only off a few, the other accounted
for excellently learned even of the protestants them selves, namely those of
Basil, who have most diligently and with much commendation published his
works. But I may seem to do injury to that holy man, to compare him with any
of our da^es, glory he never so much of the sprit or off the gospel. To
return therefore to the matter no indifferent Reader has any cause to
discredit the miracles reported in this History, if he will have an eye to the
person that writes, and to the time in which they were wrought. Nay rather it
is no small argument for the confirmation of our Catholic faith, planted
among us englishmen, that at the planting thereof such miracles were wrought.
Of this argument in the second part of the Fortress we have treated more at
large. Cap. 3. That the History ought not to se^e (...).
To that place I refer the Reader.

If otherwise the History for the often miracles here repeted, seem to any man
vain, fabulous, or incredible, him earnestly I require diligently to pondre
and bear away that which follows: First generally in an ecclesiastical
history, in a history written off the Church, in the Historical narration of
matters pertaining to God, to faith, and to religion, it has ever so fallen
out in all Christen writers, that of miracles much and often mention has been
made. Who so peruseth the ecclesiastical histories of Eusebius Pamphilus and
of Ruffinus, the tripartit history of Socrates, Sozomenus and Theodoret, the
history of Euagrius and Nicephorus, he shall find in them strange and
miraculous matters in the lives of holy me^ reported. For example of such, Li.
6. c^. 9
Eusebius reports of Narcissus a holy man that light lacking in the church
all the oil of the lamps being spente, he made by praierwell water to serve
instead of oil, and the lamp light to burn by that. Also of the same man he
writes that whereas three men had perjured them selves in an accusation
against him, each one wishing to him self diverse plages and vengeance from
God if their accusation was false, each one had soon after the plage that he
wished falling upon him evidently and miraculously. Li. 7. ca. 18
The same writer reports of an herb growing before an image of our Savior
in Caesarea of Phaenicia, where also an other image stands of the woman cured
by Christ of the bluddy flixe, which herb after that by grows it touches
the brazen hemme of the Images garment, it cures deseases of all sort.
Ruffinus in like manner in his ecclesiastical history reports miraculous
things of Spiridion the holy bishop of Tremithunt in Cypres, Lib. 1. c. 5.
as that when certain thieves would have stolen of his sheep, and came to the
fold in the night time for that purpose, he found them in the morning fast
bound without^ any man to bind them. Who finding the^ in such case in the
morning, and vndertstanding the cause^therof, absoluit sermon, quos meritis
vinxerat. He loosed them by his word, which before had bound them by his
merits, says the History. Again whereas a certain f^ende of his had left
with his daughter Irenee by name, a certain pleadg, and the maid minding to
keep it sure hyding it under the earth, and dying shortly after, without
telling the Father any thing thereof, the party came soon after to require the
pleadg, Spiridion the holy bishop not being able otherwise to find it about
his house, and seeing the poor man grievously lame^ting the loss thereof, went
hastily to the grave where the maid lay, and called her by her name. Who
straight answering him: he asked her where she had laid the pleadg of such a
man which the maid forthwith told him, and he thereupon found it, and restored
it to the party. Thus much and more reports the ecclesiastical history of
Ruffinus written about the year of our Lord 400. Li^. c. 8. 10. Lib. 2. cap. 8.
If I would stand upon the recital of other miracles in that history reported
done at the Cross of Christ found out by Helena, done by a captive Christian
woman in Iberia, done by the scholars of S. Antony the eremite, Hist. tripart.
li. 1. c. 5. 10. and 11. lib. 7.^ cap. 5. ^oz^m. lib. 6. ca. 29.
Isidorus, Moses, and other: If I should likewise make a particular recital
of the miracles mentioned in the tripartit History wrought by the Cross of
Constantin, of the visions of Amos and Antony the eremites, also of Piammon the
monk, of the miraculous cures and prophecies by Ioannes a monk also, of the
visions and miraculous cures wrought at Co^statinople in the Catholic oratory
of Gregory Nazianzen, Lib. 7. c. 5. (...). 22.
if I should again touch the miracles wrought by Symeones that famous
Anchoret, and of a number of other out of the History of Euagrius and
Theodoret, Li. 4. et in Philotheo.
I should pass the bonds and measure of a preface. It shall be sufficient
generally (as I said) to note that al ecclesiastical Histories (such as this
History of Venerable Bede is) do always by occasion intermingle miracles in
the lives of holy men and lights of Christ's church. The most learned ^athers
of the first ^. ^. years have w^^ten Saints lives.


Yea this kind of write has be^ thought so profitable and necessary for the
church of Christ, for confirmation of the faith, for example of good life, for
the glory of God, that the best and most learned writers in Christ's church have
occupied their studies therein. Athanasius wrote the life of S. Antony the
Abbat: and so much commends the knowleadg thereof, that in the preface he
says: Perfectaest ad virtutem via Antonium scire quid fuerit. It is a perfect
way to virtue, to know what a man Antony was: Gregory bishop of Nissa, brother
to S. Basil, wrote the lives of holy Ephrem, Tom. 3.
and Theodorus the Martyr. S. Hierom wrote the lives of Paulus, Hilarion, and
Antony monks. S. Ambrose wrote the lives of S. Agnes, Li. 1. and 3. de virg.
Item inexhortat ad virgins.
S. Thecla, S. Soter, and Pelagia, all Martyrs and virgins of Christ's church.
Eusebius Emissenus wrote the lives of Genesius, Epiphodius, Alexander Martyrs
of Christ's church also. Prudentius wrote in verse the lives and miracles of
many Saints. In hom. so. 126.
Theodoret that learned bishop of Cyrrha wrote a great book of Saints lives,
entitled Philotheus, whereof he makes often mention in his ecclesiastical
history. Li. 1. ca. 7. Li. 2. c. 30 Li. 4. c. 25 and 27. Li. 22. c. 8
Seuerus Sulpitius an eloquent writer of more then twelve hundred years paste,
wrote the miraculous life off Saint Martine. Saint Augustine in his books De
ciuiDei, among other arguments and tokens of the Christen faith reakoneth up in
a set chapter sundry miracles wrought at the toumbes and relikes of holy
Martyrs, especially of S. Steven. Brefely, if we will have an eye to holy
scripture it self, we find in the four evangelists beside the heavenly
doctrine, beside the tydinges of our salvation, beside the mysteries of our
redemption, the miracles also wrought by our Savior most diligently
expressed, and of the three which first wrote particularly repeted: we find in
in the Acts of the Apostles, many miraculous cures, and expulsions of wicked
spirits wrought by the Apostles. In the books of the kings likewise manifold
miracles and things (otherwise vncredib^e) are reported to be done by Elias
and Heliseus the prophets. To conclude therefore, this present history of
Venerable Bede, this history of the church of England (our dear country)
containing in it beside the historical narratio^ of the coming in of us
englishmen into this land, and of attaining to the faith off Christ in the
same manifold miracles, and particular lives of holy men, as of saint Augustine,
Paulinus, Mellitus and other our first Apostles, off learned Theodoret and
Wilfrid, of the holy bishops Aidan of Scotland, S. Cutbert, S. John of
Beuerlake, S. Chadde, S. Erkenwald of England, of S. Oswald, of S. Audery and
diverse other religious virgins, in the very spring and first fruits of our
Christen faith, ought not to any Christen man seem a vain, fabulous, or
incredible narration, more then the histories of other Saints lives no less
miraculous and different from the common trade of men (especially in the lewd
loose liberty of this wicked time) than are the lives and doings mentioned in
this history, ought to seem: being yet written of the most learned fathers in
Christ's church above named, and in the purest time of Christianite, by the
adversaries own confession, to wit: all within the compass off the first V.
C. years. And as Theodoret in the preface of his Philotheus warns the
Christen Readers not to discredit any thing by him to be mentioned in that
history of saints lives, so will I with his words, warn the studious Reader
hereof, such as esteem the judgment of the holy and learned Fathers. Theodoret
says, and I in the name of Venerable Bede say the same. In praefat. ad
Philotheum.
Eos qui in huius historiae lectionem inciderint, oro atque obsecro etc, An
admonition out of Theodoret touching miracles.
Those which shall happen to read this history (says Theodoret) I pray and
beseech that if they find any thing written, which passes their power, they do
yet believe it, not measuring the virtue and power of holy men, with their own
virtue or power. For God gives gifts of the holy Ghost to the godly, and more
excellent to such as excel in godlynes. And this I speak to them which are
not acquainted with the secret works of God. For such as have well serched and
tried the secrets of the holy Ghost, they know and feel his bountifulnes, and
do well understand what God among men works by me^, when by the mighty power
of miracles he draws the unbelievers to the knowleadg of him. Truly whosoever
will stick to credit such things as we shall report, no doubt but he will also
stick and stagger, to believe the miraculous works of Moses, of Iosue, of
Elias and of Elizeus. Yea the miraculous works of the Apostles, he will
account for very fables. Otherwise, if he will believe those other things to be
al true, why will he mistrust these for false? For the same grace of god which
wrought in the other, has also wrought in these holy men all such things as
they did. For this grace being continual and ever running, tendering always
such as make them selves worthy thereof, by such men, as by certain rivers,
keeps her main course, and flows most plentifully. Thus far Theodoret. An
other out of S. Augustine.
For in deed, as S. Augustine says serching out the reason how we that live
are visited of holy men departed this world, Lib. d^ cura pro mor tuis gere^da
cap. 16.
A lij sunt huma^arum limits rerum, alia diuinaerum signa virtutum, alia sunt
quae naturaliter, alia mirabiliter fiunt, quamuis and naturae Deus assit vt
sit, and miraculis natura non desit. The bonds of man's abilite, and the signs
off Gods power be diverse. Some things are done naturally, some miraculously:
though yet both God helps nature, and nature concurreth in miracles. And
therefore S. Augustine though (being yet so excellently learned) he could by no
reason find out how holy men departed this world miraculously work here on
earth (as in the same place he expressly confesses) yet he reporting how that
John that holy Monk appeared in a vision by night to a godly woman fervently
desiring to see and talk with him, and how he heard it by the mouth of one
which learned it of the party her self, and of her husband, he says, Cap. 17.
Qui hoc ab eis comperit, retulit mihi vir grauis, and nohilis, and
dignissimus, credidi. One which understood this of the parties them selves,
reported it unto me, a sober man a worshipful, and worthy of credit, I believed
him. But (says S. Augustine in the words immediately following) if I had seen
that holy Monk my self, because, as they say, he was both very gentle to be
asked, and very wise to make answer, I would have asked of him (touching this
matter) whither he him self came to that woman in his sleep, that is, his
ghost in the shape of his body, as we also do dream in our bodies, or whither
he him self being otherwise occupied, or if he sleapt, dreaming some other
thing, such a vision yet of him appeared to the woman in her dream, either by
an Angel, or by some other means, and that by the spirit of prophecy he
foreknew all this, and therefore promised before to her husband that he would
see her. For if he him self was present to the woman in her dream, truly
that was done by miraculous grace not by nature, by the ghifte off God, not by
his own power. But if he being otherwise occupied, or sleaping him self, and
occupied with other fantasies, yet the woman saw him in her sleep, truly
then it seems not much unlike to that we read in the Acts of the Apostles,
where our Savior speaks to Ananias of Saul, Act. 9.
and tells him, that Saul did see Ananias coming toward him, Ananias him
self not knowing any thing thereof. Which so ever of all these that man of God
should answer unto me, I would farther yet ask him touching the Martyrs,
whither they them selves be present in visions, or by some other means do
appear to such as see the^ in what form they list, and specially when the
devils in men's bodies confess that they are tormented of them, and desire them
to spare them, or whither all these things be done at the will of God by the
Angelical powers for the honor and commendation of Saints, and for the
profitt of men, the martyrs them selves being in the mean, in most perfect
quiett, occupied with more excellent sightes severally from us and praying so
for us. For at Millain also at the toumes of the holy Martyrs Protasius and
Geruasius, the devils naming them, as also other departed men, confessed also
bishop A^. brose then living, and cried upon him to spare them, the bishop then
being otherwise occupied, and not knowing at all thereof. Last of al whither
these things be some times done by the very presence of the Martyrs, sometime
by the ministry of Angels, and then whither it may be discerned of us, and by
what tokens we may discern it, or whither none else can discern it, but such
as has that gift by the Spirit of God dividing peculiarly to every one as he
wills. 1. Cor. 12.
Al these things, I think, this John would discuss and declare unto me: that
either at his teaching I might learn and know such things to be true and
certain, or else I might believe without knowleadge, he teaching yet such things
as he knew. But if perhaps he would answer to all these my doubts out of holy
scripture, and say unto me. Eccles. 3.
Seek not such things as pass your capacite, nor search not after that which
excels your abilite, but what our Lord has commanded you, think upon
those things allwaies, I should gladly take this answer also. Note.
Non enim paruus est fructus, si aliqua obscura and incerta quae comprehendere
non valemus, clarum certumque sit nobis non esse quoerenda, and quod
vnusquisque vult discere, putans prodesse si sciat, discat non obesse si
nesciat. For it is no small profitt, if in such dark and doubtefull matters as
by reason we can not find, yet we may clearly and evidently see that such
things are not by reason to be found. And that every one desirous to know,
thinking such knowleadge might profitt him, may learn it is nedelesse to know,
which he can not possibly know. Thus far S. Augustine in that place, believing
the miraculous operations of holy Martyrs, and visions of holy men, though he
could not attain to the reason of either other. In like manner he believes that
S. Felix the holy Confessor off Nola, Lib. eodem Cap. 16.
when that cite was grievously assieged, non solis beneficiorum effectibus,
verum etiam ipsis hominum aspectibus apparuisse, not only by miraculous works
and present succor, but by evident vision and common sight appeared unto men.
Such visions such miracles holy and learned men stick not to believe, though the
reason thereof they perce not unto. And even so such holy and miraculous
examples as abund in this History, though they can not perhaps sink in to the
hearts of protestants, whose faith is limited by reason, and builded upon
wordly wit, yet Catholics which have learned of S. Paul to subdue their
understanding to the obedience of faith, 2. Cor. 10.
and whose faith is guided by Charity which believes all things, as the
Apostle also teaches, 1. Cor. 13.
can easily believe the report of so holy and learned a man, Heretics will not
believe miracles.
as Venerable Bede in all Christendom has these many hundred years ben
accounted. Let protestants follow the Arrians, which when a blind man was
restored to sight at the toumes of S. Geruasius and Protasius at Millain S.
Ambrose then being bishop, Confess. lib.
and S. Augustine not yet christened being then present also, said yet (as S.
Ambrose writes of them) Non sunt isti martyrs, nec torquere diabolum possunt,
Sermon. 91.
nec aliquem liberare. These are no Martyrs, they can not torment the devil,
they can not help men. And again. Ariani dicunt. Non sunt daemonum vera
tormenta, sed ficta and composita ludibria. The Arrians do say. These are not
true torments of the devils, but feigned and imagined illusions. Let
protestants follow their forefathers, old cursed heretics, let them scoff at
the miracles done at the toume of S. Alban that holy Martyr, and of S. Cutbert
that holy Confessor. We will with Theodoret, with S. Augustine and with S.
Ambrose believe such virtue and miraculous power of holy Martyrs and Confessors
mentioned by Venerable Bede, as they believed the report of good men, before
them.

For the farther contentation of the Reader in this point, beside all which
has been said, we shall in the history it self, when strange and incredible
miracles and visions shall occur, note in the margin other like examples
avouched by the most approved writers of the primitive church. To make an
end, if all this suffiseth not to defend this history from the cauilles of
protestants, because of the miracles here reported then let them show a reason
why the Acts and Monuments of M. Fox, deserve not the like. Protestants
pretend miracles.
Are there not also in that donghell heaped a number of miserable miracles to
set forth the glory of their stinking Martyrs? I report me to the leaves of
that book, pagi. 95. 183. 208. 251. 389. 416. 433. 442. 443. 444. 520. 645.
668. 8^8. 881. 1040. 1355. 1670. 1677. In all which places miracles such as they
be, are to be found. And to speak somewhat particularly, he that in this
history will discredit such miracles as S. Bid reports upon report of one
brother or sister, let him give a reason why he believes the tale of Elyzabeth
Lawnson and Symo^ Harlston. Page 1677.
Who mistrusteth miracles reported upon conjecture, let him, considre the
miracle told of Tindall. Page 520.
If it seem incredible that the bodies of dead men may remain uncorrupted and
sound, why is it told for a miracle that the heart off Zwinglius was found
whole in the ashes, Pa. 444.
all the rest of the body being burned up? If visions appearing to some, not to
all that are present seem fabulous, Page 355.
let it be a fable (as in deed it is, being thereof eye witness my self) that
he tells of Latimers heart blood, when he suffered in Oxford. If the Cross of
saint Oswalde seem a superstitious tale, how much more fond and fabulous is
the tale of one that suffered at Bramford, Pa, 1670.
with a great white cross, appearing in his breast? Thus if we may compare
truth with falsehood, light with darkness, true miracles with light tales, we see
as much vncredibilite, if we look to reason, as great vanite in respect of the
matter it self, in the one as in the other. But how far more credit this
ancient history of Venerable Bede deserves then the liyng libels of vpstert
sectaries, it shall (as I have already said) easily appear, if we consider but
the Author of this history, and the time that he wrote in. Whereof we have
spoken at large before. One thing remains, which being said. I shall have
finished. Concerning the proper names of places, as of cities and monasteries
mencion^d in the history, we have many times kept the lat^n or rather Saxon
names: where Polydore and other instructions could not help us to call them by
their present names they now bear. Wherein we desire the gentle Reader the
rather to bear with us, considering that this translation being penned on this
side of the seas, we could not being out of the country, have such special
intelligence of each shere and County as to that purpose was requisite, and as
we might perhaps easily hadd, yff we had been at home, and travailed the country
our selves. Notwithstanding as touching the sheres, principal cytes, and
diners monasteries, by the help of Polidore we have termed them, as they are
now called. Whereby the whole course of the history shall be every where
perspicuous and evident, though some certain small monasteries and villages
remain unknown. How so ever it be, the principal intent both of Venerable Bede and of us being the honor of God, the publishing off our first Christen
faith, the course and proceeding thereof, we have chosen rather to set forth
the history in some part barbarous the^ to c^nceale from our dear country (in
these necessary times of instruction) the precious treasure of our Christian
belefe, wherein we were first baptized, and have so many hundred years in such
quiet and felicite continued. Trusting verily in almighty God that the perusing
hereof, with the Fortress and defense of our faith, presently also set forth,
may stay the conscience of some from dangerous deceites of this later
religion so directly and in so many points repugning the other. Which if it
may please the goodness of God to work in the heart of any one of my dear
countremen, I shall think all my labor happily bestowed, and my simple pains
abundantly rewarded. In the mean we have declared our good will, and done in
part our duty. Which with all that is amiss, if any thing so be, I beseech
every gentle Reader to accept in good part.

Fare well. At Louain. The 12. of June. 1565. Thomas Stapleton.

THE LIFE OF S. BID: WRITTEN BY TRITHEMIVS.
Bid a monk and priest of the monastery of S. Peter and Paul, of S. Benets
order in England, a man in holy scripture much conversant and very well learned.
In other good lerning of great knowleadg. As in philosophy, Astronomy,
Algorisme and Poetry. Skilful of the greek tongue: of an excellent wit. His
tongue and style not curious, but pleasant and semely. He wrote many volumes
in the which his wit and lerning is tried. This man at the age of seven
years, was by his friends committed to Benedictus, and after to Ceolfridus the
Abbbat of the forsaied monastery, at At VVei mouth at the river Were which
runs by Dyrtham.
Murmouth, to be brought up and instructed. From the which age continuing all
days of his life in that monastery, he bestowed all diligence in the study of
holy scripture. And observing with all the rule of his order, singing daily
gods service in the church, in the rest he delighted allwaies, to learn, to
teach, or to write. In the nintenth year of his age he was ordered deacon. In
the xxx. year he was made priest. Both which orders he received at the hands
of the holy Bishop John of Beuerlake, by the co^maundment of Ceolfrid his
Abbat. From which time of his pristhood, vntel the end of his life he wrote
the works here following.

In Genesim vsque ad I saac. lib. 4. In Exodum. lib. 1. De tabernaculo and
vasiseius. lib. 3. In Numeros. lib. 1. In Leuiticum. lib. 1. In Regum. 30.
quest. lib. 1. In Deuteronomium. lib. 1. In Iudicum. lib. 1. De aedificatione
templi. lib. 2. In principium Regum. lib. 3. In I^suae. lib. 1. In Prouerbia
Salomonis. lib. 3. In Paralipomenon. lib. 2. In Ecclesiastem. lib. 1. In
Cantica Canticorum. lib. 6. In Esdram and Neemi^m. lib. 3. In Tobiam. lib. 1.
In Ezaiam prophetam. lib. 2. In Ezechielem. lib. 1. In Hieremiam. lib. 2. In
Danielem. lib. 1. In xij. prophetas minores. lib. 12. In epistolas Pauli. lib.
14. In epistolas Canonicas. lib. 7. In Euangelium Marci. lib. 4. In
Apocalypsim. lib. 3. In actus Apostolorum. lib. 2. In Euangelium Lucae. lib. 6.
Gesta Anglorum. lib. 5. Flores B. Gregorij in Ca^tica. lib. 2. Homilias
euangeliorum. lib. 2. Chronicam sui coenobij. lib. 2. G^sta diuersorum
sanctoru^. lib. 1. De te^poribus and natura reru^. lib. 1. Martyrologium. lib.
1. De passione Sancti Felicis. lib. 1. Aliud minus volumen. lib. 2. De Locis
sanctis. lib. 1. Vitam S. Alberti episcopi. lib. 2. Scintillaru^ ex sente^tijs
patru^. lib. 1. Epigrammata hero. lib. 1. Himnorum diuerso carmine. lib. 1.
Distinctiones in Hieremiam. lib. 1. Lectiones noui Testam. lib. 1. Lectiones in
vetus Testam. lib. 1. De Christo and Ecclesia. lib. 2. Distinctiones in Job.
lib. 1. Epistolarum ad diuersos. lib. 1. De cantico Abacuc. lib. 1. De
orthographia. lib. 1. De art metrica. lib. 1. De schematibus. lib. 1.
He wrote also many other things, which are not come to my knowleadge. This
man's works were of such authorite, even while he yet lived, and wrote allwaies
new, that they were openly read in Churches, by the appointment of the
bishops of England. And because that, his homelies then read in the church,
bearing the name of the Author, as the manner is, were entitled The homelies of
the venerable priest Bid, not being able to call him with a more honorable
name while he yet lived, the same title has remained even to this day.
Whereby he is rather called Venerable Bede then S. Bid. For it was not lawful
to call any a Saint yet living. Some do feign other causes why he should be
surnamed Venerable. As that being blind, he preached to stones, and of an
epitaphe written by an Angel. But these men are deceived. For neither Bid was
blind, neither it is known that any such epitaphe was written upon his
sepulcher. And truly, were it not to avoid prolixite, I could easily confute
these folies. He departed this world under Leo the Emperor. In the year of
our Lord 732. In the year of his age 72. the last day of May. Indictione. 15.

BID TO THE READER.
All unto whom this story of our nation shall come, either hearing it or
reading it, I humbly beseech, that for my infirmites as well of body as of
mind, they will be intercessours before the heavenly clemency. And that every
one in his country will so awnswere my labor with mutual charity, that
whereas I have noted in every province, shere, or county, and in the most
notable places thereof, such things as I thought worth the remembrance, and
pleasant to the inhabitants of each one, that I may for all reward have the
help of their godly prayers.

FARE WELL.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE KING CEOLVLPHE BEDA THE SERAVNT of Christ and Priest.
THE History of things don in the church of the English nation which of late
I had set fourth, I did both first very gladly send your grace desiring then to
have a sight and proof thereof, and now again do send it you, to the intent
you may both copy it out, and more fully at your lesure consider it. I can not
but highly commend this yower zele and good desire you have not only to give
good ear to the holyscriptures, but also to know of things both don and spoken
by worthy men before your time, and specially of our own country. For whither
an history contains good things don by good men, the wise hearer is thereby
provoked to well doing: either reports evil things don by evil men, the
virtuous and well disposed reader nevertheless is moved thereby both to fly
that is evil and noisome to his soul, and embrace the thing he knows to be
good and acceptable unto God. Which thing you wisely pondering, desire to have
the said history published both to the instruction of your self, and also to
the edifieng of such other whom God has committed unto your governance. And to
thentent I may put both your grace and all other that shall hear or read it,
out of all doubt of the verite of the said History, I will briefly show you
what authors I have chiefly followed in the making thereof. The chiefest
author and aider I had in compiling this work, was the right reverent abbat
Albinus, a man of great learning, which being brought up in the church of
Canterbury under Theodorus Archbishop of blessed memory, and Adrianus abbat,
both me^ of great worship and learning, has procured and sent unto me al such
things as were don by Saint Gregory the Popes disciples, either in the province
of ke^t, either other places adjoining and bordering upon the same. Which
things the said Abbate has learned partly by writings partly also by
tradition of elders, and such things as he has in such sort learned, he has
sent unto me by the hands of Nothelmus priest of the church of London, to be
received either in writting either by mouth and relation of the said Nothelmus.
Which also going after unto Rome was permitted by Gregory bishop, which is now
head of that church, to search the closettes of the said holy church of Rome,
where he found out certain epistles of saint Gregory and other bishops
there, and at his return has delivered unto us the said epistles to be put in
to our history with the counsel and advise of the reverent father Albine above
mentioned. So that from the beginning of this book unto the time that the
country of England received the faith of Christ, we learned such things as
we bring, gathered out of the works of such as had wrote thereof before our
time. And from thence unto this present such things as has been don in the
church and diocese of Canterbury by the disciples of Saint Gregory or their
successors, or under what king they have been done, we have known by the
industry of the said Abbate Albine, at the report of Nothelmus, who also has
brought me in sum part of knowledge of such things as were don in the provinces
of the Essex.
east and Salisbury. Exceter Welles.
west saxons, and also of the Suffolck, Norfolck and Cambrigd shere.
east english and of the Northu^bers that is to wit, by what bishops preaching,
and under what king each of the said provinces were converted unto the faith of
Christ. And to be short, by the exhortation of the said Albine, I was chiefly
provoked and enboldened to set upon this enterprise. Northumbers are called in
this stistory al. that dwell beyond the river Hu^bre North ward.
Daniel also the most reverent bishop of the west saxons, which is yet a live,
has instructed me in certain points of the ecclesiastical history both of
his province of the Sussex and Hapshere.
South Saxons, and of the I Will of Wite. Now in what sort the province of Mercia
or Marshland contains the dioceses of L^hfield and Coue^try, Lincoln and
VVorcet.
Mercia, recerued the says which they knew not before, and the province of the
Essex.
east Saxons recovered the faith which they had lost before, both by the
ministry of Ceddi and Ceadda priests of great devotion, and how the ij^ said
fathers both lived and died, we have diligently learned of the brothers of the
monastery of Laestinge by them erected. Again of things don appertaining to the
church in the province of the east english we have found out partly by
monuments of writting and traditions of the foreliuers, and partly, by the
information of the reverend Abbot Esius. As for such things as were don in the
territory of Lindissig (that is holy Ilond) touching the furderance of the
faith of Christ, and what priests there succeeded from time to time, we have
learned either by the writings of the reverent bishop Cynebertus, either by the
lively voice of other men of good creditt. The history of the province of the
Northumbers from the time they received the faith of Christ unto this present,
we have gotten not by any one author, but by relation of many faithful
witnesses which might know and remember the same beside such things as by my
own experience I knew. Among which you shall note, that such things as I have
wrote of the most holy father and bishop Cutbert either in this book either in
the treatice that I have made of his life, I have taken partly out of those
things which I found before written of him by the brothers of the church of The
country of Northumberland properly.
Lindisfarnu^ following simplely the faith of the history which I read, and
partly also have added thereunto such things as I could learn my self by the
faithful testimony of such as knew him. I humbly beseech the Reader, that if he
shall find any thing otherwise then truth in this treatise, he will not impute
it unto me, as the which has endeavored to put in writing to the instruction
of our aftercommers such things as we could gather by common report, which is
the true law of an history.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THE church of England.
Of the situation of Britanny and Ireland, and of the people which inhabited
there of owld time.

The 1. Chapter.
BRita^ny an Island of the Oceane, which of owld time was called Albion, does
stand betwext the north and the west, right over against Germany, France, and
Spain, iij of the greatest countries of Europe. Which being eight hundred
miles long Northward, is but ij hundred miles broad, except you reckon the
cabes or points of the mountains which runs out a long far into the sea,
whereby the Island is in cumpasse That is 1800. miles.
forty and eight times lxxv miles. Of the sowth side it has Flaunders, the
first haven town whereof to arrive at for a man coming out of England is called
Ruthubi, the haven whereof is now corruptely called This haven is now lost by
the irruption of the sea.
Reptacester 50 miles of from Calleis, or as some write 60. miles. On the back
side of it where it lies open unto the main Oceane, it has the Isles called
Orcades. It is an Island very batfull of corn, fruit and pasture. In sum places
it bears vines, it has plentif of fowls of diverse sorts, both by sea and
by land, of sprynges also and rivers full of fysh but specially of lampriles
and eles. There be many times also taken porposes, Dolphyns and whales, beside
many kind of shellfishes, among other of muskles, in whom be found perles of
all colors as red, purple, crymson, but specially white: there is also great
store of cockles, whereof is made the dye of crymson, whose rudd will be
appalled nether with heat of son nether with wette of wether, but the oulder
it is, the more bright and beutifull glass it casts. It has also sprynges
fit to make salt, and others of whott waters, where ar builded several places
meet for all ages as well for men as women to bathe them selves. For the water
(as saint Basil writes) runnyng thowrogh certain metalles, receives thereof
such virtue of heat, that it is not only made warm thereby but also skalding
whot. This Island is stored with mines of sundry metalles, as of brass, lead,
iron, and silver. It brings forth also great ple^tyf of the Geate stone, and
that of the best. This stone is black and burns being put to the fire, and
then is of virtue good to chase away serpents. If you rub him till he be warm,
he holds fast such things as ar laid unto him even as Aumber does. This
Island had in it sumtimes xxviij fair cities, beside an innumerable sort of
castles which also were well and strongly fensyd with walls, turrettes, gates,
and bullwarkes. And for as much as it is placed right in manner under the north
pole, it has light nights in the summer, so that at mydnight many times men
dowteth whether it be yet twylight of the evening past, or breach of the day
followyng. Whereby the days be of a great length there in summer, as contrary
the night in winter that is to wytt, xviij hours, by reason the son there
is so far go^ sowthward. And so in like manner the nights in the summer ar
there very short and the days in the winter that is to wytt vj. equinoctial
hours, where as in Armenia, Macedonia, Italia, and other countries subject to
the same line, the longest day or night passes not xv, the shortest ix hours.
This Island at this present to the number of the v. books of Moses, with v.
sundry languages does study and set forth the knowledge of one perfect truth,
that is, with the language of the English, the Britannes, the Scotts, the The
Redshankes.
Pictes, and the latin, which by study of the scriptures is made common to all
the rest. At the first this land was inhabited of none other nation but only of
the Brita^nes, of whom it receives his name: which Brita^nes coming out of
Armorica (called now little Brita^ny) as it is thought, chose unto them selves
the sowth part of this land. And after when they from the sowth forward had in
their possession a great part of the I Will, it chanced that certain people of
the Pictes coming out of Scythia, as it is said, travailing upon the seas with
a few long ships, the wind dryuing them in cumpasse rownde about the coaste
of Britannye, blewe them a land on Irelands side, on the north parts thereof.
Which they finding inhabited of the Scotts, besought the^ to allow them some
part of the land, where they might plant them selves. But they could not
obtain their desire. This Ireland, next unto Britanny is the greatest lland of
the Oceane sea, and stands westward of Britanny. But as Northward it is not
so long as it, so westward it is much longer, and reaches unto the North
parts of Spain, having the main sea runnyng betwext. The Pictes (as I have
said) arriving with their navy in Ireland, required of the inhabitants, that
they might be suffered, there to rest and place them selves. The Scotts
aunsered that the Island was not bigg inowgh to hold them both. But we can give
you good counsel (quoth they) what we think best for you to do. We know well
there is an other Island not far from ours standing east ward from hence,
which we may see out of this land in a fayer sonnye day. If you will go
thither, you may inhabit there at will. And if there be any resistance made
against you, we will aid you. Whereupon the Pictes arriving in Britanny planted
them selves in the North parts thereof. For as for the sowth parts the
Brita^nes had taken up before. And whereas the Pictes having no wives did
require of the Scotts to marry their dawghters, the Skottes agreed to grant
them their bone, under condition, that as often as the matter was in dowt, they
should choose their king rather of the next of the house of the woman then of
the man. Which order, it is well known the Pictes keeps even to this day. In
process of years, after the Brita^s and the Pictes, the Skottes also were
received in to Britanny among the Pictes. Which coming out of Ireland under
Rewda their Captain, either by force or friendship, entered and inhabited the
country in Scotland, which they possessed. Of which captain even unto this
day they are callid dall reudini, for in their language dall signifies part. A
description of Ireland.
Irelande both in breadth, holsomnes and fines of air, for passes Britanny, so
that there snow remains skant iij. dayse to gether: and no man there for
foddering of his beasts, either makes hay in the summer, or buyldeth stawles
for his cattaile. There is no noysom creping beast to be seen there, no serpent
that can live there. For many times serpents which has been brought thither
out of Britanny, the ship drawing nere unto the land, as soon as they are
towched with the smell of the air, they dies out of hand. Yea more then that,
all thing in manner that comes from the said Island, is of sovereign virtue
against poison. And this we saw with our eyes, that when certain men, that
were stinged of venomous serpents, had taken the scraping of certain leaves of
books which had be^ of Ireland, and had dronke it in water, forthwyth all the
force of the venim was staynched, and the swelling of the stinged bodies
utterly assuaged. This Island is rich in milk and honey, nor void of vines, fish
or foul, and full of stagges. This is properly the country of the Skottes, out
of the which they isshuing has inhabited Brita^ny being before possessed of
the Britons and the Pictes. There is a great creke of the sea which severed of
old time the Britons from the Pictes, which from the west runs far in to
the la^d. Where unto this day there is a city of the Britons very strong and
well fensed called Alcuith. At the north side of the which creke, the Scotts
has come and made their dwelling country.

How that C. Julius Caesar was the first of all the Romans that came in to
Britanny.

The. 2. Chap.
THe Romans had never access unto Brita^ny, nor knoledge thereof until Caius
Julius Cesars time. Who the 593. year from the buylding of Rome and the 60.
before the incarnation of ower Savior Christ, being Consul with L. Bibulus, at
the time that he had battle with Germany and France, which two countres the
river Rhene does sever, came into Picardy, from whence is a very nigh and short
passage in to Brita^ny, and with 80. ships charged with men and warfare
provision, passes over in to Britanny: where he being received with a very
sharp and hot byckering, and after shaken with a contrary tempest was feign
to return in to France with the loss of a great part of his navy, and no
small number of his souldiars, and of the most part of all his men of arms.
And so for that winter he was forced to dimisse his army: which being over
past, he sayleth again in to Britanny, with a navy of 600. sail one and
other. Where after he had arrived, and was now marching toward his enemy with
his main host, his ships riding at the anchor, were with a violent storm rent
and cast either one upon the other, either upon the quick sands, and there
broken in pieces, in such sort, that xl. of them were lost out of hand, and the
rest with much a do repaired. Cesars horsemen at the first encounter were
overthrown of the Britannes, and Labienus one of his coronells slain. At the
second encounter, with great loss and danger of his army, he put the
Britannes to flight. From thence he went unto the river of Tems, which men say
can be waded over but in one place: where on the farther side a great number of
the Britannes warded the banks, under Cassibellauno their captain, which had
stycked the bottom of the river and the banks also thyck of great stakes,
whereof certain remnantes unto this day ar to be seen, of piles of the bigness of
a man's thyghe covered with lead styckyng fast in the bottom of the river.
Which when the Romans had espied and eskaped, the Britannes, not able to stand
the violence of the Roman Legions, hidd them selves in the woddes, out of the
which they often brekyng out, greatly endomaged the army of the Romans. In
this mean time Colchester.
Trinobantum, a very strong city, with their Capitain Androgorius yielded unto
Caesar, delivering xl. hostages. Which example, other more cities followyng,
fell in leage with the Romans: by whose aduer^ising Caesar having intelligence
of a strong hold, that Cassibelianus had builded between two dykes or marshes
well fensed with woddes on each side, farsed with plente of all things,
assayling with great force at lenght ouercomed. After that returning in to
France, having dimissed his army for the winter season, he was suddenly besett
with great tumultes of wars reised against him on every side.

How Claudius the Emperor was the second that came in to Britanny, which did
also subdue the Isles Orcades, And how Vespasian se^. by ^im took the I Will of
wit.

The. 3. Chap.
THe 797. year from the buylding of Rome, Claudius the third Emperor after
August, being much desirours to show him self a prince profitable unto the
commonwealth, sought by all means battle and conquest. Whereupon he made a
viage in to Britanny, which was all in a mute ny, for that such as were
traytorously fled from them, were not restored. He passed over in to the Island
whether nor before Julius Caesar, nor after, any durst adventure. And there with
out either blud or battle received by submission the greatest part of the
Island voluntaryly yelding them selves unto him. Also he brought in subjection
to the Roman empire the Isles Orcades, which lies in the Oceane above
Britanny: which don he returned to Rome the vj. month after that he departed
thence: The year of our Lord 46.
and caused his son to be surnamed 'Brita^nicus. This battle was sought the
foruth year of his empire which was the year of thincarnatio^ of our lord 46.
In the which year also there fell a great famine, Actor. 11.
thorough out al Syria, which in the Acts of the Apostles is showed to before
spoken by Agabus the prophet. Vespasianus which after Nero was emperor, being
sent of the said Claudie in to Britanny, subdued unto the Seigneurie of the
Romans the i will of Wite, sta^digng nigh Brita^ny westward. Which is of length
from este to west about 30. miles: from south to North 12. being in the east
part by sea 6. miles, in the west 3. miles of from the west shore of Brita^ny.
Nero succeding Claudius in the empire never durst meddle with warfare matters.
Whereby among other many hindraunces which befell in his time unto the empire,
one was that he had almost lost Britanny: For under him two noble towns were
taken and overthrown.

How that Lucius King of Britanny sent to Eleutherius desiring to be Christened.

The. 4. Chap.
THe year of the incarnation of our Lord 156. An. 156.
Marcus Aurelius Verus the 14. Emperor after August, governed the empire with
his Brother Aurelius Commodus. In whose time Eleutherius a holy man being Pope
of the church of Rome, Lucius King of Brita^nes wrote unto him, desiring that
by his commandment he might be made christian: which his request was granted
him. Whereby the Britannes receiving then the faith, kept it sound and
undefiled in rest and peace, until Dioclesian the Emperors time.

How Seuerus the Emperor by a trench drawn overthwart severed one part of
Britanny from the other.

The. 5. Chap.
THe year of our Lord 189. An. 189.
Seuerus borne in Afrike at Tripolis, the 17. emperor from August, reigned 17.
years. This man being rough of nature, enta^gled with much wars, governed the
common wealth very valiau^tly, but yet with much trauail. After he had
vanquyshed his civil enemies, with which he was very sore assailed, he is
called in to Britanny, by the means of the great defection of the most part of
the country from the Signorie of the Romans. Where after he had recovered by
great and grievous wars a great part of the land, he made a partition betwext
them and the other wild and savage people, not with buylding of a wa^^ of stone
as some suppose, but with a trench and a ra^paire of tur^e and timber, thyck
fensed with bulwarks and turrets. Which said trench he caused to be drawn
from one sea to the other. And there at york he died, leaving behind him 2.
sons, Bassianus and Geta, which Geta being condemned of treason, died. And
Bassianus taking upon him the surname of Antonius governed the empire after the
deceasse of his father.

Of the Raygne of Dioclesian, and of the persecution which he raised against
the Christians.

The. 6. Chap.
THe year of our Lord 286, An. 286.
Dioclesianus the xxxiij. Emperor after August, being chosen of the army
raygned xx. years, and he created Maximinianus surnamed Herculeus, his fellow
in government of the Empire. In whose time one Carausius, of low degree in
birth, but valiant in arms, and politic in counsel, was appointed toward
the sea coaste against the French men, and the Saxons, which then with
continual robberies much wasted that countries. But he so behaved him self,
that he did more hurt there, then the ennemies them selves: For such pillage as
he had recovered from them, he did not restore it to the right owners, but
reserved it to him self, whereby he was suspected, that he wittingly suffered
them to pill and spoil at pleasure. Where upon being commanded to be put to
death of Maximinianus, he took upon him the princely authority, and usurped
the governance of the Britannes, which after he kept vij. years. At length by
treason of his fellow Allectius he was slain. Which Allectius him self, (
Carausius being killed) kept the possession of the Island iij. years, whom
Asclepiodotus chief governor of the army ouercam, and received the Island in
his possession the tenth year after it was invaded. In the mean time,
Dioclesian in the east, Maximinianus in the West raising the tenth persecution
after Nero against the Christians, commanded the churches to be spoiled, the
Christians to be tormented and killed: which persecution was both longer and
also crueller then all the other: for hole x. years together it continued in
burning the churches, in ba^nishing the innoce^ts, in murdering the Martyrs,
and never ceased. Brefely among other places, it made Britanny to be honored
with the glory of many holy Martyrs which constantly stood and died in the
confession of their faith.

The passion of Saint Albane and his fellows, which did shead their bludd for
Christ's sake.

The 7. Chap.
AMong other suffered Saint Albane: of whom Fortunatus priest in the book he
wrote in the praise of virgins, speaking of the Martyrs which from all
coasts of the world came unto God, says, Albanum egregium foecunda Brita^nia
profert.

The fertile land of batfull Britanny
Brings forth Albane a Martyr right worthy.
This Albane being yet but a Pagane, when the cruel commandments of the
wicked Princes were set forth against the Christians, received in to his house
one of the clergy which had fled from the persecutours: whom he perceiving
both night and day to continewe in praying and watching, being suddenly
towched with the grace of God, began to follow the example of his faith and
virtue, and by little and little instructed by his holesom exhortations, forsaking
his blind idolatry became Christian with his hole heart. At length after the
said person of the clergy had certain daise tarried with him, it came to the
ears of the Prince, that this holy confessor of Christ (whose time was not yet
come that god appointed for him to suffer martyrdom) lay hid in Albanus house.
Whereupon he commau^did his soldiers to search his house with all diligence.
Whether when they were cum, saint Albane apparelled in his gests and masters
garments offerid him self to the soldiers, and so was brought bound unto the
judge. It chanced that the judge the same time, was doing sacrifice unto the
devils before the aultars. And when he had seen Albane, being all chaufed with
anger for that he feared not voluntarily to offer him self unto the souldiars
and perell of death, for his geste, whom he had harbored, he commanded him to
be brought before the idols of the devils, before whom he there stood. And
for so much (quoth he) as thou had rather to conueye away the rebel and
traitor to our Gods, then deliver him up unto the soldiers that he might
sustain due punishment for his blasphemous despising of the Gods, look what
pains he should have suffered if he had been taken, the same shall thou suffer,
if thou refuse to practice the rites of ower religion. But Saint Albane which
wilfully had before discovered him self to be a Christian, little heeded the
menacies of the Prince. But being thorouly fensed with spiritual armor of
grace, told him plainly to his face, that he would not obey his commandment.
Then said the judge, of what house or stock art thou? Albane aunswered^ what is
that to the of what house I am? but if thou be desirous to know of what
religion I am, be it known unto the that I am a Christian, and that I employe
my self to Christian manners and excercises. Then the judge demanded him his
name. My parents (quoth he) names me Albane: and I honor and worship the true
and living god which made al thing of naught. The^ the judge being very wroth
said. If thou will enjoy long life, cum of, and do sacrifice unto the great
gods. The Martyrdom of saint Albane the first Martyr of Britanny.
Albane answered, these sacrifices which you offer up unto the devils,
neither help the offerers nor obtain them their desires, but rather purchase
them for their reward eternal pains in hell fire. The judge hearing this
being in a rage, commanded the holy confessor of God to be all beaten of the
tormentours, thinking his constance would relent at strypes, which refused to
yield to words: but he showed him self not only patient, but also joyful in the
middle of all his torments. The judge when he saw he could be nether won
with words, nor turned with torments from the religion of Christ's faith,
commanded that he should be behedded. In the way as he was ledd to his death,
he came to a floudde which with a very swift course ran betwixt him and the
place where he should suffer. Now he saw a great company of all sexes, degrees,
and ages going with him to the place of his execution, in so much that it seemed
the judge was left alone at home without any to attend upon him. This company
was so great, and the bridge they had to pass over so little, that it would be
toward night, er they all could get over. Albane longing much for his blessed
death, and hasting to his Martyrdom, cumming to the rivers side and making
there his prayer with lifting up his eyes and heart to heaven, saw forth with
the bottom to have bin dried up, and the water give place for him and the
people to pass over dryshod as it were upon even grownde. Which when among
other the executioner which should have beheddid him did see, he made have to
mete him, at the place appointed for his death, and there (not without the holy
inspiration of God) he fell down flat before his feet, and casting from him
the sword which he held in his hand ready drawn, desired rather that he might
be executioned either for him or with him, rather then to do execution upon him.
Where upon this man being now made a fellow of that faith where of before he was
persecutor, and the swerd lying in the ground before the^, the other officers
staggering and doubting all who might take it up and do the execution, the
holy confessor of God with the people there assembled went unto a hill almost
half a mile of from that place beautifully garnished with diverse herbs and
flowers not rough or uneasy to climme, but smothe, plain and delectable,
worthy and mete to be sanctified with the blood of the blessed Martyr, unto the
the top where of when he was ascended, he required of God to give him water:
and strayt there arose a spryng of fayer water before his feet whereby all
might perceive that the river before was by his means dried. For he which left
no water in the river, would not have required it in the topp of the mowntaine,
but that it was so expedient, for the glory of God in his holy martyr. For
behold the river having obeyed the Martyr, and served his devotion, leaving
behind a testimony of duty and obedience (the Martyr having now suffered)
returned to his nature again. Here therefore this most valiant martyr being
behedded received the crown of life which God promises to them that love him.
But he which there took upon him to do that wicked execution, had short joy
of his naughty deed: for his eyes fell unto the ground with the head of the
holy martyr. There also was behedded the soldier which being called of God
refused to stryke the holy confessor of God: of whom it is open and plain,
that though he was not Christened in the fount, yet he was baptized iu the bath
of his own blud, and so made worthy to enter in to the kingdom of heaven. Now
the judge seeing so many strange and heavenly miracles wrought by this holy
martyr, gave commandment that the persecution should cease, beginning to
honor in the saints of God the constant and pacient suffering of death, by
the which he thought at first to bring them from the devotion of their faith.
S. Albane suffered his martyrdom the xx. day of June, nigh unto the citte of,
^ which we call now dorsuolde ^odde.
Verolamium. Where after the Christian church being quietly calmed and
setteled again, there was a temple builded of a marvelous rich work, and
worthy for such a martyrdom. In the which place truly even unto this day ar
syck persons cured, and many miracles wrought. There suffered also about that
time Aaron and Julius town dwellers of the city of Leicester and many other
both men and women in sundry places, which after diverse fell and cruel
torments sustained in all parts of their bodies, by perfitt victory atcheued by
patience, yielded their souls unto the ioyse of heaven.

How that after this persecution ceased, the church of Britanny was sumwhat
quiet until the time of the Arrians heresies.

The. 8. Chap.
AFter that the storms of this persecution were ouerblowen, Temples of
Martyrs: holy days. Consecration of the B. sacrament.
the faithful christians which in time of danger lay hid in dens and
deserts comes forth and shows them selves abroad, renews their churches,
which before were overthrown flatt to the grownd, foundeth, buyldeth, and
perfiteth new temples in honor of the holy Martyrs, celebrateth holy dayse,
does consecrate the holy mysteries, with pure mouth^ and heart, and every where
as it were displayeth their ensigns in sign of conqueste. Heresies in Brita^ny.
And this peace continued in the church of Christ in Britanny until the fury
of the Arrians heresies: which ru^nyng thorough out the world corrupted also
with his venomous errors this Ila^d, though situat out of the compass of the
world. Now when that once by this means heresy had once found an open vent to
pass over the Ocean sea in to this Island, shortly after all manner of heresies
flowed in to the said land, and was there received of the inhabitants as being
men deliting ever to hear new things, and steadfastly retaining nothing as
certain. About this time died Constantius in Britanny which in Dioclesians
life time governed France and Spain: a man very mild and of much courtesy.
He left Constantine his son by Helene his co^cubine created emperor of
France. Eutropius writes that Constantine being created emperor in Britanny
succeeded his father in the kingdom. In whose time the heresy of the Arrians
springing and being discovered and condemned in the council of Nice, did
nevertheless infecte not only the other parts of the world, The Arrians
heresy prospers, not with standing the general council of Nice.
but also the very churches of the Islands with deathly doctrine and pestilent
infidelite.

How that in the time of Gracian the Emperor Maximus being created Emperor in
Brita^ny returned in to France with a great army.

The. 9. Chap.
THe year of the incarnation of our Lord 377. An. 377.
Gratian the 40. Emperor after August, raygned vj. years after the death of
Valens, though a little while before he reigned also with Valens his uncle and
Valentinian his brother. Which seeing the state of the commen wealth miserably
plagued, and nigh altogether decayed, was drouen of nece^site for the better
repairing of the said decaise, to choose unto him Theodosius a Spanyard borne
to be his partener in governance of the Empire, comitting, unto him the
regiment of the ^aste and also of Thracia. In which time, one Maximus a vahau^t
man and a good, and worthy of the Imperial crown (had it not ben that
contrary to his oath and allegiance he took upon him by tyranny to be Emperor
in Britanny) half in manner against his will being created Emperor of the army,
passed over in to France. Where he slew Gratian the Emperor being
circumuented by subtle wiles, and suddenly stolen upon ere he were ware, as he
was in mind to pass in to Italy. After that also he chased Valentinia^ the
other partener of the empire out of Italy. Valentinian flieng for succor in to
the east, and there with all fatherly piete being received of Theodosius, was
by his help strayt wayse restored unto the empire, Maximus the tyran being
shutt up by seige with in the walls of Aquilegia and there shortly after taken
and slain.

How that Aradius being Emperor, Pelagius a Britain made wicked battle
against the grace of God.

The. 10. Chap.
THe year of our Lord 394. An. 394.
Arcadius son unto Theodosius with his brother Honorius, being the xliij.
Emperor after August, reigned xiij years. In whose time Pelagius a Britan
borne, disperkled the venim of his faithless doctrine very far abroad, holding
that a man might live well without the help of the grace of God, using herein
the aid of Iulianus of Campania, who was intemperatly sturred with the loss
of his byshoprick. The propery of heret^kes.
To whom S. Austen and other catholic fathers also has answered in most
ample manner, but yet they would not be amended thereby. But being convicted of
their falshed, they rather would increase it by defending and mainteining it,
then amend it by retourning to the truth.

How that Honorius being Emperor, Gratian and Constantine usurped tyranny in
Britanny, where the first shortly after was slain and the other in France.

The. 11. Chap.
THe year of our Lord 407. An. 407.
Honorius son of Theodosius the younger being emperor in the 44. place after
August ij. year before that Rome was iuuaded by Alaricus King of the Goths,
when the nations of the Alanes, the Sue^es, and the Vandalls and many such
other with them, the frenchmen being beaten down, passing the Rhene raiged
thorough out al France about that time Gratianus in Brita^ny is created tyra^,
and is slain. In his, place Constantine being but a common soldier was
chosen: only for the names sake, with out any desert of virtue: which so sone as
he had taken upon him the empire, passed over in to France, where being often
deluded of the barbarous nations (as unwisely and uncertainly making his leage
with them) greatly endomaged the commonwealth. Where upon Honorius sending
Constantius the Count in to France with an army, Constantine was beseiged at
Arells, and there taken and slain, and Gerontius his partener slew his son
Co^stans at Vienna, whom of a monk he had made emprour. Rome was destroyed of
the Goths the 1164. year after it was builded. After which time the Romans
left to rule in Brita^ny after almost 470. years that C. Julius Caesar first
entered the said I Will. The first destruction of Rome.
The Romans dwelt with in the trench which as we have said, Seuerus drew
overthwart the Ila^d at the south part, which thing may appear by the cities,
temples, bridges and paued streets to this day remaining. Not withstanding they
had in possession and under their dominion the farther parts of Britanny and
also the Islands which are abo^e Britanny.

How the Britannes being spoiled of the Scotts and the Pictes, sought aid of
the Romans, which at the second time of their coming, builded a wall between
the ij. countries, but they shortly after were oppressed with greater miseres
then ever they were in before.

The. 12. Chap.
BY means the said tyrannes and capitaines of the Romans did use to transport
with them over in to France the flower of all the youth of Britanny to serve
them in their forayne wars, The cause why the old Brittons became weak and
open to forain inuasio^s.
their men of war were consumed, and the country being all disarmed was not
now able to defend them selves against the invasion of their enemies. Where
upon many years together they lived under the miserable seruage and
oppression of ij. most cruel outlandish nations, the Scotts and the
Redsha^kes.
Pictes. I call them outlandish, not for that they were out of the circuit of
Britanne, but that they were divided from the land of Britanny by ij. arms of
the sea running betwext them, of the which one from the east sea, the other
from the west runs in far and wide in to the land of Britanny though they
may one reach to the other. In the middle of the east creek there is a citte
builded called Guidi. Above the west creek toward the right hand stands a
citte called Alcuith, which in their language is as much to say as the Rock
Cluith, for it stands by a fludd of the same name. The Britannes then being
thus afflicted by the said nations, sent their ambassadors with letters unto
Rome, with lamentable supplications requiring of them aid and succor,
promising them their continual fea^te, so that they would reskue them against
the oppression of their said enemies: where upon there was sent unto them a
legion of armed soldiers from Rome, which coming in to the island and
encountering with the enemies, overthrew a great number of them, and drove the
rest out of the fruntiers of the country, and so setting them at liberte and
fre from the misery with which they were before so grievously ouercharged,
cou^seled them to make a wall between the ij. seas, which might be of force to
keep out their evil neighbors: and that don, they returned home with great
triumph. But the Britons buylding the wall which they were bid to make, not of
stone as they were willed, but of turue, as having none among them that had
skyll there in, made it so slender, that it served them to little purpose. This
wall they made between the ij. said arms or creekes of the sea, many miles
long, that where as the fense of the water lacked, there by the help of the
tre^ch they might keep their country from the breakyng in of their ennemies. Of
which piece of wurke, there remayneh even unto this day most assured tokens yet
to be seen. This trench begins about two miles of from the monastery of
AEbercuring, Westward in a place which in the Pictes language is called
Peanuakel and in English is called Penwelt, and runnyng out eastward is ended
by the city of Al^luith. But the former enemies when they had once perceived
that the Roman legion was returned home again, forth with being set on land
by boats, inuadeth the borders, ouercometh the country, and as it were corn
reddy to be cut, they moweth, beats, and bears down all before them.
Where upon Ambasadours be sent again to Rome, with lamentable voice requiring
their succor, beseching them they would not suffer their miserable country to
be utterly destroyed, nor permit that the name of the province, which through
them had so long ^lorished should now thus despirefully be extingueshid by the
wicked cruelty of their forayne people. Again there is sent an other legion,
which in the h^^^est time coming upon the sudden, made a great slawghter of
the enemies, and such as could eskape chased them over the seas in to their
own conntry, which before were wont to waste and spoil the country of Britanny
without resistance. Then the Romans toulde the Brytans plain, that it was not
for their ease to take any more such trauaylous iourneis for their defense, and
bydd them to practice their armor them selves, and learn to wythstande their
enemy, whom nothing else did make so strong but their faint and cowardous
hearts. And for so much they thought that would be sum help and strength unto
their loyal fellows whom they were now forced to forsake, they builded up a
wall of hard stone from sea to sea a right between the two cities which there
were made, to keep out the enemy, in the felf same place where Seuerus before
had cast the trench, (which wall even to this day remains famous and to be
seen) with public and private charges: the Britannes also putting to their
helping hands. They then builded it eight foot broad and xij. high, right as
it were by a line from east to weste, as it does to this day plainly appear,
which being perfited, they give the people strayt warning to look well to them
selves, they teach them to handle their wepon, and instruct them in war like
feats. Also by the sea side southward, where their ships lay at harbar, least
their enemies should land there aboutes, they makyth up bullwarkes a long one
sum what distant from the other, and this done bids them fare well, as
minded no more to return. As soon as they were gonne, the Scotts and Pyctes
having intelligence that they had made promise they would come no more, they
taking heart of grace thereof retourneth again to their wont business: And first,
all that was without the wall they takes for their own. After that they came
to give assault unto the wall where the Britannes with faint hand and fearful
heart defending it, were with grapples, which they had divised, pulled down to
the grownde, and otherwise so assaulted, that they leaving both the cytties and
the wall also, were dispercled and put to flight. The enemy follows, kylleth,
and sleyth more cruel^y then ever he did before. For even as the lambs of the
wild beasts, so were they torn and mangled of their ennemies. Whereupon
being dreuen out of their own houses and possessions, they falls a robbing
and spoiling one the other of them, increasing their outward misery with inward
tumult, so far forth that all the whole country was brought to that exigent,
that they had none other sustenance, but that they got by hunting and killing
of wild beasts.

How in the time of Theodosius the younger the Britannes sowght help of
Boethius then consul of Rome, but could not obtain it and how at that time
Palladius was sent to the Scotts (which beleyued in Christ) to be their
Bishop.

The 13. Chapter.
THe year of the incarnation of our Lord 403. An. 403.
Theodosius the younger succeding Honorius, was made Emperor of Rome, which he
governed 27. years being the xxv. Emperor after August. In the eight year of
whose Empire, Palladius the first bishop of Scotland:
Palladius was sent of Celestinus bishop of the Roman church to the Scotts
which had received the faith of Christ, to be their first bishop. An. 411.
And the 23 year of his reign, Boethius one of the pears and patricians of Rome
was now the third time made consul with Symmachus. The poor leaving of the
Britanes, directed unto him their letters, where of this was the beginning. To
Boethius thrice cons^ll the Mourning of the Britannes. In the process of which
epistle they thus sets forth their pittyfull estate. The Barbarous enemy
drives us upon the sea: the sea again upon the enemy: between these twain
rises two manner of deaths, either we are killed or drowned. And yet for all
their suit, they could obtain no aid of him, as he which had then both his
hands full of business and battle at home with Bleda and Attila kings of the
Hunnes. And though the year before Bleda was murdered by the wyhe treason of
his brother Attila, yet he alone remained so intolerable an ennemy unto the
world, that he wasted all most all Europe, spoiling and overthrowing both
cities and castles. About the same time there arose a great famine in
Constantinople, after which followed also the pestilence: and a great part of
the wall of the said city fell unto the ground, with 57. turrettes. And many
other cities also being overthrown with earth quake, hunger, and pestilence
beside, consumed many a thousand both of men and beasts.

How the Britones being forced by hungar drove the Barbarous people out of
their country. Whereof ensewed plentif of corn, riott, pestilence, and the
loss of the whole country.

The 14. Chap.
IN the mean season hu^gar more and more prevailing against the Britones, (in
so much that many years after it left tokens and remembrance of the hurt it did
in the country) drove many of them to yield them selves into the hands of the
robbers. Other there were which could never be brought there unto, but rather
then they would so do, from the hills and brakes where they lu^ked, many
times invaded their ennemies, as trusting so much the more in the help of God,
how much the less hope they had of aid of man. And by such means first of
all, both resisted and overthrew them, which many years together had lived by
the spoil of the country. Whereby for the time they drew homeward with shame
enough, intending not long after to return. The Pictes then and long time
after kept them selves quiet at home, save only that they would make now and
then invasions into the land, and drive away bouties of cattle. After that
(they leaving their pilling and spoiling) the country drew to a quietness, there
ensued such plentif of grain as never was seen the like before, as far as any
man could remember: whereof the people grew to lose and wanton living, whereof
all manner of lewdenes followed strait after, specially cruel^^, hate of truth
and love of lying: in so much that if any were gentler and more given to truth
then other, the other would wurke him all the hurt and spite they could, as a
common enemy of the country. Ry^ and evil life the Britains destruction.
This did not only the seculars but also the clergy it self, and the heddes
thereof, giving them selves over to dronkennes, pride, contention, envy, and
such other wickedness, casting utterly from them the sweet yoke of Christ. In
the mean season a bitter plage befell among them for their corrupt living
consuming in short time such a multitude of people, that the quick were not
sufficient enough to bury the dead. And yet for all that, they remained so
hardened in syn, that neither their fre^des death, nether the ^eare of their
own could cure the moreyn of their souls, which daily perished through their
sinful living. Whereby a greater stroke of gods vengaunce ensewed upon the
whole sinful nation. For being now infested again with their old neighbors,
they devised with them selves what was best to do, and where they might seek
reskew to withstand and repel the force of the Northen nation. And they agreed
all with their king Vortigerius to demand aid of the Saxons beyond the seas.
Which thing doutlesse was don by gods own appointement, that the wicked people
might be thereby plagued, as by the end it shall most manifestly appear.

How the English and Saxons being sent for in to Britanny, did first clear the
country from the Pictes, and Scotts but shortly after joining them selves in
leage with them, turned their weapon upon their fellows that sent for them.

The. 15. Chap.
THe year of the incarnation of our Lord 4^29. An. 429.
Marcianus with Valentinian the 46. emperor after August, The first arrival
of English me^ in to Britanny
reigned vij. years. In whose time the people of the English or Saxons, being
sent for of the said king in to Britanny, landed there in iij. long ships,
and by the kings commandment is appointed to abide in the east part of the
land, as to defend the country like friends, but in deed, as it proved
afterward, as minding to destroy the country as enemies. Wherefor encountering
with the northen enemy, the Saxons had the better. Whereof they sending word
home in to their country as also of the batfulnes of the land and the
cowardnes of the Britannes, the Saxons sent over a greater navy and number of
men better appointed for the wars, which being now joined with the former
band, drew to a stronger army then all the power of the Britannes was able to
ouercomme. These by the Britannes were allowed a place to dwell among them, with
that condition that they should war for them against their enemies, and should
receive waiges of the Britannes for their travails. These that came from beyond
the seas, were iij. of the strongest nations in Germany. That is, the Saxons,
English, the and the Vites. Of the Vites came the people of Kent and of the I Will
of Wite, Saxons, English and Vites.
and they which in the province of the West Saxons or called unto this day the
nation of the Vites right over against the i will of wite. Of the Saxons, that is
of that region which now is called of the old Saxons, descended The people of
Essex, of Sussex, and of the westcountre.
the east Saxons, the south Saxons and the west Saxons. Of the English, that is
of that country which is called England, and from that time to this is thought
to stand in the midst between the Vites and the Saxons, descends the east
English, the vplandish English, the Marshes and all the progeny of the
Northumbers, that is, of that people which inhabiteth the north side of the
flud Humber. The English me^ occupied at the first all England except kent,
Essex, Sussex, and part of the westcountre.
The chief capitaynes of the Saxons ar said to have been ij. brothers,
Hengistus and Horsus, Of the which Horsus being after slain in battaill of the
Britannes, was buried in the east parts of kent, where his tomb bearing his
name is yet to show. They were the sons of one Vetgissus whose father was
Vecta, whose father was Voden, of whose ishew many kings of sundry provinces
had their original. Now then great companies of the said nations daily
flocking in to this Island, they began to grow so strong, that the people of
the country which sent for them stood in great fear of their powessance. And
suddenly taking leage with the Pictes whom they had now dreuen farther of, The
Redshankes.
began to turn their force upon the Brytannes. And first they require of
them more plenty of vittayles, and pycking matter of falling out with them,
threateneth them that except they would provide them better store, The first
spoilyng of Brita^ny by the English men.
they would break of with them, and spoil all the country about. And as much as
they then promised, they after in deed performed. To be short, the fire once
kendled in the hands of the Paganes, took just revenge of the wickedness of
the people: not much unlike unto that fire which being kendled of the Caldees
consumed the city of Jerusalem. So also this fire of vengaunce, the wicked
conqueror kendeling it, or rather God the just judge disposing it, raiged
first upon the cities and country next unto it, after from the east sea unto
the west, over whelmed all the whole Island, with out any resista^ce made to
quench it. Both public and private houses were overthrown to the grownd, the
priests were slain standing at the altar, the bisshops with their flock were
murdered, without respect of their dignity, nor was there any that would bury
the slain. Sum of the miserable leuinges being taken in the hills were there
killed, other being sterued with hungre, were feign to creape out of their
caves, and buy their vittall at their enemies hands, with sale of their liberte
for ever, if yet they were not killed out of hand. Other fled over the seas with
a heavy heart. Other taryeng still in their country in fear of death and lack
of food, lived full miserably in the mountains, woddes, and cliffes.

How the Britannes obtained the first victory of the English by the help of
Ambrosius a Roman.

The. 16. Chapter.
But after that the English men having now driven out and disperkled the land
dwellers, were come back again, the Britannes by little and little begannne to
take strength and couraige unto them, coming out of their caves, in which they
lay hid before, and with one uniform consent calling for heavenly help,
that they might not for ever utterly be destroyed. They had then for their
captain a Roman called Ambrosius Aurelianus a gentle natured man, which only
of all the blud of the Romans remained then a live, his parents being slain,
which bore the name of the king of the country. This man being their
Captain, they assembled them selves together, and prouokyng the victoures to
the fight, through gods assistance, atcheiued the victory. And from that day
forward, now the men of the country, n^w the enemy had the victory, until the
year that Bathe was beseiged, where they gave their enemies a great overthrow,
which was about the xliiij. year of their coming in to the land. But of this we
shall speak more here after.

How Germanus the bishop, sailing with Lupus in to Britanny ceased first the
tempest of the sea, after the storms of the Pelagian heresies by the power of
God.

The. 17. Chapter.
A Few years before the coming of the Saxonnes in to the land, Counsel of
the catholic
the Pelagian heresies being browght in, by Agricol^ the son of Seuerian^s a
Pelagian bishop, did sore corrupt the faith of the Britannes. bishops in
France for extirping of Pelagian^ heresy.
But the Brita^nes being neither willing to receive their lewd doctrine as
blasphemous against the grace of God, neither able to refute their wylye and
wicked persuasio^s, they deuiseth this holsom counsel, to seek for aid of the
bishops of France, against these their spiritual enemies. And they calling a
common counsel co^sulted among them selves, whom of them all it were best to
send to help their neybours faith. By the assent of them all there was chosen
ij. worthy prelates Germanus Altisiodorensis, and Lupus bishop of the cite
Trecassa, which should pass over in to Britanny to confirm them in the faith,
which with reddy obedience accepting the commandment of the Synod, took
shipping thither ward, and had very prosperous winds until they were half
way over between France and Britanny. Then suddenly as they were sailing, the
devil much enuyeng that such men should go to recover the people out of their
danger and win them to the right faith of Christ, he rayseth such tempests
and storms against them, that a man could not know day from night. The sails
are not able to bear the boisterous fury of the wind, the marinours being in
despair gave over, the ship was guided rather by the prayer of the good, the^
pollice of the master. The holy bishop Saint Germane at the beginning hereof
was a sleep, Tempest ceased by prayer and holy water.
the^ Lupus and the other wakeneth and calls upon him, as in whose prayers
they had a special trust. Who seeing the present peril they were in commanded
them all to fall to prayer. He him self having a greater trust in God, then he
had fear of the tempest, calls upon Christ, and taking in the name of the
Trinite of a few sprinkles of water, casts it in to the sea. And forthwith
the rage of the storms breketh, the surges falls, God being called upon
differreth not his help, the evil sprits ar chaced away, the air returns to
his natural course, and the wind which of late blustered all against them now
with a merry gale blowing all together with them set them shortly after a land
in the place where they them selves desired. Thither a great multitude of
people being assembled received the priests of God, of whose cumming the
wicked spirits gave warning long before they landed, which afterward when they
were expelled out of the obsessed bodies by the commandment of these holy
servants of God, they declared both the whole order of the tempest which
they had raised and the great danger which they had wrought the said good
bishops, and did not deny but they were ouercomed by their merits and
commandment. In short time after their ariuall, they filled the Island with
their good name, their preaching, and their virtues. And the word of God was
preached by them not only in their churches, but also in the open streets and
in the country, in such sort that in all places both the sound, and faithful
catholics were confirmed, and they that before swarued out of the right faith
were amended. And in short time thourough their authority; virtue, and
learning, they brought all the whole country under obedience to their doctrine.
The authors and head professors of heretical error lay lurking all this
while, and like the wicked sprites, much spighted to see the people daily to
fall from the^. At lenght after long aduisement used, they takes upon them to
try the matter by open disputation, which being agreed upon they come forth
richely appointed, gorgiously apparailed, accompained with a number of
flattering favors having leifer to committ their cause to open disputing, An
open disputation between Catholics and heretics of the pelagian sect in the
year of our lord 400.
the^ to seem to the people whom they had subverted, to have nothing to sayin
defense thereof. Thither resorted a great multitude of people with their wynes
and children. The people was present both to se and judge the matter: the
parties therewer far vnleke of co^ditio^. In the one side was the faith, on
the other ma^s presumption: on the one side meekenes, on the other pride: on
the one side Pelagius, on the other Christ. First of all, the blessed priest
Germanus and Lupus gave their adversaries leave to speak, which vainly
occupied both the time and ears of the people, with naked words. But after
the Reverend bishops poored out their flowing words confirmed with scriptures
out of the gospelles and Apostles: they joined with their own words the
words of god, and after they had said their own mind, they read other men's
minds upon the same. Thus the Vanite of heretics is convicted, and falsehed
is confuted, so that at every objection they were forced in effect to confess
their error, not being able to answer them. The people had much to do to keep
their hands from them, yet showed their judgment by their clamours.

How Germanus restored the blind daughter of the Tribune to her sight, and
after cumming to Saint Albanes shrine did both from thence take sum relikes,
and left other of the Apostles or other Martyrs there.

The. 18. Chap.
THis don, suddenly a certain man of the dignity of the Tribunes comes
forth among them, offeringe them his daughter of x. years oulde to be cured,
which was blind. They bid^e them have her to the adversaries. But they their
oune conscience fearing them to take such an enterprise in hand, joins their
prayers together with their parents, desiring the priests to do their cure
upon the gyrle. Which seeing their adversaries to yield, makes their prayers
for her. And after Germanus full of the holy ghost, calls upon the Trinite,
and strayte loses from his nek a little bugget which he had by his side full
of the relliques of the martyrs, Relikes of holy Martirs.
and in the sight of them all puts it to the eyes of the maiden: which done
she strait received her sight. The parents much ioyeth there at, the people ar
all amassed at the sight of the miracle. After that day the said errors were so
pulled out of the minds of all men, that with all heart and desire they
embraced the doctrine of the bishops. Thus these damnable heresies being
suppressed, and the authors thereof utterly confuted, and all men's minds
instructed with the purite of the faith, they went unto saint Albanes, The
faith and devotion of Christen bishops about the year of our Lord. 400.
to give god the praise and thanks by him. Where Germanus having relics of
the Apostles and of diverse Martyrs, making his prayer commanded the toumbe to
be opened, entending their to leave those precious treasures. Thinking good
that the members of the Saints gotten in diverse countries should be buried
together in one tumbe, as being like of merits, they rejoiced together with
god in heauen^ which being there left with much honor he took of the dust of
the place where the holy Martyrs blood was shead, and carried it away with him.
Which things being thus disposed, a very great multitude of people was that
day converted unto our Lord.

How he being driven through sycknes to remain there, did both quench a great
fire with his prayer, and was by a vision him self healed of his infirmity.

The 19. Chap.
AS they were cumming back, it happened by the devils procurement, that Saint
Germane by means of a sore fall he had, brake his leg. Little knew the devil
that by the affliction of the body (as it was in Job) the merits of the holy
man should be thereby the more increased. Whiles for the time by the reason of
his weakness he was feign to tarry still in one place, the next house he lodged
in, was by chance set on fire, so that after it had quickly consumed the
houses about thetched with reed, it was now coming through the blowing of the
wind to the house where this good man was harbored. Many came running in
great haste to the Bishop, The like Seuer^ Sul pi^ius writes of
willing him to make away and save him self. Who^ he rebuking through
confidence in his faith, would not remove out of the place he was in. The
people al frighted with fear and despair came running to quench the fire. But
that the power of god might appear the playner, S. Martin. In epist. 2.
presixa prologo, in vita^ B. Martini.
the fire still consumed what so ever the people sought to save, but what the
sick man lying in his bed did keep, that the fire as being a feared of the
holy man's lodging skipped, both above and beneth fearcely burning without stay,
so that in the middle of the raging flakes and flames the house which this
weak man kept, remained sound and untouched. The people much ioyed at the
miracle, and rejoiced in god to see his power to save, that their labor could
not. Before the cottage of this poor prelate lay there a multitude of people
without number some to be cured of the maladies of their souls, some of their
bodies. It can not be expressed what miracles Christ wrought by his servant,
and what cures this sick man did. In the mean suffering no remedies to be
applied unto his own infirmities, on a certain night he saw a very beutifull
person cladde all in white apparel, to stand by his bedds side, which
stretching out his hand seemed to lift him up as he lay in his bed, and bid
him stand upright upon his feet. After which time his pains being assuaged
he was so restored unto his health, that as soon as it was day, he took his
journey without fear.

How the said Bishops by the power of God aided the Britannes in Battle and
so returned home.

The. 20. Chap.
IN this mean time the Saxons and the Pictes waged battle against the
Britannes. Which being assembled together in the camp and fearing much that
they should not be able to ouermatche them, they required the help of the holy
bishops. Which coming into their camp, put their fearful hearts in such
confidence, as though a great army had been come at that instant to aid them.
Wheruppon they being their capitaines, Christ warred with them in their camp.
This happened in the xl. days of lent, The xl. days of Le^t.
which were the more devoutly observed, through the presence of the priests:
in so much that they being instructed with daily preaching many of the
country came daily to be christened. And the greatest part of the army
required their baptism. Upon Easter day they made in the camp the likeness of
a church with poles and bouse, where they were solemnly baptized. By virtue of
which holy sacrament they became fervent in faith and bold in hope of gods
strength, which before were in despair of their own. The ennemies had word
of the manner and form of their camp, and of all things done therein.
Whereupon they thinking to steal upon them and so easily obtain the victory
over them, as unawares and unarmed, makes all the haste they could toward them.
But yet by skoutes their coming was known in good time. And now the holy
days of Easter being past, the greatest part of the host goes fresh from
baptism to their armor. Among the^ Saint Germane making him self as a
captain, pieketh out a certain of light soldiers, and going forth with
them places them privily in a valley that was beset with hills on every side:
by the which it was thought the ennemy would pass unto the Brita^nes ca^pe.
Shortly after comes on the same way the army of the Saxons, which when they
that were set in the ambush perceived to approach, Saint Germane being with
them, S. Germain puts to flight an lio^si^^. of insidels by singi^g of
lleluia.
gives warning unto them all, that as they heard him begin, all they should
cry and answer the same. And suddenly breaking out of the ambush, the enemy
not being ware of them, the priest cried out thrice together Alleluya. All the
rest strayt answers the same. The Ecko whereof, through the sound of their
voices rebounding back from the hills made such a sound, as though they had been thrice as many more in number then they were. Wherewith their enemies were so
amassed, as though not only the hiller, but heaven it self also did cry^ out
and fight against them. Where upon they fled with all the speed they could
make, casting away their weapon, and harneys, and thinking it enough if they
might with their naked bodies eskape the danger. Many of them for fear and
haste were drowned in the river which was betwext home and them. The innocent
army behouldeth the revenge of their enemies, and seith them selves to have the
Victory without battle. The soldiers gathers up the spoil, and with great
joy acknolegeth god only to be the geuer of that overthrow. The bishops them
selves triu^pheth in God to see the enemy put to flight without bludshed, and
the Victory to have been gotten by faith in God and not by force of man. This
the Island being set in good order, the enemies both visible and invisible
being ouercommed, the bishop returns home ward: to whom God gave prosperous
passage both for their own virtues sake, and also at the intercession of the
blessed martyr saint Albane.

How the Pelagian here^ies beginning to spryng again Germanus returning to
Britanny with Seuerus cured a lame young man, corrected the heretics, restored
the faith.

The. 21. Chap.
NOt long after was there word brought out of the same Island that the
Pelagian heresies began of new to grow and multiplye, by means of certain
which began again to set forth the same. Again therefore ar directed to the
bishop the prayers of all the clergy that he would go through with the cause of
God, which he had taken in hand before. Whose petition he accepting retourneth
again with prosperous winds in to Britanny, with one Seuerus a man of great
holiness, as the which was the disciple of Lupus bishop of Trecassa and was
ordained bishop of Treuers, and preached first unto that part of the Germans
the word of God. In this mean season the wicked sprittes flieng about the
Island did foreshew every where (so forced and constrained) that Saint Germane
was coming. In so much that Elafius one of the chiefest of the Island with out
the report of any manifest messanger, hasted to the seas side, their to meet
the holy men at their ariuall, bringing with him his son which in the flower of
his youth was benumbed of his leg: which was so shrunk in to his thigh ward,
through the dryth of his sinowes, that he could not set his foot upon the
ground. With this Elafius came a great multitude of people to receive the holy
prelates: which as soon as they came a land, fell a preaching to the people
after their wont manner. They find the people as touching their faith in the
self same stay they left them, they learneth the fault to remain in a few,
after whom they seek, and finding them out they condemn them. This done
Elafius falls down at the feet of the bishops, offering them his son,
whose pitefull case neded no prayers to entrete for the relief thereof. Every
man of him self pityed the young man, especially the priests, who altogether
(according to the pity conceived) beseched the clemency of God. And forthwith
Saint Germane taking the young man to him, made him sit down: he ^ealeth his
knee that was thus bowed inward, and with his blessed hand sercheth thourow all
the affected place, as far as the grief went. And behold each part as soon as he touched it, received health, and the sinowes returned to their natural
course, so that in sight of them all, the young man is restored sound unto
his father. The people ar all astonyd at the sight of so strange a miracle,
and in all their hearts the catholic faith thereby confirmed. Heretics banished
the country, set it in rest and quiet.
After that he preaches to the people of the redress of the said heresies.
And by the assent of them all, the first authors thereof ar condemned, to be
banished the land, and ar delivered unto the priests to be conveyed beyound
the sea: that by this punishment both the country might be ridd of them, and
they of their heresy. Whereby it came to pass, that in that places the faith
long time after remained sound and undefiled. All things thus ordered the
holy priests returned with like good speed as they came. Saint Germane after
this went to Rauenna to treat for peace for the people of little Britanny in
france, and there with great reverence being received of Valentinian the
emperor and Placidia his mother he deceased unto Christ, whose corpse with an
honorable company was conveyed unto his own church not without miracles done
by the way thereby. Not long after Valentinian is killed of the souldiars of
Etius patricius, whom he had slain before the syxt year of Marcianus raygne,
with whom the west empire decayed and came to ruin.

How the Britannes being free from all foraine wars, fell at wars with in
them selves and to all other myscheifes.

The. 22. Chap.
AT this time the Britannes were at peace with all other forayne ennemies but
yet at wars with in them selves. Their cities and towns lay waste which the
ennemies had destroyed: and they which had eskaped the hands of the enemies,
were slain many of them of their own fellows. But having yet as fresh in mind
the late calamites and slawghters they sustained, their priests peers, and
subjects kept the^ selves sumwhat in order. But after their death, the
generation that followed, little knowing and less regarding the storms paste
in their fathers days and having respect only to that present prosperous
estate in the which they then lived, were so set to break al good orders of
truth and justice, that skant any toke^ or remembrance thereof remained, but
only in few ant that in very few. Among many other of their horrible doings,
which their own historiographer Gildas, does lamentably set forth in writing,
he says of the^ thus, that they never took care to preach the gospel of
Christ unto the English and Saxons which inhabited the land among them. But yet
the goodness of God did not so forsake his people, whom he foreknew to be saved.
But provided for the said nation of the English much more worthy preachers, by
whom they might be brought unto his faith.

How Saint Gregory the Pope sent Saint Augustine with certain religious men to
convert the Englishmen, and with letters of exhortation encouraged them in
their enterprise.

The. 23. Chap.
THe year of chincarnatio^ of our Lord 582. Mauritius the 54. S. Gregory
sends S. Augustine to preach the faith to English men.
Emperor after August reigned Emperor of Rome 21. years. An. ^. 96.
The x. year of whose raygne, Gregorius being a man of the greatest virtue and
learning of his time, was the^ bishop of the Roman and Apostolic see, which
he governed xiij. years, vj. months, x. days. Which the xiiij. year of the
raygne of the said emperor, and about the hundredth and fiftyth year of the
English men's coming in to Brita^ny, being moved by inspiratio^ of god there
unto, sent the servant of God, S. Augustine and certain other monks which
feared god with him to preach the word of God unto the nation of the English
men. Which obeying the bishops commandment, when they began to take the
said enterprise in hand, and had already travailed part of the way, they
bethought them selves it should be better for them to return home again, then
to go unto that barbarous and saluage country, whose language they knew not.
And thus by common assent they determined to do, as being the more surer way.
Where upon they sends Augustine back again to the Pope (whom he had
appointed to be bishop there if they were received of the English men) humbly to
require him that they might not go forward in that so uncertain, so perilous,
and paynfull peregrination. Whom he yet exhorted by letters, that putting their
trust in the help of God they should proceed in their good purpose, of the
which letters this is the copy. Gregorius the s^ruaunt of the servants of
God etc. A letter of S. Gregory exhorting S. Augustine to pursue
For so much as better it were never to begin a good work, then after it is
once begone to go from it again, you must needs (my dear sons) now
fulfill the good work which by the help of God you have taken in hand. his
journey to England.
Let therefore neither the trauail of the journey, neither the talk of evil
to^gued me^ dismay you. But with all force and fervor make up that you have by
the motion of God bego^ne, assuring your selves, that after your great labor
eternal reward shall follow. Be you in all points obedient unto Augustine wo^h I
have sent back unto you, and appointed him to be yower Abbate, knowing that
shall much profitt yower souls, which you shall do upon obedience of his
commandment. Ower almighty Lord defend you with his grace, and grant me to
see the fruit of your labors in his kingdom of heaven: and though I can not
labor my self with you, yet I may enjoy part of yower reward, for that I have
a will to labor. God keep you helthy my dear beloved children, dated the. 23.
of July, ower Lord Mauricius Tiberius reigning, ower most virtuous emperor, in
the xiiij. year of his empier, the xiij. year after his Consullship, Indictione
14.

How he sent to the bishopp of Arells a letter to receive them.

The. 24. Chap.
HE sent also at the same time letters unto Etherius archbishop of Arells that
he should favorably entertain Augustine going in to Brita^ny of the which
letters this is the tenor. To the Right Reverend and most holy, his brother and
fellow bishop Etherius, Gregory the servant of the servants of God. Though
with such priests as loves god, religious men needs no commendation, yet
because oportunite to write did serve, we thought it good to direct our
letters to your brotherhood: An other letter of S. Gregory to the Archbishop
of Aerls.
aduertising you that we have sent Augustine the bearer hereof with other
servants of god accompanyeng him for the health of souls: whom it behooves
yower holiness to help and comfort as the holy order of priesthood requires.
Ant to thente^t you may be the better willing so to do, I have willed him to
discover unto you the cause of his journey, not dowting but that known, you
will gladly show him what comfort you may. We commend also unto your charity
ower common son Candidus priest, whom we have sent to ouersee ower church
belonging to ower patrymonye. God keep you in safete reverend brother. Datum vt
supra.

How that Augustine cumming in to Britanny first preached unto the king of kent
in the I Will of Tenet, and so being licenced of him came after in to kent to
preach.

The. 25. Chap.
AVgustine being much encouraged with the comfort of S. Gregory returned to
preach the word of God with the servants of Christ which were with him and
came in to Brytanny. Ethelbert at that time was king of kent a man of great
powessance, as the which had enlarged the fruntures of his empier as far as
the great flud Humber by the which the west and north English ar divided.
The i will of Tenet
At the east end of kent there is the I Will of Tenet. 600. miles in cumpasse,
according to the estimation of English miles, which Island is parted from the
land by the flud VVantsome which is of iij. furlonges bredthe and in ij.
places only passable: for both the heddes of him runeth in to the sea. In that
Island was Augustine set on land, and his fellows, to the number of almost
forty persons. They took with them certain French men to be their
interpretours according as Gregorye had commanded. And sendinge unto the king
Ethelbert, they sent him word, that they came from Rome, and that they brought
him very good tydinges, that is to wytt, that such as should follow and obey
his doctrine, they should enjoy an everlasting kingdom in heaven with the
true and living God. Which hearing this, commanded that they should tarry in
the said Island, having The first face, show, and manner of preaching the
ghospel to us Englishmen, by S. Augustine our Apostle, in the presence of Elbert
then king of kent etc, An. 596.

all things necessary ministered unto them, until they should hear farther of
his pleasure. For the brute of Christian religion had come before unto him, as
the which had married a Christian woman of the country of France named
Bertha, whom he married with these conditions taken of her parents, that it
should be laufull for her to keep unbroken the rites of her faith and
religion, with her bysshope Luidharde by name, whom they appointed her, to
assiste and help her in matters of her faith. Within few dayse hereof the
king came unto the Island: and sitting a broad, he bid Augustine with his
fellows to come to common with him. He would not suffer him to come unto him
into any house, least if they were skillful in sorcery they might the rather
deceive him and prevail against him. Our faith begann with Cross and
procession.
But they came not armed with the force of the devil, but endewed with the
strength of God carrying before them in place of a banner, a Cross ofsyluer and
the image of ower Savior painted in a table, and singing the letanies, prayed
both for themselves, and also for them to whom and for whose sake they came
thither. And when they sitting down as the king did bid them, preached unto
him the word of life, and also to all his houshoulde there present, he
answered them saying you give us very fayer words and promises: but yet for
that they are strange and unknown unto me, I can not rashly assent unto them,
forsakyng that ancient religion which this long both I and my people have
observed. But for so much as you ar come so far to thentent you might part unto
us such knowleadge as you take to be right true and good, we will not seek
yower troble, but rather with all courtesey receive you, and ministre you such
things as ar behouefull for yower liuelioud. Nether do we let, but that you
may win unto yower profession with yower preaching as many as you can. He
allowed them therefore a lodging in the cittye of Cantorbury, which was the
head cittye of his dominion, and as he promised, provided them of necessaries,
and freely licenced them to preach. It is said that as they approached near the
city, having the cross and image of our king and Savior Jesus Christ carried
as their manner was, before them, they song all in one tune this letany
following. We beseech the o Lord for thy great mercy sake that thy furye and
thyn anger may be taken from this city, and from thy holy house, because we
have sinned. Alleluya.

How the said Austen living in kent did follow the primative church both in
teaching and living, and of Canterbury the place of the kings abode was
created Bishop.

The. 26. Chapter.
AFter they were now entered in to their lodging, they began to express the very
Apostolik order of living of the primitive church, The life of our Apostles and
first preac^ers.
serving God in continual prayer, watching, and fasting, and preaching the
word of life to as many as they could, despising the commodities of the
world, as things none of their own, taking of them whom they instructed only
so much as might serve their necessities, living them selves according to that
they taught other, and being ready to suffer both troubles and death it self
in defense of the truth they taught. Wherebye many did believe and were baptized,
maruailing much at the simplicite of their innocent living, and the sweetness of
their heavenly doctrine. There was at the east end of the city an ancient
church buylt in the honor of saint Mar^ine, made while the Romans were yet
dwelling in England, in the which the queen (which as we have said was a
Christen woman) did use commonly to pray. They also resorted commonly to the
said church and began there first to sing service, Our first Apostle said
mass. The first Christening of Englishemen in Caunterbury.
say mass, pray, preach, and christen, until such time as the king being
converted unto the faith they received more ample license to preach where they
would, and either to build of new or repair owld churches. But when the king
him self being much delighted with the purite of their life and thexample of
their godly conversation, as also with their sweet promises (which to be true
they proved by the working of many miracles) did believe and was baptized, there
began more and more daily to resort unto their sermons and renouncing the rites
of their owld gentilite, to join them selves by the faith to the unity of the
holy church of Christ. Of whose faith and conversion though the king much
rejoiced, yet he would force none to becomme Christian, but only show him self
in outward appearance more friendly unto the faithful as companions of one
kingdom of heaven with him. For why? he had learned of these his masters that
the service of Christ must be voluntary and not forced. And without any farther
delay he appointed out for his said doctors a place and see semely for their
degrees in his head city of Cantorbury, and gave them possessions necessary
for the maintenance thereof.

How he being created bishop did advertise Gregory the Pope of such things as
he had don in Britanny, and required his counsel upon certain incident cases,

The. 27. Chap.
AFter this the servant of God Augustine came to Arles, where of Etherius
Archebishoppe of the said city, he was created Archebisshop of the nation of
the Enhlish men, according as S. Gregory the Pope had commanded. And returning
unto Britanny, he sent forthwith Laurence priest and Peter monk unto Rome,
which should make relation unto saint Gregory, how that the English men had
received the faith and he made their bishop, This chapter is full of much good
lerning and godly instructions.
and also required his answer upon certain doubts necessary for him to be
informed of, where of with out delay he received answer. Which we thought good
to put in to this our history.

The interrogatories of Augustine bishop of the church of Cantorbury. First how
the bishops should behave them selves among their clergy, and how the
offeringes of the faithful upon the altar should be distributed. And what is
the bisshops office in the church. Gregory the Pope answered. The holy
scripture testifies as I am sure you know, and specially the Epistles of Saint
Paul unto Timothe, in the which he goes about to enstructe him, The Sea
Apostolic.
after what sort he ought to be conuersaunt in the house of God. The manner of
the sea Apostolik is, to give commandment unto such as be made bishops, that
all manner oblations that are given be divided in to iiij. portions. And the one
thereof given unto the bishop toward his hospitalite, the other to the clergy,
the third to the poor, the fourth to the reparation of the churches. But for
so much as you being brought up under regular discipline, S. Augustine our
Apostle was a monk.
must not by the order of yower rule, live a part from yower clerg^e, in the
church of the English which is as yet but newly entered in to the faith of
Christ, you must follow that trade and form of living, which was used in the
primative church among the fathers, among whom there was none that said that
to be his own which he possessed, but al their things were common. And if
there be any among the clergy out of holy orders which can not live chaste,
The clergy ou^ of holy orders takes wives.
they shall take wives and have their stipend allowed them without. For of the
same parts of which we have spoken of before, we know it is written, that it
was divided to every man according as he had need. You must also think and
provide for their stipend: and they are to be kept under the ecclesiastical
rule, and seen unto, that they live honestly, and plye their psalmo^ye, and
keep both heart, tongue and bo^y from all unlawful chinge through the grace of
God. As for them that lives after the common ^ort, what need I to speak,
either what portions they shall give, either what hospitalite they shall keep,
either what work of mercy they shall fulfill? Seeing it is commanded that all
which is superfluous, should be employed upon godly uses, according as our
Lord the master of us all does teach us, Quod superest date eleem^sinam and
omnia munda erunt vobis, Luc. 11.
of that which is left give alms, and all shall be clean unto you.

Augus^ines demand. Where as there is but one faith, why be there so many
sundry customs of churches? And one custom of masses is observed in the holy
church of Rome, an other in France?

Gregorius pope answers. Yower brotherhood knows the custom of the church
of Rome in the which you were brought up. The order of the English service
chose^ out of other diverse countres for the best.
But it pleases me that if you have found any thing be it other in the church
of Rome, France, or any other, that may more please god, that you cheuse that,
and plant in the English church which as yet is but late come to the faith,
the best orders that you can cheuse, and gather out of them all. For the
things are not to be loved for the place, but the place is to be loved for the
good things tha^ ar in it. Cheuse then out of each church, and that that is
most godly, most religious, most best in any of them, that being gathered
together as it were in a boundell deliver unto them, and inure them there unto.

The question of Augustine. I pray you how shall he be punished which takes
any thing away from the church?

Gregorius answers. Of church ^obberies.
That you may consider by the person of the these. For there be some which
having otherwise to live, yet steleth, and some other there be, which are
driven thereunto by need. Whereby some must be merced with fines, some must be
punished with stripes, and ^ome favorably, some sharply corrected. And when
sharp punishment is excercised, it must be done in charity, not in fury. For
therefore the man is punished that he might not be damned in hell fire. And so we
must chastise our brothers offending, as the good fathers does their carnal
children, whom though they punish for their fawtes, yet they seek to have them
their heirs, whom they punish, and their possessions they keeps for them,
whom they seem to chasten in their anger. This charity therefore is ever to be
kept in mind, and according to it correction is so to be measured, that the
mind excedeth not the rule of reason. Thou shall also tell them, that they
must make restitution of such things as ar taken from the church. But god
forbid, that the church should look to receive with increase of gain such
earthly things, as has been taken from them.

The question of Augustine. Whether ij. german brothers may marry two systers
which be many degrees from them?

Gregorius answers. That may be done lawfully by all means, for there is
nothing found in the scripture to the contrary.

The question of Augustine. Unto what generation may the Christians mary with
their kindsfolke?

Gregorius answers. It is permitted by a certain law of the Romans that
brothers and sisters children may laufully be joined together in wedlock. But
experience shows that of such wedlock their can grow no children, and the
holy law forbids that we should reuele the turpitude of our kindered.
Wherefor it is necessary that it be the third or the fourth generation that
should be permitted to marrye. As for the second must in any wise forbear one
from the other. To marry with our step mother, it is a grievous offen^e, for
it is written in the law. Leuit. 18.
Thou shall not reuele the tupitude of thy father. The son can not ^euele the
turpitude of his father. But because it is written, Genesis 2.
They shall be two in one flesh, he that presumes to reuele the turpitude of
his step mother, which was one flesh with his father, he truly reueleth the
turpitude of his father. It is also forebidden the to marry with thy brothers
wife, for that by her former marriage she was one flesh with thy brother, for
which cause John Baptiste was behedded and suffered holy martyrdom. To whom
though it was not said, that he should deny Christ, yet was he killed for the
confession of Christ. For in that our Lord Jesus Christ said I am the
truth, for that he was killed for the truth, he shed his blood also for Christ.
And whereas there be many of the English people, which whiles they were yet
infideles, were thus unlawfully coupled, when they comes to the faith they
are to be warned, that they forbear, and take it to be a right grievous
offense. Teach them to fear the dreadful judgments of God, least for
unlawful carnal love they run in dawnger of hell fire. And yet for this are
they not to be kept from the communion of the body and blood of our Savior
Christ, least you may seem to punish such things in them, which they
committed by ignorance before their baptism. For at this present time the holy
church with a zele does punish some things, some other of a mekenes it does
tolerat, at some other it winketh upon consideration. Yea it so bears and
dissembleth, that the evil which it hates, by bearing and dissembling it
redresseth. All such as comes to the faith, ar to be warned that they
commit no such thing, and if they then do, they are to be restrained from
receiving the sacrament. For as they are sumwhat to be borne withal which of
ignorance does offend, so they are sharply to be corrected, which wittingly
fear not to syn.

Augustines question. If the bishops ar so far a part one from the other, that
they can not conveniently assemble together, whether one may be ordained a
bishop without the presence of other bishops?

Gregorius answers. In the church of England in which thou only art as yet a
bishop, thou can ordain none, but without other bishops. For when come there
any bishops out of France which might assist you in ordaining bishops? We
will therefore you ordain bishops, but so that they may not be one far from an
other, that there be no such necessity, but that they may hereafter come
together at the creation of other. The Curats also whose presence may do good
ought easily come together. When then by the help of god, the bishops shall be
so made that they shall not be far a sunder one from the other, Of creati^g of
bisshops.
there shall be no bishop created without iij. or iiij. bishops assembled
together. For in spiritual matters how they may be wiselye and prouidently
disposed, we may take example of carnal matters. We see when marriages ar
solemnized in the world, other that are married ar called there unto that such
as were married before, should joy with such as are married after. Why then
may it not be like in this spiritual ordinance (in the which by spiritual
ministry a man is joined unto God) that such then should resort together,
which either may rejoice of the worthiness of him that is made bishop, or may
pray together unto god for his continuance?

Augustines question. How shall we deal with the bishops of Britanny and
France?

Gregorius answers. We give the none authorite over the bishops of France,
for that of ancient time, of my predecessors the bishop of Arles received his
palle, The Sea of Rome.
whom we must not bereue of his authorite. And if it chance you therefore to go
to France, you shall treat with the said bishop of Arles, how such defaultes
as ar in the bishops may be redressed. Who if he be negligent in the execution
of ecclesiastical discipline, you must move him and prick him forward there
unto: to whom also we have written, that joining with you being there present
he will do his endeavor, to reform the manners of the bishops in such things,
as ar contrary to our Lords commandment. You by your own authority have
nothing to do in sitting upon the bishops matters. But yet by courteously
entreating them, by counselling them, by giving good example for them to
follow, you may reform to virtue the minds of the evil disposed. For why? It
is written in the law, he that passes through an other man's feilde, shall not
thrust his syckle in to his corn, but rub the ears with his hand, and so
eat them. Neither can thou thrust the syckle of judgment into the corn that
is committed unto an other man's charge, but with the example of thy well doing,
thou may rub of the chafe of syn from gods corn, and by treating and
persuading with them, convert them to the body of the church of Christ, as a
man does the meat he eats, in to his own. But what so ever there is to be
don by authori^e, let it be don by the said bishop of Arles: least that order
should be broken which was ordained by the ancient institution of our
forefathers. The primacy of Caunterbury in England.
As for all the bishops of Britany, we commit the^ unto your charge, that the
unlearned by holsom doctrine may be instructed, the weak by good persuasions
may be strengthened, the froward by just authorite may be corrected.

Augustines question. Whether a woman that is great with child may be
baptized? Or how long after she is brought a bed, shall she tarry er she be
received in to the church? And the child that is borne, how long shall it
tarry er it be baptized lest it be prevented by death? Or how long after she is
brought a bed, shall her husband forbear her carnal company? Or if she be in
her monthly desease, whether she may cum to the church or be received to the
mystery of holy communion? Or the man after he has carnally known his wife,
whether he may enter in to the church before he has washed him self with
water, or receive the mystery of the holy communion? Of all the which the rude
English nation had need to be informed.

Gregorius answers. I doubt not but you have been required counsel in their
matters, and I think also I have made you already answer herein. Yet that
which youerselfe could say and think herein, I think you would have it
confirmed with my answer. The woman with child, why should she not be
christened, seeing to be teeming is no sin before the eyes of allmighty God?
For our first fathers, when they had sinned in paradise by the right judgment
of God, they lost the immortalite which they had received. And for so much as
God would not utterly destroy mankind for his syn in punishment of his syn, he
took from him the benefit of immortalite. And yet of his mercy and goodness he
reserved unto him the increase of issue. That then which of the gift of God is
reserved unto the nature of man, by what reason should it be restrained from
the grace of baptism? For in that sacrament by the which all syn is utterly
taken away, it is great folly to think any man to be restrained from the gift
of that grace which is willing to receive it. When the woman is delivered, how
many days after she shall cum to the church it is plain to be known by the
commandment of the old testament which says thus. Leuit. 12.
The woman which has borne a male child shall remain xxxiij. days in the
blud of her purification^ she shall towch no holy thing nor shall enter into
the sanctuary, until the days of her purification be fulfilled. But if she
have brought fourth a femal child, lxvj. days she shall remain in the blud of
her purificatio^. Which yet is to be known that it is taken in mystery: for if
the same hour that she is delivered she should cum to the church, she should
run in no danger of gods displeasure. For it is the pleasure of the flesh not
the pain that causes the syn. The pleasure is in begetting the child, but
bearing is the pain and travail. Where upon it was said unto oue^ first
mother which first brake gods commandment. I shall multiply thy pangues and
pains and thou shall bring fourth in sorrow. O^^. 3.
If then we forebid the woman which is delivered, to cu^ to the church, we make
as though her pain were her syn. By no ways then it is forbidden to christen
either the woman that is delivered, or the child whereof she is delivered, yea
the very first hour either of the delivery of the one, either of the birth of
the other, if any of them both be in peril of death. For the grace of the
sacrament, as it is to be given unto the living with great discretion, so is it
to be offered without delay to the^ which draws toward their death: lest while
time convenient to give the mystery of our redemption is looked and tarried for,
by means of delay the party dye before he may receive the said benefit.
Nether shall the man carnally accompany with his wife, until the child that is
borne be weaned. But now by a corrupt custom, the women refuse to nourse the
children borne of their own body: which seem to have been found out only of
incontinence: for therefore they refuse to nourse their own children, by cause
they will not forbear the company of their husbands. Wherefore such as of an
evil custom do put out their children to nourse, shall not lie with their
husband until the daise of her purification be fully complet. Also in the
time of of her flowers they are forbid to company with their husband. So that
the old law does punish the^ which has to do with a woman being in that
case. Which woman yet nevertheless is not then forbidden to cum to the church,
because the superfluite of nature can not be imputed for syn: and for that she
suffers that against her will, it is no reason she should be restrained from
cu^ming into the church. For we know that the woman which was deseased with the
bluddy flix coming humbly behind our lord, Luc. 8.
touched the hem of his garment, and by and by she was cured of her said
infirmite. If then the woman which had the bluddy flix, might laufully touch
the garment of our Lord, why may not she enter into the church which suffers
her monthly flours? But you will say: as for her, her malady forced her to
seek remedy, this other is taken of her customable sycknes. Of natural
infirmities.
Consider this with thy self dear brother, that all that we suffer in this
mortal flesh by feebleness of nature, it was by the just judgment of God
ordained after our syn. As hunger, thrist, heat, cold, werinesse, proceeds of
the infirmite of nature. And what other thing is it to seek food against
hunger, drinck against thirst, open air against heat, garmente against cold,
rest against weariness, but to take medicine against sycknes? So unto the
woman that monthly course of her body is a desease. If then she did well
presume which being sick touched the garment of our Lord, that which is
granted to one woman, why should it not be granted unto all other, which by
nature ar grieved with like sycknesse? Nether shall she be forebidden in the
said days to receive the holy sacrament: but if of a great reverence which she
has there unto, she will not presume to receive it, she is the more to be
praised: but if she do receive it, she is the less to be judged. Note.
For it is the point of well disposed minds there to acknoledg their fault sum
times, where there is none in deed. For many times that is committed without
fault, which yet proceeded of a fault. Where upon to eat when we are hungry is
no fault, and yet hungar began and sprange first of the syn of our first
father. And that mounthely custom is no syn to the woman, for that it
happenyth naturally. But yet because nature is so corrupted, that without the
man's will, it seems to be defiled, it had his first original of syn, and
remains as a punishment, to the intent man might now know what he is becum
through the justice of God by syn. And that man which did commit sin with his
will, should feel the punishment of syn against his will. And therefore women when
they do consider them selves herin, if they mekely refuse to cum to the
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, they are to be commended of their
good consideration: But if of a good custom, of a religious lif, they have a
fervent desire to cum unto the holy mysteries, they are not to be forbidden, as
I have said before. Difference between the new testament and the old law.
Math. 15.
For as in the old testament outward works ar to be observed, so in the new
testament that is not so much regarded which is outwardly don, as that which
is inwardly intended. For where as the law forbids us to eat many meats
as unclean, yet in the gosspell our lord says: not that which enters in to
the mouth, defiles the man, but that cummeth out of the mouth that defiles
the the man: And shortly he says expounding the same: out of the heart comes
evil thoughts. Where it is sufficiently declared that to be unclean before God
which springs out of the root of an unclean heart. Wheuppon Saint Paul also
says, that to the clean all thing is clean: but unto the unclean and the
infidele nothing is clean. Ad Titu^. 1.
And strayt after he puts the cause of that uncleanness: For their mind and
conscience (says he) is defiled. If then the meat be not unclean unto him
which has not an unclean mind, why then that which the woman having a pure
mind does suffer of nature, shall be imputed unto her as impurite? As for the
man which slepeth with his own wife, shall not cum in to the church except he
be washed with water. Leuit. 15.
The law commands the old people, that the man which has had to do with
his wife, shall both wash him self with water, and not enter the church before
the going down of the son. Which saying yet may spiritually be construed: for
then spiritually the man has to d^e with the woman, when the mind does delight
him self with unclean thoughts of unlawful lust. And except this fire of
lust be quenched, he shall not think him self worthy the company of the
faithful brethern, which finds him self possessed with unchaste desires.
Though of this thing diverse countries ar of diverse minds, and sum uses one
thing, sum an other, yet the manner of the Romans was ever of ancient time,
after the company of their own wives both to purify them selves in the bath,
and of reverence a while to forbear cumming in to the church. We say not this
for that we take marriage to be syn. Whether in the act of marriage be any
sin.
But for that the very laufull company of man and wife is not without pleasure
of the flesh: and that pleasure can not be all together without sum syn. For he
was not borne of aduoutry or fornication but of laufull wedlock which says:
Psalm. 50.
Behold I am begotten in iniquite, and my mother has conceived me in syn. He
which knew him self to have been conceived in syn, mourned to remember his
sinful birth. For the tree does bear in his branches, the corrupt humors
which he drew of the root. In the which words yet he does not call the
carnal company of man and wife sin, but the pleasure therein. For there be
many things, which of them selves be lawful and allowable, and yet in the
doing of them we are sumwhat defiled. As oftentimes being angry we punish other
men's faults, whereby the calmnes of our mind is troubled: and though it be
well done that we do, yet is it not well that in doing it our mind is putt
out of quiet. Psalm. 30.
For he was angry with the vice of the offenders, which said, Mine eye is
troubled with anger. For whereas the mind can not lift him self up unto the
light of contemplation, except it be still and quiet, therefore he sorowed to
see his eye distempered with anger. For while he was forced to look downward
to punish the transgressors, he was forced also to be withdrawn from the
contemplation of things which are above. So then it is a commendable thing to
be moved with anger against sin, and yet is it a grief and a hinderance to
the well disposed mind: for in that he has been angry, he knows that he has
offended. Wherefore, to come to the purpose, the right use of carnal company
between man and wife, is to come together for procreation of children, not for
lust and pleasures sake. And if any man does use his wife not for carnal
pleasure, but to the end of procreation only, this man truly is to be left
unto his own discretion, both for coming unto the church and also for
receiving of the holy sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord. For he is
not to be kept either from the one or the other, which being in the fire yet can
not be burned. But when on the contrary, not the desire of issue, but the
pleasure of the body bears the chiefest rule in the work of copulation, they
have both cause to bewail their frailte. For though the word of god did
grant them so much, yet does it not so grant it them, that they should be out
of fear of offense. 1. Co^. 7.
For as saint Paul writing to the Corinthians says, he that can not live
chaste let him have his wife, so he strayt says farther, I say this as
tolerating, not commanding. There is no toleration of that which is laufull of
it self. Wherefore in that he uses this word tolerate, he shows it to be
faulty. It is well to be pondered that our Lord entending to speak unto the
people in the mount of Sina gave commandment they should first abstain from
women. Exodus 19.
And if the purite of the body were there so earnestly required, where our Lord
by means of his creature did speak unto men, that they which should hear
the word of God should be free from weme^, how much more the women which
receive our Lord almighties body, shall seek to preserve in the^ selves the
clennes of the body, least they may take hurt by the greatness of that
inestimable mystery? ^^ Regu^. 21.
Hereof also is it said by the priest unto David as touching his seruau^ts, that
if they wercleane from weme^ they should eat of the sew bred, which otherwise
they should not be suffered to take, except David would say that they were pure
from women. The^ the man bathed in the water after the carnal knowledge of his
wife may be admitted to the sacrament, when it is tried that he may come to the
church.

Augustines question. Whether after the illusion which is wont to befall unto a
man in his dream, a lay man may receive the body of our Lord, or a priest may
say mass?

Gregorius answers. Of nightly pollutio^s or i^lusions.
The testament of the old law, as we have above said, says him to be
defiled, and suffers him not to enter the church before evening, and not but
first bathed. Which thing the spiritual people otherwise understanding, shall
take it in like sense as we have above declared. For he is deluded as it were
by dream, which being tempted with vnclenesse, is defiled with true
imaginations in his thought. But he washith him self with water, that is, he
washes away with tears the filth of his thoughts: And except the fire of
temptation go out, let him take him self guilty as it were unto the evening.
But in this manner of elusions, there is a difference to be had. For a man must
narrouly search and discuss him self, of what cause this thing comes into
his mind, when he is a sleep. For sometimes it comes of surfeit, sometimes
of superfluite or weakness of nature, and sometimes also of unclean thoughts.
When it comes of the superfluite or infirmite of nature, it is nothing at all
to be feared. For the mind in this unclean fantasies. And though the party
do not remember, that in his dream he sustained any such fantasies, yet by
his own judgment he is not guyltles, if in the days before, he remembers he
had offended in gluttonous feding of the body. Suggestio^ Delight. Consent.
consent by the spirit: The devil was the first prompter to sin. Eua as it
were the flesh took delight therein. Adam as it were the spirit consented. And
herin is requisite great discretion, that the mind as judge over him self
should discern betwext suggestion and delight, betwext delight and consent. For
when the wicked fend does raise the first motions unto sin in ower heart, How
sin bredeth in the hearts of me^.
if there follow no delight therein in the mind, there is no sin at all
committed. But when the flesh begins to take delight therein, then sin
begins to spring: If then advisedly he does agree thereunto, then syn is
perfyted. So that in suggestion is the beginning, in delight the feeding, in
consent the finishing of sin. And it often chances that the evil, that the
devil sows in the thought, the flesh therein deliteth, add yet the soul does
not agree there unto. And though the flesh can feel no delight without the soul,
yet the soul stryuing against the pleasures of the flesh, is against his will
hampred with the pleasure of the flesh in such sort, that with reason he does
gaynsaye and not agree unto it, and yet is bound with delight, but so that he
much lamenteth his band. Where upon that principal champion of the heavenly
army S. Paul, bewailed him self saying: Romans 7.
I find a law in my lymmes, repining against the law of my mind and leading me
away prisoner in the law of sin which is in my lymmes. If he were prisoner,
then he did not fight: and if he did fight why was he prisoner? He then stryued
with the law of his mind, against the which the law of his flesh did fight.
Then if he fought, he was not in bonds. Man therefore is both bond and free:
free throwgh righteousness which he loved, and bond throwgh the delight, which
he boar against his will. These be the aunswers of holy pope Gregory unto the
demaundes of the reverent bishop Augustine. The epistle which he had addressed
unto the bishop of Arles, and sent after to Vergilius the successor of Etherius
here follows.

The Epistle of S. Gregory unto the bishop of Arles that he should aid
Augustine in the work of God.

The. 28. Chapter.
GRegorius the servant of the servants of God sends greeting unto the
reverent and his holy brother Vergilius bishop. With what affection ower
brothers cumming of their own accord unto us ar to be enterteyned, it may
thereby well appear, for that many times we are wont to bid them unto ower house
for charites sake. If therefore it chances yower brother and mine Agustine
bishop to cum unto you, I pray you receive him with such hearty and friendly
enterteynement, that both he thereby may honorably be comforted, and other
tawght how brotherly charity is to be mayntayned. And for that it often times
chances that they which be far of, shall sooner learn by report of other
such things as ar to be reformed where we are, then we ower selfs, if it be so
that you hear by him of things among yower priests or other, worthy to be
redressed, sytting in examination of the parties faultye with him, make
diligent search and scrutenye thereof. And in such things as offends God and
provoke his wrath, show yower self so houfull and hard to be entreated,
that both to the fear of other, the offenders be punished, and the innocent
throwgh false surmises be not oppressed. God keep you in health Reverend
brother. Geuyn the xx. of August, the xviij. year of the raygne of our good
lord and Sovereign Mauritius Tiberius Emperor. Indictione quarta.

How the said Gregory sent unto Augustine a palle with a letter, and more
preachers.

The. 29. Chapter.
Farther more the said Pope (for so much as Augustine had advertised him that
there was a great harvest and few workmen) sent him with his said legates, more
preachers, of which the chiefest were Mellitus, Iustus, Rufinianus: And by them
also he sent all such things which were necessary for the furniture ad
ministry of the church: As holy vessels, aultarclothes, ornaments for the
churches: Apparel also for the priests and clergy. Also relics of the holy
Apostles and martyrs and many books. He sent him also letters by the which he
signifies unto him that he has sent him a palle, and enstructeth him what
order he should keep in making of Bishops in the country of Britanny: of which
letters this is the tenor. To his most reverend and holy brother Augustine
bishop, Gregorius the servant of the servants of God. Though such as labor
in the work of God, may assuredly hope that god does reserve for them
unspeakable reward in the kingdom of heaven, we nevertheless stand bound
temporally also to honor and reward them: that they may be means thereof be
the more earnestly bent to take pains in fardering the honor of God. A palle
from the Pope to Augustine the first Bishop of Caunterbury.
And for so much as by the goodness of God and yower trauail, the new church of
the English people is brought unto the faith and grace of Christ, we grant
unto you the use of the Palle, that to wear such times only as you say Mass:
And we license you to ordain xij. Bishops in such places as be under yower
jurisdiction: but so that the Bishop of London be ever here after consecrated
of his own Synod, and receive his palle of this holy and Apostolic see
wherein I by the authority of God do now serve. Also we will that you send a
bishop to the citte of york, whom you shall think worthy of that prelacie, so
that if that city with the country about receives the word of God, the said
bishop be authorized to make twelve bishops more, and he him self be their
Metropolitan. For we entend to give him also a palle by the grace of God, if
we live: whom never the less we will to be subject to yower disposition. But
after yower death so to have the oversight of the rest of the bishops whom he
shall make him self, that he be in no case subject unto the aucthorite of the
bishop of London. Betwext the Bishops of London and York let this be the
difference, that he be highest, The priuil^ges of the Bishops of york and
London.
that is first ordained. All things that is don for zele of Christ, is to be
done with common counsel and mutual concord, so that they may with one
mind dispose their doings, and which they have disposed accomplish without
variance. We will farther that unto you be subject, not only the bishops which
you shall make your self or such as shall be made by the bishop of york, but
also all the priests of Britannie^ to thentent that of yowr living and life
they may receive a pattern both to believe and also to live a right: and
executing their officies both in soundnes of faith and integrite of lif they
may attain to the kingdom of heaven when it shall please God to call them. God
keep you in health reverend brother. Given the xx. of August the xix. year of
the reign of our Sovereign Lord and Emperor Mauritius Tyberius the xviij.
year after his consuship, Indictione quarta.

The copy of a letter sent by S. Gregory to Mellitus the Abbat going to
Britanny.

The. 30. Chap.
AFter the said legates were gone, and were now in their journey toward Brita^ny,
the holy father Gregorius sent letters after them worthy memory, in the which
he openly declared, how earnestly he te^dered the health of our country. Writing
thus. Unto his dear beloved son Mellitus abbat, Gregorius the servant of the
servants of God. After the departure of you and the company which was with
you, we were in dought what becam of you, for that we could hear nothing how
you sped in yower iourny. When then God shall bring you unto our reverend
brother Augustine bishop tell him, what I have of long time devised with my
self of the cause of the English men. Holy water, aultars and relikes.
That is to with that not the temples of the Idols, but the Idols which be in
them be broken, that holy water be made and sprinkled about the same temples,
altars builded, relikes placed. For if the said churches be well made, it is
needful that they be altered from the worshipping of devils in to the service
of God: that whiles the people does not see their temples spoiled, they may
(forsaking their error) be moved the more often to haunt their wont place to the
honor and service of God. And for that they are wo^te to kill oxe^ in sacrifice
to the devils, they shall use the same slaughter now, but changed to a better
purpose. It may therefore be permitted them, that in the dedication days or
other solemn days of martyrs, they makes them bowers about their churches,
and feasting together after a good religious sort, kill their oxen now to the
refreshing of them selves, to the praise of God, and increase of charity, which
before they were wont to offer up in sacrifice to the devils: that whiles sum
outward comfortes ar reserved unto them, they may thereby be brought the rather
to the inward comfortes of grace in God. For it is doutlesse impossible from
men being so rooted in evil customs, to cut of all their abuses upon the
sudden. He that laboreth to clim up unto a high place, he goes upward by
steps and pases, not by leapes. So unto the children of Israel being in
Aegipt our Lord was well known. But yet he suffered them to do sacrifice unto
him still in offering up of beasts unto him, which otherwise they would have
offered up unto the devils, as they were wont to do in the land of Egypt, that
altering their intent, they should leave sum, and also keep sum of their old
sacrifices: that is, that the beasts which they offered before, they should now
offer still. But yet in offering them unto the true God, and not unto the devils
they should not be the same sacrifices in all points as they were before. These
be the things which I think expedient you declare unto our said brother: to
thentent that he being there may consider with him self, how each thing is to
be disposed. God keep you in health dearly beloved son in Christ. Given the xv.
day of June The xix. year of the reign of our sovereign Lord, Mauricius
Tyberius emperor: and the xvij. year after his consulship. Indictione quarta.

A letter of S. Gregory to Augustine exhorting him that he should not glory
in him self of his virtues, and miracles.

The. 31. Chap.
ABout this time he sent Augustine an epistle touching such miracles as he had
known to be done by the said Augustine. In the which epistle he exhorts him,
that he should take no pride of mind therefore. I know (says he) dear
brother, that it pleases god to show by thee great miracles among the people,
which by thee he has called to his faith. Whereupon it is needful that of
that heavenly gift, both thou ioyest with fear, and fear with joy. Thou
have to joy for that by means of the said miracles the Englishmens souls are
won to the faith. Thou have to fear, lest through the miracles, which be
don by thee, thy weak mind be lifted up in presumption falling as far
inwardly by vain glory, as thou art by outward praise puffed up. We must
remember that the disciples returning with joy from their preaching when they
said unto their heavenly master, Lucae. 10.
Lord in thy name the very devils were obedient unto us, it was by and by
answered unto them. Do you not rejoice tereat, but rather rejoice for that
your names are written in heaven. For they had fastened their mind upon a
private and temporal joy when they ioyed of their miracles. But Christ
calls them back from private joy unto commune, and from temporal to
eternal, when he said: Joy for that your names are written in heaven. For not
all the chosen of god does miracles, but yet all their names are written in
heaven. For why? They which be the disciples of the truth, ought to joy in
nothing, but only in that good thing, which all other good shall have, as well
as they, and whereof they all shall have joy without end. This therefore
remains dear beloved brother, that of the things which by the power of god
thou workest outwardly, thou exactly ever discuss thy self inwardly, and
thourouly understand both thy self who thou art, and what plenty of grace god
has bestowed upon that country, for whose sake, (to thente^t it might be the
rather converted) thou have received the gift of working miracles. And if thou
remember, that thou haste at any time either by word or deed offended god, have
that ever in thy remembrance, that the often thinking upon thy sin may
press down the mounting pride of thy heart. And what so ever grace thou either
have or shall receive, to work miracles, think it given thee not for thine
own sake but for theirs, the minister of whose salvation thou art ordained.

How Saint Gregory sent letters and presents to king Ethelberte.

The 32. Chapter.
THe said holy pope Gregory at the self same time sent unto king Ethelberte a
letter with rich presents of diverse sorts, doing unto the king temporal
honors, which through his help was growe^ in knowledge of the glory of heaven.
The copy of the said letter is this. Unto the right honorable and his most
worthy son, Ethelbert king of the English, Gregory bishop. A godly letter of
S. Gregory to Ethelbert the first Christen king of english men.
God almighty, for this cause does call good men to the governance of his
people, that by their hands he may distribute the gifts of his mercy and
grace, unto all such over whom they have the governance. Which thing we know
to have been done among the nation of the English, over whom you are chosen to
have the rule, that by the gifts of God employed upon you, the like benefits
of grace might by your means be given to all such as are under your dominion.
And therefore O Noble Son labor diligently to keep the grace which you have
received from god: and seek with speed to set forth the faith of Christ to
your subjects. Have a good zele to procure the conversion of as many, as you
can possibly: forbid the worshipping of Idols: overthrow their temples: edify
the manners of your people with example of your own integrite, with words of
exhortation, fear, fayer speech, and well doing, that he may be your rewarder
in heaven, whose knowledge and name you make to be enlarged upon the earth. He
also shall make your memory the more famous unto your posterite, whose honor
you seek and maintain, among your people. For so Constantinus being sometimes
a most virtuous Emperor him self, and calling his subjects from the wicked
worshipping of Idols, brought them all with him self under the obeisance of
God almighty, our Lord Jesus Christ. Whereby it was brought to pass, that his
name was of higher renoune then any of the princes, that went before him, and
so much in glory excelled all his auncetours, how much also he passed them in
well doing. Wherefore let your highness also seek now to publish unto the kings
and countries subject to your dominion, the knowledge of one god, the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost: to thentent thereby you may pass in honorable
fame the ancient kings of your nation: and how much the more you trauail to
do away sin in your subjects, you may have so much the less fear of your
own sins before the dreadful bench of Gods justice. Our right reverend
brother Augustine bishop being brought up in rule of religion, having good
knowledge in the holy scriptures, and a man through the grace of god of much
virtue, what so ever he shall advertise you to do, gladly hear it, devoutly
do it, diligently remember it. For if you will hear him in that he speaks
unto you in Gods behalf, God also shall the sooner hear him speaking and
entreating for you. If otherwise (as God forbid) you refuse to give ear and
heed to his words, how can God hear him praying for you, whom you despise to
hear speaking to you from god? Wherefore with all yowr heart join yower self
with him and assiste him in gods busynes with all such authorite, that God has
given you, that he may make you partaker of his kingdom, whose faith you in
your kingdom cause to be received and observed. We will also yower highness to
know, that (according as we are taught in the holy scriptures by the very words
of God) the end of this world draws onward, and the kingdom of the saints of
God shall follow, which never shall have end. And the end of the world
approaching many things shall fall upon us, which have not ben heard of
before, that is to wit, change of the air, terrible sightes from heaven,
tempests contrary to the order of the times. All which shall not yet fall in
ower days. Wherefore if you shall know any of these to happen in your land, let
not yower mind be dismayed therwyth. For therefore shall there be signs sent
before the end of the world to thentent we should the more diligently tender
the health of ower souls, live ever in dowte and fear of death, ready prepared
by good works for the cumming of Criste our Judge. Thus much have I said in
few words right honorable Son, intending to speak more at large, as I shall
hear the faith to be enlarged in your kingdom. Then shall I be so much the
more encouraged to speak, how much the greater comfort I shall conceive by the
conversion of your country. I have sent you small presents, which yet shall
not seem small unto you, if you shall accept them as hallowed with the blessing
of S. Peter. All mighty god make perfect in you his grace according as he has
begone. And send you both long life here upon the earth: and that ended,
eternal life in his kingdom of heaven. The grace of God keep yower highness in
safte my dear Son. Datum vt supra.

How Augustine repaired the church of our Savior and builded the abbay of S.
Peter the Apostle.

The. 32. Chap.
AVgustine after he had obtained to have a bishops see appointed him in the
kings city, as is above said, through the aid of the king, he recovered there
a church, which was there of owld buylt by the Romans which were Christianes,
Christ's church in Caunterbury
and did dedicate it to the name of our Savior Jesus Christ, and there made a
house for him and his successors. And not far eastward from the city he
builded a That monastery is now called the Augustines, if it^ stand yet.
monastery in the which king Ethelbert through his advise builded a new church
in the honor of Saint Peter and Paul, and enriched it with sundry gifts, in
which both the body of Augustine him self and of all the bishops of
Ca^torbury, and of all the kings of kent were wont to be enterred. Which church
yet not Augustine him self, but Laurentius his successor did consecrat. The
first Abbat of that monastery was one Petrus a priest, which being legate unto
France was drowned in a creake called Amflete and burned after a homly manner
of the inhabitours of the same place. But ower Lord entending to have it
known, how worthy a man he was, made that every night there appeared a light
from heaven upon the place, where he lay buried: which when the neighbors
about had espied, gathering thereby that he was some good and holy man, and
searching out what and from whence he was, removed his body from thence and
buried it honorablye in the town of Bulleyne, in a place of the church
convenient sor so worthy a person.

How Edilfrith king of the Northumbers wasted Britanny and conquered the
Scotts.

The. 33. Chap.
ABout this time Edilfrith a man very valiant and much desirous of renown was
king of Northumberland: one that more wasted the Land of Brytanny then any of
the English Princes. So that it seemed he might be compared unto Saul king of
the Iraelites, save only in that he was void and ignorant of Gods religion.
For none of all the coronells, none of all the kings did conquer more of the
land of Britanny, either making them tributary, either dreuing them clean out
of the country and planting the Englsh in their places, then did this
Edilfrith. To whom that might be well applied that the Patriarch Jacob said,
when he gave his son Benjamin his blessing in the person of Saul, Benjamin
like a ravening wolf, in the morning shall eat his pray and at night shall
divide the spoil. Whereby Edanaden king of Skottes much grudging to see him go
forward after this sort, assembled a main and a strong army against him. But
the said Edelfrith encountering him in the field with a few men gave him the
overthrow, and in that famous place of Degsastone, disconfited his great army.
In which field Theobald brother to Edilfrith was slain, with that part of the
army whereof he was general. This battle was foughte^ in the year of our lord
603. and the xj. year of his raygne, which lasted xxiiij. years, and the first
year of the reign of Phocas then Emperor of Rome. From that time forward unto
this present never was there king of Scotts, which durst meet the English men
in the field.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF the church of England.
Of the life, lerning, and death, of blessed Pope Gregory.

The. 1. Chapter.
IN the year of the incarnation of our Lord 605. An. 605.
the hollie pope Gregory (when he had most gloriously governed the sea of the
Roman and Apostolic church. 13. years. 6. months and. 10. days) departed
this life, and was translated to the eternal seat of the kingdom of heaven.
Of whom it becomes me in this our history of the church of England more
largely to speak: because by his diligence he converted our nation, that is,
the Engleshmen from the power of Satan, to the faith of Christ. Whom we may
well, and also must call our Apostle. For as soon as he was high Bishop over
the whole wordle, S. Gregory Bishop over the whole world. 1. as head thereof.
and appointed gouerner of the churches lately converted to the belefe of the
truth, he made our nation the church of Christ, which had been ever until
that time the bondsclaue of Idols. So that we may lawfully pronownce of him
the sayng of the Apostle: That althowgh he were not an Apostle to others, yet
he was unto us. S. Gregory our Apostle. 1. Cor. 9.
For the signet and token of his Apostleship, we are in our Lord. This Gregory
was a Roman borne, his fathers name Gordian, his pedegre of awncient stock not
only noble, but also religiouse. For Felix sometime bishop of that same see
Apostolic, a man of great renomme in Christ, and the church, was his
great grandfathers father. This nobilite of religion he kept, and maintained,
with no less virtue, and devotion, then his parents, and ancient kinsfolk
had done before him. But his woldly nobilite he forsook altogether and by the
special grace of God turned the same to the purchasing of eternal glory in
heaven. S. Gregory a religious man.
For changing suddenly his secular habit he went into a monastery: Where he
began to live in such grace of perfection, that unto his mind (as often after
he was wont to wytnes with weeping tears) all transitory things were already
subject, that he far surmounted al worldly works, that he was wont to think
of nothing, but heavenly things, yea, that being yet clogged with his erthly
body, he now by contemplation did pass the very natural bounds of his
flesh, and that he derely loved death also, which to most men is a paynfull
pain, as an entrance of life to him, and reward of his labor. All which
things he said of him self, not craking of his increase in virtues, but rather
lamenting the lack, and decay of the^. In which defecte (as he was wont to
say) he thought himself now to have fallen by reason of his ecclesiastical
charge, and occasion of greater care. For talking on a time secretly with
Peter, his deacon, when he had recompted the old gifts, and virtuous graces
of his mind, straight way he said sorowfully. But now alas, by the means of
this my ecclesiastical charges, my mind is encombred again with secular
affairs, and after the good quiet and rest which it had, is now defiled
again with the dust of earthly business. And when condescending to many, it
wandereth and roueth about owtward matters, after desiring inward good
thowghtes, it returns thereunto no dowbte, the weaker. Therefore I weigh with
my self what I do now suffer, and I weigh also well, what I have forgone. And
when I behold, what I have lost, this that I suffer wexeth more greueouse. Thus
said this holy man of a great and passing humility. But we must think that
he lost none of his monastical perfection by any occasion or trowble of
ecclesiastical charge or office of a Bishop: but rather that then he did much
more good, and profited more in virtue by the labor of converting many to
the faith, then he hadd done before with the private quiet of his own
conversation only. For even being bisshopp, he ordered his house like a
monasterye. For as soon as he was taken owte of the monasterye, and ordained to
the ministerye of the altar, being afterward sent as legate from the sea
Apostolic to Constantinople, he for all that, S. Gregory the popes legate at
Constantinople.
in the earthly princes palace lived so, that he never intermitted his purpose
of heavenly conversation. For he took with him certain brethern of the
monastery (which for very brotherly love followed him to that Imperial city)
for the better keeping, of his regular observance: that alwaie by their example
(for so he writes) he might be fastened as with a strong cable or anchor to the
pleasant port of prayer, when soever he were tossed with the raging whaues
of wordly cares, and might also strengthen his mind by daily conference, and
reading with them, whenever it should be shaken with secular affairs. And
truly he was by these men's company not only defended from the assaults of the
world, and earthly troubles, but also more and more stirred up to the
exercises of heavenly life. For they exhorted him, that he would discuss and
expound with some godly and mystical interpretation the book of blessed Job,
which was enwrapped with many great obscurities. Neither could he deny them
his pains, which of brotherly love moved him to this profitable labor: but
has therefore meruelously declared in 35. books of Expositions, how this work
of Iobes history, first is to be understood according to the letter, them
how it may be referred to Christ, and the sacraments of the church, last in
what sense the same may be applied to every particular faithful man. Which
work he began to write, while he was legate in Constantinople, but he finished
it afterward when he was Bishop of Rome. This blessed man, being in
Constantinople supressed an heresy of the state of our resurrection (which
then there arose) in the very beginning, by the force of catholic truth, and
verite. S. Gregory represseth an heresy ri^ing in Constantinople.
For Eutychius Bishop of Constantinople began to preach a false doctrine,
which was, that our bodies in the glory of the resurrection should be so
subtle, as is either the wind, or air: so that it should not be possible to
feele', or touch them. Which when S. Gregory had heard, he proved this opinion
to be quite contrary to the right faith by the reason of truth, and also by the
example of the resurrection of our Lord. For the right, and catholic faith
believes, that our bodies being exalted in the glory of immortality, shall in
deed be subtle by the effect of spiritual pour, but yet not withstanding able
to befelt, and touched for the truth of our nature: according to the example of
the body of our Lord of which now rosen from death him self said to his
disciples: Touch ye and see, for aspirite has nor flesh, nor bones as ye see
me have. Luc. 24.
In the assertion of this faith the right reverend father Gregory did labor
so much against this vpstert heresy, quenched the same with such diligence,
and so vanquished it by the healp of the virtuous Emperor Tiberius
Constantinus, that from thence forth noman was found, The works of S. Gregory,
which durst be a styrrer up again, or mainteiner thereof. He made also an
other excellent book, which is called the Pastoral. Wherein he declares
plainly, what manner of man he ought to be, which should be chosen to rule the
church. And how the rulers thereof ought to live them selves, and with what
discretion instruct every one of their hearers, and also with how great
consideration they should daily weigh their own weakness. Moreover he wrote.
40. homilies upon the Gospel, which he has divided by equal number into 2.
volumes. He made also 4. books of dialogues, in which at the request of his
Deacon Peter, he has gathered the virtuous deeds, of holy men, which him self
could either know in Italy, or hear of, for their same, to the example of
good life for all the posterite. That like as in his books of Expositions he
teaches, in what virtues a man must labor, so by the describing of holy men's
miracles he might show, what, and how great the excellency of those virtues
is. Furdermore bicause^ the first and last parts of Ezechiel the prophet seemed
obscure and dark, he has fully showed by 22. Homilies, how much light, and
good matter is within them. That I need not speak of his small book of
answers, which he wrote back to the questions of S. Austin the first bishop of
Englishmen, as I have declared before, Lib. 1. cap. 27.
placing the whole book it self in this mine history. Neither of his other
littell book of Synodes, or Councils, which he has made most profitably,
conferring with the bishops of Italy for the necessary affairs of the
church. Nor of his familiar letters, sent unto diverse men. Surely it is my
think, marvel, that he should write so many, and such great volumes being
(as he says of him self) almost in all his youth vexed with the pains of his
bowels, and entralles, by the weakness of his stomach ever more sickly, and
made faint and feeble with agues though not very fervent for the time, yet with
quotidians continually trubling him. But in these his great griefs counting
carefully with him self, that the scripture says, Heb. 12.
Every son which is received, is scourged before, the harder he was kept
down with these present adversities, the more certainly did he lift up
himself, with the hope of everlasting comfort. And this much have I said
hitherto in the praise of his excellent wit, which could not, no not with so
great weakness of the body, be any thing debated. Now whereas other bishops
bestowed their labor in building of churches, and decking the same with gold
and silver, this man gave him self all together to the gayning of souls. S.
Gregory a great alms man.
Whatsoever money he had, he diligently distributed, and gave the same to poor
men, that his righteousness might remain world without end, and his horn be
exalted in glory for ever. Psalm. 111.
Who might truly say of himself that saying of blessed Job: Job. 29^
The ear hearing did bring me to bless, and the eye seeing did bear witness
for me, because I had delivered the poor man crieng out, and the fatherles
child, who had no helper. The blessing of the perishing man came upon me, and
the heavy heart of the wydowe did I comfort. I have put on justice, and decked
me theer with as with a garment, and pretiouse crown in my judgment. I have been an eye to the blind, and a foot to the lame. I was a father of poor men,
and the cause which I knew not I diligently sought for. I did break in peaces
the jaws of the unjust man and even out of his teath plucked I the pray: And
a little after. If I have denied (says Job) to poor men what they have asked,
and have made the eyes of the widow look long for her healpe: If I have
eaten my meat alone, and the poor fatherles child has not eaten thereof
with me. For even from mine infancy mercy has grown with me, and out of my
mothers womb hit was borne with me. etc. Moreover to this good S. Gregory's
piete, and perfect righteousness this pertains also that he has made our
nation by preachers which he sent hither, partetaker now of eternal liberty,
taking us from the teeth of our old ennemie the dyule. For which our faith, and
salvation rejoicing with himself, and commending the same with worthy praise,
he says thus in his exposition of blessed Job: A joyful ^eioysing of S.
Gregory touching the conversion of England to the faith.
Behold the tongue of Britannie, which ons knew nothing but to rore rudely
has of late begone to sing the Hebrewe Alleluya in geauing praise to God.
Behold the Ocean sea ons rough and high, but now mild, and calm obeys to
the feate of holy men, and the furiouse fluddes thereof, which earthly Princes
with force could never fraye the same for fear of God the poor priests do
bind with bare words. And that Ocean sea which never feared the mighty
hosts of infidels and heathen soldiers, does now tremble at the tongues of
humble faithful men. For whereas by good precepts, and heavenly words, yea and
with manifest miracles too, the grace and knowledge of God is powered into it,
by the terror of his divinity it is so bridled, and kept low that now it
fears to be troubles^me, and most ernestly desires to come to the glory of
immortality. By which words this holy father Gregory does de clare that S.
Austin, and his company brought the Englismen to the knowledge of truth, not
only by preaching to them in word, but also by showing them heavenly signs,
and miracles. This holy Pope Gregory amongst his other doings, caused that
in the chapels of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, masses should be said
over their bodies. Mass said at the shrines of S. Peter and Paul in Rome.
In the celebratio^ of which masses he added these three words and petitio^s
full of great goodness and perfection: Diesque nostros in tua pace disponas,
atque ab aeterna da^natione nos eripi, et in electoru^ tuoru^ iubeas grege
numerari. Which is to say: And dispose our days in thy peace: command us to
be taken from eternal da^natio^, and to be numbered in the flock of thine
electes. He governed the church of Christ in the reygne of the Emperoures Morys
and Phocas. But in the. 2. year of this Phocas Empire departing out of this
life, he went to the true life which is in heaven. His body was buried in S.
Peter's church before the Vesterie, the xij. day of March. With the which
body he shall rise again herafter in glory, with other Pastors of the holy
church: In his tu^be was written such an epitaphe, as follows: This corpse, An
Epitaphe upon S. Gregory our Apostle.
o earth, taken of the, take now again to keape
Until the same the lord shall stir, to life from deathfull sleep.
His spirit above the stars is gone, where death shall not it press.
Which rather was a way to him, the true life to possess.
The chefest Bishop buryd is, in this sepulcher here
Which ever, and in every place in goodness did appear.
The hungry man with food he fed, the naked he arayde.
With sacred sermons Christen sowles, from Satan's power he stayed.
He did in work, what thing in word, soever he did teach.
That he might be a sample set, to men while he did preach.
The English land to Christ he turned by virtues force and guide.
Making by that new nation, all Christendom more wide.
Toy how, thy care, thy study was, good Pastor and thy pains
Of thy poor flock unto thy Lord, to bring the greatest gaynes.
With these thy triumphs then, rejoice Gods chosen captain.
For now reward of thy good works, thou surely do obtain.
I must not here with sylens pass over the report which we have heard by our
elders and auncesters, of S. Gregory, how, and upon what occasion he was moved
to bestow such diligent labor in the conversion of our cuntrie. The
occasion why S. Gregory sent preachers unto our country.
Men say therefore, that on a certain day when many marchantes came to Rome,
and brought into the market place diverse wares to be sold, and many also came
thither to bye, that amongst them Gregory him self came to cheapen, and view
the market. Where when amongst other things he had spydde young men set to
be sold of white skin and comely countenance, with decent order, and color of
their hear, beholding them a while, he demaundyd at last out of what region,
or land they were brought? And it was answered that they came out of the isle of
Britannie, where the inhabitants were all of that beutie. Then asked he
whether the people of that ylande were Christen men, or yet lived in the
paynims errors? And answer was made, that they were all paynyms. Then this good
man heauely syghing from the botome of his heart, Alas, quoth he, it is a
piteouse case, that the author of darkness should possess such bright beauted
people, and men of so fair a face should inwardly bear so foul a soul. Than
inquired he an other thing farther, what was the name of that nation, or people?
And when answer was geeuen, that they were called Angli.
Angles, or english. Truly not without cause, quoth he, they be called Angles.
for they have an Angelicam.
Angels face. And it is mete such men were partakeners, and inheretors with
the Angels in heaven. But what is, quoth he, the name of the province, whence
they came? The marchantes answered, that the people of that province were
called Of yorkeshere.
Deyres. Marry quoth he, they may justly be named Deiri
Deyres. For they shall be taken Deira eru^i
From the ire of God, and called to the mercy of Christ. But what is quoth he,
the kings name of that province? When it was answered that his name was All,
S. Gregory, alluding to the name, said: Alleluia must be sounge in that
Princes dominions to the praise of Almighty God his creator. Siclegit Polya
lib. 1. Hist. Augl.
And furthwith going to the Bishop of the Roman and Apostolic see (for
himself was not yet chosen Bishop thereof) he besowght him, that he would send
into Britanie, and to the Angles there, certain ministers of the word, by
whom they mowght be converted unto Christ saying, that himself was ready to do
this deed by the help and aid of God, but yet so, that it should first please
the Pope Apostolic to permit, and allow the same. Which his request when he
could not then obtain, (for if the Bishop would have granted him that he
asked, yet the Romans could not had suffered him to depart so far from the
city) afterward, as soon as himself was Bysshopp, he browght it to pass, and
fulfilled this good work, which he had before so long desired, s^nding forth
diverse preachers, but himself helping at home with prayer, and godly
exhortatio^s, that their preching might be fruteful, and take good effect. This
much according to the opinion which we have heard from our auncieriters I
thowght best to put in the history of our Church.

How Austin exhorted the Briton Bishops to the catholic unity, and accord
with a miracle done before them: and how he profecyed what vengeance should
fall on them if they despised his words.

The 2. Chap.
About this time Austin by the aid and healpe of king Elbert called together
the Bishops and doctors of the greatest province, and nearest to him, which
were the Britons, to common with the^, into a place which until this day is
called Augustine zat, About South Hampto^.
as ye would say the power and strength of Austin, being in the borders of the
Vectias, and west Saxons. There he began with brotherly admonition to persuade
the^ to be at peace, and catholic unity with him, and to communicate with him
for Gods sake the labor of preching the gospel to the heathen of England.
For as yet they kept not the Easter sunday in dew time, but from the. 14. to
the. 20. moon. Which compte is concluded in the co^pas of. 84. years. They
used moreover many other things contrary to the unity of the church. Which
when they had been with long discourse declared, and these men neither for
prayers or exhortations, neither for rebukes or threttes of Austin, and his
company would geaue their assent, but rather preferred their own traditions
before all other churches which throwgh out the whole world agreed with
Austin in Christ, then this holy father made an end of so long and
troblesome strife, saying in this wise. Let us pray unto God, Psalm. 67.
which does make men all of one mind and accord to dwell in his fathers house,
that he will vowchsafe to signify unto us by some heavenly signs, which
tradition is to be followed, and by what ways we must spedely walk to the
entrance of his kingdom. Therefore let here be browght forth some sick body,
Our Apostles Faith confirmed by a miracle.
and by whose prayers he shall be healed, let his faith be beleaued, and his
godly doing be followed of us all. To this when his adversaries had granted
althowgh very unwillingly, there was presented a certain blind Englishman.
Who being offered to the Briton priests, when by their ministry he was not
helped, ^e could be cured, at the length S. Austin compelled by just, and
great necessity fell on his knees to the father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
beseching him, that he would restore sight to this blind person, that had lost
it, and that by the corporal illumination, and bodily lightning of one man,
his spiritual grace might enkendle light in the hearts of many faithful. And
forthwith the blind man saw: and Austin was praised of the people as a true
precher of all truth and verity. Then these Britons confessed in dead, that
they understood, that to be the true way of ryghteousnes, which Austin had
preched and showed the^. But yet they said, that they could not alter and
change their old customs and ordinances without the consent and licens of
their clerges and people. They desired therefore that they might have a second
Synod of a greater multitude. Which when it was appointed to be so, there
came by report seven Briton Bisshops, and many other well learned men
specially out of their greatest monastery at Bangor, where at that time
Dynoth was Abbot. These men being now ready to go to the forsaide Synod came
first to a certain holy and wise man (which lived there about an Anchoretes
life) to ask his counsel, whether they ought at Austins preaching and
exhortation leave their traditions, or no? Who answered them: if he be a man of
God, follow him. But how shall we prove (said they) that he is a man of God? The
Anchoret answered: our Lord says, take ye on you my yooke, and learn ye of me.
For I am mild, and humble of haerte. Matthew. ^1.
If therefore this Austin be mild, and humble of heart, it is likely that him
self bears the yooke of Christ, and will offer you the same to bear. But if
he be cursed, and proud, it is certain, that he is not of God, neither must we
much esteem his words. Then they enquired again of him, how they might know
whether this Austin were proud, or no? Marry quoth he, provide ye that he with
his compaine come first to the place of the Synod, or counsel house. The
general^ rule of our Savior evil construed in a particular case.
And if when ye approach nere, he arises courteously to you, think ye that he
is the servant of Christ, and so hear ye him obediently. But if he despise
you, nor will vouchesafe to rise at your presence, which are the more in
number, let him likewise be despised of you. And truly as this Anchoret bad
them, so did they. For it happened that when they came thither S. Austin was
already there^ and sat in his chair. Which when they saw, straight way
wexing wroth they noted him of pride, and therefore endeavored to ouerthwarte
and gainsaye, what soever he proposed. His oracion briefly was thus: Although
though (dear brethern) in many other points ye do contrary to our custom,
Three (...) proposed to the B^t^n or w^^ch bishop^.
or rather contrary to the custom of the universal church of Christ, yet
not withstanding if ye will in these 3. things consent, and obey unto me: that
is, to celebrate the Easter in dew time, to accomplish the ministry of
baptism (by which we are borne again to God) according to the manner of the
holy Roman, and Apostolic church, and last of all to preach with us to this
English nation the word of our Lord^ll your other ceremonies, rites, fashions,
and customs though they be contrary to ours, yet we will willingly suffer
the^, and be content to bear with the^. But they answered, that they would do
none of the things requested, neither would compre him for their Archbishop:
saying with them selves: A wrong^ and (...)te surmise.
Nay, if he would not so much as rise to us, truly the more we should now
subject our selves to him, the more would he hereafter despise us, and set us
at naught. To whom the good man of God S. Austen thretfully proficied, that,
if they would not take peace, and be at accord with their brethern, they should
receive and feel war from their enemies. And if they would not preach to the
English men the way of life, they should suffer at their hand, and by their
power the vengeance of death. Which thing in all points came so to pass as he
forsayed, by the secret working of Gods judgment. A true prophecy of S.
Augustine out Apostle.
For it happened afterward, that the most mighty king of English men Edilfrede
(of whom I have spoken before) gathering a great army, made at the city,
which the English men call Legacester, but the Britons better Carlege, a foul
slaughter of this unfaithful, and naughty people. For being now ready to give
the onset of the fight, when he had spidde their priests (which came together
to pray to God for the soldiers warringe) stand a part from the rest in a
sure and safe place, he demanded, what they were, and to what end they came
thither? Now the most part of these priests were of the monastery of Bangor,
where was said to be so great a number of monks, The monastery of B^gor in
wales.
that this monastery being divided in to seven companies, with each company
his several assigned ruler, none of these compaines had less then 3. hundred
persons, who all did ever live by the labor of their own hands. Many
therefore of them after their 3. days fast, came with the rest to thafforsaide
army, to pray for the soldiers: Fasting and praying in schismatikes avails
not.
having also by them a defendour named Brockmal, who should keape, and preserve
them from the weapons and strokes of their enemies, while they were thus
ernestly bent to their prayers. This the cause of their coming thither, when
king Edelfrede had understood, he said: If these men cry and call upon their
God against us, truly although they have no armoure, yet they fight against us,
who with their wicked words, and hateful curses persecute us. Therefore he
commanded his soldiers first to assault them. And so he vanquished after, the
other part of this detestable host, but yet not without great loss of his
own men. It is reported, that there were slain in that wars of them which
came to pray, about a thousand, and two hundred men, and only fifty to have
escaped by flight. For Brockmale at the first coming of his ennemies fled
straight with all his soldiers, and whom he ought to have defended, left
them all naked and bare to the strokes of the sword. So in this manner was
fulfilled the prophetie of holy bishop Austin. Who was himself long before
that taken out of this life to the kingdom of heaven. And thus these
vngratiouse, and false people suffered the punishment of temporal death, because
they had refused, and despised the wholesome counsel of perpetual life, and
salvation offered them.

How the said Austin made Mellite and Iustus Bishops, and of his death.

The. 3. Chap.
IN the year of thincarnation of our Lord. 604. An. 604.
Austin. Archbishop of Britannie consecrated ij. Bishops, Mellite and Iustus.
The one, that is, Mellite to preach to the province of the Essex and the
country about London.
Este Saxons, which are separated from kent with the Tems. And are fast joined
to the Este sea. Whose chief city is London, of situation nere set upon
the banckes of the fludde called the Tems^ a princely mart town, of many
people arriving thither by sea and land. In the which country at that time
raygned Sabereth Elberts nefue by his sister Ricula. Although this Sabereth was
himself under the dominion of the same Elbert, who was (as I have before
said) king over all the Englishmen, even unto the end of the fludde Humber.

Now as soon as this province by the preaching of Mellite had received the
word of truth, Mellite the first bishop of London. S. Paul's church.
king Elbert builded in the city of London S. Powles church, where Mellite,
and his successors ever after should have their bishops see. The other, which
was Iustus, Austin ordained bishop in kent, in a city of Caunterbury diocese,
which the Englishmen called Rotchester, by the name of the chiefest citisen, or
ruler thereof. Iustus the first Bishop of Rochester.
Which is in distaunce from Caunterbury town about 24. miles westwarde. In
the which city king Elbert builded S. Andrew the apostles church, and gave
many goodly and diverse gifts to the bishops of both these churches, that is,
S. Paul's in London, and S. Andrews at Rotchester. Like as he gave also others
to the bishop of Caunterbury. and moreover he added territories and possessions
thereto, for the better maintaining of them that lived with these bishops. The
death of S. Augustine our apostle.
After this the derely beloved man of god holy father Austin died^ and his
body was laid by the church of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, (of
which church I have made mention before) without the door thereof, because it
was not yet finished, nor dedicated. But as soon as the church was dedicated,
his body was brought in, and decently buried in the north porche of the same
church. King Elbert the first Christen king of Englishmen, builds S. Poules
in London and S. An ^rewes in Rochester for the ij. first bisshops of both
those Secs, Mellitus and Iustus.



Where also were interred the bodies of all the Archebishops following, except ij.
only, that is, Theodore and Berthwold. Whose bodies were laid in the church it
self, Memories of souls departed.
because the porche could receive no more. This church has almost in the
midst of hit an altar dedicated in the honor of S. Gregory the Pope.
Agendae eorum.
at the which altar every saturday their memories are solemnly celebrated by
the priest of that place. In the tumbe of this same Austin was written such and
epitaphe as follows.

Here lies and rests blessed S. Austin, The epitaphe upon S. Augustine
tou^be in Caunte^bury.
the first Archebisshop of Caunterbury who was sent hither of holy S. Gregory
Bishop of Rome, and strengthened of God by working of miracles. Who converted
king Elbert and his royaulme from the worshypping of idols to the faith of
Christ: and so fulfilling in peace the days of his office, he dyed the. 26.
of May, in the raygne of the same king Elbert.

How Laurence with his other Bishops warned the Scotts of the unity of the
catholic church, and specially to follow the same in celebrating the Ester.
And how Mellite came to Rome.

The. 4. Chap.
AFter the death of S. Austin Lawrence succeeded in the Bysshoprik. Laurence the
second Archebisshop of Caunterbury.
Whom S. Austin himself while he lived had ordained thereto, lest that after he
was dead the state of this church, rude as yet, and lately converted might
begin to waver, and fall, if hit should have lacked a Pastor and ruler never so
little while. Wherein he followed the example of the first pastor of the church,
that is, of the most blessed, and Prince of thappostles S. Peter. who when he
had laid at Rome the foundation of Christ's church, consecrated Clement for
his successor, who had ever before ben his healper in preching the gospel.
This Laurence being now Archebisshop saw how ioylely the fundations of this
his church did increase, which were well and strongly laid. And he endeavored
to lift up the same to their perfayte highness, both by often words of holy
exhortation, and also continual examples of devout and godly works. And truly
he hofully cared not only for the new church, which was now gathered of
Englisheme^, but also for the church of the old inhabitants of Britannie, and
of the Scotts too. who harbored in Ireland the next isle to Britanny: for the
which people also he labored as a true pastor and prelat. For as soon as he
knew the life and profession of the Scotts in their forenamed cuntrie, to be
skarce Ecclesiastical, and well ordered in many points (like as was the
Britons at that time in Britannie) specially because they celebrated not the
solennitie of Ester in dew time, but (as I have before showed) thowght that
they must observe and celebrate the day of our Lords rresurectio^ from the. 4.
moan to the. 20. he, Our first Christen
I say with the other Bishops wrote unto them an exhorting epistle, Bishops
labor to reconcile the Scotts from their schism to the Catholic vnit^
beseching and praying them to receive and keep the societe of peace, and
unity of Catholic observation, with that church of Christ which is spredde
over all the whole wordle. The beginning of this epistle was such: To our
derest beloved brethern the Bishops and Abbottes throwgh out all Scotland,
Laurence, Mellite and Iustus Bishops, and servants to them that serve God
greating. When as the sea Apostolic The sea Apostolic.
(according to thaccustomable manner thereof to send into all places of the
wordle) directed and sent us unto these west quarters, to preach the word of
God to paynim people and to hethen men, it happed, us to enter into this isle
which is called Britannie. Where thinking that all that did bear the name of
Christen men walked according to the customed way of the vniuer sall church,
we honored with great reverence as well the Britons, as the Scotts. But after
we had well proved and tried the Britons to swerve from the same, we yet judged
the Scotts for better men. Marye now we have learned by Bishop Dagamus
coming to this before mentioned yland, and we do understand by the Abbot
Columban of France, that the Scotts do nothing differ from the Britons in
their conversation. For Bishop Dagamus coming to us, would not only not eat
with us, but not so much as eat his meat in that house where we were. etce.
This Laure^ce with the other Bishops, sent also letters worthy and mete for
his degree, to the Briton priests. With which letters he hofully sowght and
earnestly labored to confirm and strenghthen the^ in the catholic unity:
but how much he has auailed therein these present days do now well declare.
About this time came Mellite bishop of London to Rome, Mellite the first B. of
London trauaileth to the Pope for instructions. etc.
there to commune and counsel with the Apostolic Pope Boniface for necessary
causes of the the English church. And when as this right reverent Pope had
called a Synod of the Bishops of Italy, to appointe some order, as concerning
the life of monks, and their quiet state, Mellite him self sat amongst
them, the 8. year of the reign of Focas the Emperor, the 13. Indiction, and
the 27. day of February, that what thing so ever were regularly decreed the re
he also subscribing thereunto might confirm them with his authorite, and
returning to Britannie might bring them with him to the English church, as
precepts and rules to be kept, and observed. As also beside these rules,
certain epistles which the same Bishop of Rome wrote, and directed to the
derely beloved in Christ, Archbishop Laurence, and all the clergy: and with
other letters which he wrote likewise to king Elbert, and all the English men.
This is the same Boniface which was the 4. Bishop of Rome after S. Gregory. Who
by ernest suit obtained a temple of the Emperor Focas for the Christians.
Which temple of ancient time was ever called by a Greek name Pantheon, as who
would say, the temple of all Gods. Out of which temple this Boniface casting
forth all filthiness, and purging hit clean, This church stan^eth in Rome at
this day, and is called S. Ma^ia rotunda.
made a church thereof in the honor of our lady the blessed mother of God, and
all the holy martyrs of Christ, that the number of devils being shut out
thence, the blessed company of Saints might have there a perpetual memory.

How when the kings Elbert and Sabareth were dead, their successors brought
up again idolatry. Whereupon Mellite and Iustus depart out of Britannie.

The. 5. Chap.
IN the year of thincarnation of our Lord 613. An. 613.
(which was the 21. after that bishop Austen, and his compaine were sent to the
English nation to preach) Elbert king of kent after his temporal reign,
which he had kept most gloriously the space of 56. years, entered into eternal
bliss of the kingdom of heaven. Who was the third king of the English men,
and reyned our all the South provinces, The first English kings of Britanny.
Suss^x and Ha^pshere.
which are separated from the North by the fludde Humber, and the borders
adjoining thereto. But he was the first of all the kings that entered in to the
kingdom of heaven. For the first English king, was Elli king of the South
Saxons, the second Celin king of the West Saxons whom they called Cewlin. The
third, as we have said, Elbert king of Ke^t. The west country suffolck,
nortfolck and Ca^bridgshere.
After him the fourth was Redualt king Este English. Who while king Elbert yet
lived, was chief gouerner of his country, and royalme under him. The fyueth
was Edwine, king of Northumberland, that is, king of all Meuanie, which lie
betwex Ireland and Britannie. The sixth was Oswald king also of Northumberland
a most Christen prince. Whose dominions were as large. The seventh was Oswy his
brother, keeping the kingdom almost within equal bounds for a certain time.
But after, he conquered for the most part the Pictes and Scotte; me^ which
dwelled in the North quarters of Brita^ny: and made the^ tributarie. But we will
speak of that here after. King Elbert died the 24. day of February, the 2.
year, after that he had received the faith, being full past: and is laid in S.
Martins porch, within the church of the blessed Apostels Peter and Paul, where
also Queen Bertha is buried. Which king beside other his deades that he
bou^tefully bestowed upon his subjects, gave and appointed them by the counsel
of wise me^ certain laws and judicial decrees according to thexa^ple of the
Romans: which being written in the English tongue are until this day kept of
the^ and as occasion serves practiced. Temporal awes o^ king (...) the (...)
christen king of kent.
In which his laws and decrees he first and chiefly ordained, what amends he
ought to make, which had by theft taken away any thing from the churches,
bishops, or other orders. Wherein the king provided a safeguard, and surtie for
them, whom, and whose doctrine he had now received. This Elbert was the son of
Irminrike whose father was Octa, and Octaes father Orrich, called also Oiske.
Of whom the kings of ke^t are wont to be called Oiskinges. This Orriches
fathers name was Hengist, who with his Oiske being sent for of Vortiger, first
entered into Britannie, as I have showed before.

But after the death of Elbert, when Eadbald his son had taken on him the
rule of the royalme, he greatly hindered, and dammaged there the young
springes and tender increases of the church. For he would not only not accept
and mainteyne the faith of Christ, but he was also polluted and defiled with
such a fornication, as the Apostle witnesses never to have been heard of
amongst the gentiles, which is, that he had married his fathers wife. With
which ij. heynouse factes he gave occasion to his subjects to return to their
former filthe and vomit, Reuolting from the faith in kent.
which under his fathers reign or for favor or fear of the king had yielded
to the laws of Christen faith and chastity. But the scourges of God, and
vengaunce from heaven wanted not, to the punishing and correcting of this
unfaithful king. For he was plaged with often frensy of mind, and raging
fury of an unclean sprite. Vengeance from God.
Now besides all this the death also of king Sabareth, king of the Este Saxons
much increased the trouble, and persecution of the church. Who departing
hence to the everlasting kingdom of heaven, left his iij. sons remaining yet
paynims, heirs of his temporal kingdom in earth. After the death of their
father they began straightwaie and openly to follow idolatry, which while
their father lived, they seemed somewhat to have relented: giving also free
license to al their subjects to worship idols. These princes on a certain time
when they saw the bishop in the church, The people do co^municat (...) Mass.
after he had celebrated the solemnites of the mass geaue the people the
sacrament, being puffed up with barbarouse, and rude folly, said (as the
common report is) thus unto him: Why do thou not geaue us also some of that
white bread, which thou did give our father Saba, (for so they were wont
to call their father Sabareth) and which thou do not yet cease to geaue the
people in the church? To whom he answered: If ye will be washed in that
wholesome font, wherein your father was, ye may likewise eat of this blessed
bread, whereof he was partakener. But if ye contemn the lauetorie of life, ye
can in no wise taste the bread of life. The blessed sacrament, bread of life.
We will not (said they) enter into this font of water, for we know we have no
need thereof. But yet nevertheless we will eat of that bread. And when they
had been often and ernestly warned off the bishop, that it could not be, that
without holy purging, and clensing by baptism any man might communicate of
this most holy oblation, they at last in their fury and rage said to the
bishop: well, if thou will not consent to us in so small a matter as we ask
of the, thou shall not hensforth abide in our province and dominions. And
straightway they expelled him. Commanding him, Mellit the first Christen
bishop of London expelled from thence.
and all his company to depart their royalme. Who being expelled thence went
into kent, to common there with Laurence, and Iustus his fellow bishops, what
were best to be done in this case. And by common consent it was concluded, that
better it were for them all, to return into their countries, and there to
serve God with a free mind, and quiet conscience, then to abide with those
barbarouse men, or live amongst such rebels of the faith, without all fruit
or profit. Therefore Mellite, and Iustus departed first, and came to the coasts
of France purposing there to expecte, and attend for the issue of these
matters. Reuoltig from the faith in London^
So shortly after, these kings, which had driven from them this preacher of
truth fell freely to idolatry, and worshipping of devils. But yet not
without the vengeance of God. For on a time waging battle against the
Genissans, they with their whole army were slain. The vengeance of God
ensuing.
But although the authors of this misscheffe were thus destroyed, yet could not
the common people ons stirred to naughtynes be amended, and revoked to the
simplicite of faith, and charity, which is in Christ.

How Lawrence chastened by S. Peter converted king Edbald to Christ, who
immediately after called back Mellite and Iustus to preach.

The. 6. Chap.
WHen Laurence was now ready to forsake Britannie, and go after Mellite and
Iustus, he commanded the night before he went, his bed to be brought forth,
and laid in S. Peter, and Paul's church, of which church we have oftentimes
spoken. Where, when after many his prayers, and tears powered out to God for
the state of the church, reposing his body to rest, and sleaping in his bed,
the blessed Apostle S. Peter appeared to him: who scourging him with sharp
stripes a great while in the close and secret night, challenged him with
Apostolical auctorite, and asked, why he would forsake the flock, which he
himself had committed unto him? and to what shepeherd, renning now away, he
would leave the sheape of Christ besette in the midst of wolfes. Have thou,
quoth he, forgotte mine example, who for the little ones of Christ, which he
commended to me in witness and token of his love, did suffer fetters, strypes,
enprisoninges, afflictions, and at the last death it self, yea the death of
the cross, by infidels, and the enemies of Christ, that I might be crowned
with him? By these S. Peter's strypes, and with these his exhortations Lawrence
the servant of Jesus Christ being styrred up, and encouraged, came boldly to
the king erly in the morning, and loosing his garment showed him, how sore he
was beaten, and pitifully his flesh was torn. The king amassed thereat meruayled
much with himself. And inquired who durst be so bold as to whyp and scourge
such a man, as this Lawrence was. But as soon as he had heard, that for his
own healthes sake and salvation this bishop had suffered so greueouse
beatinges, yea and that of the Apostle of Christ, he feared much. And
afterward abandoning all worship and honor of ydols, renouncinge also his
unlawful marriage he embraced the faith of Christ. and being baptized he
endeavored to keape and mayntaine the state of the church in all points to his
vttermoste power. Moreover he sent into France, and called home Mellite and
Iustus commanding them to return to their churches and freely instruct their
flock. Thus the year after their departure they returned again, Iustus to
Rochester, where he was bishop. But as for Mellite the Lo^doners would not
receive, although he was their bishop, chosing rather, to obey idolatrouse
bishops then him. And truly king Edbald was not a Prince of so great power
and strenght as was his father, that he might restore this bysshopp to his
church notwithstanding the paynim Londiners resistaunce, Kent returns to the
faith.
but for his own part, and all his subjects, from the day, that he was
converted to our Lord, he submitted himself to the precepts of God. Moreover
he buylt a chapel in the honor of our lady the blessed mother of God within
the monastery of S. Peter head of thappostles. Which chapel Mellite the
Archebisshop consecrated.

How bishop Mellite quenched with his prayer the fire burning the city of
Caunterbury.

The. 7. Chap.
FOr in the raygne of this king Edbald the holy Archbishop Laurence departing
hence to the kingdom of heaven, and being buried, the seventh day of
February in the church and monastery of S. Peter thappostle fast by his
predecessor Austin, Mellite who was bishopp of London, sat in the Sea of
Caunterbury church, third Archebysshopp after S. Austin: when as Iustus was
yet a live, and bishopp of Rochester. Which ij. Prelates because they did rule
and govern the English church with great labor, and diligence, received
eftsoons exhorting epistles from Boniface Bishop of the Roman and Apostolic
see. Who after Dersd^dit (otherwise wise called Theodatus) gouuerned the Church
in the year of our lord 618. An. 618.
Mellite was often troubled with infirmities of the body, and much greaued
with the gowte, yet notwithstanding ever hole and sound of mind. Who passing
over spedely all erthly things, hyed him fast to the bliss of heaven which is
ever to be believed, ever to be wysshed for, and ever to be sowght for. He was
also noble by birth, but much more noble for the excellency of his mind. I
will rehearse one token of his virtue, by which a man may easily guess the
rest. When upon a certain time the city of Caunterbury by negligence was
taken with fire, and began to waste and consume away by much increasing of
the flames, so that no help of man, no castinges of water thereon was able to
que^che or stay it, the greatest part of the city being at length nere burnt
and the furiouse flashes extending them selves even to the Bishops place, this
good bishop seeing man's healpe now to fail, and trusting only in the aid and
succoure of God, commaundyd that the might be carried out of his house and
set against these fierce flawes of fire percing and flyeng all round about.
Now where the greatest rage of this burning was, there was the place of
martyrdom of the. 4. hollie crouned Saints. Martyrium heat orum quatuor
Coronatorum.
When then the bishop by his servants was brought forth, and set in this
place, here he began with prayer, The prayer of the righteous man much
avails. Jacob. 5.
sick as he was, to drive away the peril of fire: which the stowght strength
of strong men with much labor could not before bring to pass. And behold
the wind that blew from the Southe whereby this fire was first kendled and
blasted abroad, now suddenly bent against the Southe, first te^pered his
blastes, for fear of hurting the places ouerryght in the other side, and after
quyte quenching the flames, ceasing, and extinguisshing the fire, made all
calm and well again. And truly this good man of God, which did fervently
always burn with the fire of inward charity, and was wont with his often
prayers, and hollie exhortations to drive from himself and al his, the danger
of ghostly temtations, and trowble by spryghtes of the air, might now justly
prevail against the wind, and easily cease these worldy flames, and obtain
that they hurted nor him, nor his: Who after he had ruled the church. v.
years deceased hence to heaven, in the raygne of king Edbald and is buried
with his predecessors in the oftmentioned monastery, and church of S. Peter,
At the Augustines ^n Caunterbury.
the year of our Lord. 624. and the. 22. day of February.

How Pope Boniface sent Iustus Mellites successor a palle and an epistle.

The. 8. Chapter.
TO whom Iustus succeeded inmediatly in the Byshoprike, who was Bysshopp of
Rotchester. Over which church he appointed for him Romanus, and consecrated
him Bishop. Auth^rite from^ Rome to make Bishops.
For now had Iustus received authority to ordeyne Bishops, from the high
Bishop Boniface, successor of Deusdedit, as we said before. The form of
which authorite is as follows: To our derest beloved brother Iustus, Boniface
sends greating. A letter of Pope Bon^^ace to Iustus the. iiij. Archeb. of
Cau^^ terb.
How godly, and how ernestly you have, dear brother, labored for the Gospel
of Christ, not only the tenor of your epistle directed unto us, but also the
perfection, and end of your doings, have well and fully declared. For
almighty God has not forsaken either the glory of his name, or the fruit of
your labor. Whereas himself faithfully ha^h promised the prechers of his
Gospel, sayng: Mattb. 2^.
Behold I am with you always even unto the end of the wordle. Which thing
especially his clemency has showed in this your ministry, opening the
hearts of the gentiles, to receive the singular mystery of your preching. For
he has made most honorable the state of your dignity by his grace and
goodness, while that himself has prepared you so fertell fruytes using most
prouidently his talentes committed to you, geauing you this gift, that you
may now assign and show whole countries plentifully multiplied in the faith
by you. And this is geauen you in recompense, because you persisted continually
in this ministry of preching appointed to you, looking with lawdable
patience, for the redemption of that people to whom you were sent, and that
they might geate some good by your merytes, and labor: whose salvation is now
begone wytnessing our Lord, saying: ^ atth. 10.
He that shall stand, and persevere to the end, he it is that shall be saved. Ye
are therefore saved by the hope of patience, and by the virtue of long
suffering, so that now the hearts of infidels being purged, and healed from
their natural, and superstitiouse desease may receive the mercy of their
Savior. For after we had read the letters of our dear son king Adelwald, we
understood with what great lerning, and instruction of holy scripture you have
browght him, to the belefe of thundowbted faith, and trewly converted him to
Christ. Wheruppon we presuming and putting sure affiaunce in the great mercy
of God, do hope, and beleaue, that not only king Adelwaldes subjects, but
also all the next dwellers and inhabitauntes about him shall receive by your
preching parfect salvation, and life everlasting. To the intent that as it is
written: the reward of your p^rfit and ended work, be given you from our
Lord, the geauer of all good things. And at the length the universal
confession of all nations, receiving the verity of Christian faith, may
manifestly declare, Psalm. 8.
that their sound has gone for the over all the earth, and their words even
to the uttermost parts of all the wordle. Wherefore of our bounteousnes we have
sent you by the bearers of our present letters a palle. Which we give you
license to use only in the celebration of the most holy mysteries: granting
you moreover by the grace, and mercy of our Lord, the ordeyning of Bishops,
when occasion shall require. For so the gospel of Christ by the preching of
many, may the better be spredd over all nations, that be not yet converted.
Let therefore your brotherly charity keape with a pure mind, and sincere
intention this authorite, which it has now received by the bountifulnes of
the sea Apostolic. In remembrance and token whereof you shall here receive,
to your use as prelat there, this Robe which we send you. It remains that
calling continually for the mercy, and grace of our Lord, you endeavor to be
such a man, as may use the reward of this our granted, and geauen autorite
worthelye, and not to any danger, or loss of sowles: but rather that you
may be able to show, and present the same hereafter, before the judgment
seat of the hiest, and most assured Judge to come, with the gain of many
sowles to God. Who keape and preserve you always in health most derely
beloved brother.

Of the reign of king Edwyne: and how Pauline coming thither to preche the
gospel, first baptized his daughter in Christian faith, an others with her.

The. 9. Chapter.
ABout this time the people also of Northumberlande (that is, the English men
which dwelled toward the Northsyde of the fludde Humber) received together
with their king Edwyne, the word of faith by the preching of Pauline, of whom
I have sumwhat spoken above. To the which king in a good abodement of receiving
the faith was granted both possibilite of the kingdom of heaven, and also
greater pour by thincrease of his kingdom on earth. For he had subdued all
the coasts of Britannie, whersoeuer any provinces or of Englishmen or Britons
were inhabited: which thing no one king of English men had done before him.
Hebride^ Insulae.
Moreover he added (as we have showed before) the Meuian yles to the English
kingdom. Of which yles the first that is nerest the South, and in situation
larger, and for the plentifulnes of corn more fertyle, has dwelling rome for
the number of. 960. families to the estimate of English men. The second has
space of ground but for 300. tenements, or somewhat more. Now the occasion that
these peoples came to the faith, was such: The before named king Edwine was
joined in affinite to the king of kent, by the marriage of Lady Edelburge,
otherwise called Tate, daughter to king Elbert. Which Lady when king Edwine
woed sending thither his ambassadors, answer was given by her hrother Edbald
then king of Kent, that it was not lawful for a Christian woman, and virgin to
be married, or spoused to a paynime, lest the faith and sacrament of the king
of heaven might be profaned by the company of such a king as knew not the
true worshipping of God. Which answer when the ambassadors brought back to
king Edwine he promised, that in any case he would do nothing that should be
contrary to the Christian faith, which this virgin professed, but rather
permit that she with all the men and women, priests or servants which came
with her, should keape and observe after the Christians manner their faith, and
customs of their religion. Neither did he deny, but that himself also would
receive the same religion, so that after the examination of wise men, it were
found more holy then his, and meter for God. Then upon these conditions this
virgin was promised, and sent also unto king Edwine. And according to
appointment made the man of God Paulinus was ordained Bishop, and chosen to go
with her, to confirm her, and her company, that they might not be polluted
with the fellowship of painimes. Who did so by his daily exhortations, and
ministringe the blessed sacrame^te unto the^. This Paulinus was made bishop by
Iustus tharchbishop of Caunterbury about the 21. day of Iulie, the year of
our Lord. 625. An. 625.
Being ordained he is directed in company with the above mentioned virgin unto
king Edwine, as if he had been her bodily compagnion: but the virtuous bishop,
intended wholly in his heart naught else then to call that country, to which he
went, to thacknowleadging of the truth, that according to the saying of the
Apostle, 2. Cor. 11.
he might exhibet, and present hit as a chaste virgin to the true and only
spouse, which is Christ. When he was now commen into this country, with the
healpe and aid of God he labored ernestly to keape them, which came with him,
from falling from their faith. And sought also how he might possibly convert by
preching some of those painims to faith, and grace. But as the Apostle says:
Although he long labored in preching the word of our Lord to them, 2. Cor. 4.
yet the God of this world so blinded the hearts of th^s^ infidels, that the
light of the gospel, and the glory of Christ could not shine before them.
The year following, there came into this cuntrie a desperate ruffian named
Ewmere: sent thither by Euichelme king of the west Saxons. A traitorous fact.
Who entending to dispatche king Edwine both of his kingdom, and life to,
brought privily under his garment a double egged short swerd, to this intent
dipped in poison, that if the stroke of the sword were not forceable enough to
kill the king out of hand, yet it might be healped forward with the infection
of the poison. He came therefore on Ester Sunday unto the king, who lay at the
river Deruent, where was the court then. He entered there into the palace as an
ambassador, which had earnest message from his prince, and when with crafty
speech he had a little made the prince attent to his fained embassaye, he
steppeth forth suddenly, and drawing his swerd from under his garment flew to
the king. Example of a trusty subject.
Which when Lilla, the kings most faithful servant saw, and having no
buckler ready at hand wherewith he might defend the king from present death,
stepped straightwaie with his own body between the king, and the stroke. But
this murderer struck his swerd so far, and feercely in them both, that
through the body of this servant now quight slain, he wounded the king
himself grievously. Which thing when he had thus done, being straightwaye
besette with the weapons of the kings guard, even in that tumult to, with the
same bluddy swerd he slew an other, whose name was Fordhere. Now it happened,
that the same night of holy Ester Sunday, the Queen brought forth, and was
delivered of a daughter, whose name was Eanfled. For the which child when the
king in presence of the bishop Pauline gave thanks to his Gods: the bishop
contra^ie wise began to praise, and geaue thanks to our Lord Christ, and
said to the king certainly, that he had obtained by his prayers of Christ,
that the Queen might be delivered safely, and without great grief. With which
his words the king being much delyted, promised that he would renounce all
idols, and ever after serve Christ, if so be that Christ would now grant
him his life, and health, and victory also in his wars, which he purposed
to have against this king Euichelme, who had sent in such sort this Ruffian,
and manqueller, that had wounded him. And in pledge of perfourming this his
promise he assigned and granted to bishop Pauline this his daughter, to be
Christened. Who was baptized first of all the Northumberlannes, The first
Christening of Englishmen in North^mberland.
with xij. other of the kings family upon whitsondaye following. At which time
the king also being recovered of his wound, that he had lately taken, made an
army, and marched forth against the West Saxons, at the which battle he
slew, or else took presonners all them whom he understood to have conspired
to his death. So retourning home to his country victour, and conqueror, yet
would he not by and by, or without farther counsel receive the Christian
faith: although truly he worshipped not idols from that day, that he promised
he would serve Christ. But sought ever after diligently of the right reverend
father Pauline the reason, and trade of faith, and conferred with his
counselors and nobles, whom he knew to be wisest, what were best, as they
thought, to be done in these matters. And moreover (as he was by nature a very
wise man) sitting oftentimes alone. for a great space, in much silence of
outward voice, but in his inward thought commoning with himself, he discussed,
and debated in his mind dyuersly, what he should do in this case, and what
religion were best to be followed.

How Pope Boniface exorted this king with his letters to the faith.

The. 10. Chap.
ANd behold in the midst of these cogitations, he happily received from
Boniface bishop of the sea Apostolic letters exhorting him to the faith. The
copy of which is such: To the most puissant prince Edwine king of the
Englishmen Boniface Bishop, and servant to them that serve God etc. Althowgh
the hye secret power of Gods divinity can not be expressed by words, A letter
of Pope Boniface to kings Edwin exhorting him to the faith.
or speech of man (for it consists by the greatness thereof, of so
unspeakable, and so unsearchable an eternity, that no force nor strength of
wit is able to comprise or compass, how great it is,) Yet for as much as
the goodness of God, opening the gates of our hearts to the knowledge of him,
does mercifully poor into men's minds by secret inspiration such things as
he will shall be spoken of himself: we have thought good to exte^de our priestly
care and deutie, in uttering unto you the rich store of our Christian belefe,
that bringing likewise unto your understanding, Matt. 28.
the gospel of Christ, which he commanded to be preched to all nations, we
might brinche unto you the cup of life and salvation. The goodness therefore of
the highest majesty of God, (who with his only word, and commandment has
made, and created all things, the heaven, the earth, the sea, and all that in
them is, setting a decent order wherein they should consiste) by the counsel of
his coeternall word, and the unity of the holy ghost, Genes. 1. and. 2.
made man of a piece of earth to his own image and lyknes, and gave him
moreover such a prerogative of excellency, that he preferred him and set him
ruler over all his other creatures, assuring him beside of an everlasting
perpetuite, so that he kept the bound of his commandments. This God the
father, the son, and the holy ghost, which is the inseparable Trinite, all
mankind from the Este to the weste worsshippeth with wholesome confession, and
adoreth with a sure faith, as the creator of all things and their maker. To
the which God yea the hye honors of Empire, and the puissant powers on earth
are lowly subject, because by his only ordenance and disposing, all kingdoms
be geauen and granted. Whose merciful goodness increasing always, and ayding
each his creatures, has vouche safed most merueylously to enkendle with the
heat and fervor of the holy ghost the cold hearts of those nations which
enhabite the uttermost parts of the earth, that they also might know him,
and beleaue in him. For we think your hyghnes has fully heard, and
understands by this time (the cuntrie lyeng so nere) how our Redemer of his
mercy has wrought wonderfully in the illumining of the most excellent Prince
our dear son, king Audubald, and all his subjects. And we with a certain
longlooking of heavenly hoope, trust, that the like miracle and gratiouse gift
shall be geauen to you also from God above, and specially whereas we understand
the Sovereign Lady your wife (who is a part of your body) to be illumenyd
with the hope of eternal life by the regeneration of holy baptism. Wherefore
we have thought it good to exhort you in these our present letters most
ernestly, and with all affection of inward charity, that abandoning all idols,
detesting the worsshipp and honor of them, forsaking the fond foolishnes of
your Gods temples, and despising the deceytfull entisementes of your false
sothsayinges, ye will now believe in God the father Almyghtie, and his son
Jesus Christ, and in the holy ghost: that believing so, ye may be absolved,
and loosed by the working power of this blessed, and inseparable Trinite, from
the bonds and captivity of the dyuel, and herafter be made partakener of life
everlasting. Now if ye long to know in how great fault, and offense they are,
which worship idols, and embrace the wicked superstition of them, thexamples
of their destroying and perdition (which are esteemed as Gods) can sufficiently
inform you, of whom king David in his psalms says thus: Psalm. 95.
All the Gods of the gentyles are dyuels but our Lord has made the heavens.
And again: They have eyes, and see not: they have ears, and hear not: they
have noses, and smell not: they have hands, ans feel not: they have feet and
walk not. Therefore all such are made like unto them, as do put any hope or
confidence in them. For how can they have virtue or power to healpe any man,
which are made of a corruptible matter, and wrowght by the hands of your
inferiors, and subjects? And how culd they get any abilite to hurt, or
healpe, whereas man's art and craft only, has applied a deadly similitude, and
lykenes of a body to the^: who (were they not moved by you) themself could
never waggene walk, but like a stone set fast in one place, so are they
builded up: having no understanding in the wordle but be dull with
insensiblenes hitselfe, and starcke dead. Therefore we can not by any
discretion and judgment find owte, upon what blindness, and deceit of mind,
ye worshipp, and obey those Gods, to whom your own selves have geauen the
image, and representance of a body. Yt behooves you then, to receive now the
sign of that holy cross by which mankind was redeemed: and execrating all
dangerous deceites of the dyuell, shake from your heart his subtlety, and
guyle, who ever maliceth, and enuyeth at the works of Gods goodness. Yt
behooves you also to set hands on these Gods, which hitherto ye have made
your self of one metal or other. Ye must, I say, tear the^, rent them, and
squasshe them to pieces. For the very dissoluing and breaking of them, that
never had live sprite, or breathe in them, nor could not by any means take of
their makers sense, and feeling, the breaking, I say, of them shall plainly
show you, that in dead it was nothing at all, which you have hitherto so
reverently worshipped. Whereas you are your self far better, then they be. For
you have received of our Lord a live sprite: and Almighty God has browght
you, althowgh by many ages, and diverse degrees, and kindreds, from the stock
of the first man Adam. Whom God himself made, and gave life unto. Come you
therefore to the acknowleging of him, that has created you, that has breathed
into you the sprite of life, that for your redemption has sent his only
begotten son, who should take you out of original sin, and reward you
after, with the joys of heaven, being now delivered from the devils power, and
malice. Receive ye therefore the words of the prechers, and harken to the
gospel of God which they show you: that believing, as we have alredie said in
God the father, and Jesus Christ his son, and in the holy Ghost, that
blessed, and inseparable Trinite, forsaking al honor and worshipp to devils,
and expelling from you the ernest entising of that poisoned, and your most
deceytfull enemy, ye may be borne again by water, and the holy ghost, and
by the only healpe, and bountifulnes of God, dwell with God (in whom ye shall
beleaue) in all brightness of everlasting glory. And here we have sent you the
blessing of S. Peter head of thapostels, and your good guide, and governor:
that is, a sherte laid with gold, and a cloak of the finest sort we have from
Ancyra. Which we beseech your hyghnes to acept with so good a heart, and will,
as ye understand it is sent from us.

How this Pope exhorted the Queen also that she should diligently, and ernestly
seek for the kings salvation.

The. 11. Chap.
THis bishop sent also letters to the Queen. And the transcript of that
epistle, which this holy and Apostolic Pope Boniface directed from Rome to
Queen Edelburge wife to king Edwyne was such. A letter of Pope Boniface unto
Edelburge Queen of ^orthumberberland.
To the most high and veriuous Princess Queen Edelburge, his dear daughter,
bishop Boniface servant to the^ that serve God. The bou^tifulnes of our redemer
by his great providence, has offered mankind (whom by the shedding of his
own pretiouse blood he has delivered from the bond, and captivity of the
dyuel) sundry ways, and many healpes, by which they might be saved:
insinuating by diverse, means into the minds of gentiles the knowledge of his
name: that thereby they might be Christened, and acknowledge their creator.
Which thing that it has been by the gift of God bestowed on your honor, the
mystical regeneration of your purifying in baptism does plainly declare. And
truly our heart has joyfully reioysed for this great benefit of our Lords
bountefulnes to you: who has vouchesafed to enkendle a spark of right
religion in you being now converted to him, that thereby he might after easily
inflame with the love and knowleadg of him self, the heart and minds not only
of your most renomed, and dear husband, but also of al your subjects. For we
have learned by the^ which came to declare unto us the laudable conversion of
our most gracious, and well beloved son king Audubald, that your honor also
(after ye had received the wonderful sacrament and veryte of Christian faith)
do shine and excel in good works, and such as be ever pleasant in the sight
of God. Therefore let your highness refrain always, and diligently keep you
self from worshipping of idols from thallureme^te of temples and from fond
south saynges. And so persisting with a sure and unchangeable devotion in the
love of your redemer watch ye and labor, never ceassing to bestow your pains
continually to the^crease, and enlarging of Christian faith. For when as for
our fatherly charity we had enquired sumwhat of the state of your derely
beloved husband, we understood that he served and obeyed so far forth to the
abomination of idolatry, that he would not yet show any obedience, or give
ear to the voice and counsel of Gods preachers, which news was unto us no
small grief, that a part of your own body should remain in this sort
alienated from knowledge of the highest, and the inseparable holy Trinite:
wherefore as becomes a father to do, we have differred no longer to send unto
you (our daughter in Christ Jesus) our good counsel and frendfull warninge.
Exhorting you that whereas ye are now your self endued with Gods grace, and
divine inspiration, ye differ not henceforth to be instant at all times,
warning him in season, or out of season, and still calling on him, until he
also by the healping hand of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ may be coupled
with you in the number of Christians: that you may so much the better, and with
a surer bond of societe accompany him, and hold the laws and rightes of
wedlock with him. ^^. 2.
For it is written: They shall be ij. in one flesh. and how can it be said, that
there is unite of conjunction between you, if your husband by the darkness of
detestable error shall abide still alienated from the brightness of your faith?
Cease not therefore to ask with continual prayer of the great mercy, and
long suffringe of our Lord, the benefit of his illumining, and conversion,
that whom the knotte of carnal affection has made now as one body, those
also the unity of faith may preserve in perpetual societe after their
dedeparture out of this life. Be you then instant most virtuous daughter, and
with endeavor hasten spedely to mollefie the hardness of his heart with godly
remembraunces, and divine precepts. Show him plainly how excellent a mystery
it is that you by believing have your self obtained. And how marvelous a
reward you shall have hereafter, because you are now regenerat by baptism.
Inflame his cold stony heart with often expressing the manyfolde graces of the
holy ghost. That, he settinge a side by such often exhortations this bodily
and earthly worshipping of Idols, the heat, and warmeth of divine, and
heavenly faith may inflame his understanding. That it may truly appear to be
fullfilled in you, which is spoken in holy scripture. 1. Cor. 7.
The infidel and unbelieving man, shall be saved by the faithful and beleauing
woman. For unto this end you have your self received mercy of our Lord, and
favor, that you should render, and yield unto him as your Redemer, the
multiplied fruit of your faith, and other good gifts, which he has credited
to you. Which thing that you may fulfill by the gratiouse healp of his
goodness, we cease not to ask with our daily prayers. In these therefore our
premises showing you the deutye of our fatherly love, and charity we exhort
you, that having the opportunity of a bearer, ye will spedely declare unto us
those things, which the myghtie power of God shall vouchesafe to work
merueylously by you in the conversion of your husband, and al your subjects.
That we (which carefully long, and heartily look for happy news of the
salvation of you, and all yours) by this your tydinges may be comforted, and
made glad, and perfectly knowing the light and brightenes of Gods favor and
mercy to shine amongst you, we may with joyful confession geaue full, and
whole thanks to God the geauer of all good things, and to blessed S. Peter
the chefest of his Apostles. In the mean time we have here sent you the
blessing of S. Peter your patron, and head of the apostles. That is a looking
glass set in silver, and a comb of yuery gilted with gold. Which we pray
your goodness as well to accept, as ye understand it is sent unto you.

How king Edwine was provoked to receive the faith, by a vision appearing to
him in bannishment.

The. 12. Chap.
THus much did Pope Boniface by his letters, for the converting of king Edwine,
and all his country, which king was also well helped, and almost forced to
receive the faith, and mark diligently the wholesome precepts of Christian
doctrine by an oracle, and vision from heaven. Which the goodness of God
vowchesafed to show him, while he lay bannished in king Redwaldes court,
king of the east Englishmen. For when bishop Pauline had well perceived that
the princes haughty courage could hardly be brought to the lowly humblenes of
Christianite, and that it would styfly be bowed and bent to bear the mystery,
and burden of Christ's cross: when he remembered also, how he had now labored
a long time both with preaching to the people, and with praying to Gods
mercy for the salvation of king Edwine, and all his subjects: at the lenght
having learned in sprite (for so it is most lykest to be,) what was that vision,
which had long before ben showed to the king from heaven, he made no delays
at all, but came spedely to the king, and warned him to fulfill and
accomplish his vow, which in the vision that appeared to him he had promised
to do in case he were delivered from his present miseries and restored again
to his raygne, and kingdom. Now was this vision such, as follows: At what
time king Edelfryde Edwines predecessor with greuouse pursuing put Edwine to
flight, A vision, by the which Edwin the first Christen king of Northumberland
was called to the faith.
and made him lie pryue, and lurk in diverse places of other realms for many
years space as a bannished man: at the lenghth Edwine came to king Redwald,
besechinge him, that he would save him, and defend his life from the traynes,
and ernest search of this his dedly ennemie. Who gladly entertained him, and
promised to fulfill this his request, and petition. But after that king
Edelfride had heard say that Edwine was seen in that province, and understood
that he lived there, and dwelled familiarly with all his company, forthwith he
sent out his Ambassadors to king Redwald, with a great sum of money, to
procure Edwines death. But it prevailed nothing. The^ sent he the second time,
and the third time also offering greater gifts, and more plentifully both gold
and silver thretning him at the last wars, if his request were accomplished.
Then king Redwald other dreading the threts or corrupted with the brybes
granted his request, and promised that he would put Edwyne to death himself,
or else yealde him up to thimbassadeurs. Which thing when a certain faithful
friend of Edwynes had marked and well understood, he entered incontinent to the
chamber where Edwyne purposed to take his rest. For it was now an hour within
night and calling him forth, told him what the king had promised to do against
him: saying in the end this much: I shall therefore (if it so please you)
lead you out of this province, and bring you into such a place, that another
king Redwald, nor yet king Edelfryde shall be able to find you. To whom Edwyne
answered in this manner: Sir, I thank you most heartily for this your great
gentleness. But I can not follow your counsel herin. For first, I must not
break my promise, which I have made to so great and mighty a Prince as is
king Redwald, especially whereas he has done me no harm, ne wrong, nor has
as yet showed any hatred, or displeasure toward me. And truly if I must of
necessite dye thus, I had rather he should put me to death, then any baser man
or person of lesle nobilite. Again whether I pray you should I flee now, who
have so many years, and so long time walked like a vagabounde through all
provinces of this isle of Britannie, only to avoid and eschew mine enemies
snares, and assaults? Now when this his friend was gone, Edwyne remained
without alone and sytting sadly before the palace began to be troubled with
many storms, and vexations of thoughts, as a man not witting what to do or
whither to go in this so ruefull case. After he had been long vexed with
inward, and privy troubles of mind, burning inwardly with close fire of
secret sorrow, behold, in the great silence, and quiet of the mydde night he
saw a man utterly unknown to him both for visage and countenance, and also
for his array and apparel to approach and draw toward him. Whom because he
had espied thus at a blushe, and so straungely desguised, he was not a little a
frayde. The stranger comes even unto him, greteth him and asks him,
wherefore he sat so soroufull on the stone abroad watching, and all alone at
that hour especially when other men were within at rest, and in their deep
sleep: Then Edwyne likewise demaundyd of him, what he had to do therewith, if
he passed over the night within door, or else without. To whom this man
answered, and said: Think ye not but that I know the cause of your heauynes,
and watch. And also of this your solitary syttinge with out doors. For I know
certainly who ye be, and wherefore you are so sad, and soroufull. And also what
myscheffe you fear shortly shall befall you. But tell me of fryndshippe, what
reward would you geaue him, that should now rydde you quyte out of all these
sorrows, and trowbles and persuade king Redwald, that neither he himself should
hurt you, nor yealde you up to your enemies, that they might slaye you? When
Edwyne answered that he would geaue all that he possible could to any such a
one for reward of so good a turn, this man added moreover and said: But what
if beside this, he do warrant you, that ye shall be a king, and all your enemies
vanquished, yea and that in such sort that you shall not only excel all your
ancient progenitors, but also far pass in power all the kings of
Englishemen, which have ever ben in this country. Here Edwyne being made more
firm, and constant by often questioning doubted not to promis, that in all
points, and at all times he would be answerable with worthy thanks geauing to
the man that should bestow on him such great benefits. Then this man spoke
the third time and said: But tell me again, what if beside all this, the same
man, which shows you now before, truly, and unfeignedly, that you shall
hereafter surely, and undoubtedly doubtedly have such and so great benefits,
can geaue you also better counsel, and more profitable for your sowles
health, and salvation, then ever any your parents, and auncesters heard of,
could ye then consent, and obey him, and harken to his wholesome sayenges? Here
Edwyne promised out of hand without any longer delay, that he would
altogether follow his lerning, and doctrine which both could, and would
deliver him presently from so many miseries, and so great dangers as he was
in, and exalte him afterward to the raygne and souerantie of his country.
Which his answer was heard, and taken. Then this man straightwaye, which had so
long talked with him, laid his right hand upon Edwines head, and said: when
these things therefore shall happen herafter in such sort to you, remember
well this time, and this our talk. And differ not at that time to fulfill and
accomplish this, that you do now promise me. Which being said, by and by he
vanished away. To the intent that Edwine might understand and perceive, that
it was no man, but a ghost which appeared to him. Now when this young prince
was left alone, and sat there solitary, rejoicing with himself for this
gentle consolation, and good comfort, but yet very careful, and much counting
with himself who it should be or whence he should come which had thus spoken,
and talked familiarly with him: behold his foresaid friend came again, and
greating him cherfully, Arise Edwine (said he) and come in. Let pass this
your carke and cares. Set your heart at rest, and take your quiet sleep. For
the kings mind is changed. Neither does he purpose now, or intend to do
you any wrong, but rathe^ to defend you, and accomplish his promised faith
unto you. For after he had showed the Queen in secret that his purpose, which
I told you of before, ^he dehorted him most ernestly, and withdrew him from
so evil, and so deadly an intention, saying that it was in no wise mete for
such a king, of so great prowe^e, and honor, as he was, to sell his best,
and derest friend, being now browght into straightes and misery, for a little
gold. Nor that he should break his faith, and promise, which owght to be more
esteemed then al treasures, or not bide by his word for the coueit, and love of
money. But to be short the king did even as his Lady had counseled him to
do. For he not only not betrayed, and yielded to thembassadours this his
banished man Edwine: but helped him rather to the kingdom. For as soon as
these embassad ours were thus with denial departed home again, he gathered
incontine^tly a myghtie army to conquer king Edelfrede. Whom he slew without
difficulty (because he marched forth against him hastily and with a weak and
vnordred oste) in the borders of the Marchland men, at the Este side of the
river called Idle. For in dead king Edelfride had not time, and space enowgh
grawnted him to gather all his force together, and to ioygne his power with
well disposing his host, and sowldiers in order. In this skirmishe Renier king
Redwalds son was slain. And thus Edwin according to the oracle which he had
received, not only avoided the dawnger of his most dedly enemy, but also by
his death succeeded in thonor of his Souerainte, and kingdom. Now therefore to
return again unto my purpose, thowgh Bishop Pawline seriously preched the
word of God, yet king Edwine slacked and lengered to beleaue him. Using yet
for a certain space, at diverse competent hours to sit solitary, (as I have
said before) and diligently to compte with him self, what were best to be
done and what religion was best to be followed. At which solitary meditation of
the prince this good and godly bishop Pawline entered on a day in to the
palace, and cominge to the king, laid his right hand on his head and asked
him, whether he remembered that sign, or no? The king suddenly trembled thereat
for fear. And when he would have fallen down at Paulinus feate, the bishop
lyfted him up, and spoke after a familiar sort thus unto him: Behold o
Sovereign Prince, by the bountiful hand and power of our Lord, and God, you
have eskaped the hand and vengeance of your most hated, and dreadful enemy.
Behold also, by his most gratiouse goodness you have obtained the Soueraintie of
reign, and rule of the kingdom. Remember now therefore the third thing, which
you promised him, and differ no longer to perform, and accomplish the same,
by receiving his faith, and keaping his commandments, who has delivered you
from your temporal adversities, and exalted you to the honor, and majesty of
a king. Whose holy will if you will hereafter obey and ever more do his
pleasure, which by me he preaches, and declares to you, he will also deliver
you from the perpetual tormente of hell, and make you partakener with him in
heaven of eternal kingdom, and bless without end.

What counsel king Edwyne had of the nobles and pears of his royalme, for the
receiving of Christian faith: and how one of his Bisshops profaned and brake
down the Idols aulters.

The 13. Chapter.
WHich word when the king heard, he answered immediately both that he would,
and also that he was bound to receive this faith, which B. Pauline had
preched, and taught. But yet I think it good, (quoth he) first to confer, and
common hereof with my friends, the nobility, and pears of my realm: that if
they shall happily think herein, as I do, then we may be Christened all
together in the founte of life. Whereunto when Bishop Pauline agreed king
Edwyne calling the states together consulted with them. And asked severally
each of them, what manner of doctrine this seemed to be, which until that day
had never ben head of before? And how they liked the honor, and worshipping of
this new God which was preached now amongst them? To whom Bishop Coyfi
first of all his Bishops answered: May it like your highness to prove, and try
well what manner of doctrine this is which now is preched unto us. But this
much shall I surely say, and as I certainly know, protest, and confess unto
you, that the religion which unto this day we have ever observed and kept,
has no virtue, nor goodness in hit at al. For none of your graces subjects
has been at any time more ernest, and diligent in worshipping of our Gods
then I have been: and yet not withstanding many of them, have received of your
graces bounteousnes more ample benefits, then I have, many of them more
higher dignities, then I have: and many of them have been better prospered in
all they took in hand to do, or sought to get, then ever I was. A carnal
re^p^ct of ^n a^hen Bishop occasi^n o^ good.
But if the Gods could ought have done, they would have rather hoolpen me, who
at all times served them so dewly. Wherefore it remains, that if these things
which be now newly preched to us shall be found after good examination, the
better, and of more strenght, and stedfastnes, that then without longer delay
we hasten to receive, and embrace them. To this persuasion, of bishop Coyfi an
other of the nobles consenting said by and by: Such seems to me, dear
Sovereign, the life of men present here in earth (for the comparison of our
uncertain time, and days to live) as if a sparowe beaten with wind, and
wether should chance to fly in at one window of the parlour, and flitting
there a little about, straight way fly out at an other, while your grace is
at diner in the presence of your dukes, Lords, Capitaines, and high guard. The
parloure it self being then pleasant, and warm with a soft fire burning
amidest thereof, but all places, and ways abroad troubled with tempeste,
raging storms, winter winds, hayle, and snow. Now your grace considers,
that this sparrowe while it was within the house felt no smart of tempesteouse
wind or rain. But after the short space of this fair wether, and warm
air, the poor byrd escapes your sight, and returns from winter to winter
again. So the life of man appears here in earth, and is to be seen for a
season: but what may, or shall follow the same, or what has gone before it,
that surely know we not. Therefore if this new lerning can enfo^me us of any
better suertie, my think it is worthy to be followed. Thus or in like manner
said the rest of the elders, and the kings counselors, no doubt, by the
holy inspiration of God. Only bishop Coyfi was not content to rest him here,
but said moreover that he would with diligence note Pauline and mark what he
said of that God, whom he preached. Which thing when he had so done according
to the kings will, and pleasure, he returned again, and with a loud voice
said. I understood certes long a go, that in very deed, it was right
naught which we worshipped as God. For the more curiously that I sought for the
truth in worshipping our Gods, certainly the farther was I from it, and the
less I found hit. But now do I plainly perceive and know, that in this
Pawlinus preaching and teaching is that truth, and verity, which is able to
geaue us the great gifts of life, of salvation, and of bliss everlasting.
Wherefore I counsel, and exhort you my most Sovereign and dear Prince, that
we may out of hand curse our temples and abandon them. And burn down with
fire our Idolatrous aulters. Which we have heretofore erected in vain, and
consecrated without all fruit, and profitte. But that I may be short, and
come nere my purpose: the king gave his full, and plain consent to this holy
man bishop Pauline. Willing him to preach the gospel freely. And himself
renouncing there all idolatry, promised that he would receive, and embrace the
faith of Christ. And demanding then, of this before said Coifi, bishop of his
sacrifices, who should first profane the aulters, and destroy the temples of
Idols, with all the grates, and bars wherewith they were enuyroned? Marry
(quoth he) I will. For who may better then I, which ons by folishnes
worshipped, and highly esteemed them? Therefore to the good example of all
other, I will now my self through the wisdom of God (that is one, only, and
true God) geauen unto me, beat down, and utterly destroy the abomination of
our temples. So sorsaking in this wise all superstitiouse custom, and vain
dread, he besought the king to grant him harness, and armoure, and
therewith a great courser, and mighty courageous stalyon horse. On which he
mounted lustely, and with all speed rode forth to batter, and beat down to
ground the idols. Now was it not laufull for a bishop of the sacrifices either
to were harness, and armoure, or to ride on other then a mare. But Coyfi made
small compte thereof. For being alredie well harnessed, and strongly girded
with a swerd about his loins, sitting fast on the kings courser and stought
stalyon, he took also in his hand a spear, and so did march and set
fourth against the pernitiouse idols. Which sight when the people saw, they
thought he had been mad. Yet he for all that stayed not. But as soon as he
approached nere the temple, profaned it, casting thereon the spear, which he
held in his hand, and much rejoicing now, because he knew the true worshipping
of God, commanded the company which was there with him to destroy the
temple, to fire the idolatrouse aulters, and break the bars, grates, or
whatsoever ornaments were theraboute. And truly the place where those Idols
sometime were, is now to be seen, not far from York at the ryfing of the
river Derwent. And is at this present day called Gormund in Gaham. In which
place, the bishop Coyfi by holy inspiratio^ of the true God, polluted, and
destroyed the aulters of false Gods, which himself before had solemly
consecrated.

How king Edwine and all his subjects were made Christians, and in what place
bishop Pawlyne baptized them.

The 14. Chap.
THen king Edwyne, The first Christendom of the English Prince in
Northumberland, or in the North country.
with all the nobilite of his country and most part of the commons received
Christ's faith and came to the lauetorie of holy regeneration the xj. year of
his raygne. Which was the year of our Lord 627. and about the 180. after the
entrance of the english men into Britannie. He was Christened at York on Ester
Sunday, which was the xij. of April. in S. Peter thapostles church. Which he
had in all speed set up of wood, while he was catechized, An. 627.
and instructed there in the faith against his Christening. In this rite of
York he appointed a Bishops See, for bishop Pawline his informer, and
teacher. At whose request, and petition as soon as himself was Christened, The
Cathedral church of York.
he builded in that same place a great temple of stone, for an ample and large
Cathedral church in the midst whereof he would have enclosed this his own
propre oratorie, which himself had first made of wood while he was instructed
to the faith, and before he was yet baptized. Layeng therefore deep foundations
about this his first oratorie, he began to build there a fair church four
square. But before the wall thereof came to his just hyghnes, the king was
slain by cruel death and left that royal work to be endyd and parfyted by
king Oswald his successor. Now Pauline from that time. 6. years after that
is, to the end of king Edwynes raygne preched the word of God continually (by
his good leave and favor) through out all that province. And they beleaued
him, and were Christened, who were preordinated to life everlasting: amongst
whom was Offride, and Eadfride, king Edwynes sons. Which he had in his
banishement by dame Quenburge daughter to Cearle king of the Marshes. After
whom, his other children, which he had by Queen Edelburge were baptized, as
his son Edilhune, his daughter Edilfride and an other of his sons called
Buskfrea, of which the ij. first were taken out of this mortal life in their
infancy or tender youth, and buried in the church of York. Iffy also Offride
his son was Christened too, with many other of the nobility, and diverse
honorable men. And (as it is reported) then was the fervor of faith and
ernest desire of holy baptism so great amongst the people of
Northumberland, that on a certain time, when bishop Pauline came with the
kings, and Queen's majesty, to the court, or princes palacie at Adregin, he
stayed there with them. 36. days only occupied in catechizing and instructing
the people in Christ his faith, and afterward baptising them: in each of the
which days he did nothing else from morning to evening, but instruct them
with the word of God, and teach the^ the faith, and salvation in Christ Jesus,
which flocked thither out of all places and villages theraboute. Whom after he
had thus informed, and taught, he baptized in the fludde Elene. For that was
the next nere water, which he could conveniently use for baptim. This town
Adregin in the time of the king and aftercommers waxed rude, and deserte. And
an other was buylt up for hit in a place called Melwyn: And this much did
bishop Pawline in the In northu^^erla^d
Bernicians province. But in the country of the In yorkeshere.
Deires, where he lay most commonly with the king, he baptized in the fludde
Suale, which renneth fast by a village adjoined to Cataracte. For as yet there
could not be builded oratories, fountes, or places of baptism, in this new
begone, and late founded church. But yet was there buylte a great church in
the coast and champyon called D^wne. Where was an other of the kings courts,
and palace. Which church the painims that slew king Edwine b^rned afterward
with the whole village. In sted of the which palace the kings ever after made
their mansion place in the country called Loides. Altar of stone.
But the altar of the before mentioned church eskaped the fire, because it
was made of stone. And is kept to this present day in the monastery of the
right reverend Abbot, and priest Trunwulfe standing in the wodde Elmete.

How the province of the Este English received the faith of Christ.

The. 15. Chap.
NOw had king Edwine (by common report) such a zele, and ernest devotion
toward the Christian faith that he perswadid Carpwald king Redwalds son,
and king of the Est English, to lea^^ of the vain superstition of idols, and
to come with his whole royalme and embrace the true faith, and receive the
sacraments of Christ his church. For his father king Redwald before him was
Christened in kent but alas in vain. For returning home again he was seduced
by his wife, and certain other perverse doctors. And being in such wise
depraved from the sincerite, and pureness of faith, his end was worse then his
beginning. For he would seem, after the manner of the old Samaritanes to serve
both Christ, and his own false Gods to, as he did before. And in one temple
he had erectyd an altar for the sacrifice of Christ and an other little altar
for burnt sacrifices to his Idols and dyuels. The which temple Aldwolfe king
of that province after him ( who lived in this our^age) said that it dured so,
unto his time, and witnessed that he saw it himself in his childhoode. Truly
this before named king Redwald was a noble prince of birth, althowgh vile and
base in his acts and deades. For he was king Tityls son, whose fathers name
was Woffa, of whom the kings of the east english men are called Woffinges.
But king Carpwald not long after he had been Christened, was slain by a
gentile, and paynim named Richbert. And from that time. 3. years after, the
province lived in gent^lite falling from Christian religion until at the last
Sibert king Carpwalds brother took the kingdom, a man in all points learned
and most Christian. Who whiles his brother was yet alive, living bannished in
France was Christened there, and instructed in the holy mysteries of our
faith of which he went about to make all his royalme partakener, as soon as he
came to the crown. To whose good endeavor herin bishopp Felix did most
ernestly favor, and with great praise apply himself. The cou^tres of
Suffolk, Norfolck and of Ca^bridg sheres (then called, the East english)
counerted to the faith.
Who when he came from Burgundy (where he was borne, and took holy orders)
into Britanny to Honorius tharchbishop, and had opened this his desire and
godly purpose unto him, the Archebishopp gladly gave him license and sent him
furthe to preche the word of God unto the foresaid Este English. Where certes
his zele and virtuous desire proved not in vain. For this holy husband man
and happy tiller of the spiritual filde found in that nation plentifulnes of
fruit, and increase of people that beleaued him. For he browght all that
province, being now delivered by his healpe from their long iniquite, and
unhappiness, unto the faith, and works of justice, and in the end reward of
perpetual b^isse, and happiness for ever, according to the good abodement of
his name, which in Lattin is called Felix, and in our English tongue sounds
happy. Du^mocke
He was Bishop in the cite of Dummocke afterward. Where when he had ruled the
church of Christ. 17. years in that dignite, and in that province he endyd
his life in peace.

How Pawlyne preched in the province of Lindisse, and of the state of king
Edwynes raygne.

The. 16. Chap.
But Bishop Pawlyne continued still, Lincoln shere.
and at this time preched the word of God in the province of Lindisse, which
is the next toward the South bancke of Humber, bending even unto the seas side
where he first converted to our Lord the mayor of Lincoln whose name was
Blecca, Prefectum Lindecoli^ae ciuitatis
withal his howseholde. In the which city he buylt a well wrowght church of
stone: the rouffe whereof either for long lack of reparations, or by the
spoil of enemies is now cast down. But the walls thereof stand yet to be
seen at this present day and yearly some or other miracles are wont to be
showen there to the great good, and comfort of them which faith fully seek
therefore. In this church after Iustus departure hence unto Christ, Pawlyne
consecrated Honorius, Archebishopp of Caunterbury, as I shall show more
conveniently herafter. Now as towching the faith, and belefe of this
province, a certain priest, and abbot, a man of good credit, and to be
believed, whose name is Deda, of the monastery of Peartan told me that one of
the elders of that covent (as he reported him self) was baptized with many
other of the people there, at none day by bishop Pawline in the presence of
king Edwine, and in the fludde of Trent, nere the city Thwolfing acester. the
which father, and elderly man, was wont to describe Paulinus person, saying
that he was a taule man, sumwhat crooked back, and black of hear, lene in
face, and having a hooked and thin nose, in countenance both dredful, and
reverent. Who had in his chapel one James by name, who was a deaco^, and an
industrious and diligent man, noble certes and of great fame in Christ, and
the church. Who lived also eue^ unto our time. But in those days such was the
peace, and tranquillite through out all Britannie which way soever king
Edwynes dominions lay, that (as it is yet in a common proverb) a weak woman
might have walked with her newborn babe over all the yland even from sea to
sea, without any damage, or danger. Moreover this king did so much tender
his subjects and the wealth of the commons that in most places where he saw
fay^e, clear well springes breaking out by the highwaies side, he enclosed them
in quick set boures for the refreshing of wayfaring men having by, great
brazen basens to bathe, or wash in. Which basens either for fear of the
kings displeasure no man durst touch farther then to his own present use, and
necessite: or no man would take them away for the love, and good will they
boore to their prince. Who was for the time of his reign so honored and
loved, that the triumphing banners, and flagges were borne before him not in
war only, but in peace too, whersoeuer he went abroad, or rode with his guard
in progress about the great cities, towns, and sheres of his dominions. Yea
even when he passed through the streets to any place, there was carried before
him that kind of flag or stremer, which the Romans call Tufa, and the English
men now a Thuuffe.

How king Edwyne received letters of exhortation from Pope Honorius who sent
therewith a palle to bishop Pauline.

The. 17. Chapter.
AT what time Honorius Boniface his successor was bishop of Rome, and sat in
the sea Apostolic, when he had understood that the king of Northumberland
and all his subjects in that country were converted to the faith and
confession of Christ by Paulinus preaching, he sent the same bishop Pauline a
palle, and letters to king Edwyne exhorting him, and his subjects with
fatherly love and charity, to persist, or rather go forward in this true faith
which they had now received. The tenor of which letters is such. To the most
puissant prince and his most virtuous son in our Lord Jesus Christ Edwyne
king of the English men, bishop Honorius servant to them that serve God sends
greating. The epistle of Pope Honorius to Edwyn the first christen king of
Northumberland.
So is your Christian love, and integrite, fyred with the flame of faith to the
worshipping of your creator and maker, that it shines far and wide, and being
declared through all the world brings forth fruit of your doing. And truly
so do ye know your self best to be a king, when that after ye are taught by
the right and true preching, ye beleaue in almighty God your king and creator.
Worshipping him, adoring him, and rendering up to him the sincere devotion of
your heart, as far forth as man's weakness, and poor abilite can attain unto.
For what other thing I pray you, are we able to offer unto our God, then that
persisting in good works and confessing him to be the author of mankind we
worship him, and spedely render our vows, and prayers unto him? Therefore we
exhort you our most derely beloved son in our Savior Christ Jesus, as it is
mete for a loving father to do, that ye endeavor al manner of ways ye ca^,
with ernest will, and daily prayer, to hold and keep this, that the mercy of
God has wrought in you, calling you, and all yours unto his grace. And so
shall he which has vouche^afed to bring you in this present world from all
error to the knowledge of his holy name, prepare for you in the world to come
a mansion place in heaven. Be ye therefore often occupied in the reading of S.
Gregory's works. Who was a man certes of blessed memory, our good
predecessor, and your true precher, and Apostle. Have before your eyes
continually the great zele of his doctrine, and good affection which he gladly
practiced for your souls health and salvation. That by this means his
ver^^ouse prayer may both increase your kingdom, and also prosper yo^ people.
And that in the end he may represent you all, as clean souls, and without
fault, before the throne of almighty God. Now as concerning these things,
Co^stitutions from Rome touching the clergy.
which your grace desired to be ordained and appointed by us for your priests
we have without all delay provided the same, and truly the rather for your
sincere and unfeigned faithes sake. Which has been at diverse times, and by
diverse relatio^s, as also now by the bearers of these our presents,
commendably declared unto us. We have therefore with the rest of our rules and
orders sent here ij. palles for the ij metropolitans of your country, that is,
for bishop Honorius, and bishop Pauline. Willing and commanding, that when one
of them is called out of this mortal life to the mercy of God, then shall his
make and fellow which is yet a live subro gate by this our authorite an other
bishop metropolitan in his place which is deceased, which thing we do
grant unto them, as well for your good affection to us, and love to the
truth, as also for the distance of places, and of so great provinces and
cuntries, as lie between Rome and Britannie. And last to the intent, that we
might in all points show your highness, how our consent, and agreement is ever
more ready at hand, to your devout zele, and ernest desire of Gods glory. Who
keape your grace always in parfecte health, and prosperity.

How bishop Honorius who succeeded Iustus in the byshoprike of Caunterbury,
received from Pope Honorius a palle, and letters.

The 18. Chapter
NOW about this time died Archbishop Iustus, the x. day of November. And
Honorius was chosen in his place. Who coming to Archbishop Pauline to be
appointed thereto, met him at Lincoln. And there was consecrated, and
instituted bishop of Caunterbury. And is now numbered fifthe after S. Austin.
To whom also Pope Honorius sent a palle with letters, in the which he
commanded the very self same thing, that he wrote before in his epistle to
king Edwine. Which is, that whenever the bishop of Caunterbury, or the
bishop of York were departed this life, then the other which remained a
live, and is yet prelate of the same degree should have power, and authority,
to ordain an other priest in the Archebishops rome, which is now deceased.
That it might not to be needful always to travail, and toil by sea and by
land as far as to Rome, for the institution, and appointing of an
Archbishop. The copy of the Popes letters I think not much amiss to be here
inserted in our history.

To Honorius our derely beloved brother, The epistle of Pope Honorius to
Honorius the Archebisshop of Caunterbury.
Honorius sends greating: Among many other prerogatives, and gracious gifts
which our merciful Redemer vowchesafeth to geaue his poor servants, this
does he also bountifully grant us of his mere liberalite, and goodness, that
by brotherly comfort and frendfull letters, as it were by an inward looking on
our hearts, or an outward beholding of our mutual visage, and cou^tenaunces,
we represent, and show in our selves a certain love, accord, and unite. For
which gratiouse benefit we render thanks vncessa^tly unto his high majesty.
And beseech him in most suppliaunte wise, to strenghte^ and confirm you with
his mighty power continually, that ye may ernestly labor always in
preaching his holy gospel, and profit therein: that ye may follow the rule,
and steps of your head and master, blessed S. Gregory: that Christ may
send by you greater increase unto his church: And last that the souls already
won, and converted by you and your predecessors (which has proceeded of the
first planting of blessed S. Gregory) may in more ample wise increase in
faith, and prosper in good works, in the fear of God, and parfecte charity.
And so I trust the promises of our Lord shall hereafter take place in you, and
this his blessed voice call you to eternal bliss and joyfulness: Matthew. 11.
Come unto me, all ye that labor, and travail, and I will refreshe you.
Matthew. 24.
And again: O my good, and faithful servant, because thou have ben faithful
over a little, I will appointe the ouerseer to a great dele, come in, unto the
joys of thy Lord and master. And thus much, derely beloved in the way of
exhortation, we have premised, of the abundance of our charity, and love
toward you. Now as concerning the privileges of your churches, we have not
differred to grant you such things, as we have thought metest for you.
Therefore to answer your requests herein, look what authorite, we in the
stead, and place of S. Peter head of the Apostles, have granted you, by our
express commandment in letters directed to our dear son Edwine your king
we will ye keape, and observe the same. Which is: that when one of you is
departed this mortal life, the other which is left a live shall assign an
other bishop in the departed Archebisshops rome and dignite. And for the better
doing, and ordering hereof, we have sent unto each of you a palle, that by the
authorite of this our commandment, your orderly and due institution may be
acceptable in the sight of Almighty God. Wherein to condescend, and grant
this much unto you, we were moved by the long iourny, and ^ediouse travailing
by see, and land from Britannie to Rome, that no hinderance may happen
hereafter to your church, by any pretenced occasion any manner of way. But
rather that you may farther set forth the faith and devotion of the people
committed to your charge. Almighty God keape you in good health most derely
beloved brother. Geauen the xj. of ^une in the 24. year of the raygne of our
most gratiouse, and sovereign Lord Heraclius Emperor. Also the third year,
of the most happiest Caesar Heraclius the son. The 7. Indiction: the year of
our Lord. 633.

How first this Pope Honorius. And after him the elected bishop John sent
letters to the Scotts for the keaping of Ester. And against Pelagius heresy.

The 19. Chap.
THis Pope Honorius sent letters also unto the Scotts, (whom he understood
to err in the observation of the holy time of Easter, as I have before
specified,) diligently exhorting the^, that they would not esteem or think
their own small number wiser, then the churches of Christ, either ancient,
either newely converted which have been heretofore, or be now at this present
day any where through out all the whole world, in celebrating any other
Easter, then after the co^ account of Ester, and according to the uniform
decrees (...) bishops in the wordle. Which have upon that matter sat in
Synodes, and concluded a certain order in general councels. To whom al^o for
the^ mending of the same error, Ihon Seuerinus successor, who next succeeded
Honorius, when he was yet but elected, and nominated Bis^hop of Rome directed
letters of great authorite and full of good lerning: plainly proving in the^,
that the Ester Sunday must be compted, and observed, from the. 15. moon, unto
the. 21. as it was proved, The copy of a letter from the clergy of Rome to the
clergy of Scotland.
and allowed by the Nicene Council the first. Moreover he warned the^ in
the same epistle, to avoid, and escheue, Pelagius heresy, which he
understood, did begin to rise, and spring again amongst the^. The beginning
of which epistle was thus: To our derest beloved, and the most virtuous
prelates, Thomian, Colu^ban, Chroman, Dima^, and Bathan Bishops: Chroman,
Herman, Lawstran, Stellan, and Segian Priests: to Saran, and all other
doctors, or Abbotes of Scotland: Hilarie, Archeprieste, and keaper of the
vacant sea Apostolic, Ihon deacon, and in the name of God elected, and chosen
Bishop of the same holy see: Primicer^
and Ihon, the chief Secretary, and keaper of that sea Apostolic, and Ihon
also servant of God, and Counselor of that same see etc. Your letters which
ye sent to holy Pope Seuerine, a man worthy of happy, and long memory, have
had as yet no answer made to the^, for the matters, which ye required,
because the Popes holiness departed this life before your letters, were browght
hither. Which we have now opened in this vacancie of the holy see, lest the
ignorance of so great a question mowght have lasted long, and ben vndiscussyd
amongst you. In which letters we have read, and perceived that certain of
your province labowring against the right faith, do go abowte to renew an
old heresy, refusing very ignorantly our Ester, in which Christ was offered
our true pascall Lamb to God his father, and entending to celebrate the same
with the Jews in the. 14. moon. etc. By this beginning of their epistle it
appears plainly that at that time this heresy was but a little before risen
in Scotland: And also, that not all the country but certain of them only
were infected therewith. Now when these before mentioned prelates of Rome had
showed the customable observation of Ester: thus in the same epistle they wrote
of the pelagian heretics, which were in Scotland: We understand also by your
letters, that the poison of Pelagius heresy begins now to spring again
amongst you: Against the pelagian heresy.
which we most ernestly exhort, and counsel you utterly to forsake, and
provide that the poisoned infection of so dedly an heresy sink no farther into
your minds, but labor as ye may utterly to forgett it. For ye ought to
remember, how this execrable heresy has long since ben condemned. And
has been abolished, and put owte of remembrance not only, these. ij. hundred
years, but is also yet at this present, daily condemned of us, with
continual curses, and all they excommunicated which follow the same. We
therefore exhort, and request you, that ye suffer not their ashes to be
stirred, and blown up amongst you, whose strength and weapons be burnt and
consumed. For what Christen heart is there, which detesteth not to death, and
abhors their proud intent and wicked words, which dare affirm, that a man
may live, and be withowt sin, even of his own voluntary will, and not
throwghe the grace of God? And then to consider again the truth hereof, it is
blasphemy, and extreme foolishnes to say: that a man is withowt sin. For he
can not possibly be so. Neither ever any was, but only the mediator of God, and
man Christ Jesus our Lord, who was a very and true man conceived and borne
withowt sin. For as for other men, they are all borne in oryginall sin. And
do bear the wytnes, and token of Adams first preuarication, and breaking of
Gods commandment, yea, althowghe they lived without actual sin according
to the Prophet, saying: Behold, I was conceived in iniquite, and my mother
has browght me forth in sin. etc. Psalm. 50.


How after king Eduynes death, bishop Pawlyne returned to kent, and there
took the Bysshoprike of Rotchester.

The 20. Chapter.
WHen king Edwyne had most triumphantly raygned over the English and Britons
both, the space of. xvij. years, (in some of which, as about the number of.
6. years, he had himself ben subject to Christ, and ever looked for his
raygne, and kingdom) Cardwell king of the Britons made a rebellion against
him, having aid and succor thereunto, of Penda a stowght man, and of the kings
blood of Marshland. Over which nation afterward he had by diverse chances, and
fortune, rule and governance, for the space of xxij. years. An. 633.
Now when they had thus joined battle, and entered fight with king Edwine in
a great, large and plain field, called thereof Hethfilde, they slew him there
at the last, the. 4. day of October, in the year of our Lord. 633. and of
king Edwynes age the. 47. year: whose whole host was other presently
murdered there, or shamefully put to flight. In the which wars one of king
Edwines sons, that lusty, and warlyke young prince Offryde, was killed,
before his father died. The other son Edfryde of very urgent necessite fled
unto king Penda for succor. Of whom afterward against the promised faith,
and his solemn oath, he was most cruellye put to death in the raygne of king
Oswald. At this time there was a very greauouse persecution in the church,
and a foul murder of the Northumberlandes, especially because that one of the
Capitaines, which caused this persecution, and aduersite, was a painim: the
other thowgh not a paynim, yet more feerce and barbarouse, the^ was any
heathen, or paynim. For king Penda with all the nation of the Marshland men
was wholly geauen to Idolatry, and altogether heathen, and unchristened. But
king Cardwell althowgh he had the name of a Christian and professed that life,
yet was he in mind, and manners so rude, and owtrageouse, that he would not
spare either women's weakness, or childrens innocence, but put all to death
with greauous, and bitter torments, according to his bestly cruelty and
unmercifully tyranny. Wasting a long time, and raging our all the provinces,
purposing moreover with himself to exterminate out of the borders of Britannie
the whole nation of Englishmen, and to extinguish the very name of them.
Neither did he ought esteem or any thing reverence, and honor the Christian
religion which the English men had. So that unto this day the Britons manner,
and custom is, to set light by the faith, and religion of English me^.
Neither will they in any one point more communicate with them, then they would
with heathens, and painims. King Edwynes head was brought unto York. And
afterward carried into S. Peter's church, (which church he himself had begone
to build, but his successor king Oswald finished hit, as we have before
declared.) And there laid in S. Gregory's chapel. By whose disciples, and of
whose preachers he had in his life time received, and learned the word of true
life. Thus was the state of Northumberlande much troubled with this great
slaughter, and cruel persecution. Seeing therefore there was none other remedy,
nor any saftie could befounde, but only by flight, bishop Pauline accompaning
the good Queen Edelburge, with whom not long before he came into that
cuntrie, took shipp, and returned again to kent. And was there very
honorably received of Honorius the Archbishop, and of king Edulbald. His
guide, and gouerner in iorning unto kent was Bassus one of the strongest of
king Edwynes chief guard. This bishop brought away with him from the
cuntries of Northu^berlande Eanfride king Edwynes daughter, and Wulcfrea his
son. Iffy also Offrides son, and nephue to king Edwyne. Which ij. young
princely children this tender mother for fear of king Edbald, and Oswald sent
into France, to be brought up in king Dagoberts court. Where they both died in
their infancy. And were buried in the high church with such honor, as is mete
for kings sons, and innocent babes of Jesus Christ. He brought moreover
away with him much precious plate of king Edwynes: amongst which was a great
golden cross and a golden chalice consecrated for the ministry of the
altar, which are yet both reserved, and to be see^ at this day in the
Cathedral church of Caunterbury. Now was the sea of Rotchester vaca^t at this
time. For Romanus bishop thereof, sent from the Archbishop Iustus legate to Pope
Honorius, was drowned in the tempest, going to Italy. Cross and chalice of
good.
The^ bishop Pauline at the offer of bishop Honorius, and at king Edubaldes
request took that charge on him, and kept Rotchester dioces, until, at his
full and ripe age, he quietly departed this transitory life, and was received
into the bless of heaven, with the godly fruit, and reward of his labors,
and travails, that he suffered here on earth for Christ his truth, and
Gospel. Who at his decease left in his church of Rotchester his palle, which
he had receifrom the Pope of Rome. And in his Archebishoprike of York he left
James his deacon a good and godly man. Who living long after in that church by
preching and baptising took many prays out of the devils teathe, and won
many souls unto Christ. Of whose name the village has a name at this day,
in which he for the most part abode, and dwelled nere unto Cataracte. Who
because he was conninge in song, and musycke, and also in the office and
service of the quyre, when that contrie was more quiet, and the company of
faithful began a little and little to increase again, set up a schole amongst
them, and professed to be a master of church musyke, Church music first
practiced in the North.
and singinge, according to the fashion, and manner of the Romans, and the
Diocesans of Canterbury. Which thing when he had so don a long time, with
great profyt, at the lenght (that I may use the word of scripture) being a
man well strooken in age, full of years, and having seen many good days, he
walked the ways which his fathers went.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND.
How the first successors of king Edwin did both forsake the faith of their
nation and also lost their kingdom. Moreover how the most christen king
Oswald restored both.

The. 1. Chapter.
King Edwin being in battle, the son of Elfrike his uncle by his fathers
side, called Osrich, who after that he had heard Paulin preach, received the
faith, succeeded him in the governance of the Deirans: of the which province he
had the petigree of his parentage, and the first beginning of his kingdom.
But the realm of the Bernicians (for the nation of Northumberland had been
divided of old time into these two countries) was ruled by Edelfrides son,
named Eanfride, who had of that province the beginning of his kindred and
kingdom. For during all the time of Edwines reign the sons of king
Edelfride, who (as we said before) reigned before Edwin, were banished with a
great number of noble young gentill men, and so lived among the Scotts, or
Redshankes: where they were instructed according to the Scotts doctrine, and
had received the grace of baptism. These young princes after the death of
their ennemie king Edwin retourninge in to their country, Osrich the eldest
of them took the kingdom of the Deirans, and Eanfride the second son the
kingdom of the Bernicians: but alas as both had now received the yles of an
earthly kingdom, so likewise both in giving and abandoning them selfs to the
devil, lost the divine mysteries of the heavenly kingdom, wherein they were
instructed, and yielded them selves again to be defiled with the former old
filth of Idolatry. Apostasy from the faith punished.
This apostasy remained not long unpunished. For Kadwallader the king of
Britons with wicked force, but with worthy vengeance slew them both the next
summer ensuing, sodeinly issuing out with all his host. At what time he
murdereth first Osrich unprepared and his whole army pending themselves
miserably with in the suburbs of their own city. Then afterward when by the
space of a whole year having possessed the provinces of the people of
Northumberland, not as a king that were a conqueror, but as an outrageous
cruel tyranne destroying them, and with tragical slaughter renting them in
pieces: he put Eanfride also to death coming unto him very unadvisedly with
twelve chosen soldiers minding to entreat upon peace. That same year
continues until this day unhappy and hateful to all good men, as well for
the Apostasy of the English kings forsaking the religion of Christ, as also
for the king of Britanes furiouse tyranny. Wherefor the historiographers and
writers of that time have thought it best, that the memory of those Apostate
kings being utterly forgotten, the self same year should be assigned to the
reign of the king that followed next, which was Oswald a man dearly beloved of
God. Who after that his brother Eanfride was slain, coming unlooked for with a
small army, but fenced with the faith of Christ, the Britons cursed captain
and that victorius host, whereof he made his auant that nothing could be able
to withstand it, was vanquished and slain in a certain place which in the
English tongue is called Denises Burna, that is to say, the river of Denise.

How by the sign of the Cross, which the same king set up when he fought
against the Barbarous Britons, he conquered the^: and among diverse other
miraculous cures a certain yownge man was healed of a desease in his arm.

The. 2. Chap.
THe place is showed until this day, and is had in great reverence, where
Oswald when he should come to this battle did set up a sign of the holy
cross, amd beseeched God humbly upon his knees that with his heavenly help
he would succor his servants being in so great a distress. A cross erected
by king Oswald.
The report also is, that ( the cross being made with quick speed, and the
hole prepared wherein it should be set) the king being fervent in faith did
take it in have, and did put it in the hole, and held it with both his hands,
when it was set up, until it was fastened to the earth with duste which the
souldiars heaped about it. Now when this was done he cried out a loud to his
whole army: Let us all kneel upon our knees, and let us all together pray
ernestly the almighty, living, and true God, mercifully to defend us from the
proud and cruel ennemy: for he knows, that we enterprise wars in a
ryghtfull quarrel for the saulfegard of our subjects. All did as he commanded
them. And thus in the dawning of the day they marched forth, encountered with
their enemy, and (according to the merit of their faith) achieved and won
the victory. In the place of which prayer manifold miraculous cures are known
to be done, questionless in token and remembrance of the kings faith. For
even until this present day many men do customablye cut chyppes out of the
veraye tree of that holy cross which casting into waters and giving thereoff
to sick men and beasts to drink, or sprinckling them therewith, many forthwith
are restored to their health. That place is in the English tongue named heaven
feld and was so called long before, not without a sure and a certain fore
sight of things to come, as signifieng undoubtedly, that in the same place a
heavenly memorial was to be set up, a heavenly victory should be got,
heavenly miracles should be wrought and remembered even unto our days.

This place is nere to that wall which stands toward the northeast, wherewith
the Romans did ones in time past compass all whole Britain from sea unto
sea to keep of the invasions of forenners as we have declared before. In the
self same place the religious me^ of Hagstalden church (which is not far from
thence) have now of long time been accustomed to come every year, the eve and
the day that the same king Oswald was afterward slain to keep Diriges there
for his soul, Diriges over night and Mass in the morning for the dead.
and in the morning after psalms being said solemnly to offer for him the
sacrifice of holy oblation. This good custom long continuing the place was
made more holy, and is now much honored of al men by the reason of the church
that was lately builded and dedicated in the same place. And not without a
cause, considering that no sign of the Christen faith, no church, no altar
was set up in all the whole country of the Bernicians, before that this
virtuous warrier, moved with hearty devotion of unfeigned faith did set up this
baner of the holy Cross, when he should fight against his cruel ennemie. It
shall not be beside owr purpose to recounte of many which were done, yet one
miracle more mightily wrought at this holy Cross. One of the religiouse men of
the foresaid church of Hagstalden, called Bothelme, who lives yet at this
day, a few years past, when by chance in the night he went unawares on the yse
sodaynely falling down brake his arm, and began to be so vexed with greauous
anguishe thereof, that for vehemence of pain he was not able to bring his arm
to his mouth. This man hearing that one of the brethren had appointed to go up
to the place of the same holy cross, prayed him that at his return he would
bring him a piece of that blessed wood, saying that he believed that by Gods
grace he might have his health thereby. He did so as he was desired: and when he
was come home again about evening, the brethren being set at the table to
eat, he gave the deseased party some of the old moss, wherewyth the ouermoste
part of the wodde was covered. Who sitting also then at table, and having at
hand no better place to lay up the gift wherewith he was presented, put it in
to his bosom. After going to bed, and forgetting to lay it a side he let it
lie all night in his bosom. At midnight he waked and feling a cold thing
lying nere to his side, sturring him self to find what that should be,
suddenly he finds his arm and hand hole and sound, as if he had never had
the desease.

How the same king at his own request received Aidan of the Scottishe
nation, and gave him a bishops see in the isle of Lindisfarne Now called Holy
Ilond.

The. 3. Chap.
SHortly after that the same Oswald was come to the Crown he being desirous,
that all the people, which he began to rule, should be instructed in the grace
of Christian faith, whereof now he had very great proufes in vanquishing his
foreign ennemies, he sent to the Peers of Scotland, among whom he living in
banishment, and the soldiers which were with him were Christened, making a
request unto the^ that they would send him a prelate, by whose doctrine and
ministry the realm of England which he ruled might both learn the gifts,
and also receive the sacraments of our Lords faith. Neither was this godly
request denied him. For bishop Aidan was directed straight unto him, a man of
maruailous meekness, godliness, and modesty: and one that had a zele in Gods
quarrel, although not in every point according to knouledg. For he was wont to
keep Easter sunday from the fourtenth day after the change of the moon, until
the twe^tith: according to the custom of his country, whereof we have diverse
times made mencio^. For the north part of Scotland, and all the Redshanks did in
that manner even at the same time solemnise Easter sunday, thinking that in this
keeping of Easter they followed the advertisement written by the holy praise
worthy father Anatholius which how well it was done of them, the skillful in
Christen religion are not ignorant. Truly the Scotts, which dwelt in the
southe coasts of the isle of Ireland, had long a gone learned to keep the fest
of Easter by the Canonical approved custom, being advised thereto by the Pope
sitting in the sea Apostolic. To this bishop Aidan king Oswald appointed holy
Ilond for his see and bishopric, according as he had him self desired. Holy
Ilond.
This place with flowing and ebbing is twyse every day like an isle enuyroned
with the surges of the sea, twyse made to stand as maine land, the banks
being voided again of the sea waves. A rare zele to the preaching of Gods word
in a wordly prince.
By the virtuous advise of this good bishop, the king glad and ready to follow
the same, much enlarged the Church of Christ through his dominions. And in
this most godly endeavor both of the Prince and of the bishop this was a
gracious and pleasant sight, that whereas the bishop was unskillful of the
English tongue, and the king by reason of his long banishement in Scotland,
understood and spoke the scottish very well, when the bishop preached the
faith of Christ, the king was interpreter of the heavenly word to his dukes
and subjects. Hereupon for the space of a long time people flocked out of
Scotland into Britain, and such as were called to the high degree of
priesthod, began with great and fervent devotion to preach the word of faith
to those provinces of England, which king Oswalde governed, baptising all such
as believed. Therefore churches were builded in places convenient: the people
rejoicing assembled together to hear the word of God, possessions and
territories were given by the kings bountifulness for the foundation of
religiouse houses: the little children of England and elder folks were by the
Scotts their instructours trained and traded up in observation of regular
discipline. For they were for the most part monks all such as came to preach.
Aidan the bishop himself was a monk, of the isle which is called Hydestinate.
The house of his religion was no small time the head house of all the
monasteries almost of the northren Scotts and of abbyes of all the Redshankes
and had the soueraintie in ruling of their people, Which isle in very deed
belongs to the right of Britain, being severed from it with a narow sea: but
by the free gift of the Redshankes who inhabited those parts of Britanie, it
was now lately bestowed upon the Scottishe monks in consideration of their
virtuous sermons and painful preaching, whereby they received the faith of
Christ.

When the nation of the Pictes (otherwise Redshankes) received the Christen
faith.

The. 4. Chapter.
FOr in the five hundredth three score and fifte year of our Lords incarnation
(at which time Iustine the younger succeding I ustinian had received the
governance of the Romayne empire, An. 563.
a priest and abbot notable by his habit and religious life called Columban came
from Ireland into Britany to preach the word of God to the Redshankes that
dwelt in the North, that is to say to those that by high and hideous ridges of
hills were disseuered from such Redshankes as dwelt in the south quarters. For
the southern, Redshankes, who had there dwelling places in the same
mountains, did long before (as they say) receive the true faith and abandonned
idolatry, at what time the word was preached unto them by the right reverend
bishop and blessed man, Ninia a Briton borne. Who was at Rome perfitly taught
the faith, and mysteries of the truth. Whose see the English nation has enen
now notable for the name and church of Saint Martin the bishop, where he also
does rest together with many holy men. Which place appertaining to the
Bernicians province is commonly called Ad candidam casam, at the white cottage,
for so much as there he made a church of stone after an other facion, then the
Britons were wont to build. Columban came to Britanie when the most puissaunt
king Bride Meilocheus son reigned over the Redshanks, in the ninth year of
his reign, and did by his learning and example of life convert that nation to
the faith of Christ. In consideration whereof the aforsay de isle was given him
in possession, to make a monastery. For the isle is not great, but as though
it were of five families by estimation. His successors keep it until this day,
where also he lies buried dying at the age of lxxvij. years, about xxxij. years
after that he came into Britain to preach. But before that he travailed to
Britain, he made a famous monastery in Ireland which for the great store of
oaks is in the Scottish tongue called Dearmach, that is to say, a filled of oaks:
of both the which monasteries very many mo religious houses were afterward
erected by his scholars both in Britain, and also in Ireland. Of all the which
the same abbey that is in the isle where in his body lies buried, is the head
house. This isle is always wont to have an Abbat that is a priest, to be the
ruler: to who^ both the wholle country and also the bishops them selfs ought
after a strange and uncustomed order to be subject, according to the example
of the first teacher, who was no bishop, but a priest and a monk. The report
is, that some things ar written by his scholars concerning his life and
sayings: but yet what manner of man so ever he was, we know this of him for a
surety, that he left successors, men that excelled in great continence, in
passing charity, and virtuous trade of religious life. In observing the high
feast of Easter they trusted to uncertain compasses, and no marvel
consydering that no man sent unto them, the decrees made in general counsayles
for the keeping thereof. Yet they diligently observed all such works of
devotion and chaste conversation as they could learn in the prophets, in the
ghospels, and the Apostles writings. This keeping of Easter continued no small
time with them, that is to wit, until the seven hundredth and sixteneth year
of our Lords incarnation, by the space of an hundredth and fifty years after,
they received the faith. But when the right reverend and holy father and priest
Egbert came to them from England, living in Christ's quarrel in exile in
Ireland, being a man very well learned in the holy scripture and singular for
the perfett life, which he had lead many years together, they were reformed by
him, and brought to keep Easter on the true right and laufull day.
Nevertheless they did not always before that time solemnise and keep the feast
of Easter upon the fourtenth day after the change of the moon according to
the Jews custom (as some men supposed) but on the same day, though in an
other weke then it was convenient. For they knew (as Christen men do) that the
resurrection of our Lord, which was on the first day of the weke ought
always to be celebrated on the first day of the weke also: but as ignorant
and highvplandysh men they had not learned when the same first day of the weke
which now is named Sounday should come. Yet for as much as they continued
in perfect charity, they deserved to attain the perfitte knowledge of this
thing, according as the Apostle promises saying: Philip. 2.
And yff ye be off an other mynds, God will reueile that also unto you. But
hereof we shall treat more at large hereafter in a place convenient.

Of the life of Aidan the bishop.

The 5. Chap.
FROM this isle therefore and from this covent of monks founded by holy
Columban, Aidan was sent and consecrated bishop to instruct England in the
faith of CHRIST, at what time Segenius abbot and priest was head of the same
monastery. The example of a true preacher, and avertuous Bishop.
Wherein among other lessons of living he left the Clerks a most wholesome
example of abstinence, and continence. This thing did chiefly commend his
doctrine to all men, that the learning which he taught was correspondent to
the life that he lead. And why? He was not desirous after wordly goods, he was
not enamoured with present Vanitees. His joy and comfort was foorthwyth to
distribute to the poor that met him all that was given him of kings or
other wealthy men of the world. He used to travail continually both in the
city and in the country, never on horse back, but always on foot, except
peradventure great need had forced him to ride. And in his travail what did
he? Forsoothe whom so ever he met, rich or poor, incontinent abiding for a
time with them, either he allured them to receive the faith if they were out
of the faith, or strengthened them in the faith, if they were in it,
exhorting them eftsoons no less in works then words to alms giving and
other good deeds. And his religious life so far passed the slackenes and key
cold devotion of our time, that all they which went with him, were they
professed into religion, or were they lay brethern, Sieve adio^si sieve Laici.
gave them selfs continually to contemplation, that is to say, bestowed all
their time either in reading scripture, or in learning the psalter. This was
the daily exercise of him and his brethren to what place so ever they came. And
if by chance it had happenned (which yet happened seldom) that he were
bidden to the kings banquet, he went in accompained with one or two clerks,
and taking a short repast, he made spedely have to read with his brethren, or
else went other where forth to pray. Every devout man and woman being at that
time taught by his ensamples took up a custom all the whole year through,
VVensday and fridayes fast.
saving between Easter and whitsonty^e upon wensday and friday to continue in
fasting until three of the clock in the after none. If rych men had done any
thing amysse, he never for hope of honor, or fear of displeasure spared to
tell them of it, but with sharp rebuking amended them. If any guess or
stranger had come unto him, were he never so worshipful, he never gave money
but only made them good chere. As for such gifts as in monye were liberally
given him by rich men, he did either (as we have said) give them in a dole
for the relief of the poor, or else he laid it out for the raunsomyng of
those that had been wrongfully sold: finally many of such, as by money he had
redeemed, he made after his scholars, bringing them up in learning and virtue
and exalting them to the high dignite of priesthod. The report is that (when
king Oswald desired first to have a Prelate out of Scotland, who might preach
the faith to him and his people) an other man of a more austere stomach was
first sent: Who when after a little while preaching to the English nation, he
did nothing prevail ne yet was wyllingly heard of the people, he returned into
his country, and in the assemble of the elders, he made relacion, how that in
teaching he could do the people no good to the which he was sent, for as much
as they were folks that might not be reclaymed, of a hard capacite, and fierce
nature. Then the elders (as they say) began in counsel to treat at long
what were best to de done, being no less desirous that the people should
attain the salvation which they sought for, then sorry, that the preacher whom
they sent, was not received. When Aidan (for he also was present at the
counsel) replied against the priest of whom I spoke, saying. Me thinks
brother, that you have been more rigorous, then reason would with that unlearned
audience, and that you have not according to the Apostles instruction, first
given them milk of mild doctrine, vntell being by little and little nourished
and weaned with the word of God, they were able to understand the more perfect
mysteries, and fulfill the greater commandments of God. This being said, all that were at the assemble, looking upon Aidan debated diligently his saying,
and concluded that he above the rest was worthy of that charge and bishopric,
and that he should be sent to instruct those unlearned paynims. For he was
tried to be chiefly garnished with the grace of discretion, the mother of all
virtues. Thus making him bishop they sent him forth to preach. Who when he had
taken his time, even as before he was known to be endued with discretion, so
did he afterward show him self to be beautified with all other virtues.

Of king Oswaldes wonderful religion and passing piete.

The. 6. Chap.
King Oswald and that part of the English nation of whom he was the
Sovereign gouuernour, being from thence forth instructed by this right
Reverend prelates doctrine, did not only learn to hope for the heavenly
kingdom unknown to his graundfathers, but also conquered (more then any of
his auncetours did) earthly kingdoms by the power of the same one almighty
God, who made heaven and earth. Brefely all the nations and provinces of
Britanny, which spoke four diverse languages, that is to say, the Britons, the
Redshankes, the Scotts, the English, became subject unto him. And yet being
advanced to so royal majesty, he was ever notwithstanding (which is
maruailous to be reported) lowly to all, gracious to the poor, and bountiful
to all pilgrims and strangers. The report is that at a certain time, when on
the holy day of Easter the king and the foresaied bishop were sit down to
diner, and a silver dish replenished with princely deintees was set on the
table before them, being now ready to say grace, suddenly entered in his
servant, to whom was committed the charge to receive the needy, and told the
king, that a very great number of poor people flockinge from all places did
sit in the Court, looking for some alms from the king. Who by and by gave
commandment that the delicates which were set before his own person,
should be bestowed on the poor, and the dishe of silver broken, and by
peecemeale parted among them. At the sight whereof the bishop who sat by the
king, being delited with such a work of mercy, took him by the right hand
and said: I pray God this hand be never consumed. Which thing came even so
to pass, as in his blessing he desired. For where as after that he being
slain in battle, his hands with his arm were cut of from the residew of his
body, so it is that his hands to this time continue vncorrupted^ and are
reserved in a silver shrine in S. Peter's church, where with worthy honor, they
are worshipped of all men in the kings cite, That Cite is now called Ba^brough
which has his name of a lady sometime Queen, called Bebba. By this kings
trauail the provinces of the Deirans, and the Bernicians, which did so deadly
hate one the other, were reconciled and joined together, in one allegeaunce and
amity, like as they were one people. This king Oswald was king Edwines
nephew by his sister Achas side. And it was mete, that so noble a predecessor
should have so worthy an heir as well of his religion, as of his realm, and
that of his own kindred.

How the cuntry of west Saxons received the word of God by Berinus preaching,
and Agilbertus and Eleutherius his successor.

The. 7. Chapter.
THe west Saxons (who of old time were called Genisse) received the faith of
Christ in the reign of Cynigilsus, The west country of England as the dio ceses
of Salisbury of Exceter, of Bathe and Welles, and of Ha^psher.
Berinus the bishop preaching to them the word: who came into Britanie by Pope
Honorius appointment, promising in his presence that he would sow the seeds of
the holy faith in the heart of the uttermost coasts of England, whether no
teacher had of any time gone before him. In consideration whereof at the
commandment of the same Pope Asterius the bishop of Geane did consecrat him
bishop. But at his arrival into Britany, and first entering into Geuisse,
finding that all the inhabitants there were very paynims, he thought it more
expedient, to preach the word of God among them, rather then in travailing
further to search for such as he should preach unto. And thus at his preaching
of the gospel in the forsaid province, when the king him self being newly
taught the faith was Christened with his nation, it happened at that time, that
Oswald the most holy and very victorious king of Northumberland was present.
The first Christening in the west country.
Who coming then to take his daughter to wife, took him first out of the holy
font for his godson, not without the marvelous and sweet provision of almighty
God. After this solemnity both the kings gave the same bishop the city of
Dorcinca for his bishoprike, where after that he had builded and dedicated
churches, Dorchester in Bar keshere.
and by his pains brought much people to our Lord, he went to God, and was
buried in the same city. Winchester.
Many years after when Hedde was bishop he was translated from thens to the
city of Venta and laid in the church of the blessed Apostles S. Peter and
Paul. After the death of this king his son Senwalch succeeded him in his
kingdom: Apostasy from the faith punished.
who refused to receive the faith and sacraments of the kingdom of heaven,
and shortly after lost the great rule of his wordly kingdom also. For taking
an other wife, and casting of the sister of Penda king of the Marshes his true
wedded wif, he was by Penda assauted with battle, deposed from his kingdom,
and constrained to fly to the king of the east English men, who was called
Anna, with whom living in banishment by the space of three years he learned the
faith. For this king with whom he lived in banishment, was a virtuous man and
blessed of God with plentiful and holy issue, as we shall declare hereafter.
But when Senwalch was restored to his kingdom, there came out of Irelande into
his province a certain prelate named Agilbertus, a french man borne, yet
having made long abode in Ireland because he read there the scriptures. This
bishop of his own accord came to serve the prince and to preach him the word
of life. Such was his lerning and industry, that the king entreated him to
remain with him, enduing him with a bishoprik in his dominions which at the
princes request he accepted, and ruled the same people many years with priestly
authority. At the lenght the king, who could only speak the Saxon tongue,
being weary of that foren language that Agilbertus used, did privily bring into
the province an other bishop of his own language, named VVini, the which also
was made bishop in france. And dividing the province into two dioceses, gave
him a bishops see in the city of Venta, which the Saxons call Vintancester.
Winchester,
Wherefore Agilbertus being highly displeased, because the king did this without
his counsel, returned again into france, and after that he was advanced to
the bishoprike of the cite of Parris, there he died an old man, and very aged.
But not many years after his departure out of Brita^ny Wini also was by the
same king deposed from his bishoprike, from whence he departed to the king of
the Marshes called Vulfhere, and of him he bought with money the sea of the cite
of London and continued there bishopto the end of his lif. Whereby the province
of the west Saxons lacked no small time a bishop. At which time the forsaid
king of the west Saxons being very often disquieted in his mind for the great
loss and spoil which in his kingdom he sustained by his enemies, called at
last to his mind how he had wickedly expelled him out of his realm, by whom
he had received the faith of Christ, understanding withal that by want and
lack of a bishop he wanted also the help and grace of almighty God. Therefore
he sent ambassadors into france to Agilbert besee^hing him that he would
return and resume again his bishoprike, offering with all to make
satisfaction for that which was past. But Agilbert excusing him self, alleged
that he could in no wise repair thither, because he was bound to abide at his
bishoprike, which he had in his own country and diocese: Nevertheless to
the^d he might somewhat help him who did most earnestly desire him, he sent
thither in his stead a certain priest Eleutherius by name his own nephew, who
should be made a bishop for him, if it were his pleasure, affirming that he
deemed him to be well worthy of his bishoprike. This Eleutherius was honorably
received of the people and the king, who entreated also Theodore then
Archbishop of Caunterbury that Eleutherius should be consecrated their bishop.
In which function he lived and labored many years, being the only bishop
of that province, appointed so by a Synodall decree.

How Earconbert king of kent gave commandment to destroy ydolls, and of his
daughter Eeartongath, and also of his kynse woman Edelburg virgins dedicated to
God.

The. 8. Chap.
IN the 640. An. 640.
year of the incarnation of our Lord, Eadbaldus king of kent passing out of
this life left the governance of the realm to his son Earconbert. Earconbert
did prosperously reign xxiiij. years and certain months. This was the first
king of England, Idols first threwen down in England.
who of his princely authority commanded that the idols, which were in all
his whole realm should be forsaken and destroyed: and moreover that the fast
of forty days, should be kept. And that this his authority might not
lightly be contemned of any man, he appointed mete and convenient punishments
for the transgressors thereof. Eartongath this princes daughter, as a worthy
child of such a father was a virgin of great virtue. She served god in a
Monastery all days of her life that was builded in the country of France by
an honorable Abbess, called Fara in a place named Brige. For in those days,
when many monasteries were not yet builded in England many were wont for the
love of religious life to go to the religious houses of France, sending also
their daughters to the same to be brought up, and married into heavenly
bridegroom: Virgins in Monanasteries.
especially to the monastery of Brig^e, and in Cale, and also Andilegum. Among
whom was Sedrido daughter to the wife of Anna king of the east English (of
which king Anna we have made mention before) and Edelburg, the said kings
natural daughter, who being strangers and alians, were yet both made abbesses
of the same monastery in Brige by reason of their worthy virtues. This kings
elder daughter Sexburg wife to Earconbert king of kent had a daughter named
Eartongath and of her we will now treat. The inhabitans of that place are wont
even at this day to tell of many virtuous deeds and miraculous signs, wrought
by this holv virgin. We only will be contented to speak somewhat shortly of her
departure out of this world, and passage to a better life. The time and hour
of her calling to God being at hand, she began to visit in the monastery the
celles of the sick: especially of such her sisters, as either for age, or for
virtuous conversation were most notable. Unto whose prayers lowly commending
her self, signified unto them the hour of her death approaching, according as
she had learned by revelation. The revelation (as she reported) was such. She
said, she had seen a company of men apparelled in white enter into the same
monasterye, of whom asking what they sought for, or what they would there, it
was answered her that they were sent thither, to thend they might take with
them that golden coin, which came from kent to that place. And on the same
night, in the last part thereof, that is to say when the son began to rise,
she passing over the darkness of this present world, went up to the light
that is above. Many of the brethren of the same monastery which were in other
houses, reported that they heard even at the same moment, the melody of angels
singing together, and the noise as though it were of a very great multitude
coming into the monastery: whereupon upon they by and by going forth to
know what manner a thing it were, The like is written of S. Antony beholdi^g in
company of other the soul of Amos 2 religious eremite carried up into heaven
the Angels acco^payni^g with melody.
saw that there was an exceading great light, sent down from heaven which
ledd and conducted that holy soul delivered out of the prison of the flesh to
the everlasting joys of the heavenly country. Beside all this they reported
of other miracles, which were showed by the hand of god that very night in the
self same monastery. But we passing to other miracles do leave these to the
religious persons of this monastery to report. The honorable body of Christ's
virgin and spouse, was buried in the church of S. Steven, that first blessed
martyr. And it was thought good three days after the burial, Hist. tri. part.
lib. 1. cap. 11.
that the stone wherewith the grave was covered, should be laid aside, and
reered up higher in the same place. At the doing whereof so pleasant a smell,
S. Hierom also writes the like of S. Antony in the life of Paul the Eremite.
and so sweet a savor came from the bottom of the earth, that to all the
brethern and sisters that stood by, there seemed as though there were
storehouses, and cellars of balm natural opened. Yea furthermore Edelburg
aunte by the mothers side to this Eartongath (of whom we have treated) even she
also in great chastity of body preserved the glory that god loves, which
rests in perpetual virginity: and how virtuous a virgin she was, it was
better known after her death. For when she was Abbess, she began in her
monastery to build a church in the honor of all the Apostles wherein she
willed her body to be buried. But the work being well nere half done she died,
and was buried in that very place of the church, (though yet not finished)
where she desired. After whose death the Brethren more intending upon other
things, the whole building of this church ceased forseuen years space, which
being expired, they determined utterly to leave of the buylding of it, for the
excessive labor and charges thereof, yet they appointed to translate into the
church, (which was builded up and dedicated) the bones of the Abbess that were
taken out of that place, for which purpose opening the grave they found her
body so uncorrupted as it was free from the corruption of carnal concupisence:
and so when they had washed it ons again, and cladde it in other attire, they
translated it into the church of S. Steven the martyr. The day of whose birth
was there customably kept solemn in great glory the seuenthe day of July.

How that many miracles in doing of cures were wrought in the place where king
Oswald was slain.

The. 9. Chapter.
OSwald the most Christian king of Northumberlande reigned nine years, that
year also being reckened, which both by the deadly crueltee of the king of
Britain and also through the wicked Apostasy of the two kings of England is
to be accursed and not to be had in memory. For (as we have declared before) it
was agreed upon by one accord of all writers, that the name and memory of
those that forsook Christ his faith, should be utterly rased out of the roll of
Christian kings, neither any year of their reign regestred. At the full end
of these nine years Oswald was slain in the field in a cruel battaill by the
same paynim people and paynim king of the Marshes, by whom also his
predecessor Edwyne was killed, in a place which in the English tongue is called
Maserfelth, in the eight and thirtith year of his age, on the first day of the
month of August. How great the faith of this king was in God, of how hearty and
fervent devotion, it well appeared after his death by sundry miracles, for to
this day cures of the deseased both men and beasts are daily wrowght in that
place, where he was slain of the miscreantes and hethen, fighting for his
country. Hereof many carried away the very dust, where his body fell down on
the earth, which casting into water, they cured thereby many infirmites. This
was of so many and so often practiced, that by carrying the earth away, a hole
was left so deep, that a man might stand upright right in it. Opera illo.
rum sequu^tur illos.
And no maruayle at all, that sick persons are healed in the place, where he
dyed, who allwaies, during his life bestowed most of his time in alms giving,
Their works de follow them, Apoca. 14
in comforting the needy and helpyng the poor. And verily many and sundry
miracles are reported to be done by the dust of the place where he dyed. But we
shall be contented to rehearse only two which we have heard of our auncitours
and elders. Not long after the death of this prince it fortuned a man on
horseback to journey that way, Miracles at the place where king Oswald was
slain
where the prince was slain, whose horse even about that very place, began
suddenly to become tired, to stand still, to hang down his head, to foam at the
mouth, and at the length, after great and excessive pain to fall down right:
the man lighted of, and laying some straw under his horse, tarried by to see
whether the horse would mend or else dye owtright. The poor beast being of long
time troubled with greauous pain, toumbling and turning it self now on the
one side, now on the other, walowed at the length to that same place, where
this king of worthy memory was slain. Incontinent the pain ceasing, the
horse leaft the inordinat motions of his body, turning it self as if it had been weary on the other side, and forth with as perfitly whole on both sides
arose up and began to grase: at the sight whereof the owner of the horse, as a
man of a quick wit, understood that some strange and singular holiness, was
in that place where his horse was upon the soden so healed. Putting therefore a
mark in the place, he leapt on horseback, and rode to the ynne, whither he
purposed to travail. Here he found a damsel niece to the good man of the
house of a long time deseased with a grievous palsy, whereof hearing his often
and the whole house hold much complaining, he began to tell them of the place
where his horse was healed. What need many words? They set her on a carte, and
brought her to that place, laying her down therein. Where having rested and
slept for a small time, waking she found her self whole and perfectly cured of
that palsy. She called for water, she washed her face, she dressed up her
hear, she covered her head with a linen clothe, and with them, who brought
her on carte, she returned on foot.

How the dust of that place prevailed against fire.

The. 10. Chap.
AT that time a certain other trauailer came out of Britain, as the brute is
making his journey ner to that same place, wherein the forsaid battle was
fought. Vewing the place he espied one plat more green and pleasanter to the
eye then was the residue of the field. Whereof he gessed the cause should be
that in that place some one man holyer then the rest of the army had been
slain. Therefore he took away with him some of the dust of that earth,
knitting it up in a lynnen cloth, and demyng with him selue, as in deed it came
after to pass, that the same dust might be medicinable for sick persons. This
man ryding on his journey came that evening to a certain village, where taking
up his inn, and finding the neighbors of the parish at feast with the often,
being required sat down also with the^ at the banquet hanging upon on of the
posts of the wall, the linen cloth with the dust, which he had brought. The
feast and chere encresing, cups walking apase, the gestes with mirth so far
forgott the^ selves, that a great fire in the mids of the house being made,
the sparkles flying up aloft, and every man intending to mirth, the roufe of
the house being made but with slender twigges and thatched, was suddenly set
all on a light fire. Whereat the gestes being disamaied ra^ne al out of doors,
not able to save the poor house being now all on fire and ready to consume. To
come to the purpose, the whole house being consumed with this fire, that post
alone whereon the dust hanged, (enclosed in a cloth) continued, safe from the
fire, and therewith not hurt at al. At the sight of this miracle al maruailed
much and with diligent enquire and examination found out that this dust came
from that place where king Oswaldes blood was shed. After that the miracles
were manifestly known and bruted abroad, much people began to resort thereto:
where after much haunting, many obtained health and cures of deseases both for
them selves, and for others.

How that a light sent down from heaven stood al a whole night upon king
Oswalds relics: and how that they which were possessed with evil spirits,
were healed by the same relikes.

The. 11. Chapter.
OF all other miracles I suppose it must in no wise be left unwritten, how
heavenly a miracle was showed when king Oswalds bones were found out, and
translated to the church wherein they are now reserved. This was done by the
industry of the queen of the Marshes, Offride by name, who was his brother
Oswines daughter which Oswin after Oswalds reign came to the croune, as we
shall declare in the process that follows. There is a famous monastery in the
province Lindissi named Beardanan, Lincoi^eshere.
which the same queen and her husband Adilrede did greatly love, honor, and
reverence, wherein she desired to lay up her uncles honorable bones. When the
chariot was come, wherein the same bones were brought toward the evening, the
men that were in the monastery, would not gladly receive these bones, into the
forsaid monastery: because although they had known that he was a blessed man,
notwithstanding forasmuch as he was a foreign borne, and took upon him to be
their king, they hated him also after his death, like as they did of long time
by his life. Whereby it came to pass, that, that same night the relikes that
were brought thither, did remain still without: yet was there a great pauilion
stretched out over the chariot wherein the relikes were: but the showing of
heavenly miracle did manifestly declare, with how great reverence those bones
ought to be received of all faith full people. For all that night long a
pillour of light, reaching from that chariot unto he auen, stood so, that it
was plainly seen in all places almost of the same province of Lindisse. Wherefore
when the morning was come, the brethern of that monastery, who on the day
before had denied began now to desire earnestly, that the same holy relikes,
might be laid up in their house. These bones were after enclosed in a shrine,
which they had provided for that purpose. The shrine also was placed in the
church with honor convenient: And to thend that the holy man's princely
personage might alwaie be remembered, they erected over his tu^be his standerd,
made of gold and purple: Also whereas the very water wherein they washed his
bones, they poored out into a corner of the vestrey, from that day forward it
came to pass, that the earth it self, which received that holy washing, had
also especial grace to drive away devils from the bodies that were possessed.
Furthermore in process of time, when the forsaide Queen abode in the same
monastery there came to salute her a certain honorable Abbess, which lives
until this day: her name is Edilhild sister to the blessed man Edelwin and
Aldewin, the first of the which was a bishop in the province Lindisse, the
second was the Abbot of a monastery, the which is called Peartane not far from
the place where that Abbess had her monastery. This abbess co^moning with the
Queen, after they began to fall in talk of Oswalde, among other matters she
said, that she also had seen, on the very same night a light upon his relikes
which in height reached up to heaven. Whereunto the Queen added that many sick
folckes were now healed with the very dust of the pauiment, on the which the
water of his wasshing was poured out: Then the Abbess desired to have some
deal, of the dust given her, and as soon as she received it, she knit it up in
a cloth, laid it up in a little casket, and returned. Not long after, when
she was in her own monastery, a certain stranger came thither, who in the
night was wont diverse times suddenly to be troubled with a foul sprite, and
that most grievously. This geste when he had been liberally entertained, after
supper went to bed, and suddenly being possessed with the devil, began to cry
out, to gnash with his teeth, to foam at the mouth, and to cast fourth his body
violently, flinging some parts one way, and some an other. And when no man
was able either to hold or to bind him, a servant ran, and knocking at the
gate told the abbess. Who forth with going forth with one of the nuns, to
the place where the brethern lay, she called forth a priest, requiring him to
go with her to the pacient. Where when at their coming they saw many men
present, laboring to keep down the partty vexed, and to stay his inordinat
motions and yet prevailing nothing, the priest adjured him, and did what he
could for the appeasing of the rage, that this piteous creature was in: but the
priest himself for ought he could do auailed the party nothing. At last when
it seemed there remained no health, Gregory B. of Nisso, brother to S. Basil
reports of miracles wrought by the duste lying upon Martyrs tum^^s. In vita
Theodori Martyr^s.
or hope of amendment in the mad body, the Abbess by and by, remembering the
aforesaid dust commanded forthwith a maid who served her, to go and bring her
a little coffer, wherein the dust was reserved: who going as she was
commanded, as soon as she entered into the court of the house, (in the inward
part whereof the man that was possessed with the evil sprit, was tormented)
bringing the said dust, the person possessed suddenly held his peace, and
laid down his head, as though he were fallen a sleep: setting every part of
his body as though he would rest. Al they who stood about the patient, were
whist, and being attentive kept silence, carefully looking what end the matter
would have. And behold, after a quarter of an hour, or there about, the man
that was before disquieted, arose up all quiet, and with fetching a great
sigth said, even now, I feel my self whole, and now I come to my wit again.
They which stood by demanding how this had happened, he answered: Incontinent
as soon as this virgin, with the little coffer which she brought was come nigh
to the court of this house, all the wicked sprites that troubled me departed
and appeared no more. Then did the Abbess give him a little piece of that dust.
The priest prayed over him, and departed. He passed thus, the rest of that
night in most quiet rest: neither did he suffer all the night after any trouble
or vexation at all.

How a little child sitting hard by Oswaldes tomb, was healed of an ague.

The 12. Chap.
SHortly after this time there was a certain little boy in the same
monastery, Paulinus a learned bishop of Nola in S. Augustins time reports
sundry miracles of health restored to sick persons at the tu^be of S. Felix.
Natali 6. the like writes S. Basil of the 40. Martyrs. S. Ambrose of the
bodies of S. Geruasius and Protasius. li. 10. epist. ad sororem: epist. 85. et
sermon. 19.
who had a great while ben sore sick of a fever. Who on a day looking heauely
for the course of his fever, one of the brethern, coming to him, said: will thou my son, that I shall teach the, how thou may be delivered of the grief
of this sickness? Rise go into the church, and when thou come to Oswalds
sepulture, sit down there, and abiding quietly cleave unto the tumbe, beware
thou go not from thence, nor stir out of the place, until the fit of fever
shall be past: then will I come and bring the forth from thens. The child
did as the religious man had counseled him. And when he was sitting hard by
the holy man's tumbe, the sickness did in no wise presume to attache him, but
fled incontinently from him, as daring not keep any course with him neither the
next day, nor the third day, no yet any time afterward. That this was so
done, the religious man, who came from thence reported to me, and says
furthermore, that at the time of his talk with me, that young man, on whom
when he was but a child this miracle of health was done, was yet alive in the
same monastery. All learned stories ar^ full of such examples.
And it is not to be wondered at, that the prayers of that king now reigning
with God may do much with him: Who having sometime the governance of a
temporal realm, accustomed him self to continual and earnest prayer for the
everlasting kingdom. Finally men report, that he had oftentimes continued in
prayer from midnight mattins, until it were day, King Oswalda great praier^
Holy men work miracles by intercession.
and by the reason of his common custom of praying, or giving god thanks, he
was wont always, whersoeuer he did sit, to have his hands upright upon his
knees. Yea it is is said also, that he ended his life, as he was saying his
devotions. For whiles he was compassed about with the artillary, O rare example
of a Christen Prince.
and assailed of his ennemies, and saw that he should be slain immediately, he
made his prayer to god to save those soldiers souls, which were in his army.
Of the which occasion came up this proverb: God have mercy on their souls,
quoth Oswald, when he died him self. An old uerbe.
His bones were conueyghed and buried in the monastery, whereof we speak. And
whereas the king who killed him commanded that his head and his hands with
his arms cut of from the body, should be hanged up on poles, a year after,
Oswine, his successor in the kingdom came with his army, and took them away,
burying his head in the churcheyarde of holy Island church, and laying up his
hands with his arms in the cytee of Bebba. Ba^brough


How a certain man in Ireland being at the point of death, was by his relikes
restored to life.

The. 13. Chap.
THe renown of this famous man has passed not only over all the borders of
Britain, but also spreading the beams of wholesome light far beyond the
Occean sea, came to the coasts of Germany and Ireland likewise. The right
reverent bishop Acca was wont to tell, that in his journey to Rome, as he
passed through Friselande, and abode sometime there in the house of
VVillibrorde, that holy bishop of Friselande with his prelate VVilsride he
heard him oftentimes report, what were done in that province by the means of
the religious relikes of this most virtuous king. At what time also he being
but yet a priest led a pilgrims life in Ireland for the love he had to the
everlasting country, he reported that the brute of this kings holiness was
then far abroad sown in that isle also. One miracle, which he rehearsed among
other, we have thought good to write in this owr present historye. In a time of
mortalytie (said this man) which by a great death destroyed Britayne, and
Ireland, a certain scholar whose auncetours were scotts, was stricken with the
same pestilence, a man skillful certesse in the study of learning, but one
that used no diligence, and took no labor at all for the attayning of his
own everlasting salvation. Who when he saw him self to be at deaths door,
trembled and was troubled in sprite, for death so nigh approaching, fearing, (as
his lewd life deserved) to be thrown down into the doungeon of hell. And
therewith he cried to me being lodged not far of, and fetching deep and
sorrowful sighs, in a trembling and lamentable voice, made thus his moan unto
me. You see, (quoth he) that now by the increase of my bodily grief, I draw to
the point of death. And I know surely that by and by after the death of this
my body, I shall be taken away to the everlasting death of the soul, and that
I must endure the torments of hell: for that trauayling in the reading of holy
writ, A lesson for ungodly stude^ts
and occupied always in divine study, I became yet rather a slave of sin,
then a keeper of gods holy commandments. But, if God of his merciful goodness,
will grant me any leisure to live, I purpose to amend my sinful manners, and
dispose from hence forth my whole life, to the will and pleasure of almightye
God. Yet I know that I have not deserved either to have or to hope for so much
truce and respyte to live: except peradventure by the help of such, as have
faithfully served God, he will of his tender mercy vouchsafe, to forgive me so
wretched and miserable a sinner. For we have heard it commonly reported, that
there has been in your nation a king of wonderful holiness called Oswalde,
the excellency of whose faith and virtue, yea after his death, was well
known by working of many miracles. I beseech you therefore, if you have any of
his relikes left with you in your keeping, bring it to me, because it may so
be, that God will have mercy upon me through his merits. To whom I made this
answer: forsooth I have of the tree, The goodness of God and our faith works
miracles by holy relikes.
whereupon his head was sticked, after that he was flayne of the paynims, and
if thou will believe assuredly, the merciful goodness of God by the merit of so
worthy a person, may both grant the longer time to lead this life, and also
make the a meet man, to enter into the life everlasting. Who answering me
incontinent, that he did perfectly believe so, I called for water, and blessing
it, I cast in a chyppe of the forsayde oken tree, giving of the water, the
sick man to drink. Forthwith he began to amend, and recovering his health,
lived along time after, and being turned to God, in all heart and deed, did
openly declare to all men, where ever he came, the graciousnesse of our
merciful maker, and the glory of his faithful servant.

How that Thamar when Pauline was dead succeeded him in the bishoprike of
Rochester, and of the meruaylous humility of Osuuius whom Oswin killed cruelly.

The 14. Chapter.
THis blessed king being exalted to the kingdom of heaven his brother Oswin a
young man, about thirty years old took on him in his steed the governance of
the earthly kingdom, and ruled the realm with great disquietnesse and
trouble, the space of eight and twenty years. For first the paynim, and mighty
king Penda had war against him. Then the paynim people of the Marshes, which
slew his brother made him battle. Also his own son Alcfride did likewise
rebel and resist him. Last of all Adilwalde his nephew, son to Oswald
withstoode him. In the second year of this Oswins reign, that is to wit in
the. 644. An. 644.
year after the incarnation of owr Lord, the right reverent father Pauline,
sometime bishope of york: but then governing the diocese of Rochester, went to
God the twentieth day of October. He was bishop. 19. years and two months, and
one and twenty days: and was buried in the chapel of the blessed Apostle S.
Andrewe, which king Edilbert builded up even from the foundation in the same
cytee of Rochester. In whose place the archbishop Honorius advanced Thamar, a
kentish man, a man comparable to any of his ancestors both in virtue of
life, and excellency of learning. Oswin at the beginnying of his reign, had a
partaker of his estate royal named Osuuius, who descended of king Edwines
blood, that is to say, the son of Osrike, of whom we have made mention
before, a maruaylous devout and godly man, who seven years together ruled the
province of the York shere.
Deirans, in most plenty of things, and with the love of al his subjects. But
Oswin who governed the other part of Northumberland, toward the north, to wit
the province of the Bernicians, Omnisque potestas impatiens consortis erit.
Lucanus lib. 1.
cold not long live peasibly with him: but rather forging and increasing causes
of debate murdered him at length most cruelly. For upon these variaunces an
army being on both parts assembled, Osuuius seeing him self to weak, to
ioygne battle with Oswin, thought it more expedient, to break of war at
that time, and refrain until better occasion served. Therefore he discharged
the army, which he had gathered together commanding every man to return home
again. The field where they met, is called VVilfares down, and stands
almost ten mile, from the village of Cataracton toward the west. Osuuius
conueighed him self out of the way, with only one that was his most faithful
soldier named Condher to one Hunwald an Earl, whom he took for his very
friend. But alas he was much deceived: for being by the same Earl betrayed
with his forsaid soldier unto Oswin by by his lieutenant Edelwin he slew him
most cruelly and traitorously. This was done the xx. of August, in the ninthe
year of his reign, in a place which he called Ingethl^ng, where, for the
satisfaction of this heinous act, Prayer for the dead.
there was afterward a monastery builded, in the which daily prayers should be
offered up to God, for the redemption of both the kings souls, as well the
murderer, as the party murdered.

King Osuuius was of countenance beautiful, The commendati^ of king Osuuius.
of stature high, in talk courtyous and gentle: in all points civil and
amiable: no less honorable and bounttfull to the noble, then free and
liberal to persons of low degree. Whereby it happened, that for his outward
personage, inward heart, and princely port he had the love of all men.
Especially the nobility of all countres frequented his court, and coueted to
be received in his service. Among other his rare virtues, and princely
qualites, his humility and passing lowlynesse excelled. Whereof we will be
contented to recite one most worthy example. He had given to bishop Aidan a
very fair and proper gelding: which that virtuous bishop, Bishop And an ^^ero
S. Martin^ who gave half his doke to a naked poor man.
(though he used most to trauail on foot) might use to pass over waters and
ditches, or when any other necessite constrained. It fortuned shortly after, a
certain poor weak man met the bishop, riding on his gelding, and craved an
alms of him. The bishop as he was a passing pitefull man, and a very father to
needy persons, lighted of, and gave the poor man the gelding gorgeously
trapped as he was. The king hearing after hereof, talked of it with the bishop,
as they were entering the palace to diner and said. What meaned you my Lord to
give away to the beggar that fair gelding, which we gave you for your own
use? Have we no other horses of less price, and other kind of rewards to
bestow upon the poor, but that you must geaue away that princely horse,
which we gave you for your own ryding? To whom the bishop answered. Why
talks your grace thus? A charitable saying, but now more like to be mocked
at, then to be followed
Is that brood of the mare derer in your sight, then that son of God the
poor man? Which being said they entered for to dyne. The bishop took his place
appointed. But the knge coming then from hunting, would stand a while by the
fire to warm him. Where standing and musing with himself upon the words, A
rare and strange humilite of a king.
which the bishop had spoken unto him, suddenly put of his sword giving it to
his servant, and came in great have to the bishop, falling down at his feet,
and beseching him not to be displeased with him for the words he had spoken
unto him, saying he would never more speak of it, nor measure any more
hereafter what or how much he should bestow of his goods upon the sons of
God, the poor. At which sight the bishop being much astonned, arose suddenly
and lifted up the king telling him that he should quickly be pleased, if it
would please him to fit down, and cast away al heaviness. Afterward the
king being at the bishops request merry, the bishop contrary wise began to be
heavy and sorry in such sort, that the tears trickled down by his chekes. Of
whom when his chapleyne in his mother tongue, which the king and his court
understood not, had demanded why he wept: I know said he, that the king shall
not live long. For never before this time have I seen an humble king. Whereby I
perceive, that he shall spedely be taken out of this life, for this people is
not worthy to have such a prince and governor. Shortly after the bishops
dredful abodement was fullfilled with the kings cruel death, as we have before
declared. Bishop Aidan him self also was taken away out of this world and
received of God the everlasting rewards of his labors even on the twelfthe
day after the king, whom he so much loved, was slain, that is to wit, the 30.
day of August.

How that bishop Aidan both told the shippemen of a storm that was to come^
and also gave them holy oil wherewith they did cease it.

The. 15. Chapter.
HOW worthy a man this bishop Aidan was, God the high and secret judge of men's
hearts, by sundry miracles (the proper works of his majesty) declared to all
the world. Three of the which it shall be sufficient presently to recite, for
remembraunces sake. A certain priest called Vtta ^ man of great grauitye and
truth, and one that for his qualites was much reverenced and esteemed of men of
honor, at what time he was sent into kent to fetch Eanflede king Edwines
daughter, who after the death of her father had been sent thither, to be married
to king Oswin, appointing so his journey, that he minded to trauail thither by
land, but to return with the young lady by water, he went to bishop Aida^
beseching him to make his humble prayers to god to prosper him and his, The
devotion of our primitive church.
who were then taking their journey. The bishop blessing them and committing
them to the goodness of god, gave them also hallowed oil, saying: I know that
when you shall have shipping, a tempest and a contrary wind shall rise upon
you sodeinly. But remember that you cast into the sea, this oil that I give
you, and anon the wind being laid, comfortable fayer weather shall ensue on
the sea, which shall send you home again with as pleasant a passage as you
have wished. All these things were fulfilled in order, as the bishop
prophesied. Truly at the beginning of the tempest, when the waves and surges of
the sea did chiefly rage, the shipmen assayed to cast ancar, but all in vain.
For the tempest increased, the whaues multiplied so fast, and water so filled
the ship, that nothing but present death was looked for. In this distress
the priest at the length remembering the bishop words, took the oil pot, and
did cast of the oil into the sea, which being done (according as the virtuous
bishop had forsaide) the sea calmed, the bright son appeared, the ship passed
on with a most prosperous viage. Thus the man of God by the sprit of prophecy,
forshewed the tempest to come, and by the same holy Spirit, though bodily
absent appaised the same. No common reporter of uncertain rumors, but a very
credible man, a priest of our church Cynimund by name showed me the process of
this miracle: who said that he had heard it of that same Vtta the priest, in
whom the miracle was wrought.

How the same man by prayer ceased the fire that ennemies had put to the kings
city.

The. 13. Chap.
AN other miracle worthy temembraunce, wrought by the same father, is reported
of many, such as were most likely to have perfect knowledge of it. At what
time Penda capitain of the Marshes, invaded the province of Northumberland
(this Aidan being bishop) and wasting and spoiling the whole country, Ba^brough
even unto Bebba the cite of the kings own abode, being not able neither by
battle neither by siege to win it, minded to set it a fire, and had for
that purpose, carried thither in certain chains and gables (cut of by main
force in the suburbs of the cite) a great quantitye of beams, rafters, posts
and small twigges, wherewith he had compassed that part of the cite that
adioyneth to the land, in a great height, and the wind now serving at will,
the fire was kindled and the cite began to consume, this reverent prelate
Aidan, being then in holy Ilond, about two miles from the cite, whether
oftentimes he used to depart to keep his secret trade of devotions and
solitary contemplacions (as even to this day the place is well known)
beholding the flakes of fire, Theodoret in his Philotheus reports of a great
army of the Persia^s destroyed at Nisiba by the prayer only of lames then a
holy Bis^hop of that cite.
and great smoke over the cite, lifting up his eyes and hands to heaven, with
tears (as it is reported) cried out, and said: Behold O Lord how great
mischief Penda works? Which words of that blessed man being pronounced, the
winds being turned from the cite, turned back the light fire again, upon
them who had kindled it. In so much that some being hurt, all made afraied,
they were feign to leave the assault of the cite which they saw to be helped
by the hand of God. In vita lac^bi Nisibensis.


How the post of the church, whereunto that holy bishop leaning departed this
life, could not be burned, when all the rest of the church burned: and of his
inward life.

The. 16. Chap.
THis virtuous bishop Aidanus at what time he should depart this world,
having labored in the office of a bishop xvij. years, Ba^orough
remained in a village of the kings not far from the cite of Bebba: for having
there a church and a chamber, he used oftentimes to stay and abide there taking
from thence his yourney round about the country to preach the word of God, as
he did in all other tounes subject to the king, not resting long in any place
as having no possessions of his own, but his church only and a small plotte of
ground lying there about. Being therefore sick, they pitched him a pauilion,
fastening it hard to the church wall, on the west side thereof. In this
pauilion leaning to a post joined to the out side of the church to fortefy it,
he gave up the ghost in the xvij. year of his bishopric, the last day of
August. His body was from thence carried to holy Island, and in the church yard
of the monastery buried. But shortly after a greater church there being
erected, and dedicated in the honor of the most blessed prince of the Apostles
S. Peter, his bones were transposed thither, and laid at the right side of the
altar, with much honor as that virtuous bishop deserved. Finanus a holy man
directed thither, from the Ilond and monastery of Hij in Scotland, succeeded
Aidan, and was bishop a long time. It fortuned not long after that Penda king
of the Marshes or Vplandish english men, inuading the coasts of Northumberland
with a mighty army, destroying with fire and sword all that he met, burned
also that village and the church wherein that holy man Aidan died. But behold
all the rest of the church burning, that only post whereunto this holy man
leaned at the moment of his departure, could by no force of fire be consumed.
The miracle being known and ^, the church was builded up again, in the self
same place, and the post also to fortefy the wall as before. Which being done
not long after by the oversight of the inhabitants, the village and church
also, chanced to be set all on fire, that post yet escaping the flame and
fire as before. And whereas the fire passed through the holes of the post,
whereby it was fastened to the church wall, yet the church burning the post
could not be hurt. God which by the shadow of Peter healed the sick works
the like in the dead rel^ kes of holy men.
Whereupon a third church being, builded, that post was no more set withowt,
to bolster up the wall as before, but for remembrance of the miracle it was
had into the church, and laid as a threshold for people to knele upon, and
make their devout prayers to almighty God. And it is well known that sithen
that time diverse have in that place ben cured of deseases, and with water,
wherein chippes cut from that post have been dipped, many have recovered
health. Act. 5.
This much have I written of this holy man and of his works not yet commending
in him his wrong and evil accustomed observation of Easter according to the
count of the Jews, but detesting that in him utterly, as also I have
evidently declared in my book De temporibus. But as it behooves a true
historiographer, I have reported of him and of his doings, such things as
were commendable, and might profit the readers. As that he was a man of great
charity and quiet, of great contynency and humility, a conqueror of wrath and
couuetousnes and one that was far from all pride and vain glory. Again I
commend in him his greatindustry both in keeping and in teaching the
commandments of God, his diligent reading, continual watching, his priestly
grauitye in rebuking the proud and haughty, and mild demeanor in comforting
the weak, and refreshing the nedy. And to be short, I commend him as one that
labored all days of his life (as of his most nere acquaintance I understand)
to observe and fulfill all that was written and commanded in holy scriptures
the Prophets and Apostles. These things in that holy prelate I do much embrace
and commend, as things undoubtedly pleasing almighty God. But that he observed
not Easter in his due time, either as ignorant thereof, or witting it well, yet
being lead with the authority of his country, not acknowleadging it, this I
neither commend nor allow. Yet in this very point this I allow in him, that
in his manner of observing Easter he believed, reverenced, and preached no other
thing, then we do, that is the redemption of mankind by the passion,
resurrection and ascension of Christ Jesus the mediator between God and man.
And therefore he observed his Easter not (as many falsely do suppose) altogether
with the Jews, that is the fourtenth day of the moon, what so ever day it
fell upon, but he kept it ever upon a sunday reakoning from the fourtenth day
of the moon to the twentieth: and that for the faith undoubtedly which he had
in our lords resurrection, believing it to be in the first fery after the
sabooth day in hope of our resurrection to come, which the holy church
believes shall happen upon the same first fery, that is upon a Sunday, even as
owr lord arose upon a sunday, as the scripture testifies. Joan. 20.


Of the life and death of the virtuous king Sigebert.

The. 18. Chap.
ABout this time, Norfolck Suffolck and Cambridg shere.
after Carpwalde Redwaldes successor, Sigibert his brother a virtuous and
devout man reigned over the East english nation. This prince while he lived in
France flying the emmyte of king Redwald, was there baptized. Whereupon after
his return coming to the Crown, and desyring to follow that godly order and
trade which he had seen practiced in France, set up a schole to bring up
children by the help and aid of Bishop Felix whom he took out of kent for
that purpose, appoynting them masters and teachers after the manner of the
kentish men. This king was so flamed with the love of heaven, that leaving at
the last all affairs of his realm to the gouuernement of his cosen Egrick,
who also before had part of his dominion with him, he entered to a monastery
which he had made for him self, King Sigibert becomes a monk.
where being shoren in, he bestowed his time to the atchieuing of the eternal
kingdom of heaven. Wherein having with much devotion warfared a long time to
God, the vplandishe english men with their old Capitain Penda invaded his
dominions. His people after long resistaunce finding them selves to weak,
beseched Sigibert for the encouraging of their souldiars, to come forth in to
the field with the^. Which when of his own accord he would not agree unto,
they plucked him by force out of the monastery, and brought him against his will
unto the field, hoping that the souldyars in the presence of their old
valiant Capitain, would less think upon flight, and running away.
Notwithstanding the virtuous man remembering his profession, being set in the
midst of the army, carried only a little rod in his hand. Thus of the cruel
hethen he was killed, with king Egrick, and the whole army discomfited. Anna
son to Guido of the kings blood succeeded in the kingdom, a man of great
virtue, and the father of a blessed issue, as we shall hereafter in his place
declare. This king also was afterward slain of the self same Penda Capitain
of the Marshes or vplandish enhlishmen then heathen and vnchristned.

How Furseus builded a monastery among the Eastenglish men, and of his visions
and holiness which also his ^^esh remaining after his death uncorrupted does
witness,

The. 19. Chapter.
IN the time that Sigibert gouuerned yet the east parts of England, a holy man
called Furseus came thither out of Ireland, a man notable both for his sayings
and doings, of great virtue, and much desiring to wander and trauail in Gods
quarrel, where so ever occasion served. Coming therefore to the east coasts of
England he was reverently received of the said king, where poursuing his
godly desire of preaching the word of God, he both converted many infidels,
and confirmed the faithefull in the faith and love of Christ, by his painful
preaching and virtuous examples. Falling here in to sickness, S. Paul was
comforted also by a vision from God to be steadfast in preaching the word
he had from God a vision by the ministry of Angels, wherein he was warned to
go forth cherefully in his pain full preaching of the gospel, and perfeuere
in his accustomed watching and praying because his end and death was certain,
though the hour thereof were most uncertain, according to the saying of our
Lord. VVatch therefore because ye know not the day nor the hour. Act. 2^.
With this vision being much confirmed and encouraged, Mat. 25.
he hastened with all speed to build up the monastery in the place king
Sigibert had given him, and to instruct it with regular discipline. This
monastery was pleasau^tly situated for the woddes and sea adjoining, being
erected in the village of Cnobherburg, and enriched afterward by Anna king of
that province and many other noble men, with sundry fair houses and other
ornaments. This Furseus came of the noblest race of the Scottish nation, nobler
yet of mind, then of blood. From the very time of his childehood, he gave him
self to reading of holy scripture, and monastical discipline. Especially, as
it becomes holy and perfect men, what soever he learned to be acceptable to
God, he was hoful and dili gent to execut and perform. Brefely, in process
of time he builded him self a monastery, wherein he might with more leisure
and liberty attend to co^templation and spiritual devotion. In the which
monastery being stricken with sickness, he was taken out of his body, as the
book written of his life does sufficiently testify. In the which trance
continuing from evening until the next morning, he was brought to the sight of
the Angelical company and to the hearing of their blessed praises and thanks
geuings to God. Among other things which he heard them singe, he was wont to
tell of the versicle I bunt sancti de virtute in virtutem. Psalm. 83.
Holy men shall proceed from virtue to virtue. And again. Videbitur Deus dcorum
in Syon. The God of Gods shall be seen in Syon. This holy man being restored
again to his body, was within three days after taken out again, at what time
he saw not only greater joys of the blessed company of heaven, but also
beside great conflictes of the wicked sprits, which very busely went about to
stop him of his journey toward heaven with their often accusations, auailing
yet naught against him, the holy Angels warding him and defending him. Of all
the which things who lists more at large to be instructed, as with what
spiteful suttelties the wicked sprits replied always against him not only his
doings and superfluous words, but also his very thoughts as if they had them
written in book, also what gladd and heavy tydinges he learned of the Angels, and
other holy and just men appearing then unto him, let him read the little book
which is written of his life, and he shall receive thereof (I doubt not) much
spiritual comfort and instruction. Among the which yet one thing there is
that we have thought good and profitable to many to express in this our
history. At what time in his trance he was carried up to heaven ward, Note the
sc^^^^. spiritual fires which shall burn the^wde.
he was commanded of the Angels who carried him to look down in to the
world. Which when he did, he saw as if it were a dark and obscure valley
underneath him. Also in the air four several fyres, not far distant one
from the other Asking therefore the Angels what fyres those were, it was told
him that those were the fyres which should burn and consume the world. The
first fire they said, was the fire of lying, which we all incur when we do
not fulfill the promis which we made in baptim: that is, to renou^nce the
devil and all his works The second fire is of covetousness and desire, when we
prefer the riches of the world before the love of heavenly matters, The
third is of strife and debate, when we stick not to offend the minds of our
even Christians, even in trifling and superfluous matters. The fourth is of
wickedness and impiete, thinking it a light matter to injury, beguile or use
violence toward our wekers and inferiors. These four fyres increasing by
little and little so far at the lenght extended, that joining altogether they
grew to a great and houghly flame. Which approaching nigh unto him fearing he
cried to the Angel, Lord, behold the fire draws to me. To whom the Angel
said, Every man shall receive according to the works of his body. 2. co. 5.
Fear not. That which thou have not kindled, shall not burn the. For though
this flame seem to the terrsble, great, and hougy, yet it tries every one
according to the deserts of his works. For the worldly desire that each one
has shall burn (and purify) in this fire. And as a man burns in his body
by unlawful pleasure, so departed out of his body he shall burn by due and
deserved pain. The pains of Purgatory.
Then he saw one of the three Angels, which in both his visions had been his
guides, to go before and divide the flames from him. The other two warding him
on each side from the danger of the fire also. He saw again the devils The
devil fights with sin against man. Read S. Paul Ephesians. 6. b. 12. etc. 16.
and wicked sprits flyeng through the fire, fighting with fire against the
Just. After follow the accusations of the wicked sprits against him, the
defense of the Angels for him, and a greater sight of the heavenly company.
Among the which many of his own nation of Scotland appeared, virtuous
priests in their life time, and men of great opinion of holiness, of whom he
learned diverse things very profitable both for him self and for other, which
would learn of him. Who after they had ended their communication departing up
to heaven again with the other blessed company, three Angels remained with
Furseus to reduce him again to his body. In their return, as they approached
to that great foresaied fire, the Angel parted the fire from him, as before,
yet when this man of God had entered the way made between the flames, certain
of the wicked sprits snatching up one of them which they tormented in the
fires, threw him at him, and touching him, burned his shouldet and cheke. The
man of God As God is said in scripture to bend his bow to strik with sword,
etc. Psalm. 7, so here the writer applies carnal terms to spiritual matters,
the names of fire to sin, of throwing by the devils to the charge of sin.
etc.
knew well the person, and remembered that at his death he had taken of him a
garment of his bequethed him. But the holy Angel taking away spedely the
tormented soul, threw him again in to the fire. Whereat the wicked sprit
said, repel him not now whom ye received before. For as ye took the goods of
this sinner, so ought ye also take part of his pains and torments. Unto whom
the Angel answering, said, he took it not of covetousness, but for the saving
of his soul: with this the fire ceased. And the Angel turning to the man,
said. That which thou have kindled has now burned in the. For if thou had
not taken the money of this man dying in his sin, the torment of his fire had
not touched the. And here in many words the Angel taught him, what was to be
done concerning their salvation which did repent. The man living long time
after, bore the sign of that fire which he suffered in soul, visible and
evident to all men in his shoulder and cheke. And the flesh maruailously openly
showed that, which the soul privily suffered. He endeavored ever after, as he
was also wont before, to preach both by word and example to all men the
trade and duty of a virtuous life. The manner of his visions he communicated
only to such, who of virtuous desire and holy zele desired the same.

It remains yet (touching this man) that we recite here the credible report
of an ancient brother, of our monastery, who says he heard of a very trusty
and virtuous man, that he had seen this Furseus in the province of the East
costs of England, and had heard of his own mouth these visions. Reporting
moreover, that in the most sharp frost of deep winter, that holy man sitting
but in a slight garment, as he recounted these visions, through the great
fear, and pleasure also conceived by the remembrance thereof, he would sweat
as if it had been the hottest day in the midst of summer.

To return to our principal purpose, this holy man having preached the word
of God many years in Scotland, and not being able to endure any longer the
commotion of the people, leaving all that he had, departed from his native
country and Ilond that he was borne in. From thence he came to the east coast
of England, preaching there the word of God, and erecting at last (as we
touched before) a noble Monastery. Al which things duly performed, intending
utterly to abandonne all worldly cares and troubles, he lest also the busy
gouuernement of the monastery committing that charge of souls to his brother
Fullanus and to Gobbanus and Dicullus priests: taking upon him the most
solitary life of an Anchoret. He had an other brother called Vltanus who also
after long proof and trial in the monastery, went unto a wilderness and
lead an Eremites life. To him he went alone, living one whole year with him in
continency, prayers, and daily hand labor. The country being after much
disquieted by often invasions of ennemies, and monasteries them selfs being in
danger, leaving al things in good order, he sailed in to France. Where being
honorably received of the French king Clouis the second, and of Erkinwald
then preuost of Perone he builded a monastery in a place there called
Latiniacum. Where not long after falling sick he died. Whose body Earkinwald
the preuost taking thence kept it in the porche of his church vntell the church
it self was consecrated in Perone. Which being solemnly done within six and
twenty days after the body was brought thither, and being removed from the
porche to be laid by the high altar, it was found as whole and uncorrupted
as if the man had but that hour departed. Four years after a little chapel
being erected at the east side of the altar where the body should more
honorably betoumed, being taken up again to be transposed thither it was
found in like manner without any blemish of corruption. In the which place it
is well known that his merits have much ben renowned by sundry miracles
wrought by the allmighty power of God. Thus much of the incorruption of his
body we have brefely touched, that the reader might more clearly understand,
of what excellency and virtue this man was. All which things, and of other his
virtuous companyons in the book written of his life, he that reads, shall
find more ample mention made.

How after the death of Honorius, Deusdedit succeeded, and who in that time were
bishops of Rochester and in the east parts of England.

The. 20. Chap.
IN this mean Felix the bishop of the east englishmen departing this world,
having ben their bishop. 17. years, Honorius the Archebishopp of Caunterbury
created in his place Thomas one of his deacons, borne in the province of
Giruij, after whose death living in that bishopric five years, he substituded
in his room, Beretgilsus, surnamed Bonifacius a kentishman borne. Honorius
also the Archbishop, the measure of his life expired, passed to a better in
the year of our Lord, 653. An. 653.
the last day of October. Whom Deusdedit a west Saxon borne succeeded, after a
year and a half, the sea being vacant all that time. For whose creation and
consecration Ithamar bishop of Rochester came to Cannterbury. He was
consecrated the. xxiiij. of March, and gouuerned that see. ix. years. iiij.
months and two days. After whose departure Ithamar consecrated in his place
Damianus a Sussex man borne.

How the Marshes or vplandish englishmen (that is the sheres of Lincoln,
Couentry Lichefield and worceter) received the Christen faith under Penda their
king.

The. 21. Chapter.
AT this time the Middelenglishme^ The first Christening of the Marshes or
middleland english men An. 6^0.
( that is of the sheres above named) received the Christen faith and the
sacraments thereof under Penda their king son to Pendam that cruel and
unmerciful hethen. This being a virtuous young man worthy of the name and
person of a king, was of his father put in gouuernement of that country. Who
coming after to Oswin king of Northumberland, requiring Alcfled his daughter
to wife, could in no other wise obtain his suite, unless he would as that
country was, receive the Christen faith, and be baptized. Hereupon the gospel
was preached unto him. Who hearing the promis of everlasting life, the hope of
resurrection and immortalite of the soul, yielded him self gladly to be
Christened though he should not speed of his suite. To this he was much
persuaded by Alcfrid king Oswins son, who had married his sister Cymburg king
Pendan his daughter. Thus then he with the Earls and kinghtes that waited upon
him and all their servants were baptized of Finanus the bishopp in a famous
town of the kings, By Barwick.
called Admurum. From whence he returned home with much joy and comfort,
accompained with four priests notable both for lerning and for virtue,
which should instruct and baptize his people. These priests were called
Cedda, Adda, Betti, and Diuna, who was a scottesman borne, the other three
english. Adda was brother to Vtta that holy and virtuous priest that we
mentioned before, Ad Capreae Caput.
and Abbot of the monastery called Cubeshead. These foresaied priests entering
the province of the middleland with the Prince preached the word of God, and
were gladly heard. Whereby many daily as well noble as of the base forte
renouncing the filth of idolatry, were cleansed in the font of life. Neither
king Pendam father to this young prince did withstand or gainsaie the
preaching of the gospel in his dominions, if any would hear it. But hated in
deed and persecuted all such, as bearing the name of Christians, lived not
according to the faith they professed: A true saying of an Heathen.
saying commonly that such men were wretched and worthily to be spited which
regarded not to please their God in whom they believed. These things began two
years before the death of king Penda the younger who being after slain, and
Oswin a most Christen king succeding him in the crown, Diuna one of the
four foresaied priests, was consecrated of Finanus, and created bishop of all
the middle or vplandish english men. For the scarcety of priests made, that
over all that people one Bishop was set. Who winning to the faith in short
time a great multitude of people, in Fepping died, leaving for his successor
Ceollach a Scottish man also borne. Who not long after leaving the bishoprike,
returned to his country the Island of Hij where the chief and principal
monasteries of Scotland were. To him succeeded Trumher a virtuous man and
brought up in religion, an Englishman borne, but consecrated bishop of the
Scotts, in the reign of king VVillher, as we shall hereafter more at larg
declare.

How the East Saxons at the preaching of Cedda, received again the faith^ which
under king Sigibert they had lost.

The 22. Chapter.
AT this very time the east Saxons by the means of king Oswin received again
the faith, The country about London.
which before expelling Melitus the first bishop of London out of the country,
they abandonned. Their king then was Sigbert, succeding to Sigibert surnamed
the little. This Sigbert being a nere and familiar friend of king Oswin then
king of the Northumbrians came by that occasion oftentimes to Northumberland.
The persuasion of king Oswin with the heathen king Sigbert.
At which metinges the virtuous king Oswin used eftsoons to persuade with
him, that such could not be Gods which were made with men's hands, that wodde
or stone could not be any quick matter to make a living God, the pieces and
remnants whereof either were wasted with fire, or served to make vessels for
the use of man, or otherwise being naught worth, were cast forth, trodden
under foot, and turned into earth. God rather, said he, must be understood
to be of majesty incomprehensible, to men's eyes unvisible, almighty and
everlasting, who made both heaven and earth and all mankind, governed them
also, and should iugde the whole world in equite, whose mansion place is
everlasting. Finally that al such as would learn and perform the will of
their Creator, should undoubtedly receive of him everlasting reward
therefore. These and such other godly aduertissemte^s being friendly and
brotherly from time to time made and repeted to king Sigbert by Oswin, he began
at lenght his other friends agreing thereunto, to savor them and believe them.
Whereupon advise being taken with his company, and all both consenting and
pricking him fore ward, By Barwick
he was baptized of Finanus the bishop in the cite of Admurum, nigh unto the
wall wherewith the Romans parted Britanie from the Scotes, xij. miles from
the East sea. King Sigbert, being now a citezen of the everlasting kingdom,
returned to his earthly kingdom, requiring of king Oswin to have with him
some learned men and preachers to convert his country to the faith. Who sending
for Cedda and an other virtuous priest out of the middle land, directed them to
the east Saxons to preach there the faith, Where having through out the
country preached a long time the word of life, and made up a great harvest
to Christ, Cedda departed home again, and came to holy Island to talk with
Finanus the bishop: who hearing the prosperous success of the ghospel and the
free course it had, calling unto him two other bishops, Cedda the second Bishop
of London, and Essex. Chemesford and Tilberi.
he consecrated and ordained Cedda bishop of the East Saxons. Cedda being made
bishop returned to his province and began with more authorite to perfect the
work he had begone erecting in diverse places churches, making priests and
Deacons, who in preaching and baptising might aid him, especially in the
cities of Ithancester and Tileburg, the one standing upon the Tems, the other
upon a bra^che thereof called Pente. In which two places assembling together
diverse newly Christened, he instructed them after the rulers of religious
persons, as far as their tender capacite could then conceive. Thus when the
heavenly discipline and holy devotion daily increased to the great joy of the
prince and the comfort of all the people, behold by the instinct of the old
enemy of mankind, this virtuous Prince by the hands of his own alliau^ce was
murdered. The cruel executours of this heinous act were two german brothers.
Who being examined upon what motion they committed that detestable fact, they
answered, for no other cause but for that they hated the prince for his
overmuch elemency and mekenes in pardoning his enemies, Virtue per secuted of
the evil, even to death.
and forgeuing al offenses done at the entreating of the parties. This lo was
their grudge conceived against the king, for which they murdered him: truly
because deuoutely and sincerely he observed the commandments of God. Though
yet in this his giltlesse death a true fault of his was punished, according as
the holy bishop Cedde had foretold him. Enormous crimes in the righteous
sooner punished.
For this Prince having in his court one that lived in unlawful wedlock, and
being therefore excommunicated of the bishop (not being able by any other means
to let that wicked coupling, or amend it) and not only he but all other also
that would either keep him company or eat with him, the Prince neglected
utterly this sentence of the bishop. Excommunication.
It fortuned the prince being invited of the excommunicated man to a feast,
going thither, met in the way the bishop, at whose sight the king being
much afeared, lighted of from his horse (as the bishop also incontinently did)
falling down before the bishops feet, and asking pardon. The bishop being
offended with the king (for the evil example he gave) touching him lying on
the ground with the rod he held in his hand, protested unto him with a
loud voice, and with bi^hoply authorite, saying: So Peter pronounced Ananias
to death Act. 5.
I tell you, because you would not refrain from the house of that wicked and
damnable person, in that house you shall die. Yet it is to be thought that such
a death of so virtuous a man, did not only wipe away this fault, but also
increased his merit. Because he was slain for virtues sake and for observing
Gods commandments, as by the confession of those which slew him it appeared
before. To this Sigbert, Suithelme son to Sexbald, succeeded in the kingdom,
and was baptized of the bishop Cedda in the province of the east englishmen,
in a town of the kings called, Rendlesham. Edelwald king of the east english
brother to Anna their former king, was godfather to this Suidhelme.

How the same Bishop Cedda, obtaining a place to build a monastery of king
Oswald, by fasting and prayer did consecrat it to God: and of his death.

The 23. Chap.
THis man of God Cedda being bishop of the east Saxons, used yet oftentimes to
visit his own country of Northumberland and preach the gospel there.
Edilwald son to king Oswald who reigned in part of Northumberland, over the
people called Deiri, perceauing this bishop to be a holy, wise and virtuous
man, required him to take of his gift a piece of ground toward the building of
a monastery, The foundation of monasteries.
wherein he and his people might resort to hear the word of God, to pray,
and to bury their dead. For he believed he should much be comforted and helped
by their good prayers who should in that place serve God. This king had in his
house Celin brother to bishop Cedda, a man of no less virtue, who preached and
ministered the sacraments (for he was a priest) to him and all his court. By
whose means he came to the knowleadg of Cedda, and was induced to love him.
The holy bishop at the kings request, chose out a place to erect a monastery
in the high and desert mountains. Where before that time were rather starting
holes for thieves or dens for wild bestes, then mete mansion places for men.
Hereby the prophecy of Esaie Esaiae. 35.
seemed to be accomplished, saying, that in the poisonned couches of dragons,
sweet grass and rushes should grow, meaning that the fruits of good works
should blossom and spring, where before bestes or men bestly living made their
abode. This virtuous bishop desiring by prayer and fasting to purge as though
it were the place from the former filth of iniquites there committed, and so to
set upon the foundation of the monastery, obtained license of the king all the
Lent that then approached to remain in that place to fast and pray there after
his manner. In all which time, fasting every day, except the Sondayes vntell
the evening, Fasting in Lent vntell evening.
as the manner is, he received then but a little bread with one egg, and a little
milk mingled with water. For, as he said, the custom of them of whom he
learned the trade of monastical life, was that in the new erecting of any
monastery or church, the places should be first consecrated Consecration of
holy places.
to God with fasting and prayer. In this his fast, ten days yet only remaining
of the forty, the king sent for him upon occasion of certain affairs. But to
the intent that so godly a purpose might not be interrupted by occasion of the
Princes business, though he brake of him self, yet he entreated Cinbellus his
priest and natural brother, to make an end of that he had begone. Which
being of him gladly and virtuously fulfilled, he erected the monastery now
called Lesting, giving unto it, the same rules and order of religion as the
monks of Holy Island used, where he was brought up in. Thus gouuerning both his
bishopric and this monastery many years, at the length as he visited the
monastery in the time of a plage, falling sick there with other died. He was
first buried abroad, but after a church being there builded of stone in the
honor of our Lady he was taken up and laid at the right side of the altar.
The bishop at his departure left the monastery to be gouuerned of his brother
Ceadda, who after also was made bishop, as we shall anon declare. For four
german brothers (which is a rare thing) Cedd, Cymbill, Celin, and Ceadda were
al virtuous priests, and two of them bishops. When it was known in
Northumberland that their bishop was dead and buried, thirty brethern of the
monastery which he erected among the east Saxons, came to the place where he
died. Desiring by the body of their father either to live, or (if it so pleased
God) to die and be buried there. Who being gladly received of the brethern, in
that time of mortalite, Intercession of Saints.
were all taken out of this life, except one little boy, who (as it is well
known) was saved by the prayers of the bishop. For living many years after,
and studying holy scripture, he learned at lenght that he had not ben yet
baptized. Whereupon being forthwith christened, afterward was promoted to
priesthood, and proved a profitable member to the church. Of whom we doubt not
to pronounce but that (as I said) he was by the special intercession of that
blessed bishop (whose body of charity he came to visit) saved from the danger
of death, both that he might thereby escape eternal death, and might be
occasion also of life and salvation to other by his doctrine.

How the province of the Marshes, received the faith of Christ, Penda their
king being s^a^en. And how Oswin vowed for the victory against Penda twelve
farmeplaces to the building of monasteries.

The. 24. Chap.
IN those days king Oswin after often and cruel invasions of the heathen
unmerciful Prince Penda, forced of necessite offered him many and most precious
jewels with an infinite sum of treasure to redeem quiet and peace to his
country, and to cease the continual wasting and cruel spoils that he made.
But the heathen and barbarous tyran yelding nothing to his request and
petition, but pursuing his deadly enterprise and protesting utterly to
extinguish the whole nation from the highest to the lowest, the virtuous king
Oswald called for help of God against the barbarous impiete of his ennemie,
vowing and saying, since the infidel regards not our presents, let us offer
the^ to our Lord God who will undoubtedly regard them. And withal^ h^ vowed,
that is he had the upper hand of his enemy, his young' daughter should be
consecrated to God in perpetual virginite, Vows to God.
and twelve farm places with the lands appertaining should be converted to
the erecting of monasteries, which being said he prepared him self to battaill
with a very small army. The army of the heathen is reported to have been thirty
times more in quantite, containing thirty whole legions well appointed and
gouuerned with old tried and valiant capitaynes. Against all the which king
Oswin with his son marched forth boldly though with a very small army (as we
said) yet with a sure confidence in Christ. His other son Ecfrid was at that
time kept in ostage in the province of the Mercians under Queen Cinwise.
Edelwald son to king Oswald who ought of all reason to have stood with his
country and uncle king Oswin, forsook both, and became a capitain under the
heathen prince. Although when the field was begone, he departed a side, and
getting him to a hold by, expected the event of the battaill. Thus meting and
coupling together the thirty capitaines of the heathen prince were all put to
flight and slain, and with them almost all other which from other countres
came to aid them. Among the which was Edilher brother to Anna King of the
east english, then reigning after his brother, who also had been the chief and
principal motive of the battaill. And whereas the field was fought nigh to the
river Iuuet, it did at that time so ouerflowe all the banks, and fields about
that in the flight more of the enemies were drowned in the water, then slain
with the sword. This noble victory being by gods help so miracuiously
obtained, incontinently king Oswin rendering due thanks therefore, and
perfourming the vow he had made, gave his daughter Elfled which was yet scant
one year old, to be brought up and consecrated to perpetual virginite, and
the twelve possessions which he promised, for the erecting of monasteries,
where instead of worldly tillage and co^modites, religious monks by
continual devotion might labor to purchase eternal rest and peace for him
and the country. The foundation of monasteries.
Of the which twelve farms six he appointed in the province of the Bernicians,
and six other in the province of the Deirans. Each farm contained ten
housholdes, which made in all six score. The daughter of Oswin entered the
monastery of Hartesilond, VVitby.
there to be brought up under Hilda the Abbess in religion and perpetual
virginite. Who two years after, purchasing a farm of ten housholdes, builded
for her self a monastery in a place called Stranshalch. In the which monastery
this kings daughter was first brought up as a lerner, but was after her self
a lady and teacher of monastical life, vntell at the age of threscore years
this virtuous virgin passed to the blessed marriage of her heavenly and long
desired spouse, Christ her Savior. In this monastery she, her father Oswin,
her mother Eanfled, and her grandfather king Edwin and many other noble
personages are buried in the church of S. Peter the Apostle. This battaill
king Oswin kept in the country of Loide the thirtenth year of his raighn, the
xv. day of November, to the great quiet and commodite both of all his
dominions, and of the adversary part also. For his own country he set at rest
and delivered from the cruel invasions of his deadly enemies, and his
adversaries the Marshes and midleenglish men he brought to the faith of
Christ, their wicked head being ones cut of.

The first bishop (as we said before) both of the Marshes and of all the
midleenglishmen and also of those of holy Island was Diuna, which died in the
country of the middleenglish men. The second bishop was Cellach, who leaving at
length his bishopric yet living, returned to Scotland. Both these were
Scottishmen. The third bishop was Trumher an englishman borne, but instructed
and made bishop of the Scotts: who was also Abbat of Ingethling monastery
builded in the place where king Osuuius was slain. For Queen Eanfled cosen
and alliant to Osuuius required of king Oswin (who hadkilled Osuuius) in part
of satisfaction of his unjust murder, the erecting of a monastery for the use
of the holy man Trumher, who also was of kin to Osuuius. To thentent that in
that monastery daily prayer might be had for the health and salvation of both
kings, as well the slain, as of him that slew. This kinke Oswin reigned three
years after the death of king Pendam, over the Marshes and over the south
people of England, subduing also the nation of the Pictes for the most part to
the allegeaunce of the english men. At what time he gave to Penda (son to
Pendam the hethen) because by marriage he was now his cosen, the kingdom of the
south Marshes containing (as men say) five thousand familes, divided by the
river Trent from the Northmarshes whose land contains. 7000. familes or
housholdes. But the same Penda the next spring after was traitorously slain by
the treason (as they say) of his own wife, in the very time of Easter. Three
years after the victory of Oswin and the death of Pendam the hethen, the
Nobility of the Marshes Immin, Eaba, and Eadbert rebelled against king Oswin,
auauncing to the crown VVulfher son to Pendam a young man, whom vntell that
time they had kept preuy: Thus expelling the gouuernours set over them by
king Oswin who was not their natural king, they recovered again valiauntlye
their liberty and their lands, living from that time forewarde free under a
king of their own blood, and serving ioyefully the true king of all kings,
Christ our Savior to be at lenght partakners of his everlasting kingdom in
heaven. This VVulfher reigned over the Marshes xvij. years. His first bishop,
as we said before, was Trumber, the second Iaroman, the third Ceadda, the
fourth- VVinfride. All these in continual succession were bishops of the
Marshes under king Wulf her.

How the controversy about the observation of Easter was moved against those
which came out of Scotland.

The. 25. Chapter.
IN the mean while after the death of Aidan Fina^ succeeded in the bishoprik of
Northumberland, sent and consecrated of the Scotts. Who in holy Island builded
a church mete for a bishops see. Yet not of stone, but of oken timber and
thatche work, as the manner of Scotts was. This church afterward the most
reverend father Theodore Archbishop of Caunterbury dedicated in the honor of
S. Peter the Apostle. Eadbert also the bishop after of that place covered the
church both the ruff and the walls with lead. About this time a great
controversy was moved touching the observation of Easter. The bishops of
France and kent affirmed, A co^trouersic about theob seruatio^ of Easter.
that the Scotts observed the Sunday of Easter contrary to the accustomed
manner of the universal church. And among them one Roman a Scott borne but yet
instructed in the truth in France and Italy, and therefore an earnest and
stout defender of the true observation of Easter. Who couplingand disputing of
this matter with Finanus the bishop, induced many to the truth, and enflamed
other to a farther search and examination of the question, but with Finanus him
self he could nothing prevail, but rather exasperated him, being a hasty
nature man, and made him an open adversary to the cause. James that reue^ent
deaco^ of tharchbishop Paulin, with all such as he converted to the faith,
observed the true and catholic time of Easter. Ea^ fled also the queen, king
Oswins wife with all her train and company observed after the same manner
according as she had seen it practiced in ke^t, bringing with her one Roman out
of ke^t a catholic priest. By this variaunce it happened oftentimes that in
one year two Esters were kept. As the king breaking up his fast and sole^nising
the feste of easter, the Queen with her company continued yet the fast, and kept
palm Su^day. Yet this diversity of observing Easter, as long as Aidan lived,
was of all men tolerated, knowing very well that though in observing easter he
followed the custom of those with whom he was brought up, yet he believed as al
holy men did, and kept unity and love, with all. Upon which consideration he
was beloved of all men, even those which varied from him in that opinion and
was reverenced not only of the mean and common sort, but also of Honorius the
Archbishop of Caunterbury and of Felix the bishop of the east english. But
after the death of Finanus, which succeeded him, Colman being made bishop sent
also out of Scotland, the controversy began to increase, and other variaunces
touching external trade of life were stirred up. By occasion whereof many began
to fear and doubt, lest bearing the name of Christians, Gal. 2.
they did ru^ne (as the Apostle says) or had run in vain. This controversy
reached even to the princes the^ selves, to king Oswin and his son Alcfrid.
For Oswin being brought up and baptized of the Scotts, and skillful also of
their tongue thought the manner which they observed to be the best and most
agreeable to truth. Contrary wise Alck frid, the kings son being instructed
of the learned man Wilfrid, preferred worthily his judgment before all the
traditions of the Scotts. This Wilfrid for better instruction and lerninges
sake had travailed to Rome, and lived also a long time with Dalphinus the
Archbishop of Lions in France, of whom also he took benet and collet. To
this learned Prince Alcfrid gave a monastery of forty families, in a place
which is called Humpum. Tonsurae ecclesiasticaecorona^ suscepera^.
The Scotts before were in possession of that monastery: But because after the
decision of this controversy they chose rather of their own accord to
depart and yield up the place, then to change their accustomed manner of
observing the Easter, it was given by the prince to him, who both for lerning
and virtue was worthy thereof. About this time Agilbert bishop of the west
saxons, a friend of Prince Alcfrid and Wilfrid the Abbot came to the province
of Northumberland, and stayed there with them for a space. Who in the mean
while at the request of Alc srid made Wilfrid a priest. He had in his company
also at that time one Agatho a priest. At their presence therefore the question
being renewed, and much talked of, they agreed on both sides, that in the
monastery of Stranshalch where that devout and virtuous woman Hilda was
Abbess, a Synod should be kept for the decidyng of this question, and other
then in controversy. To this Synod came both the kings Oswin the father and
Alcfrid the son. With king Oswin stood bishop Colman with his clergy of
Scotland, Hilda also the Abbess with her company, among whom was Cedda that
reverent bishop lately consecrated of the Scotts (as we have touched before)
who in that assemble was a most diligent interpreter on both sides. For the
other opinion which king Alcfrid followed, Agilbert the bishop stood, with
Agatho and Wilfrid priests. Iacobus and also Romanus two other learned men
stood of that side. First then king Oswin, (premising that it behooved those
which served one God, to keep one order and rule in serving the same, nor to
vary here in celebrating the heavenly sacraments, who looked all for one
kingdom in heaven, but rather that the truth ought to be serched out of all,
and followed uniformly of every one) commanded his bishop Colman first to
declare what his observation was, whence he received it, and whom he followed
therein. The bishop answered and said. The Easter which I observe, I have
received of my forefathers, of whom I was sent hither bishop, who all being
virtuous and godly men have after the same manner observed it. And this
observation, that you may not think it a light matter or easily to be
rejected, is the self same, which S. John the Evangelist the disciple whom
Jesus specially loved with all the churches under him observed. These and such
like words when bishop Colman had spoken, the king commanded Agilbert the
bishop to speak his mind also, and to bring forth the beginning and author
of his manner of observing Easter: unto whom Agilbert answered: Let I bes^che
you, my scholar Wilfrid priest speak herein for me. For we and all that here
sit be of one mind, and observe herein the ecclesiastical tradition
uniformly. Beside he shall better express to your highness the whole matter
speaking him self the english tongue, then I shall be able using an
interpreter. Then Wilfrid, the king commanding him, spoke in this wise. The
Easter which we observe, we have seen in like manner to have been observed at
Rome, where the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, lived, and preached, suffered,
and are buried. This manner we have seen to be observed in all Italy and
France, passing through those countres partly for study, partly on pilgrimage.
This manner we know to be observed in Afrike, in Asia, in Egypt, Universality
prescribes.
in Greece, and through out all nations and tounges, of all the world where the
church of Christ takes place, after the self same order and time, beside only
these few and other of like obstinacy, the Pictes I mean and the Britons,
with whom these men from the two fardermost Ilondes of the Ocea^ sea, and yet
not all that neither, do fondly contend against the whole world. Here Colmanus
the bishop interrupted and said. I maruail much you term our doing a fond
contention wherein we follow the example of so worthy an Apostle, who only
leaued upon our Lords breast, and whose life and behavior all the world
accompteth to have been most wise and discrete. Unto whom Wilfrid answered, and
said. God forbid we should charge S. John with fondness or lack of wit. For
he in his observation kept yet the decrees of Moses law literally, according
as the whole church followed yet in many things the Iuish manner: for why? The
Apostles were not able upon the soden to blotte out all customs and rites of
the law instituted of God him self, The primitive church at the first did
not abrogat all Iuish ceremo^^ies.
as all that come to the faith must of necessite abandonne Idols invented of
the devil. And this forsothe they were forced to bear a time withal, lest
the Jews which lived among the gentiles might be offended. For in the like
consideration also S. Paul did circumcide Timothe, Actor. 16. 21. 18.
offered bloudsacrifices in the temple, shaued his head at Corinth with Aquila
and Priscilla: truly to no other intent, but that the Jews might not be
offended. Upon this consideration James said unto Paul. You see brother, how
many thousands of the Jews have received the faith, Act. 21.
and all these are yet zealous folowers of the law. Notwithstanding the light
of the gospel now shining through out the world, it is not now necessary,
no it is not lawful now for any Christen man to be circumcided, or to offer up
bloody sacrifices of bestes. E^^o: 12.
S. John therefore according to the custom of the law, in the fourtenth day
of the first month at the evening began to celebrat the feste of Easter, not
regarding whether it fell out the Sabbath day or any other fery of the weke.
Io^n. 20.
But S. Peter preaching the gospel at Rome, remembering that our Lord arose
the first day after the Sabbath, giving thereby to us certain and assured
hope of our resurrection, he understood the observation of Easter in such
sort, that according to the custom and commandments of the law he looked
for (even as S. John did) the rising of the Moon at evening, in the fourtenth
day of his aage, in the first month. And at the rising thereof at evening, if
the morrow after were Sunday (which then was called, the first day after the
Sabbath) he began in that very evening to observe the feste of Easter, as all
we do even to this day, This manner is observed now vnifor mely in all
Christendom.
beginning on Easter eve. But if Sunday were not the next morrow after the
fourtenth day of the change of the Moon, but the sixtenth, seuenteth, or any
other day of the Moon vntell the one and twentieth, he tarried for the Sunday,
and the Saturday before upon the evening he began the most holy solemnite of
Easter. Thus it came to pass that Easter sunday was kept only either the
fiftenth day of the change of the Moon in the first month, or the one and
twentieth, or in some day between (as the sunday fell) and no day else.

Neither does this new observation of the gospel and of the Apostles break
the old law, but rather fulfill it. For in the law it is commanded that the
passover should be solemnised from the evening of the xiiij. Exodus 12.
day of the change of the moon of the first month vntel the xxj. day of
the same moon. Which observation all the successors of S. John in Asia after
his death, and the whole universal church through out the whole world has
embraced and followed. Again it was by the Nicene council not newly decreed,
Russinus lib. 10. ^^
but confirmed (as the ecclesiastical history witnesses) that this is the
true observation of Easter, and of all Christen men after this account to be
celebrated. Whereby it is clear my Lord Colma^, that you neither follow the
example of S. John (as you suppose) neither of S. Peter, whose tradition
wittingly you withstand, nor the law, nor the ghospel in the observation of
your Easter. For S. John observing the Easter time according to Moses, passed
not upon the Sunday, as you do, which keep your Easter allwaies upon a Sunday.
Again S. celebrated the Easter upon the Sunday from the fiftenth day of the
change of the moon, vntell the xxj. day, which you follow not, which keep it
so upon the Sunday, that you reaken from the xiiij. day of the change unto
the xx. So that oftentimes you begin your Easter in the xiij. day of the
change at evening, which neither the old law observed, neither Christ in
eating his passover, and instituting that most S. John, neither with S.
Peter, neither with the law, neither with the gospel. To these Bishopp Colman
replied, and said. How think ye? Did Anatholius that holy man and so much
commended in the ecclesiastical history before of you alleged, Eusab. lib. 7.
cap. 28. Hi^^o.
think or teach contrary to the law and the gospel, writing that Easter
ought to be observed from the xiiij. day of the moon unto the xx. Is it to be
thought that our most Reverend Father Columba and his successors, virtuous
and godly men, who after the same manner kept their Easter, either believed or
lived contrary to holy Scripture? especially their holiness being such, that
God has confirmed it with miracles? Truly as I doubt not but they were holy
men, so I will not fear to follow allwaies their life, manners, and trade of
discipline. In good sothe, Vide Eus^bium lib. 7 cap. 28. His^. eccle.
quoth VVillfrid, It is well known that Anatholius was a right holy man, very
well learned, and worthy of much praise. But what is that to you, who vary also
from his decrees and doctrine? For Anatholius in his Easter (according to the
truth) accounted the usual compass of xix. years, which you either utterly
are ignorant of, or if ye know it, yet though it be through all Christendom
observed, ye set light by it. Again though he observed the Easter Sunday
sometime upon the xiiij. day of the moon, yet he accounted the same day at
evening to be the fiftenth of the change, after the account of the Egyptians.
So upon the xx. day he kept the Easter, that at the son setting, he reaconed
it for the xxj. Which his rule and distinction, that ye be ignorant of, it is
manifest by this, that same time ye keep your Easter clean before the full of
the moon, even the xiij. day of the change. As touching your father Columba
and those which followed him, whose holy steps ye pretend to follow, as the
which have been confirmed by miracles, to this I may answer that in the day of
judgment whereas many shall say unto Christ, that they have prophesied, cast
out devils, Mat^h. 7.
and wrought miracles in his name, our Lord will answer, that he knows them
not. But God forbidd that I should so judge of your fathers. For it is our
duty of such as we know not to deem the best. Therefore I deem not but they
were men of God, and acceptable in his sight, as the which loved God though in
rude simplicite, yet with a godly intention. Neither do I think that the
manner of their observation could be much prejudicial against them, as long
as they had yet received no instructions to the contrary. But rather I verily
suppose, seeing such co^maundeme^ts of God, as they knew, they willingly
followed, they would also have conformed themselves to the Catholic judgment,
if they had been so informed. But now Sir you, and your companions, if hearing
the decrees of the Apostolic see, or rather of the universal church and that
also confirmed in holy write, you follow not the same, you offend and sin
herein undoubtedly. For though your fathers were holy me^ could yet those few
of one so small corner of the uttermost ilond of the earth, preiudicat the whole
church of Christ dispersed through the universal world? And if your father
Columba (yea and our father, if he were the true servant of Christ) were
holy and mighty in miracles, yet can he by any means be preferred to the
most blessed prince of the Apostles, Math. 16.
to whom our Lord said, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build
my church, and hell gates shall never prevail against her: and to thee I will
give the kayes off the kingdom of heaven. Thus when Wilfrid concluded, Note
the conclusion of the king.
the king said unto bishop Colman: Were these things in deed spoken to Peter
of our Lord? To whom the bishop answered, yea. Can you then (says the king)
give evidence of so special authority given to your father Columba? The
bishop answering, No, the king spoke unto both parties, and said. Agree ye
both in this without any controversy, that these words were principally
spoken unto Peter, and that unto him the kayes of the kingdom of heaven were
given? When both had answered, yea: the king concluded and said. Then I say
unto you, that I will not gainsaie such a porter as this is, but as far as I
know, and am able, I will covet all points to obey his ordinances, lest
perhaps when I come to the doors of the kingdom of heaven, I find none to
open unto me, having his displeasure, which is so clearly proved to bear the
kayes thereof. Thus when the king had said, all that sat and stood by of all
sorts and degrees, abandonning their former vnperfectenesse, confourmed them
selves to the better instructions which they had now learned.

How bishop Colman being ouercomed, returned home, and Tuda succeeded in the
bishopric. Also what trade of life those governors of the church lead.

The. 26. Chap.
THe controversy being thus ended, and the assemble dissolved, bishop Agilbert
returned home. Bishop Colman also seeing his doctrine and sect reprouued,
taking with him such as would follow him, that is, such as refused to accept the
Catholic observation of Easter and the bearing of a round shaven crown (for
of that matter also much disputation then was had) returned unto Scotland
minding to deliberat there with his countremen what to follow herein. Bishop
Cedda forsaking the Scotts embraced the catholic tradition and returned to
his bishopric. This controversy was moved in the year of our Lord. 664. in
the 22. year of king Oswin, An. 664.
and in the xxx. year after the Scotts had been bisshops over the englishmen.
For Aidan gouuerned the church 17. years, Finanus ten, and Colman three. After
the departure of Colman in to his country, Tuda was set bishop over the
Northumberlandmen, instructed and created bishop among the South Scotts,
bearing after the manner of that country, a round shaven crown, and observing
the Easter after the Catholic manner. He was a man of great virtue, and
holiness, but he gouuerned the church a small time. For he came out of
Scotland, whiles Colman was yet bishop, teaching both in word and with
example diligently the true faith in Christ. In holy Ilond, at the departure of
the Scotts, Eata a reverend father and most meke person was made Abbat over
the rest of the monks which remained. Who before had been Abbat of Mailros at
the suite of bishop Colman obtaining it of king Oswin at his departure,
because the same Eata had been one of the xij. scholars of bishop Aidan, which
at his first coming in to England he brought up. For this bishop Colman was
derely loved of king Oswin for his rare wisdom and virtue. This Eata not
long after was made bishop of holy Ilond. Bishop Colman at his departing took
with him certain of the bones off bishop Aidan. Part also he left in the
church which he was bishop of, laying them up in the vestry thereof.

But how sparefull persons he and his predecessors were, Commendation of the
Scottis^ monks, which governed first the ong^^^ church in the North country.
and how greatly they absteined from all pleasures, even the place, where he
bare rule, did witness. In the which at their departure few houses were
found beside the church: that is to say, those houses only without the which
civil conversation could no wise be maintained. They had no money, but
cattaill. For if they took any money of rich men, by and by they gave it to
poor people. Neither was it needful that either money should be gathered or
houses provided for the receiving and intertainement of the worshipful and
welthy. Who never came then to church, but only to pray and to hear the
word of God. The king him self, when occasion served to resort thither, came
accompayned only with five or six persons, and after prayer ended, departed.
But if by chance it fortuned that any of the nobilite or of the worshipful
refreshed them selves in the monasteries, they contented them selves with the
religious men's simple fare and poor pittens, looking for no other cates above
the ordinary and daily diett. For then those learned men and rulers of the
church sought not to pamper the panche, but to save the soul, Virtue wins
aut^orite, viceleseth.
not to please the world, butt to serve God. Whereof it came then to pass
that even the habit of religious men was at that time had in great reverence.
So that where any of the clergy or religious person came, he should be
ioyefully received of all men, like the servant of God. Again if any were
met going on journey, Religious men in our primittiue church reverenced
they ran unto him, and making low obeissaunce, desired gladly to have their
benediction either by hand or by mouth. Also if it pleased them to make any
exhortation as they passed by, every man gladly and desirously harkened unto
them. Upon the Sondayes ordinarely the people flocked to the church or to
monasteries, not for belly chere, but to hear the word of God. And if any
priest came by chance abroad into the village, the inhabitaunts thereof would
gather about him, and desire to have some good lesson or collation made unto
them. For the priests and other of the clergy in those days used not to come
abroad in to villages, The behavior of priests in our primitive church.
but only to preach, to baptize, to visit the sick, or (to speak all in one
word) for the cure of souls. Who also at that time were so far from the
infection of covetousness and ambition, that they would not take territories and
possessions toward the building of monasteries, and erecting of churches, but
through the ernest suite, and almost forced of noble and welthy men of the
world. Which custom in all points has remained a long time after in the
clergy of Northumberland. And thus much of these matters.

How Egberecht a holy man, english borne, lead a religious solitary life in
Ireland.

The. 27. Chapter.
THis very year of our Lord 664. An. 664.
a great eclipse of the Son happened the third day of May, about ten of the
clock. In the which year also a sudden great plague, consuming first the
south parts of Britanny, taking hold also in Northumberland with long and
much continuance, wasted away an infinite number of men. In the which mortalite
the foresaied bishop Tuda, was taken out of the world, and honorably buried
in a monastery, called Pegnalech. This plague perced also even to Ireland.
There were at that time in the Island diverse young gentle men and other of
England, which under Finanus, and Colmanus their bishops, had departed a side
thither, partly to study, partly to live more straightly. And some of those
forthwith bound them selves to the religious habit, some other wandering
rather about the celles and closets of such as taught, followed more their study
and lerning. All these the Scotts entertained gladly and cherefully, giving
them not only their board and their lerning free, but books also to learn in.
Among these, two young gentlemen of England were of great to wardnesse above
the rest, Edelhum and Ecgbert. Of the which two the former was brother unto
Edelhum that blessed man, who in the age following lived also in Ireland for
studies sake, from whence with great lerning and knowleadg returning home to
his country, Lincoln shere.
he was made bishop of Lindisse, and ruled the church honorably a long time.
These young gentlemen living in the monastery (which in the Scottish tongue is
called Rathmelfig) all their companyons being other taken away by the
mortalite, or otherwise gone abroad, remained both of them behind, lying
sick of the plage. Ecgbert one of the two when he thought his time was come to
die (as I learned by the report of a most trusty and reverent old man which
told me he heard the whole story at Ecgberts own mouth) departed very erly
out of his chamber, where the sick were wont to lie, and getting him to a
secret commodious place, sat down all alone, began diligently to think on
his former life, and being pricked with the remembrance of his sins, washed
his face with tears, beseching God from the bottom of his heart, to lend him
life and time of repentance, to bewail and recompense with amendment of life,
his former negligences and offenses. Vows in sickness. Cononicall hours
He vowed also, never to return home to his country where he was borne, but to
live as a pilgrim all days of his life. Again beside the ordinary service of
the canonical hours (if sickness or weakness of body let him not) to say
every day the whole psalter to the honor and praise of almighty God. Last of
all to fast ones every weke, one whole day and night. His vows, prayers and
lamentinges thus being ended, he returned to his chamber, and finding his fellow
a sleep, went also to bed, to take some rest. Which after he had a little
done, his fellow waking looked upon him, and said. O brother Ecgbert, what
have ye done? I had hoped, we should both have passed together to life
everlasting. But now understand ye, ye shall have your request. For by a vision
it was reveled unto him, both what the others petition was, and that he had
obtained it. What need many words? Edilhum the night following departed.
Ecgbert recovered, and living many years after being made priest, leading a
life worthy of that vocation, after great ame^dme^t of life, as he desired,
departed this world of late, to wit, in the year of our Lord 729. in the
xc. year of his age. He lead his life in great perfection of humilite, mekenes,
continency, innocency and of righteousness. Whereby he profited much both his
own country, and the place where he lived in voluntary banishment, the scotts
and the pictes, in example of living, in diligence of teaching, in authorite of
correcting, in bountifulness of bestowing that which the rich gave
abundantly unto him. Beside his vows mentioned before, he made and kept other
as that thourough out the whole lent he never eat more then ones in the day:
eating also then nothing else but bread and thin milk and that with a certain
measure. His milk was of one day old, which the day before he would eat it,
he was wont to put and keep it in a viole, and the night following, skimming
away the creme, with a little bread to drink it up. This kind of fast he used
to keep xl. days before Christmas, and as long after whit^^ntyde, all his
life time.

How after the death of bishop ^da, Wilfrid in France, and Ceadda among the
west Saxons were made bishops of Northumberland province.

The. 28. Chapter.
IN this mean time king Alcfrid sent Wilfrid his priest unto the king of
France, that he might in his dominions be consecrated bishop. Who sent him to
be consecrated of Agilbert (of whom we made mention before,) being then bishop
of Paris, where he was consecrated with great honor of him and many other
bishops meting for that purpose together in a Manor of the king called, In
compendio. Bishop Wilfrid making some abode in France after his consecration
king Oswin following the example and diligence of his son king Alcfrid sent
in to kent a holy man, virtuous, sufficiently learned in holy scripture, and a
diligent perfourmer of that he had learned, to be created bishop of York. This
man was a priest, and called Ceadda, brother to the most Reverend bishop Ceddi
(of whom we have often mentioned before) and Abbat of the monastery of Lesting.
The king sent also with him an other of his priests Eadhed by name, who after
in the reign of king Ecfrid, was bishop of Rhyppon. But they at their arrival
to kent, finding the Archbishop of Caunterbury, Consecration of Bisshops with
a number of other Bys^ops.
Deusdedi^, departed, and no man yet supplying his rowme, stroke over to the
west Saxons, where VVini was bishop, and of him this virtuous man Ceadda, was
consecrated bishop, having with him to assist and accompany him at the
consecration, two other bishops of the old Britons, who continewed yet in
their accustomed observation of Easter beginning from the fourtenth day of the
change, contrary to the canonical and right order, as we have often said
before. There was not at this time, beside this bishop VVini, The duty of a
Bishop.
any one true bishop and rightly consecrated in all Britanny. Ceadda then being
thus created and consecrated bishop, began seriously to set forth the truth
of gods word, to lead his life in chastity, humilite, and abstinence to study
and much teaching. For the which intent he visited continually the cytes,
towns, villages, yea and private houses in his diocese, and that not making his
journey on horseback, but going allwaies on foot, as the Apostles used. All
this he had learned of the virtuous bishop Aidan, and of his brother bishop
Ceddi, whose virtuous examples he endeavored him self allwaies to follow, and
to teach the same to other. Wilfrid also returning to England now a bishop,
instructed much the church of England and reduced them to the Catholic unite,
touching external rites and observations in many points. Whereby it came to
pass, that Catholic ordonaunces taking place, and beginning daily to be more
and more embraced, the whole company of the Scotts, which then lived among
the english men, either yielded to the same, or else returned back to their
country.

How Wighard priest was sent to Rome, to be consecrated Archbishop of
Caunterbury, and how he died there, according as by letters from the Pope it
was specified.

The. 29. Chap.
AT this time the most worthy and renouned kings of England, Oswin of the
North country, and Ecgbert of kent and the places adjoining, deliberating
between them selves, touching the paisible gouuernment of the church (for king
Oswin had now perfitly learned, though he were brought up of the Scotts, The
church of Rome.
that the church of Rome was the Catholic and Apostolical church) by the
choice and consent of the holy clergy of England called unto them one Wighard a
priest, a man of great virtue and worthy to be a bishop, one of the clergy under
Deusdedit the deceased Archebishopp, and sent him to Rome to be consecrated, to
the intent that he being made Archbishop, might consecrat and order other
bishops for the Catholic churches of English men through out all Britanny.
But Wighard coming to Rome, before he could be consecrated bishop, departed
this life, whereupon the Pope sent back to king Oswin these letters.

To our most honorable Son, Oswin, king of the Saxons, Vitalianus Bishop, the
servant of those which serve God. A letter of Vitalianus the Pope to king
Oswin.


We have received your excellencies wishefull letters, by the perusal whereof,
we perceived your excellencies most godly devotion, and fervent zele to attain
everlasting life, hoping assuredly that as you now reign over your people, so
in the life to come you shall reighn with Christ, for as much as by his
Souuerain help and grace, you are now converted to the true, right and
Apostolic faith. Blessed is that people, over whom God has placed a prince of
such wisdom, virtue, and desire of Gods honor. As the which not only serves
God him self incessantly, but also labors to draw all his subjects to the
right unite of the Catholic and Apostolic faith, purchasing them thereby
undoubted salvation of their souls. For who hearing this ioyefull report of
such a Prince, will not also rejoice thereat? What Christen heart will not leap
for joy, and conceive singular comfort of so zealous furdering of the faith?
Truly considering the happy conversion of your nation to the serving of
almighty God, I remember and see in you the oracles of the divine prophets
accomplished, as it is written in Esaias. Esai^. 11.
In that day the root of Iesse stands up for a toke^ to the people, him the
nations shall call upon. And again. Hear o ye Islands, and harke^ ye people
that dwell a far of. And within a few words after the prophet It is not
enough that thou shall serve me, in restoring the tribes of Jacob, and in
co^uerting the dragges of Israel. I have given the for a light to the nations:
that thou be my salvation even to the furdermost of the earth. And again.
Kings shall see, princes shall arise and shall adore. And a little after. I have
given the for a leage of my people, that thou should raise up the earth, and
possess the scattered inheritages, and say to those which lay hounde, come
ye for the: and to those which sat in darcknes, be ye opened. And again. I the
Lord have called thee in righteousness, and have taken thy Behold most
honorable Son, by the verdit of the prophets it is most clear, that not
only you, but all nations shall believe in Christ the maker of all things. It
behooves therefore your highness being now a part of Christ, to follow in all
things and allwaies the sure rules and ordonnaunces of the head of the
Apostles, as well in observing your Easter, as in all other things delivered
by the holy Apostles Peter and Paul. Whose doctrine does daily lighten the
hearts of all true beleuers, no less then the two lights of the element, give
light to the whole world. And after many other words written touching the
uniform observation of Easter through out the whole world, it follows in the
letter. As touching one well furnished with lerning and other qualites mete to
be your bishop, according to the tenor of your letters we could yet so suddenly
find none ready, the journey being so long to you. Truly as soon as we shall
epsy out a mete person and and worthy of that vocation, we shall direct him
spedely to your country. That by his preaching and holy scripture he may
thouroughly root out all the wicked darnel of the enemy out of your Ilond, by
the help and grace of allmighty God. The presents which your highness directed
to the blessed prince of the Apostles, for his perpetual memory, we have
received, thanking therefore your highness, beseching with all our clergy,
incessantly the goodness of God, for your highness preservation and good estat.
The bringer of your presents is departed this life, and is laid at the entry
of the blessed Apostles towmes, we much lamenting and bewailing at his
departure here. Notwithstanding by the bearers of these our presents we have
sent the jewels of holy Martyrs, that is, the relikes of the blessed Apostles
Peter and Paul, and of the holy Martyrs, S. Laurens, John and Paul, of S.
Gregory, and of Pancratius, all to be delivered to your highness. To your Lady
and bedfelowe, our spiritual daughter, we have sent by the said bearers a
cross of gold having in it a nail taken out of the most holy chains of the
blessed Apostles Peter and Paul. Of whose godly behavior we understanding
have all as far reioysed, as her virtuous deeds are before God pleasant and
acceptable. We beseech therefore your highness to further and set forward the
conversation of your whole Ilond to the faith of Christ. You shall not
undoubtedly lack herein the special protection of our Lord Jesus Christ the
redemer of all mankind who will prosper you in all things to the increasing
of his true beleuers, and planting of the catholic and Apostolic faith: For
it is written. Seek ye first the kingdom of God, Matthew. 6.
and the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be cast unto you.
Truly your highness seeks, and shall no doubt obtain, and all parts of your
Ilond (as we wish and desire) shall be brought under your allegeaunce. We
salute your highness with most fatherly affection, beseching continually the
mercy of God that it will vouchesafe to assist you and all yours, in the
perfourmance of all good works, that in the world to come ye may all live and
reign with Chrst. The heavenly grace from above preserve always your highness.
In the next book following we shall have occasion to declare who was found and
appointed bishop in place of Wighard that died at Rome.

How the people of Essex and London in a time of plage retourning to Idolatry,
by the diligence of Iarumanus their bishop, were soon brought home again.

The 30. Chap.
AT this time Sigher and Sebbi kings ruled over the people of Essex and London
after the death of Guidhelme (of whom we have spoken before), although these
were also under the allegeannce of Wulfher king of the Middlela^d englishmen.
This province being visited with that great plague and mortalite (which we
mentioned before) Sigher with the people over whom he ruled forsaking the
sacraments of Christ's religion fell to Apostasy. For both the king him
self, and many as well of the people as of the nobles, loving this present
life, and not seking after the life to come, or else not believing any such life
at al, began to renew their temples which stood desolat, and to worship idols,
as though they could thereby escape the mortalite. But Sebbi his companion with all under him perseuered devoutly in the faith, and ended his life in great
felicite, as we shall herafter declare. Wulfher the king understanding part of
his dominions to fall from the faith, for to call thembacke again, sent unto
them bishop Iarumannus, the successor of Trumher, who by much labor and
diligence being a man of great virtue, painful, and zealous, (as a certain
priest waiting then upon him and helping him in preaching the gospel reported
unto me) brought them to the faith again, both the king and all his people.
So that abandoning and throwing down their temples and altars, they opened
again the churches, confessed gladly the name of Christ, and chose rather in
hope of resurrection to dye, then in the filth of idolatry to live. Which being
so brought to pass their priests and instructers returned home with much
joy and comfort.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND.
How after the death of Deusdedit, Wighart being sent to be made bishop, and
dying there, Theodore was consecrated Archbishop, and sent in to England with
a certain Abbat named Adrian.

The. 1. Chapter.
THe same year of the foresaied eclipse and pestilence that soon after
followed, in which also bishop Colman ouercommed by the general and uniform
sentence of the Catholics, returned home to his country, Deusdedit the sixth
Archbishop of Caunterbury died, the xiiij. day of July. Ercombert also kinke
of kent departed this world the very same month and day, and left to his son
Ecgbert the Crown and kingdom, which he received and held by the space of ix.
years. At that time the Sea of Caunterbury being vacant a great while, and the
diocese desirous of a bishop, VVighart a virtuous priest, a man very well
learned, skillful of the Canons, rules, and disciplines of the church, and an
english man borne was sent to Rome both by Ecgbert and also Oswin king of
Northumberland (as we have mentioned before) and with him certain presents to
the Pope Apostolic, as great store of plate, both silver and gold. Being
arrived to Rome in the time that Vitalianus gouuerned the Apostolic see, and
having declared the cause of his coming to the said Pope, within short space,
he and almost all his company were taken with the pestilence and died.
Whereupon the Pope with advise and counsel enquired diligently, whom he might
direct for Archbishop over the churches of England. In the monastery of
Niridan not far from Naples in Campania, there was an Abbat named Adrian, an
African borne, a man very well learned in the scriptures, thouroughly instructed
both in monastical discipline, and in ecclesiastical gouuernement, very
skillful of the greek and latin tounges. This man being called to the Pope, was
willed of him to take the bishoprike upon him, and trauail unto England. But he
answering that he was no mete man for so high a degree, promised yet to bring
forth one, which both for his lerning and for his age were more worthy of that
vocation. And offered to the Pope a certain monk living in a Nunnery there by
called Andrew, who though he were of all that knew him, esteemed worthy of tke
bishoprike, yet for the impediment of his weak and sickely body, it was not
thought good to send him. Then Adrian being required again to take it upon
him, desired certain days of respit, if happily in the mean time, he could
find any other mete to supply that room. At this time there was in Rome a
certain monk of Adria^s acquaintau^ce, named Theodore, borne at Tarsus in
Cilicia a man both in profane and divine knowleadg, and in the greek and
latin tongue excellently learned, in manners and conversation virtuous, and for
age reverend, being then lxvj. years old. Him Adrian offered and presented to
the pope, and obtained that he was created bishop. Yet with these conditions
that Adrian should accompany him in to England, because having twice before
travailed in to France for diverse matters, he had therefore more experience in
that journey, as also for that he was sufficiently fournished with men of his
own. But chiefly that assisting him always in preaching the gospel, he
should give diligent eye and wait, that it is Theodore being a greek borne,
enduced not after the manner of the greeks any doctrine contrary to the true
faith received, in to the english church, now subject unto him. This man
therefore being made subdeacon, tarried yet in Rome iiij. months, vnte ^l his
hear was full grown: to take the ecclesiastical tonsure round, which before
he had taken like unto the Last church after the manner of S. Paul, whereof we
shall hereafter treat more at large. He was consecrated bishop of Vitalianus
then Pope, An. 668.
in the year of our Lord 668. the xxvj. day of March upon a Sunday. After
the xvij. of May in the company of Adrian the Abbat he was directed to England.
Their journey commenced first by see they arrived to Marsilia, and so by land
to Arles, where delivering to John the Archbishop letters of commendation from
Vitalian the Pope, they were received and enterteyned of him, until that
Ebroinus chief of the kings Court gave them saulfeconduit to pass and go
whither they intended and would. Which being granted them, Theodore took his
journey to Agilbert bishop of Paris, of whom we have spoken before, and was
very frindly received of him and kept there a long time. But Adrian went first
to Emmeson and after to Faron bishop of Meldes, The country about Lions.
and there continewed and rested with them a good space. For winter was at
hand and drove them to abide quietly in such convenient place as they could
get. Now when word was browght to king Ecgbert, that the bishop, whom they had
desired of the Pope of Rome was come, and rested in France, he sent thither
straight way Redfride his lieutenant to bring and conducte him. Who when he
came thither, took Theodore with the license of Ebroinus, and browght him to
the port that is named Quentauic. Where they continewed a space, because
Theodore was weak, sick and weary. And as soon as he began to recover health
again, they sailed to England. But Ebroinus with held back Adrian,
suspecting he had some embassy of the Emperors to the kings of England
against the realm of France whereof at that time he had special care and
chardge. But when he found in deed that he had no such thing, The Augustins
in Caunterbury.
he dimissed him and suffered him to go after Theodore. Who as soon as Adrian
came to him, gave him the monastery of S. Peter thapostle, where, (as I have
mentioned before) the Archebishops of Cauntourbury are wont to be buried. For
the Pope Apostol^que had required Theodore at his departinge, Dominus Pap^
Apostolicus.
to provide and geane Adrian some place in his diocese, where he and his
company might commodiously continewe and live together.

How Theodore visited the country, and how the churches of England received
the true Catholic faith, and began also to study the holy scriptures, and
how Putta was made bishop of Rochester for Damian.

The 2. Chap.
THeodore came to his church the 2. year after his consecration, the xxvij.
The duty of a Bishop.
day of may being sunday, and continewed in the same xxi. years, three months,
and xxvj. days. And straight way he visyted all the country over where soever
any english people dwelled (for all men did most gladly receive him and hear
him) and having still with him the company and help of Adrian in all things,
did sow abroad and teach the right ways and paths of good living, Theodore
the first Primat of all England.
and the canonical rite and order of keeping the feast of Easter. For he was the
first Archbishop, unto whom all the whole church of the English nation did
consent to submit them selves. And because both he and Adrian, as we have said,
were exceeding well learned both in profane and holy literature, they gathered a
company of disciples or scholars unto them, into whose breasts they daily did
power the flowing waters of wholesome knowledge. So that beside the expounding
of holy scripture unto them they did with all instruct their hearers in the
sciences of music, Astronomy, and Algorisme. In the tounges they so brought
up their scholars, The felicite of the english church, under Theodor the
Archbishop of Canterb.
that even to this day some of the^ yet living can speak both the Latin and
Greek tongue as well as their own in which they were borne. Neither was there
ever since the English me^ came first to Britain, any time more happy than at
that present. For England then had most valiant and Christian princes, It was
feared of all barbarowse and foreign nations. The people at home was all wholly
bent to the late joyful tydinges of the kingdom of heaven. And if any man
desired to be instructed in the reading of holy scriptures, there lacked not
men expert and cunning ready to teach him. Singing in churches through out all
England.
Again at this time the tunes and notes of singing in the Church, which
until than were only used and known in Kent, began to be learned throwgh all
the churches of England. The first master of song in the churches of
Northumberland (except James whom we spoke of before) was Eddi surnamed
Stephen, who was called and browght from kent by Wilfride a man most reverend,
which first among all the bishops that were of the English nation, did learn
and deliver the Catholic trade of life to the English Churches. Thus Theodore
vewing over and visiting each where, did in convenient places appoint bishops,
and with their help and assistance together, amended such things as he found
not well and perfect. And among all other when he reproved bisshopp Chadd^,
for that he was not rightly consecrated, he made most humble awnswer, and
said: If you think that I have taken the office of a bishop not in dew order
and manner, I am ready with all my heart to give up the same, for I did not
think my self ever worthy thereof, but for obedience sake being so commanded
I did agree althowgh unworthy to take it upon me. Which humble awnswere of his
Theodore hearing, said that he should not leave his bisshopricque, but did
himself supplye and complete his consecration after the right and dew
Catholic manner. The very same time in which after the death of Deusdedit,
Bishop Chadd a man of great hu^blenesse.
an Archebysshopp of Caunterbury was sewed for, consecrated, and sent from
Rome, Wilfrid also was sent from England to France there to be consecrated.
Who because he returned into kent before Theodore, did make priests and
deacons until the time that the Archebisshop himself came to his see. Who at
his coming to the city of Rotchester where the sea had been now long vacant
by the death of Damian, did appoint and consecrat bishop there, a man better
skilled in the ecclesiastical discipline, and more given to plain and simple
sincerity of life, than any thing politic in worldly affairs. His name was
Putta, a good church man, and cunning in music after the Roman use, which
he had learned of Pope Gregory's scholars.

How Chadda before mentioned was appointed bishop of the Marshes or
middleenglishmen and of his life, death, and burial.

The 3. Chap.
AT that time was VVulpher king of the Marshes, Lincoln diocese, and
Lichfield, and VVorceter.
who after the death of Iaruman, desired of Theodore to have an other bishop
appointed for him and his. But Theodore would not consecrate them a new
bishop, but desired king Oswin, that Chadde might be their bishop, who at that
time lived quietly in his monastery at Lesting, and Wilfrid ruled the diocese
of york, and also of all Northumberlande, and of the Pictes to, as far as king
Oswines dominion did reach. And because the said most reverend bishop Chadde
was wont always to preach and do the work of the gospel more walking a
foot where he went, than on horseback, Theodore willed him to ride, when so
ever he had any journey to take. But he refusing utterly so to do for the
exceeding desire and love that he had of that holy labor and travail, Theodore
himself did lift him on horseback with his own hands, knowing him in deed
to be a very holy man, and so compelled him to ride whether need required.
Chadd heing thus made bishop of the Marshes, the middle english men and of
Lincoln shere.
Lindisse, he diligently governed the same after the examples of the ancient
fathers in great perfection of life. Unto whom also king VVulpher gave the land
of L. tenements to build a monastery with all in the place which is called
Etbeare, which is by a wood in the province of Lindisse, where until this day
the steps of monastical life which he began and placed there, do yet
remain. The seat and chief mansion of the diocese he held at Lichfield,
where he dyed also and was buried, and where until this day cotineweth the sea
of the bishops that succeed in the same province. This man had made himself
not far from the church a certain closet and private mansion, in which as
often as he was at leisure from the business and ministry of the gospel,
he was wont to pray and read secretly with a few, that is to say, vij. or
viij. brethren with him. And when he had governed the church most worthily in
that province two years and an half, by the dispensation and appointement of
God above, that time came, which the Ecclefiastes speaks of: Eccles. 3.
There is a time to lay abroad stones, and a time to gather them together
again. For there came a plage sent from God, which by the death of the body
removed the live stones of the church from the earthly places to the
celestial building in heaven. For very many of the church of this most
reverend bishop were taken out of this life. And when his hour was come to,
that he should pass out of this world to our Lord, it happened on a certain
day, that he abode in the foresaid closet, and had no mo but one brother with
him, whose name was Owen, all the reast of his fellows being returned to
church, as the cause and hour required. This same Owen was a monk of great
perfection, and one that had forsaken the world with pure intent and hope of
the reward of heaven, a man for all points worthy to whom God in special
wise might reuele and show his secrettes, and well worthy to whose words the
hearers may give credit. For coming with Queen Edildride from the province of
the East English, and being the chief off her servants, and governor of her
house, for the great zeal of faith that increased in him determining with
himself to renounce the world, did in deed accomplysh the same not slackely
and negligently, but in such sort vncladd himself of worldly matters, that
forsaking all that ever he had, being clothed but with plain and poor
apparayl and bearing an hatchet or axe in his hand, came to the monastery of
the same most reverend father, called Lestinghe. For he signified that he would
enter into the monastery not for ease and idleness, as some do, but to
travail and labor: which thing he well showed and proved in his doings: for
the leasse able and apt that he was for the study and meditation of the
scriptures, the more dilligent and painful he was to work with his hands.
Finally his reverence and devotion was such that the bishop accepted him for
one of his brethern to accompany him with the other few in the foresaid
closet. Where while they with in were occupied in reading and prayer, he
without did those things abroad that were necessary to be done. And on a
certain day as he was doing some such thing abroad, the reast being gone to
church, as I began to say, and the bishop being alone in the oratorie of the
house, occupied in reading or prayer, this Owen heard suddenly (as he after
told) a most sweet noise of voices singing and reioysinge coming down from
heaven to the earth: the which voice, he said, he first heard beginning from
the south east, that is, from whence the depth of winter comes, and then by
little and little drawinge nere him, until it came to the roof of the oratorie
where the bishop was, where it entered, filled it within, and compassed it all
rownd about. Whereat giving earnestly mind to mark the thing that he heard,
he did again as it were about an hour after hear the same joyful song go up
and ascend from the roof of the said oratorie, and return up to the heavens
the very same way that it came, with unspeakable swetenes. Whereat as he mused
a space and was as it were astouned, imagining and devising depely in his mind
what this might be, the bishop opened the oratorie window, and as he used to
do, made a noise and sign with his hand, and bad some man come into him, if
there were any body without. Then came he straight way, to whom the bishop
said: Go to the church quickly, and cause those vij. brethren to come
hither, and come you with them to. And when they were come, first he admonished
them to keep among them selves, and toward all faithful folk the virtue of
charity and peace, and also with vnweary continuance to follow the rules and
orders of monastical discipline, which they had either learned of him, and seen
in him, or found in the doings or sayings of the former fathers. And then did
he tell them moreover, that the day of his departing was very nigh at hand. For
that most lovely geast, quod he, who was wont to visit our brethren, has
voutsafed this day to come to me also, and to call me out of this world.
Wherefore go your ways to church again, and speak unto the brethren that
with their prayers they both commend unto our Lord my departing, and remember
also with fasting, watching, prayers, and good works to prevent their own
departing the hour whereof is uncertain. And when he had spoken these and mo
like words, and that the brethern had taken his blessing, and were gone forth
very heavy and sad, he that only heard the heavenly song, came in again, and
casting himself flat on the ground, said: I beseke you good father, may I be
so bold as to ask you a question? Ask what you will, quod he. Then, quod the
other, I pray you tell me, what was that song which I heard of that joyful
company descending from heaven upon this oratorie, and after a time retourninge
to heaven again. He answered and said to him: If you have heard the voice
of the song, and understood the coming of the heavenly compaines, I command
you in the name of our Lord to tell no man hereof before my death. They were in
deed the spirits of angels, which came to call me to the heavenly rewards,
which I have always loved and longed for, and after vij. days they have
promised to come again and take me with them. The which was in deed fullfilled
even as it was foretold him. For straight way was he taken with a feyntnes of
body, which daily grew more greuouse upon him and the vij. day (as it had
been promised him) after he had first forewarded his departing with the
receiving of the body and blood of our Lord, How seling before death.
his holy soul loosed from the prison of the body was carried and lead (as we
may well believe) of the company of Angels to the joys everlasting. And it
is no marvel, if he gladly beheld the day of death, or rather the day of our
Lord, which day he did always carefully look for till it came. For among
his manifold merits of chastity and abstinence, of preaching, The great fear
of God in B. Chadd.
of prayer, of wilful poverty, and other virtues, he was so far humbled to
the fear of our Lord, so much mindful of his later end in all his works,
that (as a certain brother named Trumbert was wont to tell me, one of them
that read the scriptures to me, and was brought up in his monastery and
government) if perhaps while he were reading, or doing some other thing, there
rose any sudden great blast of wind, by and by would he call on the mercy of our
Lord, and beseke him to have pity on ma^kinde. But and if there came a blast
yet more vehement, then would he shut up his book and fall down on his face,
and set him self more fervently to prayer. And if any stronger storm or
blustreing shower continewed long, or that lightning and thunders did make both
the earth and air to shake for fear, then would he go to church, and
earnestly set his mind to prayer and saying of psalms, until the air waxed
clear again. And when some of his company asked him, why he did so: Have ye
not read, quod he: That our Lord has thundered from heaven, Psalm. 17.
and the most high has given his voice? He has sent out his arrows, and
scattered them abroad, he has multiplied lighteninge and troubled them? For
our Lord moves the air, reyseth up winds, shoots out lighteninges,
thundreth from heaven, to stir up the creatures of the earth to fear him, to
call again their hearts to the remembrance of the judgment to come, to pluck
down their pride, and abate their boldenes, and thus to bring to their minds
that terrible time, when both heavens and earth shall burn, and himself come
upon the clouds with great power and majesty to judge both the quick and the
dead. And therefore, quod he, it behooves us with dew fear and love to yield
and give place to his warning from heaven that as often as he trowbleth the
air, and lyfteth up his hand as it were threatening to strike, and does not
yet strike, we straight way call upon his mercy, and boulting out the very
botome of our hearts, and casting out the dregs and relikes of sin, do
carefully provide that we never deserve to be stricken at all. With the
revelation and relation of the foresaid brother concerning the death of this
bysshopp, the words also of Ecgbert the most reverend father do well agree, of
whom we spoke before. Which Ecgbert at the time when the said Chadda was a
youngman, and himself of like age to, did in Ireland strayghtly lead a
monastical life both together in prayers, continence, and meditation of the
holy scriptures. But Chadda being afterward returned to his country, Ecgbert
abode there still as a pilgrim for our Lords sake unto the end of his life.
Now a long time after there came to visit him from England a certain most
holy and virtuous man named Higbalde, Lincoln shere.
who was an Abbot in the province of Lindisse. And as they talked together of
the life of the former fathers, as is the manner of such holy men to do, and
gladly would wysh to follow the same, they fell upon mention of the most
reverend bishop Chadda. And than said Ecgbert: I know a man yet remaining
alive in this Island, which when brother Chadda passed out of the world, did
see a company of Angels descend from heaven, and take up his soul with
them and returned again to the celestial kingdoms. Which vision whether
Ecgbert meaned to be seen of himself, or of some other, it is to us
uncertain: yet while so worthy a man, as he, said that it was true, Charity
believes all things 1. Cor. 13.
the thing it self can not be uncertain unto us. Thus dyed Chadda the vj. day
of March, and was buried first by S. Mary's Church, but afterward his bones
were removed into the church of the most blessed Saint Peter chief of
thapostles, the same church being finished. In both which places in token of
his virtue often miracles of healing sick folk are wont to be wrought.
Miracles at the tomb of S. Chead.
And of late a certain man that had a phrenesie, and ran up and down
wandering every where, came thither at an evening, and by the ignorance or
negligence of them that kept the place, lay there all the night, and the next
morning came out well in his wit, and declared, to the great wonder and joy of
all men, that there he had by the gift and goodness of our Lord gotten his
health. The place of the sepulcher is covered with a wodden tomb made like a
little house, having an hole in the side, at which they that come thither for
deuocions sake are wont to put in their hand and take out some of the dowste.
The which they put into water and than give it to drink to sick beasts or
men, whereby the grief of their sickness is anon taken away, and they restored
to their joyful desired health. In the place of B. Chadda Theodore
consecrated and ordained VVinfrid a vertuowse and sober man, to rule and have
the office of a bishop as his predecessors had before him over the provinces
of the Marshes and myddle english and also of Lindisfar dioecese. Lincoln
dyocese.
In all which countrees VVulpher (who yet lived) did hold the crown and
scepter. This VVinfrid was of the clergy of the same bishop whom he succeeded,
and had executed the office of deacon under him no small time.

How by shopp Colman leaving England, made two monasteries in Scotland, one
for Scotts, and an other for the English men that he had browght with him.

The. 4. Chap.
IN the mean time bishop Colman who was a Scottish bishop, left England and
took with him all the Scotts that he had gathered together in the I Will of
Lindisfar, Holy Ilo^d
and about xxx. englysh men also, which were all browght up in the orders of
monastical life and conversation. And leaving in his own church certain
brethren he came first to the I Will of Hij from whence he was first sent to
preach the word of God to the English men. Afterward he went to a certain
little I Will, which lies on the west side, cut of a good way from Ireland, and is
called in the Scottysh tongue, Inhisbowinde, that is to say, VVhitecalfe I Will,
In to which he came, and buylte a monastery, and placed the monks in the
same, which he had browght with him and gathered of both nations. Which
bicawse they cowld not agree together, for that the Scotts in somer time when
harvest was getting in, would leave the monasteries and go wander abroad in
places of their acquayntaunce, and than at winter would come again and require
to enjoy in common such things as the english me^ had provided and laid up,
Colman seking remedy for this discord, and vewing all places far, and nere,
found at length in Ireland a mete place for his purpose, called in the Scottish
tongue Magio. Of that ground he bought a small parcel to buyld a monastery
therein, of the Earl that possessed the same upon this condition with all that
the monks there abydinge should remember in their prayers the Lord of the
soil, who let them have that place. Thus the monastery being spedely erected
by the help of the Earl and of all such as dwelled thereby, he placed the
Englishmen alone therein, the Scotts being leafte in the foresaid Island. The
which monastery unto this day is holden of Englishmen, and is the same which
is commonly called Iniugeo, being now much enlarged and amplified of that it
was at first. This monastery also (all things being since, brought to a better
order) has in it at this present a notable company of virtuous monks, that
come thither out of England, and live after the example of the worthy old
fathers, under their rule and appointed Abbat, in great continency and
synceritie, getting their living with the labor of their own hands.

Of the death of king Oswin and king Egbert, and of the Synod made at
Hereford, at which the Archbishop Theodore was chief and president.

The. 5. Chap.
THe year of the incarnation of our Lord 670. An. 670.
which was the second year after that Theodore came to England, Oswy king of
Northumberland was taken with a grievous sickness, whereof he dyed, the year
of his age. lviij. Who at that time bare such love and affection to the
Apostolic see of Rome that if he might have escaped his sickness, he purposed to
go to Rome and to end his life in those holy places there, having for that
purpose entreated bishop Wilfride to be his guide in his journey, and promised
him a great sum of money to conduct him thither. But he departed this life in
that sickness the xv. day of February, and leafte Egfride his son
enheritour of the realm. In the third year of whose reign Theodore gathered
a Council of bishops with many other doctors and prelates of the church,
such as diligently studied and knew the canonical statutes and ordinances of
the fathers. Who being assembled together, he began, with such mind and zeal
as became a bishop, to teach diligently to observe those things that were
convenient for the unity and peace of the church. The form and tenor of
which Synod is this.

In the name of our Lord God and Savior Christ Jesus who reigns and
gouuerneth his church for ever, The first Synod or Convocation of the english
church.
it seemed good unto us to assemble our selves together according to the custom
prescribed in the ecclesiastical Canons, to treat of necessary affairs of
the church, we the bishops vndernamed, that is, I Theodore although unworthy,
appointed by the Sea Apostolic, Archbishop of Caunterbury, our fellow priest
and brother the most reverend bishop of the Eastenglish, B. Bisi, our fellow
priest and brother Wilfrid bishop of the Northumbrians, by his deputed legates
present. Also our fellow priests and brethern Putta bishop of Rochester,
Leutherius bishop of the West Saxons, and VVinfrid bishop of the Marshes or
Middleenglish men, we all being assembled together, and placed every one in
order in the church of Hereforde, the xxiiij. of September, in the first
Indiction, I beseke you, said I, most derely beloved brethern, for the fear
and love of our Redemer, let us all in common treat and debate such things as
appertain to the right faith, keging uprightly and straighly the decrees and
determinations of our learned auncetours and holy fathers. These and such like
things for the preservation of charity and unite among us, and in the church
when I had said, and made an end of that exhortation and preface. The
determinations of the holy fathers to be followed.
I demanded of each of them in order, whether they agreed to keep those
things, which are canonically decreed of the ancient fathers of old time.
Whereto al our fellow priests aunsweared, and said. It pleases us all very
well, that those things which the canons of the holy fathers have defined and
appointed, we all do keep and observe the same. And then straight way did I
bring forth unto them the book of canons, and out of the same book I showed,
before them ten articles, which I had noted out of diverse places, because I
knew them to be most necessary for us, and I besought them, that the same
mougthe be received and kept diligently of all men.

The first article was, that we al in common do keep the holy feast of Ester on
the sunday after the xiiij. day of the moon in the month of March. The
second that no bishop should have ought to do in an others diocese, but be
contented with the chardge of the people committed unto him. The third, that no
bishop should moleste or any wise troble such monasteries as were consecrated
and given to God, nor violently take from the^ ought that was theirs. The
fourth, that monks should not go from place to place, that is to say, from one
monastery to an other, unless by the leave of their own abbot, Vow of
obedience ^ religion.
but should continue in the obedience which they promised at the time of their
co^uersio^ and entering into religion. The fifth, that none of the clergy
forsaking his own bishop should run up and down where he list, nor when he came
any whither, should be received without letters of commendation from his
diocesan. And if that he be ones received, and will not return being warned
and called both the receauer and he that is received shall incur the sentence
of excommunication. The sixte, that such bishops and clerks as are strangers,
be content with such hospitality as is given them, and that it be laufull for
none of them to execute any office of a priest, without the permission of the
bishop in whose diocese they are known to be. The seventh, that whereas by the
ancient decrees a synod and convocation ought to be assembled twice a year,
yet because diverse inconveniences do happen among us, it has seemed good to
us all, that it should be assembled onse a year the first day of August at the
place called Clofeshooh. The eight, that no bishop should ambitiously prefer
him self before an other, but should all acknowledge the time and order of
their consecration. In the ix. article it was generally entreated, that the
number of bishops should be increased, the number of Christian folk waxing
daily greater, but hereof at this time we said no farther. The x. for
marriages, that noman commit aduoutrie, nor formication, that noman forsake his
own wife, but for only fornication, as the holy gospel teaches. And if any
man put away his wif being laufully married unto him, if he will be a right
Christian man, let him be joined to none other: but let him so continewe still
sole, or else be reconciled again to his own wife. And thus these articles
being in common treated of, and agreed upon, that no offense of contention
should rise from any of us hereafter, or any other decrees should be published
instead of these, it seemed good, that each of us should confirm these things
that were decreed, subscribing thereto with his own hand. Which sentence and
sum of our appointement I gave Titillus the notarie to write out. Yeuen the
month and Indiction above written. Who soever therefore go about any wise to
do against this ordinance and sentence prescribed according to the decrees of
the canons, and confirmed also with our consent and subscribinge of our hands,
let him know himself in so doing to be excluded from all charge and office
of priesthood, and also from our fellowship and company. The grace of God keep
us safe, living in the unity of his holy church. This synod was kept the
year from thincarnation of our Lord 673. An. 673.
in which year Ecgbert king of kent died in Iulie, and his brother Lother
succeeded him in the kingdom, the which he enjoyed xj. years and vij. months.
Bisi also Bishop of the East english, who was present at the foresaid Synod,
did succeed Bonifacius, of whom we made mention above. This Bisi was a man of
much holiness and devotion, and when Boniface was dead after he had been bishop
xvij. years this man was made bishop in his place, being consecrated and
appointed there to by Theodore. This Bisi yet living, but grievously vexed with
sickness in such sort that he could not execute the office of a bishop, two
other for him Aecci and Badwine were chosen and consecrated bishops: from which
time unto this day that province has been wont to have two bishoppse.

How VVinfride was deposed, and Sexulfe made bishop in his place, and Ercanwald
made bishop of the East Saxons.

The. 6. Chapter.
NOt long after these things were done Theodore tharchebishop being off ended
with VVinfrid bishop of the Marshes, Theodore the Archbishop of Caunterbury
deposes VVinfride bishop of Lichefilde etc.
for a certain crime of disobedience, deposed him of his bishopprike, not many
years after that he had received the same, and in his place appointed Sexulphe
for bishop, who was the builder and Abbot of the monastery, that is called
Medes hansted in the country of the Giruians. Which VVinfride being deposed,
returned to his monastery, which is named Artbearue, and there ended his life
in holy conversation. At that time also, when Sebbe and Sighere of whom we
spoke before ruled the east Saxons, Essex.
tharchebishop appointed over them Earconwald to be their bishop in the city
of London. Saint Erkenwalde the 4. bishop of London.
The life and conversation of which man both before he was bishop, and after,
was reported and taken for most holy, as also even yet the signs and tokens of
heavenly virtues and miracles do well declare. For until this day his
horselitter, being kept and reserved by his scholars, wherein he was wont to be
carried when he was sick and weak, does daily cure such as have agewes or are
diseased any otherwise. And not only the sick parties that are put under or
laid by the said horselitter be so healed, but also the chippes and pieces
that are cut of from it and brought to the sick folk, are wont to bring them
spedie remedy. This man before he was made bishop had builded two goodly
monasteries, one for him self, and an other for his sister Edilburge, and had
instructed and disposed the^ both very well with good rules and disciplines.
That which was for himself was in Surry by the river of Thems, at the place
that is called Crotesee, that is to say, the i will of Crote. And that other for
his sister in the province of the East Saxons, Berking in Essex
at the place that is called Berching where she should be a mother of Nonnes.
And so in deed after she had taken upon her the rule of the said monastery,
she behaved herself in all things as became one that had a bishop to her
brother, both for her own vertuowse living, and also in the good and godly
guyding of them that were under her chardge. Which thing was also well proved
by miracles from heaven.

How in the monastery of Berking it was showed by a light from heaven in what
place the bodies of the nonnes should be buried.

The. 7. Chapter.
FOr in this monastery many wonderful signs of virtues and miracles were
showed, which for the memory and edifieng of thaftercommers are yet kept of
many men, being written of them that knew the same. Some of the which we will
also put in our ecclesiastical history. When the tempest of the same plage so
often mentioned, storming over all the Ilond, came to this monasterye and had
entered upon that part thereof where the men did live, and daily one or other
was taken out of the world to our Lord, this good mother being careful of
her company, at such time as also the same visitation of God towched that part
of the monastery, in which the flock of Gods hand maids dwelled by them
selves, from the men's company, began often times in the covent to ask the
sisters in what place about the monastery they would have their bodies to be
laid against such time as it showlde happen them to be taken out of this
world with the same hand of Gods visitation as other were. And when she could
get no certain awnswere of the systers, although she often enquired the same
of them, she received both her self and all the reast with all, a most
certain awnswere of Gods provision from above. For after matyns was done, on a
certain night, as these handemaydes of Christ went forth of the chapel to
the graves of the brethren that were gone out of this life before the^, and
did sing their accustomed lawdes and praises to our Lord, behold suddenly a
light sent down from heaven like a great shete came upon them, and struck them
with so great a trance, that for very fear they stopped and leafte of their
song that they sange. And the brightness of that shining light, to which in
comparison the son at mydday might seem but dark, being not long after
lyfted up from that place, went to the sowth part of the monastery, that is to
say, the East end of the chapel, and there abiding a while, and covering
those places, withdr^we it self up to heaven so plain to all their sightes,
that none of them all dowbted, but that the very light which showld lead and
receive up into heaven the sowles of Christ's handemaydes, did also show a
place for their bodies to reast in, and abide the day of resurrection. The
brightness of this light was so great, that a certain elderly man one of the
brethren who at that time with an other younger man was in their chapel,
reported, that the beams thereof entering in at the morning through the chinkes
of the doors and windows, did seem to pass all brightness of the day light.

How a little boy dieng in the same monastery called a certain virgin that
should follow him, and how an other virgin at her departing did see a part of
the light to come.

The. 8. Chap.
THere was in the same monastery a child about three years old, or not past,
named Esica, which bycawse of his age being yet a very infant, Children browght
up in No^^eries.
was wont to be brought up in this house of virgins that were dedicated to God,
and to be occupied in meditation among them. This child being stricken with the
foresaid plage, when he came to the last panges of death cried out, and spoke
to one of these holy virgins of Christ, naming her as if she were present by
her own name, Eadgit, Eadgit, Eadgit, and therewithal ended this temporal
life, and entered into life eternal. But that virgin which he called at his
death, straight way in the place where she was, being taken with the same
sickness, the very same day that she was so called, was taken out of this
life, and followed him, that had called her, to the kingdom of heaven.
Moreover a certain one of the same handemaydes of God being taken with the
said disease and now browght to the last point, began suddenly about midnight
to cry to them that did keep and watch her, desiring them to put out the
candle that stood there burninge. And when she had often times so called unto
them, and yet none of them would do as she bad them: I know, quoth she at the
last, that ye think me thus to speak, as if I were not in my right mind. But
do ye well know that I speak not so. For I tell you very truly, that I see
this house filled with so great a light, that that candell of yours seems to
me altogether dym and withowt light. And when none of them did yet awnswere
unto these sayings of her, nor follow her bydding, well, quoth she again,
let that candell stand burning as long as ye list. But yet know ye well, that
the same is not my light. For my light shall come unto me when the morning
begins to draw nere. And therewithal she began to tell, that a certain
man of God appeared unto her, which dyed the same year, and said to her, that
when the morning drew nere she should depart hence to the everlasting light.
The truth of which vision was so tried and proved by the death of the maiden,
about the appering of the day light.

What signs were showed from heaven, when the mother of that company departed
this world.

The 9. Chap.
NOW when the godly woman Edilburge mother of these holy professed Nonnes
should also be taken out of this world, a wonderful vision appeared to one of
the sisters whose name was Thorithgid, the which had now many years continewed
in the same monastery, and always was diligently occupied in serving God with
all humility and sincerity, and in helping the said mother to keep good order
and discipline, with enstructing or correcting the younger sort. The virtue of
which woman, that it might, as the Apostle says, 2. C^. 1^.
be made perfect in infirmity, she was suddenly taken with a very greuouse
sickness of body, and was therewith very sore tormented by the space of ix.
years, through the merciful provision of our redemer, Sin purged by pain
in this life.
to this end, that what so ever spot of defilinge sin had through ignorance
or negligence any thing long remained in her among her virtues, it might al be
perboyled out by the fire of long tribulation. This same woman on a certain
night, when the day light began a little to appear, as she went out of her
chamber that she abode in, saw plainly as it were a corse, brighter than the
son, wound up in a shete and carried upward from the dortery where the sisters
were wont to reaste. And as she diligently marked what it should be that drew
up this vision of the gloriouse body which she beheld, she saw as it were
certain cords brighter than gold, which drew it up so hye, till it was taken
into the open heavens, and than she could see it no longer. Which vision when
she thought upon with her self, she douted no whit, but some person of that
company should dye shortly, whose soul should be lifted up to heaven by the
good works it had done, Good works.
even as by golden cords. Which thing happened so in deed. For not many days
after, the mother of that covent, for the love that God bare her was delivered
out of the prison of this flesh. Whose life was certainly such, that no man
which knew it, can dout, but that the entering in to the heavenly mansion was
open unto her going out of this life. There was also in the same monastery a
certain holy Nonne, both noble for the dignity of this world, and more noble
for the love that she had of the world to come. The which many years was so
bereafte of al use of her limbs, that she was not able so much as to move one
part of her body. This Nonne when she knew that the body of the reverend
Abbess was brought and laid in the church until it should be buried,
desired that she might be carried thither, and be laid by the same, bowing down
as folk do at their prayers. Which thing being done, The like manner of
devotion used Constantia a holy woman at the ^^mbe of Hilarion the monk, as S.
Hierom records, in the life of Hilarion written by him. Tom. 1.
she spoke to the Abbess as if she had been alive and desired her to obtain
of the mercy of the pitiful Creator, that she might be loused and rid of so
great and so long torments. And not long after her petition was heard and
granted: for xij. days after she was taken out of this life also, and
received everlasting reward in change of those temporal afflictions. Now
when Torithgid the foresaid handmayd of Christ had lived three year more
after the death of the Abbess, she was so far pyned away with the sickness
that we spoke of before, that the skyn and bones did scant cleave together. And
at last the time of her departing being now at hand, she could not only styr
none of all her limbs, but was speachelesse and could not move her tongue. In
which case as she lay three days and as many nights, suddenly being relieved
with a ghostly vision, she opened her mouth and eyes, and looking up to heaven
began thus to speak to the vision which she saw. Thy coming is to me mo^^
joyful, and thou art heartily welcome. And when she had so said, she held her
peace a little, as it were abiding for an answer of him whom she saw and
spoke to. And then as it were a little angerly she said again: I can not
gladly suffer this. And straightway holding her peace a little, she spoke the
third time and said: If it may not by any means be to day, I beseech the that
the mean time be not long delayed: wherewith holding her peace a little as she
had done before, she ended and concluded her talk thus. And if it be fully so
appointed, and that this sentence and order can not be changed, I beseke thee
that there be no more but only this next night between. After which words,
being demanded of them that sat about her, to whom she spoke, forsooth, quoth
she, to my most dear mother Edilburge. Whereby they understood she came to
bring her word that the time of her passing hence was nigh. For even as she
made request, after one day and one night passed, she was delivered both of the
bond of the flesh, and of her sickness, and entered into the joys of eternal
bless.

How a certain blind woman praying in the Churchyard of the same monastery,
received her sight.

The. 10. Chap.
IN the place and office of Abbess Edelburg succeeded a devout handmayd of God
named Hildilhid, the which many years even till her very great and extreme
age, governed the same monastery exceeding diligently, both in keeping of
regular discipline and order, and also in providing such things as apperteined
to daily uses. This woman, because of the straightness of the place wherein
the monastery was built, thought good to have the bones of the holy monks and
handmaydes of Christ which were there buried, taken up and removed all to the
church of the blessed mother of God, and there to be buried and laid in one
place. In which place how often the brightenes of the heavenly light appeared,
how often and how great a flagrant odor of a meruailouse sweet savor, and
what other miracles were there showed, who so will know and read, he shall find
the same abundantly in that book, out of which we have taken these things.
Yet my think I can in no case let pass a miracle of one, that was healed,
which miracle (as the same book declares) was wrought in the Churcheyard of
the said religiouse house. There dwelled an Earl thereby, whose wife had a
certain darkness suddenly comen over her eyes, the grief whereof daily
increasing she was so far troubled and molested therewith that she could not
see any little light at all. Behold how far different the faith of our
primitive church is from the false faith of protestants.
This lady remaining a space in this blindness, it came suddenly to her mind
on a time, that if she were brought to the monastery of the holy virgins, and
there prayed at the relics of the Saints, she might receive her sight
again. And she made no delay, till she had straight fulfilled that which she
had ones conceived in her mind. For being lead by her maids to the monastery
(being hard by adjoining) where she had full belefe to be helped and healed,
she was straight brought into the churchyard. And as she prayed there for a
space on her knees, her petition was heard and obtained anon. For rising up
from her prayer before she went out of the place, she received the benefit of
her sight that she sought. And where she was lead thither by the hands of her
waiting maids, Note the judgment of S. Bid
she went joyfully home by herself without any guide: so that it might seem
that she had lost the light of this world only for this end, that she might
show by her healinge, what and how great the light is that Christ's Saints
have in heaven, and what grace of power and virtue.

How Sebbi king of the same province ended his life in monastical conversation.

The. 11. Chapter.
AT that time, as also the foresaid book shows, there reigned over the East
Saxons a man very devout and godly named Sebbi, of whom we made mention above.
For he was very much given to exercises of religion, and virtue, to much and
often prayer, and to charitable almesdedes, esteming the solitary and
monastical life before all the richesse and honors of a kingdom. Which kind
of life he had taken long time before, and given up his kingdom had not the
selfewilled mind of his wife refused to separate from him. And therefore some
men thought (as it had been often said) that a man of such a nature and well
disposed mind, was more mete to be made a bishop then a king. Now when this
soldier of the ecclesiastical kingdom had passed over xxx. years in his
temporal reign, at lenght he died. But first he admonished his wife, that
then at least they should wholly give themselves both together to serve God,
whereas they could no longer now enjoy or rather serve the world together.
Which thing when he had with much a do obtained of her, he came to the bishop
of London named Waldher who had succeeded Erconwald, and at his hand and
blessing received the habit of religion, which he had long desired. To which
bishop he brought a great sum of money to be bestowed and given to the poor,
reserving nothing at all for him self, but rather desyring to remain poor in
spirit for the kingdom of heaven. And when he perceived the day of his death
to be at hand, because the foresaid sickness grew on still upon him, for the
princely haught courage that he had, he began to fear least at his death
through the bitter pange of the same, he might hap either to utter with his
mouth, or with some other part of his body do any thing, that were not mete
and comely for his person. And therefore he sent for the bishop of London, where
he also then continewed, and desired him that at his departing and passing out
of this world, there should be no mo present but the bishop himself, and two
of his chapplens. Which thing when the bishop had promised most gladly to do,
not long after, the said man of God setting him self to sleep, saw a
comfortable vision, which took from him all care of the foresaid fear and
showed him moreover on what day he should end this life. For he saw (as he
after reported him self) three men come to him araied in bright shining
clothing, and one of them, while his fellows, that came with him, stood by and
asked how the sick man did whom they came to visit, sat before his bed and
said, that his soul should depart from the body both without pain, and also
with great light and brightness. And he farther also declared unto him that he
should die the third day after. Both which things (as he learned by the vision)
were so fulfilled in deed. For the third day ensuyng when the ix. hour was
come, suddenly as if he had fallen in to a soft sleep he gave up the ghost
without feeling any grief at all. And whereas for the burial of his body, they
had prepared a tomb of stone when they began to lay his body in it they found
it to be longer then the tomb by the quantity of an handbreadth. They hewed
therefore the stone as much as they might, and made it longer than it was about
two fingers breadth, but yet it could not receive the body not so neither.
Whereupon because of this distress of burying him they were minded, either to
seek an other tomb, or else, if they might, to gather in the body by bowing of
the knees, that so it might be holden and received of the same tomb. But a
wonderful case happened, and not withowt the working of God from heaven, the
which kept them from doing any of those things. For suddenly, the bishop
standing by and the said kings son a monk also Sighard by name, which after
him reigned with his brother Frede, and also a great company of other men, the
very same tombestone was found to be of a fyt length for the quantity of the
body. Yea and so much that at the head there might also a pillowe be laid
between: and at the feet there remained in the tomb bysyde the body about the
quantity of four fingers. And thus was he buried and Laid in the Church of
the blessed doctor teacher of the gentiles S. Pawle, by whose good lessons he
being taught had learned to labor and long for the joys of heaven.

How after Eleutherius, Headd^ was made bishop of the west Saxons, after Putta
Quichelmus was made bishop of Rotchester, and after him Gebmund, and who were
bishops in Northumberland at that time.

The 12. Chap.
THe fowrth bishop of the westsaxons was Eleutherius. For the first was
Birinus, the second Agilbert, the third VVini. After the departure of king
Cenwalch in whose reign the said Eleutherius was made bishop, certain Lords
usurped the kingdom, and divided it between them, and so held it about x.
years. In their reign dyed this bishop, and Headdy was put in his place, and
consecrated bishop by Theodore in the city of London. In the time of whom
being bishop, Ceadwalla did overcome and put out the said vsurpours, and took
the kingdom to himself. And when he had kept the same for the space of two
years, at last pricked and styrred with the love of the kingdom of heaven, he
leafte it, while the same bishop did yet govern the diocese and went unto Rome
and there ended his life, as it shall be told more at large hereafter. In the
year of thincarnation of our Lord 677. An. 677.
Edilred king of the Marshes or middleland englishmen came into kent with a
terrible and fell host, not only spoiling the country, and profaning the
churches and monasteries withowt any respect of pity or fear of God, but
also ransacking with the same general ruin the city of Rotchester, whereof
Putta was bishop, howebeit at that time he was not there. Who when he heard
hereof, that his Church was spoiled, and all things taken away and ryffled,
he went unto Sexwolfe bishop of the Marshes, and received of him the possession
of a certain church and a little piece of grownd, and there ended his life in
peace and reast not taking any care at all for the restoring of his
byshopricke, for (as we have above said) he was a man more given to
ecclesiastical and spiritual, than to worldly and temporal matters. And so he
lived quietly and only served God in the same church, going sometimes abroad,
where he was desired, to teach verses and hymns of the church. In his place
did Theodore consecrate William bishop of Rotchester. Who not long after for
scarcity and lack of things necessary departed from the bishopric, and
went his way thence, in whose place Theodore ordained Gebmund bishop. The year
of thincarnation of our Lord 678. An. 678.
which was the viij. year of the reign of king Ecgfride, there appeared in the
month of August a blasing star, the which continewed three months, rising in
the morninges, and giving forth as it were an high pillar of a glistering
flame. In which year also throwgh a certain dissension that rose between king
Ecgfride, and the most Reverend bishop Wilfrid, the said reverend father was
put out of his byshoprike, and two other appointed bishops in his place over
the province of Northumberlande, The dioce^es of York, Carlele and Dyrham.
Holy ^^nd.
the one named Bosa to govern the Deires, and the other named Eata for the
Bernices, which Eata had his see at york, and Bosa at the Cathedral church of
Hagulstald or Lindisfarne which two men were both taken out of the cloister of
monks and called to this degree. And with them also was Eadhed made bishop
over the province of Lindesfar, Lincoln shere.
which king Ecgfride had very lately conquered of VVulfhere whom he overcame in
battle and put to flight. The first bishops of Lincoln.
In which province this man was the first bishop that they had of their own,
the next was Ediluine, the third Eadgar, the fourth Emberth, who is there at
this present. For before Eadhed came they were in the diocese of bysshopp
Sexwolfe, who was bishop both of the Marshes, and the myddle english, but now
being put from the gouuernement of Lindisse he remained only bishopp of the
Marshes. These bishops Eadhed, Bosa and Eata were consecrated bishops at york
by Theodore tharchebishop, who also the third year of VVilfrides departing
thence, joined unto them two bishops mo, Tru^bert at Hagustald, Eata remaining
at Lindesfar, and Trumuin over the province of the Pictes, which at that time
was subject to the dominion of the english men. But because that Edilrede king
of the Marshes recovered the said country of Lindisse again, Eadhed came away
thence, and was by Theodore made bishop of the diocese of Rhyppon.

How bishop Wilfride converted the province of the Sowth Saxons to Christ.

The. 13. Chap.
WHen Wilfrid was put out of his byshoprike, The Conversion of Sussex to the
faith.
he went and wandered in many places a long time, and came to Rome, and from
thence returned into England again. And though because of the displeasure of
the said king, he could not get into his own diocese again, yet he could
not be kept from doing the office of preaching the gospel. For he went his
way to the province of the South Saxons, Sussex.
which from kent reaches southwarde and westward as far as the West Saxons,
containing vij. M. tenementes, and was yet at that time living in the paynimes
law. Unto them did he minister the word of faith and baptism of salvation.
The king of the same country, whose name was Edilwach was christened not long
before in the province of the Marshes, in the presence and at the exhortation
of king Wulfhere. Who also at the font was his godfather, and in sign of that
adoption gave him two provinces, that is to say, the I Will of wight, and the
province of Manures, in the West part of England. By the permission therefore
and great rejoicing of the king, this bishopp christened the chief Lords and
knights of the country. And the reast of the people at the same time or sone
after were christened by the priests Eappa, Padda, Bruchelin, and Oidda. The
Queen also named Ebba was christened in her I Will, which was in the province of
the Viccians: for she was the daughter of Eanfride who was Eanberes brother,
which were both christen men, and all their people. But all the province of
the South Saxons had never before that time heard of the name of God nor the
faith. Yet there was in the country a certain monk, a Scot borne named
Dicul, which had a very little monastery in a place called Bosanham, In Bosam a
monastery before the faith openly received in Sussex.
all compassed about with woddes and the sea, and therein a v. or vj. brethren
serving God in humble and poor life. But none of the people there did give
them selves either to follow their life, or hear their preaching. But when
bishop Wilfride came and preached the gospel unto them, he not only delivered
the^ from the misery and peril of eternal damnation, but also from an
horrible morraine of this temporal death. For in three years before his
coming to that province, it had not rayned one drop in all those quarters.
Whereby a very sore famine came upon the common people, and destroyed them by
hole heaps in most pitiful wise, In so much that it is reported, that diverse
and many times xl. or l. A miserable famine in Sussex before the faith received.
men in a company being famished for hunger, would go together to some rock or
sea bank and there wringing their hands in most miserable sort, would cast
themselves all down, either to be killed with the fall, or drowned in the sea.
The first christeni^g in Sussex miraculous.
But on that very day on which the people received the baptism and faith,
there fell a goodly and plentiful shoure of rain, wherewith the earth
flourished again, and brought a most joyful and fruitful year, with goodly
green fields every where. Thus their old superstition being laid away, and
idolatry blown out and extincted, the hearts and bodies of them all did
rejoice in the living God: knowing that he which is the true God, had by his
heavenly grace enryched them both with inward and outward gifts and goods.
For this bishop also when he came into the country, and saw so great a plage
of famine there, taught them to get their sustenaunce by fysshing. For the sea
and rivers there about them, had great abundance of fysh. But the people had no
skill at all to fish for any thing else but eeles. And therefore they of the
bishops company gat somewhere a sort of eelenettes together, and cast them into
the sea, and straight way by the help and grace of God they took CCC. fishes
of diverse kinds. The which they divided into three parts, and gave one
hundred to poor folk, and an other to them of whom they had the nets, and
the third they kept for themselves. By the which benefit the bishop turned the
hearts of them all much to love him and they began the more willingly to hope
for heavenly things at his preaching, by whose help and succor they received
the gifts and goods of this world. At this time did Edilwach give unto the
most reverend bishop Wilfrid, the land of lxxxvij. tenementes where he might
place his company that were exiles with him. The name of the place was
S^^l^se^s. Selsee.
The which place is compassed of the sea round about saving on the west, where
it has an entrance into it as broad as a man may cast a stone with a slinge.
Which kind of place is in Latin called Paeninsula, and in Greek (...). Selsee
the first monastery in Sussex now brought to the faith.
When bishop Wilfrid had received this place, he founded a monastery there
which he did bind to monastical life and rule, and did put therein monks:
namely some of them that he had brought with him. Which monastery his
successors are known to hold and keep unto this day. For until the death of
king Ecgbert, which was v. years space, he continewed still in those quarters
in great honor and reverence among all men for his good deserving: for he did
the office of a bishop both in word and deed. And because the king with the
possession of the forsaid place had given him also all the goods and demaynes
of the same with the grounds and men to, he instructed them all in the
Christian faith and baptized the^ al. Among the which there were CCC. bond men
and bondwemen, whom he did all not only deliver by christening them from the
bondage of the devil, but also by giving them their freedom, did louse them
from the yoke of the bondage of man.

How by the prayer and intercession of Saint Oswald the pestilent mortality
was taken away,

The. 14. Chapter.
IN this monastery at the same time there were showed certain gifts of
heavenly grace by the holy Ghost, as in which place the tyranny of the devil
being lately expelled, Christ had newly begone to reign. Miracles in the
monastery of S^^^ee in Sussex.
One of which things we thought good to put in writing to be remembered
hereafter, the which in deed the most reverend father Acca was often times wont
to tell me, and affirmed that be had it showed him of the brethren of the same
monastery, a man most worthy to be credited. About the same very time that
this province received the name of Christ, a sore plage and mortality reigned
in many provinces of England, which plage by the pleasure of Gods dispensation
and ordinance when it touched also the foresayed monastery, which at that
time the most Reverend and virtuous priest of Christ Eappa did rule and
govern, and that many both of them that came thither with the bishop, and
also of such as had been lately called to the faith in the same province of the
South Saxons were taken daily out of this life, Fasting against the plage.
it seemed good to the brethren to appoint themselves to fast three days and
humbly to beseke the mercy of God, that he would voutsafe to show grace and
mercy toward them, and deliver them from this perilouse plage and present
death, or at least when they were taken out of this world, to save their
souls from eternal damnation. There was at that time in the same monastery a
certain little boy, that was lately come to the faith, a Saxon borne, which
was taken with the same sickness, and had kept his bed no small time. And
when the second day of the said fasting and praying was now come, it happened
that about vij. a clock in the morning, as the boy was leafte al alone in the
place where he lay sick, suddenly by the appointement of God there vowtsafed
to appear unto him the most blessed two chief Apostles S. Peter, and S. Paul.
For the boy was of a very innocent and meke mind and nature, and with sincere
devotion kept the sacrament of faith which he had received. In this vision
the Apostles first saluted him with most gentle words, saying: Fear not,
Son, the death, for which thou art so pensife: for we will this day bring thee
to the kingdom of heaven. But first thou must tarry til the Masses be said, and
after thou have received thy viage provision, the body and blood of our Lord,
being so released both of sickness and death thou shall be lifted up to the
everlasting joys in heaven. Therefore do thou call for priest Eappa unto
thee, and tell him, that our Lord has heard your prayers and devotion, and
has mercifully looked upon your fasting, neither shall there any one more dye
of this plage, either in this monastery, or in any of the possessions that
adioyne to the same. But as many as belong to you any where and lie sick,
shall rise again from their sickness and be restored to their former health,
save only thou, which this day shall be delivered from death, and be brought
to heaven to the vision of our Lord Christ, whom thou haste faithfully served.
Which thing it has pleased the mercy of God to do for you, through the
intercession of the godly and dear servant of God king Oswald, Intercession of
Saints.
which sometime governed the country of Northumberland most nobly both with the
authority of this temporal kingdom, and also in holiness and devotion of
Christen piety which leads to the everlasting kingdom. For on this very day
the same king being bodily slain in battle of the infidels and miscreants
was straight taken up to heaven to the eternal joys of the soul, and
fellowship of the chosen and elect companies. Let them seek in their book that
have the notes of the departing of the dead, and they shall find that he was
taken out of the world on this self day, as we have said. Mass in the memory
of Saints.
And therefore let the^ say Masses and give thanks that their prayer is heard,
and also for the memory of the said king. Oswald, which sometime governed their
nation. For therefore did he humbly pray our Lord for them, as being strangers
and exiles of his people. And when all the brethren are come together to the
church, let them all be houselled and so fynish their fast, and refresh their
bodies with sustenaunce. All the which words when the boy had declared to the
priest being called unto him, the priest enquired of him, what manner of array
and lykenes the men had, which appeared unto him. He aunsweared, they were very
notable and goodly in their array and countenaunces, and exceeding joyful and
beautiful, such as he never had seen before nor believed that any men could be
of so great comlynesse and beauty. The one was shaven like a priest, the other
had a long beard. And they said, that the one of them was called Peter and
the other Paul, and that they were the ministers and servants of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ of whom they were sent from heaven for the saving and
defense of our monastery. Wherefore the priest believed the words of the
boy, and went out by and by and sought in his book of Cronicles, and found
that king Oswald was slain on that very day. Then called he the brethren
together and commanded dinner to be provided, and masses to be said, and that
they should all communicate after the accustomed manner. And also willed a part
of the same sacrifice of our Lords oblation to be brought to the sick boy:
which thing so done, not long after the boy died the very same day, and proved
by his death, that the words were true which he had heard of Christ's
Apostles. And this morouer gave witness to his words, that at that time no
creature of the same monastery was taken out of the world, except him only. By
which vision many that might hear of the same, were meruaylowsly styrred and
enflamed, both to pray and call for Gods mercy in adversity, and also to use
the wholesome helps and medicines of fasting. And from that time not in that
monastery only, but in very many other places to, the birthe day of the said
king and champion of Christ began yearly to be kept holy with masses and
devout service most reverently.

How king Ceadwall ^lew Edilwach king of the Genisses, and wasted that
province with cruel death and ruyn.

The. 15. Chap.
IN this mean time Ceadwall a valiant young man of the royal blood of the
Genisses, That is, of Hampshere.
being bannyshed from his country, came with an host of men, and slew king
Edilwach, (of Sussex) and wasted that province cruelly murdering and spoiling
every where. But he was sone after driven out by two Capitaines of the kings,
Berthun, and Authun, which from that time did hold and keep the dominion of
the province. The chief of which two, was afterward slain of the same
Ceadwall, being then king in the west country and the province subdued and
browght into more greuouse subjection then it was before. Again he that
reigned after Ceadwall oppressed it with like misery and bondage a great many
years. Whereby it came to pass that the people (of Sussex) in all that time
could have no bishop of their own: but were feign, (their first bishop
Wilfrid being called home again) to be under the diocese of the bishop of
the Genisses which belongs to the, West Saxons, as many as were in the
territory of Selsee.

How the I Will of Wight received christen inhabitants, in which I Will two
childerne of the kings blood as soon as they were Christened, were slain.

The. 16. Chap.
AFter that Ceadwall had thus obtained the kingdom of the Geuisses or west
Saxons, he took the I Will of Wight also, which was so all given to the
worshipping of idols, that he intended utterly to bannysh and drive out thence
all the old native inhabitants, and to put people of his own country in their
place. For thowghe he was not yet at that time christened and regenerated in
Christ him self at it is said, yet he bownd him self with a vow, that if he
took the Island, he would give unto God the fourth part thereof and of all the
pray. Which thing he so performed, that bishop Wilfrid happening to be there
at that time a man of his own country, he gave and offered the same unto him to
the use and service of our Lord. The said Island contained, as the English do
rate it, M. CC. tenementes. Whereof was given to the bishop the possession of
the land of CCC. tenementes. Which portion the Bishop gave and committed to
one of his clerks named Bernwini, his sisters son, and appointed there to a
priest named Hildila, to minister the word and baptism of life to all that
would be saved. And here I think it not to be passed over in silence, that for
the first fruits of them that were saved throwgh believing in the same i will, two
children of the blood royal being brethren to Aruald king of the Island, were
crouned with a special grace of God. For when the ennemies came on the Island,
The Vites inhabited Ha^pshere, as the Saxons Sussex.
they ^led and escaped to the next province of the Vites. And there they gat to
a place called Stonestat, hoping to hyde themselves from the face and sight of
the king that had conquered their country, but they were betrayed and fownd
out, and commanded to be put to death. Which thing when a certain abbat and
priest named Cimberth had heard of, whose monastery was not far from thence at
a place called Redford, he came to the king which was than in the same parties,
lying secretly to be cured of his wounds that he had taken fighting in the I Will
of Wighte, and desired of him, that if he would needs have the childerne put to
death, yet they might first receive the sacraments of the Christian faith. The
king granted his request, and than he took them and catechized them in the
right faith of Christ, and wasshing them with the wholesome font of baptism,
made them sure and in perfyt hope to enter into the kingdom everlasting. Anon
after came the hangeman to put them to death, which death of this world they
joyfully took, by the which they douted not but they should pass to the
eternal life of the soul. When after this order all the province of great
Britain had received the faith of Christ, the I Will of Wight received the same
also: in which notwitstanding because of the misery and state of forayne
subjection, no man took the degree of the ministry and place of a bysshopp,
before Daniel, who now is bysshopp of the west Saxons and of the Geuisses. The
situation of this I Will is over against the mids of the South Saxons and
Geuisses, Sussex and Ha^psphere.
the sea coming between, of the breadth of three miles, which sea is called
Solent: in which, two arms of the Ocean sea, that break out from the maine
north sea about Britanie, do daily mete and violently run together beyond the
mouth of the river Homelea, which ronneth along by the country off the Vites
that belong to the province of the Genisses, and so enters into the foresaid
sea. And after this meting and striving together of the two seas, they go
back and flow again into the Ocean from whence they came.

Of the Synod made at Hetdfield, Theodore the Archbishop being there
president.

The 17. Chap.
AT this time Theodore having word that the faith of the church at
Constantinople was sore troubled through the heresy of Eutiches, The second
Synod of the church of England.
and wishing that the churches of the english nation over which he gouuerned
might continue free and clear from such a spot, gathered an assemble of
Reverend priests and many doctors, and enquired diligently of each of them,
what faith they were of, where he found one consent and agreement of them all in
the catholic faith. Which consent he procured to set forth and commend with
letters sent from the whole Synod for the instruction and remembrance of the
aftercommers, the beginning of which letters was this. In the name of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, and in the reigns of our most good and virtuous
Lords, Ecgfride king of the Humbers, the x. year of his reign, the viij. year
of the Indiction, and the xvij. day of September, and Edilrede king of the
Marshes in the vj. year of his reign, and Aldulphe king of the Estenglish, in
the xvij. year of his reign, and Lothar king of kent, in the vij. year of his
reign, being there president and chief Theodore by the grace of God
Archbishop of the I Will of Britanie, and of the city of Caunterbury, and with
him sitting in assemblee the other bishops of the same land, most Reverend men
and prelates, having the holy ghospelles set before them, at a place called in
the Saxon tongue, Hedtfield, after commoning and conference together had
thereuppon, we have expounded and set fourth the right and true catholic
faith in such sort as our Lord Jesus being incarnate in this world delivered
it to his disciples, which presently saw and heard his words and doctrine,
and as the creed of the holy fathers has leaft by tradition, and generally as
all holy men, all general Counsels, and all the whole company of the
authentic doctors of the catholic church have taught and delivered. Whom
we following in good, dew, godly, and rightbeleuing manner, according to their
doctrine inspired into them from God do profess and believe, and steadfastly do
confess with the holy fathers, the Father, and the Son, and the holy ghost
most verily, and in true and formal propriety, the Trinity in the unity of
one substance and the unity in Trinitye, that is to say, one God in three
persons, of one substance, and of equal glory and honor. And after many like
things pertaining to the confession of the right faith, the holy Synod did
also add to their letters, these things following. We have received the five
holy and general Synodes of the blessed and derebeloued fathers of God, that
is to say, of CCC. xviij. which were assembled at Nice, against the most wicked
and blasphemous Arrius, and his opinions. The v. first general councels
received by a common consent of the church of England about 800 years past.
And of Cl. at Constantinople against the madenesse and fond sect of
Macedonius and Eudoxius, and their opinions. And at Ephesus the first time, of
CC. against the most wicked Nestorius, and his opinions. And at Chalcedo^, of
CCxxx. against Eutiches and Nestorius and their opinions. And at Constantinople
the second time where was assembled the fifte Council in the time of the
emperor Justinian the younger, against Theodore and Theodorete and Ibe, and
their epistles and their opinions. And a little after against Cyrill. Also we
receive and admit the Synod made at the city of Rome in the time of the most
holy and blessed Pope Martin, the viij. year of the Indiction, and the ix. year
of the most godly and good Emperor Constantine. The 5^.
And we worship and glorify our Lord Jesus Christ, in such sort, as these men
have done, adding or diminishing nothing: and we accurse with heart and mouth
them whom these fathers have accursed, and whom they have received, we
receive, glorifyeng God the father without beginning, and his only begotten
son, begotten of the father before all ages and times, and the holy ghost
proceeding of the father and the son in unspeakable wise, according as these
above mentioned, holy Apostles, and prohetes and doctors have preached and
taught. And all we, that with Theodore the Archbishop have set forth and
declared the catholic faith, do hereunto subscribe with our own hands.

How John the Chantour of the sea Apostolic came into England to teach his
conninge.

The. 18. Chap.
AT this Synod there was present, and also confirmed the decrees of the
catholic faith a most reverend man named Ihon, the chief Chantour of S.
Peter's church and abbot of the monastery of S. Martyns, which was come of
late from Rome by the commandment of Pope Agatho, having for his guide the
most reverend Abbot Bishop surnamed Benedict, of whom we spoke before. For
when the said Benedict had buylt a monastery in England, In this monastery
S. Bid was brought up.
in the honor of the most bessed chief of thapostles S. Peter by the mouth of
the river Were, he came to Rome as he had often been wont to do before with his
fellow and helper in the same work Ceolfride, (who after him was abbot of the
same monastery) and was received most honorably of Pope Agatho of worthy
memory, Privilege from Rome for the liberty of monasteries.
of whom he desired and obtained for the warrant and assurance of the liberty
of the monastery that he had erected, a letter of privilege confirmed by the
authority Apostolic in such form as he knew the will and grant of king
Ecgfride to be, by whose leave, and liberal gift of possession and land he
had made the said monastery. He obtained also to have with him, the foresaid
Abbot Ihon into England, to the entente he might teach in his monastery the
yearly course and order of singing, as it was in S. Peter's at Rome. And so the
said Abbot Ihon did, as soon as he had commandment by the Pope, both with
his own voice and presence teaching the chantours and singing men of the said
monastery the order and form of singing and reading: Order of singing and
church service from Rome.
and also putting in writing those things that appertained to the celebration
of high feasts and holy days for the whole compass of the year. Which
things of his writing have been hitherto kept in the same monastery, and are
now every where copied out by diverse. And the same Ihon did not only teach the
brethren of that monastery, but such as were skilled in song came together to
here him almost from all the monasteries of the same province. And many to did
earnestly desire and entreat him in such places where he taught to come to them
him self. Beside this office and skill to teach synging and reading he had
also an other charge in commandment from the Pope Apostolic, The heresy of
the Monotholite.
which was that he should diligently learn of what faith the church of
England was, and bring word thereof at his return to Rome. For not long
before there had been kept at Rome a Synod by the holy Pope Martin, of the
consent of. Cv. bishops against them principally, that preached one only
working and will in Christ. Which Synod he brought with him, and gave it to
be written and copyed out in the foresaid monastery of the most virtuous
Abbot Benedict. For such men had at that time very sore troubled the faith of
the church of Constantinople, The Pope is informed of the state of the church.
Lege Cipr. lib. 1. epist, 3. et Aug. ep. 92. and 93.
but by the goodness and gift of our Lord they were anon espied out and
convicted at the same time. Wherefore Agatho the Pope minding as in other
provinces, so also in England to be informed what the Church was, and how
clear it was from the pestilent contagions of heretics, committed this charge
and busynes to the most Reverend Abbot Ihon being now appointed to go to
England. And therefore when the synod, which we spoke of before, was called
together in England for this purpose, the catholic faith was in them all found
clear, sownd, and uncorrupted. And a copy of the same was given him to carry
to Rome. But in his retourning homewarde, not long after he passed the sea, he
fell sick by the way and died. His body for the love of S. Martin, whose
monastery he governed, was by his friends brought unto Tours, and there buried
honorably. For as he went toward England he was gentelly received and lodged in
that church, and desired earnestly of the brethren there that when he
returned to Rome, he would come that way, and lodge with them. Finally he took
with him from thence certain to help and succor him both in his journey, and
also in his busynes that he was charged withal: who although he thus died by
the way, yet nevertheless the copy of the Catholic faith of England was
brought to Rome, and received most gladly and joyfully of the Pope apostolic,
and of all that heard or read the same.

How queen Edildred continewed a perpetual virgin, whose body could not be
corrupted, nor rot in her tomb.

The. 19. Chapter.
KIng Egfride took to wife a woman named Edildride the daughter of Anna king
of the East english, of whom we have often made mention, a man meruailouse godly
and in all points notable for virtue both of thought and deed. This said woman
had been wedded to an other man before him, that is to say, to the prince of
the South Giruians named Tonbert. But he died a little after he had married her,
and then she was given to wife to the foresaid king. With whom she lived xij.
years, and yet remained continually a pure and glorious virgin, even as bishop
Wilfrid a man of blessed memory did show me enquiring of purpose of the
matter, because many did doubt thereof, and said unto me that he could of
all men be a very sure witness of her virginity, for so much as king Ecgfrid
promised to give him lands and much money, if he could persuade the queen to
use his company, though yet he knew well that she loved no man in the world
more then him. And it is not to be mystrusted, Why the miracles here reported
ought not to be mistrusted Luc. 22.
but that the same thing may be done in our time also which, has been
sometime done in times paste as true histories do witness, whereas one and
the same lord gives the grace, which promises to abide with us unto the end
of the world. For beside this, the sign and token of the divine miracle, in
that the flesh of the same virgin buried could not be corrupted and putrefied,
does well show, that she lived always uncorrupted and untouched of any man.
Again it is well known, she besowght the king very much and a long time, that
she might forsake the cares of the world, and have leave to go into a
monastery, and ther^ only to serve Christ the true king. Which when she had at
last obtained, she entered into the monastery of Abbess Ebb, who bare a good
affection to king Ecgfride. Nonnes consecrated of bishops
The monastery stands in a town called Coludi, and the aforesaid bishop
Wilfrid gave her the veale and habit of a nonne. Within a year after which,
she was herself made an Abbess in the i will of Ely in which place there was
built a monastery of virgins dedicated to God, among whom she began to be a
very good mother and virgin both in examples and also good lessons of heavenly
life. Of her it is said, that after the time that she went to the monastery,
she would never wear any lynnen but only woollen clothes, and seldom wash
herself in warm bathes, save against solemn high feasts, as Easter,
whitsontyde, or twelfetyde, and than would she be the last of all, and with her
own hands and help of her handemaydes would first wash the reast of Christ's
virgins that were there. Very seldom also except on high feasts or for great
necessity did she eat more than onse a day, and that continually, on less a
greater feblenesse did let her. From the time of the first coming to prayer
together until the rising of the day she abode in the Church still
continewing at her prayers. And there are that say, that by the spirit of
prophecy she did foretell both the pestilence whereof she should dye herself,
and also did openly in all their presence declare the number of them that
showld be taken from this world out of her monastery. She was taken away to
our Lord in the mids of her company seven years after she was made Abbess. And
as she her self had willed, she was buried in a tomb of wood in none other
place than in the myds of them in such order and sort as she departed. After
whom succeeded her sister Sexburg in the office of Abbess, which woman
Earcombert king of Kent had had to wife. And when Edildride had lain buried
xvj. years, it seemed good to her said sister now Abbess, to have her bones
taken up, and put in a new tomb, and removed into the church. Whereupon she
wylled certain of the brethren to seek a stone, whereof they might make a
tomb for this purpose. The i will of Eelye.
And they taking ship (for the country of Eelye is round about compassed with
waters and fennes, nor has any great stones for such purposes) came to a
certain little city leafte desolate and uninhabited, the which was not far from
thence, and in the englysh tongue is called Grandchester, and straight way they
found by the walls of the city a tomb of white marble ready made very fair,
and covered very trym and fyt with a cover of the same stone: whereby
understanding that our Lord hadd prospered their journey, they gave him
thanks therefore, and browght it to the monastery. And when the grave was
opened and the body of the holy virgin and spouse of Christ taken out into the
light, it was found so clean from corruption, as if she had dyed or been put
in the grownd the very same day, even as both the aforesaid bishop Wilfride,
and many other that knew it, bear witness. But Cinfride a certain
physician, which was present by her both when she dyed and when she was taken
out of the tomb, was wont of more certain knowledge to tell, that when she
lay sick she had a very great swelling under her arm pit, and they bad me,
quoth he, to lance that swelling, that the ill humor that was within might
issue out. Which when I had done, for the space of two days after she seemed to
be somewhat better at ease, so that some thowght that she might be cured of her
grief. But the third day her former pains took her again, and straight way
was she taken out of the world, and changed all pain and death with health
and life everlasting. And when after so many years her bones showld be taken
out of the grave, they spread a tent over the same, and all the company of the
brethren on the one side, and systers on the other, stood round about synging
and the Abbess with a few other went in, to take up and bring forth the
bones. But suddenly we heard her within cry out with a loud voice, Glory be
to the name of God. And anon after, they called me in, opening the entrance of
the tente, where I saw the body of the holy virgin of God being taken out of
the tomb, and lyeng on the bead like one that were a sleep. Then did they also
open the covering of her face, and showed me the wound of the cut, that I had
made, healed and cured, so that in marvelous wise in the place of the open and
gaping wound wherewith she was buried there appeared than but little small signs
of the scar. Byside this, all the lynnen clothes, wherein the body was winded
appeared hole and so new, that they seemed to be put about those chaste lymnes
but that very day. And the report is, that when she was grieved with the
foresaid swelling and pain of her cheek bone and neck, What burdens are
borne now a days of less then kings children, and yet no grief felt at all?
she took great joy in this kind of disease, and was wont to say: I know
most certainly, that I worthily do bear this bourden of pain in my neck, in
which I remember that when I was a gyrle, I did bear the superfluouse and
vain bourdens of tablettes and owches, and I believe that the sovereign pity
of God does therefore send me this grief and pain in my neck, that he may so
absoyle and quit me from that gylte of vanity and lightenesse, whereas now instead of gold and precious stones the read fire heat and burning swelling
breaks out off my neck. It happened also that by the touching of the same
The napkins and partlets taken from S. Paul's body healed the sick and
expelled devils. Act. cap. 19. c.
Clothes wherein the corse lay, both spirits were driven out of certain
bodies possessed, and also other diseases healed sometimes. And it is said,
that the tumbe in which she was first laid and buried, did heal certain that
were pained in their eyes, which as soon as they set their head to the same
tomb and prayed, straightway had the grief of their sore or dymme eyes taken
away. The body of the virgin was taken and washed, and laid in new clothes,
and so carried into the church, and put in the other tomb that was brought,
where it is kept unto this day, and is had in great reverence. The said
tumbe, found ready made, was (not without a miracle) so apt and fyt for the
virgins body, as if it had been of purpose made and cut out for her, the place
also of the head was made by it self severally, and seemed to have been
fasshioned as just as could be for the bygnesse of her head. In Cambridge
shere.
This country of Ely is in the province of the East english, and conteyneth
about CC. housholdes, and is compassed on each side, as we have said, like an
Island, round about with either fennes or waters. And therefore of the eeles
which are plentifully taken in those waters, it has his name. In this I Will this
said handmayde of Christ desired to have a monastery, because, as we said
before, she came of the nation and blood of the East english.

An hymn of the said virgin.

The 20. Chap.
THe occasion seems convenient to put in this history an hymn of virginity,
which many years past we made in meter, in the lawde and praise of the said
Queen and virgin, which is in deed therefore verily a Queen, for that she is
the spouse of Christ. And herein we shall follow the custom of the holy
scripture in the history whereof many songs and psalms are put in among,
which were (as is well known) made in meter and verse.

A song or sonnet in praise of virginity and in the honor of S. Edildred.
O God, o gloriouse Trinity, in whom all rule does always stand,
O gloriouse God, all one in three, aid thou the things we take in hand.
Of wars let Virgils verse endite, sing we the pleasant fruits of peace:
Aeneas fights let Virgil write, Christ's gifts to sing let us not cease.
My verse is chaste, it is not made, to tell of ^ynfull Helens stelth,
My verse is chaste, such wanton trade, write they that live in wanton wealth.
Of heavenly gifts to speak I long, not of thassaults of ruinous Troy:
Of heavenly gifts shall be my song, the which the earth does now enjoy.
Behold high God commes from above, the virgi^ns pure womb to possess
Behold high God commes for men's love, them to redeem from death endless.
A mayde^ mother bringes sorth a child, who is the father of all that is,
Borne is a son of a maiden myld, Marie the gate of God and blys.
The blessed flock in her delight, maid and mother of the Deity,
The blessed flock most pure and bright, in pure and chaste virginity.
Her worthiness has made mo spring, of this chaste virgin stock and bow
Her worthiness does daily bring, mo virgin flowers to bud and blow.
The fyry flames the virgin pure, S. Agathe never shranke to bide,
The fyry flames did eke endure, Eulalya as gold in furnace tried.
The ugly beasts with gaping jaws, chaste Te^la conquered gloriously,
The ugly beasts with ramping paws, chaste Eufeme lead victoriously
The bloddy sweard with laughing look, Agnes more strong than stele nere drad,
The blooddy sweard S. Cicilie took, great joy therein no harm she had.
The world wide has flowed in such, triumphing acts of sober hearts,
The world wide has flowed in much, love of like chaste and sober parts.
And eke our days with one are blessed, a noble virgin verily,
Our Edildride does shine addressed, with like bright perfect purity.
Of royal spirit and stock she came, her father a famous worthy wighte,
Her royal spirit and noble name, was much more noble in God his sight
She had also the soueraintie of Queen and reign terrestrial
But she had an higher majesty of reign and bliss celestial,
O virgin bright what sekst thee a man, which have already thy spouse above?
What other husband sekst thee than, Christ is thine only spouse and love.
I think that thou ^erein mighst do, as did the mother of the heavenly king,
That thou both wife and virgin too, mighst be like her in that ilke thing.
For when this spowse of God had past, xij. years in secular life and reign,
This spouse of God herself did have in life monastical to remain.
VVher she to heaven wholly bent, florisht in virtues many and hye
From thence her soul to heaven went, to which she did her wholly apply.
This virgins body pure in ground had lain the space of xvj. year
Yet was the same as sweet and sound, as when it first was laid on bear.
O Christ this was thy work most true, the very clothes about the corse
O Christ, were fair and hole and new, long time on them had lost his force.
The dropsy eke that foul disease, these holy shrouds did heal and cure
And diverse had by the^ their ease, of sundry griefs they did endure.
The furiouse fend that erst beguyld, our mother Eve maliciously
This fend so fell a virgin myld, did put to flight victoriously.
Lo bride of God see and behold, what honor in earth to thee done is
O spouse of Christ a thousand fold is done thee more in heavens blys
The joyful gift thou do possess, a bride full bright for thy bridegroom,
The joyful gift that never cesse, lo Christ him self to thee is come.
And thou to him melodiously, do sing with sweet and tuning voice
To him with hymns and harmony, new and sweet spouse thou do rejoice.
The la^bes high throne and company follow thou shall for ever and ever.
His love and bond is such to thee, noman there fro shall thee disseuer.
How bishop Theodore made peace between the two kings Ecgfrid and Edilfride.

The. 21. Chapter.
THe ix. year of the reign of Ecgfride a battle was fought between him, and
Edilfride king of the Marshes, by the river of Trent in which was slain
Elbuine king Ecgfrides brother a yo^g man of about xviij. years of age, and
very well beloved of both the countries. For a sister of his named Osthride was
wife unto king Edilred. And whereas hereupon there seemed to rise an occasion
and matter of sharper war and longer enmity between the two kings, and the
fierce peoples, Gods derebeloued bishop Theodore trusting in the help of our
lord did by his wholesome exhortation, utterly quench the fire of so great a
peril begone, in such sort that the kings and people being pacified on
both sides, the life of no man perished for the death of the kings brother,
but only a dew amercement of money was given and paid to the other king for
amends. The bonds of which peace did a long time after endure between the
said kings and their dominions.

How the fetters of a certain prisoner were lowsed, when masses were song for
him.

The. 22. Chapter.
IN the foresaid battle in which was slain king Elbuine, a certain notable
thing and well known of many, happened, which we in no wise may leave untold,
both for the profit of the reader and for the glory of God. In the battaill
above mentioned among other of the soldiers a certain young man named Imma
was left for dead: which when he had all that day and night following lain
among the bodies of the slain men, like as he had been dead also, at last
received air and breath and revived again, and sat up, and bound his wounds
him self, as well as he could resting himself a little. After he arose up and
began to go his way seeking where he might find some fryndes to see to him and
help him. But as he so did, he was found and taken of his enemies of the other
camp, and brought unto their Lord, who was an Earl subject to king Edilred.
Of whom being demanded, what he was, he feared to confess that he was a
soldier, and thought better to answer that he was a poor husband man of the
country, and one that had wife and children, and that he came forth with such
other as he was to bring vittailes to the soldiers. But for all this the said
Lord suspected him and willed his wou^des to be looked unto: and when he began
to wex hole, he commanded him at night season to be kept in bonds, least he
should escape away: but behold no bonds could hold him, but as soon as they
were gone that had bound him, his bonds and fetters were straight way loosed.
An example for the co^firmatio^ of purgatory.
For he had a brother, whose name was Tu^na, a priest and Abbot of a monastery
in the city, which of his name is called unto this day Tunnacester: who when
he heard that his brother was slain in the battle came to seek, if he might
happily find his body. Where he finding one that was in all points like him,
and thinking it to be him in deed, brought him to his monastery, and buried
him honorably, and did often times cause mass to be said for his soul: By
the saying of which masses that, which I said, came to pass, that noman could
bynd him, but that he was straight way loused again. The sacrifice of the
Mass propitiatory.
Then the Earl that kept him began to wonder here at, and to enquire of him,
what the cause was that he could not be bound, and whether perhaps he had
about him any loosing letters, such as men talk of that he could not be bound
by the virtue of them. But he aunsweared, that he knew no such art nor
conning: but I have a brother, quod he, in my country, one that is a priest and
I know that he thinks I am slain, and therefore does often say mass for me:
and if I were now in an other world, my soul showld be there loused from
pains through his intercessions and prayers as my body is here from bonds.
And while he was thus kept a certain space in the Earls house, some that
marked him more diligently, saw by his countenance, behavior, and talk,
that he was not (as he had said) of the common poor sort of people, but of
some good house and degree. Therefore the Earl called him secretly, and
examined him more straightly of whence he was. Promising that he would do him
no harm in the world, if he would plainly utter and show himself, what he
was. Which thing when he had done, and declared himself to be one of the
kings servants, well, quoth the Earl, I knew by thy words and awnsweres,
that thou were no husbandman of the country. And thou art well worthy to dye
now, for that all my brethren and kynnesmen were slain in that battle, yet
I will not put the to death, for breaking of my faith and promise. And therefore
as soon as he was full cured, the Earl sent him to London and sold him to a
merchant of Friseland. But neither he, nor any man else as he was lead thither,
could bynd him by any means. And yet his enemies did lay on him many and
sundry kinds of fetters which yet allwaies were loosed. When he that hadd
bowght him, saw, that he cowld be kept and holden in no bonds, he gave him
leave to ransom himself, if he were able. For after about viij. a clock in
the morning when masses began to be said, his bonds and fetters were ever
lowsed. And thus upon his oath either to come again, or else to send his
ransom, he was let go, and came to kent to king Lodhere, who was son to the
sister of Queen Edildrede of whom we have spoken before, and himself had been
sometime a servant of the said Queens. There he sued to the king for so much
as would pay his ransom, which he obtained, and sent it (as he had promised) to
him whose prisoner he was. Afterward he returned to his country, and came to
his brother, and declared him in order all the adversities that had happened
unto him, and also what comfortes and succors he had had in the same. And he
knew, by that his brother told him, that his bonds were loosed at those times
specially, in which masses were said and song for him. He understood also,
that the other helps and succors that happened to him in his danger, came of
the heavenly gift and grace throwgh his brothers intercessions and offering of
the holy wholesome host and sacrifice. Many that heard these things of this
man, were styrred up and enflamed in faith and godly devotion, unto prayer,
unto alms and charitable deeds, and to offer to our Lord hosts of the holy
oblation and sacrifice, for the delivery and relief of their frindes, that
were departed this world. For they understood thereby and knew, that the
wholesome blessed sacrifice was effectuous to the everlasting redemption and
ransoming both of soul and body. This story was told me of one of them that
heard it of the very man in whom it was done, and therefore knowinge it to be
true and certain, I dowbted no whit, to put it into this our ecclesiastical
history.

Of the life and death of Abbess Hilda.

The 23. Chap.
THe year following after this, which was, the year of thincarnation of our
Lord DClxxx. An. 680^
the most deuowt and godly servant of Christ Hilda Abbess of the monastery,
that is called Streanes halch (as we before mentioned) after many heavenly
deeds that she did in this world, passed out of this life to receive the
rewards of the life of heaven, the xvij. day of November, when she was three
score and six years of age. The which number of years equally divided into two
parts, she lived, the first xxxiij. in secular life with most noble and
worthy conversation, and as many after did she dedicate to our Lord more nobly
and worthily in monastical life. For she was come of noble birth, and was the
dawghter of king Edwins nephewe named Hererike, with which king also at the
preaching of Paulinus of blessed memory the first bysshopp of Northumberland,
she received the faith and sacraments of of Christ, and did syncerely keep
the same, until she deserved to come to his sight and vision, whom only to
serve after she had determined, and forsaken this secular life and world, she
went to the province of the East english. For she was allied to the king there,
and from thence she desired, if she might by any means, to forsake her country
and all that ever she had, and go into France, and there in the monastery
named Cate to lead a pilgrims and exuls life for our Lords sake, that she
might the more easyly deserve to enjoy an everlasting country in heaven. For
in the same monastery her sister Hereswide mother to Adulphe king of the East
english did at the same very time live under rules and disciplines of religion
abiding and looking for the crown everlasting: whose example she mynding to
follow and live a stranger out of her own country, did abide in the said
province one hole year. After which being called home again into her country
by bisshopp Aidan, she had delivered her the lands of one Lordeship at the
north coast of the river Were, in which she lived also the space of one year,
and lead a monastical life with a few other of her company. After this she
was made Abbess in the monastery that is called Heortheu, which monastery
had been builte not long before of the godly and devout handmayed off Christ
Heiu. Which is said to be the first woman in the province of Northumberland,
that took the vow and habit of a Nonne, Vow and habit monastical.
being blessed and consecrated by bishop Aidan. But not long time after the
making of the monastery she departed thence to the city of Calcaria,
Colchester.
which is called of the english men Calcacester, and there she appointed to
abide and continewe. Now this other handmayd of Christ Hilda being placed to
rule this monastery, did straight procure to order and dispose the same in all
points with regular life and discipline, in such wise as she could be best
enstructed of them that were learned. For both bishop Aydan, and as many
religious persons as knew her, for the great wisdom and love to serve God,
that was in her, were wont often times to visit her, lovingly to help her, and
diligently to instruct her. Thus when she had certain years gouuerned this
monastery in great observation and straighnes of regular life and order, it
was her chance to take in hand the buylding and disposing of a monastery in
the place called Straneshalch, which busynes committed unto her she finished
with all speed and diligence. For she fournished and framed it with the same
rules and orders of regular life, with which she had disposed the other
monastery before. And truly she did there teach singularly the works of
righteousness, devotion, chastity, and other virtues, but specially of peace
and charity, in such wise that after the example of the primitive church,
there was none rich there, none poor, but all things common to all, for
nothing seemed peculiar and private to any one. She was of such wisdom, that
not only all mean persons in their necessities, but also kings and princes
did seek and find counsel of her: Such religious men, as lived under her
gouerna^ce, she made to bestow their time in the reading of the holy
scriptures, and in the exercise of the works of virtue, that out of her
monastery many might easily be found, mete and worthy me^ to serve the church,
and the altar. And in deed we have seen in a short space five bishops out of
the same monastery, all, men of singular merit and holiness, whose names are
these Bosa, Adda, Ostfor, John, and Wilfrid. Of the first we have spoken
before, how he was consecrated bishop of York. Of the second to speak
shortly, he was made bishop of Dorcister. Dorchester in Barkeshere.
Of the two last we shall speak afterward, of which the one was consecrated
bishop of Hagulstad, and the other of York. Of the middlemost let us now say
somewhat. In holy Ilond.
When he had in both the monasteries of Abbess Hilda diligently applied the
reading and studieng of the scriptures, at last desiring more perfect
exercises, he came to ke^t to the Archbishop Theodore of blessed memory.
Where having continewed a certain space and spent his time in holy studies and
reading, he found also the means to go to Rome, Going to Rome accounted a
matter of devotion in our primitive church.
which at that time was counted a thing of great virtue and devotion. From
thence retourning home again to England, he went unto the province of the
Victians over which king Osric reigned than, and there he remained a long time,
preaching the word of faith, and also giving himself for an example of life
to all that knew and heard him. At which time the bishop of that province
named Boselus being so sick and weak, that he could not himself fulfill the
office a bishop, by all men's judgment and consent the foresaid man was elected
and chosen bishop in his place, and at the co^maundment of king Edilred was
consecrated by bishop Wilfrid of blessed memory, who at that time was bishop
of the Middleenglish. For Theodore tharchebisshop was than dead, and none other
as yet made bishop for him. In which province a little before, that is to wytt,
before that foresaid man of God Boselus, one Ta^frid a man most stout,
couragiouse and well learned and of an excellent wit, was elected bishop out
of the monastery of the said Abbess: but he was taken away and died before
his time, ere that he might be consecrated. This foresaid handmayde of Christ
Abbess Hilda, whom, all that knew her, were wont to call mother for her
notable grace and godliness, was not only in her own monastery an example of
life to them that were with her, but also to many other that were far of the
ministered occasion of salvation and amendment, to whom the happy report of her
doing and virtuous living came. And so was fulfilled the dream, that her
mother Bregoswid had, when this was but an enfant. For when her husband Heriric
was out of his country as an outlawe under Cerdix king of the Britons, where
also he was at last poysonned, she saw in a dream, that he whom she sought
with all diligence, was as it were suddenly taken out of her sight that no sign
and token of him any where did appear. But as she yet busily sought for him,
she found by and by a very precious ouch and jewel under his garment, which as
she did well mark and consider it seemed to shine and glister with brightness
of so great a light, that it filled all the borders of Britannie, with the
grace thereof. The which dream was proved true in her daughter, whom we
speak of. Whose life not to her self only but to many other that would live
well, did give examples of the works of light. But now when she had many
years ruled this monastery, it pleased the merciful worker of our salvation,
that her holy soul should also be examined and tried with long sickness of
the body, that after thexample of the Apostle, her virtue might be made perfect
in infirmity and weakness. 2. Cor. 22.
For she was stricken with fevers, and began to be grievously vexed with the
heat, and was in the same wise sick and deseased for the space of vj. years.
In all which time she did never omit and let pass, both, to give thanks to
her creator, and also to teach and enstructe openly and privately the flock
committed to her charge. For by her own example she warned them all, both to
serve our Lord dewly when he gives them their bodily health, and also thank
him continually and faithfully in worldly adversities, or bodily infirmities
and sickness. And thus the seventh year of her sickness, the grief and pain
tourning toward the heart and inward parts she came to her end and last day in
this world, and about the crowing of the cock after she had received the
viage provision of holy howsell she called unto her he handmaides of Christ
that were in the same monastery, whom as she admonished and counseled to
keep the evangelical unite among them selves and with other, at the very last
word and making of this her exhortation she gladly and willingly saw the hour
of her death yea rather (to speak with Christ's own words) she passed from
death unto life. In which very night our almighty Lord vouchesafed to reuele
her death and departing by a manifest and plain vision in an other monastery
that was a good way of, named Hacanes, the which she had buylt the same year.
For there was in the same monastery a certain Nonne named Begu which had
served our Lord in monastical conversation and blessed virginity xxx. years
and more. This Nonne taking her reast at that time in the dortour house, heard
suddenly in the air the known sound of the bell, wherewith they were wont to
be called up to prayers, when as any of them was called out of the world. And
opening her eyes (as she thought) she saw the roof and top of the house
uncovered, and all above full of light. Which light as she earnestly marked and
looked on, she saw the soul of the foresaid handmaid of God in that light
carried unto heaven, accompained and lead by Angels. And as she then started
out of her sleep, and saw other systers taking their reast about her, she
knew and perceived, that that which she saw was shown her either in a dream
or in some vision of mind. And by and by she rose up for overmuch fear that
she had, and ran to the virgin, which was then gouernesse of the monastery
in the Abbess stead, whose name was Frigit, and with much weping and tears,
and drawing long sigthes told her that the mother of them al Abbess Hilda was
now departed this world, and with a meruailouse great light, which she saw,
and company of Angels leading her, ascended up to the gates of everlasting
light and fellowship of the heavenly citisens. Which when she had heard, she
raised up all the sisters, and called them to church, willing them to be
occupied in prayers and psalms for the soul of their mother. Which thing as
they diligently did the rest of of the night, at the break of the day there
came certain brethren from the place where she died, to bring word of her
departing. Which the other answered that they knew of before. And when they
had declared in order how and when they had learned the same, it was found
that her passing was showed them by the vision at the very same hour, that
they reported her to pass out of the world. And with a goodly consent and
agreement herein it was by the work of God so disposed, that when the one saw
presently her departing out of this life, at the same time the other did know
her entering into the perpetual life of souls. These two monasteries are
distant a sonder almost xiij. miles. It is also reported, that in the same
monastery to, where the foresaid handmayde of God died, one of those vowed
virgins to God, that loved her more then the rest had her departing showed unto
her the same night in a vision, and saw her soul go to heaven with angels,
which thing the very same hour it was done she opened and declared to those
handmaydes of Christ that were with her and called them up to pray for her
soul, and that, before the reast of the company knew of her departing: which
thing to be so, was anon after declared to the hole company when morninge came.
For at that hour this Nonne was alone severally with certain other handmaydes
of Christ, in the outmost places of the monastery, where such as were such
women as were newely come to religion, were wont to be tried and abide the
time of probation, until they were instructed in the rule and order, and then
taken into the fellowship of the reast, and professed.

How the gift of synging was miraculowsly given to a certain brother in the
monastery of this Abbess.

The. 24. Chap.
IN the monastery of this Abbess there was a certain brother notably endewed
with the special grace of God, which was wont to make songs and meters fit
for religion and godly meditation, in so much that what so ever he learned of
the holy scriptures by other men's expounding, he turned and made the same anon
after with poetical and musical words set together with wonderful
sweetness and melody in his own mother tongue. With whose verses and songs
the minds of many men were often enflamed to the contempt and despysing of the
world, and desire of the everlasting life of heaven. After whom diverse other
among the english men assayed to make godly and deuowt meters, but noman cowlde
match his connyng therein. For he learned this art of singing and making, not
towght of men, nor by any man's help, but he received the gift thereof freely
by the only aid and grace of God. And therefore he cowld never make any fond
or vain balade, but such things as belonged to religion and godly meditation
were only mete to come out of his religiowse and godly mowth. For as long as he
was a secular man, which was, till he was well stricken in age, he never had
learned any such matter of singinge. In so much that sometimes at the table,
when the company was set to be merry, and agreed for the nonse, that each man
showld sing in order at his cowrse, ^he, when he saw the harp to come nere
him, rose up at myds of supper, and gat him out of doors home to his own
house. And as he so did on a certain time, getting him out of the place where
they were drinking and making merry together, to the stable among the beasts
which he had appointed him to keep and look to that night, and when the hour
of sleep came, was gone his way quietly to bed, as he lay, he dreamed that
acertaine man stood by him, and bad him, God speed, and calling him by his
name, said to him, Cednom, I pray thee singe me a song. Whereto he made
awnswere and said, I can not sing. For that is the matter why I came out from
the table to this place here, because I cowld not singe. But yet, quoth he
again that spoke with him, thou have somewhat to sing to me. What shall I
sing? quoth he. Sing, quoth the other, the beginning of al creatures. At which
awnswere he began by and by to singe in the lawde and praise of God the
creator, verses which he had never heard before, of which the sense and
meaning is this. Now must we praise the maker of the beauenly kingdom, the
power of the creator, his cownsell and deuyse, the works and acts of the
father of glory. How he being God eternal was the maker and author of all
miracles, which first unto the children of men created heaven for the top of
their dwelling place, and after the omnipotent keeper of mankind created the
earth for the flower thereof. This is the meaning, but not the order of the
words which he sange in his sleep. For verses be they never so well made can
not be turned out of one tongue into an other word for word, without leasing a
great piece of their grace and worthynesse. Now when he awooke and rose up, he
remembered still by heart all the things that he had song in his sleep, and did
straight way join thereto mo words in the same manner and form of meter, and
made up a song fytte to be song and applied to God. And on the morrow he came
to the farmar or baylie under whom he was, and told him of the gift that he
had received, and being browght to the Abbess he was commanded in the
presence of many learned men to tell his dream, and rehearse the song, that it
might by the judgment of them all be examyned and tried, what or whence the
thing was which he reported. And it seemed to them all, that some heavenly grace
and gift was granted him of our Lord. For more trial whereof they recited
unto him the process of some holy story or example, willing him, if he cowld
to turn the same into meter and verse. Which he took upon him to do and
went his way, and on the morrow after came again and browght the same made in
very good meter, which they had willed him to do. Whereupon straight way the
Abbess acknowledging and embracing this grace and gift of God in the man,
enstructed and exhorted him to forsake the world, and the life thereof, and to
take the monastical life and profession upon him. Which he did and was
thereupon by the commaundment of the Abbess placed in the company of the
brethren, and by her appointement tawght and enstructed in the course of holy
scripture. But he what soever he cowld hear and learn, would afterward
think upon the same again by him self, and chewinge thereon like a clean
beast at his cudd, would turn it into very sweet meter, and melodiously
singinge the same, made his teachers to become his hearers again. His songs
were of the creation of the world, and beginning of mankind, and all the story
of Genesis, of the going of Israel out of Aegipt, and their entering into the
land of promise, and of many other histories of the holy scriptures. Of thin
carnation of our Lord, of his passion, resurrection, and ascensio^ into heaven,
of the coming of the holy ghost, of the doctrine and preaching of the
Apostles. Also he was wont to make many songs and meters of the dread of domes
day and judgment to come, of the horrible pains of hell, and of the joys and
swetenes of the kingdom of heaven. And many other also of the benefits and
judgments of God. In all which, his endeavor was to pull away men from the
love of wickedness, and stir them up to the love and readiness of virtue
and good life. For he was a man very devout and religiouse, and humbly obedient
to his rules and disciplines. And very zelouse and fervently bent against them
that would do otherwise. And therefore he ended his life with a good end. For
when the hour of his departing was at hand, he was taken before and diseased
xiiij. days with bodyly sickness, and yet so temperatly, that he might all
that time both speak and walk. The fer^^ry.
There was there by, a little house into which they that were sick were wont
to be brought, and such as were lykely shortly to dye. This man desired him
that served him, the same eueninge before the night that he should depart out
of the world, to go and provide him a place to reast and lie in that house. The
other maruailed why he desired the same, for he was nothing likely to dye so
sone. But yet he did as he was bid. When they were there placed, and were
meryly talking and sporting among themselves and them that were there before,
being now about midnight he asked and enquired of them all, whether they had
the sacrament there within. What need, quoth they, is there of the sacrament,
for your time is not come to dye yet, that are so meryly talking with us, as a
man in good health. Reservation of the blessed Sacrament.
But yet, quoth he again, do ye bring me hither the sacrament. Which when he
had taken in his hand he asked them, whether they were all of a quiet mind and
persit charity toward him, without any quarrel, grudge, debate, and rancour.
They aunsweared all, that they were of very good mind and will toward him, and
far from al wrath and displeasure: and they asked him again, whether he bare
good will and affection toward them. Howseling befoer death.
He aunsweared by and by, I do bear, my dear children, a quiet and good mind
to all Gods servants. And there withal arming him self with that heavenly
food made him ready to enter into the other life. Then he asked, how nyghe
the hour was, that the brethren should rise to say their night lauds and
service to our Lord It is not far of, quoth they. Well than, quoth he, let us
abide and tarry for that hour. And blessinge himself with the sign of the
holy cross Blessing with the sign of the cross.
he laid down his head on the bolster, and so falling a little in a slomber
ended his life in quiet and silence. And thus God wrought with him, that eue^
as he had served our Lord with a simple, plain, pure mind and quiet devotion,
so likewise he might come to the fight and vision of God, leaving this world
with a quiet and still death. And that also the tongue which had made and
invented so many goodly meters and wholesome words in the praise of the
creator of all, might conclude and shut up the last words in the praise and
lawde of the same, blessing himself, and commending his spirit into the hands
of our Lord. It appears also by these things that we have told, that he
knew before and forsawe the time of his departing.

Of a vision that appeared to a certain man of God before that the monastery
of the town Colodon was burned.

The 25. Chap.
ABout this time the monastery of virgins, A Nunnerie burned for the sins of
the inhabita^s.
which stands in the town of Coludon of which we have made mention above was
through negligence by a great misfortune consumed with fire. Which thing
notwithstanding happened also for the wyckednes of them that dwelled in the
same, and specially of the chief and elders thereof, as all men might easyly
see that knew it. And the open scourge of God did mercifully whippe them even
at the beginning, that being thereby corrected they might like the Ninevites
turn away the wrath of the just judge from them by fastings, weaping, and
prayers. In the same monastery there was a certain man a Scotborne named
Adaman, leading a very devout life unto God in chastity, abstinence and
prayer, in such sort, that he never did eat nor drink, save only each Sunday
and thursday: and oftentimes also he passed over whole nights watching in
prayer: which straightnes of hard life he began at the first of dewtie and
necessity to amend his former syn and ylliuing, but in process of time he had
turned that necessity into a continual custom. For whereas in his youth he
had committed a certain greuouse offense and sin, that coming often to his mind
and remembrance, considering in his heart the greatness thereof, he abhorred it
and trembled thereat excedingly, and feared the pounishement of the sharp judge
upon him for the same. Resorting therefore to a priest and hoping of him to
learn some remedy of salvation, he confessed his syn to him, Confession to the
priest.
and desired him to give him counsel, whereby he might flee and escape the
wrath of God and vengeance to come. The priest when he had heard his offense
and sin, said. A great wound requires a greater cure and medicine: and
therefore give thy self to fastinges, and prayers, Psalm. 94.
as much as thou art able, to the end that coming before the face of our Lord
in confession thou may deserve to find him merciful unto thee. But he for
the passing grief of the guilty conscience that held him, and desire that he
had to be sone assoyled of the inward bonds of sins wherewith he was laden,
said: I am young of age, and strong of body. And therefore what soever ye put
me unto, so that I may be saved in the day of our Lord, I will easily bear it
all, and though ye bid me to stand the whole night and spend it in prayers,
and pass over the whole weke in abstinence. It is very much (quod the priest)
to endure the whole weke without sustenaunce of the body, Penance enjoined.
but it suffiseth to fast two or three days at onse. And this do thowe
until I come again to the after a short time, and show thee more fully what
thou must do, and how long thou must continewe in penance. After which
words the priest appointed him what penance he should do, and went his way.
And through a sudden occasion that happened he passed into Ireland, where he
was borne, and came not to him again, as he had promised to do. Yet the young
man remembering both his commandment, and also his own promise, gave himself
wholly to weping, penance, holy watchinge and continence, in such wise that
(as I said before) he never took sustenaunce save only thursdaies and
sondayes, but continually fasted all the other days of the weke. And when he
had heard that his ghostly father was gone into Ireland, and there departed,
ever after from that time he kept this manner of fasting, according as it was
first appointed him. And the thing which he had onse begone to do for
compunction of his syn and dread of Gods vengeance, the same did he now,
without lothesomnesse or werynesse, yea with pleasure and delight for the
reward that followed, and for the fervent love of God. And as he now long time
had continewed diligently the same, it chanced that on a certain day he went
out of the monastery to some place a good way of, having one of the brethren
with him in his company. And when they had done their journey and were coming
home again, drawing nere the monastery they beheld and vewed the goodly high
building of the same, whereat the man of God brast out all into tears, and with
his weping countenance bewrayed the heauynes of his heart. Which thing when
his fellow saw, he asked him why he so did. O quod he, al these buildinges
that you see, both the common that belong to many, and the private houses of
particular persons shall shortly be turned into ashes and consumed by fire.
Which he hearing, as soon as they came into the monastery, found the means to
tell that to the mother of the covent, named Ebba. Who being troubled at such a
warning and fortelling, as good cause was, sent for the man unto her, and
enquired the whole matter of him diligently, and how he knew the same. Of late,
quod he, being occupied at night time in watching and saying of psalms, I
suddenly saw one stand by me, of a strange and unknown favor. At whose
presence when I was sore afraid, he bad me not to fear, and then in familiar
wise he spoke to me thus and said. Thou do well in that this night time of
reast, thou have had the strength, not to give thy self to ease and sleep,
but to be occupied in watching and praying. Whereto I answered and said, that
I knew my self to have great need to continewe in wholesome watching, and to
make diligent and dew intercession to our Lord for my sins. Thou say
true, quod he farther, that thou and many other have need to redeem and
satisfy for their sins with good works, and at such time as they are at
leisure from worldly pains and business, to labor the more freely for the
desire of everlasting wealth: but yet very few do so. For right now have I
walked through all this monastery in order, and looked in every selle and
bead, and of them all, saving thee, have I found not one occupied about the
saving of his own soul: but they are all both men and women either depely
drowned in sleep, or watching unto wickedness and syn. For the little houses
that were made to pray or read in, are now turned into chambers of eating
and drinking, Abuses of religious persons punished by God from heaven.
and talking, and other enticemente of ill. And the virgins, vowed unto God,
contemning the reverence and regard of their profession, as often as they have
any leisure thereto, do occupy themselves in weauing and making fine clothes,
wherewith they may set forth themselves like brydes, to the danger and great
peril of their estat and profession: or else to get the^ the love of strangers
and men abroad. And therefore is there worthily prepared from heaven for this
house and them that dwell therein a greuouse punishment and vengeance by fire.
Then quod the Abbess, And why would ye not sooner tell me hereof when ye knew
it? Forsooth, quod he, I feared so to do for respect of you, least ye would
perhap be overmuch troubled therewith. And yet take ye this comfort herein,
that this plage and punishment shall not fall in your days. This vision being
spread abroad and known, they of the place began somewhat to fear for a few
days, and to amend them selves, and leave their naughty life. But after the
death of the Abbess they returned to their old naughtynesse, yea and to worse
to. And when they said and thought themselves in peace and saftie, they were
anon stricken with the punishment of the foresaid vengeance. All which things
to have been thus done in deed, the most Reverend Giles my fellow priste
reported unto me, who lived than in the monastery: and afterward, (for that
many dwellers there went thence because of this ruyn) lived a long time in owr
monastery, and there dyed. This have I thowght good to put in our history to
this end, that we might warn the reader and put him in mind of the works of
owr Lord, how dreadful and terrible he is in his judgments and counselles
over the children of men. And that we serve not at any time the allurementes
and prouocations of the flesh, little fearing the judgment of God, least perhap
his sudden wrath strike us, and scowrge us justly and sharply either with
temporal losses and plages, or else deal more hardly with us and take us quite
away to perpetual pain and perdition.

Of the death of king Ecgfride and king Lother.

The 26. Chap.
THe year of thin carnation of our Lord DClxxxiiij. An. 684.
Ecgfride king of Northumberland sent Bertus his captain general with an
host of men into Scotland, and miserably spoiled and destroyed the harmless
seely people, which had ever been great frindes to the english nation, in so
much that the hand and force of the enemy spared not the very churches and
monasteries. Yet the men of the I Will as far as they were able did both resist
and withstand force with force, and also calling on the aid of Gods mercy, did
long with continual cursinges make supplication to be reue^ged from heaven.
And although such as curse cannot possess the kingdom of heaven, yet it is
believed, that they which for their vnmercyfulnes were worthily accursed, did
shortly suffer the punyshmentes of their wickedness by the vengeance of God. For
the next year after this, the same king against the advice and counsel of his
frindes, and specially: of Cutbert a man of blessed memory, who of late had
been consecrated bysshopp, did rashly and indiscreetly go forth with an army to
waste the province of the Redshankes. Who making as thowghe they sled, browght
him unto the straightes of the hills where was no passage, and there with the
most part of his host that he had browght with him, he was slain the xl.
year of his age, and xv. year of his reign, and xx. day of may. And in deed
(as I said) his frindes and counsel would not suffer him to begin this war,
but even as the year before he would not give ear to the most Reverend father
Ecgbert, for settinge upon Scotland that did him no harm, so was this now
given him for a punishment of that syn, that he would not harken unto them that
labowred to call and stay him from his own destruction. After which time the
hope and prowess of the dominion of the English began much to decay and go
backward. For the Redshankes recovered again their lands and possessions
which the English men did hold, and the Scotts that were in Britain, The
wel^hmen.
and also a certain part of the Britons got again their freedom and
liberty, which they hitherto have yet these xlvj. years or thereabowt. Where
among many of the englishmen that were either slain with the swearde or made
bondmen, or escaped from the land of the Redshankes by fleeing, the most
reverend man Trumwini, which had been bishop over them there, departed with his
company that were in the monastery of Ebbercune, the which stands in the
Englysh region, but nighe unto the straight that divides the lands of the
english and the Redshankes. And commending his fellows to his friends abroad in
diverse monasteries where he best might, himself went to the often mentioned
monastery of Gods servants and handmaydes, named Streaneshalch, and there
chose him his abiding place: where with a few other of his company he lead his
life a long time of years in monastical straightness, very profitably not to
himself only, but to many other also. At which time there governed the same
monastery a certain virgin of the kings blood named Elflet, and their mother
Eanflede together, of whom we have before made mention. But when this bishop
came thither, the good and virtuous Abbess found thereby not only great help
in her chardge and governance, but also comfort to her own life and
conversation. After king Ecgfride succeeded in the kingdom Altfrit a man very
well learned in the scriptures, who was said to be Ecgfrides brother, and son
to king Oswine. This man did nobly and worthily recover the decayed and
destroyed estate of the kingdom, thowghe the bounds and greatenes thereof
were now more narowe. This same year, which was from thincarnarion of owr
Lord DClxxxv. An. 635.
dyed Lothere king of kent the vj. day of February, when he had reigned xij.
years after his brother Ecgbert, who reigned jx, years. For this Lother was
wounded in the battle of the South Saxons, the which Edrich the son of
Egbert fowght against him, and while he was at surgerie in curing he dyed.
After whom the said, Edrich reigned one year and an half. Who departing
without issue, that kingdom was for a space throwghe uncertain and foraine
kings sore decayed and destroyed, until the lawful and legitimat king
Victred, who was Egberts son came and was quietly settled therein, who both by
good religion and princely prowess delivered his people from foraine forse and
invasion.

How Cutbert the man of God was made bishop, and how he lived and tawght
while he yet was in his monastery and monastical conversation.

The. 27. Chapter.
IN that same year that king Egbert ended his life, Holy Ilo^de.
he caused (as we have said) Cutbert an holy and reverend man to be consecrated
bishop of the church of Lindesfarre, The I Will of Cochette.
who had lived a solitary life many years in great continency both of body
and mind, in a very small isle, called, Farne, which lies distant from the
said church of Lindisfarme almost ix. miles a good way in the main Ocean
sea. This man from the first beginning of his childhode was always fervently
desyrouse of religiouse life, and when he was grown somewhat toward man's
state, he took both the name and habit of a monk. For he entered first into
the monastery of Mail^os, which stands on the bank of the river Tyne, and
was at that time gouuerned of Abbot Eata, the mekest and mildest man of a
thousand. Afterward he was taken from thence, and made bishopp of the diocese
of Hagulstald or Lindisfarne, as we have a foresaid. The which see was before
gouuerned by Boisill a man of great virtues, and graces and of a prophetical
spirit. Whose humble and diligent scholar Cutbert had been, and learned of him
the knowledge of the holy scriptures, and examples of good works. Which man
after he was gone to God, Cutbert was made head of the same monastery, where
both by the authority of his master, and example of his own doing he
instructed and brought many unto regular life and discipline. The life of S.
Cutbert being yet a monk.
Neither did he only give unto the monastery both admonishementes and examples
of virtuous and regular life, but also labored to turn the common people
far and nere thereabout from the life of their careless conversation, to the
love and longing of the joys of heaven. For many folk at that time did
profane and defyle the faith that they had with wicked works and dooinges,
some also in the time of the great death and plage, setting at naught the
sacraments of faith (wherewith they were endewed) ran to the erroneous
medicines and sorceries of idolatry, as though they were able by enchantementes
or withcrafte, or any other secret art and coning of the devil to stay and
keep of the plage sent from God the creator. Both which sorts of people to
correct, and reprove their erroneouse and ill doing this good father would go
out of the monastery sometime on horseback, but moo times on foot, and come to
the villages lyeng thereabout, and preach the way of truth to them that were
astraye. Which thing also Boisill was wont to do in his time. For it was the
manner of the people of England at that time, that when any of the clergy or any
priest came to a village, they would all by and by at his calling come together
to hear the word, and willingly harken to such things as were said, and
more willingly follow in works such things as they could hear and
understand. Now this man Cutbert had such a grace and skill in vtteraunce,
such a zele in persuading, such an Angels face and countenance, that none that
was present durst presume to hyde the secrettes of his heart from him: but did
all openly declare in confession the things that they had done: both for that
they thought that the same could in no wise be hid from him, and also that
they might be shryuen and cleansed from their sins through the dew fruits
of penance as he should appoint them. This good man was wont to resort unto
those places and villages most commonly that stood a far of in stipye and
craggie hills, and which other men were afraid to come at, or else being
learned lothed to visit because of the unseemly dwelling and vplandish rudeness
of the inhabitants. And yet he did so ioyefully give himself to this godly and
charitable labor, and so diligently instructed them with good and wholesome
doctrine, that he would go out of the monastery oftetimes, and not come home
again in an whole weke, sometimes not in two or three, yea not in a whole
month, but all that time tarry in the hills among the poor folk of the
country, exhorting them to the joys of heaven both with the word of
preaching, and work of virtuous example. When this reverend seruante of our
Lord had lived many years in the monastery of Mailros, and excelled in great
signs of virtues, the most reverend Abbot there Eata removed him to the isle of
Lindesfarne, that he might there also set forth to the brethren the keeping of
regular discipline both with the authority of an head and ruler, and also
express and show the same by his own doing and example. For this most
reverend father did at that time gouuerne the same place as Abbot there of.
Though of old time in that place both the bishop was wont to abide together
with his clergy and ministers of his church, and the Abbot with the monks, who
did also notwithstanding belong to the household, and cure of the bishop. For
Aida^ which was the first bishop of that place, came thither with monks being
also a monk himself, and did there place and begin monastical life and
conversation: even as before also the blessed father Augustine did in kent, as
is well known, and as we have declared before, at what time as the most
reverend Pope Gregorye wrote to him, on this wise. For as much as, dear brother,
In the first book the. 27. chap.
it is not mete for you that are enstructed and brought up in monastical rules
and orders to be and dwell several from your clergy and chapplins in the
church of England, which is of late by the work and grace of God brought unto
the faith, you must therefore use this life and conversation which our fathers
used in the beginning and rising of the primitive church, among whom noman did
call any thing his, of all that they bad: but all things were common among
them.

How the same man living an anchors solitary life did by praying bring forth
water out of a stone ground, and also received grain by the labor of his
hand out of sowing time.

The. 28. Chapter.
AFter this, Cutberte increasing in the merit of religiouse and holy devotion
came also to the secret silence of an Anchors life and contemplation. And
because many years passed, we have sufficiently written of his life The life of
S. Cutbert written by S. Bid, is ex tant in the. 3. tome of his works.
and virtues both in heroical verse, and in prose, yt shall suffice at this
present only to rehearse this much, that at his going to the island he protested
to the brethren and said: If the grace and goodness of God do grant me in
that place, that I may live by the work of mine own hand I will gladly abide
there: if not I will God willing very shortly return to you again. Now this
place was quite destitute both of water and grain and wodde, and also not mete
for any man to dwell in because of the wicked spirits and fendes that haunted
there. Yet at the prayer and desire of the man of God it became such in all
respect, that it might well enough be enhabited. For at his coming the evil
spirits went their way. Which enemies being so driven out, and that he had made
himself a narrow and small dwelling place, compassed about with a trenche,
and with the helping hand of the brethren had bylded necessary howses in the
same, that is to say, a chapel and a common dwelling place, he commanded
the brethern to make a pyt in the pauement of the same dwelling place. Which
they did, and yet the earth was very hard and stonye, and seemed not to have any
moisture in the world, nor any vain of water or spring in it. But the next day
at the faith and prayers of the servant of God, the pyt was found full of
water, which unto this day does give sufficient use and abundance of that
heavenly grace to all that come thither. Beside this he desired to have
ploughing tools brought him and wheat withal, and when he had labored and
made ready ground before and sown it in dew season, it so happened that at
the very time of summer there grew thereof not only no ears, but not so much as
any blade or grass. Wherefore when the brethren came to visit him as their
manner was, he willed barley to be brought him, to see if happily the nature of
that soil, or the will of the high geuer were, that the sede of that grain
could grow any better there. Which when it was brought him, and that he had
sown it in the same field, out of all season of sowing, and out of all hope of
having any fruit again, yet there arose and grew up anon corn plentifully,
and gave to the man of God the joyful refresshing and sustenaunce of his own
labor. And when he had there served God solitarily many years (for the bank
wherewith his house was compassed and trenched about was so high, The third
Synod of the english church.
that he could see nothing else out of it, but heaven, which he thyrsted and
longed to enter into) it happened at the same time, that there was a great
synod assembled in the presence of king Egfride by the river of Alua, at a
place called Atwiforde, which signifies as much, as, at the two fordes, in
which Archebisshop Theodore of blessed memory was president, and there this
foresaid man with one mind and consent of them all was chosen to be bishop of
the church of Lindisfarne. Who when he could in no wise be drawn out of his
monastery for all the messengers and letters that were sent him, at last the
foresaid king himself having the most holy bishop Trumwine with him and many
other religiouse parsons and men of power and authority, did pass over unto
the Island. Also many of the brethren of the i will of Lindesfar came thither for
this purpose: all which on their knees most earnestly desired and required him
for Gods sake and with weping tears in our Lords name they besought him so
long, that they made his eyes stand full of sweet tears to, and so they gat
him out of his cave, and brought him to the Synod. And when he came thither,
though much again his own will he was ouercomed by the one assent and will of
all the reast, and compelled to submit his neck to bear the yoke and office
of a bishop. And the words that forced him most, were, that the servant of
God Boisil (who did with the prophetical spirit he had, foreshew many things
that should fall after him) had also prophesied and fortelde that Cutberte
should be bishop. Now his consecrating not appointed to be straight way but
after the winter passed which then was at hand, in the feast and solemnisation
of Easter it was finished at York, in the presence of the foresaid king
Egfride, where there came to his consecrating vij. bishops, Consecration of
bishops with a number of bisshops.
of whom Theodore of blessed memory was chief and primate. He was first
elected and chosen to be bishop of Hagulstad diocese in Trumberts place, who
was deposed from the same. But because he rather desired to be of Lindisfarne
church, in which he had sometimes lived, it seemed good, and was appointed that
Eata showld return to the sea of Hagulstad, of which he had first been made
bishop, and Cutberte showld have the chardge and jurisdiction of Lindisfarne
Church. And when he had thus taken upon him this degree and office of bishop,
he did setforth and adorn the same with the works of virtues and holiness,
following the example of the blessed Apostles. For he did both with continual
prayers make intercession for the people committed unto him, and with most
wholesome exhortations styrred them to thirst after the joys of heaven. S.
Cutbert the example of a good Bisshoppe.
And (the thing which most of all is wont to help and farther teachers) such
things as he towght other folk to do, he first in his own doing gave
example of the same. For he was above all things fervent in the fire of Gods
love and charity, modest and sober in the virtue of patience, excedingly given
to devotion of praying, affable and familiar to all men that came to him for
comfort and counsel. For he took this for a kind of prayer too, if he did
help and succor with his exhortation such as were weak and imperfect,
knowing that he that said, Thou shall love thy lord God, said also, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. He was also notable for his abstinence
and straight living, S. Cutberts devotion at mass time.
ever panting after the hope of heavenly things with great contrition and
compunction of heart. Finally when he offered the host of the wholesome
sacrifice unto God, he commended his prayers to our Lord not with a voice
lyfted up on high, but with tears powered out from the botome of his heart.
Thus when he passed over two years in his bysshoppricke, he went again to his
i will and monastery, being warned by the oracle and admonyshment of god, that
the day of his death was now at hand, or rather the entrance and beginning of
that life, which only in deed should be called life. Which thing he himself at
the same time did after his plain and simple manner open unto certain, but in
dark and obscure words, yet such as were afterward plainly understood.
And to some to he did utter and reuele the same in very open and plain words.

How the said bishop did foretell his death to be very nighe at hand unto
Herebert a virtuous priest.

The. xxix. Chapter.
FOr there was a certain priest reverend for his vprightnes and perfection of
life and manners named Hereberte, which had a long time been coupled to this
man of God in the bond of spiritual love and fryndship. For living a solitary
life in the isle of that great wide lake, out of which ronneth the head and
beginning of the river of Derwent, he was wont to visit Cutbert every year,
and to hear the good lessons of eternal life at his mouth. When this virtuous
priest heard of his coming to the city of Lugubalia, he came after his
accustomed manner desyryng to be enflamed more and more to the bliss and joys
above by his wholesome exhortations. Who as they sat together, and did inebriat
one an other with the cups of the life of heaven, among other things the
bishop said: Remember brother Hereberte, that what soever ye have to say and
ask of me, you do it now: for after we depart the one from the other, we
shall not mete again and see one an other with the eyes of the body any more
in this world. For I know well, that the time of my departing is at hand, and
the laying away of my bodyly tabernacle shall be very shortly. Which things when
he heard, he fell down at his feet, and with heavy sighs and pouring tears I
beseke you (quoth he) for our Lords sake, forsake me not, but remember your
most faithful fellow and companion, and make intercession to the high and
tender pity of God, that we may depart hence unto heaven together to behold
his grace and glory, whom we have in the earth served and honored together.
For you know that I have ever studied and labored to live after your good and
virtuous instructions, and what soever I offended and omitted through
ignorance and frailty, I did straight way do mine endeavor to amend the
same after your ghostly counsel, will, and judgment. At this earnest and
affectuouse request of his, the bishop gave him self to his prayers, and anon
being certified in spirit that he had obtained the thing that he besought of
our Lord: Arise (quoth he) my dear brother, and weep not, but rejoice with all
gladness. For the high mercy of God has granted us that we have prayed for.
The truth of which promise and prophecy was well proved in that which befell
after. For after they departed a sonder, they saw not one an other bodyly any
more, but on one self same day, which was the xix, day of March, Quomodo in
v^^asua dilexerunt se, i^a in mer^e no^ sunt separati.
their souls went out of their bodies, and were straight joined together again
in the blessed sight and vision, and carried hence both to the kingdom of
heaven by the hands and service of Angels. But Herebert was first tried and
pourged in the fire of long sickness, As they loved in their life so in
their death they were not severed.
by the dispensation of our Lords goodness and pity, as it is credible, that
such want of merit and perfection as he had, more than blessed Cutbert, the
same might be supplied in the purging pain of long chastening sickness, so
that being made equal in Gods grace and favor with his fellow that was
intercessour for him, even as he should depart out of the body at the self
same time with him, so he might also deserve to be received into the self same
and like seat of perpetual bliss. This most reverend father dyed in the I Will
of Farne, and at his death he besought the brethren most earnesty, that he
might be buried there in the same place, where he had no small time served and
been in warfar for our Lord. But yet at last ouercomed with their request,
he was content, that he might be brought to Lindisfarne I Will, Holy Ilond
and laid in the church there. In the mean time, these things done
Wilfrid the most reverend bisshopp kept the bishoppricke of that church
one year until an other was elected to be made bishop for Cutberte. After
which time Eatbert was consecrated, a notable man in the knowledge of the holy
scriptures, and also in the dew keeping of heavenly precepts and lessons, and
most of all in doing of alms and deeds of charity, in so much that according
to the old law he gave every year to poor folk the tenth not only of his
cattle, but of all grain, fruit and apples, and some part of his clothes and
apparaill to.

How the body of Cutbert after xj. years burieng, was found free from
corruption and rotting. And how the successor of that bysshoppricke passed
out of the world not long after.

The 30. Chap.
THe ordinance and dispensation of God willing to show more largely abroad in
how great glory the man of God Cutbert lived after his death, whose high
godly life before his death excelled notably by many and often signs and
miracles, did put into the minds of the brethren xj. years passed after his
burial, to take up and remove his bones: thinkinge to find them all dry,
the body being now consumed and brought to duste as dead bodies commonly are,
and so to put them in a new toumbe, and lay them again in the same place,
but somewhat above the flower and pauement, for the more reverence dew
thereunto. Which mind and intent of theirs they did declare to Eadbert their
bishop, who agreed to the same, and bad them remember to do it on the day of
his departing. And so they did. And when they opened the tumbe, they found the
body all whole and sound, as if it were alive, and the lymmes, joints, and
synowes soft and pliable, much liker a sleping body than a dead. Also all
the clothes, that were about him, seemed not only without wem or any blemish,
but also as fresh fair, and bright, as when they were new and first made.
Which when the brethren saw, they were stricken straight with a great fear,
and with all have went to show there bysshopp what they had found, who as it
happened was that time solitary abiding alone in the farthest place from the
church, being closed round about with the flowing and ebbing fluddes of the
sea. For there was he wont always to keep the time of Lent, The devotion of
bisshops in times past.
and also xl. days before Christmas in great devotion of abstinence, prayer,
and tears. In which place also his reverend predecessor Cutberte before that
he went to the I Will of Farne, did at certain times secretly serve our Lord in
spiritual warfare. And they browght him a part of the clothes that were about
the holy body. Which he both receiving thankefully as acceptable presents,
and most gladly rejoicing to hear of such miracles (for he kissed the clothes
with a great affection as if they were yet about the fathers body) put ye on
(quoth he) new clothes about the body for these that ye have brought me, and
so lay it again in the cheast that ye have provided therefore: I know most
certainly, that that place shall not remain long empty, which is hallowed
with such a special grace of this heavenly miracle. And how happy is he,
unto whom our Lord the author and giver of all bliss will vouchesafe to give
leave and license to reaste in that place? These and many like things when the
bishop had said with many tears, and great compunction, and trembling
tongue, the brethren did as he had bydden them, and wound the body in a new
clothe, and put it in a new cophin, and so laid it above the pauement of the
chauncell. And shortly after the dear beloved of God Eadbert the bishop was
taken with a bitter and burning disease, the which daily increased and waxed
more fervent, so that not longafter which, was the sixte day of May, he
departed out of this world, and went unto God. And his body was also laid in
the grave of the blessed father Cutbert, with the cophim over him, in which
they had put the uncorrupted body of the said father. In which place signs
and miracles sometimes done in restoring the sick to their health, do bear
witness and confirm the merit and virtuous lives of them both. Of which
miracles we have long synse put certain in memory in the book of his life.
But yet we have thought it convenient to add thereto certain in this history
also, which we happened to hear and learn of late.

How a certain man was cured of the palsy at his tomb.

The 31. Chapter.
THere was in the same monastery a certain monk named Beadwegen, whose
office of long time was to serve such geastes and strangers as came, and is
alive yet to this day, a man of whose much devotion and religiouse
conversation all the brethren and strangers that resort thither to bear
witness and testify. And that obediently and dewly he does the office put
unto him, only for the reward that he looks for above. This man on a
certain day when he had washed in the sea the mantels or clothes that he
occupied in the hospital, coming home again was in the myd way suddenly
taken with a pain in his body, in such wise that he fell down on the earth,
and lay flat on the ground for a space, and could scant at last get up again.
And when he was risen up he felt the half part of his body from the head to
the fete to be grievously taken and stryken with a palsy, and so with much
pain he came home to the house leaning on a staff. The disease grew and
increased little, and little: and when night came, was waxen so greuouse and
painful, that the next day he was scant able to rise up or go by himself.
Into which pain and adversity he being thus brought, conceived in his mind a
profitable way and counsel, which was to get him to the church by some means
or other as well as he could, and enter into the tomb of the blessed father
Cutberte, and there upon his knees humbly to beseech the high sovereign
goodness of God, that either he might be delivered from the anguish and pain,
if it were so good and profitable for him, ot else if it behooved him to be
longer chastened with that grief by the gratiouse provision of God, that he
might then patiently and with meke mind bear and suffer this pain and
afflicton put upon him. And as he had devised and purposed in his mind, so he
did in deed, and bearing up and staying his feeble lymmes with a staff he went
into the church, and there fell down prostrate at the corse of the man of
God, praying with fervent intent and devotion that through his help and
intercession our Lord would be good and merciful unto him. And as he was at
his prayers falling as it were in a certain soft slumber, he felt (as he him
self was afterward wont to tell) like as a great broad hand touch his head in
that place where the grief was, and with the same touching pass along over all
his body to the very feet, on that side where the pain lay, and there with all by little and little the grief went away, and straight thero^ followed
perfect health: which done he awoke forthwith, and rose up sound and hole and
giving thanks to our Lord for his health, came and showed the brethern what
had chanced unto him. And at the great rejoicing of all men he returned
again to the office and service that he was wont diligently to do, being
now as it were made better and more seruisiable by this tryeng and examining
scourge of God. The clothes also wherewith the holy body of Cutberte was clad
either before in his life time, or after when he was dead did not want the
grace and gift of healing the sick: In the third tome of S. Bedes works.
as who so will read, shall find in the book of his life and virtues.

How a certain man of late at S. Cutbertes relics was cured of a great sore
in his eye.

The. 32. Chapter.
YET this one thing is not to be passed over or unspoken of, which three years
passed was done by and at his relics, as was told me by the same man on
whom it was done. And it was in the monastery, which is buylt by the river
of Dacore, and thereof has his name, in which that time Switbert a good
religiouse man was head and Abbot. In that monastery there was a certain
young man, that had a foul unhandsome swelling in the lead of his eye, the
which daily grew bigger, and was like to put him in danger of the loss of his
eye. The physicians laid salues and plasters thereto to assuage the swelling,
but they could do no good: some men would have it to be cut of, other said no,
for fear of a farther danger. And thus the foresaid poor brother continewed
in this case no small time, and could get no help at man's hand against this
peril of the loss of his eye, but rather it daily increased and waxed worse,
till at last it was his chance through the grace and goodness of God to be
healed suddenly by the reliliques of the most holy father S. Cutbert. For when
the monks had found his body not rotten nor corrupted after it had many years
lain buried, they took parts of the hear of his head, which in manner of
relics they might give or show for a sign of the miracle to their fryndes
when they came, and desired the same. A little part of these relics were at
that time in this monastery, in the keeping of one of the priests there named
Thridred, who now is Abbot of the house. Which man on a certain day went to
the church and opened the shrine of relics, to give a part thereof to afrynd
of his. At what time it chanced, the young man which had the sore eye, was
present in the church. And when the priest had given his frynd such part
thereof, as he would, he gave the rest to the young man to lay up again in his
place. Who by a good motion and mind that came to him, as soon as he had
received the hears of the holy head, took the^ and put them to his sore eye,
and held them there a space to keep down and assuage the greuouse swelling
therewith. And that done he laid the relics up again in the shrine as he
was bidden, If they which now preach only faith, had such faith they should see
such miracles now.
believing that his eye should shortly be healed by the hear of the man of God,
wherewith he was touched. And his faith and belief deceived him not. For it was
at that time (as he was wont to tell) about vij. of the clock in the morning.
And as he thought upon his busynes and went about other things as the day
required, toward none the same day, he happened suddenly to touch his eye, the
which he felt and found with the eyled and all, as whole and sound, as if
there had never been seen any blemyshe or swellinge therein.

THVS ENDS THE FOVRTH BOOK FO THE HISTORY OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND.
THE FIFTE BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND.
How Aedilwalde Cutberts successor living a solitary and heremytes lyffe alayd
by prayer for certain of his Brethren a great tempest in the sea.

The. 1. Chapter
THE famous and reverend father Aedilwalde, which by virtuous and worthy
behavior of him self many years in the monastery called Inripe, brought the
office of priesthood taken upon him in great reverence and estimation,
succeeded Cutbert the man of God in practice of that solytary and lonefull
lyffe, which he passed in Farne island before he was made bishop. Whose
worthynesse and good life, that all men may more evidently perceive, I will
declare one miracle wrought by him as one of the same company for and in whom
it was wrought, declared to me: to wit Gutfride a faithful seruante of Jesus
Christ by vocation a priest, Holy Ilond.
who afterward was Abbot of the same church of Lyndisfarne where he was
brought up. I came (said he) with ij. other off my brethren to Farne Island
desyring to speak with the reverend father Aedilwald. And when we had talked
with him a while to our great comfort, and afterward receiving his blessing
haste nyd homewarde again, behold, suddenly as we were in the mydest off the
sea, the caulme in which we sailed was taken away, and so great a tempest and
terrible storm came upon us, that neither with sail nor ower we could
prevail, nor presently look for any thing but death. And when we striving
long with the wind and the seas to no effect, looked back at the lenght, if
perchance by any possible means we might return back to the Island again
from whence we came, we manifestly perceived that on every side with leeke
tempest our journey was stayed, and return intercepted: and no hope of escape
in our selfs: Afterward when we descried the land a far of and looked
stedely toward the same, we saw in Farne islande that virtuous and holy
father Aedilwalde come out of his cave to look how we sailed away. For as soon as he heard the blusteringe of the wind, and rage of the Ocean sea, he
came forth to see what might happen and chance to us. And when he saw us
laboring hard against the surges of the sea, and in clean desperation of
recovering the land, he fell down upon his knees: and prayed to almighty
God, father of our Lord Jesus Christ to deliver us from that present danger
of death: And when he had ended his prayer, he appeased the rage of the sea in
such sort, that the violence of the storm all together ceasing, we had wind
and wether at will without any surges of the sea or great waves of water,
until we came to land. When we were on ground, and had laid our ship at
ancre, streytwayes the same storm and tempest which for our sakes was a little
while alayed, began again, and ceased not his rage all that day, to the end
it might be given us to understand, that the little caulme which happened, was
given of God from heaven at the contemplation of that godly man's prayer, to
deliver us out of danger. This virtuous man, high in favor with God
continued in Farne island xij. years, and there died: but he is buried in
Lindisfarne island: Nere to the place where the bodies of the forementioned
bishops lie: in saint Peter the Apostle his church. These things were done
in king Elfrides reign, who was king of Northumberlande xviij. years after
his brother E^gfride.

How bishop John cured a dumme man, with blessinge of him.

The 2. Chap.
IN the beginning off this king his reign when bisshoppe Eata was dead, Of
S. John of Beuerlake.
John famous for his integrity and pure life took the bishoppricke of
Hagulstald upon him: of whom his near and familiar acquaintance were wont
to report many strange miracles and virtues wrought at diverse several
times: and specially amongst all other, Berethum sometime his deacon, but now
Abbot of the monastery caulled Inderwodde: a man worthy of all reverence and
credit for his truethe: off the which I have thought good to committ one or two
to your memories. There is a secrett and solytary mansion place compassed
about with a great wood, and closed rownde with a deeke distant from
Hagulstalde not paste a mile and a halffe, but divided with the river Tine
which runs betwixt them boothe, having a church yard off saint Michael
the archangell where this holy man was wounte to seiourne and make his abode
very often, as occasion, and time served, with a few of his companions, and
give him selffe most earnestly to prayer and study, but specially in the Lent.
And when at a certain time (lent being at hand) he came thither to abide
after his accustomed manner, he commaundid those that were about him to seek
some poor beggar, and impotent Lazar, whom he might have with him all the
time of his continuance there, to extend his charity and deal his alms
unto. There was in a town not far off, a young man, that was dumme well
known of the bisshoppe (for he used to come before him oftentimes to receive
his alms:) the which was never able to speak so much as one word. Besides,
he had such an unseemly sore in his head, that in the crown and hyer parts
there could not a hear take root, only a few evil favored rough hears
stood staringe round about his temples. This impotent Lazar the bishop
commanded to be brought thither, and a harbor made for him within the
precinct of his house, where he might ordinarilye every day receive his alms:
And when one weke of Lent was past, the next sounday he willed the poor man to
come into him: when he was come, he bydd him put out his tongue, and show it
unto him, and taking him by the chinne, made a sign of the holy cross upon
his tongue: and when he had so signed and blessed it, he commanded him to
pluck it in again, and speak saying, speak me one word, say gea, gea,
which in the english tongue is a word off affirmation and consent in such
signification as yea, yea. Incontinent the stringes of his tongue were loosed,
and he said that which he was commanded to say. The bishop added certain
letters by name and bid him say A: he said A. say B. he said B. and when he had
said and recited after the bishop the wholle cross rewe, he put unto him
sillables and hole words to be pronounced. Unto which when he aunsered in all
points orderly, he commanded him to speak long sentences, and so he did:
and ceased not all that day and night following, so long as he could hold up
his head from sleep, (as they make report that were present) to speak and
declare his secret thoughts and purposes, the which before that day he could
never utter to any man: in leeke manner as that long lamed Lazar, who restored
by the Apostles Peter and John, Act. cap. 3.
to the use of his legs again stood up and walked, and entered into the
temple with other walkinge and leppinge and praising God with much joy and
myrthe, that he could now go upon his legs, the which benefit he had
lacked long time before: The bisshoppe also rejoicing that he had his speech
again, commanded the physician to take the sore of his head in cure. Which he
did, and by help of the bisshopps benediction and holy prayer, the skin came
again, and hears grew as fightly to see as any other ma^s. So he that was
before evil favored, dumme, and a lothesome creature to look to, he was now
made a hansome young man, his countinuance amyable and pleasant to behold,
his tongue ready and expedit to speak, his hear curled and fair to see. And
so rejoicing for the recovery of his health, he returned home, notwithstanding
the bishop offered him lodginge and gentle entertaynement, amongst his own
familye.

How the said bishop healed a sick maiden by prayer.

The 3. Chap.
THe same good Abbot Berecht told me an other great miracle done by the said
bishop: and this it was. When that learned prelate and Reverend father
Wilfrid after long exile and banishement was recovered again to the
bisshopricke of Hagulstalde, and the same bishop John translated to York after
Bosa (a man full of all godliness and humility) was departed out of this
transitory life, he came on a certain time to a Nunnerie in a town called
Vetade, where Herebuge was abbess. When we were there said he, and entertained
gently with good heart and chereful countinence of al, the abbess told us
that one of her covent and young nonnes (which was her own daughter) being
sick, lay languishinge and pininge away, because she was let blood off late
in her arm: and while she was thinking off it in her fond and foolyshe
fantasye, the sudden pain made her very weak: which growing upon her more
and and more, the arm where the vain was opened, waxed very sore, and so
pitefully swollen, that a man could scarce clippe it with both his hands,
and she lyinge in her bed for the great intolerable pain seemed to be almost
dead and at the pitts brimme. Wherefore the Abbess besought this good bishop
to go in and bless her. Because she believed steadfastly that if he did other
bless her or touch her, the vehemence of her desease would cease, and she
should stratyways begin to amend: He asked them when she was let blood, and
understanding it was done at the prime of the moon, said, that it was very
unskillfully and and indiscreetly done to let her blud at the prime of the moon. I remember well (quod he) Archbishop Theodore (renouned among all his
posterity) told me that letting of blud and opening the vain was very
dangerous about the first quarter of the moon, and rysinge of the sea. And
what can I do for this maiden, now she is at deaths door? Not withstandinge
she besought him very instantly for her daughter, which she loved tenderly (for
she purposed to make her abbess after her) and at the lenght with much a do
obtained, so much of him as to go into the chamber, and see the sick maiden:
Wherefore he took me with him, and went to the maiden which lay languishinge
(as I said) with great and intolerable pain in her arm, so swellinge that it
could not once bow at the elbowe. And standinge there he said certain
prayers over her, and after he had blessed her, went out again. When we had sat
an hour at the table, one came in and called for me, and leading me a side
from the company, said, Coenburge (for that was the maids name) desires you
to come to her as soon as you can. When I came in to the chamber I found her
very cherefull and merry and as it were almost hole. And when I had sat by her
a while, shall we call for some drink said she? mary with a good will quod I,
and I am right glad you ar able so to do. When we had both drunk, she began
to declare unto me, that sense the bishop had prayed for her and blessed her,
and went out of the chamber, she began to amend and wax better and better,
and albeit I have not recovered my former strength again, quod she, yet all
the anguishe and pain, is gone both out of my arm (where it was most
fervent) and also out of all other parts of my body, the bishop as it were
carrying all out of doors with him, though yet the swelling seems scant all
alayed in my arm. As we were taking our leave, and departinge thence, the
swellinge also went away, as the pains and anguishe of her body did before: So
the maiden delivered from danger of death and other woeful wooes, gave laud
and praise to God with the rest that were there attending and waytinge upon her.

How he healed an Earls wife with holy water.

The. 4. Chapter
OF this forsaid bishop, Berecht abbot of Inderwodde told us an other miracle
not much vnleke this. An earl called lord Puch had a manor, abbout two miles
from our monastery, whose lady had been trobled with such a vehement desease
for xl. days, that in iij. weakes space she was not able to be carried out of
the chamber, where she lay. It fortuned one day this devout and godly father
to be sent for by the earl to dedycate and hallowe a church, Dedication of
churches.
and when the solemnity of this dedication was past, and the church halloed,
the earl invited him home to his house, and (as ciuilite and courtesy
required) desired him to diner. The bishop refused his gentilnesse, saying
that of dewty he must return and go to the next abbaye: But the earl most
instantly entreatinge him promised that he would do great alms to the poor,
if he would vouchsaffe to go home to his house that day and break his fast. I
entreated him in leeke manner as the Earl did, promisinge that I would give
alms also to relieve the poor, if he would go to dynner to the earls house,
and bless him and his family. And when we had obtained so much of him with
long entreataunce, we went to the earls house to take our repast. The bishop
sent the sick lady by one of the company that came with him, some of the holy
water, which he hallowed in dedicatio^ of the church, commanding him to will
her to drink of it, and to wash that part of her body with the same where the
grief was most vehement. Al which being done she rose out of her bed whole and
sound. And perceauing that she was not only cured of her long infirmity and
desease, but made also as lively, lusty and strong as ever she was before,
came to the table, showed her self very officious in caruinge and drynkinge to
the bishop and all the hole table and ceasyd not to use such courteous
officiosytye, all the dynner time. Following in this point saint Peter's
mother in law, who delyueryd from her hot burning fever by the only touch
of Christ's hand, rose up as strong and hole as ever she was before, and
served them at the table.

How he curyd another earls son lyinge at the point of death.

The. 5. Chapter.
THis bishop called another time in leeke manner to dedicate and halloe a
church of the earl Addi was desired, after all the solemnity were done, by
the earl, to go in to one of his children, which was very sick and ready to
dye, as being benu^myd of al senses and natural operations of the body. the
cophyn also or chest where he should be laid after his death was preparyd and
made ready. Further more the good earl intreatyd him with weapinge tears
desirying for the passion of god that he would go in and pray for his son
because his life was both necessary and dear unto him: for his part he
steadfastly believed that yff he would lay his hand upon him and bless him
once, The faith of our primitive church.
he should streytwaye recover. At his desire and long entreataunce the
bishop went in, and saw him (to the great dysconfort and heaviness of all
that were present) ready to yield up the ghost, and the cophyn hard by him in
which he should be buried. He made his prayer to god and blessed him, and goying
owte spoke those comfortable words that men use to syck folk, to wytt, I pray
god send you health and quyck recovery from this desease And when they had sat
a while at the table the child sent to the earl his father, desyringe to have
a cup of wine sent him: for he was thrustye. The earl being glad with all
his heart that his son could drynk sent him a cup of wine which the bishop
had blessed. As soon as he had drunk of yt, he rose owte of his bed, put on
his clothes, came down from his chamber, went to the great hall, saluted the
bishop, welcomed the ghestes, and said he had a good stomach and appetyte to
eat. They commau^dyd him to the table and were glad that he was so well
recoueryd. He sat down, he eat, he drank, he lawght and made merry with them
and in all points behaved him selffe as the other ghestes, and lyuinge many
years after contynuyd in the same state with owte any grudge of his old
desease. The abbot said this miracle was not done in his sight and presence
but he heard yt by relation of them which were present when yt was done.

How by his prayer and blessinge he relieved one of his clerks maruelously
broosed with a fall from his horse and in great danger of death.

The. 6. Chapter.
NEther do I think yt good to pass over in silence that great miracle which
a faithful servant of our savior Christ named Herebalde was wont to report
to have been done and practiced upon him self, who at that time was one of
his clergy, and is now abbot in a monastery that borderyth hard upon the
river VVyre. So far forth said he, as yt was lauful for a man to judge I
fownde all the whole state and ma^ners of his life corresponde^t to that
grauytye and holiness which is required in a bishop: and of that I am right
well assuryd because I was daily conversant with him. But touching his w^nes in
the sight of God, and favor before the myghth^ which sercheth the secrets of
all men's hearts, I h^e^ experience in many other, but specially in my felff, ^
whom be in a manner restoryd from death to life ^ prayer and benediction. For
when in my first florys^^yng and lusty yowthe I lyuyd amongst his clergy, and
was set to schole to learn both to read and singe, and had not yet abandonyd
all foolysh fantasies, and yowthfull panges, it fortuned one day that as we
rode with him we came into a goodly plain way and fair grene which seemed a
very trymme place to run and coorse ower horses in. And the yowng men that
were in his company, especially of the lay sort, began to desire the Bishop
to give the^ leave to coorse and gallop their horses. But at the first he
utterly denied and said them nay with this check: It is but a foolysh fond
thing you desire. At the last not able to withstand nor gaynesay the ernest
and importune request of all the whole company, he said, do if you will: mary
so, that Herebald refrain, and abide with me. Than I entreating as suppliantly
as I could to have license to galloppe my horse and coorse up and down with
the other young men (for I trusted well my horse, which the bishop him self
had before given me) I could not prevail at all. But when I saw them take
their horses up with the spurs and fetch now this way now that as
courageously with stop and turn, as could be, the bisshoppe and I beholding
all their pastime, I strayt ways ouercomed with wanton courage could not stay
my self, but went amongst the thickest of them, and ran with the best. And
as I took my horse up with the spurs, I heard him behind my back, with a
deape sigth, to say. O merciful God what woeful woo, woorkest thou to me in
ryding after thus sort. I heard those words, notwithstanding with willful
will I minded to follow my pastime. And behold even straightwaye as my horse
wild, fearce, and courageous with great violence and force lept over a deeke
by the way, down fell I to the ground, and as one ready to dye by and by,
lost all my senses, and was not able to move any one ioyncte of my body. For
whereas in the same place lay a stone close to the ground covered with a little
green turffe, and not one other could be found in all that plain valley and
level ground, it fortuned by chance, or rather by the divine providence off
God to punisshe my disobedience it happened, that I pitched upon the same
stone with my head, and hand which in the fall I putt under to stay my self,
and so broke my thumme, and sculle off my head, that (as I said before) I lay
there leeke a dead man ready for his grave. And because I could not be removed
thence, they stretched forth a pauilion, and made me a lodging there. This was
about seven of clock in the morninge: from that hour until night I tarried
there with out any noise or disquietnes even as it had been a dead man: than I
began to reliue and came to my self again, and was carried home to the
bishops lodging, by certain of my fellows where I lay speachlesse all that
night, casting and vomiting blud, because my bulcke and ynner parts, were sore
broysed with the fall. But the bishop for the tender affection and singular
good fancy he bare to me, was marvelous sorry for my misfortune and deadly
wound, and would not all that night after his accustomed manner tarry with
his clergy, but continuing alone in watch all that night, as I may well
conjecture, besought the goodness of allmighty God for my health and
preservation. And cominge to my, chamber early in the morninge, said certain
prayers over me, and called me by my name, and when I waked, as it were out of
a great slumber, he asked me, if I knew, who it was that spoke to me. And I
casting up my eyes, said yea right well, you ar my dear bishop and master:
than said he can you recover or live? Yea quoth I, by yower good prayers if it
please God. So streytwaies laying his hand upon my head, and repeting the
word of benediction returned again to his prayers, and coming to see me again
a little while after, found me fitting up in my bed, and well able to speak.
Then moved, as it were with some inspiration from heaven, asked whether I knew
without all scruple and dowte, whether I was baptized or no: to that I
answered, yea forsothe I know with out all doubt I was washed in the holly
font of baptism in remission of sins, and know the priests name very well
that baptized me: but he forthwith replied saying: if you were christened of
him doubtless you are not well christened: for I know him well, and am right
assured that when he was made priest he could not for his dulheddid wit
learn, nor to instruct nor to baptize. And for that cause I straightly
chardged him not to presume to that mynisterie which he could not do
accordingly: As soon as he had spoken those words he began to instruct and
inform me in the faith again: and it came to pass that as he breathed in my
face, the pain vanished away, and I felt my body much better than it was
before. Than he called for a surgion, and commanded him to set my skull
again, and knitt it up together as it should be, and by and by with his
blessing I was so well recovered, that the next day I was able to mount to my
horse and ride with him to the next place where he minded to lodge: And not
long after being fully recovered I was baptized. This good bisshopp continued
in the sea, three and thirty years, and so translated thence to the joyful
kingdom of heaven, lies buried in sancte Peter's porche, in a monastery called
Inderwodde the year of our Lord. 721. For when he was not able for old age
to preach, teach, and gouuerne his bisshopprike, he consecrated and made
Wilfride one of his chaplins archebisshop of York, and went to the said
monastery, and there with good example and conversation ended his life.

How Cedwall king of the Weast Saxons came to Rome to be baptized, and his
successor of devotion went to the sepulchers and monuments of the blessed
Apostles.

The. 7. Chapter.
THe third year of king Aldfrides reign, Cedwall king of the weast saxons,
when he had kept the souerainty in his country very stoutely for ij. years
space, for Gods sake and hope of an eternal kingdom in heaven forsook his
own upon earth, and went to Rome. He thought it to be a singular glory and
renown for him, to be regenerated at the sea Apostolic, with the sacrament
of baptism, by the which he learned that all mankind had entrye to the
kingdom of heaven. With all, this hope he conceived, that as soon as by
baptism he was cleansed from sin, and made a member of Christ's mystical
body, he should depart from this world to the eternal joy, the which both
by the providence of God, were fulfilled even as he had secretly in his mind
determined before: For cominge to Rome when Sergius was Pope, he was baptized
on easter eve, the year after the incarnation of Christ 689. An. 689.
and wearing yet the white apparel, and robes of innocence which were put upon
him in baptism fell sick, and died, the 20. day of April. Whom the Pope at
his baptism named Peter, that he might bear that holy name of the Apstole
whose sepulcher and tu^be he came to see, with good zeal and devotion many
hundred miles, and buried him honorably in his church. And at the Popes
commandment, an Epitahphe was engraued upon his toumbe^ that both the
remembrance of his good zeal and devotion might continewe in admiration
trough out all ages, and the readers and hearers also might be stirred to the
leeke godliness and devotion. The epitaphe was written after this sort.

An Epitaphe upon king Cedwall.
All dignities and wordly wealth, all princely joy and mirth
All palaces and castells strong, all ladies of great birth,
All triumph all princely attire, all precious pearl and pride
The fervent love of heavenly bless, made Cedwalle set a side.
And spedely to Peter's seat and monuments at Rome
His fleshly lusts and filthy sins with baptism to overcome.
Through dangerous seas and hougely hills a pilgrimage to make
And happily the joyful star to endless comfort take.
Incontinent when his repair was known among the states,
Full courteously they met him all, and brought him to their gates.
Pope Sergius perceauinge eke his zeal and godly mind
Did joyfully baptize him streyt, and from his sins unbind.
He altered his propre name, and did him Peter call
Delyueringe him from Satan's snare, from mysery and from mysery and from thral:
But innocent life this worthy wight on earth did not long keep
Within few days death did approach, and rocked him a sleep.
Undoubtedly great was his faith great was the mercy of Christ,
Whose judgments who so seeks out, shall creke when he is highst.
From Britanny that famousisle, to Rome he saffly past
The monuments and Apostles tumbes, he saw al at his later cast.
Deaths fyery dart his heart did perce and brought him to the ground
Where foysteringe man's carcas lies, until the trumpet sound.
Here covered with marbel stone his body lies at ease,
In paradise his soul abides, Gods wrath he did appease.
Then evident it is that he, who from his realm did range
For earthly things did heaven obtain, and lost naught by exchange.
An other epitaphe.
Here Cedwall is buried, otherwise named Peter king of the weast Saxons who
died the xx. of April in the second indiction and lived thyrty years, or
there about, when that noble and mighty prince Justinian was Emperor of Rome:
and had reigned iiij. years in the empire and Sergius a true pattern of the
Apostles had sat ij. years in Peter's seat.

As this good king Cedwall was taking his journey to Rome, Huu one of the
kings blood suceeded into the croune of that realm, who after he had reigned
there 37. years gave over his kingdom and committed the governance of it, to
his children, and went him self to the tumbes and monuments of the Apostles in
Rome Gregory being the Pope, having an ernest desire to wander leeke a
pilgreme here in earth for a time, about such holy places, that at the lenght
he might be more willingly received of the blessed saints in heaven: the
which practice in those days many englishmen both of the nobility and commons,
Pilgrimage to Rome a wo^t matter in our primitive church.
spiritual and temporal, men and women, were wont to use with much emulation.

Of the death of Archbishop Theodore.

The. 8. Chapter.
THE year after king Cedwall died at Rome, that is to say, the year of our
Lord 690. An. 690.
archbishop Theodore worthy of perpetual remembrance for his singular
virtues, being very old and in those years, to which men commonly by course
of nature may come, to wit, four score and eight, departed out of this wordle.
The which number of years that he should live and see, was signified unto him
by revelation in a dream: as to his familiare fryndes he was wont to make
report: He continued in his bishoprike xxij. years and was buried in saint
Peter's church, where all the other bishops of Canterbury ar buried. Of whom with
the rest of his fellows equal both in dignity and degree it may be truly
verified that their names shall live in glory from generati to generation time
out of mind: for that I may use few words, the church of England for the
time he was archbisshoppe, received so much comfort and increase in spiritual
matters, as they could never before nor after. As touching his personage, his
life, his age and manner of death the epytaphe written upon his tumbe in four
and thirthy heroical verses does manyfestly set owte to all that have
access thither, of the which these are the iiij. off the first.

A worthy prelate lies here fast closed in this grave
To whom the name of Theodore the greeks most justly gave.
With title right the souerayntye having of each degree,
Christ's flock he fed with true doctrine, as almen do welsee.
iiij. of the last.

His soul was set at liberty (that lumpyshe lump of claye
Dyssolued) when September had put nynetene days away.
And couetinge their feloship that lives a godly life,
Is companyd with angels hie, void off all care and strife.
How after the death of Theodore Berechtwalde took the archbysshopricke upon
him, and amongst many other bysshopps consecrated and orderyd by him, he made
Tobye (a man very well lernyd) bysshopp of Rochestre.

The. 9. Chap.
BErechtwald succedyd Theodore, and was archbysshoppe of Canterburye who before
was abbot of a monastery lyinge hard by the north entree of the river Glade
otherwise called Rachwulf, a man dowtlesse well traueled in the knowledge of
holy scripture, and very skyllfull both in ecclesiastical and Monastical
ordres, censures, and disciplynes, but nothing to be compared to his
predecessor: He was chosen to this bysshoprycke the year after the incarnation
of Christ 692. An. 692.
the first of July, when Wichthrede and Swebharde were kings of kent. He was
consecrated the next year after, upon a sunday (being then the xxix. of June)
by Godwyn archbisshoppe and metropolytane of france and was installyd and put
in possession the next day before the calendes of September, which was also
upon a sundaye. Who amongst many other bysshopps of his creation, after
Gebmund bysshopp of Rochester was dead, did consecrate and substitute Tobye in
his place, a man well expert in the latin, greek, and Saxon tongue, and all
other liberal sciences.

How Ecgbert a holy man, would gladly have gone to Germany to preach, and
could not, and how Victberte went thither in deed, but because he could do
no good, returnyd back to Ireland, from whence he came.

The. 10. Chap.
THe very self same time Ecgbert a most reverend priest, and faithful servant
of our savior Christ of me to be named with honor and reverence, who (as we
said before) lived leke a pilgrim in Ireland, to obtain aeternall life in
heaven, purposing with him self to profitt many, took upon him the office
of an apostle to preach the word of God to certain countries, which had not
yet receuyd the same nor heard of it. And many such countries he knew to be in
Germany, of whom we Englishmen or Saxons, which now inhabit Brytanny are well
known to have our beginning and ofspringe. Al which of the brytons our
neighbors are corruptly called Germans, for of them there are Frisians People
of high Allemaigne about the cite of Camin.
Rugyns, Danes, Hunnes, old Saxons, People of the higher part of ^^iseland.
Bruchtuars, and many other nations besides, observing yet the rytes and
ceremonies of paynims, to whom this valiant and noble soldier of Christ
purposed to go, after he had sailed rownde about Britanny, yff happily he
might deliver any of them, from the bondage and thrauldome of Satan and trade
them toward Christ: or if this could not come to pass according to his
expectation, then he fully determined to travel to Rome both to see and to
worship the chapels, monume^tes, and tumbes off the holy Apostles and Martyrs:
But the secrett working off God, and answers by revelations from heaven suffryd
him to atcheue neither of these enterprises. For when he had chosen certain
stout men to accompany him, and such as were most meet to preche the word of
God, as well for their good gesture and comely action, as for their profounde
knowledge and wisdom, and had preparyd all things necessary for their voyage
to the sea, there came to him one day early in the morning a religious man,
that had been somtymes scholar and servant to that good priest Boysyll in
Britanny, at what time this said Boysyll was chief gouerner of the abbay of
Maylros under Eat their abbott (as we have signified before) and showed him a
vision that he had the same night, and said. When matyns was done I laid me
down upon my bed, and falling in a little slu^bringe sleep, Boysil that was
somtymes my good Master and bringer up, appeared to me and demau^ding many
questions, asked whether I knew him. Yea Sir very well quoth I: you ar my
especial good Master and frynde Boysill. Then said he, I am come now to show
ower Lord and sauidur Jesus Christ's commandment to Ecgbert: the which
notwithstanding this, must be signified unto him by the. Tell him therefore that
he is not able to go forward with the iourny, We read in the Acts of the
Apostles that S. Paul and Stlas were forbidden of the holy Ghost (which was by
revelation) to preach the word in Asia and in Bithinia.
which he purposes. It is gods will he go rather and instruct Columbes
monasteries. This Columba was the first preacher of Christ's faith to the
Pictes dwelling beyond the great mountains northward, and the first founder
of a monastery in the i will Hu which was had in great reverence and estimation a
long time both of the Scotts and of the Pictes. This said Columbe is now
called of some Columcell: deryuing his name by composition of the latin words
Cella and Columba. Ecgbert hearing this vysion gave the messenger chardge that
he should reuele it to no man, left peradventure in the end it might appear
to be a vain and fantastical vision: but he considering the matter secretly
with him selff, feared it was in deed true, Act. cap. 16.
notwithstanding he never ceased to make provision for his journey which he
purposed to take for the instruction of those countries in Germanye. The
Redshankes.
But within iij. or iij. days after, the same man came to him again, saying,
that the very same night after mattins was done, Boisill appeared again unto
him in a vision, and said these words. Why did thou thy message so
negligently and so coldly to Ecgbert? Go now and tell him that whether he will
or no he shall go to Columbes monasteries. For, because their plowes go not
right he must, reduce the^ to good order again. When he heard this, he
chardged the messenger, in leke manner as he did before, to reuele it to no
man. And albeit he was so certified of the vision, yet for at that he called
his company together, and went forward on his journey. And when they had
fraighted their ships and laid aborde all that should be requisite in such a
long voyage, and tarried three or iiij. days for a good wind, there arose one
night such a vehement tempest, that great part of the merchandise in the shipp
being lost, she was left in the midst of the sea lying upon one side. But
notwithstanding this storm, all Ecbertes goods were saved and his companions
also. Then he saying as it were, the sentence of the holy prophet, this great
tempest happens for my sake, withdrew him selff from that journey, and was
content to tarry at home. But one of his fellows named Victbert a man notable
both for his mind mortifyed with contempt of worldly things, and also for
deep and profounde knowledge, took shipp, and arriving in Frislande preached
the gospel of Christ ij. years to the inhabitans there, and Readbert their
sovereign and king. In the end finding all his labor spent in vain amongst
such barbarous people, he returned to the solytary places where he lived before
(to wit in to Ireland) where he passed many a year leke an anchoret in much
perfection, and served God in silence and contemplation, and because he culd do
no good in conuertinge those foryners to the christian faith, he studied how
he might better profitt his own country men, by virtuous example of life.

How Wilbrorde preaching in Friselande converted many to Christ, and how also
the ij. Henwaldes his companions were martyred.

The 11. Chap.
WHEN that godly man Ecgbert perceived that neither he him selff could be
suffered to go and preach to the countries of Germany, but was stayed for some
other great commodity of the church whereof he had understanding by
revelation from God, neither Victbert coming into those parties did profit any
thing, he assaied yet the second time to send thither for the setting forth of
Gods word certain holy and virtuous men, able and willing to take pains,
amongst whom that notable and excellent learned man VVilbrorde priest, was
chieff. Who after their arrival thither being in number xij. Friseland
converted to the faith.
went streyt to Pypine chief gouuernour then of Fraunce^ where being very
friendly entertained of him, because he had lately taken the lower part of
Frisland, and by force driven out their king Radbed, he sent them thither to
preach ayding and assisting them with his princely authority that no man
should by violence injury them, or interrupte their preachinge, and also
bountifully rewarding all such as would embrace and receive the faith. Whereby
it came to pass by the assistaunce of Gods grace that in short time they
converted very many from idolatry to the faith of Christ.

After the example of these holy men, ij. other english priests which had
voluntarily lived in banishment a long time in Ireland for hope of aeternall
life, came to Saxony, if happily by their preaching they might win any to
Christ. As these good men had leeke devotion, so had they both one name, being
both called Henwalde. Yet for diversity to know one from the other, one was
called black Henwalde, and the other white Henwalde, because of the diverse
color of their hear: Both of them had a great zeal, and reverend love to
Christ's religion. But black Henwalde was the better divine. They coming into
the country, went to a farmers house, and desired they might be conducted to
the Lord, which had the rule and gouuernaunce there, saying they had an
embassy, and other matters of importance to declare unto him. The gouuerneme^t
of the old Saxons.
For the old Saxons had no kings but many Lords to rule the country. Who as
often as there was surmise or fear of wars toward, did cast lotts equally
amongst them selfs, and upon whom the lot fell, him they folloed as their
general captain, as long as the wars endured, and obediently exequuted
what so ever he commanded. When the wars were done, all the Lords were equal
in power and authority again, as they were before. The farmer entertained
these good men, and promising to conduct them to the Lord of the soil
according to their request stayed them iij. or iiij. days in his house. When
they were espied of the rude barbarous people, and known to be of an other
religion, (for they soonge hymns, psalms, and other devout prayers, and
said mass, having with them books, and holy vessels, and a little table
hallowed, instead of an altar) they had them in ieolosy, and suspicion that
if they came to the Lord and talked with him, they would turn him quite from
worshipping of their gods, and bring him to the new religion of Christ's
faith. Whereby a little and little all the whole country should be enforced to
change the old ancient manner of worshipping their Gods into some new
religion never heard of before. The martyr^ome o^ (...). english priests in
Saxony.
Wherefore they took them away suddenly and killed white Henwald with a sword,
and black Henwald with long torments and horrible di^membringe all parts of
his body, and after they had murdered the^ cast the^ into the river of Rhene.
This fact when the Lord of the country (whom they desired to see) understood,
he was very angry, that strangers repayring to him, could not have free
passage. And streytwais sending forth his men of arms slew all the
inhabitaunts of the same village, and burnt their houses down to the ground.
Those good priests, and faithful servants of our Savior Christ suffered the
third day of Octobre: and to testifye their Martirdom unto the wordle, there
lacked no miracles from heaven. For when their bodies were cast of the paynims,
(as we signified before) into the river Rhene, it so fortuned that they were
carried against the maine runninge stream, almost xl. miles, where their
companions were, and a great bright beam of light reaching up to heaven
shyned every night over the place, whersoeuer they came, they them selves that
had cruelly murdered them beholding and seeing the same. Moreover one of them
appeared by vision in the night to one of their companions, whose name was
Tilmon, (a noble man of great renown in the world, who from the high degree of
a knight becacame a monk) showing that he might find their bodies in that
place, where he should see a light shine from heaven. The which came so to
pass. And their bodies being found, they were buried with all honor worthy
for such holy martires. And the day of their Martyrdom, or rather of the
findings of their bodies, is kept solemn and holy in those parties with much
devotion and reverence. Finally when that worthy and renouned Captain of the
frenchmen named Pipine, had understanding of this, he caused their bodies to be
buried very honorably in the church of Coollen, a famous city situated hard
by the river Rhene: Besides it is commonly said, that in the place where they
were killed there spronge up a fountain, which at this present day flows
with a great stream to no little commodity of the country.

How ij. reverend and holy men were made bishops to set forth and preach
Christ's religion in Frisland, Switbert in Britanny, and Wilbrorde in Rome

The. 12. Chapter.
AT the first arrival of these holy men to Freslande, Wilbrorde having license
of the prince to preach, went first to Rome, where Sergius at that present
occupied the sea Apostolic, that with his license and benediction also he
might set upon that Apostolic office of preachinge to the heathen, which he
long desyred^ hoping with all to receive of him some relics of Christ's holy
Apostles and Martirs: to the end that while in the country where he preached,
he should erect churches, after the idolles were cast out and destroyed, he
might have in a readiness, some holy saints relics, to bring in their
place, and to dedicat churches in their honor, whose relics he had receuid,
Diverse other things also he learned and received from thence, requisite for so
great an enterprise. In all which requests when his desire was accomplished,
he returned back again to preach. At the very same time his brethren and
companions left in Fresland, altogether bent to the setting forth of Gods word,
choosed out of their company, a man modest and sober in all outward behavior
and humble of spirit, called Switbert to be their bishop. Whom (sent for that
purpose into Britanny) the most reverend father in God Wilfrid did
consecrate, lyuinge then, as a banished man out of his country amongst the
Marshes. For at that time Canterbury had never a bishop. Theodore was dead, and
Berthwalde his successor which went over the sea to be consecrated, was not
yet returned to his bishoprike. The said Switbert returning out of Britanny
after he was consecrated and made bishopp, went within a short time after to
the People of the higher Frisia.
Bruchtuars. And converted a great number of them to the perfect way of truth:
but shortly after when the Bruchtuars were subdued and conquered by the old
Saxons, all that received the gospel were dispersed: some into this corner,
some in to that: The bishop him self with certain other went to Pipine which
at the earnest suit of his lady, Slichildride gave him a dwelling and ma^sion
place in a isle of the Rhene, which in their toungue is called In litore, that
is to say, in the sea cost: where he buylding a goodly monastery (which his
successors possess at this present) lived a very austere and continent life
there, where al so he died. After the foresaid holy men that came to Frisland
had preached there iiij. years or mo, Pipine with the common assent of all the
country sent that virtuous and worthy prelate VVilbrodde, to Rome where Sergius
was yet Pope, desyring that he might be made Archbishop of that part of
Freslande: the which was fulfilled, according to his request the year sense
the incarnation of Christ. 696. An. 696.
Upon saint Cicelies day and in saint Cicelies church he was consecrated and
named Clement of the said Pope, and forthwith sent away to his bisshoprycke, to
wit xiiij days after his cominge to Rome. At his return Pipine assigned him
a Cathedral Church in his chief and principal cite called by an old
ancient name of those countries, VViltaburge as you would say a town
inhabited of the VViltes. VVilbrord an english man, the first Archbishop of
Vltraict in Frissela^d.
In the french tongue it is called Vltraict. Where when this holy and reverend
father had buildid a church and preaching the faith of Christ far and wide
had reuokyd many from blindness and error, he erected also many churches and
monasteries through out al those cou^tryes, and within short time after made
many bishopps chosen either out of those that came presently with him, or of
other which came thither afterward to preach, of the which company many are
now departed to god. But Wilbrorde called otherwise Clement lives yet a
reverent father even for his age: for he has lived in his bishoppricke xxxvj.
years and after many agonies and troubles of his heavenly warfare labors and
pants yet after the reward of everlasting bliss in heaven.

How one in Northumberland rising from death told many things that he had
seen, some terrible to hear, and some worthy to be desired of all men.

The. 13. Chap.
THe very same time was wrought in Britanny a miracle worthy of perpetual
remembrance and not vnleke to the old ancient miracles of times past: for to
stir up and revive men living here upon earth from the death of their
souls, a certain man stark dead for a time, rose from death to life, and
told many notable things that he had seen, of the which I thought it good to
touch certain briefly in this history: There was in the coast of
Northumberlande (in a place called Incunning) an honest householder of the
country which with all his family lived a godly and vertous life: He fell
sick, and by vehemence of his disease growing more and more upon him, was
brought to extremyty: and in the beginning of the night died. But in the
dauninge of the day, reviving again, and fittinge up suddenly: made all that
remained about the corse, run a way as men wonderfully amassed with fear.
Only his wife which loved him tenderly (although she tremblyd and quakyd)
tarried still. And he comforting her said, be not afraid. For I am now risen
in very deed from death which had me as it were in prison, and am permitted to
live in earth amongst men again, but not after the same manner and trade as I
did before. From hence forth my conversation must be far vnleeke to my former
life. And rising by and by, he went to the paryshe church and continuing there
in prayer until it was fair day light forthwyth divided all his goods into
three parts: one part he gave to his wife, an other to his children, the third
he reserved to him self, and made distribution of it straytways amongst the
poor. Not long after dispatched of all worldly cares he went to the Monastery
of Mailros. The which is almost closed in with a creek of the river Tuyde.
Where being shoren in, he went into a secret cell which the abbot had provided
for him and continued there until his dying day in such contrition of heart
and mortefying of the body, that if his tongue had not reported yet his life
had testified that he had seen many things both terrible, and also
comfortable which no other man had seen. Of the vision which in his departure
he saw, he told after this sort. He that conducted and guided me in this
vision had a goodly bright shyning countenance, and was clothyd all in white:
and as it seemed to me, we went altogether in silence toward the rising of the
son: and as we walked further we came to a great broad valley so broad, so
long, and so deep that no man could measure it. That which lay on the left
hand as we went, seemed to have one side very terrible with flaming fire, the
other intolerable with hayle, and snow: beating an percing into every corner.
Let the Christian reader here advise him self, whether he may scorn at this
vision, because in heathen writers, as in the Menippus of Lucian and other such
fond tales are fained or rather to believe it, because so learned and holy a man
r^porteth it, the time also of our first coming to the faith considered. Truly
I think, therefore the heathen and infidel faineth such things, in his false
religion, because he knows tha^ God reueleth the l^ke to such as serve him in
true religion. Even as S. Augustine notes, that therefore the devil is
delighted with external sacrifice of man, because he knows that kind of
worship to be due and proper to God him self. Lib. 10. de Ciuit. dei: Cap. 19.
Both places were full of men's sowles, which apperyd to me to be cast
interchaungeably, now hither now thither as it were with a violent tempest: for
when they could no longer suffer the intolerable heat and flames of fire, they
leaped to the mydst of that hateful and deadly cold. And when they pitefully
in could find no reast there, again they were reuersed into those
unquenchable flames of fire. As an infinite number of miserable and wretched
souls were tormented without cea^inge or intermission (as I might then see)
with this alteration and interchaunge of pains, I began to thynck with my
self, peradventure this may be hell of whose intolerable torments I have heard
men oftentimes talk. But to this cogitation and thought of mine, my guide
answered saying. Na think not so for this is not hell as thowe do suppose.
But when he brought me farther being altogether amassed with that terrible
sight, I saw the places rownde about us suddenly leese their light and every
corner full of darkness. As we entered in to them, within a little space they were
so thycke that I could see nothing, but the bright show and cote of him which
did conducte me. When we went forward all alone in this darkness behold
suddenly there appeared before us, many round flawes of fire ascending as it
were out of a great pit and falling down again into the same: When I was
brought thither my conductour and guide vanished away, and left me alone in the
midest of that darkness, and horrible sight. But as those flawes of fire flew
up into the element still without intermission, and fell down into the deape
doungell again, I saw the topp of every flawe that ascended full of men's
souls, which in manner of little sparcles of fire flying up with the smoke
were sometimes a hye, and when the heat and vapors of the fire were gone, fell
down again into the pit. Moreover a foul and noysom savor, breaking out
with the same vapors infected all the dark places rownde about. And as I
tarried there somewhat long in great horror and fear, not knowing what I
should do nor whether I should go, nor what should be come of me, in the end, I
heard suddenly behind my back most lamentable and pitiful crying, and
withal a loud skournefull lawghing, as it had been of some rude and barbarous
people, insulting over their enemies brought in captivity and thrauldome. As soon as the noise waxing more brimmer and brimmer came fully to my ears, I
descried a multitude of wicked sprites, which did hale, tear, and pluck, the
miserable and wretched souls of men, in to the midst of darkness, weaping,
wayling, and lamenting their state: the wicked sprits in the mean skornefully
laughing and triu^phing at their myserie: amongst whom, as well as I could
discern, there was a moncke, a lay man, and a woman. The wicked sprites
drawing and haling them, went down into that deape fyery flaminge dongell. And
it came to pass, that when they were gone a great way of, I could neither
discern the lamentable cry of those souls: neither the skornefull laughter
off the devils, but had always in my care a confuse noise. In the mean
season came up from the fiery flaming dongell, certain evil favored black
sprites and compassed me round about, and with there fiery eyes, and foul
stinking savors which they breathed out had almost strangled me: Besides they
threatened to take me with the fiery forkes in their hands: yet they could in
no wise touch me, although they aduentred to fraye me. When I was compassed in
every side with such foul finnes, and ougly darkness I cast my eyes now this
way now that way if happily there might come any assistaunce or help to save
me: and behold there appeared behind me, (even the very same way I came) the
glimsing of a star, shining in the midst of that darkness, which waxing
brighter and brighter and coming a pace to me, dispersed those wicked sprites
away, which with their fyery pronges were ready to rent me in pieces. He that
came and put them to flight was the guide which conducted me before: Who
turning streytwayes upon the right hand, lead me as it were somewhat
northward where the son rises in the winter, and with a trice brought me out
of darkness into the fair broad light. And as he lead me in the fair shining
light, I saw before us a great wall, which was so long and so hye, that on
nether side I could see any end. I began to marvel and muse with my self,
why we should go to the wall, specially when I saw nor gate, nor loope hole,
nor any other entrance up to it: but when we were come thither I can not tell
by what means, we mounted quickly to the top, and behold there was a fair
broad field, both comfortable and pleasant so full of sweet fragra^t savors,
and of fresh florisshing flowers, that incontinent the sweet smell drove away
quite and clean all the stinking and lothsom sent of that dark fiery furnace,
which had almost stifled me. So goodly and clear a light shined there in every
place that it seemed more fayrer, than the brightness of the day and beams of
the some, when it is at the highest. There were in that field innumerable
companies of white colored men, many seats, and infinite multitudes of
souls rejoicing and triumphing. As he lead me through the midst of those
blessed souls, I began to think with self, perchance this may be heaven,
of the which I have heard men oftentimes preach. To this my imagination and
thought, he answered saying, this is not the kingdom of heaven as thou do
imagine. As we went forward and passed the resting places of those blessed and
happy souls, I saw a more brighter shining light before us than the other
was, and heard a sweet melodious noise of Musicians, besides that such a sweet
perfume and fragra^t savor brake out in every place, that the other which I
smelled before, and thought excessiuely passing, was in comparison unpleasant
and nothing worth, in leeke manner as the other bright shininge light of the
pleasant grene field in comparison of this seemed somewhat dark and obscure.
In to the which paradise of pleasure as I hoped well we should go, suddenly my
conductour and guide stood still, and turning back brought me again the same
way we came. In our return, when we came to the mansions and resting places
of those blessed souls, he asked me, this question. Do you know what all this
is that you have seen? I answered no: Then he said unto me. The valley which
you saw horrible with hot flaming fire, and sharp biting cold is the place,
where their souls remains to be examined and tried, which differring the
confession of their sins, and amendment of life had recourse to penance in
the instant and point of death, and so departed owte of this wolrde. Yet
because they made humble confession of their sins and repented even at the
hour of their death, they shall come to the kingdom of heaven at the day of
judgment, and some before. For the good prayers, charitable alms, and devout
fasting of those that yett lyuethe, and especially the holy sacrifice of the
mass, help to deliver many out of those torments, before that terrible day.
Moreover the the fiery flaminge pit, and stinkinge doungell, which thowe did
see is hell mouth, into the which whosoever falls, he shall never be
delivered thence. The goodly grene field full of odoriferous flowers, where
thowe saw all joyful, iocund, and merry, is the very same place where their
souls ar received which depart out of this life in the state of grace, but
yet not of such perfection, that they deserve to be brought streytwaies in to
the kingdom of heaven, but for all that in the day of judgment, shall have
the sight and fruition of Christ's deity and immortal joy with his chosen and
elected. Only they which are perfect in all their words, thoughts, and deeds,
ar carried strayt to heaven after they have passed their transitory life. The
place where thou heardest the sweet melodious singing, with the goodly
flagrante savors and bright shyning light, is next adioyninge to this.
Concerning thy own state, because thou shall have thy natural body, and live
amongst men in the wordle ones again, if thowe wilt diligently examine thy
doings upon earth, and direct thy manner of living in uprightness and
simplicity, and refrain thy tongue from vain and ydell talk, certainly
assure thy self to have a resting place amongst these blessed souls which
thou see here: for when I went away for a time and left the alone, it was
for no other cause but to learn and enquire, what should be come of the. When
he had talked with me in this sort, I utterly detested this present life and
was sorye to return to my natural body again. I was so ravished with the
sweet fragrant sauoures, and beutifull sights of that place which I did see,
and especial their society which for the time made their abode there.
Notwithstanding I durst not be so bold, as to demand or ask any question of
my conductour or guide, but in the midest of these meditatio^s, I perceued (by
what means I can not tell) that I was in the world again, and lived as other
me^ did. These sightes and many other things else, this virtuous and holy man
would not report to sleuthfull sluggards and idell folks, men that had no
regard of their own life, but to such only, as either dismayed with fear of
torments or ravished with hope of eternal joy, would gladly receive and suck
out of his words, some heavenly comfort and increase of piety. Well, to be
short, in the same rewe where is celle stood, dwelled a monk called Hengils
promoted to the holy order of priesthod, which he honored much with his
virtuous works. This man remains yet a live, and leeke a solitary
heremitein Ireland, fedeth his old impotent body with brown bred and cold
runninge water. This monk resorting to the said holy man oftentimes,
understood by certain questions which he propounded, what sightes he saw,
after his body and soul were departed, and by his relation all which I have
brefly declared, came to our knowledge. Moreover he communicated his visions
with king Alfride, a man excellently learned in all good literature, who heard
him with such comfort and attention, that at his desire, he was placed at the
length in the same monastery, and shoren in religion. In the which monastery at
that time, Edilwald priest of most godly and modest life was Abbot but now he
is made bishop of Lindisfarn, which church he governs in right good order,
both with wholesome doctrine, and good example of life, semely for his vocation.
This holy man took after in the same monastery a more secret celle unto him,
Holy Ilond.
where with more liberty he might serve his maker, in continual prayer without
intermission. And because the place was situated upon a rivers side, he was
wont to dippe and plung^ him self in the flowinge water oftentimes, for great
desire he had to chastise his body, and continue there singing of psalms and
other duout prayers, as long as he could abide for cold the water now and
then coming up to his hippes, and now and then to his chinn. And when he came
out of the water he never changed his clothes being wet and cold, but tarried
until they were warmed and dried by the natural heat of his body. In the winter
season, when peaces of ice half broken dropped down on every side of him, which
of purpose he had broken to plounge into the river, and diverse men seeing him,
said, it is a marvelous matter and strange case brother Drithelme, (for so he
was called) that you can possibly suffer such bitter and sharp cold, he
answered simplye, (for he was but a simple and sober spryted man) I have seen
places colder then this is. And when they said unto him, we marvel that you will
live so co^tinent and auster a life, he answered I have seen more austeryte and
hardness then this is. So until the day of his calling hence owte of this
wretched world, for the ernest desire he had of heavenly felycitie, he punyshed
his old impotent body with daily fasting, and was by good fruteful
instruction and godly conversation a great comfort to many.

How an other contrary wise dyinge found all the sins that ever he had
done written in a book brought unto him by the devil.

The. 14. Chapter.
But contrary wise there was a man in the country and province of the Marshes
whose visions, talk, and manner of life did profitt many, but not him self. In
the time of Coenrede which raygned after king Edilrede, there was a certain
lay man taken up for a soldier and put in office in the camp, who for his
dyligence and actyuitie in feats of arms was great in favor with the king:
but for the negligence and improuident care concerning the state of his own
soul, in displeasure with the princ^^ Wherefore the king charged him
eftesoones to make humbl^ confession of his sins, and amend his former life,
and utterly to forsake al his detestable acts and heinous offenses, lest by
deaths sudden prevention he lost time of repentance and amendment of his
life: but he, notwithstanding this gentle admonition, and fryndly exhortation
of his sovereign contemned and set naught by those comfortable words of
salvation, and promised that he would do penance afterward. In the mean
season being vysited with sycknesse he took his bed and began to be more
and more vexed with the vehement pangs of his disease. The king came to his
chamber (for he louyd him tenderly) and exhorted and counseled him, that at the
lest now he would fall to penance for his naughty life, and sinful acts,
before he died. Na quoth he. I will not be confessed now, but when I am well
recoueryd and able to go abroad again, than I will, lest if I should now do
it, my fellows would say that I did it now for fear of death which in my
prosperyty and health I would never vouchsafe to do. Wherein he spoke to his
own leekinge stowtly and leeke a man, but certes, as yt appeared after he was
myserably deceuyd with the crafty illusions of the devil. When the king came
to visit him again, and give him good counsel because his desease grew more
vehemently upon him every day, he cried out incontinent with a pytyfull and
lamentable voice saying. Alas what mean you my liege, why come you hither?
You are nether able to profitt, nor pleasure me nor do me any good. The king
answered streytways, Ah, say not so: see ye play the wise man's part: Nay says
he, I am not mad, but I have here undoubtedly before my eyes a wicked
conscience all woundyd and mangled. And what is this said the king? If yt
please yower highness quoth he: a little before yower grace came, ij. bewtyfull
and hansome yownge men came into the house, and sat down by me. One at my
head, the other at my feet: and one of them took a goodly fair book owte of
his bosom but little in quantytye, and gave y^ me to read. In the which when I
looked a little while, I found all the good deeds that ever I had done fair
written: and god knows they were few in number and little in effect: when I
had done, they took the book of me again and said nothing. Then suddenly came
there abowte me an whole legion of wicked sprytes, and beseaged the house
rownde abowte in the utter side, and sittinge down replenisshed every corner
within. Than he which for his foul evil fauouryd black face, and highest
seat apperyd to be greatyst amongst them, taking out a book terrible to all
men's sight, unmeasurable for greatness, and for weight importable, co^mau^dyd
one of his black guard, to bring yt to me to read. When I had read a little,
I found all the enormous detestable sins that ever I had committed not only
in word and deed, but also in light thoughts written there in great black
letters: and he said to the ij. fair young men that sat by me, Why sit you
here knowing most certainly that this fellow is owers? They made answer. True
it is. Take him and lead him away to the botomelesse pit of damnation: and
with that they vanished away. Incontinent ij. wicked sprites having fire pronges
in their hands rose up and stroke me one in the head, and the other in the
sole of my feet, the which now with great torment and anguysh creep up in
to the bowels and other internal parts of my body, and when they meet
together I shall dye, and be drawn hence by the dyuells watchinge and
whyuering about me into hell without redemption. Thus spoke that miserable
manlying in extreme desperation and died owte of hand, and now lyuinge in
thrauldome with the devil in everlasting pain does that penance (but all in
vain) which in his life time he might have done if it had been but one hour,
with an assured hope of gods mercy and pardone for all his sins. Of this
miserable and wrechyd man, it is evident that (as S. Gregorye writes of
certain) he had not those visions for his own sake, whom they auailed
nothing at all, but for other men which knowing his lamentable end might be
afeared to differ and prolonge the time of repentance, while they have
oportunytye and leisure, lest by sudden prevention of death they dye
impenitent. That he saw diverse books brought before him by diverse and
sundry sprites, A true and necessary doctrine for this wicked time.
some good, some bad, it was done by the divine providence and permission of
god to putt us in remembrance that our doings and thoughts flee not away with
the wind, but ar reserved particularly to the strait examination of the
dreadful judge. And at the end shall be showed to us other by the good
angels which frindfully wish our salvation, or by the wicked sprites, which
spitefully work our damnation. Concerning that first of all the good Angels
brought forhe a fair white book, and the devils afterward their foul evil
favored black lygger: the angels a little one, they an unmeasurable great one:
it is to be noted that in his childehode he did some good deeds, yet
notwitstandinge he disgraced all that ever was done with his lewd and loose
demeanor in yowthe. But if he would have amended in youth the wanton toys and
foolish panges of childhode, and with well doing raunesomed them out of the
sight of god, Psalm. 13.
he might have been brought to their society, of whom the Psalm of David
says, Beati quoru^ remissae sunt etc. Blessed ar they whose iniquities ar
forgeuen, and whose sins ar covered. This history I thought good to set forth
plainly and simply, as it was declared unto me of that worthy prelate
Pechthelme, to the comfort of all such, as shall read it or hear it.

How an other in leeke manner saw a place of pain appointed for him in hell.

The. 15. Chapter.
FVrthermore I my self knew a religious man (whom would God I had never known)
placed in a good and famous monastery, notwithstanding he him self was
infamous for his lewd behavior and loose life. I could tell his name also, if
it were worth the telling. This man was earnestly rebuked of his brethren and
other head officers of the monastery, for his enormities, and exhorted to a
better trade of life, but all was in vain. Notwithstanding, albeit he would
not give ear nor humbly obey their charitable exhortations, yet they did
tolerate him very long for his externalll service, which was very necessary
for them. For he was a singular good carpenter. This man was much given to
dronknesse and other wanton pleasures of dissolutnesse, and accustomed rather
to fit in his shopp both day and night, than to come to the church to singe or
pray, or hear the true word of life with his brethren, by which occasion it
happened to him, as men ar commonly wounte to say. He that will not come of
his own accord within the church door, A old proverb.
shall run against his will to hell gates. For he being now streeken with a
very fainte desease, and brought to extremity, called all the covent about
him, and with much lamentation and deep sitghes, leeke a man damned already,
began to declare unto them, that he saw hell gates open, and the devil
drouned in a deape doungell thereof, and Caiphas and all the whole rableme^t
that put Christ to death, cast in flaminge fire, hard by him: and next to them
(oh, miserable and wretched man that I am, said he) I see a place of eternal
perdition prepared for me. His brethren hearing these woeful words exhorted
him earnestly to repent and be sorry for his sins, while he was yet alive.
Then he brought to extreme desperation answered, No No. There is no time for me
to amend my former life, especially seeing I perceive my judgment is past and
fully complete already. With those words he died without receiving the
sacrament. His body was interred in the foremost part of all the Abbaie, not
one of all the whole covent durst say mass for his soul, nor singe psalms,
nor once say one Pater noster for him. Oh how far a sunder has God
separated light and darkness? The first blessed Martyr S. Steven ready to
suffer death for testimony of the truth, saw heaven gates open, Actor. 7.
and Jesus standing on the right hand of God. He to the end he might more
joyfully die, fixed the eyes of his mind there before his death, where he
should be after: but this forsaied fellow, black in soul, black in body, and
black in all outward doings, saw hell open, at the hour off his death, and
perpetual damnation prepared for the devil and all that follow him. Again to
thentent that though his death were miserable in desperation, yet by his own
damnation he might give other example to repent and work their own salvation
in time, he saw his own place and doungell prepared amongst such caytyffs,
as Cayphas and his accomplices were. This chanced of late in the country of the
Berniciens, In Northumberland.
and wa^ by common talk blasted all the country over: so that it stirred up
many to make quick confession of their sinful acts and not to take days with
God. Which God grant it may work also in such as shall read this present
history.

How many churches of Scotland by the instant preaching of Adamannus kept the
feast of easter after the catholic manner and how he wrote a book of holly
places.

The 16. Chap.
AT that time a great multitude of Scotts in Ireland, and many Britons in
Britanny received by the singular gift of God, the true manner of celebrating
the feast of Easter, taught by the catholic church. For when as Adamannus a
virtuous priest and Abbott of all the mounkes and religious men, that were in
the isle Hu, being sent Ambassador by the prince of his own country to
Alfride king of the Englishmen, and tarying a certain time in the country
saw the Canonical rites and ceremonies of the church, and besides was
sharply admonished by the learned that he should not presume to live contrary
to the universal church, Catholic ^os^ruations to be preferr^d.
nor in keeping the feast of Easter, nor in any other decrees, what so ever they
were, with his country men few in number, and dwelling also in one of the
furmost corners of all the world, he so changed his mind hereuppon, that what
so ever he had heard or seen in the english church, he most gladly preferred it
before the custom and manner of his own. For he was virtuous, wise, and very
ready in the knowledge of holy scripture. After his return therefore into the
country he-endeuoured diligently to reduce all the isle Hu to the broad beaten
pathe of truethe, which he knew very well, and had embraced with all his heart:
but he was not able to bring it to pass. Whereupon he sailed into Ireland,
and preaching there and showing them with gentill exhortations the true and
laufull observation of Easter, he wanne many that were not in the dominion of
the said Island of Hu from errous to unity, received universally of the
catholic church, and taught the^ to observe the true time of Easter. This
Adamannus when the feast of Easter was now kept by his means in Ireland after
the institution of Christ's catholic church, he returninge to his islande
again and preaching to his brethren in the monasteryes this general
observation, and kepinge of Easter as he had don before and yet being not able
to compass his purpose it fortuned he fell sick, and departed out of this
world, before the year was complete and fully ended. And that by the great
providence of almighty God so disposing it swetely: to the end such a virtuous
man desirous of unity and peace, should be taken hence to aeternall life before
easter came again, for observation of which feast he should have been forced
to much variaunce and discord by such as would not embrace the truth. This
same virtuous man wrote a book of holy places very profitable for the readers,
which he learned at the lectures and expositions of Archwulf a bishop in
France: who to see holy places and monuments went to Jerusalem, and when he
had wandered over all the land of promise, and had gone to Damascum,
Constantinople, Alexandria, and other many isles of the sea, was driven in his
return by tempest to the weast coasts of Britanny. Who within few days
after reforting to that worthy servant of our Savior Christ's Adamannus above
mentioned, he was received with all kind of humanity and frendefull
intertainement, specially when he was known to be learned in scripture, and
skillful in description of holy places. For Adamannus so esteemed him that he
put in writing, what soever notable thing worthy of remembrance the bishop
testified that he had seen in those holy places: and made a book (as I said)
thereof profitable to many: but most of all to those, which lie far from the
place where the Apostles and Patriarchs lived, and know nothing of them but
what they may pick out with long study and often reading. This book Adamanus
dedicated to Alfride, and by his liberality and charges, it was given to other
inferior persons to be read, the author him self being rewarded with many
goodly gifts, and sent to his country again. Out of whose writings to gather
some certain things, and place them in this our history I have thought it good
and profitable to the readers hereof.

What things he mentioned in the same book touching the place of the
nativity, passion and resurrection of Christ.

The. 17. Chapter.
OF the place of Christ's nativity he reports in this sort: Bethleem a city
of David, situated in a narrow and streyt mount, compassed with valleys of
every side, is a mile in lenght, from the weast to the East, very base and
plain without any toures or turrets. The place of Christ's natiuite.
The walls are builded flatt without any battelments. In the east corner there
is as it were a den not labored of man but framed of nature. The utter most
part of it, is said to be the place of Christ's nativity, the innermost the
maunger, where he lay. This den covered somewhat far inward with goodly
precious marble, has over the place where our Lord was borne, a great church
of the blessed virgin Mary builded upon it. Of the place of his passion and
resurrection he wrote after this sort. As ye enter into the city of Jerusalem
on the North side, to come to the holy places, ye must by order of streets
first go to the church of Constantine which is called Martyrium, that is to
say, the Martyrdom, or place where the witness of our redemption was found.
This church the Emperor Constantine builded very gorgeously, because our
savior Christ's cross was found in that place by his mother Helena: Going
from thence on the weast side you shall see Of this church erected by Helena
mother of Constantin, Paulinus Nolensis makes mention. Epist. 11. ad Seuerum.
a church builded in Golgotha where that rock is to be seen, which bore
Christ's cross and his blessed Body fast nailed to the same, and bears now
also a mighty cross of silver with a great brazen whele hanging over it full
of lamps and torches. Within the compass and place where Christ's cross
stood, was a vaute cut out of the rock: In the which upon an altar there
made, mass is wont to be said for honorable men that dies, The devotion of
the Christians in Jerusalem above a thousand years past.
the dead corpse standing with out, in the street. At the weast side of the
same church, was also a rownde chapel of Christ's resurrection, enuironned
with three walls, and borne up with xij pillars, having betwixt every wall, a
fair broad way: which has with in his compass and circuit three aulters in
three places of the middle wall, south, north, and weast. This chapel has
eight doors, and places of entreaunce, directly over the three walls: of the
which iiij. stand northeest. and iiij. weast. In the middle of this chapel
^as laid the round tumbe of our savior Christ cut out of the rock, Et erit
sepulchrum eius glorisum.
to the top of which a man standing within, may reach with his hand. It
opens on the east side, And the place of his burial shall be glorious says
the prophet.
and has that great stone that was laid upon, which until this day shows
the print, and sign of the iron tools with which it was hewed and cut. With
in, even to the very top all is covered with marble. The top it self al
gilted with gold, bears a great golden cross, upon it. In the north part
of that monument, Esaie. Cap. 11.
Christ's sepulcher was cut out of the same rock, and made seven foot long,
and three handful higher then the pauiment. The coming in is on the south side:
where continually day and night twelve ampes burn, four with in the
sepulcher, and eight above in the right side. The stone which was put upon the
brimme of the sepulcher, is now cloven. The less part notwithstanding
stands at the door of the same sepulcher as an altar foure-square. The
greater part stands for an other altar in the same church in the manner of
a quadrangle, covered with fair white clothe. The color of the said sepulcher
seems to be white and read decently mixed together.

What he wrote of the place of Christ's ascension, and the patriarchs
sepulchers.

The. 18. Chapter.
THe Author above mentioned writes also in this wise touching the place of
Christ's ascension. The mount Olyuete is as hye as the mount Syon, but not so
broad, nor so long. There growyth no trees, but vynes and olyues: wheat and
barlye, it bryngyth forth good stoore. The vain and soil of that ground is
not shryueled nor fleaten, but grene and full of grass. In the very top
where Christ ascendyd to heaven, standyth a great round church, with three
porches rownde in a circuit vawtyd and coueryd over. The ynner chapel having
an altar toward the east, with a goodly frount in the top, could not be vauted
nor coueryd over because the very place of Christ's ascension might be kept
open. In the mydle of which church the last Who thinks this incredible,
let him give a reason of the pathe way by Salisbury, called S. Thomas pathe by
Clarengdon park.
prynte of Christ's feet left upon earth, ar to be seen, where he ascendyd
into heaven openinge above and ready to embrace him. And although the earth be
fett away daily of the Christians, yet it remains still and kepyth the very
figure and prynte made with the steps of his holy feet when he ascended.
Round about the print of those blessed feet lies a brazen wheel, as high
as a man's neck having an entrance and way in, upon the east side and a
great lamp hanginge above it in a pullye, which burns day and night. In
the weast side of the same church be eight windows, and so many lamps hanging
in cords directly over them. They shine thorough the glass to Jerusalem and
their light is said to stir the hearts of all that behold and see it, with a
certain fervent zeal and compunction: At the day of Christ's ascension every
year, when Mass is done; there comes down from heaven a great gale of
wind, and makes all that are in the church prostrate them selfs down flatt
upon the grownd. Of the situation also of Hebron and monumentes of old
ancient fathers there, he writes in this sort. Hebron sometimes the chiefest
city in all King David's realm, showing now only by her ruins how princely
and puissaunt she was in time paste, has toward the east with in a furlonge
the double den, where the Patriarchs sepulchers ar environed with a four
square wall: their hedds turned toward the north. Every tumbe has his stone.
All the three stones of the patriarchs being all white, squared as other stones
are used in building of great churches. Adam lies about the north side, and
uttermost part of the wall not far from them, in an obscure tumbe nor
curiously wrought, nor workmanly set. There are besides base memorialls of three
simple weemen. The hill Mambre also is a mile from these monumentes, full of
grass and pleasant flowers toward the north, and in the top it has a goodly
champion and plain field. In the north part whereof Abraham's Oak (which is
now but a stumpe as high as ij. men can reach) is compassed round about with
a church. I have thought it good for the profitt of the readers to intermingle
in my history, these things taken out of the Authors books and comprised
here in latin after the true meaning of his words, but more briefly, and in
fewer words. If any man be desirous to know more of this matter either let
him read the same book, or that little This abridgement is extant in the 3.
tome of S. Bedes works.
abridgment which I drew out of him but late.

How the South saxons received Eadbert and Collan for their bysshopps, the
weast Saxons Daniel and Aldethelme for theirs: and of certain writings set
forth by the same Aldethelme.

The. 19. Chap.
THe year of the incarnation off Christ 705. An. 705.
Alfride king of Northumberlande dyed, the xx. year of his reign not yet
fully expired. After him sucdeded Osrede his son, a child but eight years
old, and reigned xj. years. In the beginning of his raygne Hedde bishop of
the weast Saxons departed from this mortal life to immortal joy: For
undoubtedly he was a just man, one that lived vpryghtlye in all points leke a
good bishop, and preached sincerely leke a true pastor, and that more of
the love of virtue naturally graffyd in him, then of any instructours by often
readinge taught him. Furthermore, the reverend father and worthy prelate
Pechtehlme, (of whom we must speak hereafter in place where he shall be
mentioned) who being but yet a deacon and young monk, lived familiarly a
long time with his successor Aldethelme, was wounte to tell us that in the
place where the said Hedde died, for reward of his holy life many great
miracles and cures were don: and that men of the same province used commonly to
carry away dust from thence and mingle it with water for such as were deseased
and sick: that also the drinking and sprinckling of the same did cure many
sick men and beasts also. By which occasion for often carrying away of the
sacred dust a great deep pit was made there. After his death, that
bisshopprick was divided into ij. dioceses. The one was given to Daniell, which
he keapeth at this present: the other to Aldethelme, where he ruled the people
very painefully for iiij. years. They were borhe learned men skillful in holy
scripture and all ecclesiastical doctrine. Aldethelme, when he was priest, and
yet but Abbot of the monastery of In the borders of VVilshere.
Mailsbury wrote by the commandment of the whole Synod of his country a
book against the error of the Britons, for not keeping the fest of Easter in
his dew time, and doing many things besides, contrary to the true
observation and unite of the church. By reading of the same book he reduced
many Bryto^s subject at that time to the Weastsaxons, to the catholic
solemnisation of the feast of Easter. He wrote also a notable book of
virginity, both in long verse and prose, with doble pains, following the
example of Sedulius. He set forth also many other works. For he was notably
well learned, very fine and eloquent in his talk, and for knowledge as well in
liberal sciences, as in divinity to be had in admiration. After his death
Forthere was made bishop in his place a man also much conversant in holy
scripture. These ij. having the gouuernaunce and whole rule of that diocese,
The dioceses of Sussex and Ha^pshere divided.
it was determined by a decree in the Synod, that the province of South
Saxons, which to that present day appertained to the diocese of Winchester,
where Daniel was bisshoppe, should have a see and bishopp of their own
severally. Celse founded by Eadbert the first bishop of Celse in Sussex by
Chichester.
Whereupon Eadberte Abbot in the monastery off that blessed bishop
Wilfrid was made and consecrated first bisshopp of that diocese. After his
death, Ceolla took the bisshoppricke upon him: Who not past iij. or iiij.
years past departing this life, the sea to this day is vacant.

How Coenrede king of the Marsshes, and Offa king of the East Saxons ended
their lives in the habitt of religion, and of the life and death of bishop
Wilfrid.

The 20. Chap.
THe iiij. year of Osredes reign, king Coenrede which kept the soueraintie in
the country of Marshes honorably for a time, did more honorably forsake it,
and all his dominions. For under Constantine the Pope he went to Rome, and
receiving there the tonsure and habitt of a religious man, at the Apostles
toumbes continued in praying, fasting, and dealing of alms until his dying
day. Unto this noble prince Coenrede, succeeded king Edilredes son, which
Edildred had the gouuernement of the same realm before him. There went with
him also to Rome Sigheres son king of the east Saxons called Offa, (whom we
mentioned before) a princely, and beautefull gentleman, and then in his first
flowers and much desired of his subjects to remain and rule among them. But
he moved with leke devotion and zeal as the other prince was, forsook his
lady, his lands, his kinsfolk, and country for Christ's sake, and the
gospel: that in this world he might receive an hundred fold and in the world
to come life everlasting with Christ. When he came to the holy places at Rome,
he also was shoren into religion, in the which he passed the rest of his life,
and came to the vision of the blessed Apostles in heaven, as he had long
desired before. The very self same year that these ij. princes went out of
Britannie, a worthy prelate and notable bishopp, called Wilfrid, died the
xlv. year after he had been made bisshoppe, in the territory, called Wundale.
And his body well chested, was carried to the monastery of Rhippon where he had
before lived, and with all honor, and solemnity worthy for so noble a bishopp
was buried in Saint Peter's church at Rhyppon: Lib. 3. cap. 52.
Of whose life and behahauiour let us brieflly make mention what things were
done returning as it were back again to that we have spoken before.

This Wilfride being but a child was of such towardness and good nature, The
life of bishop Wilfrid the Apostle of Sussex.
induced with so many goodly qualities, of such modest and honest behavior in
all points, that all the elders and ancients did with a special good love
reverence him. After he was xiiij. year old, he more esteemed a monastical,
and solitary life, than all secular and wordly wealth. The which thing when he
had communicated with his father (for his mother was departed to the mercy of
God) he gladly condescended to his holly requests and godly desires, and
exhorted him to persiste in that godly purpose, Holy Ilond.
which he had intended. Hereuppon he came to the isle Lindisfarne and there
atte^ding upon the monks, he diligently learned, and gladly practiced, al
points of chastity, and godliness required in a solitary and religious man.
And because he had a goodly pregnant wit he learned spedely psalms and certain
other books of prayers, being not yet shoren in or professed, but well
garnished with those virtues, which far surmounted the outward profession to
wit of humility and obedience. For the which he was well loved and esteemed
both of the elders, and also of his equals. When he had served God certain
years in that monastery he perceived by little and little being grown in
judgment (as a wife young man that could quickly fore see) the way of true
religion and virtue taught by the Scotts not to be altogether perfect.
Whereupon he fully determined to make a voyage to Rome, only to see what ri^es
and ceremonies were observed there, as well of secular priests as of religious
persons. The which determination of his, after notice given to his Brethren
by preuy conference, each man did well comme^d it, and persuaded him to go
forward in his good purpose. Incontinent coming to Queen Eamflede (who knew him
well, and by whose counsel and commendation he was received into that
monastery) declared to her highness that he had an earnest and fervent desire
to visit the monuments of the holy Apostles. The Queen much delited with the
young man's good purpose and zele, sent him to Caunterbury to king Ercombert
which was her uncles son requiring that it might please his highness to send
him honorably to Rome: at what time Honorius one of the blessed Pope Gregory's
scholars, a man profoundly learned in holy scripture, was Archbishop there.
When this young man lackinge nor good courage, nor lively sprite, had tarried
there a space, and employed his diligence to learn and commit to memory, that
which he ouerloked, there repaired thither an other young gentilman whose name
was Bishop, and Christen name Benet, one of the nobles of England, desyrours
to go to Rome, of whom I have mentioned before. The king committed Wilfrid
to this young gentilman and his company, with chardge that he should conduct
him safe to Rome. When they came to Lions in France, Wilfrid was stayed there
by Dalphine, bishop of that city. The gentleman went on his journey to Rome.
The delight and pleasure, which the bishop had in VVilfrides wise talk,
aminable continaunce, ioly actituity, and grave invention, was the occasion why
he was stayed there. For that cause also he gave him, and all his company
frendfull intertainement as long as they continued there: and further offered him
the government of a great part of France, the mariadge of his brothers
daughter, (which was yet in the flower of her virginity,) brefely to adopte
him for his heyr, if he would make his abode there. But he rendering lowly and
hearty thanks for so great courtesy and gentilnesse, that the bishop vouchsafed
to show unto him being but a stranger, answered, that he was fully determined
to an other conversation and trade of lyffe: and therefore had forsaken his
country, and taken this journey to Rome. The which when the bishop heard, he
sent him to Rome, with a guide to conducte him in the way, and gave him money
sufficient to bear his chardges, desyringe that at his return he would
remember to take his house by the way. Wilfrid with in few days after
cominge to Rome, and occypuing him self in daily contemplation of heavenly
things, according to his first determination fell acquainted with a notable
holy and learned man called Boniface, who was Archedeacon, and one of the
Apostolic Popes counselors. By whose instruction he learned orderly the four
books of the Gospel, and the true count of Easter, and many other godly
lessons commodious and profitable to understand the orders and disciplines of
the church, which he could not attain unto in his own country. And when he
had passed certain months there, in godly exercise and study, he returned to
Dalfine again in France, and after he had tarried with him iij. years, he
took the inferior orders of the bishop, and was so entierly loved of him that
the bishop fully determined to make him his successor. But by cruel death he
was prevented and Wilfrid reserved to a bishoprike in his own natyue
country, England. For Brunechild Queen of France sent a power, and commanded
the bishop to be put to death: whom Wilfrid his chappellain followed to the
place of execution, desyring to die with him, albeit the bishop did utterly
forbid him. But when the executioners knew, he was a stranger and an English
man borne, they spared him, and would not put him to death, with the bishop.
Wereuppon returning to England he was brought to be in friendship and amity with
king Aldfride. Who leke a good Prince had learned to follow and reverence the
general ordinances and rules of the catholic church. And for that he
perceived this Wilfrid to be Catholic, he gave him streytwayes a
Lordshippe, of x. tenements in Stanford: and within a while after a monastery
with xxx. tenements in Rhippon: which he had given but late to build an Abbay
forsuch as followed the Scotts: but because they being put to liberty and
choice, had rather depart thence then to receive the true and Catholic
celebration of the feast of Easter, and other canonical rites and ceremonies
after the custom of the church of Rome, and see Apostolic, he gave it to him,
whom he saw better qualified both for lerninge and for virtue. The same time
in the very self same monastery he was made priest by Agilbert bishop of The
country about Salisbury
Geuisse (of whom we spoke before) at the instaunce of the King, most
earnestly requiringe that so learned a man should continually follow his Court,
and especially be his teacher and preacher. Whom not long after when the
Scotts sect was disclosed (as is a fore said) and utterly abandoned, he sent
to France by the counsel and advise of his father Oswin, when he was but xxx.
years of age to be consecrated and made bishop by Agilbert then bishop of
Paris. With whom xj. other bishopps assemblinge them selfs to consecrate him,
did their dewty in that behalf very honorably with all solemnities. But while
he was yet beyond the seas, Ceadda, Lib. 3. cap. 28.
a godly and virtuous man (as it is above mentioned) was consecrated bishop of
york, at the commandment of King Oswin. Who having governed the church iij.
years departed thence, and took the cure and charge of Lesting Abbay. After
him Wilfrid took vpho^im the bishopric of al Northumberland. Who afterward
in the reign of King Ecgfride, Lib. 4. cap. 12.
was deprived of his bisshopricke, and others consecrated and put in his place,
of whom we made mention before. But when he had taken shipp to go to Rome, and
plead his cause before the Apostolic pope he was driven by a Sowthweast wind
into Freslande, where he was honorably received as well of the rude and
barbarous people, as of the King Aldgiste. Where he preached also unto them
Christ and his gospel, converting many thousands to the faith, and with
baptism wasshing away their sins. Whereby he laid the fundation of Christ's
gospel in those countries, which the Reverend father and holy bishop
VVilbrord perfited and finyshed afterward. But when he had passed over a winter
with this people newly converted to Christ, he went forward his iourny to
Rome. When his cause was debated to and fro, in the presence of Pope Agatho,
and many other bishopps, he was found in process by all their judgments to
have been most unjustly accused, and best worthy of that bishopprick. At what
time the same Agatho gathering a Synod at Rome of a 125. byshopps against such
heretics as held the opinion, The heresy of the monothelites condemned.
that there was but one will and one operation in our Savior Christ,
commanded Wilfrid also to repair thither. And when he came he willed him to
declare his faith and the faith of the country from whence he came, sittinge
amongst the other bishops: Wherein when he and his country was found to be
Catholic, it pleased them amongst other things to have this also put in the
Acts of the decrees, The Sea Apostolic.
the tenor whereof follows. Wilfrid the virtuous bishop of york, and
appealinge to the sea Apostolic for his cause, and by that full authority
absolved as well from certain complaints laid to his chardge, as all other
uncertain quarrels, and sitting in judgment in the fellowship of a 125.
bishopps in this present Synod, has confessed, for all the north parts of the
isles of England and Irelande, which ar inhabited with English men, Britons,
Scotts, and Pictes, the true and catholic faith, and confirmed the same with
his subscription. After his return to Britanny again, Bishopp Wilfrid the
Apostle of Sussex.
he converted the South saxons from idolatrye and superstition to Christ's
true faith and religion. In the isle of Wight also he appointed certain to
preach the word of God: and the second year of king Aldfrides reign, who had
the soueraintye next after Ecgfride, received his see and bishopric again, at
the instaunt request of the king. But five years after he was accused of the
same king, and many other bishopps, and deprived again of his bishopric.
Wherein upon repairing again to Rome, and obtaining license to plead in his
own defense before his accusers, Pope John and many other byshopps sittinge in
judgment, it was by their diffynitiue sentence concluded, that in some part
his accusers hadd falsely forged these malycious surmises against him. The Pope
also wrote letters to the kings of England Edilrede and Alfride requiringe
them to see him restored to his bishopric again, because he was unjustly
condemned. The reading of the decrees concluded in the fore said Synod
assembled by Pope Agatho of blessed memory, kept but of late when he him self
was present in the city and resident amongst other bishops, did much further
his cause. For when the Acts of the Synod, as occasion was moved, were openly
read ij. or iij. days before the nobylitie and great assembles of people, by
the popes commandment, the protonotarie coming to that place where it was
written, Wilfride the virtuous bishopp of york appealing to the sea
Apostolic for his cause, and by that full authority absolved as well from
certain things laid to his chardges, as all other uncertain quarells etc.
As we said before, these words being read every man was astonned and the
protonotary ceasing, each man inquired off other, what manner of man this
bysshopp Wilfrid was. Then Bonyface a counselor to the Pope, and many other
which saw him there in Pope Agatho his time, made answer and said. He is the
bishop which was accused of his own cuntry men, and came to Rome to be judged
by the sea Apostolik, even the very same which of late coming hither for the
false accusations of his adversaries, was judged giltlesse and innocent by^
Pope Agatho, after the cause and controversy was well examined of both
parties, and thought to have been deprived of his bishopric against all law,
and more than that hadd in such honor and estimation of Pope Agatho of blessed
memory, that he commanded him to sit in the Synod which he assembled at
Rome, as a man off a true perfect faith and sincere mind. All these
allegations being heard, the Pope and all that were present said, that a man
of such authority which had been bisshoppe xl. years, ought not to be
condemned, but once again dischardged and quitted from the false accusations
and malicious surmises of his enemies, and sent home again with honor to his
country. With this judgment returning toward England, he fell suddenly
sick, when he came to France, and was so weakened, the desease growing upon
him more and more, that he could not ride, nor keep his horse, but was carried
in a bed by strength of his servants. Being thus brought to Meldune a city
in France, he lay iiij, days and iiij. nights as though he had been dead. Only
declaring by a little breath, which he drew very fayntly and short, that he was
a live. Thus continuing iiij. days without meat and drink, as speachelesse,
and past hearing, he rose the fifte day, and sat up in his bed, as a man
awaked out of a deape sleep, and when his eyes were open, he saw a company of
his brethern about him, some singing, some weaping, and fetting a little
sigthe, asked for his chaplyn Acca. By and by he was called. Who entering into
the chamber, and seeing his bishop somewhat better amended, and able to
speak, he fell down upon his knees, and gave thanks to God with all the
company that was present. And when they had sat together a little while, and
entered talk fearfully, of the high judgments of God, the bishop commanded
al to avoid the chamber for an hour, and began to talk after this manner
to his chaplin Acca. There appeared unto me even now a terrible vision, the
which I will have thee hear, and concele withal until I know know further the
pleasure of almighty God, what shall become of me. A certain man clothed all in
white, stood by me, saying. I am Michael the Archangell sent hither for this
only purpose, to deliver thee from danger of death. For our Lord has given
the longer time to live for the earnest prayers, and lamentations, which thy
scholars and brethren here have made, and also for the intercession of the
blessed virgin Marie his mother: Wherefore I say unto the, that presently thou
shall be healed of this infirmity and sickness, but yet be in a readynesse:
for after iiij. years I will return again and visit the. Again, as soon as
thou art returned to thy country, the greatest part of thy possessions, that
have been taken away from the, thou shall receive again, and end thy life in
tranquillity and peace. Upon which comfortable words the bisshoppe recovered
to the great joy of all men, rejoicing and praising God for him. Thus going
forward on his journey he came to England. When the letters brought from the sea Apostolic were read, Berechtwald archebisshop and Edilrede sometimes
king (but then made an Abbot) received him gladly in favor again. Edilred
also entreating Coenrede whom he had made king in his place, to come and
speak with him, requested him to be a good and gracious Lord to the said
bisshopp, which also he obtained. But Aldfride king of Northumberland which
would not receive him, died within a while after. By which occasion it fell out
in the reign of king Osred his son, that in a Synod assembled by the river
Nid after great contention and reasoning in both parts, he was received into
his church and bisshopprike again with all favor they could show him. So
iiij. years space, to wit to his dying day, he lived in peace, and died the
xij. day of October in a monastery, which he had in the province of Wundale
under the gouuernement of Abbot Cudbalde. From whence by the hands of the
covent he was carried to his own monastery in Rhyppon, and interred in the
blessed Apostle S. Peter his church hard by the altar, toward the Sowth
side, as we signified before, and over him is written this epitaphe.

An Epitaphe upon Bishop Wilfrid.
Wilfrid that worthy prelat, lies bodily in this grave:
Who moved with godly zeal, to Christ this temple gave.
And of the Apostle Peter's name, S. Peter's church did it call.
To whom the kayes of heaven Christ gave, cheaf governor of all.
He guilted it with gold most fine, and hanged it with scarlat round.
And set up there a Crucifix, of gold even from the ground.
The four books of Christ's gospel, in golden letters are wrote
At his co^maundme^t and charges eke, right worthy to read and note.
A cover for the same also of beaten gold he did fit.
The price and value was great, but his heart surmounted it.
Touching the course of Easter, in dew time to be kept,
Because by wrong tradition, many it ouerlept,
He taught the catholic order, all England thourough out,
Extirping the contrary error, by authorite most stout.
A number of religious men, he assembled in this place,
Instructing them virtuously in the holy Fathers race.
With miseries and perils eke much vexed of long time,
And of his own dear countremen charged with many a crime:
But when five and forty years, he had kept a bishops state
To heaven be past his bretherns cause, with Christ for to debate.
And that with all alacrite, with mirth and joyful heart,
Now graunto Christ that after his trace, we follow thee on our part.
How Albine succeeded the holy Abbot Adrian, and Acca the good bishop Wilfrid.

The 21. Chapter.
THE next year after the death of that forsaid holy father which was the fifte
of king O^rede his reign, the Reverend and worthy father Adrian Abbot, and
coadiutour to Theodore (Bishop of most blessed memory) in preachinge the word
of God, passed out of this transitory lyff, and was interred in his own
monastery, in our ladies church, the one and fourtith year, after he was
directed from Pope Vitalian and made coadiutor to Theodore, and the 39. after
he came to England: Of whose profounde knowledge and lerninge amongst other
things, this may be a sufficient testimony that Albine his scholar, who had
the governance of the Abbay after his decesse, was so well practiced in
exercise of holy scripture, that he had great knowledge in the greek tongue,
and did speak latin as eloquently without staggering or staying, as he did
english, which was his natural language. After the death of bishop Wilfrid
Acca his priest succeeded in the bishoprik of Hagulstad, a man of a ioly
courage, and honorable in the sight of God, and of men, who enlarged his
Cathedral church, dedicated in the honor of saint Andrewe, and set forth
the buildinges with diverse comely, and sightfull works, and moreover employed
all his diligence and endeavor to gather together out of all places the holy
Apostles and Martirs relics, to the end he might in honor of them build
certain aultars a part by them selves in little chapels made for the same
purpose, within the precinct and walls of the same church. Besides he sought
with all possible diligence the histories of their martyrdom and other
ecclesiastical writers, and made up a very large and worthy library. Moreover
he zelously prepared holy vessels, lights, and other necessaries appertaining
to the better furniture and adorninge of the church of God. Again he sent for
a cunning Musician named Mabam which was taught by the successors of Pope
Gregory his scholars in Canterbury, to teach him and his clergy to tune and
singe. For the which purpose he kept him xij. years, to the end he might
partly teach them certain verses and songs of the church which they could not
yet singe, partly by his singular conninge bring in ure again, such songs
and tunes as for lack of use had been quite, and clean forgotten. For bishop
Acca him self was a very cunninge Musician, well learned in holy scripture,
sound and perfect in the Catholic faith, expert and skillful in all orders,
rules, and disciplines of the church, and so continued until it pleased God to
reward him for his good zeal and devotion. He was brought up from a child in
the most holy and virtuous prelate Bosa his clergy, then bishop of york, and
afterward coming to Wilfrid upon hope of some better lerning, spent all
his time in his service, until death arrested him. He went with him also to
Rome, and learned many holy and necessary ordinances of the church, which he
could not attain unto in his own country.

How Abbot Ceolfride, sent to the king of Pictes, or Redshankes, cunninge
carpenters and workmen to build him a church, and an epistle with all
touching the Catholic celebration of the feast of Easter and after what
manner priests and religious men should be sha^en.

The. 22. Chapter.
THE same time Naitane king of the Pictes, which inhabit the North coaste of
Britanny admonished by often meditation of holy scripture, abandonned the
error, which he and al his country had long kept, touching the keeping of
Easter, and brought him self and al his subjects to the catholic solemnising
and dew observation of the time of Christ's resurrection. Which that he might
bring to pass with less difficulty, and more authority, he required aid of
the Englishmen, whom he knew to have framed their religion after the
counterpaine and example, of the holy church of Rome and sea Apostolic. For he
sent ambassadoures to that Reverend father Ceolfride (Abbot of the monastery
dedicated to the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, situated at the mouth of
the river Were, and not far from the river Tyne in a place called Now called
weimouth in which Ab^by under this Ceolfrid S. Bid was brought up, and lived
al days of his life.
Ingiruum, where he ruled with great honor and admiration next after Benedict,
of whom we have made mention before) desyringe to receive from him some
earnest and forceable exhortation both to persuade him self and also to confute
all other which would presume to keape the fest of easter after their own
fansye and custom, and not according to the ordinance of Christ's church. He
requested farther to have instructions by his letters what manner of tonsure the
clergy should use. Notwithstanding he was partly already informed in many
points requisite for that purpose. With all he desired to have some conninge
and expert woork men, to build him a church of great stone according to the
manner of building in Rome, promising to dedicat the same in the honor of
saint Peter head and chief of the apostles, and to follow evermore with all
his wholle realm the order and fasshion of the church of Rome and see
Apostolic: so far forth as men not knowing the Romans tongue and far
distant from them might attain to the knowledge thereof. Upon sight of these
letters Ceolfride much tendering his godly purpose and intent, sent him such
cunnyng and expert artificers, as he required, and withal letters indighted,
as it follows. To the right honorable, and most renouned Prince Naitane,
Ceolfride A learned letter of the Abbat Ceolfrid^ unto Naitan king of the
Peyghtes or Redshankes.
Abbat sends greting in our Lord. The Catholic observation of holy Easter,
wherein you desire to be instructed, right godly and renowned Prince, we have
gladly and dilige^ly endeavored to set forth unto you in these presents,
according as of the Sea Apostolic we have our selves ben informed and taught.
Of which your zeal we thank highly allmighty God, knowing well that when
princes and Lords of the earth do employ their study to learn, to teach, and
to observe the truth, it is a singular benefit and special gift of God given
unto his Church. And most truly spoke a heathen philosopher saying, that the
world should then be happy, when either kings embraced philosoply, or else
philosophers might bear the Soueraynte. Now if by the philosophy of this
world, knowleadg of the world might be hadd, where by the world might be
beloved, how much the more ought such as are cityzens of the heavenly country
above, and but strangers in this world, desire, labor, and with all means
possible be suppliantes to God, that the higher power and charge they bear in
this world, the more they apply them selves to harken after and understand
the will and pleasure of that high Judge, which judges all, and both them
selves obey gladly the same, and move also all other committed unto their
charge, by their example and authoryte to fulfill and perform the same? To
come therefore to the matter, wherein you require to be instructed, you shall
understand, we have in holy scripture iij rules set forth unto us, by the
which the true and just time of solemnising the feast of Easter is appointed, A
proof out of holy Scripture, of the Catholic observation off Easter.
which by no authorite of man can be changed. Of the which rules, two were
taught by God in the law of Moses, the third is joined in the gospel by the
effect off Christ's passion, and resurrection. For the law off Moses
commanded that in the first month of the year, Exodi. 12. a. 2 c. 18.
and in the third weke of that month, that is from the fiftenth day vntell
the one and twentieth, This first month begins in the first moon after the
Aequiu^ctium.
Easter should be kept. And it was added by the institution of the Apostles out
of the gospel, that in the same third weke, we should tarry for the Sunday,
and in it celebrat our Easter. This triple rule if a man diligently note and
observe, he shall never miss in the cownte of Easter. But if it be yower
pleasure, to have every particular point more pitthely and largely declared,
it is written in Exodus, where the people of Israel ar commanded to keep the
feast of Easter when they should be delivered owte of Aegipte, that God said to
Moses and Aaron. Exodi. 12. a. 2.
This month shall be unto you the beginning of all months, and cheafest in
the hole year. Speak to all the children of Israel and tell them. The x. day
of this month let every man take a lamb, according to their familiee and
howseholde. And a little after he says. And you shall keep him until xiiij.
day of the same month. And all the whole multitude of Israel shall offer the
same up in sacrifice at the evening. By the which words it is evident, that in
the observation of Easter, though the fourtenth day of the first month be
mentioned, yet it is not so mentioned that on that day Easter should be kept,
but in the evening of that day. That is, that the lamb should be offered, when
the moon is fiften days old, which fyftenth day off the moon, is the
beginning of the third weke of the monthe. And that it is the self same night
of the xv. day of the moon in which God stroke the Aegiptians, and delivered
the children of Israel, it appears by that he says. Exodus 12. c. 15.
Seven days ye shall eat sweet bred: With which words also all the third
weke of the first month is commanded to be kept solemn and holy not only
the first day of the weke. And that we should not think those seven days to
be counted from the xiiij. to the xx. he added by and by. The first day, there
shall be no leaven bred in your houses: Whosoever shall eat in any of your
houses any leaven bred, his soul shall perish out of the company of Israel,
from the first day until the vij. etc. Until, he says: For in the same day
(he says after) I will bring and conducte your host out of the land of
Aegypte: First of all then. He called that the first day of Nume. 33. a. 3.
Wherefore when the children off Israel were gone from Ramesse the xv. day of
the first monethe, the next day after they kept the Passover with a mighty
power. Ergo the seven days of sweet bred, in the first of the which seven the
children of God were delivered out of Aegipte, must be counted (as I said
before,) from the beginning of the third week, that is from the xv. of the
first month to the xxj. fully complete and ended. Now that the xiiij. day is
not numbered amongst these seven, where Easter begins, that which follows in
Exodus does evident declare. Exodus 12. c. 17.
Where after it was said, For in the vij. day I will deliver thy host out
of the land of Aegipte, it was added streytwayes. And you shall keape holy
this day, Now who does not plainly see, that from the xiiij. day to the xxj.
be not only seven days, but also eight, if the xiiij. day be reakoned for
one. But if we will count from the evening of the xiiij. day to the evening
of the xxi. (as the verity of holy scripture diligently searched out does
declare) we shall well perceive, that the xiiij. day so begins the feast of
Easter in the evening, that all the whole week has no more but vii. days and
vij. nights. Wherefore our proposition is proved true, wherein we said that
Easter must be kept in the first month of the year, and the third week of
that month. And that is in deed truly solemnised in the third week, the
solennite where of begins in the evening of the xiiij. day, and is complete
and ended in the evening of the xxj. day. Now after that Christ our true
paschall lamb was offered up in sacrifice, and had made the Sondaie (called
amongst the ancient writers, It is so called Act. 20. and Joan. 20.
^na vel prima sabbati, one of the sabothe, or first of the sabothe) solemn
and holy to us for joy of his resurrection, the tradition of the Apostles has
so put this Sounday in the feast of Easter, that they fully decreed, nether to
prevent the time of Easter in the old law nor to diminishe any on day, but
commanded according to the precepte given in the law, that the same first
monethe of the year, the same xiiij. day, and the same eueninge should be
expected and tarried for. In which evening when it fell upon the saboth day,
every man should take a lamb according to their families and householdes, and
offer him up in sacrifice at the evening. That is to say, all christian
churches through out the whole world (which all joined together makes but one
catholic church) should prepare bred and wine, for the mystery of the flesh
and precious blood of that immaculate lamb, which took away the sins of
the world, and when all lessons, prayers, The B. Sacrament is offered up to god
the father.
rites and ceremonies used in the solemn feast of Easter were done, should
offer the same to god the father in hope of their redemption to come. For this
is the selffe same night that the people of Israel were delivered out of
Aegypte by the blood of the lamb. This is the same night in which the people
of God were delivered from aeternall death, by Christ's glorious resurrection.
In the morning following, being Sunday, the solemn feast of Easter should be
celebrated. For that is the day, wherein our Savior, opened the glory of his
resurrection, appearing diverse times in that one day to his disciples, to their
unspeakable comfort and joy. This is the first day of the sweet bread of the
which clear mention is made in the Leuiticus, where we read thus. Leuit. 23. a.
5.
The xiiij. day of the first month at evening is our Lords passover and the
xv. day of the same his solemn feast of sweet bred. vij. days shall ye eat
sweet bred: the first day shall be most solemn and holy. Wherefore if it
were possible that the soundaye might always fall upon the xv. day of the
first month, that is to say upon the fifteneth day of the age of the moon,
we might celebrate and keep the feast of Easter always at one time with the
old ancient people of god as we do in one faith, albeit they differ from us
in the kind of external sacraments. But because the week days do not run
equally with the course off the moon, the tradition of the Apostles preached
at Rome by S. Peter, and confirmed at Alexandria by the Evangelist Saint Mark
his interpreter, has decreed that when the first month is come, and the
eueninge of the xiiij. day of the same, the next sounday also should be
expected and looked for from the xv. day to the one and twentyth off the same
monethe. For in which so ever off those it shall be found, Easter shall be kept
in the same. And that because it appertains to the number of these vij. days
in which the feast of sweet bred is commanded to be kept. Wherefore it comes
to pass that our Easter never passes the third week of the third month,
nor over, nor under: but either it has the whole weke, (that is to say. vij.
days of sweet bred according to the old law,) or at the lest some of them. If
of all them it compryseth but one, to wit, the vij. day which the holy
scripture so highlye commends, saying. Leuit. 23.
The vij. day shall be more solemn and hollye, and no seruil woo^ke shall be done
from morninge to eueninge, no man can justly reprove us, and say we keep not
the Ester soundaye (which we took of the gospel) in the third weke of the first
month appointed by the law as we should do. Now the^ seeing the general cause
which the Catholics allege for the observing of this feast of Easter, The
contrary opinion is refuted.
is plainly set before your eyes, the unreasonable error of those which rashly
presume to pass or prevent with out any force of necessity the time appointed
in the law, is manifest for all men to espy. For they anticipate and prevent
the time appointed in the law without any force of necessity, which think
that Easter day must be kept, from the xiiij. moon of the first month to
the xx. of the same. For whereas they begin the eve of that holy feast, from
the eueninge of the xiij. it appears that they appointe that day in the
beginning of their Easter whereof they find no mention in the law. And whereas
they refuse to keep the Easter soundaye the xxj. day, in it appears truly
that they exclude utterly from their solemnity that day which the law
commands to be observed and had in memory with joy and mirth above al other.
And so they end their Easter after a perverse order keeping it sometimes
altogether in the second week, but never in the vij. day of the third week.
Again they which think they should keep Easter from the xvj. day of the said
month to the xxij. day roue far wide from the truth, and run though an
other way, yet as far out of the way, as the other did, falling (as the
common proverb says) in to the great gulff, and swalloing sands of
Charibdis, while they seek to escape the dangerous straites of Scilla. For
whereas they teach, that we should begin frgm the rising of the xvj. moon of
the first month (that is from the eueninge of the xv day) it is manifest, that
they utterly seclude from their solemnity, the xiiij. day of the same month,
which the law does principally and before the rest commend: so that they scarce
come to the eueninge at all of the xv. day in the which the people of God were
delivered out of the bondage of Aegipt, in the which our savior Christ
delivered the world from sin by sheding his precious blud, in the which he
being buried, put us in comfort and hope of resurrection and aeternall rest
after death. And these men by occasion of their former error, falling in to
an other in punishment of the first, whereas sometimes they keep their Easter
in the xxii. day of the said month, they do expressly pass the bonds of
Easter commanded in the law. For in the evening of that day they begin
their Easter, in which evening they ought by the law clean to have ended and
finished their Easter. Again by this means they make that day the first day
of Easter, which in the law is not mentioned at all: to wit, the first day of
the fourth week. And both these sorts of men are deceived not only in
counting the age of the moon, but also in finding out of the first month. The
debating of which matter is more tedious and long, then that either it can or
may be comprised in an epistle. Only this I say, that the time being ones
certainly known when the day is as long, as the night, and the night as the
day, at the spring time of the year, it may infallibly be found, which ought
to be the first month of the year after the acco^pt^ of the moon, and which
ought to be the last. In the spring the day is as long as the night, and so
the night as long as the day after the opinion of all learned men in the East,
and specially of the Aegiptians which bear the price for calculation before
all other Astronomers The xxj. day of march.
the xii. calendes of April, as we also have had experience by trial of the
dyall. Whatsoever moon therefore is at full before the day and night be of one
le^ght being xiiii. or xv. days old, that moan pertains to the last month
the year before, and therefore is not meet or convenient for the feast of Easter.
But that moan which is at full either after the day and night be of one and
equal lenght, or in the very point of that equality, in that doubtless
(because it is the full moon of the first month) we must understand that the
old au^cients were wount to keep Easter, and that we ought to keep ours in
leeke manner, when the Sondaie comes. Gene. 1.
That it should be so, this reason seems somewhat to enforce: In Genesis it is
written that God made ii. great lights the greater to rule the day, and the
lesser over the night: or as some other translation has, the greater light was
made to begin the day and the lesser to begin the night. Therefore as at the
first begin ning, the son rising from the full midst of the East made by that
his rising, the equalite of day and night in the beginning of the year: and as
the moon in the very first day of the world the son going down, followed also
at the full, rising in the midst of the East: so every year in leeke manner the
first month of the moon must be observed after the same rate: so that she be
not at the full, before the day and night be of one length but either on the
very same day (as it was at the first creating of the world) or when it is
paste. For if the full moan go but one day, before the day and night be of one
length, the former reason proves manifestly that the same moan must not be
ascribed to the first month of the year, but rather to the last of the year
that is past: and for that consideration not meet nor convenient for the
solemnisinge of Easter day. Else in one year we should have ij. Easters. Now if
it like you to hear also the mystical reason hereof, this it is. In the
first month of the year, (which is called mensis nouorum, that is, the The
month of April.
month of new spring) we are commanded to keep the feast of Ester, because
our hearts and minds being renewed toward the love of heavenly things, we
ought to celebrate and honor the mysteries of Christ's resurrection and our
redemption. We are commanded to keep the third week of the same month,
first because Christ him self promised unto us before the law, and in the time
of the law, came in the third age off the world in the time of grace, and
was made our Easter, and passover. Secondarely becawse he risinge from death
the third day after his bitter passion upon the cross, would have that day
to be called the day of our Lord, Dies Dominic^.
and all Christen men to keep the feast of Easter yearly the very same day in
honor of his glorious resurrection. The third cawse is, because we do then
truly keep this solemn feast, if we endeavor to the uttermost of our power
to make our passover (that is to say ower passage owte of this wordle to God
the father) with the triple knot of faith, hope, and charytie. After
theequalite of the day and night we are commanded yet to tarry for the full
moon of the month in which Easter falls, to thend that first the son may
make the day longer then the night, and afterward the moon also may appear to
the world in her full light, to signify unto us, that the son of
righteousness, in whose beams is our salvation, that is to sayour Lord Jesus
Christ by the victory and triumph which he had in his resurrection, has
ouercomed the darkness of death, and so ascendinge to heaven has replenished
his church: (which is often signified by the moon) with the inward light of
his grace, by sendinge down the goly ghost. The which order of ower salvation
the prophet beholdinge, said, Eleuatus est sol and luna stetit in ordine sno.
The son is lyfted up, and the moon stood in her order. They therefore
which contendeth that the full moon of the month in which Easter should fall
may come before the Son makes the day and night of equal length, as they
disagree in the celebration of most high and great mysteries from the doctrine
of holy scripture, so they seem well to agree with them, which trust to be
saved with out the preventing grace of Christ. He means the Pelagians
Which in deed presume to teach that man might have had perfect
justification, though Christ the true light had never ouercomed the blyndnesse
off the world with his painful death and glorious resurrection. To conclude
therefore, we about the equinoctial spring, when the day and night be of one
length, and when the full moon of the first month orderly following the same
(that is to say) after the xiiij day of the said month is fully expired (the
observation of all which times is commanded in the law) do expecte yet in
that third week (according as in the ghospel we learn) the next Sunday
following, and then we keep the solemn feast of Ester: And that to the end we
may testyfie by ower doings, that we cellebrat not this solemnytie with the old
fathers, in remembrance that the children off Israel had the hard yoke of
bondage shaken from their necks in Aegipte, but that we woorshipp with devout
faith, and perfect charity the redemption of all the world, prefigured in
that deliverance off gods old people owte of thrauldome, and fully ended in
Christ's resurrection: to the end we may signify that we rejoice in the assured
hope of ower resurrection, which we believe shall be on the same Sunday also. This
account of Easter, which we have here declared unto you to be followed, The
invention of the golden number.
is comprised in the compass of xix. years, which of late, that is to say in
the Apostles time, began to be observed in the church, especially at Rome
and Aegipte, as I have specified before. But by the industry of Eusebius, who
of the blessed Martyr P^amphilus has his surname, it is more plainly and
distinctly set in order: So that, where as before the bishop of Alexandria was
wont every year to send abrod to every particular church the true time of the
Easter that year to be observed, now from hence forth the course of the full
moon being brought in to this order, and certainly tried out, every church by
itself can find it without failing. This count of Easter (so distincted by
Eusebius) Theophilus bishop of Alexandria made to serve for one hundred years,
at the request of Theodosius the Emperor. Cyril his successor made it for 95.
years more, comprising it in v. circles of the said compass of 19. years.
After whom Dionisius the yownger added as many circles in leeke order and
style which reached even to over time. The which now approaching nigh to the
date and term prefixed, there is now adays, such store of calculatours, that
in our churches through owte all England there be many, which can by the old
precepts of the Aegiptians, (which they have learned and committed to memory)
extend and draw forth the circle and course of Easter, in to as many years,
as them lists, even to the number of 532. years. Which number of years
being expired, all that appertains to the course of the son, moon, month
and weke returns into the same order it did before. The calculation or
directory of which time, we have not at this present sent unto you, because
demanding only to be instructed of the reason and cause of this time of
Easter, it seems you are already informed of the time it self. Having now
hitherto brefly and compendiously spoken concerning the dew observation of
Easter, according to yower highness request, we exhort you most humbly to
provide that your clergy have the same tonsure which the church does receive
and use as most agreeable to the Christian faith: whereof you required also our
letters. We know right well that the Apostles were not shaven all after one
sort. Neither now the whole catholic church as it agrees in one faith, one
hope, and one charity toward God, so uses also one and the self same order
of tonsure. Again that we may consider the time before us, to wit, the time of
the holy patriarchs, Job a perfect pattern of patience, when his tribulation
and aduersite began, shore his head. Whereby we learn that in time of
prosperity he was accustomed to let his hear grow. Yet Joseph a true
teacher and practiser of chastity, humility, piety and al other virtues, is
written to have been shaven, when he came out of preson. Whereby it appears
that in prison for the time of his induraunce he was wounte to remain with
long hear nor clipte nor shorn. Lo here two virtuous and godly men who
inwardly in heart and mind were one, showed yet in outward behavior some
diversity and contrariete. But though we may boldly say that the diversity of
ecclesiastical tonsure hurts nothing at all such as have a pure faith in
God, and perfect charity toward their neighbor, especially seeing we read
no controversy between the catholic writers, touching the difference and
diversity of shauing, as there has been for the celebration of Easter, yet
notwithstanding amongst all kind off tonsures which we find to have been used
or in the church, or universally amongst all other men, I may well say, that
none is rather to be followed and received of us, than the very same, which he
ware on his head, to whom Christ said after he had confessed him to be the
son of God. Matt. 16.
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church, and hell gates
shall not prevail against it. To the will I give the kayes of the kingdom of
heaven. And contrariwise we may well believe, that none is more to be abhorred
and detested of all faithful men, than that which he had to whom desiring to
bye the grace and gift of the holy ghost with money, saint Peter said.
Act. 8.
Thy money perish with the, because thou think the gift of God may be
obtained with monye. There is no part, nor fellowship for thee in the ministerye
of this word. And truly we are not shaven or clipte round for that
consideration only, that saint Peter was so shaven. But because he was so
shaven in the remembrance of Christ's passion, therefore we also desiring to
be saved by the merits off the same passion, do bear upon the top of our
crown, (being the highest part of our body) the sign of Christ's passion
as Peter did. For as every congregation of faithful men which by the death of
him that quickens and relyueth them, is made in very deed a holy
congregation, commonly accustometh to bear the sign of the cross in their
forhead, that by the divine power of the same they may be defended from all
assaults of the devil, They did bear the sign of the cross^ in their so
rehead which used to ble^se them selves therewith.
and may by often remembrance and admonition of it, be instructed how they
ought to crucify the flesh with all her sin and concupiscence, so in leeke
manner it beho^eth them, which either being made by vow monks, or by
profession of the clergy, do bind them selfs more streytly with the bridle of
continency for Chistes sake, to bear in their head by clipping, the form of
a crown, as our merciful Savior carried upon his precious head, at the time
of his passion a crown of thorn, to the intent he might thereby carry yea and
carry away the thorns and briers of our sins. To the end also they may
protest unto the world, even by their open head, that they are ready and
glad to suffer all mockery, irrision, and obloquy for his sake. Last of all
to testify, that they look for the crown of aeternall glory, which God has
promised to all that love him, and that for the purchasing of this, they
contemn all wordly shame and wanton wealth. But touching that fassion of
shauinge which Simon Magus enemy of Christ's faith used, who does not even
streyte at the beginning detest and abhor it with all his magyke? Which to
outward sight seems to have the leeknesse of a crown in the ouermost part
off the head, but when a man comes nere and beholds the hinder part, he
shall find that which seemed to be a crown, to come very short thereof. And
truly such manner as it is void of Christian considerations, so for Symons
sect it is very convenient. Who in deed by their simoniacall hypocrisy seem
in this life to certain deceived persons worthy the glory of everlasting joy,
but in the life which follows the dissolution of this body, are not only
depryued of all hope of the crown of glory, but (which is more) are condemned
to everlasting torments and pain. And here tuly I would not your highness
should think that I prosequute and debate this matter so largely, as though I
judged them worthy to be condemned which use this manner of shauinge, yff they
tender in heart and deed the unity of Christ's catholic church. Nay I boldly
protest, and affirm that many of them have been virtuous and holy men. Of the
which Adamannus, priest and Abbot of the Columbines is one. To whom amongst
all other things, when he was sent in embasie, for his own country to king
Alfride, and as he passed was desirous to see our monastery, and showed in his
behavior and talk, much wisdom, humilitye, and godliness, I said these
words unto him. I beseke you good brother. Why do you, believing that you shall
pass hence to a crown of life that has no end, wear in your head the
proportion and form of a crown, which has an end, seming in behavior to
be contrary to your faith? And if you seek the felowshipp off S. Peter, why do
you follow that manner of shauing, which he used whom S. Peter did ex
communicate and deliver to the devil, and do not rather show that you love
entierly with all your heart his habit, with whom you desire to live in
eternal bliss? Know you for a suerty my derely beloved brother (quoth he)
that albeit I use the same fasshion of shauing which Simon Magus did after the
custom and manner of my country, yet I utterly detest and abandone the
unfaithfulness and infidelyty of Symo^ Magus and desire with all my heart to
follow the steps of the most blessed head of the Apostles S. Peter so far
forth as my poor ability will serve. To that I replied and said. I believe
it is so in very deed. Yet it may be a more manifest declaration, that you
embrace even from the bottom of your heart all that the holy Apostle Peter
taught, if you keep that outwardly which you knew was used of him generally.
For I think your wisdom do easily judge it most convenient utterly to seclude
from your presence and face (dedicated to God) the habit, proportion, and
figure of his cou^tinaunce, who^ you abhorte with all heart, and mind. And
contrariwise as you desire to follow his steps and counsel, whom you look to
have as a patron before God the father, so it besemeth you to follow his
outward behavior. This for that time I spoke to Adamanus. Who after well
declared how much he had profited by saying the ordinances and rules of our
church. For after his return to Scotland he reduced by his preaching many of
the same cuntry, to the catholic observation of Easter. Albeit he could not
reduce the monks that lived in the Island Hij (where he was Abbat) thereto as
yet. He thought also to redress the manner of ecclesiastical tonsure amongst
them, if his authority could have prevailed. And I now also (most puissant
prince) do exhort you to endeavor with all the country, where the king of
kings, and lord of lords, has given you the souerainte, to observe and
keep all that agrees with the unity of Christ's catholic and Apostolic
church. So it will come to pass, that after you have had dominion and rule
here upon earth, the primat and head of the blessed Apostles will gladly open
to you and yowers the gates of heaven to rest with the holy angels, and other
dear fre^des of God. The grace of God, of our Everlasting king and lord
preserve you (most derely beloved son in Christ) and grant you long
prosperous reign to our quietness and peace. When this epistle was read in
the presence of king Naitane, with many other learned men besides, being truly
translated into the kings native tongue, by them which did well understand
it, he much reioysed at that exhortation as some make report: even so much
that rising from the place where he and many of the nobility were sat, he fell
down upon his knees, and gave God thanks, that he had deserved to receive
such a benefit out of England. And treuly, said he, I knew before that this
was the true celebration and kepinge of Easter: but now I do so well know
the cause and reason, why it should be so observed, that me thinks I had no
knowledge of it at all before: wherefore I profess and openly protest before you
all, that are here present, that from henceforth I and all my people, will keep
the feast of Easter at the time which is here described. I think it good also
that all priests and religious men in my realm ought to receive this kind and
manner of shauing, which we have heard to be very reasonable. And without any
further delay by his princely authority he performed that which he spoke. For
forthwith the account of xix. years, This account is now called the golden
number.
were sent abroad by a public edicte, to be copied out, learned, and observed
through out all the provinces of the Pictes: the erroneous accomptes of 84.
years altogether blotted out. All priests and religious men had their heads
shaven round after the true shape and figure of a crown. And all the whole
country being well reformed, was glad that they were reduced now to the
discipline and order of saint Peter, (primate and head of the Apostles) and
committed as though it were to his patronage and protection.

How the monks of Hij with other monasteries under their jurisdiction began
at the preaching of Egbert to keep Easter after the canonical ordonaunce of
Christ's church.

The 23. Chapter.
NOt long after the monks of Scotland which inhabitt the island Hij with all
other monasteries under their jurisdiction were brought by gods great
providence to the canonical observation of Easter, and right manner of
ecclesiastical tonsure. For the year after Christ's incarnation, 716. An. 716.
when Coenrede took the gouuernaunce and souerayntye off Northumberlande after
Osrede was slain, the derely beloved of God and honorably of me to be named,
the Father and priest Ecgbert cominge unto them out of Irelande was honorably
received and joyfully intertayned of them. This Ecgbert being diligently heard
of the^ as one that had a singular good grace in preachinge and that practiced
in life with much devotion, which he taught openly in their congregation, did
change by godly exhortations and aduertisements the old tradition of their
forefathers. Of whom we may verify that saying of the Apostle, Romans 10.
Aemulationem dei habebant sed non secundum scientiam. They had an earnest
desire to follow God, but not according to knowleadge. And he taught the^ by
one appointed compass (which should be perpetual) to keep the chief and
princypall feast after the Catholic churches institution, and manner of the
Apostles. The which appears to be done to by the great goodness and infinite
mercy of God: that because the country which had the knowleadge of God, and his
holy word did freely and gladly communicate the same to englishmen, should
them selves afterward come to a more perfect trade of life, then they had
before by the help and instruction of Englishmen also, now associated and
allied unto them. As contrary wise the Britons which would not ones open their
mouth to teach the Englishmen the knowleadge of Christ, which they had before
received, are now hardened in blindness, and halte allwaies from the right
way of truth, neither using the ecclesiastical tonsure after dew manner,
neither celebrating the solemn feste of Easter in the societe of the Catholic
church. Whereas now all Englishmen are established in the faith, and perfectly
instructed in all points of Catholic religion. The monks of the Island Hij in
Scotland received at the preaching of the learned father Ecgbert, the Catholic
rites and customs, under their Abbat Dumchad, about 80. years after they sent
Bishopp Aidan to preach the faith to Englishmen. This man of God Ecgbert
remained in that Island xiij. years, which he had now as though it were newly
and first consecrated unto Christ by reducing it to the Catholic unite and
societe. The same good father in the year of our Lord. An. 728.
728. upon Easter day, which then fell upon the xxiiij. of April, after he
had that day said Mass in remembrance of our Lords resurrection, departed
this world, and finished that day that joyful festiuite, with our Lord and
all the blessed company in heaven, which he had begone with his brethern even
that day by him reduced to the Catholic unite. And truly the providence of
God herein was wonderful, that that Reverent father should pass out of this
world to the Father, not only upon an Easter day, but also upon that Easter
day which was the first Easter after the Catholic order celebrated in that
place. The brethern therefore reioysed, both for the certain and Catholic
observation of Easter then learned, and also to see their teacher and master
that time also to pass to God, to be there their patron and intercessour. The
good father also reioysed that he lived here so long, vntell he might see
presently his scholars to celebrat with him that Easter, which ever before
they shunned and abhorred. So this most reverend Father being now certainly
assured of their undoubted amendment, reioysed to see that day of our Lord: He
saw it, I say, and reioysed.

What is the state of Englismen, or of all Bryta^nie at this present with a
brief recapitulation of the whole wor^, and with a note of the time.

The. 24. Chap.
THE year of Christ's incarnation 725. which was the vij, off Osric king of
Northumberlandes raygne, An. 725.
Vicbert Ecgbertes son king of kent passed out of this transitory life the
xxiij. of April leaving iij. sons, Edilbert, Eadbert, and Aldric, heirs of
his kingdom, which he hadd gouuerned. 34. years and a halffe. After his
death the next year following Tobias bishop of Rochester died, a man
certainly well learned (as I mentioned before), for he was scholar to ij.
Masters of most blessed memory: Archebishoppe Theodore, and Abbat Adrian. By
which occasion beside his knowledge in divinity, and all other sciences, he so
perfectly learned the greek tongue, and the Latin, that he had them as perfect
and familiar, as his own propre language. He is buried in a little chapel of
saint Paul which he builded in S. Andrews church, for a toumbe and place
of burial after his death. After him Aldwulff succeeded in the bishoppricke,
and was consecrated by Berthwalde the Archebishoppe. The year of our Lord An.
729.
729. appeared ij. great blasinge stars about the son making all that
beheld them maruelously afraied. For one went before the son every morninge,
the other appeared in the eueninge, streyt after the son was down, presaging
as it were, to the east and weast some great destruction. Or, if you will say,
one appeared before day, the other before night, that by both the said times
they might signify diverse miseries to hang over men's heads. They held up a
fire brande, toward the North, ready as it were to set all a fire. They
appeared in Ianuarye, and continued almost ij. weeks. At what time the
Saracenes wasted and spoiled France with much murder, and bloodshed. Who not
long after were justly punished in the same country for their spoiling. The
same year that the holy and good father Ecgbert died as we said before on
Easter, streyt after Easter king Osric having the Souerainte in
Northumberlande departed out^ of this life the 9. off May, after that he had
appointed Ceolwulff brother to king Coenrede his predecessor, to be his
successor in the kingedome, having reigned xj. years. The beginning and
process of whose reign is so full of troubles^ has had such diverse success
of things contrary one to the other, that we can not yet well tell what may be
written of them, nor what end every thing will have. The year of our Lord
731. An. 731.
Archebisshoppe Berthwalde worn out with old age died the 8. of January 37.
years, 6. months and xiiij. days after he had been bisshoppe. In his place
the same year Tacwine of the province off the Marshes, was made archebisshop a
long time after he had been priest in the monastery of Bruiden: He was
consecrated in Caunterbury by the reverend fathers, Daniel bishop of
Winchester, Ingualde bishop of London, Alduine bishop of Lichfelde, and
Aldwulff bishop of Rochester, the x. of June, being the soundaye a man
certes notable for his godliness and wisdom, and well conuersaunt in holy
scriptures. Wherefore at this present Tacwine and Aldwulff are bishops of
kent, Ingualde of the east Saxons, Eadbert and Hadulac of the east english.
Daniel and Forthere of the Weast Saxons, Aldwine of the Marshes and VValstode
of them which dwell beyond the river Seuerne toward the Weast. Wilfrid of
the Of York.
Viccij. Cymbert of Of holy Island and al Northumberland.
Lindisfarne. The isle of Wight is under the jurisdiction of Daniel bishop of
Winchester. The province off the Sowthsaxons continuinge certain years
without a bishop is gouuerned of the bishop of the Westsaxons in such
cases as the bishops help is necessary. Al these provinces, and others of
the south eue^ to Humber with their kings are in subjection and owe homage to
Edilbalde king of the Marshes. But of Northumberlande where Ceolwulff is
king, there are but iiij. bishops, Wilfride of York, Edilwalde of Lindisfarne,
Acca of Hagulstalde, Pethchelme of Whitchurch which being made a bishopps see
of late, when the faithful people began to multiply, has now this
Pechthelme for their first bishop. The Pictes also at this time are in leage
with the Englishemen and in unite with the catholic church. The Scotts which
inhabitt Brytannye content to keape their own lymittes and bordres, work no
treason toward England. The Britons, albeit for the most part, even of
pryuie malice and grudge they malign the Englishmen, and impugn with their
lewd manner the time of Easter ordained by the catholic church, yet the
allmightye power off God, and man resistinge their malice, they can have their
purpose in neither off them. For though they are in some part free, yet for
the more part they are insubiection to englishmen. And now all war and
tumult ceasing, all things being brought to an unity and concord, many in
Northumberlande as well noble men, as poor, layinge away al armor and
practice of chiualry become both they and their children religious men. Which
what success it is leeke to have, all the posterity shall see. Thus for this
present stands the whole state of Britanny. The year sense the English men
came into Britanny 285. and 733. sense the incarnation of Christ: In whose
reign let the earth always rejoice. And seeing Britanny takes joy and
comfort now in his faith, let many islands be glad, and sing praise to the
remembrance of his holy name.

THVS ENDS THE FIFTE AND LAST BOOK OF THE History of the Church of England.
The words of Venerable Bede following after the abridgement of this whole
history, in the 3. Tome of his works, which we have thought good to place here
at the end of the History it self.
THIS much touching the ecclesiastical history of the Britons, and especially
of the english nation, as I could learn by the writings of my aunceters, by
the tradition of my elders, or by my own knowleadg, I have by the help of
God, brought unto this order and issue, I Bid the servant of God, and priest
of the monastery of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul at Weimouth. Which
being borne in the territory of the same monastery, when I was seven years of
age, I was delivered by the hands of my friends and kinsfolks to be brought
up of the most Reverend Abbat Benet, and afterward to Ceolfrid. From the which
time, spending all the days of my life, in the mansion of the same monastery,
I applied all my study to the meditation of holy scripture: and observing
withal the regular discipline, and keeping the daily singing of Gods service in
the church, the rest of my time, I was delighted always, to learn of other, to
teach my self, or else to write. In the xix. year of my age I was made deacon,
and in the xxx. year Priest, Both which orders I received by the hands of
the most Reverend bishop John of Beuerlake at the commandment of Ceolfrid my
Abbat. From which time of my priesthood vntell the year of my age lix. I have
upon holy scripture for my own instruction and others partly brestly noted and
gathered what other holy fathers have written, partly I have at large expounded
after the manner of their interpration and meaning.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE SPECIAL MATTERS. The figure signifies the leaf. A. B. the
first and second side.
A
A Buses of religious persons punished by God from heaven. 144. b An army of
infidels put to flight by singing Alleluia. 27. b. The martyrdom of S. Alban
and miracles thereat befalling. 17. b. 18. Apostafie from the faith punished.
76. a. 82. b. The life of our Apostles and first preachers. 32. a. Arrian
heresies in Britanny. 19^ a. S. Augustine sent by S. Gregory to preach the faith
to englishmen 29. b. S. Augustine preaches the faith to Ethelbert or Elbert
king of kent 31. a. b. he was a monk. 33. a. made bishop in France. 32. b.
he prophecieth the destruction of the Britons. 50. b. S. Augustine the first
bishop of Canterbury created of the bishops of France by the commandment of
Pope Gregory. 32. b. The death of S. Augustine our Apostle. 51. b. An Epitaphe
upon him 52. a. The life and virtue of S. Edilrede, now called S. Audery. 133.
a. Miracles and cures do^e at her tomb. 134. b. A songin the praise of
virginite and in the honor of S. Audery 135. a Altar of stone. 68. b.
B
Of the Author of this History, Venerable Bede, read the preface to the
Reader. Berkinge abbay in Essex. 120. b King Elbert the first Christen king,
of englishmen endued the Bisshoprikes of Caunterbury, of London and Rochester
with lands and poss^ssions 51. b Consecration of bishops with a number of
bishops 910. a. 149. a. The devotion of bishops in the primitive church of
england. 151. a. 109. 113. b The example of a true preacher and a vortuouse
Bishop. fol. 80. b. Vow and habit monastical by the cons^^ration of bishops.
138. b. S. Augustine ordeineth bishops by the appoyn^ment of Pope Gregory.
folio. 35. a. No bishop ordained without a number of other bishops. 35. a.
Bl^ssing with the sign of the Cross. 143. a. A dumme man brought to speech
by blessing. 155. a.^58. b. Riot and evil life, the Britains destruction. 23.
a. Why the old Brittons became weak and open to foreign invasions. folio 20.
b. The situation and description of Britanny. 13. a. How Caesar conquered
Britanny. 15. a. The second conquest of Britanny. 15. b. The faith received in
britanny from Rome. 16. a. Civil wars among the old Brittons. 29. a.
C,
Christ's church in Caunterbury builded by S. Augustine our Apostle, and a
monastery thereby. 44. a. The bishop of Canterbury created Archbishop of
other bishops in britanny by Pope Gregory. 35. b. The first Christening of
Englishmen in Caunterbury. 32. b. Catholic observations to be preferred. 171.
b. Heretics confu^ed by Catholics in open disputation. 25. a. 26. b.
Canonical hours. 108. b. The virtuous first bishops of England labor to
bring the Britons and Scotts living in schism to the unite of the catholic
church. folio. 53. a. King Cedwall baptized and buried at Rome. 159. b. Elbert
the first christen king made laws for the indemnite and quiet possession of
church goods and of the clergy. 54. a. The places off Christ's nativity,
passion, Resurrection and Ascension described as they were a thousand years
past. 172. b. 173. a. and b. Cedda the second bishop of London and Essex. 98.
b. Dedication of Churches. 15^. b. 100. a. Holy vessels, altarclothes,
crnaments for the church, priestly apparel, certain relics and church books
sent by S. Gregory the Pope in to England at the first Christening of the same.
40. b. Churchemusike first practiced in the north. 75. a. The temples of
idols converted in to Christen churches, being hallowed with holy water, and
altered after the use of Christen religion, having altars set up and relikes
placed in them. 4^. b. Bishop Chadda a man of great humbleness. 114. The
great fear of God in him 116. b. Miracles at his tomb. 117. b. Cloisters of
Nonnes in order, form, and proportion, as to this day. folio. 140. 141. a.
142. b. Such of the clergy as were out of holy Orders took wives. 33. a. The
manner of the clergy of the primitive church of England. 147. a. The people do
communicate at Mass. 54. b. The v. first general Counsels received by a common
consent of the church of England. 131. a. Consecration of the B. Sacrament. 19.
a. Confession to the priest and penance enjoined. 143. b. Our faith began with
Cross and procession. 31. b. Cross and chalice of gold. 75. a. A cross
erectyd by king Oswald. 76 b. Many restored unto health by the chippes of the
same cross. ibid. b. A broken arm made sownde and hole again by the moss of
the cross. 78. a. Why the clergy wear shaven crowns. 187. a. The life of S.
Cutbert being yet a Monk. 146. a. The life of S. Cutbert when he lived like an
Anchoret. 148. a. and. b. S. Cutberts body after xi. years burial found whole
and sound. 151. a. Miracles and cures done thereat. 151. and. 152.
D.
Prayer for the dead. 90. b. The devotion of owr primitive church. 91. b. The
devotion of Christians in Jerusalem above a thousand years past, in
Constantins time. 173. a. Memories of souls departed. 52. a. Dyriges over
night and Mass in the morninge for the dead. 77. b. A necessary doctrine for
this time. 170. a. Dorchester in Barkeshere a bishopric. 82. b. 139. a.
E.
The Catholic observation of Easter. 102. b. Item the same proved out of holy
scripture. 181. b. 182. 183. 184. 185. 186. The east part of England converted
to the faith. 69. b. The english men (at the first inuading of Britany by the
foreign nations of the Saxons generally so called) occupied all England except
Sussex, Essex, Kent, and part of the westcountre. 24. a. The first spoiling of
Britanny by the english men. 24. a. Saint Erkenwald the. 4. bysshopp of London
120. b. Excommunication. 99. a.
F.
The faith of our primitive church. 156. b. 157. a. 123. b. The faith and
devotion of the first 400. years after Christ. 26. b. Fasting against the
plage. 128. a. The determinations off the holy fathers to be followed. 119. a.
Friseland converted to be faith. 163. a. VVensday and frydayes fast. 80. b.
G.
Off the noble parentage and virtuous life off S. Gregory. 45. a. S. Gregory
brought up in a monastery, after sent to Constantinople from Rome as legate,
quenched there by his lerning an heresy off Eutichius touching our
resurrection. 45. b. 46. a. b. A recital off the learned works off S. Gregory.
46. b. S. Gregory the pope off Rome our Apo^^le. 45. a. S. Gregory a great
aulmes man. 47. a. Letters off S. Gregory for the furderance of the faith in
England, to S. Augustine. 29. b. to the Archebishopp off Arles. 30. a. to S.
Augustine again. 3^. a. to the B. off Ar^^s again. 40. a. to S. Augustine
again. 40 b. to. Mellitus the first B. off London. 41. b. to S. Augustine
again. 42. a. to king E^h^^bert. 43. a. A joyful rejoicing off S. Gregory
for the converting off our country to the faith. 47. a. An ^pitap^e upon S.
Gregory in meter. 48. a. The occasion why he sent preachers to our country. 48.
b.
H.
A true saying off an heathen. 97. b. The heresy off the monothelites
condemned. 177. b. Heretics banished the country set it in rest and quiet.
28. b. Extirpation off heresy by counsel off foreign bisshops. 25. a. The
virtuous liffe off Hilda a learned and famous Abbess. 138. 139. Howseling
before death. 116. b. 142. b.
I.
Idols first thrown down in England. 83. b. Intercession off Saints. 152. a.
^00. b. 128. b. Holly men work miracles by intercession. 88. b. The life of S.
John off B^^uerlake. 164. b. 165. 166. 167. The situation off Ireland. 14. b.
K.
A rare and strange humilite off a king. 91. a. King Sigebert becomes a
monk. 94. a. Reuolting from the faith in kent revenged from God. 54. a. Kent
returns to the faith. 56. a.
L.
The first bishop off Lincoln. 126. a. Lincoln converted to the faith. 69.
b. In the year 60^. London received the faith, and S. Paul's church at that
time builded. Rochester also received the faith, and S. Andrews church at that
time builded. 51. b. Reuolting from the faith in London plaged from God. 55.
a. Thr bishop off London consecrated off his own Synod by the appointment off
S. Gregory the pope. 41. a. Fasting in lent until evening. 100. a.
M.
Whether in act ^ff Marriage be any sin. 38. a. Marriage unlawful above the
third degree. 34. a. Our first Aposile said Mass. 32. b. The martyrdom off ij.
english priests in Saxony. 163. b. Mass in the memory off saints. 128. a.
The sacrifice off the Mass propitiatory. 137. a. S. Cutberts devotion at Mass
time. 149. a. The first chrysteninge off the Marshes, or middleland englishemen
anno Domini. 650. 97. a. S. Augustine conuinceth the schismatic traditions
off the Brito^s by miracle. 49. b. Why miracles reported in the history ought
not to be mistrusted. 133. a. Miracles at the place, where king Oswald was
slain. 85. b. Off miracles mentioned in the historye, read the preface to the
Reader. The foundation off monasterys. 99. b. 101. b.
N.
Nonnes consecrated off bishops. 133. a. A Nunnerie burned for the sin off
the inhabitans. 143. a. The first christeninge in the North country. 59. b.
The first christendom off the english Prince in the North. 68. a. Children
brought up in Nonneries. 121. b. Off nightly pollutions how and when they
restrain from the blissed sacrament. 39. a. The invention off the golden
Number. 186. a.
O.
The commendation of king Osuuius. 90. b. Oblations of the people distributed
by Bishops. 33. a. S. Of waldes day kept holy with Masses and service. 129. a.
The persuasion off king Oswine with the heathen king Sigberte 93. a. King
Oswald a great prayer. 88. b.
P.
Pelagians heresies in Britanny. 20. a. The pope is informed of the state of
the church. 132. a. Letters from the popes off Rome for the increasing of the
Faith in England. 57. a. 60. a. 62. a. 70. b. 71. b. The letters off S.
Gregory, see in the letter G. Fire quenched by prayers. 27. a. Mellitus
quenched a great fire by prayer. 56. b. S. Gregory pope off Rome the chiefest
bishop off the whole world. 45. a. A tempest on the sea alayed by the
prayer. 154. a. A great desease suddenly healed by prayer. 165. a. 1^7. a. The
behavior of priests in our primitive church. 107. b. The primitive church
at the first did not abrogate all Iuysshe ceremonies. 104. a. A rare zele to
the preaching of Gods word in a worldly prince. folio. 78. b. 88. a. An old
proverb. 88. b. 17. b. An example for the confirmation off purgatory. 136. b.
The pains off Purgatory 95. b.
R.
Religouse men our primitive church reverenced. 107. b. Reservation of the
blessed sacrament. 142. b. The goodness of God and our faith works miracles
by holy relikes. 89. b. Enormouse crimes in the rightuouse sooner punished. 99.
a. Relikes of holy ma^tyrs. 26. a. The Pantheon, or temple of all idols in
Rome, converted by pope Boniface into the church of our Lady and all Saints.
53. b. Mellitus the first bishop of London goes to Rome, and counsels pope
Boniface about matters touching the english church. 53. a. The sea Apostolic
off Rome. 177. b. 109. b. Privilege from Rome for the liberty off monasteries.
131. b. Authorite from Rome to make bishops. 57. a. Constitutions from Rome
touching the clergy. 71. a. The Sea of Rome. 33. a. 35. a. Going to Rome
accounted a matter of great devotion in our primitive church. 139. a. 160. b.
The first destruction of Rome, and decaie of that empire. 20. b.
S.
The arriual of the Saxons in to Britanny. 23. b. Discipline of the church upon
such as committed sacrilege. 33. b. The government off the old Saxons. 163.
a. The sacrifice off the Mass. 183. a. The blessed sacrament bread off life.
55^ a The prayer and fasting of schismatikes avail not. 5^. a. Commendation
off the scottishe monks, which governed first the english church in the north
country. 10^. a. Palladius the first bishop off Scotland sent from Caelestinus
the Pope 22. a. The order of english service chose of the b^st orders of other
cou^tres 33. b. The devil fights with sin against man. 95. b. Sin purged
by pain in this life. 122. b. How sin bredeth in the heart of man. 39. a.
Singing in churches thorought out all England. 114. a. Order off singing and
church service from Rome. 132. a. The gift off singing (off holy things only)
given miraculously to a simple lay man. 141. and. 142. A lesson for ungodly
students. 89. a. Example off a trusty subject. 59. a. The conversion off
Sussex to the faith. 126. Miracles in the monastery of ^^l^ee in Sussex 127. b.
Selsee the first monastery in Sussex now brought to the faith. ibidem. In Bosam
a monastery before the faith openly received in Sussex. 126. b A miserable
famine in Sussex before the faith received 127. a. The first Christeninge in
Sussex miraculouse. ibdem. The dioceses off Sussex and Hampshere divided. 175.
a. The first Synod off the English Church. 118. b. The second. 130. b. The
third. 148. b.
T.
Difference between the new Testament and the old. 37. b. Temples in the honor
of Martirs. 19. a. Theodore a greek borne the first Primat of all England. 113.
b. He deposes VVinfride bishop of Litchfield. 120. a. The felicite of the
english church under him. 113. b. Sickness and tribulation sent of God for
trial of virtue. 139. b.
V.
Virtue persecuted of the evil even to death. 99. a. Virgins in monasteries.
84. a. Edwine the first Christen king of the North brought to the faith by a
vision. 63. b. Vniuersalite prescribes. 104. a. Vow of obedience in religion.
119. b Vows in sykenesse. 108. b. Vows to godde. 101. a. The first
Christeninge in the west contry 82. b. A tempest ceased by holy water. 25. a.
Sickness healed by holy water. 156. b. Unjust wars revenged from God. 145.
The life of bishop Wilfrid the Apostle of Sussex. 175. b. The faith first
preached and received in the i will of wight. 139. b. The situation of the I Will off
wight. 130. a. VVilbrorde an englishman the Apostle off Friseland. 164. a. Good
works. 122. b.
Y^
The bishop of York made archbishop by the Pope. 41.
Faults escaped in Printing.
Leaf. Side. Line. Fault Correction. 27. b. Margen. Hosius. Host. 25.
Insidels. Infidels. lleluya. Alleluya. 29. a 25 aut. and. 30. a. ^. vvo^h.
vvho^. 41. a. ^8. consuship. consulship. 74. b. 3. Our. Over. 75. a. Mar.
good. gold. 88. b. 16. recei. receined. 6. isis. ^^. Mar. verb. proverb. 90.
a. 30. by by. by. 95. a. Mar. vvde. world. 99. a. 10. elemency. elemency.
104. b. 15. out. on. 106. a. 20. can he. can he not 112. b. 27. it is. this 129.
a. 1. sor. for. 134. a. 24. lymnes. lymmes. 151. b. 23. to. do. 160. b. 23.
generati. generation. 177. a. 9. for such. for such.

FINIS.

