AN EXCELLENT AND A right learned meditacion, compiled in two Prayers, most
fruitful and necessary to be used and said of al true English men, in these
dangerous days of affliction, for the comfort and better stay of the christen
conscience, bewailing the deserved plages of England.

Psalm. I. Call upon me (says the Lord) in the day of trouble, and I shall,
deliver the, and thou shall honor me. Prynted at Roane by an Englysh Scolers
copy, by Michael VVodde, the third day of Ianuarye. Anno Do. M. D. LIIII.

A Prayer.
OH almighty, ever living, and most merciful Lord God the dear father of our
lord and savior Jesus Christ, and through him our most gracious good father,
whose providence is over al, whose wisdom and righteousness is seen ouet al, as
thy mercy, even in the midst of most miseries is tasted of all. In deed we
have deserved most horrible plages, by re ason of our unthankfulness, contempt
and slaundrous abusing of thy most holy gospel, which most ple^teously and
putely thou did give us, with such a Prince to propagate and set forth the
same, as never since England was Christened, was known the like. We I say have
deserved, not only the taking away of this our dear Prince, and the benefit
of the mystery of thy pure gospel, but also all other most terrible plages,
that can be devised: for great and heinous are our offenses, and therefore just
thou Psa, cxix.
art, and righteous are thy judgments if (as thou have begun) thou shall
continue to pour out upon vsthy searful plagues and indignations. But
gracious Lord, in thine anger, because thou art accustomed to remember Psalm.
ciii.
merci, and full well know, whereof we are made, and what we at able to bear:
we beseech the which art rich in mercy, and plentiful to all Roma. x.
the^ that call upon the, that for thy names sake through Christ, thou would
correct us acordi^g to thy sweet Psalm. vi.
mercy, and not in thy sour fury and indignation. Much better it is for us
(dear father) and more tolerable, that we should yield our selves into ^^.
Samu. xxiiii.
thy hands, to be chastened of the, then to fall into the hands of thy
enemies, as David prayed. For great is thy mercy, against the, against the
Psalm. li.
only have we sinned, and broken thy holy commandments. But loving Lord, and
almighty God, and father well thou know, we have not sinned against the
devil, the world, the pope and his prelates, neither against the queen's
highness, and politik maiestrates of the Realm, so that justly have they no
right or power to punish us. How be it thou may justly use them as thy
fearse rod against us. But good God and heavenly father, against them have we
not be haued our selves, that rightly and justly, they can be thought to
punish us: Yea, rather they wish, that with them horribly we would displease
and sin against thee, for nothing should it grieve the^, if we were horrible
rebels against the, blasphemers of thy name, idolaters, worshippers of stocks
and stones, false seruers of the, adulterers, thieves, dronkerds murderers,
glottons, oppressors, and altogether overwhelmed in mischief. But this is our
sin, and offense against the^: because we prech, believe, and confess the,
God the fa John. xvii
there, to be the true and only God, and Jesus Christ thy dear son to be the
i. Cor. viii
only Lord, Savior, Bishop, Prist, and mediator: and the holy spirit to be
Math. i. Heb. vii. i. Tim. iiii John. xiiii xv. and. xvi. Psalm. cxix*
the only comfortor, viuificator, cou^ celour and master of all truth, and thy
written word, to be the lantern of our feet, the sufficient doctrine of our
salvation. This dear Lord is a sin against the^: because we will not serve
the, after the tradicions of men. But as in thy word, by thy son and
Apostles, thou have taught us, there i. Tim. iii
fore are they angry, wroth, and persecute us. If we would worship bread Heb.
vii. ix. and. x.
instead of Christ, cast of our care and Creed of the satisfactori and
propiciatory sacrifice, which thy son our Lord, did make once for all, in
his own body himself, to the perfect sanctifying forever, of all that shall be
saved: and come and by their propiciatory sacrifices in that abho minable idol
the mass. If we would cast of thy commandments, to follow good intentes, to
serve the in a tongue we know not, to prai unto sain tes, to bie pardons, to
run a pilgrimage gate going, to offer candels and tapers to images, to bie
trentals, dirigies: to say as they say, and do as they do, submitting our
selves to the faith of the Antichristian popysh and devilish church, clean
contrary from the faith of thy catholic and true church, which is grounded
and builded upon thy dear child Jesus Christ, who as he is the foundation, so
is he 1. Cor. iii.
the fullness of al, whereof we al receive, and the very glue which coupleth
Ephe. i,
and knitteth together every one of us, to grow and go forwards into a Collos.
i.
perfect man, being made of thee unto John. i.
us, wisdom, righteousness, sancti fying, and redemption, that our rejoicing
Ephe. iiii.
might be in him, which also is our head, from whom comes our i. Cor. i.
life, by the woorkyng of his spirit, which is kept always alive in us, so
Ephe. i.
long as we suck of the blood and natural ioyse which descends from our head
into the members, that is to Phil. ii.
say: so long as we stycke and abide by his written word and Gospel, not
suffering the same to putrify and corrupt, by admitting false gloses and
expositions of men's own brains and devises, not contained in thy book of the
Bible. I sai dear Lord, if we would do thus, leaving the water in the well of
life, and drink of their dyrtie dygged pittes and cestorns, then should we
have peace with them, then would not the devil rage, then would the world
wrestle no more against us, then would the Pope and his prelates promote us,
then would the queen be merciful, and the Magistrates our good masters, even as
thy dear child says: If you were of the world, John. xvi
the world would love his own. Here therefore look down, O merciful father
toward us, and a fearce judge toward al such our enemies, as are not to be
converted, for they are no less thine enemies then ours* so that in perse
cuting us, they persecute the, and punish the. For this word which we preach,
believe and confess, is not our word, but thy word, not our expositions or
co^struinges, but the expositions and construinges of thy holy Spirit. This
gear the devil can not abide, but would have this place, and be to us a god.
The Pope and his prelates would reign in men's consciences, and for gods word,
they would have us to believe their stynckyng tradicions, councels, decrees and
lies. The queen and Magistrates, in place of thy son Jesus Christ, would place
their abominable idol of bread: in place of our pressed, after the order of
Melchisedecke, they would place priests after the order of Baal and
Antichrist. In steed of Christ's sacrifyce, they would thrust out unto us, an
horrible sacrilege, and spoylyng thy son Jesus Christ of his glory. If the^
this be a sin, to stycke to the our God and father, to stycke to thy Christ
our Lord, alone savior, perfect priest, prophet, bishop, sacrifice,
propitiatio^, propiciatorie, and Medyatour, thy holy spirit our doctor,
comfortour, viuificatour, expositour of thy word: and thy written word and
gospel, our only square, rule, and line to serve the by: If it be a syn to
preach this, believe this, and after our callinges, every one of us to confess
and protest this: then Lord thou art a sinner which commaundest and requirest
this of us. Wherefore awake (O Lord our God) sanctify thy holy name, which
they blaspheme. Stablishe and strengthen thy kingdom, which they disturb in
us, and work parfectly thy will, which they go about to hinder in us, and
suffer not thy self to be trodden under foot of them, because of the greuousnes
of our sins, for they (O Lord) do not punish in us our sins, but they seek
to suppress, and wholi to take away thy holy word* which does work in us:
that thou should not be truly worshipped, and that thou myghtest have no
people to preach the, believe in the, and confess the. Oh vouchesafe therefore
to hear mercifully, and to grant graciousli this our poor complaint, dear
father of mercy, which have bydden us Psalm. l.
in our need to call upon the, and do promise that thou wylt hear and help
us, so that we shall praise thy name. For Christ's sake therefore, in whom thou
art well pleased, although in us for our manifold syns thou have just cause to
be displeased (but great is thy mercy) for his sake (I say) in this our need
help us, in such sort, as most may be to thy glory, our consolation,
conuercion of such as are to be converted, and subuertion, confusion, and
eternal shame of such as seek thy dishonor, and are not to be converted. For
thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever

Amen.
Another Prayer
O Almightite, eternal, and everliving Lord, the eternal father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, thou great and most fearful God, thou that kepest covenant and
merci, with them that love the, and seek to do thy commaundmentes: yea thou,
that (as the Prophet says) eue^ in thy wrath think Abac. iii.
upon mercy: cast down thy louinge countenance upon thy pore flock that does
profess the here in England: and regard the mischief that is imagined against
us.

Consider (Lord) how they counsel and co^uent, against the doctrine, and pore
members of thy dear son Jesus Christ. We are certain, that it was thou,
which did confound the cruelty of the tiraunt Haman, Hest. vii.
the enemy of thy people, ouerthrowi^g him in the mischief that he him self had
imagined. And we sureli be leave (Lord) that thy hand (as the prophet says) is
not shortened, but that Esaye. lv*
thou art always hable to healpe, al though our ambicious pride, our un
saciable covetousness, our carnal life our careless security, and other
unspeakable most grievous offenses, have separated us from thee, and our sinful
infidelity has caused the to turn thy face from us, and not to hear us. we
confess Lord, that we have sinned excedingli, we have been disobedient Dani.
ix.
and gone back from thy precepts and judgments: we would never faithfully
follow thy servants the Preachers, which spoke unto us in thy name truly as
thou co^maundest the^, but rather we gave ear to the enchau^tings of the
popish charmers, and followed the vain enticements of the wicked world, living
and waloing in the lusts, delites and appetites of our frail flesh and carnal
securitye, flattering our selves in such faults and naughtines, wherein we put
our pastime and feliciti. wherefore this cross (yea rather this curse) is
iustlye for our unthankfulness poured upon us. Unto us (O Lord our God)
belongs open shame and confusion, but yet unto the pertains mercy and
forgeuenes. we have sinned (o lord) and done wickedlye against all thy
righteousness: yet let thy wrathful displeasure be turned away (we beseech
thee) from us thy feable flock and poor miserable afflicted congregation, And
in this (O LORD) shall thy goodness be declared, magnified, and pray sed, if thou
be merciful unto us miserable wretches, which are not rich in good works.
iiii. Esd^^ viii.
Be not always wroth at us (O lord) but spare thy people, and have mercy upon
thine own congregation. O be merciful unto us.

Behold Lord, how thine enemies have entered thine enheritau^ce, Psa* lxix.
and daily defyle thy holy temple. Se how thy word is shut up, and with holden
from thy congregation, so that thy flock is like to famish for lack of food.
Lo, we are become an open shame to our neighbors, yea a very scorn and
laughing stock to all that dwell about us. O remember not our old sins and
offenses, but have mer cie upon us, and that quickly, for cls we are come to
great misery* Help us (O Lord our savior) for the glory of thine own name:
Let not the enemies triu^phe over us, lest they say, that we have no God.

O regard the sorrowful sighyng of the prisoners that lie in bands for thy
glorious gospel and words sake, and let their tears ascend up into thy
presence: and according to the greatness of thy power, preserve and strengthen
those that are appointed to the slaughter, for professyng of thy holy word and
name. Suffer not Math. vii
the du^me dogs to turn again, and with their teethe to tear in pieces,
the true teachers of thy holy word. Suffer them not to suck the blood of such
as have purely preached thy truth. Suffer not the swynish sort of Sodomites,
to tread in the mire that precious pearl the gospel of thy glory, the only
schole and learning of our salvation. O Lord, suffer Gen, xxvi
not these proud Philistines, to stop up thy sweet springes of lyui^g water,
and instede thereof to make us drink perforce, of their stinking puddles of
abominable popyshe masses and men's imagined traditions. Suffer not the stout
sturdie rams with their filthy fete, to tread down and trouble the pure
pasture, and fair Ezechiel. xxxiiii.
fountain of thy holy word, prepared to feed and refresh thy flock withal.
Suffer not the sede of Antichrist, the sons of perdicion, to set up them
selves, and their own vain inuencions to be embraced and honored instede of
the. Suffer not them (O Lord) to bring this thy church of England back
again, in to the blind bondage of that bloody Babylon, the bawdye beast of
Rome. And for as much as the hearts of Prin ces, magistrates, and governors ar in
thy hand, suffer not lord, these subtle sor cerers, so to be witch and enueagle
the queen's highness (who^ thou, having for our unworthiness and heinous offenses
taken thy blessed servant and confess our Edward the.vi. our late most
christen king and Governor from us, have of thy wonderful power, placed in the
roial seat of this realm) from the hearing and readyng of thy blessed word,
whereat she both might and ought to learn her duty. Suffer them not (for
thy mercyes sake, O lord) to withstand the truth, and to keep her grace back,
from the knowledge of thy gospel, which is the only rote, whereof true faith
spri^geth: no more than thou suffredest their au^cie^t grandfather Elimas the
Act. xiii.
Sorcerer, to prevail against Paul, preaching to the prudent grouernor
Sergius Paulus, whom the said Elimas sought to turn away from the faith. O
lord open ye eyes of the nobiliti of England, and stre^gthe^ their hearts with
thy spirit of strength and magnanimiti, that they become no more subjects to
the proud popish prelates, and shameless shauelings the Angels of satan, not be
made their slaughtermen and sheadders of gyltles blood (as in times past) in
murtheri^g thy prophets and ministers, and so provoke thy wrath and vengeance,
to the utter confusion of this English realm and nacio^* who^ thou have
adourned, and mercifulli blessed with so mani bou^ teous gifts: But as thou
dyddest move the hearts of the princes and nobiliti of Jerusalem, to help and
deliver Ieremithi prophet. from the hands Iere. xxvi
of the prests, which cried out up o^ him, and sought his death, because he
earnestly and sincerely preached thy word, even so lord stir up the har tes
of our nobiliti and magistrates, that they may be unfeigned favorers of thy
truth, and of the teachers thereof, and so to keep their hands clean from
innocent blood. Give grace, O Lord to the counsel of England, that they may
faithfully favor thy blessed Bible: and endue them with the spirit of thy
counsel, to occupy them selves in the study thereof, according to the
counsel of the most noble king David: Be ye learned you that judge the earth:
so as they being our guydes and governors, may serve the in fear and
trembling, and apply their endeavors to govern according to thy rule, and
ordinance. Put thy spirit of strength, virtue, boldness* sobriety and love (O
gracious Lord) into the hearts of the states of this realm, as well the nobility
and gentilmen as the co^mo^s of the same, that they al together agreeing in thy
truth, repenting them of their horrible sins, where with they have most
grievously offended thy hie majesty, and linking their hearts together in a
uniform concord, peace and christian love of mind faithfully one to another,
having the always before theireies, and beigaided with the most mighty
protection of thy stretched out arm, suffer not thy holy sacred word nor thy
blessed and most comfortable sacraments, after this lamentable sort to be
blasphemed and banished away from us, by these bloody Edomites, and shaven
swarm of Sodomites, the chaplains of Baal, our popish pestiferous prelates,
nor thy realm and heritage of England and Calise with the dominions and
members of the same, to be devoured, ouertu^ned, betrayed, nor brought to
slavery or confusion, through domestical or foraine cruel war, or by
ambicious coulourable means of crafty confederacy, subtle fetches, ravenous
desires, or forceable power of unnatural forainers and strange nations,
devised or brought in by the sleighti enticements or traitorous conspiracy, of
popish prestes and their adherentes (the enemies of thy glorious gospel) under
pretense of honor, frendshyp, common weal, and safegarde of the realm, which
have the before their eyes* but secretli mind or not regard the danger of
subuersio^ and ruin of thy realm and people of England, for the aduau^cing
and setting up of their god Moasim. in their abominable idolatrous masses, and
other supersticious wykednes, and to the intent to restore Antichrist of Rome
the devils vicare upon earth, into his pristine tira^nous power, and estate
here in England again, to sit in the consciences of thy people, and (his wou^d,
which the stroke of thy mighti spiritual sword gave him here among us, being
healed again) to make havoc of thy chosen flock, who^ thou boughtest with
the price of thy dear son our only savior Jesus Christ's most precious
heart blood. And although (O Lord) our froward neclige^ce, our impenitent
behaucour, and carnal disobedience toward thy holy law, have caused the justly
to take the liberty and fre use thereof away from us, and leave us* to our
selves in the sluttish swine tubbes and dirtie dregs of idolatry,
supersticion and barborous ignorance: Although our stubburnes and wilful
repyning against the gospel like government, and prudent procedings of our
most learned, merciful, wife, loving, and natural English christian soueraygne
liege lord thy servant Edward the.vi. late king and governor of this realm,
deserves an insole^t mocker, an enemy of thy truth and testament, an
unnatural forainer, and a merciles oppressor to have rule and government over
us: al beit our covetous cloining, beastlishe bribing, extreme extorcioning,
deuylish deceiving, spightful spoiling, and ravenous robbing of our natural
brethren and cou^trimen, justly demerite the invasion of bloudi tirau^ts, and
proud strangers, to spoil and strip us of all that is our own, house, land,
goods, substance and liberti, although the adultrie, fornication, filthy
whoremonging, rude ribawdrye, and lycencious life of us Englismen, in abusing
other men's wives, and defiling virginity, might occasion the rauishing and
defilyng of our wives, daughters and maidens, by pocky papists, forain fraikes,
and lecherous epicures, that contemn chaste marriage, and puritye of life:
although our proud lokes, our parcial parttaking, and contempt of our poor
brethren, and nedy neighbors: albeit (I say) our petuerse persecuti^g,
merciles murdering, and shameful sheading of innocent blood, provoke just
recompense of tira^nie, murder, and bloodshed upon us, by the hands of stout
strangers and brave soldiers: and generally, although our manifold sins,
infidelity, and wikednes have undoubtedly earned and deserved (O Lord) thy
terrible curse and vengeance* for breaking of thy most sacred holy law and
blessed commandments, to be poured upon us, in town and in field, upon our
bodies and children, upon the fruits of our ground, our cataile and all that we
have: yea and though we deserve to be driven out of our natural countri, and to
be beaten down, and slame of our enemies, and to be plaged withal the curses
mentioned in the blessed book of thy severe De. xxviii
law and justice (as we even from the bocome of our hearts confess, we have
don in deed) yet O most gracious lord whose mercy is above al thy works, and
have promised by thy prophet, that in Eze. xviii
what hour soever a sinner groneth, and repents him of his sins, thou will
gracioussi hear him, and remember his sins no more. we thy miserable crea
tures, most humbly be sech thy fatherly goodness and mercy* by the merits of
thy dear son our Lord Jesus Christ, forgive us our wickedness, forsake us
not, leave us not as Orphans, co^fortles and helples. The holy ghost (by thy
servant David) commands us to call Psalm. ^.
upon the in the dai of our trouble, assuring us of remedi. And is not this a
time of trouble? Are not these days, dangerous days? Is not this a world
wherein thy wrath does plainly apear? Romo. ii.
wherefore O lord, be merciful unto us. Hold thy hand of blessing over thy real
me and people of England, with the dominions of the same, and be their Psalm.
lxi.
buckler, shield and tower of refuge from the face of the enemi. Let not the
uncircumcised papists and carnal epicures triumph over us. Let them not giest
upon us, with mockes and tauntes, in rimes and balades for their pastime, and
say: where is now their God? where is their christ? where is their gospel? where
it their safegarde? Their natural king is gone, a stranger is their ruler,
their enemi of Rome has the vpperhand, prestes and women bear the bell, their
diuiniti is turned to idolatri, their chri stianitie to poperi, their policy
to foleri, their nobiliti to ignominy, their chivalry to slavery, their
manhood to misery, their liberty to captivity, their yomanrye to drudgerye,
their weal into woe, their mirth into mour ning, their commons confounded,
their wives ravished, their maide^s defiled, their men murdered, their widows
pined, their substance spoiled, they^ land conquered, English changed to
Spainish, Calise into ^lemishe; Lordanes made lords* and England become a
grange. O lord, which art the health, Psa. xxvii*
and help of all that faithfulli trust in the, deliver us in the multitude of
thy mercies, from the multitude of our sins, and Psalm. l^*
from these deserved plages. O Lord, infatuate and confound the counsails and
devises of thine and our enemies* as thou did at the earnest suit of thy
servant David, to that subtle traitorous ii. Re. xvii
Sire Ahitophel. Let them be turned back, and come to shame, that would evil to
England, or to any member thereof. O merciful father, who^ thy son John. xv.
Esai. v. Mat. xxi.
calls a husbandm^^, defend thy vineyard of England, which he (with the
instruments of his gospel) has planted here among us, from the violent raging
furies of these ravenous wild Boares: for his sake, that is the true Psa. lxxx.
vine. And seeing we be branches that can do nothing without him, nourish us
with the sap of thy holy spirit and dew of thy grace, that we may fruitfully
abide in the vine unto thend, and not to whither through the storms of
te^ptatio^ and peril, to be cut of, and fall before our enemies. we most heartily
Psalm. li.
beseech the (O lord) take not thy holy word and spirit from us. O merciful lord
our God, hear the prayers and peticio^s of thy sorrowful servants. O let thy
face and bright countenance (at least Psa. lxvii
once again) shine over thy English congregation, which now is in woeful case.
Deliver us not (O heavenly father) into the hands of the wicked, least their
handle us after their own lust. O incline thine ear and hearken, open thine
eyes, for the glory of thine own names sake, and behold our trouble. For we do
not cast our prayers before the trusting in our own righteousness, but only in
thy great mercies declared unto us in Jesus christ O lord hear us. O forgive us
Lord. O Lord consider and tarry not over long, but for thine own sake, send us
help, and defend us: for we are thy people, and do co^fes thy name, To the, O
heavenly father, with thy dear son Jesus Christ our only redemer, and thy
holy spi rit the co^fortour, beal honor, glory, praise and dominion for ever
and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

