QVEENE ELIZABETH'S Looking-glass of Grace and Glory.

WHEREIN MAY BE seen the fortune of the faithful: that is to say, the
wrestling, victory, and reward, or the combat, conquest and Crow^^ of GODS
children.

All clearly represented according to Scripture, and illustrated by diverse
notable examples of Gods servants both men and women: And likewise enterlaced
with man's memorable alligories and morallties: both pleasant and profitable to
be read.

By I. M. Master of Arts.

TO THE GREATEST HONOR OF THE MEMORY OF THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS LADY OF
SAMOTHEA, MARJE.
IN her lifetime Queene-heire of Scotland, Queene-dowager of France, and by
natural descent Princess apparent of England, France, and Ireland;

A BRANCHE
Sprung from the Imperial and Royal stock of CHARLES the great, once the
most Augustious Emperor of Romans and Germans, and King of France most
Christian.

GREAT-GRAND-CHILDE
Of the most prudent and puissant Prince HENRY the seventh, King of England,
France, and Ireland, by his eldest Daughter borne in the blessed Bed of the
happy Union of the two Roses, the most illustrious Queen MARGARET wife to the
most virtuous and praiseworthy Prince JAMES the fourth King of Scots.

DAVGHTER AND ONLY HEIR
Of the most noble, worthy and mighty Britanish Prince JAMES the fifth King of
Scotland, and of the most excellent and prudent Princess his wife. Queen
MARIE de Lorrayne, Duchess of Longouille, and daughter of the right
magnificent Prince, CLAVDE Duke of Guise.

WIFE
In first marriage, to the most Christian King of France, FRANCIS the second;
and in second marriage by Gods especial providence, disappointing all the
policies and practices of the Devil, and evil men tending to the contrary,
wife to the right generous and comely Prince her highness nearest and dearest
coosin, as being descended likewise from the loins of HENRY the seventh by his
eldest Daughter MARGARET Queen of Scotland, by her Daughter in second marriage,
the right illustrious Princess MARGARET DOVGLAS Countess of Angus, and
Lennox, mother to the said Prince HENRY Lord Darley, Earl of Rosse, Duke of
Albanie, Knight of the most renowned order of S. MICHAEL, and King of Scotland.

MOTHER
By the foresaid most generous Prince, her Majesty's right entierly beloved
husband, of the most Augustious Prince, our most gracious Sovereign JAMES the
CONCORDER, supreme Lord of Samothea, and the first Christian Monarch and Uniter
of this I Will;

GRANDMOTHER
Of thee three graces of great Britain; the most hopeful flower of Princes,
HENRY the MAGNANIMOVS Prince of Cambria and of Cumbri, the most sweet tender
Prince, CHARLES Duke of York and Albanie, and the most graceful Princess
Madame ELIZABETH Infanta of Albion;

THE FLOWER
Once of the whole women of her age, endued with an admirable fortitude, and
magnificent bounty of mind, adorned with an incomparable pulchritude and
beauty of Body; decored with the most heroical and princely properties, and
honored most, of all the Ladies of the earth, with the many often proffered
marriages of the greatest Kings, and noblest Princes of Christendom.

TO THE EVERLIVING MEMORY
(I say) of a matchless MARIE, once on earth full of Grace, and now in heaven
full of Glory: and even the peacemaking mother of Albions greatest grace and
united Glory.

The Sons son of her highness faithful servant, WILLIAM MAXWELL Son to
the Lairde of kirkonnell, and in his lifetime Man at Arms to the most
Christian King, does in most humble manner deuote and dedicate the
LOOKING-GLASS OF GRACE and GLORY. JAMES MAXWELL.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS LADY, AND RIGHT Graceful Princess, the eldest and now
only Daughter of our most gracious and Augustious Sovereign, JAMES the
CONCORDER, and of the most noble, excellent and worthy Princess, Queen ANNE
his wife, Madame ELISABETH Infanta of Albion, all happiness.
MADAM,
I Make bold to present unto your grace a Looking-glass, in the which (if it
shall please your grace to make use of it) ye shall see clearly represented the
fortune of the faithful both here and hence; to wit, the Grace of Gods
Servants on Earth, and the Glory of his elect children in heaven. It will
show your excellence how excellent a thing it is, for men and women to serve
God by fighting against sin, Satan, the world and the flesh, and even to be
entered into his service in their tender years. It likewise lays open the
greatness of the reward that God has laid up for all his sincere and
perseuering Servants. For it points out the right and streighte way that
leads from the Garden of grace (wherein the flowers of all Christian virtues
are to be found) unto the Gallerie of Glory: for into this there is none
entry, but by the other; even as of old, there was no passage into the Temple
of honor but through the Temple of virtue, both builded by the most virtuous
and honored Emperor Marcus Marcellus. In a word, it lays open unto the eye,
such desirable things, as the very signification of your graces own Christen
name may serve to put you in mind of: for ELIZABETH signifies as much as the
fullness of God; And the fullness of God is none other thing else, but grace
and glory, whereof God is full above measure, but men and women in a measure.
To the same purpose may likewise serve the signification of the name of ANNA;
which both imports as much as grace or gracious and taking rest, and is such a
name, as I assure my self, your grace can never forget, as being the name of
our most gracious Queen your graces own dear mother by generation, and
likewise of a most virtuous Lady very near and dear unto your grace, I mean
the Lady ANNE HARINGTON your graces most worthy Gouernesse, and even your
mother by Education. And because that this bookish looking-glass presents
unto the eye by reading, and unto the ear by hearing, the most excellent
objects that either eye can see, or ear can hear or yet can enter into the
heart of man, therefore, have I made choice of two of the most excellent
Princesses, that either eye has seen, or ear has heard tell of these many
ages past; the one our most gracious Sovereigns most worthy mother, and eue^
your graces most noble Grandmother Queen MARIE of Scotland, the other the most
renouned Godmother of both, Queen ELIZABETH of England, both of them once on
Earth full of grace, and now in heaven full of glory: And as I have in a manner
Christened it by the name of the the one, even of a much-lauded ELIZABETH, so
have I offered it as it were at the shrine of the other, I mean of a
matchless MARIE. The which thing I have done of set purpose to do thereby both
their names some piece of honor, so much at lest as lies within the small
compass of a mean Scholars ability to perform, as also thereby to
demonstrate and declare unto all our Britains, how much I do dislike and
detest the humorous and slanderous disposition of such passionate persons of
whatsoever quality or condition, country or religion, as dare be so bold as
by word or writ to disgrace and diffame either of them. And unto both of them
I thought it my duty to perform this Christian duty, but chiefly as being a
Scottishman born (though likewise descended from the ancient English blood)
unto my dread Sovereigns most noble mother, and your graces most gracious
Grandmother, as she who was not only the Sovereign Lady of our Scottish
people, but also the most worthy mistress of mine own Good sire, who had the
honor to serve her highness in France from her lower years. Unto the memory of
whose most noble name, I have not only vowed this small part of mine English
Essays, but also a part of my Latin labors written for the furthering of
peace and concord amongs divided Christianes: toward the which how great a
good will I do bear, may partly appear by the 7. chapter of this Book. To
pass over a defense of her fame which some years ago being in France I began
to be about against the wicked inuectiues of certain lewd libellers and liars:
wishing with all mine heart that I may see with mine eyes, or rather help with
mine hands one day to make a public bonefire of all such firebrand books,
leaud libels and spiteful pamphlets, as have been at any time hertofore
published in English, latin or any other language, in poesy or in prose to
the unreasonable and treasonable reuiling and reproching, blaming and
diffaming, of the foresaid most worthy Princess the blessed mother of
Britains peace, whose noble name in the despite of all such detractors, shall
be ever had of all honest hearted persons in a respectfull remembrance. That
which rests. most graceful Lady, this bookish Looking-glass, wherein ye
shall see nothing but sound divinity, and religious directions and enducements
to primitive devotion and piety, does offer it self unto your graces view,
and beggeth your gracious acceptance both for the twofold most excellent
matters sake therein handled, even Grace and Glory, and for the two most
excellent Princesses sake, whose gracious and glorious names in the forefront
it does bear. Regard it therefore with your favor able visage, and guard it
with your princely patronage, so shall it be secured under your highness
shadow, and I encouraged to attempt yet more for the honor of your most
graceful Grandmothers name, and likewise of your graces own. And so wishing
unto your grace, the best things which can be had on earth, even Grace with God
and man, and after a long and happy life, the best things which can be had in
heaven, even Glory with God and Angels; I rest,

Your graces submisse servant right devoted to all humble duties, JAMES MAXWELL.

THE Contents of this Book.
I. OF the Christians beginning to serve God and to fight against sin and
Satan in the time of youth. page 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13.
14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. II. A pleasant allegory and morality upon the
encounter of young David with the Lion, and of Satan's incessant compassing of
the earth, to assail Christ's sheep. pa. 19. 20. 21. 22. III. Of Christ our
good Shepherds careful and powerful protecting of his sheep from the
destroying violence of the devouring Lion, page 22. 23. IIII A comfortable
moral upon King Nebucadnezars choosing of young children to stand before him,
and his allotting of a portion of his own meat and drink for their food,
together, with another delectable moral upon the new wine, and new vessels
memtioned in the Gospel. pa. 11. 12. 13. 14. 204. V. Of the policies and
practices of the flesh, and in what manner the Christian must discover and
disappoint the same: page 24 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36.
37. 40. VI. A notable allegory and morality upon the histories of Sampson and
Dalilah, David and Absalom, Sara and Hagar, the harlot and the foolish young
man, mentioned in the Proverbs: page 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 37. 38. 39.
176. 177. VII Of the good Christians vanquishing of the vanities of the world,
and the allurements thereof: page 41. 42. 43, 44. 45 46. 47. VIII A delectable
Allegory and morality upon the histories of Ehud and Eglon, of Iael and
Sisera, of Joseph and Putiphars wife, and of the two women mentioned in
Salomons Judgment, page 46. 47. 48, 49. 50. 51. 52. X. Of Satan's guilefull
enticing, and forcible assailing of the Christian soul, and how w^ must fight
against his violent invasions, and fi^ s^a^^ his ^rauculent persuasions: p. 54.
55. 56. 57. 58. 62. 66. 67. 68. 69. 70. 73. X. A notable allegory and
morality upon the encounter of young David and Goliath, upon the Bridegromes
sweet and persuasiue speaking unto the Spouse in the Canticles, as also upon
Satan's tempting of the first woman, and of our Savior Chhrist: pa. 33. 55.
56. 57. 58. 59. 60. 61. 62. 63. 64. 65. 66. 69. 70. 71. 72. XI. Of the
simplicity, sincerity, and singleness of heart that ought to be used of
Christians in serving of God, page 76. 77. 78. 79. 80. 81. 82. 83. 84. 25. XII.
Of the rigteousnes, Equity, and charity that should be in Christianes: page
86. 87. 88. 89. 90. 91. 92. 93. 94. 95. 96. 97. 98. 99. 100. 101. XIII Of the
earnest study of peace, unity and concord that ought to be amongs Christians
both in church and common weal: pa 102. 103. 104. 105. 106. 107. 108. 109.
110. 111. 112. 143. 114. 115. 116. XIV Of the nature, efficacy, force and
effects of justifying faith in Christians, page 117. 118. 119. 120. 121. 122.
123. 124. 125. 126. 127. 128. 129. 130. XV. Of the unspeakable and happy hope
of Christians: p. 131. 132. 133. 134. 135. 136. 137. 138. 139. XVI. Of the
excellency of Gods word, and how that Christians ought to read and hear the
same reverently, affect it fervently, believe it constantly, and practice it
diligently in their life and conversation: pa. 140. 141. 142. 147. 148. 149.
150. 151. 152. 153. 154. 155. 156. 157. 158. 159. XVII. Of the manner how the
Christian must draw the sword of Gods word against Satan in all Sorts of
tentations, with a moral upon the encounter of Judith and Olofernes: page 141.
142. 143. 144. 145. 146. XVIII Of fasting, and of the great efficacy thereof,
and how that Gods children in all ages, both men and women, have given them
selves much unto the exercise thereof: page 160. 161. 162. 163. 164. 165. 166.
171. 173. XIX. A pleasant allegory and morality upon the history of Ester,
Mordecaie and Haman: page 53. 168. 169. 170. XX. Of the admirable virtue of
prayer, and of many notable examples of the wonderful effects thereof: page,
173. 174. 175. 176. 177. 178. 179. 180. XXI. A comfortable allegory and
morality upon the praying of Moses against Amaleck, of Sampson praying for the
restoring of his strength against the Philistims; of Samuel Praying against the
same Philistims; of David praying against Achitophell: with diverse others; page
175. 176. 177, 178. XXII. Of the Christianes continuing and perseuering in Gods
service, and in fighting against sin and Satan, aye until the victory be
obtained: page 182. 183. 184. 185. 186. 187. 188. 189. XXIII A delectable
allegory and morality upon the victory of Abraham against Chedar-Laomer; of
Debora against Sisera; of David against Goliath, and of Ezekiah against
Sennacherib, pa. 190. 191. 192. 193. XXIV Of Gods ample and honorable rewarding
of all such as fight against sin valiantly, and continue constantly in his
service unto the end: page 194. 195. 196. 197. 198. 199. 200. 201. 202. 203.
204. XXV. A delectable allegory and morality upon the remuneration and
exaltation of Joseph, Othniel, David, Daniel, and Mordecaie, received at the
hands of Pharao, Caleb, Saul, Belshazzar, and Ahasuerosh, and of the greatness
of the glory that shall be heaped upon the heads of Gods good Servants. pa.
196. 199. 200. 201. 202. 206. 267. 208. 209. 210. 211. 212.
ERRATA.
Such escapes as have been committed in the press, the gentle Reader shall
find corrected here in this Page.
Page 23. lin. 2 for they, read. 1) p. 34 lin. 4. for laborinth read lauer) p.
46. lin. 21. for assemble read resemble) p. 52. lin. 1. after) self, add
perfect) p. 59 lin. 9. for and, read end) p 69 lin. 21, for whom, read who) p.
84. lin. 1. for faith read truth) p. 108 lin. 18, for contentions were, read
contentious men) p. 109. li 16. for nicenes, read nicetics) p. 173. lin. 1. for
force, read face.

The looking-glass of grace and glory.
CAP. 1. That the Christian is called to he Christ's Servant and Soldier from
the Cradle and in the very spring time of youth.
Man's life is a warrefare, and a time of temptation and trial: 2. Corr. 10 4.
for no sooner is he laid into the Cradle, to grow and wax according to
nature; but almost as soon is he called into the Camp, to be Christ's
Soldier, and to bear armor.

David was but a young Boy, 1. Sam. 16.11.12.13. and 17.33.39.42.49.50.
when he went out against Goliath, and overcame him: and all Gods beloved ones
(for David signifies beloved) must go out against the spiritual Goliath the
great Captain of spiritual captivity, (for Goliath signifies captivity) they
must I say go out against him when as yet they are young.

David was no sooner anointed by the hand of Samuel, but he began to be
valiant, for the Spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day forward: and
wear no sooner made Christians by the annoynting of Baptism, (for as Christ
is as much as the anointed, so Christian is as much as one that is anointed)
but as soon our names are rolled up among Gods warriors. 1. Sam. 16.13. and
17.34.


Samuel had no sooner powered out his horn of holy oil upon David's head, but
as soon he began to encounter with a Lion which came to assail and slay the
sheep which he kept in the field, and overcame him, and killed him as he did
also a Bear: and the appointed of God, Psalm. 45.7. Heb. 1.9. ^. Corr. 1.21 1.
John 2.20.27.
(for Samuel signifies so much) I mean Gods Ministers, his Priests, and
Prophets, or rather the holy Ghost, have no sooner anointed us with the oil
of gladness, but as soon we must begin to fight under our Saviors bloody
ensign, and crossie Banner, 1. Sam. 17 40
prefigured by David's staff, against the roaring and deuowring Lion the
Devil: we must I say begin to serve God even when as yet we are young.

Thus we read of Samuel himself, how that he was consecrated unto the Lord,
being yet a young child, even as soon as he was wained, as Sampson and John
Baptist were set a part to Gods service from the womb. Judges. 13.5.7. Luke.
1.15.
Samuel (as has been already said) signifies as much as the appointed of God;
and the good Christian, who is appointed of God unto life and glory, should as
soon as he is wained from the breast, or at least as soon as he comes to
the years of discretion, begin to learn how to serve God, and how to eschew
sin, and how to fight against the Devil, the world and the flesh, according
to the tenor of the vow which was made in his name, when as he was baptized.
And truly as Parents offer up their Children for a living sacrifice unto God,
when as they make them to be baptized so ought they take great care, that as
soon as they come to knowledge, they may both learn and put in practice, the
whole Christian duties that do belong unto that holy ordinance and vow.
Likewise Ester was trained up in the fear and knowledge of God from her youth:
and as many as are of Gods secret and hidden ones (for Ester signifies secret
or hidden) must from their youth be instructed and trained up in Gods fear;
Ester 14.5.
for the man or woman that fears God fervently, shall not need to fear the
Devils hostility. Also of Obadiah King Ahabs Steward, it is said that he feared
God greatly from his youth, 1. King. 18.3.12.
by whose godly example al Gods Servants (for Obadiah signifies as much as
Gods servant) are taught to begin Gods service in their young years, and not
to delay it until old age. The same thing did likewise Daniel, Hananiah,
Michael, Azariah, Tobiah, and Timothy, Dan. 1.4.5 6.8.12.15.17. Toh 1.10. and
2.13. 2. Tim. 3 15.
who is recorded to have known the holy Scriptures of a child. Daniel is
as much by interpretation as the judgment of God, and Hananiah the grace and
virtue of God, and Azariah the help of God, and Tobiah the goodness of God, and
Timothy the honor or an honorer of God: and as many as desire to taste of Gods
goodness, to have his help in time of need, and to find mercy and favor at
his hands, chiefly in the day of judgment, they must imitate these young men's
example and begin to prove Timothies, that is honorers of God, when as yet they
are young.

And therefore Solomon exhorts all young folks to think earnestly on Gods
service in their youth, and not to defer or delay this maine duty, Eccle. 12.1
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, whiles the evil days come
not, nor the years approach wherein thou shall saywe have no pleasure in them.
As if he should say: Thou that art a young man or woman, if ever thou meanest
to remember thy duty toward God, remember it now whilst thou art young,
old age is forgetful, and youth is most able in memory, and most apt for
remembrance, therefore either remember now or else never: for if thou forget
God, when thou art young, when thy memory is at the best, it shall be hard for
thee to remember him when thou art old, when thy memory shall be at the worst.
Remember him therefore now, and delay it not till hereafter: to day, and defer
not til to morrow; this year, and put it not off til the next; in thy youth,
and tarry not till thou be old. The present time is the surest time, for what
wotest thou if thou shall live until old age? and youth is the best time as
being the flower of man's time: and what know thou if God will accept of the
service of thy withered old age, if thou have refused him the service of thy
flourishing young years? God gives us our whole time, be it short or be it
long: is it not good reason then that we yield him the service of our whole
time, but chiefly of the chief and best part of our time? far be it from us
then to do God such a grievous wrong as to reserve for him therotten dregs
of our decrepit and old days. No master will be content that the servant whom
he hired for the whole day, should enter to his service at the gloming of the
day, or at the going down of the Sun: And shall we think that the great
Master of mankind, can be content that his hired servant should enter to his
service in the evening he being hired in the morning? man's life is as a day, a
short life as a winters day, Matthew 20.1.2.
a long life as a summers day, but be the day of a man's life short or be it
long, be it fair or be it foul, it becomes always the good servant to rise
early, and to fall to his work timously, to labor dilligently and to continue
constantly, until the end of the day. As Elkanah with his wives Anna and
Peninna, 1. Sam. 1.2 19.
rose up early to worship God, so as many as have the zeal of God (for Elkanah
signifies the zeal of God) they will serve God early, even in the morning of
their young years. And in so doing the Christian man shall prove an Elkanah in
deed, that is, a man endued with Gods zeal, and the christian woman shall prove
an Anna, that is, a gracious woman, and a Peninna that is, a precious stone in
the spiritual building of Christ's Church.

God is the first as well as the last; Reuct. 1.11 say 44.6.
the alpha and the beginning, as well as the omega and the ending; and
therefore he claims our first years as well as the last, and the beginning
of our life as well as the ending thereof. Our young days are our best days,
and our young years are our most pleasant years, for so Solomon does
signify, when he calls the days of our old age our evil days, Eccles.
12, 1
and says that in the years thereof man has no pleasure; And therefore in
our best days we must do the best thing that man can do, which is to serve
God: and in our most pleasant years we must be about the most pleasant study of
the pleasing of God.

As King Nebuchanezzar made choice of young children, fair and well favored to
stand before him, Dan. 1.3.4.5.
and did commune with them familiarly, to whom he did likewise assign a
portion of his own meat, and of the same wine which he himself drank, for
their nourishment, So the King of Kings, makes choice of such persons as in
their young years, when as yet they were tender, have beautified their inward
man by the means of Gods service; for the fairest and best favored thing in
the world is a soul that fears God, and fights against sin. And it is
even such that our great King does choose for his minions and chief favorites,
to talk and commune with them as the children of his love and delight. And to
them he allows a portion of the meat of God, off his own Table; for he
gives them to eat of the hidden Manna and of the tree of life, which is in the
mids of the Paradise of God, Reuela. 2.7.17. Mat. 26.29 Ioh. 15.1. Cantie. 2 ^.
and 8.2 Revel. 14 1.2 3.4 5.
and he gives the^ to drink of the new wine, out of the celestial wine
seller, such as the Vine which is above does yield, which makes them sing a
new song before Gods seat, even a song of exultation, and Iubilation. And as
they do now follow the Lamb whither soever he goes in heaven, so being on
earth among men, they were as the first fruits unto God; that is, they were
such as in their very first years gave themselves to Gods service by the study
of sanctification, of newnes and holiness of life. Revel. 21.5
He that makes all things new, makes also a new wine for all such as shall
be new creatures. Wherefore, to the end we may then drink of that new spiced
wine, Cantie. 8.2
of the pomegranate of Paradise, let us now endeauoure to put on the new man,
Ephesians. 4.23 24
which after God is created in righteousness, and true holiness, according as the
Apostle exhorts, 2 Cor 5.17
If any man be in Christ, let him be a new Creature: old things are passed
away, behold all things are become new. No man puts new wine into old
vessels says our Savior; Mat. 9.17.
wherefore we must both be made new vessels by newnes of life, before we can
receive that new wine of glory in Gods kingdom: and also before we be old
vessels, in years, we must labor to receive into the new vessels of our young
hearts the new wine of Gods renewing grace, by following his service in our
young years. For it is very likely that God will never put the new wine of a
new life into such an old vessel as had once refused to receive it, when as
it was new; I mean, that it is not likely that God will ever receive such an
old man or woman into his service, as had refused it being called thereunto
when as they were young. Hebr. 16.17 12.
As Esau when he would haueinherited the blessing was rejected, and found no
place to repentance, though he sought the blessing with tears: so those kind
of persons when they would with all their heart be received into Gods service,
they shall be rejected, neither shall they find any place to acceptance or
attendance, though they should seek Gods service with tears.

Thus we see then how it stands us in hand to be entered into Gods service,
when as yet we are young and even little children: and therefore our Savior
was wont always to make much of little children, to the end they might be more
and more encouraged in the way of Gods fear: he invited little children to come
unto him, and he blessed them, and kissed them, when they came, and held them
in his arms: Suffer little children to come unto me, Math. 19.13 14 15. Mark
10.13.14.15 16
and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God, said our sweet
Savior to his disciples. (...), 8 1.2.
and as the Psalmist shows how that God sometimes does confound his foes by
the mouth of sublings and babes; Mat 11.25
so does our Savior thank the Father for revealing and opening the mysteries
of his kingdom unto Babes; yea he recommendeth unto his disciples, the
imitation of such little children as had begun to spell out the right way of
Gods service. Verily I say unto you, Math 18.1 2 3.4 5.6.10.
except ye be converted and become as little children, ye shall not enter into
the Kingdom of heaven: Whosoever therefore shall humble himseise as this
little child, the same is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven: And
whosoever shall receive such a little child in my name receaueth me: see that
ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto you, that in heaven
their Angels always behold the face of my father, which is in heaven. Our
Savior had a chief care of wel-enclined young children, and such as had any
seeds or beginnings of grace in the springtime of their youth, Mat. 19.16 20.
Mark 10.17.20.21
he loved them most dearly. Thus he loved the young man that came to ask him,
touching the way how to be saved, who said, that he had observed the
commandments from his youth, And by way of human affection he loved most of
all his disciples Saint John who was the youngest of them al, Ioh 13.23. and
19.26
so that he is called the disciple whom Jesus loved, for there is nothing that
the Lord takes so great delight in as to see a man or woman beging in their
young years to serve God and to fight against Satan, sin, the world, and
the flesh. And as our Savior did always encourage young children in the way
of Gods fear so his beloved disciple St. John whom he loved most, because he
was the youngest of them all, and for that he was so forward in godliness in so
young years; he does after his loving Lords example encourage little children
and young men in the same way. Little children I write unto you, 1. Iohu
2.1.12.13.14.18.28.
because your sins are forgiven you for his names sake. I write unto youyoung
men because ye have overcome the wicked. I write unto you Bahes because ye have
known the father; I have written unto you young men because ye are strong and
the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked. And now
little children abide in him, that when he shall appear we may be bold and not
be ashamed before him at his coming.

Thus we see then that Christians must begin to fight and overcome sin, and
Satan in their very youth. The Lion that young David encountered and overcame
was but a young one, and had invaded but one sheep: but the Lion that the
young Christian must encounter and quell, is an old one, and would feign
swallow up all Christ's sheep; your adversary the devil (says the great
Apostle Saint Peter) 1, Pet. 5.8.
as a roaring Lion walks about seeking whom he may devour. He is always
hungry and bloodthirstie, John 8.44.
for he bath been a murderer from the beginning, says blessed Saint John and
therefore is he always roaring and roauing abroadafter his pray. His throat
is as an open Sepulcher, yea it is wide as hell, and therefore insatiable and
cannot be filled with thousands of sheep: and yet he walks along
continually, and runs about mcessantly, to catch (if he can) some one silly
wandering sheep, to abate some part of his hungry and insatiable appetite. And
it is I say for this end, that he does bothwalk along the earth, and run round
about the earth, without being any whit wearied or taking any rest, And
therefore Satan being asked on a time of the Lord whence he came? answered,
Job. 1.7
from compassing the earth to and fro, and from walking in it. He is a walker,
and therefore he walks with the wicked, and with them he does rest,
whenever he takes any rest: even with and on al such as walk in the ways
of wickedness. He is likewise a Compasser, for he compasses the godly round
about, seeking to circumvent them, to deceive them, and destroy them, but
finds no rest to the sole of his foot; therein resebling Noah's dove, but yet
more his black raven. For as the raven did nothing else but flitter to and fro
until the waters were dried up upon the earth, so does this restles raven, no
other thing else but flitter and flee to and fro, and round about, until at
what time there be no more sinful souls to destroy upon earth.

Satan compasses the earth, and the whole earth, because he would consume the
whole earth, and swallow up all Christ's sheep, on earth. But he shall miss of
his aim: for the Shepherd of Israel, that leads Joseph like sheep, Psalm.
80.1. and 121.3.4.
even he that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep. The old Lion may
well come with David's young Lion and his Bear to the flock, to take a sheep
out of the fold; But as David rescued his sheep, and took it out of the young
Lions mouth, 1. Pet. 2.25.
and slew him that came to flay, the like shall our great Shepherd do. The
good Shepherd that calls his own Sheep by name, and leads them out and
goes before them, and gives his life for them, and does not leave them when
the Wolf or the Lion comes, he shall even defend his sheep, and rescue them,
and save them from the old Lions jaws. My sheep (says he) hear my voice,
and I know them, Ioh. 10.2.3 4.11.14.27.28.29.
and they follow me, and they give unto them eternal life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any pluck them out of mine hand. My father which gave them
me is greater then all, and none is able to take them out of my Fathers hands.

Our good Shepherd has not only given his life for his sheep, but he gives
likewise eternal life to his sheep. So that the roaring and deuowring Lion may
well compass them, but he shall not catch them; and though he catch them, yet
shall he not be able to quel them or kill them; he may well scatter them with
persecution, but he shall not be able to consume them with destruction, Heb
2.14.
yea he himfelfe shall in the end be destroyed.

All Christians then are called from the very first hour of their spiritual
birth, to be Soldiers and warriors against the Devil, the world, and the
flesh. The flesh is our enemy within us, like an homebred foe; the world is our
enemy without us, like a foreign ^oe; and the devil is our foe in both
fashions, within us, without us, yea and round about us. These be the three
enemies which we have to encounter, and these be the adversaries we must
overcome.

CAP 2. Of the christians fighting against the flesh and the lusts thereof.
AS the Philistims practiced and allured Dalilah to deceive Sampson, ludge 16
promising her so many shekels of silver for a reward; so the spiritual
Philistims, the procurers of man's double decay and destruction, even both of
body and of soul, (for Philistim signifies a double decay) they will practice
the consuming Dalilah of our flesh, (for Dalilah signifies a consumer) to
deceive us, to the end we may be vanquished and overcome in most wretched manner.

And the Dalilah of our flesh, will not fail to betray us unto the Princes of
the Philistims, even unto the Princes that rule in the air, Ephesians. 2.2. and
6.12
for the hire of some fleshly pleasure or profit, except that we be aware. She
will make us sleep on her knees, that is to say, she will lull us, and rock
us a sleep in the cradle, of security, and in the mean time she will shave
off the seven locks of our head; that is, she will bereave us of the seven
gifts of Gods spirit, Revel. 3.1. and 4 5.
as of faith, charity, righteousness, humility, patience, temperance, and
diligence; and so in end, make us loose our whole spiritual strength. So that
it shall be an easy thing for the Philistims of our affections, to put out our
eyes, even the eyes of our understanding, and for the Princes of the
Philistims, I mean the principalities and powers that rule in the air, to
bind us Sampson like with fetters, so that we cannot walk in the ways of
righteousness and holiness as we ought. And therefore whenever the Dalilah of
our flesh begins to entangle us, we must learn of Sampson to beguile her,
and to practice the wisdom of the serpent in the old Serpents behalf. Mat.
10.16
We must I say deceive this deceitful flesh of ours, at that time that she
seeks most to deceive us; and this we must do not only once, twice, thrice
as Sampson did, but always by perseuering unto the end. And therefore though
Dalilah-like, our flesh should be importunate upon us with her fair
persuasions, to ensnare us, yet must we beware to tell her our whole heart
with Sampson, otherwise we shall not fail to be both shaven and shamed with
Sampson. Yea the eyes of our understanding shall be put out as were Sampsons
two bodily eyes, and the feet of our spiritual faculties shall be fettered
with the fetters of fleshly lusts, and we shall be made to grind in the prison
house of a grieved spirit: for where the spirit of God is not, there is
captivity, as where the spirit of the Lord is, 2. Corr. 3.17. 2. Sam 15. and 18
there is liberty

The flesh Absalon-like, will use many policies and practices to asspire to the
sovereignty over the soul. She will use great craft toward the affections, to
entise them to dislike of the government of the spirit: she will show her self
more forward to please the affections, then the reasonable part of the soul
can do, she will as it were put forth her hand to the affections and kiss
them, and make much of them, to the end that she may steal away their
obedience from the spirit: No, she will not fail to rebel against the spirit
( for the flesh (says the Apostle) lusts against the spirit) even as Absaion
did against K. David his Father, who stole away the peoples hearts from him,
and rose up rebelliously against him.

And though it fall out oftentimes, that the Absalo^ of our flesh prevail over
the David of our spirit, and make a great slaughter of his subjects; that is,
of good motions, and holy resolutions: yet in end, the Absalom of our flesh
shall get the foil. For when our flesh Absalom-like, shall be in a manner
mounted upon the Mule of sensuality, it shall be left hanging as it were by
the hair of an hard, and heavy heart, upon the Oak of Gods anger, and it
shall be smote with the three darts of threefold affliction, in goods, in
body, and in mind, till it be mortified and slain by the terror of the ten
Co^maundments, as Absalom was killed by Ioabs ten servants, and so be cast as
it were, into the pit of repentance, for all bypast misdemeanors.

The flesh will play with the spirit, as the Harlot in the Proverbs does with
the foolish young man. Prouer. 7.
She will be always abroad to spy our opportunities, she will be still lying in
wait at every corner, hunting after occasions and adua^tages for her,
wher-through she may catch the spirit and kiss him, and with an impudent face
allure him to yield unto her desires.

The flesh will deck her self with all costlye Ornaments; she will perfume
and paynt her self with the most artificial ointme^ts, and will then say unto
the Soul, come, let us take our pleasure in daliance, let us delight our eyes
with sensual shows and sightes, our ears with amorous and licentious sounds,
our smell with the most exquisite and sweet savors, our taste with the most
delicious drinks, and daintiest meats; let us take our fill of love, of
sensual pleasures and passe-times, as long as the morning of our life shall
last, let us eat and drink, sport and play, sing and dance, for to morrow we
shall dye. Thus the flesh with her flattering lips will entise the soul, and
the foolish and unsanctified soul will not stick to yield unto her, and to
follow her straight ways, as an ox that goes to the slaughter, and as a
fool to the stocks for correction, til adart strike through his liver, even
the dart of a rele^ting remorse. But the wise and the sanctified soul will be
loath to decline to her ways, or to wander or walk in her paths; for it
knows well that she has caused many to fall down wounded, and that troops
of strong men have been slain by her; for her house is the way unto the grave,
which goes down to the chambers of death. The flesh will speak to the Soul, as
the spouse in the Canticles does to the Bride, Open unto me my Sister, my love,
my dove, my vnde filed, for mine head is full of dew, Cant 5.2.3
and my locks with the drops of the night. But for all this her sweet alluring
speech, and perswasiue talk, the Christian Soul must not by yielding unto the
flesh, rise to let her in: and therefore the soul must return her this
answer, or the like: soft, Flesh, for I am not thy Sister, but thy Sovereign,
and thou art not my Sister but my Servant; It does not befit the Mistress to
rise and open the door to her maind, neither must the maid presume to expect
any such service at her Mistress hands. It is thy part to obey, and not to
command, to attend upon my pleasure, and not to play the part of a mistress, or
yet of a mate in my behalf: or else let the soul return her the first answer
of the spouse, I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my
feet, how shall I defile them? that is to say, Ephesians. 22.23.24. Colloss.
3.9.10. Galla. 3.26 27 Mat. 22.11 12. Tit, 3.5.6. Revel. 19.8
I have cast off old Adams skin coat of original corruption by baptism,
and have put on the new fine linen coat, of the white robe of Christ's
righteousness, the which is not only imputed unto me by the father, but also
imparted unto me by his spirit: Ephesians. 5.26 27. Act 22.16. Tit. 3.5. 1. Pet.
3.21 1. Co. 6.11 John 3.5.
far be it from me to put my new coat off, or mine old coat on again. I
have washed my feet in the lauer of regeneration with the fount-water of the
fountain of God; far be it from me to defile them again, by yielding unto
any sensual suggestion or sinful temptation. Can. 5 4.5.


The alluring flesh will also imitate the Bridegroom, and put in her hand as it
were by the hole of the door to open it her self, with her own fingers; but
the soul for all that must not be in heart affectioned toward her, to yield
unto her, or to suffer her to come in: yea rather the flesh is to be chastised
with fasting, hardness and with abstinence from such things as do most pamper
and please it, for her malapert presumption: for as the soul must not debase
herself so far as to open the door of her sanctified heart to her fleshly
hand-maide, that she may enter in; so must not the handmaide be so presumptuous
as to put in her hand by the hole of the door as it were to vnbolte it, that
she may thrust her self in, for both it becomes the handmaide to stay till
her mistress call for her, and not to come into her closet or cabinet before she
be called, and to stay no longer there then her mistress does enjoin her to
stay. In one word, the Soul must not rise to let the flesh in by assenting
unto any sensual Tentation; and if it chance that she has risen by affe^ting,
yet must she not put her hands to the drawing of the bar to let her in by a
corporal acting of the evil whereunto she has assented: for if she do, she
shall be sure that her heart shall smart for it, yea her hands shall drop down
the sharp myrrh of a mournful wringing, proceeding from a sorrowful heart,
for putting of her fingers to the drawing of the bar, and to the opening of
the door; that is, for putting of her hands to the acting of the cuill, as is
said. But if that the soul chance to have let in the sensual suggestion of
the flesh both by assent and action, then in the next place must the christian
soldier endeavor, that at least it go not forth at the gates of the City of
his soul by public or notorious perpetrtion. For a private or secret
trespass weakneth the soul of the trespasser; whereas a public and open
offense, does both weaken the party that commits it, and wound others that
either see it, or hear tell of it. And therefore we must labor to smother
sin in the shell of cogitatio^ and delectation, before that it come to be
borne or brought forth by action; or if it has already been acted, we must
keep it captive in the base prison of a penitent breast, till it be quite
killed with contrition, and slain with the sword of a godly sorrow, and
afterward cast out like a dead carkase by confession.

The flesh, as she will come sometimes like an alluring deceitful Dalilah, to
entice the Sampson of the regenerate spirit to yield unto her suggestions, so
will she come at other times like a disdainful Hagar, dispightfully to
vpbraide and flout the Sara of the christian soul, Genesis 16.4.5, 6.9.
for not giving place unto her pleasant persuasions. Hagar despised and mocked
her mistress Sara for her barrennes, and the sinful flesh will flout and
vpbraide the reasonable regenerate soul for her holiness, and her barrennes
in sensual and inordinate delights. Sara being despisd of her handmayd Hagar,
complained unto her husband Abraham, the father of the faithful, of her
undutifulness: and the regenerate soul must complain unto her spouse Christ
Jesus and unto his ministers her Pastor and spiritual father, whom God has
appointed to hear the spiritual complaints of his children; who will enjoin
the christian soul to deal roughly with his rebelling flesh, as Sara did with
her mocking handmaide Hagar, ay til she humble her self under her Mistress
hands, as the Angel commanded Hagar to do in Saras behalf.

Thus the soul will with hold from her flesh Dauidlike the silk and the
satin, Psalm. 35.13 and 69.10.11.
and cover her with sackclothe; and also Daniel-like she will deprive her flesh
of the use of dainty cheer, of the pleasant bread, of the nourishing flesh,
Dani. 10.2.3.
and of the cherishing wine, till she be beaten down and brought into
subjection, as S. Paul faith he did, 1. Cor 9.27. Genesis 21.14
in the behalf of his own Body. And as Abraham gave unto Hagar Saras handmaid
bread and water, and sent her away; so the christians spiritual father or
pastor to whom he does adresse him self to find consolation and comfort to
his distressed and troubled conscience for sin, he will enioyn him to give no
other food to his disobedient flesh, but bread and water, till at what time she
have humbled her self sufficiently under her mistress hands. And by this
means, the christian, according to the Apostles exhortation, shall by little
and little crucify and kill the flesh with the affections and the lusts
thereof; Gala. 5.16 24.25
he shall learn daily to walk in the spirit, and shall not walk any more
after the flesh, nor savor the things thereof, nor yet fulfill the desires
thereof; Romans 8.1.5.13.17.
and consequently, he shall not come into condemnation. For there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus (says the Apostle) which walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit: for as many as are led by the spirit
of God, they are the Sons of God, and consequently heirs of God, and heirs
annexed with Christ.

CAP. 3. Of the christians fighting against the world and the allurements of
the same.
AS the Christian must fight against the allurements of the flesh, which is our
enemy within us, so must he likewise against the vanities of the world, which
is our enemy without us. 1. John 2.15.16.17
Love not the world says blessed St. John neither the things that are in the
world. If any man love the world, the love of the father is not in him, for all
that is in the world (as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life) is not of the father, but is of the world, and the world
passes away, and the lust thereof, but he that fulfilleth the will of God,
abides for ever. As the lust of the flesh is the inordinate desire of the
pleasures of the flesh, and of such things as the flesh does naturally delight
in, the branches whereof are, licentiousnes, luxury, intemperance, lechery,
drunkenness, gluttony, excess, and superfluity, with such other fleshly
debordments: So the lust of the world is the inordinate and immoderat desire of
worldly things; as of riches, which is covetousness; and of greatness, which is
ambition.

The Christian must strive stoutly against the immoderate love of the world,
Coll. 3.1.2
by setting his affection on things which are above, and not on things which
are on the Earth as the Apostle does exhort The world lies in wickedness, and
therefore it is the part only of wicked persons, 1. John. 5.19
to set their hearts on the world. The world is destitute of the knowledge of
God, and therefore as many as do desire to know God, John 1.9.10. and 17.25.
and to be known of him, must in a manner misken the world. I pray not for the
world (says our Savior) and therefore if we would be partakers of Christ's
intercession and prayers, toward the father, John 17.9.
we must not be of the world, though we live in the world. If ye were of the
world (says our Savior to his Servants) the world would love his own, John.
7.7. and 15.18.1. Ioh. 3.14
but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you. So that so many as are chosen of God out of the
world, they are hated of the world, and they themselves hate the world; so
far are they from the love of the world. And not only does the world hate Gods
children, and all mortified Christians, but it even hates God and Christ
himself. Ioh. 15.19
If the world hate you (says our Savior) ye know that it hated me before
you. And truly if the world does hate not only true and good Christians, but
likewise Christ himself, what reason have we to love it? yea rather ought we
not to hate it with a perfect hatred? and the Apostle affirming, that whosoever
will be a friend of the world, Iame 4.4.
makes himself the enemy of God: he teaches Christians to renounce the
amity and friendship of the world, as they do tender the amity and
friendship of God; for as the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, so is
the friendship and love of the world, Luk 16.13
the enmity and hatred of God: and as we cannot serve God and Mammon, so we can
not be both Gods friends and the worlds; but if we be the worlds friends, we
must be Gods foes and contrariwise: for as God cannot away with a divided heart
or with a divided service, so can he not like of an halfed freindship. The
whole heart is to him due; he has made the whole heart, and he would save the
whole heart, and therefore he both deserves and desires to be served and
loved with the whole heart: and consequently the world must have no share in
the heart, nor yet in the service: love and frie^dship of the heart. As Eliah
said once unto the superstitious and Idolatrous people, how long halt ye
between two opinions? 1. King. 18 22.
If the Lord be God, follow him, but if Baal be he, then go after him: so may
the good Christian say unto all worldly minded men, how long will ye halt
between two services, and two freendships? if the Lord be your master and
only true and constant friend, then serve and love him alone with your whole
heart, for he cannot away with halfes in this kind. But if mammon be your
master and the world your trustiest friend, then serve mammon and love the
world, for no man can serve or love two masters says our master Christ Such
wordlie christians as will needs divide the heart, the service, love and
friendship thereof, between God and mammon do resemble that unnatural harlot
mentioned in Salomons judgment who would have had the living child to be
divided in twain, 1. King 3.26.
where as the perfect christian is like unto the natural mother, who chose
rather to loose her child so he might live, then that he should he divided in
twain or into halfes and so die: or they are like the lukewarm Laodiceans to
whom the spirit does thus speak, Reave. 3.14.15.16.
I know thy wortkes that thou art neither cold nor hot; I would thou werest
cold or hot, therefore because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor
hot, it will come to pass that I shall spewe thee out of my mouth. In one
word, as the double hearted christian can not harbor in Gods kingdom, so the
lukewarm lover of God, shall be spewed out of Gods mouth.

It is good then for us to forsake the unfaithful freendship of the world, and
to lean to the firm freendship of God, for we may be sure that the world
will in end, both fail us, and forsake us. She will perhaps fawn on us for a
time, and bring us a present with Ehud, Judge. 3.15 16.17.18.19.20.21.22.
that is, advance us unto some good degree of honor or wealth, but after that
she hat spied out a fit opportunity, so that she may find us Eglon-like
sitting alone, as it were in the summer parlor of prospertie, she will be sure
to show her self such a one as does not a whit care for our kindness: no, she
will not fail to do her best to thrust into our belly, or rather into our
bosom, the two edged dagger of adversity and anguishe, and so turn all our
former plenty into poverty, and felicity and excellency, into deiection and
misery.

The world will say unto the christian, as Iaell said once to Sisera, Turn in
my Lord, turn in to me and fear not: yea more, Judge, 4.18 19.20.21.
she will not only inuit him lovingly to her house, but she will likewise
give him to drink the sweet milk of earthly pleasures, and she will promise
him money and wealth, which is sweeter then milk, and cover him with the mantle
of wordly might, but cre all be done, she will make him by dear enough both
her milk and her mantell, both her blanket and her bed. For she shall not
fail, Iael-like to take the prinne of pride and beat it into his head, or
rather into his heart, whereupon presently he shall fall. Job. 21.7. to 17.
For as the prosperity of the wicked makes the^ proud (as the holy man Job
does teach) so pride goes before destruction, Prove. 16.18. and 18.12. James
4.6.1. Pet. 5.5.
and an high mind before the fall, says wise Solomon. And as God lifts up
the humble and mccke, so he resists the proud and casts them upon their
back. Prove. 5.1.2.3.4.5.
The lips of the world like unto Salomons strange woman, drop as an honey
comb, and her mouth is more soft then oil, flowing with smooth and sweet
allurements: But the end of her is bitter as wormwod, and sharp as a two edged
sword, her feet go down to death, and her steps take hold on hell.

When so ever then the world shall chance to tempt the christian to love her,
as Potiphars wife did allure fair Joseph to lie with her; G^n.
39.7.8.9.10.20.21.
the christian must labor by all means to prove a Joseph indeed; that is, a
perfect one: for Joseph signifies perfect:) and therefore he must answer the
world refusingly as Joseph did Potiphars wife, and say, far be it from me to
make such a miserable exchange, as to loose the love and freendship of God for
thine: no, world, though thou would give thy self wholly to me alone, yet will
I not forgo the love of my God for all thy glory, though it were even a
thousand fold greater then it is, and millions of times of longer lasting then
it is. And though that the world will perhaps frown on thee fearfully, for
thy refusal with Poliphars wife, and though she go about to diffame thee and
blame thee undeservedly, and even shut thee up with Joseph in the prison of
poverty, and necessity: yet must the good Christian endeauoure to show him
selfite in suffering patiently all kind of affliction temporal, for that
felicities sake which is eternal as he that must count with the Apostle, Romans
8.18.
that the afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the glory which
shall be showed unto us. And he that was with Joseph in the prison, and made him
to prosper, will likewise be with the good Christian that aymeth at perfection,
in his penury and poverty, and in the mean time that his outward man is
brought low, and as it were broken with adversity, his inwardman shall grow
and flourish like a green palm tree, and enjoy all manner of inward comfort
and spiritual prosperity. And he that brought Joseph out of prison, and gave
him great glory, Gen 41.40 41.42.43.
changing his fetters of iron into gold chains, Psalm 10.17.18.19.20.21.22
his poor prison into a Princely palace, and making him of a despised
prisoner, a potent prince, he will likewise in his own time crown the patient
sufferer of adversity, with the royal Diadem of might and of majesty.

The world Haman-like will seek to be avenged on all such Christian Mordecaies
as will not adore him and do him reverence: Ester 3.2.3 4.5.6. and 6.3.10. and
7.10.
but if the Christian continue constantly in fighting against such base
idolatry, the world Haman-like shall hang, and the Christian wrastler with
Mordecai shall come to honor. In one word, so many as are borne of God, it
stands them in hand to wrestle against the world valiantly, yea to conquer
and overcome it victoriously: I mean not Coesar-like, by subiugation or
possession, but Christ-like, by conculcation: for all that is borne of God
(says blessed St. John) overcomes the world, 1. Ioh. 5.4.
and this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith.

CAP. 4. Of the christians fighting against the Devil, and his subtle
persuasions, and violent invasions.
THe third enemy that the christian has to encounter and conquer, is the
strongest and fearefullest of all the three; for the two former, the world and
the flesh, are but the old Lions arm ourbearers: the world as his chief page,
and the flesh as his handmaid. This enemy comes sometimes like a Lion to
devour us, 1. Pet. 5.8. Rcue 12 3 12.13.14.15.16.17.2. Cort. 11.14.
and sometimes like a Serpent to circumvent us, sometimes as a black Belial to
pervert us, and sometimes as a lightsome Lucifer to beguile us. Sometimes he
will carry himself as our greatest friend, and sometimes as our professed foe.
We know full well how he played his Serpents part in the behalf of our
Grandmother Eve: Genesis 3.1.2.3.4.5.6.
he would needs show himself as one that did tender the perfect estate of our
first parents; his wish forthem was, that they were as wise as God in knowing
both good and evil. And therefore he told them that they should become as wise
as God by the eating of an apple. And yet in the mean time his intent was to
have them made like, not unto God in perfection, but unto the Devil in
defection.

Whenever then the Christian is tempted by Satan the old Serpent, to eat the
forbidden fruit of any unlawful action, to the end that he may become as it
were a little God amongst men, for worldly knowledge, for wealth, for honor,
credit, or account, he must dilligently beware least he listen unto the
Serpents advise, and let him assure himself that the forbidden apple of
disobedience shall be as bitter to the taste of his soul, as it was to Adams
and Eues. And when as he shall think to be like unto God by eating of the
forbidden apple, he shall prove but a mere man, yea a naked and miserable man,
and he shall be so unlike unto God, that he dare not be so bold as to abide
the presence of God, yea he shall be feign with old father Adam, to fly from
the face of God, if he wist well where. And in that day that God shall make an
enquiry touching such men's disobedience the fig-leauie breeches of their light
and slight excuses, shall not be able to hide their nakedness, or to cover their
uncleanness from Gods cleere-seeing, ye all-seeing eyes. Let them flee
wheresoever they will, God shall find them out, Genesis 3.8. Isay 2.19. Hos. 10.8.
Luke 23.30 K^ue. 15.16
and though they should hide themselves among the thickest trees of the
obscurest woods, yea amidst the deepest dens of the earth, or among the
ragged rocks of the mountains, yet they shall not escape (for except they
repent and amend before that day) they shall find no den or hole to hide
them in at that day, till they be thrown headlong into hell: even hell shall be
their hole to hide them in, and the Devils dungeon shall be their den.

Satan comes sometimes as one that knocks at our door, and so metimes as
one that would break open our doors, to get in upon us against our will. He
knocked at the door of Euahs heart, to get in by flattery and fraudulence, but
he labored to break up the door of Jobs heart by forceand violence: Job.
1.7.8.9.10.11.12. and 2.4.5.6.7.8.9.
for his drift was to make him despair of Gods favor, and even to make him so
to rail against God, to blaspheme him and dye.

Goliath the fearful Philistim, Sam. 17.4.8.10.36.
the Giant of Gath, railed upon the people of God, and reviled them in most
outrageous manner: And so will the great Captain of spiritual captivity, I
mean the Devil, (for Goliath signifies captivity) he wilsometimes rail upon
the Christian, and revile him, by laying open unto the eyes of his touched
conscience, his own vileness and vglines, to the and that he may drive him
into despare.

But the Christian soldier must not be quelled or cast down in his courage,
though he be both weak and young, and his adversary both old and strong.
David was but a young boy and in natural strength far inferior to Goliath,
for he was not able to go in Saul's armor, though it were not so heavy as was
Goliahs spears head: and yet beng inwardly fortified by faith in God, he went
out against him with his staff in his hand, and his sling together with five
small stones in his skrippe, and said unto the uncircumcised challenger thus;
1. Sam. 17 40.45.49 50.
Thou come to me with a sword and a spear, and with a shield, but I come
to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the host of Israel whom
thou have rayled upon. And in the like manner the Christian must go out against
the spiritual Goliath in the name of Jesus the son of God, and the Lord of
heaven and earth, being spiritually armed with the staff of his cross, the
sling of faith, and with a fervent meditation upon our Saviors suffering, and
his five bloody wounds, answering unto David's five flintie stones, the which
he must always carry about him in the skrippe of a cleansed conscience, and
of a devout and dutiful remembrance. David overcame the fearful Philistim
with his sling and with a stone, wherewith he smote him mortally in the
forehead, so that he fell presently groueling to the ground: And the Christian
shall overcome the spiritual Philistim with the sling of an effectual faith,
which lays hold upon our savior Christ, whom Jacob calls the stone of
Israel, Genesis 49.24 Dan. 2.34.35.
and Dantel the stone hewed out of the mountain without hands: for he was
formed in his holy mothers womb of Abraham's sanctified seed without human
help, Luke 1.26 to 35.
and cut out of this holy mountain, dignified to be the spouse and mother of
God without man's hand, by the powerful working and ouershadowing of the holy
ghost, he even took upon him our nature in the virginal womb of his
unspotted and pure mother, to the end, Heb. ^.14.15.16.17 18.
that he might destroy through death him that had the power of death, that is
the devil; and that he might deliver all them which for fear of death were
all their lifetime subject to bondage: for in that he suffered and was tempted,
he is able to succor them that are tempted.

Thus then if our great adversary the Devil, endeauoure to steal in upon us
like a thief, or to slide and slip into our bosom like a serpent, or if he
knock at our door like a friend, then must we use great circumspection, least
we be gulled: for in that case he will not fail to disguise himself, in the
likeness of an Angel of light, 2. Cor. 11.13.4.
and to borrow the sugared lips and sweet tongue of the bridegroom, and even
speak as alluringly and sweetly unto the soul which he would slaye, as the
bridegroom does in the Canticles to his spouse, or to the soul which he
would save: Cant. 5.2.3
Open unto me my Sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, for mine head is full
of dew, and my locks with the drops of the night. But the Christian soul must
beware of rising to let him in, and must rather repel him with such an answer
as this; no subtle Satan, thou shall not come in, Revel. 3.7.
for he that is holy and true, which has the key of David, which opens and
no man shuts, and shuts and no man openneth, even he has both opened and
shut the door of mine heart; it is now shut and thou can not come in, and my
brother, my love, and my spouse is already lodged in the house of mine heart,
and is now lying in the bed of my breast, even in his Brides bosom, and thou
shall not come in. Thou call me thy sister, when as thou would make me
thy slave; thy love, when as thou would make me forlorn; thy dove, when as
thou would make me thy raven, or thy dog; thy undefiled, when as thou would
defloure me, and defile me; in one word, thou woldst have me to take thee for
my brother and my bridegroom, when as thou would indeed be my burriour:
thou would make me believe that thine head is full of dew to refresh me,
when as it is indeed full of dust and of dirt to defile me, yea full of fire and
brimstone to burn me, if thou should once get into my bosom. Get thee gone
subtle Satan, thou cursed night-crowe, that take pleasure thus to fly
abroad in the night, and dare not be so bold in the day, for a dark time is
fittest for the Prince of darkness, to be a stirring, and to be set on the
entycing of simple souls, to the doing of the works of darkness. I know well
thy compassing and thy pains taking out of what fountain it does flow;
avoid therefore, for mine heart-dore is shut, and thou can not get in, and my
souls sweet heart is already lodged in mine heart and thou shall not get in.

But if our adversary like a Lion seek to break open the door of our heart,
and in a violent manner, endeauoure to drive us into despair by reason of our
great wretchedness, wickedness and unworthiness, wherewith he will not fail to hit
us in the teeth, to the end that we may distrust of Gods mercy in our souls
behalf; then must the Christian if ever at any time else, stand out stoutly
against him in the faith of Christ, and laying aside Saul's armor, I mean, all
opinion and conceit of his own worthiness, towardnes, and strength, let him
fling only against Goliahs forehead the flintie stone of Christ's death, out of
the sling of an effectual faith working by love; Gall. 5.6.
and no doubt, but the Philistim shall fall, and with David he shall win the
field: for the Christian (to speak with the Apostle) is able to do all
things through the help of Christ which strengthens him. Philli. 4.13


So then when Satan comes in his railing humor to revile the Christian for
his vileness and unworthiness, for his wretchedness and wickedness, for the
finnes of his youth, or of his old years, for the multitude of his
vnfanctified thoughts, perverse and profane speeches, and unlawful actions,
for his faults both of knowledge and of ignorance, both of omission and
commission; and when as the Christian shall see that they do exceed the hair
of his head for number and quantity, and the sand of the sea for greatness and
gravity, yet for all this let him not be dismayed or dispairingly casten
down; but let him confidently reply and say to Satan in this manner; it is
true, Satan, that I am full of sin, and my transgressions, I grant, are both
many and mighty; but Gods mercies are more. The Lord is full of compassion and
mercy, Psalm. 103.8 9.10.11.12.13.
slow to anger, and of great kinds, he will not deal with me after my
sins, nor reward me according to mine iniquities. For as high as the heaven
is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him. As
far as the east is from the west; so far has he removed our sins from
us. As a father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on
then that fear him. I know Satan, that I am a sinner and an ugly one too, and
thereof may I justly blame thee; but I know likewise that Christ came not to
call the righteous but the sinners to repentance: Mat. 9.13.
for so he says him self. If there had not been such sinful creatures as I
am, Christ needed never to have come into the world; For this is a true saying
and by all means worthy to be embraced, 1. Tim. 1.15
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the
chief.

But if Satan go not so far, but only take occasion of a man's afflicted or
indigent estate to tempt him (as he did our Savior) to distrust of Gods
providence, Mat. 4.2.2.3.
and to make as it were, bread of stones, that is, to purchase wordly wealth by
unlawful means; then let him repel the Tempter with some such answer as
this; if our heavenly father feeds the fowls of the heaven, and cloatheth
the lillies of the field, Mat. 26 27 28.29.30
how much more will he feed and cloathe me whom am much dearer unto him then
they? And therefore how soever it be true, that I want diverse necessary or
desirable things, yet will I always wait on God patiently, Psalm.
37.3.4.7.25.34
and assure my self confidently that I shall not be forsaken for ever: no,
though my father and my mother should forsake me, Psalm. 27.10.
yet the Lord will gather me up: Job. 13.15.
and though he should even slay me (let alone to pinch me in the prouison of
necessary things) yet will I trust in him.

Again, Math. 4.5.
if the Tempter go about to set a man on the pinnacle of presumption, by
inducing or alluring him to presume upon Gods favor and mercy in his behalf,
to the end that he may the more eafily win him to the working of any wickedness:
then must he say unto Satan in this manner, far be it fro me to make a baude
of Gods mercy, to my miserable nature, or to abuse the riches of his grace to
the committing of any grievous trespass. And with all, let him adresse his
humble and hearty petition unto the Lord in this or the like form; keep thy
servant from presumptuous sins; Psalm. 19.13
let them not reign over me: so shall I be upright and be made clean from
much wickedness. Because thy sin is forgiven be not without fear (says
Siracides) to heap sin upon sin. And say not, Eccl. 5.5.6.
the mercy of God is great: he will forgive my manifold sins: for mercy and
wrath come from him and his indignation comes down upon sinners.

But if the Tempter go yet further, and entise a man to adore him, and to that
effect promise to carry him up into the high mountain of wordly might, and to
give him his hearts desire, even abundance of treasure, and of earthly honor,
to give him perhaps a kingdom, or else the smiling countenance of a king: then
must the Christian resolutely say, avoid Satan, for I will not worship thee
for all the kingdoms of the earth. Mat. 16.26
For what shall it profit a man though he should win the whole word, if he
loose his own soul? or what shall a man give for recompense of his soul what
shall it profit a man to possess all the kingdoms of the earth, if he be in
the mean time deprived of the kingdom of heaven? finally what shall it avail
him to enjoy the favorable contenance of an earthly king, if he be secluded
from the favor and contenance of the immortal king, Psalm. 6.11
in whose presence is the fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore? To what sin then soever it be that Satan tempts
the Christian unto, let him take heed never to yield, but to strive stoutly,
Heb. 12.4. 1. Cot. 16.13. Ephe. 4.27.
and to wrestle valiantly against the wicked one. Watch ye, stand fast in the
faith quite you like men, and be strong, neither give place to the Devil, says
S. Paul. Neither must the christian be any whit desmayd, when as he is tempted:
Mat. 4.1. Heb 2.18. Ma. 10.24.
for Christ our Captain has been tempted as well as we: And we know that
the servant is not above his master, and that the Captain is always above
his soldier. The Temptation of the Captain does not exempt the soldier, but
rather assure him that in his Temtation he shall not be overcome, but shall
conquer and overcome, even as his Captain overcame. Reave. 3.21
To him that ouercometh (says the great conqueror Christ) will I grant to sit
with me in my throne, even as Iouercame, and sit with my father in his throne.

CAP. 5. Of the first piece of the Christians spiritual armor, which is the
girdle of verity, and of the meaning and use thereof.
ANd as Christ our Captain has caled us to fight, so has he furnished us
with armor, wherethrough we may aduantageously fight: and as our enemies are
spiritual and not carnal, Ephesians. 6.11 12.13.14.15.16.17.
for we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against Principailties and
powers, and spiritual wickedness: So is our armor spiritual and not carnal.
The weapons of our warrefare (says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 10.3.4.
) are not carnal but mighty through God, to cast down holds, casting down
the imaginations and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of
God, and bringing into captivity every thought, to the obedience of Christ.

It is the armor of God, and not of man, though it be forged by the finger of
Gods spirit for the use of man. The several parts and pieces of which armor
being seven in number, the holy Apostle does thus set down 1. The Girdle of
Verity, in these words, stand therefore, and your loins gird about with
verity. 2. The brestplate of righteusnes in these, having on the breast plate of
righteousness: 3. The shoes of peace in these, and your feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace. 4. The shield of faith in these, above all
take the shield of faith, wherewith ye may quench all the fiery darts of the
wcked. 5. The helmet of hope in these take the helmet of salvation. 6. The
sword of Gods word in these, take the sword of the spirit which is the word of
God. 7. And lastly, the bow and arrow of fasting and prayer, in these words,
and pray always with all manner prayer and supplication in the spirit, and
watch thereunto with all perseverance. Where in watching is also included
fasting, because a man is then most apt to watch, when as he fasteth.

The Christian must have the loins of his soul gyrt about with verity, which
is no other thing but singlines of heart, vprightnes, and sincerity, 1. Cor.
1.12 Psalm. 78.72
being free from all dissimulation and hypocrisy. Josh. 24.14 1. Sam. 12 24 1.
King. 2.4 5. Psalm. 51.6.
And therefore we read how that Joshua and Samuel did exhort the people to
serve the Lord in vprightnes and truth with all their hearts; for God loves
truth in the inward affections says the Psalmist: and as he is a spirit, and
the essential truth, so must he be worshipped in spirit and in truth, John 4.24.
as the truth him self does affirm. He must be worshipped in substance and in
deed, and not only in word or in show which is hellish hypocrisy, and most
damnable iniquity. M t. 54.21
And therefore by our Savior, hell is called the portion of hypocrites, that is
to say, of al such as have a show of godliness but have denied the power thereof,
2. Tim. 3.5
as the Apostle speaks. We must worship God not only in word but also in
work, not only in the speeches of our lips, but also in the actions of out
lives, and not only in our heads and intentions, but also in our hearts and
affections: and yet more, not only in the resolutions of our hearts, but
likewise in the executions of our hands, Iam. 1.22.
according to that of the Apostle, Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers
only, deceauing your own selnes. God will not be content with the ear only,
nor with the hearing of the ear, neither yet with the lips and the religious
talking of the tongue; no, the whole head, Iame 1^.22.
and the cogitations and intentions thereof will not suffice; it is the heart
or else nothing at al Because this people (says the Lord) come near unto me
with their mouth and honor me with their lips, but have removed their heart
far from me, and their fear toward me, was taught by the precept of men;
therefore behold, I will again do a marvelous work and a wonder, Isay. 29.13
14
for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their
prudent men shall be hid. God is a Spirit and therefore he requires chiefly
the spirit, and the heart, for it is the chief part and the best part: My
son (says he) give me thine heart: Pro. 23.26
he must have the whole heart, and not an half of it, for an halfed heart, or
a divided heart, is a double heart, and God can not away with it or with any
kind of division. Pro. 23.26
Woe unto them that have a double heart, [saith Siracides] and to the wicked
lips, and to the faint hands, and to the sinner that goes two manner of
ways. An heart that goes two ways shall not prosper, and he that is froward
in heart, shall stumble therein. The divided heart is an uncircumcised heart,
and God cannot harbor in such a heart as is subject to uncircumcision and
division: and therefore the Lord (says Moses to the people will circumcise
thine heart and the heart of thy seed, Deuteronomy. 30.6
that thou may love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul, that thou may live. whereby is signified unto us, that except the
heart be circumcised by the sanctification and renouation of the spirit, that
it can not be wholly and vndeuidedly devoted unto God, Luke 16.13
as it should be. One man cannot serve two masters, and one heart must not be
parted between two suitors, to wit, the world and God. God has made the whole
heart and therefore should have the whole heart; it is he that sanctifies and
saves the whole heart, Deuteronomy. 1.13. and 10.12. and 11.1. 1. King. 2.4 5. Luk
10.27 Math. 6.21
and therefore good reason that he be served with the whole heart. The
Christians treasure is above and not below, and therefore his heart must be
above and not below, in heaven, and not in earth; with God, and not with man;
in whole, and not in half: and therefore as the Apostle exhorts me^ to love
one another not in word or in tongue only, 1. Ioh. 3.18 19.20
but in deed and in truth, for thereby (says he) we know that we are of the
truth; so must the christian labor diligently to worship God, love and fear
him, not in tongue only, but also in truth, and as I said before, not only in
word, but likewise in work, and not only with the heart, Isay 51.5.6
7.8.9.10.11.12.13.
but also with the hand. Is it such a fast that I have chosen (says the Lord)
that a man should afflict his soul for a day, and to bow down his head, as a
bull-rush and to lie down in sackloth and ashes? will thou call this a fasting
or an acceptable day unto the Lord? Is not this the fasting that I have chosen,
to loose the bands of wickedness, to take off the heavy burdens, and to let the
oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread
unto the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that wander, unto thine house?
when thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and hide not thy self from
thine own flesh? If thou take away from the mids of thee the yoke, the
putting forth of the finger, and wicked speaking, if thou power out thy soul
to the hungry, and refresh the troubled soul, then shall thy light spring out
in the darkness, and thy darkness shall be as the noone day. And the Lord shall
guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy
bones, and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water,
whose waters fail not. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from
doing thy will on mine holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, to consecrate
it, as glorious to the Lord, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways,
nor seeking thine own will, nor speaking a vain word, then shall thou delight
in the Lord, and I will cause thee to mount upon the hie places of the earth,
and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father, for the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it. Out of which notable place of the Evangelical Prophet, we are
clearly taught what it is to be a worshipper of God in spirit and in faith, and
what it is to be truly religious, and how that the soul and substance of
religion consists in action. Iam. 1.27.
To which purpose the Apostle S. James teaches that pure religion, and
undefiled before God even the father, is this, to visit the fatherles and
widows in their adversity, and to keep him self unspotted of the world. And
Siracides does likewise teach plainly, that the fear and true worship of God,
does consist not in an orall profession, but in a real execution of the
commandments of the Lord. Ecclu. 2.16 17.18.19.
They that fear the Lord (says he) will not disobey his word; and they that
love him will keep his ways. They that fear the Lord will seek out the
things that are pleasant unto him, and they that love him shall be fulfilled
with his law. They that fear the Lord will prepare their hearts, and humble
their souls in his sight: they that fear the Lord, keep his commandments,
and will be patient till he see them. Finally, Psalm. 78.72
as David fed the Israelites according to the simplicity of his heart; 2. Cor.
1.12
and as S. Paul walked in the simplicity of his heart, and as Ezekiah walked
before the Lord in truth and with a perfect heart; 2. King. 20 3.
so must the Christian worship, honor, love and fear God, in synceritie and
simplicity of heart; and likewise love his neighbor fervently and without
faining, with a pure, 1. Pet. 4.22
sincere and entire heart. And thus much is imported by the girding of the
loins with the girdle of verity, or of truth.

CAP. 6. Of the Breast Plate of Righteousness.
ANd as the Christian must have his loins girde with verity, sincerity and
simplicity, so must he bear on his breast, or rather in his breast, the
Breast Plate of Righteousness, equity and charity. That is to say, the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ must be made his, not only by gracious
imputation, whereby he is of God accounted righteous in Christ and for Christ,
but also by spiritual participation and actual imitation, whereby he is
really made to be that which he is accounted. For as the father for the Sons
sake does pronounce and account the Christian righteous (as the holy Apostle
does in diverse places deliver) and that by the means of his faith in Christ,
which does lay hold on his all sufficient righteousness: Romans 3.22 24.25.26.
and 4.3.22.23 24. 1. Cor. 1.30 Gala. 2.16. Phillip. 3.4.
so the holy ghost does work righteousness in our hearts, by the washing and
renewing of the new birth according to the same Apostle. Tit. 3.5.6 7 8.
Not by the works of righteousness (says he) which we had done (to wit before
the time of grace) but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
the new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us
abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior, that we being justified (or made
righteous) by his grace, should be made heirs according to the hope of
eternal life. This is a true saying, and these things I would thou should
affirm, that they which have believed in God, might be careful to show forth
good works: these things are good and profitable unto men. By the which clear
testimony, it is more then apparent, that besides Christ's imputed
righteousness, there is also an infused or imparted righteousness shed abroad in
our hearts, by the working of Gods renewing spirit; the which infused or
inherent righteousness does show it self forth in good works, Romans 6.12
16.17.18
flowing there-fro. And therefore the same Apostle does exhort men to give
their members as weapous of righteousness unto God, and that they should make
them selves the servants of righteusnes by actual obedience: for as many as are
made free from sin (says he) are made the servants of righteousness, even the
workers and doers of righteous actions. 1. Joh. 2.29 and 3.7.24.
For he that does righteousness (says blessed S. John) is righteous as he (to
wit Christ) is righteous, and he that does righteously is borne of him, yea he
that keeps his commandments dwells in him, and he in him. And it is of
this inherent and actual righteousness that the Prophet. Ezekiel speaks at
large in the 18. chapter of his prophesy. Ezekiel. 18.5 6.7.8.9.15 16.17.
But if a man be just (says he) and do that which is lawful and right, and
has not eaten upon the mountains, neither has lift up his eyes to the Idols
of the house of Israel, neither has defiled his neighbors wife, neither has
lain with a menstruous woman, neither has opressed any, nor has witholden the
pledge, neither has spoiled by violence, but has given his bread to the
hungry, and has covered the naked with a garment, neither has withdrawn his
hand from the afflicted, and has not given forth upon usury, neither has
taken any increase, but has withdrawn his hand from iniquity, and has
executed true judgment between man and man, and has walked in my statutes,
and has kept my judgments, to deal truly, he is just, he shall surely live
says the Lord God. Out of which place it is more then manifest, that the
righteousness or justice by which a man's soul lives, must be inherent in the
heart, and likewise must be acted by the hand: as also that perfect
righteousness, such as God does require at man's hands, is not only to give
every man what is his, by strict debt, which is equity, but also to impart
unto the needy, a part of his own goods, which is charity. Likewise in the
book of Sarachs wisdom, these two, equity, and charity are described, as the
parts of one, and the same inherent and actual righteousness. Eccle. 4.1.2
3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.
My son (says the wiseman) defraud not the poor of his living, and make not
the needy eyes to wait long, make not an hungry soul sorrowful, neither vex
a man in his necessity. Trouble not the heart that is grieved, and defer not
the gift of the needy. Refuse not the prayer of one that is in trouble, turn
not away thy face from the poor. Turn not thine eyes aside in anger from the
poor, and give him none occasion to speak evil of thee, for if he curse thee
in the bitterness of his soul, his prayer shall be heard of him that made him.
Be courteous unto the company of the poor, and humble thy soul unto the elder,
and bow down thine head unto a man of worship. Let it not grieve thee to bow
down thine ear unto the pore, but pay thy debt, and give him a friendly
answer. Deliver him that fuffereth wrong, from the hand of the oppressor, and
be not fainthearted when thou iudgest. Be as a father to the fatherles, and as
an husband unto their Mother, so shall thou be as the son of the most high;
and he shall love thee more then even thy mother does. Likewise the Prophet
Isay does paint out charity and the works thereof, as a part of righteousness: If
thou power out thy soul to the hungry, and refresh the troubled soul, then
shall thy light spring out in the darkness, and thy darkness shall be as the
noone day. And in the same place he says, that if a man deal his bread to the
hungry, and bring the poor that wander unto his house, and cover the naked,
not hyding himself from his own flesh; Isay 58.7.8.9.10.
Then (says he) shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health
shall grow speedily, and thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory
of the Lord shall embrace thee. Wherein we may learn that as righteousness is
the life of Christians, acording to Ezekiel, so is it the light of Christians
according to Isay. To which purpose tends likewise the exhortation of our
Savior Christ, Let your light so shine before men, Mat. 5.16.
that they may see your good works and glorify your father which is in
heaven. Moreover that Charity or Love is the perfection of Christian
righteousness, it does appear abundantly by the testimonies of the holy
Apostles. Ro^. 13.10.
Love does not evil to his neighbor (says Saint Paul) therefore is love the
fulfilling of the law: and in the same chapter he exhorts thus, Owe nothing
to any man, Verse 8.
but to love one another: for he that loves another has fulfilled the law.
And writing to the Colossians, he calls Love the bond of perfectnes, Collo.
3.14
which is as much as the perfection of Christian righteousness. And he that
keeps his word (says Saint John) in him is the love of God perfect indeed:
1 John 2.5 and 5.3.
for this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and his
commandments are not grievous. Love (says the wiseman) is the keeping of the
laws, and the keeping of the laws is the assurance of immortallity, Wisd.
6.18 19.
and immortallity makes us near unto God And therefore the Lord makes
always a coniunct exhortation to love and obedience: Deuteronomy. 30.6 15.16.19.20.
behold (says the Lord) I have set before thee this day life and good, death
and evil, in that I command thee this day to love the Lord thy God, to walk
in his ways, and to keep his commandments, and his ordinances, and his
laws, that thou may live and be multiplied, and that the Lord thy God may
bless thee: And again, I call heaven and earth to record this day against
you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore
choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live, by loving the Lord thy God,
by obeying his voice, and by cleaving unto him, for he is thy life and the
length of thy days. Finally, our Savior expressly affirms, that Love is both
the greatest commandment, Mat. 22.36 37.38.39.
and the next unto the greatest. The first, standing and consisting in the love
of God, and the second, in the love of our neighbor. 1. Ioh. 2.8. and 3.23.
and 2 Ioh. 5
And Saint John teaches, that love is both the old commandment of the
Father, in the old Testament, and the new commandment of the Son in the new
Testament: and consequently love or charity, is the consummation and
perfection as well of evangelical as legal righteousness.

Thus then we see how that love or charity is the chief part of the
breast plate of righteousness, and even as it were that part of this spiritual
armour-piece, that covers and fenceth the heart, which thing the Apostle
does yet more punctually insinuate, exhorting the Thessalonians to the putting
on of the Breastplate of Faith and Love. 1 Thessalonians. 5.8
And it is of this same inherent and actual righteousness, that the same
Apostle speaks, writing to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 6.7.
and calling it by the name of the armor of righteousness: Iam. 3.18. and 5.16.
and likewise Saint James when as he says that the fruit of righteousness is
sown in peace of them that make peace, and that the prayer of the righteous
man avails much. 1. Ioh. 2.29
And also St. John saying he that does righteousness is borne of God: Reu. 22.11
and again, he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and Saint Peter,
when as he says that we look for new heavens, and a new earth, according to
his promise, 2 Pet. 3.13
wherein dwells righteousness; and our Savior himself, when as he tells us
that he that receives a righteus man in the name of a righteous man shall
receive a righteus man's reward: Mat. 10.41
as also when as he teaches us how that the righteousness of Christians ought
to exceed far the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 5.20.
and withal pronounces them blessed that suffer persecution for righteousness
sake: Math. 5.10.
and Solomon does almost every where in his Proverbs speak of this kind of
righteousness, whereby the believing soul is inherently and actually made
righteous, by the working of Gods sanctifying spirit, as may appear by these
few testimonies, selected out of many.

Righteousness delivers from death, Proverb 10
the Lord will not famish the soul of the righteous, Blessings are upon the
head of the righteous, The memorial of the just shall be blessed: he that
walks uprightly walks boldly, the mouth of a righteous man is a well spring
of life, the labor of the righteous tends to life, the lips of the righteous
do feed many, God will grant the desire of the righteous, the righteous is as
an everlasting foundation, the patient abiding of the righteous shall be
gladness, the righteous shall never be removed.

The righteousness of the upright shall direct his way, Prover. 11.
the righteousness of the just shall deliver them, the righteous escapes out of
trouble. In the prosperity of the righteous the City rejoices, by the
blesling of the righteous the City is exalted, he that sows righteousness
shall receive a sure reward, righteousness leads to life, the desire of the
righteous is only good, the seed of the righteous shall escape, the righteous
shall flourish as leaf, a righteous man hates lying words: righteousness
preserves the upright of life, Prouer. 13
the light of the righteous rejoices, unto the righteous God will recompense
good, Prouer. 14.
The righteous eats to the contentation of his mind, he that walks in his
righteousness fears the Lord, the tabernacle of the righteous shall flourish,
the righteous has hope in his death, etc.

Considering then the excellent condition of the righteous man, Prou. 28.1.
what marvel is it though he be bold as a Lion, to speak with the same
Solomon? he is bold, and what is it that makes him thus bold, but this self
same inward armor and spiritual breast plate which he bears within his
bosom? he is bold, and bold as a Lion, yea the deuowring Lion by his boldness
is turned into flight. In one word, none must dwell in those new heavens and
new earth, 2. Pet. 3.13
wherein dwells righteousness (as the great Apostle speaks) but such as in
this old earth have had new hearts, and Christ's infused righteousness dwelling
in those new hearts; for only the righteous shall live for ever: Wisd. 5.15 16
their reward is also with the Lord, and the most high has care of them,
therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom, and a beautiful crown of the
Lords hands.

CAP. 7. Of the Shoes of peace.
THe Christian must have on his feet the shoes of peace, that is to say, his
ways must be ways of peace, and such as are worthy of him that has been
called unto the participation of Gods peace: for it becomes Christians to
walk worthy of God, Ephesians 4.1. Philli. 1.2 Colos. 1.10 1. Thessa. 2.12.
and of the vocation whereunto we are called, (says the Apostle) and it is
fitting that our conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ, which
is th Gospel of peace, and therefore the same Apostle does often exhort the
faithful to the study of peace. Let us follow then those things, (says he to
the Romans) which concern peace: Romans 14.17 19.
The kingdom of God (says the same Apostle) is righteousness and peace; and
therefore if we desire to be possessors of the kingdom of God, we must be
followers and practisers of righteousness and peace: Eccles. 5.10 Rom 12.18
and again, if it be possible (says he) as much as in you is, have peace with
all men: and writing to the Corinthians, be perfect, 2. Corr. 13 1^.
be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love and
peace shall be with you. And writing to the Ephesians he exhorts all
Christians in their persons, to endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace, Ephesians. 1.1.2 3.4.5.6.
as there is one body, one spirit, and one hope of our vocation, one Lord, one
says, one baptism, one God and father of all, which is above all, and through
all, and in us all. And to the Philippians, Phill. 1.27
that we continue in one spirit, and in one mind, fighting together through
the faith of the Gospel. And to the Hebrews, Heb. 12.14
follow peace (says he) with all men, and holiness, without the which no man
shall see God. God is the God of peace, and therefore no man can go unto God,
except he have on his feet the shoes of peace. Let the peace of God (says the
same Apostle) rule in your hearts, Colloss. 3.15
to the which ye are called, in one body, and be ye amiable.

The Christian, as he is at war, yea a continual war with the Devil, the
world, and the flesh, so is he at peace with God: Romans 5.1.
For being justified by faith, we have peace toward God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, says the Apostle: and as our God is the God of peace, Romans
15.33. 2. Cor. 13.11. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23 Isay 9.6. Ephc. 2.14 15.16.17
and Christ the Prince of peace, so is he both the maker and the preacher of
our peace: For he is our peace (says the Apostle) which has made of both one,
and has broken the stop of the partition wall, and came and preached peace to
you which were a far off, and to them that were near. And this same thing
the Angels did presignifie by their sweet song of peace, which they sung at
his birth, Luke 2.14.
Glory be to God in the highest heavens, and peace in earth; and toward men
goodwill. Giving us to understand, that Christ came into the world, to make
peace both between God and men, and between man and man: who as he preached
peace unto men, so was it always his custom to wish peace unto men,
whenever he came amongst men; saying, Peace be unto you, Luk 24.36 Ioh
20.21. luke 7.50. and 8.48. and 19.42.
and dismissing them, to bid them Go in peace; yea he wept over Jerusalem,
because it knew not those things that belonged to her peace: And being to
leave the world, he left his peace for a legacy unto his servants, saying,
Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, to the end that in him we
might have peace, and that the peace of God might rule in our hearts, Collo.
3.15
according to the Lords own speech, and his Apostles exhortation.

The whole company and society of Christians make but one army fighting
together through the faith of the Gospel, against the enemy thereof Satan,
and all his supposts. And if we be at peace and concord among our selves, we
may be sure to overcome; but if we be at war one with another, and if we be
divided one from another, in faith or in affection, we may be no less sure
that Satan and his army will be able to make among us a great slaughter. Mark
3.24 25
If a kingdom be divided against it self (says our Savior) that kingdom
cannot stand; or if a house be divided against it self, that house cannot
continue; and in like manner if the army of Christians be divided against it
self, it cannot prevail: and therefore it is that we see the study of unity,
concord, and peace, is so dilligently reco^mended to us in holy scripture. Romans
12.16
Be of like affection one toward another, (says S. Paul) and again, I
beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that ye all speak
one thing, and that there be no dissentions among you: but be ye knit together
in one mind, 1. Cor. 1.10. 2. Cor. 13.11
and in one judgment. And yet again, If there be therefore any consolation in
Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any
compassion and mercy, fulfill my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same
love, being of one accord, and of one judgment. And as he prays and
exhorts christians to be of one opinion and of one affection, so does he pray
unto God to give us that we be like minded one toward a another, Romans 15.5 6
according to Christ Jesus, that with one mind and with one mouth we may praise
God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Yea our Savior himself in his
last prayer, Ioh. 17.20 21.22.23.
prayed that all believers might be one, and be all made perfect in one. But
alas! it is a pitiful thing to consider how adverse the most part of men now
a days are, from this study of christian union and peace. The Prophet Isay of
old complained of the contentions were of his time: Isay 59.8.
That they knew not the way of peace. Psalm. 120.5 6
And King David of the dissentious men of his age, made the like complaint, I
seek peace, and when I speak thereof, they are bent to war, they make them
ready to battle; and the same complaint may the peaceable minded men make now
adays with far greater cause, in regard that Christians are on all hands so
much adicted to discord. But the greatest pity of all is to consider how that
Christians can be so hard-hearted as to behold without pity or compassion the
mystical body of Christ, in so pitiful a passion, as to see it stretched
along upon the cross of the crossenes of human conceits, bored through with
the nails of nicenes, crowned with the pricking thorns of subtle Sillogismes,
and Sophismes transpearced with the spear of spightfull seperations, and
exposed unto the scoffage and mockage of both misbelieuing Jews and
unbelieving Gentiles. To see I say without sorrow and subuention, the Body of
the Church of Christ lying in the sight of these two scoffers of Christianity,
like the wounded man left of robbers, Luke 10.30 3^.32.33.34.35.
half dead, lying between Jericho and Jerusalem; and to behold both Priests
and Levites passing by without yielding any succor or relief. So that either
some Samaritane, some Prince, or some private lay person belike must put to his
hand to power the oil of mittigation into the dissected bodies wounds; and
bind them up, or else the charitable deed is like to lie undone.

It is the part therefore no doubt of all good Christians, with the kingly
Prophet David, to desire and wish peace, to seek it, Psalm. 120.6. and ^22 ^.7
8.96
to speak of it, and to pray for it. O pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they
shall prosper that love thee: peace be within thy walls, and plenteousnes
within thy palaces: and not only this, but every one ought to see ke to do
her good, with the same Prophet, and to labor for her peace, by furthering and
advancing the same, according to their several abilities: yea whosoever
desires to be blessed, or to be accounted and called one of the children of
God, ought to endeauoure to be a peacemaker at least in affection, if so be
that his ability can not reach unto action and execution. Math. 5.9.
Blessed are the peacemakers (says the Prince of peace) for they shall be
called the Sons of God. And doubtless a most blessed and happy thing it were,
if once princes and pastors could be brought to sacrifice their several
abilities to the procuring and furthering of this holy peace that the ruins of
Sion might be repaired, the breaches and desolations of Gods house redressed,
and this much desired concord restored at last unto Christendom. That such
Jews and Gentiles as are yet without being no longer scandalized by our
dissensions and dissections; but seeing peace and unity flourishing among us,
might be thereby induced to like the better of our religion, and so in end
might be hailed home unto the society of the Christian profession, That so all
the Kings and kingdoms of the earth, may know and acknowledge the Lord Jesus,
Psalm. 2.8.10 11. and 67.7. and 102.15.22 and 86.9.
and fear and serve him: that his kingdom may increase and flourish more and
more, being freed from these doleful divisions, that do thus weaken and
blacken the same, and so united, may be extended from sea to sea, even from the
river unto the ends of the earth, Psalm. 72.8.9.10.11.15.17.19. Isay 45.22.
according to the tenure of the divine Oracles, touching the plenitude and
collection of the Gentiles, the beatitude and conversion of the Jews, and the
amplitude and extention of Christ's kingdom, consisting of both Jews and
Gentiles, united under one sovereign Lord, and ruled by one Christian law.

The which Oracles do bear, that in the last days all nations shall flow
unto the Church, saying one to another: Come, Isay 2.2.3. Micah. 1.2.
let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob,
and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths: Up, let us go
and pray before the Lord, Zach 8.21
and seek the Lord of hosts, we will go also. So that then in this day (o
the thrice happy and desirable day!) there shall be no contrariety or
recusancy amongs Christians: for after long debate and much discord, they shall
break their swords into mattockes, Isay 2.4. and 11.9. and 63.5. Micah 4.2.
and their spears into Sythes; they shall not learn to fight any more,
neither shall they any longer hurt or destroy one another in the mountain of
his holiness. As if he should say, Christians shall burn their books of
controversies, and turn their controversy shooles into schools of concord,
their warring and wrangling shall vanish, their iarring and iangling shall take
an end. For the mountains (that is Christian Princes) shall bring peace, Psalm.
72.3.
and the hills (that is heavenly and humble priests) shall bring righteousness
unto the people. Psalm. 72.7. Isay 11.9. Haba. 2.24 Isay 66.12.
Then there shall be abundance of peace, and the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the sea that ouerfloweth with water; yea he will
extend peace over his church like a flood, and the glory of the Gentiles like a
flowing stream; Zephan 3.9
finally He will turn to the people a pure langage that they may all call upon
the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent. Even so, come Lord Jesus,
come Prince of peace, and come quickly by thy spirit of peace into the heads
and hearts of all divided christians, Ioh. 17.21 22.23.
That they may be made perfect in one, as the father and thou art one. Inspire
us all with the spirit of peace, that the common people in their houses may
pray for peace, Scholars in their schools may write of peace, Preachers in
the Church may preach for peace, and Kings and Princes in their kingdoms may
work for peace, and encourage peaceable spirits unto the study of peace; so
that at last as children of peace; we may sing unto the praise of the God of
peace, that most excellent song of peace Ecce quam bonum et quam iucundum
fratres habitare in vnum. Psalm. 133.1


O how happy a thing it is,
and joyful for to see:
Christians together fast to hold,
the bond of unity.
CAP. 8. Of the shield of faith.
But above all, the Christian must take unto him the Shield of faith, says the
Apostle: for it is of such efficacy and force, that it is able to quench all
the fiery darts of the devil, to vanquish the world, and to overcome the
wicked one. In the holy Scripture we may read, of the manifold and wonderful
effects of faith: It is of greater force then the most ouerflowing floods; Heb.
11.29 30.31.32 33.34.35
for by faith the red sea was made as dry land for the believing Israelites to
pass through into the earthly Canaan. And in like manner all Gods true
Israelites, according to the promise, shall pass safely through the red sea of
this restles and ruthles world, into the heavenly Canaan, where there is fulness
of rest. Faith is stronger then the strongest town walls, for by faith the
walls of Jericho fell down after that they had been compassed about seven
days. And by the same faith, the walls of the spiritual Jericho that is, of
the city of sin wherein the christian soul dwells, though not as a
Citizen (for so it belongs unto the City of God, which is the City of
righteousness) but rather as a captive or prisoner: they shall in end fall, after
that we have compassed the same by wrestling and fighting against sin, so
many seven days or weeks as the world shall continue. Faith is stronger then
kingdoms and kings, for diverse of Gods Champions, as Gedeon, Sampson, and
David, through Faith have subdued kingdoms, and turned to flight the armies of
the aliants. And the same faith is stronger then the kingdom of sin and
Satan, for it subdueth the same, and overcomes both the kingdom and the
king thereof. Faith is stronger then Lions, Dan. 3.23.24.25.26.27.28. and
6.16.22 23. 1. King 17.17.18.19.20.21.2^. 2. King. 4 20.32.33.34.35.
for by faith Daniel stopped the Lions jaws; and stronger then fire, for the
three children through faith quenched the violence of the fiery furnace.
Finally, it is stronger then death, for through faith, Elias raised up the
widow of Sareptas son, and Elisha the Shunamites son. And by the same
faith, the Christian does stop the mouth of the devouring Lion, and as it were
does quench the hot furnace of hellfire: it is stronger then death, yea then
the author of death, for as it quenches all the devils fiery darts, so it
vanquisheth the wicked one, it conquereth the spiritual death of the soul, by
assurance and sanctification, and it overcomes the corporal death of the
body, by a powerful and a glorious resurrection: 1. Cor. 15.54.55.56.57
For when this corruptible has put on incorruption, and this mortal has put
on immortall^ty, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written
(says the Apostle) Death is swallowed up into victory: O death, where is thy
sting? O grave where is thy victory? And this victory we obtain by faith in
Christ, as the same Apostle teaches, But thanks be unto God (says he) which
has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, Hose 13.14
for it is he that has said I will redeem thee from the power of the grave, I
will deliver thee from death; O death I will be thy death; O grave I will be
thy destruction.

It is not then without great cause that the Godly have been always wont to
pray unto God, to increase and confirm their faith, Mark 9.23 24. etc. 4.
for so we read did not only the believing father of him that was first
possessed of Satan, and afterward cured by our Savior, but even the Apostles
themselves, Lord I believe, Luke 17.5.
help my unbelief, said the one: Lord inerease our faith, said the other. And
therefore the Apostle St. Jude exhorts Christians to pray in the holy Ghost,
Jude. V. 20.21.
to be edified and established in the faith: 2. Cor. 13.5.
and Saint Paul wills every man to prove himself whether he be in the faith
or no, as also to grow from faith to faith, and to continue grounded and
stablished in the faith: Romans 1.17. Collo. 1.2. Ephe. ^.18.19. Philli. 1.29
Gall. 5.22. 1. Cor. 1^.5.9.11
For as God is the giver of faith, and even the worker and beginner of it in
us, so is he encreaser, confirmer and finisher of our faith, act. 15.9. Romans
3.24 25. to 29. 2. Cor. 5.17 Colos. 1.12 1. Ioh. 2.3 Gall. 3.14.26. Ephe. 3.26
1. Pet. 1.2.5.9. and 5.9. 1. Ioh. 3.4 Ephesians. 2.8.9. 2. Tim. 3.15. acts 26.18.
by the holy Ghost: By faith our hearts are purified, we are regenerated and
justified, yea raised up from sin: By faith we know God, we are blessed of
God, and made his sons, we have peace with him and free access unto him. By
faith we are strengthened in Gods grace, by it we resist and overcome both the
world and the devil, and in end we acquire the salvation of our souls, and
inheritance among the Saints.

But the Christian must in the mean time consider how that all these things
and the like occurring in holy scripture are to be understood of such a faith
as does live and work by love and charity, and persevere and last by
continuance and constancy. For first if faith have not good works annexed unto
it, it is but a dead faith as the Apostle Saint James does teach, Iame 2.17 ^o.
2^.21.
and consequently it is both unprofitable and unable to work any of the above
named effects. And therefore not only does the same Apostle teach us that
Abraham's faith was made perfect by works: But also St. Paul shows us that the
faith whereof he makes so often mention in his Epistles is none other but that
which works by love. Galla. 5.6
For in Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, neither
uncircumcision but faith which works by love: and again, 1. Cor. 13.2
If I had all faith (says he) so that I could remove mountains and had not
love, I were nothing. Neither are we justified by any other faith; for the
justifying faith of Christians lives by love; and as for faith without love,
it is such a faith as the Devil and the damned may have, for the Devils also
believe and tremble, Iame 2.19.
(says the Apostle) that is, they believe through faith, and they tremble
through fear, but they love neither God nor man through hearty affection. The
Christians faith must not only be in the head by light and illumination, but
also in the heart by assurance and sanctification, and by love and affection.
It must not slitter in the brains, but it must nestle in the breast. In one
word, it must be like unto Arons precious ointment, which being powered upon his
head, Psalm. 133.2
ran down upon his beard, and from thence unto his breast, and went down on
the border of his garments. Faith I say, must diffuse and shed it self abroad
like unto a precious oil; for it must go down from the head unto the heart,
and from thence unto the hands.

Thus then we see how that the saving and justifying faith of Christians does
live and work by love. And therefore St. Paul writing to the Thessalomans
conioyneth love with faith, and makes of them both but one breastplate. 1.
These. 5.8
Let us which are of the day (says he) be sober, putting on the Breast Plate
of says and love. And writing to Timothy, he makes of them but one maine end
of one great commandment. 1. Tim. 1.5
The end of the commandment (says he) is love out of a pure heart, and of a
good conscience, and of faith unfeigned. So does blessed Saint John; 1. Ioh.
3.23
This is his commandment (says he) that we believe in the name of his son
Jesus Christ and love one another as he gave commandment. And the great
Apostle St. Peter enioyneth all Christians to join to faith virtue and love,
2. Pet. 1.5.6 7.8.9.
to the end that it be not idle, nor we unfruitful in the knowledge of Christ.

And as the christians faith must be a living faith by love and charity: So
must it likewise be a perseuering faith by continuance and perpetuity, Mat.
24.13
for he that endures to the end shall be saved, says our Savior. And
therefore he exhorts his disciples and us in them to peseuer and abide in the
faith Abide in one (says he) and I in you; as the branch cannot bear fruit of
it self except it abide in the vine, Ioh 15.4.9
no more can ye except ye abide in me: as the father has loved me so have I
loved you, continue in my love. And to the Jews which believed in him he said,
Ioh. 8.31.
If ye continue in my words, acts 13.43
ye are verily my disciples, and Paul and Barnabas exhorted the believing
people to continue in the grace of God, and the same Apostle writing to the
Corinthians, Watch ye (says he) stand fast in the faith, quite you like men,
1. Cor. 16 13.
and be strong. Heb. 3.12.13.14
And writing to the Hebrews, Take heed (says he) brethren least at any time
there be in any of you an evil heart and unfaithful, to depart away from the
living God: for we are made partakers of Christ, if we keep sure unto the end,
the beginning wherewith we are vpholden. Heb. 4.1.
Let us fear therefore least at any time by for saking the promise of entering
into his rest, any of you should seem to be deprived: for it is impossible
that they which were once lightened, Heb. 6.4.5.6.11.
and have tasted of the heavenly gist, and were made partakers of the holy
Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world
to come, if they shall fall away, should be renewed again by repentance,
seeing they crucify again to them selves the son of God, and make a mock of
him. For such men as do with Hymeneus and Philetus put away a good conscience,
1. Tim. 1.19.20.
and make shipwreck of their faith (as the Apostle speaks) they tread under
foot the son of God, and count the blood of the Testament as an unholy
thing, Heb. 10.29
wherewith they were sanctified, and in so doing, they do despite and even
extinguish or quench the spirit of grace And yet again the same Apostle does
dehorte Christians from falling away, in these words, Heb. 12.15
Take heed that no man fall away from the grace of God; so he deterreth then
from it in these. The just shall live by says, Heb. 10.38
but if any withdraue him self, my soul shall have no pleasure in him:
likewise the blessed Apostles Peter and John, 2. Pet 2.20 21.22. John. 2.19.
and 5.16.
admonish us of the deplorable danger that does follow upon this back sliding
and this falling away of men from the grace and faith of Christ; for it is such
a sin, that he that commits it in the highest degree, that is to say, by
falling away finally or totally from the grace of Christ and by grieuing the
holy Ghost, he must not be prayed for; Mat. 12.31 32. Mar. 3.29. Luke 12.10
yea our Savor him self says that it shall never be forgiven. And therefore
he exhorts the Christian soldier thus by his Prophet, Behold I come
shortly, hold that which thou have, and 3.11.12
that no man take thy crown. Reave. 2.25.26


Finally there is no celestial and eternal reward promised but only to him
that by perseuering in faith does overcome. Romans 2.7.11.17.26.27.28. and
3.5.12.12
The which thing our Savior does teach us, by an eight-folde repetition of a
promise of reward to be rendered to him that overcomes, uttered by Saint
John in his revelation. And therefore as the Apostle exhorts Timothy to
fight the good fight of faith: 1. Tim. 6.12
so he admonishes him that he persevere in fighting, when as in the next words
he bids him lay hold on eternal life. And speaking of him self, 2. Tim.
4.7 8.
he says, I have fought a good fight and have finished my course: I have kept
the faith: hence forth is laid up for me the crown of righteousness which the
Lord the righteous judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only but
unto them also that love his appearing.

CAP. 9. Of the helmet of Hope
ANd as the Christian must be armed with the shield of a living and
perseuering faith, so must he likewise have his head armed with the helmet of
hope, that is to say, he must expect patiently and confidently for grace and
glory and all good things at Gods hands, and at his only and at none others
else. Psalm 9.10.
They that know thy name will trust in thee, for thou Lord have not failed them
that seek thee. Yet my soul keep thou silence unto God, for mine hope is in
him. Psalm 62.5.
Thou art mine hope O Lord, and my portion in the land of the living. Psalm.
142.^
The holy Prophet almost every where calls the Lord his hope, Psalm. 1^.^.2
and 131.1.2 3. and 62.5. and 65.5. and 91.2. and 142.5. Prou 30.5. Isay 26.3.
his rock, his fortress, his strength, his shield, and buckler, his refuge,
and the horn of his salvation: yea not only his help and hope, but even of
all the ends of the earth, and of them that are far off, in the sea. Psalm.
40.4. and 146.5.
And he pronounces him blessed whose hope is in the lord, and who makes the
Lord his trust. The like does the Prophet Jeremy, Blessed be the man (says
he) that trusts in the lord, Iere. 17 7 8
and whose hope the Lord is, for he shall be as a tree that is planted by the
water which spreads out her roots by theriuer, and shall not feel when the
heat comes, but her leaf shall be green, and shall not care for the year of
drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit. And therefore in his
Lamentation, after much mourning and bitterness, he cheereth him self wmeto hat
up by reason of his sure hope in God, and says, Iame. 3.24.25.26.
the Lord is my portion says my soul, therefore will I hope in him: the Lord
is good unto them that trust in him, and to the soul that seeks him, it is
good both to trust, and to wait for the salvation of the Lord. God is a
shield to those that trust in him says Solomon: Prou. 30.5 Isay 26.3.
trust in the Lord for ever (says Isaye) for in the Lord God is strength for
evermore. And S. Peter teaches that God the father did send his son into the
world to redeem us with his precious blood, as of a Lamb undefiled, and
without spot, and that he raised him from the dead and gave him glory; 1. Pet.
1.3.18.19.20.21
to the end that our faith and hope might be in God, who has also begotten us
again according to his abundant mercy (says the same Apostle) unto a lively
hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. Romans 5.5. and 12.12.
And it is no other hope, but this lively hope in God and in him alone which
makes not ashamed, as the Apostle S. Paul speaks, and wherein he exhorts us
to rejoice. 2 Thessalonians. 2.16.
It is even God the father which loved us and has given us everlasting
consolation and good hope through grace, as the same Apostle speaks: and
therefore good reason that our hope be in him who has given us the same; for
all other hope which is not in God is a vain and a vanishing or a pershing
hope. Ioh. 8.13.14.15.
The hipocrites hope shall perish (says Bildad to Job) his considence also
shall be cut of, and his trust shall be as the house of a Spider, he shall lean
upon his house, but it shall not stand, he shall hold him fast by it, yet
shall it not endure. Such as despise wisdom and discipline (says the
wiseman) their hope is vain, Wisd. 3.1^ 13.
and their labors foolish, and their work unprofitable, and if they die
hastily they have no hope, neither comfort in the day of try all. The
hypocrites and ungodly man's hope reaches no farther then unto corruptible and
transitory things, and therefore it fails them as soon as this transitory
life fails them and flies away from them. So that when as they have most
need of hope, they have no hope at all, but are made both hopeles and helples
in one instant. The ungodly man shall be so far from rejoicing in his hope as
the godly man does, that he shall be in end ashamed of his hope: Wisd. 5.14
15.16.
For the hope of the ungodly (says the wiseman) is like the dust that is
blown away with the wind, and like a thin foame that is scattered abroad with
the storm, and as the smoke which is dispersed with the wind, and as the
remembrance of him passes that tarrieth but for a day. But it fares far
otherwise with the godly man, whose hope is in God; For the righteous (that is
such as have their hope in God and not in man, or in any transitory thing)
shall live for ever: their reward is also with the Lord, and the most hie has
care of them. Therefore shall they receive a glorious kingdom and a beautiful
crown of the Lords hand: for with his right hand shall he cover them, and with
his arm shall he defend them. And for this cause the Apostle compares the hope
of the godly to an Anchor, in regard of the stedfastnes thereof, which takes
hold of a better and surer foundation then any transitory or corruptible thing,
Heb. 6.18.19.
For it enterreth into that which is within the veil, that is, it is founded
and grounded upon an immortal and incorruptible Crown: for If in this life only
we hauchope in Christ, 1. Cor. 15.19
we are of all men the most miserable, says the Apostle; so that our hope must
reach further then this life, or any thing whatsoever that is subject to our
sense, or yet may be here in this world seen. We are saved by hope (says the
same Apostle) but hope that is seen is not hope; Romans 8.24 25.
for how can a man hope for that which he sees? but if we hope for that we see
not, we do with patience abide for it. For there is one hope of our vocation,
even the hope of eternal life, of glory, Ephe. 4.4. Collo. 1.27
and of an immortal inheritance. So says the Apostle of the Gentiles Saint
Paul, T t. 3.7.
That we being justified by his grace, should be made heirs according to the
hope of eternal life. And so says the grear feeder of the flock Saint Peter,
1. Pet. 3.4.
Blessed be God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to
his abundant mercy has bigotten us again unto us a lively hope by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance immortal and
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved for you in heaven.

And as we are often in holy Scripture exhorted to grow and abound in faith;
and to be grounded and stablished in the faith, Collo. 1.23
so are we likewise admonished that we be not moved away from the hope of the
Gospel, Heb 3.6. and ^ 18.19 and 105 23.
but that we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of hope unto the end;
let us keep the profession of our hope (says he) without wavering, for he is
faith-full that promised. And the same Apostle as he praises God for the
effectual faith, fervent love, and patient hope of the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians
1.2.3 4.
so he prays unto God for the Romans; that he would fill them in all joy and
peace in believing, Romans 15.13.
that they may abound in hope through the power o^ the holy Ghost: hope (says
he) makes not ashamed, yea we are saved by hope, Romans 5.5. and 8.24. and 12.12.
and therefore he exhorts us to rejoice in hope So then as many as would not
be ashamed in that great day, but even rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorious, let them now harbor in their hearts a steadfast and vnfaileable hope;
for blessed is he and yet more blessed shall he be that has not fallen,
neither does fall away at any time from his hope in the Lord, as speaks the
wise Siracides.

CAP. 10. Of the Sword of Gods word.
NO good Soldier goes out at any time to the field, without a sword by his
side or else in his hand: and the Christian who is called to be a spiritual
Soldier, must have a sword by his side, or rather in his hand likewise. And
because that his warrefare and his weapons are spiritual and not carnal, 2.
Cor. 10 4.
therefore must he take unto him not any material sword for this fight, but the
sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. Heb. 4.12.
For the word of God is lively (says the Apostle) and mighty in operation, and
sharper then any two edged sword, and enters through even unto the dividing
asunder of the soul, and the spirit, and of the joints, and the marrow, and is
a discerner of the thoughts, and the intents of the heart. And truly it had
need to be a sharp sword, that must be an instrument of the cutting off of all
sinful and sensual affections from the soul, and of the slaying and
killing of our concupiscence, and inordinate desires and fleshly Iusts. And it
had need be a strong sword that must in Iudiths hand, that is in the hand of
the praising and confessing Christian, (for Judith signisieth praising and
confessing) cut off the head of so strong a Captain as is the spiritual
Olofernes, Judith 13.6.7.6.8 9.15.17.18.
(for Olofernus signifies a strong Captain) the chief of our spiritual
enemies. Judith cut off Olofernes head with his own fawchin, 1. Sam. 17.51.
and David cut off Goliahs head with his own sword: but it fares far
otherwise with the spiritual David and Judith, that is with the Christian
Soldier, man or woman: for no sex nor age is exempted from the spiritual
warrefare. The Christian soldier I say must use another kind of sword, for
the cutting off spiritual Olofernes and Goltahs head, then any such as he can
take from Satan himself; yea his sword must be the sword of the spirit,
that is such a one as the spirit of God has forged with his own finger, and
has delivered unto us by the ministerial hand of his Prophets and Apostles.
And it was this self same sword of Gods word which our great Captain Christ
Jesus used in his great fight against our great enemy, whom he repelleth
once, twice, thrice with an Ita scriptumest, it is written. Whereby all his
soldiers, are taught upon the like occasion to use the same weapon that he did
then. As for example; if Satan entice the Christian to pride, let him answer
him thus, in his heart, avoid proud Lucifer, for it is written that God
resists the preud, Iame 4.6.
and gives grace unto the humble. If to covetousness, let him say, avoid
covetous mammon, for it is written that the love of money is the root of all
evil, 1. Tim. 6.10 Ephe. 5.5.
and that no covetous person has any inheritance in the kingdom of God. If to
uncleanness and lechery, let him say, 1. Cor. 6.15 19 Ephesians. 5.5. Revel. 21.27.
avoid unclean spirit, for it is written that our bodies are the members of
Christ, and the Temple of the holy Ghost, and that no unclean thing shall enter
into Gods City. If to cruelty, let him say, avoyde manslayer, for it is
written, Cen 4.10. and 9.1.6
that the voice of blood cries unto God from the earth, and who so sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. If to hatred and envy, let him
say, 1. Ioh 3.15
avoid man-hater for it is written that whosoever hates his brother is a man
flayer, and ye know that no manslayer has eternal life abiding in him. If to
idleness and sloth, let him say, avoyde suggester of sloth and of allsinne, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. Eze. 16.42
for it is written, if there be any that will not work, that he should not
eat, and that Idleness was one of the sins of Sodom If to luxury, excess,
intemperance and superfluity, let him say, avoid licentious Satan, for it is
written, that we walk honestly as in the day, Romans 13.1^ 1. Cor. 6.9.10.
notin gluttony, and drunkenness, neither in chambering and wanton nesse. If to
a continuing anger and wrath, let him say, avoid author of strife for it is
written, Ephesians. 4.26
let not the Sun go down upon your wrath. If to revenge, let him say, avoyde
reuengefull Satan, for it is written. Resist not evil, recompense to no man
evil for evil, avenge not your selves, Mat. 5.39. Romans 12.17.19.
but give place unto wrath; for it is written, vengeance is mine, I will repay,
says the Lord. If to cursed and evil speaking, to foolish or filthy talking,
let him say, avoid Satan, for it is written, Ephe. 4.29.30. Collo. 3.8.
let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths, let all bitterness
and evil speaking be put away from you, put away cursed and filthy speaking
out of your mouth. If to lying and deceiving, let him say, avoid father of
lies, for it is written, Ephesians. 4.25. Collos. 3.9.
cast off lying and speak every man truth unto his neighbor, for we are
members one of another. If presumption, let him say, avoid presumptuous
satan, for it is written, Nom. 15.30.
The person that does ought presumptuously, the same blasphemeth the Lord,
therefore shall he be cut of from among his people. If to desperation, let him
say, avoid soule-slayer, Psalm. ^03.8 11.
for it is written that the Lord is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger
and of great kindness, for as high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is
his mercy toward them that fear him. Lo, Job. 13.15
though he slay me yet will I trust in him, and will reprove my ways in his
sight. Finally, to whatsoever enormious sin it be that satan does tempt and
entice the Christian, let him answer, avoid sinful Satan, for it is written,
Romans 2.9.
that Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every man that does
evil.

Thus we see how the Christian must learn to make use of the word of God
against all kind of Tentations and instigations whatsoever, and we see
likewise the excellent virtue and efficacy of Gods word. By the word of God,
1. Pet. 1.23 Romans 11.17 Deuteronomy. 4.2.6 and 29.9. Isay 8.6.19.20. Psalm. 119.105.
we are borne anew again, and by the hearing of it faith is begotten in our
hearts. The word of God is our wisedme, and teaches us what we must choose
and what we must shume, what we ought to do, and what we must leave undone. It
is a lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our paths to direct our ways
and footesteps according to godliness, righteousness, honesty and peace. Gods
word is the word of truth, Ephesians. 1.13
for thereby we are taught the right way and manner of Gods true worship. It is
the word of life, Acts 5.20.
for by it we are led into the way that leads unto life, and the word of
reconciliation, 2. Cor. 5.19
for it shows us how that God in Christ has reconciled the world to him
self by the remission of our sins. Psalm. 19.7.8 9.10.11.
The word or law of the Lord is perfect (says the Psalmist) converting the
soul, the testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple:
the statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart: the commandment of
the Lord is pure, and giuetht ligh unto the eyes: the fear of the Lord is
clean, and endures for ever: the judgments of the Lord are truth, they are
righteous all together, and more to be desired then gold, yea then much fine
gold; sweeter also then honey, and the honey comb: more oeuer, by them is thy
servant made circumspect, and in keeping of them there is gerat reward. The
word of God is milk to such as are babes in Christ, 1. Cor. 3.1 ^. Heb. 5.12.
Ephesians 6.17. Heb. 4.12.
and strong meat to such as are more strong in Christ, yea it is a sharp two
edged sword for all such as are soldiers in Christ, wherewith they may kill
there own concupiscences, and make a slaughter of sin, and both conquer
Satan and onercome them own selves. Good reason then that Gods word be read
with all reverence, and heard with great humility, and affected with all
feruency and practsed with greatest diligence and industry of all Christian
people, according as we are exhorted in holy scripture. Eccles. 5.11 12
Be humble to hear the word of God, that thou may understand it and make a
true answer with wisdom: be swift to hear good things, and let thy life be
pure, and give a patient answer says Siracide. Isay 56.2
Tio him will I look (says the Lord by his Prophet I say) even to him that
is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my words. Mth. 13.9. Mark
4.9 Luke 8.8 Reucl. 2,7. 11.17.29.
Hear the word of the Lord, all ye that tremble at his word says the
Prophet to the faithful people. He that has ears to hear let him hear
says our Savior, and again, let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit
says unto the churches. But the ear and the hearing thereof, is not enough;
for Gods word must go from the head and the ear into the heart. Deuteronomy 6.6. and
11.18 and 32.46.
These words, (says the Lord) which I command thee this day shall be in thine
heart: and again, therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in
your soul. Gods word must not be leef swimming or flittering in the brains
by knowledge and speculation, but it must sink donnewards into the breast, and
their setle it self by belief and affection: we must I say keep the sayings
of Gods word not in our head but in our heart, Luke 2.51. Collo. 3.16
as Marie the blessed mother of Jesus did the sayings of her son. Let the
word of God dwell in you plenteously (faith the holy Apostle) in all wisdom,
teaching and admonishing your own selves in Psalms and himmes, and spiritual
songs singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. The word of God must
dwell in our hearts in deed, by faith and affection, but it must likewise
sometimes come and stand as it were in the door of the house, I mean in the
mouth, by confession, instruction and admonition. And therefore the Lord
conioyneth these two together, the heart and the mouth, Deu. 30.14 Romans
10.8.9.10.17.
The word (says he) is very near unto thee, even in thy mouth and in thine
heart. The same says likewise the Apostle, and adds, This is the word of
faith which we preach: for with the heart man belecueth unto righteousness, and
with the mouth man confesses to salvation: yea unto the heart and the mouth he
adds likewise the ear, faith is by hearing (says he) and hearing by the
word of God. And the Lord as he enioyneth his people to set there hearts unto
his word, and to lay his word up in their hearts by faith and affection, so
he commands them to talk of it tarying in the house, Deuteronomy. 6.6. and 32.46.47.
and walking by the way, at their lying down and at their rising up, by
instruction and admonition; for they must even teach and instruct their
children therein: And to what end all this, the Lord him self does signify,
Deuteronomy. 30.14 and 3^.46.47.
the word (says he) is very near unto thee, even in thy mouth and in thine
heart for to do it, and again, set your hearts unto all the words which
Itestifie against you this day, that ye may command them unto your children
that they may observe and do all the words of the law, for it is no vain
word concerning you, but it is your life, and by this word ye shall prolong
your days; so that the end of al is doing. We hear the word with the ear,
that we may understand and remember it with the mind; we understand it with
the mind, that we may believe it and love it with the heart, and talk of it
with the tongue; and the maine end of our hearing, understanding, remembering,
believing, loving, talking and speaking of Gods word, is our living and doing
according to the same: for as to hearken unto the word of God is better then
the fat of rams, so to obey his word and his voice, is better then
sacrifice; and the doing of Gods word is better then the hearing and speaking
of the same. 1. Sam. 15 22. Luk 6.48.49.
For whosoever comes to me (says our Savior) and hears my words, and
does the same, I will show you to whom he is like: he is like a man which
builte an house, and dug deep, and laid the foundation on a rock: and
when the waters arose, the flood beat upon that house and could not shake it;
for it was grounded upon a rock. But he that hears and does not, is like a
man that builte an house upon the earth without foundation, against which the
floode did beat, and it fell by and by: and the fall of that house was great.
So that the doer of the word is as a wise builder that groundeth his house
upon the rock, where as the bare hearer of the word is as a foolish builder
that builds upon the sand: for when the rain of Gods indignation shall fall
down upon the wicked world at the day of judgment, and the floode of his
fury shall ouerflow the sinful earth, and the whirle wind of his wrath shall
blow from the four corners and quarters of the earth, the^ the sandy
building of an outward profession, together with the foolish builder, I mean,
the bare hearer or talker of Gods word, shall be beaten down, neither of them
shall stand, but both of them shall have a great, yea an unrecoverable fall;
and only the rockie building of a religious life which consists most part in
action, and in a godly, sober and upright conversation, shall vnshakeably stand
and perpetually endure, Psalm. 125.1.
even as mount Sion which cannot be remoned but remains for ever. The Lord
complains by his Prophet Isaye of such as come naere unto him with their
mouth, Isay 29.13 and 58.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.
and honor him with their lips, but have removed their heart far from him.
And he complains of such as would draw nere unto him with the outward
service; submission and humiliation of their bodies, and of their hearts too,
by afflicting their soul for a day, by bowing down the head, by lying down
in sackloth, by fasting and crying unto the Lord, but yet bad removed their
hands too far from him. And therefore be tells them that he cares not for
their whole religion when as it is not accompanied with action; and that the
thing he does most like of, which in them notwithstanding was most lacking, is
to put to their hands to the loosing off the bands of wickedens, to the taking
of the heavy burdens, to the letting of the oppressed go free, to the
breaking off every yoke, to the dealing of their bread to the hungry, to the
covering of the naked, and to the bringing of the poor that wander, unto their
house. And in another place he shows the people of the Jews, Isay
1.10.11.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.19.20.
that the chief service he did require at their hands does not stand in the
multitude of their sacrifices, and oblations, nor in their sabbaths and solemn
assemblies, neither yet in their often resorting unto his courts and their
making of many prayers; but in their washing and cleansing of them selves, in
their taking away the evil of their works from before his eyes, in ceasing to
do evil, in learning to do well, in seeking of judgment, in relieuing the
oppressed, Zach. 7.9.10.
in judging the fatherles and defending the widow. And he tells them that
without such godly actions and executions as these, that their whole religion
and outward profession is in his eyes no better then an abomination, and that
he makes no reckoning of their drawing near unto him, with their feet in
treading in his courts, with their ears, in hearing of his word, with their
tongues, in making many prayers, with their hearts, in sorrowing and afflicting
their soul; so long as they draw not near unto him with their hands by holy,
upright and charitable actions.

If ye know these things, Ioh 13.17
blessed are ye if ye do them says our Savior Whereby we are let to
understand that the blessedness of Christianes does not stand in contemplation,
but in action: and the Apostle James does exhort men to be doers of the word,
and teaches how that it is but a vain religion which does not acquire the
own perfection by virtuous working and godly living. Receive (says he) with
meekness the word that is graffed in you, Iame 1.21.22.23.24.25.26.27.
which is able to save your souls; and be ye doers of the word, and not
hearers only, deceiving your own selves: for if any hear the word, and do
it not, he is like unto a man that beholds his natural face in a glass. For
when he has considered him self, he goes his way, and forgets immediately
what manner of one he was. But who so looks in the perfect law of liberty and
continues therein, he not being a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work,
shall be blessed in his deed. If any man among you seems religious, and
refraineth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's religion is
vain. Pure religion and undefiled before God even the father, is this, to
visit the fatherles, and widows in their adversity, and to keep him self
unspotted of the world.

CAP. 11. Of the Bow and arrow of fasting and prayer.
TO the above named parts or pieces of spiritual armor, the Christian must
join yet another piece which is the seventh and the last, and it is as it were
the Bow and the Arrow of fasting and praer. For fasting is as it were the
Christians bow, out of which he shoots the Bolte or Arrowe of a pithy and
effectual prayer, able to penetrate or pierce through the highest heavens. Pray
(says the Apostle) with all manner prayer and supplication in the spirit,
Ephesians. 6.18.
and watch thereunto with all perseucrance where (as I said above) in the
exercise of watching, fasting is included, for man is then most apt to watch
when as he does fast. The same thing does likewise appear by the great
Apostles exhortation; be sober (says he) and watch, 1 Pet. 5.8
for your adversary the devil as a roaring lion walks about seeking whom he
may devour. As if he should say; when the devil your adversary seeks most
busily to feast upon you by your fall, the^ be ye farthest of from feasting;
yea then more then at any other time else give your selves to fasting and
praying; for in so doing ye shall make your enemy to roar and to rampe in
vain, when as he shall by the means of your fasting and praying find nothing
to pray or to feast upon. The holy Scripture shows us abundantly how that the
best and godliest men and women have given themselves much to the exercise of
fasting our Savior as foone as he was led aside of the spirit into the
wilderness to be tempted of the devil, Mat. 4.1.2.3.
began his long fast or lentfast of forty days and as many nights, to teach
all his young soldiers chiefly in the time of any great Tentation to give them
selves in great earnestnes to the holy exercise of fasting and prayer For
fasting mortifieth the flesh and weakneth the too strong arm of this our
homebred enemy: and prayer viuifieth the spirit and strengthens the same to
the foyling of the flesh. The fasting of the flesh is the feeding of the
spirit, and the subduing of the Body is the renewing of the mind. Well knew
this the blessed Apostle S. Paul who says of himself, that he was wont to
beat down his Body and to bring it in subjection, and that he was exercised
in watching often, 1. Corr. 9.27 2. Corr. 11.27. 2. Corr. 4.10. and 6.6.
in hunger and thirst and fasting often. Every where (says he) we bear about
in our body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus might also be
made manifest in our bodies; by watchings, Exo. 24.28 Deuteronomy. 9.9.^.18. 1. King.
19.7.8 Man. 4.1.2.3
by fastings, by purity. And as we read in holy scripture of the forty day fast
of Moses, Eliah, and of our Saniour Christ, so we read likewise of Daniels
three weeks fast; during the which time, he turned his face unto the Lord God
praying unto him, Dan. 9.3.4 and 10.2.3. Judge. 20.26 1 Samuel 7.6 and 31.13. 2.
Chron. 20.3. Ezr. 8.21. Ierem. 36.9 Jonah. 3.5.6.7.8.9.10.
and making his confession, neither eat he any pleasant bread nor flesh, nor
drank any wine. There likewise we read how that the children of Israel fasted
and confessed their sins at diverse times before the Lord: and the people of
Niniute did humble themselves by fasting, and crying myghtily unto God, who was
appeased toward them and their whole City. David a man after Gods own heart,
and who knew well enough what thing was most agreeable unto God, tells us how
that he often humbled his soul with fasting and praying, his eyes with weeping
and mourning, his knees with bowing, and his whole body with hardlying, and
with fitting in sackloth and ashes. I was clothed with a sack (says he) I
humbled my Soul with fasting, Psa. 31.13.14
and my prayer was turned upon my bosom, I humbled my self mourning as one
that bewaileth his mother. Mine heart is smitten and withers like grass, and
69.10.11
because I forgate to eat my bread. For the voice of my groaning, my bones do
cleave to my skin. Surely I have eaten ashes as bread, and 102.4.5.9. and
109.24.
and mingled my drink with weeping, my knees are weak through fasting, and my
flesh has lost all fatnes. And godly Queen Ester who had heene trained up in
the knowledge and fear of God from her youth, in the time of the great danger
that Gods people were put in by the malicious practices of Haman. She together
with her maids of honor, Est. 4.16 and 14.1.2.3.4.5.6.12.14.19.
spent whole three days and three nights in fasting and prayer. She laid away
her glorious apparel, and put on the garments of sighing and mourning, in the
stead of a precious ointment, she scattered ashes and dung upon her head: and
she humbled her body greatly with fasting, and all the places of her joy filled
she with the hair that she plucked off. And she prayed unto the Lord God of
Israel, saying, O my Lord, thou art our King: help me desolate moman which
have no helper but thee, for my danger is at hand. From my youth up I have
heard in the kindred of my father, that thou, O Lord tookest Israel from among
all people, and our fathers from their predecessors for a perpetual
inheritance, and thou have performed that which thou did dest promise them. Now
Lord, we have sinned before thee: therefore have thou given us into the hands
of our enemies. Think upon us O Lord, and show thy self unto us in the time of
our distress, and strengthen me O King of Gods, and Lord of all power. Deliver
us with thine hand, and help me that am solitary, which have no defense hut
only thee. O thou mighty God above all, hear the voice of them that have none
other hope, and deliver us out of the hand of the wicked, and deliver me out of
my fear. And as Q. Ester and her maids fasted, so did Mordecai, he also rent
his clothes, and put on sackloth and ashes; and in every Proumce and place
whither the Kings charge and commission came (towit for the destruction of the
Jews) there was great sorrow among the Jews, and fasting, and weeping, and
mourning, Est. 4.15.16.17. and 7.10.
and many lay in sackloth and in ashes. Ester and Mordecai by their fasting and
prayer prevailed over Haman the great enemy of Gods people together with his
cruelminded accomplices, Est 9.1.2.3.4.5.13.14.15.16 and 1.11.13.
and disapointed their bloody devises and made him an example that had begun
destruction against them, according to their prayer. For Hama^ had not been
exalted before so high in the Kings court, but ere it was long, he was hanged
as high, even upon a gibbet of fifty cubits height which he had prepared for
godly Mordecai, and so were his ten sons; yea the Jews put all their
enemies to death, even all those that rose against them. And in like manner the
Christian Esters and Mordecaies, even Gods secret ones (for Ester signifies
hidden or secret) and the children of bitter contrition (for Mordecai
signifies bitter contrition) that is, such as do unfeignedly repent them of
their sins by fasting and prayer, they shall prevail over their spiritual
enemies, and disappoynte all their practices and attempts for the compassing of
their spiritual overthrow. Yea and the spiritual Haman for all his hight,
even Satan the professed enemy of all Gods people, and the great troubler and
uproar maker (for so much does the word Haman signify) shall in end be hanged
up on the self same gallous of desperation which he had set up for Christian
Mordecaies, that is, for the mourning children of contrition to hang them upon;
for his drift is, to make all such (by reason of the sight of their sins) to
despair of Gods mercy; but he shall be disappointed: for as I said, he
himself shall hang on his own gibbet, together with his ten children, that is
the whole multitude of the impenitent transgressors of Gods ten commandments,
which shall likewise be hanged upon the tree of eternal comdemnation. And in
the mean time the sorrow of Christ's mourning Mordecaies, Ester 13.17
even of all the repenting children of contrition, shall be turned into joy,
according to godly Mordecaies petition. O Lord (says he) here my prayer and
be merciful unto thy portion, turn our sorrow into joy, that we may live O
Lord and praise thy name: shut not the mouths of them that praise thee. So
that light, and joy, and gladness, and honor shall come unto them (as it did
befall unto the afflicted Jews at that time of Hamans hurtful attempt) even
light in steed of darkness, Est. 8.15.16.17.
solace for sorrow, mirth for mourning, feasting for fasting, deliverance for
danger, fine linen for sackeloth, royal apparel for rags, and in a word,
for dust and ashes, a golden Grown and a royal Diadem. Est. 2.7. and 4.16.
and 14.1.2.3. and 15.4.8
And as the fair and beautiful Queen Ester for all her beauty and majesty
was not ashamed to humble her self before the Lord by fasting and prayer and
sitting in sackloth and athes, so godly Judith who was a Lady much admired for
her beauty of face and wisdom of words, sudith 8.4.5.5.6.7.8
was likewise wont to give her self much to fasting and prayer: so that for
the space of three years and more wherein she was widow, she fasted the most
part of the week, and put on sackloth on her loins, and ware her widows
apparel. Especially before her enterprise against Olofernes the cruel and
tirannous tormenter of Gods people, she humbled her self greatly before the
Lord, who gave her enterprise the desired issue. And truly the confefing and
praising christian, (for Judith signifies praising and confessing) that would
Iudith-like overcome and kill such a strong Captain as the spiritual
Olofernes is (for Olofernes signifies a strong Captain, as he was no less
indeed,) the Christian man or woman I say, that would deceive and destroy the
great deceiuer and destroyer, through the strength of Christ, must be much
addicted to the devout excercises of fasting and prayer. Luke 2.36 37.
Also it is said of Anna the daughter of phanuel that she served God with
fastings and prayer, the whole space of fourscore and four years; in which
doing she did answer unto her name, and proved a gracious woman and even the
godly daughter of a father seeing God; for Phanuel is as much as the force of
God or seeing God: and truly so many as would see God, and take rest (for Anna
signifies gracious as said is, or taking rest) in Gods holy mountain, must in
this life harbor holiness in their hearts, and give them selves to such holy
exercises; Heb. 12.14
for without holiness (says the holy Apostle) noman shall see the Lord. By
prayer and fasting, Devils are cast out, and by prayer and fasting the devil
is overcome: Mat. 17.15 18.19.20.21.
also the flesh (which is Satan's handmaide) is effeebled by fasting, for it
delights in feeding, and by it the world is weakened if not vanquished, for
it deliteth in feasting.

The Christian that would play the good and toward soldier, and prevail over
his spiritual enemy, must pray instantly; for a praying soldier is the best
soldier that can be, he must pray, and pray in the spirit, that is to say,
faithfully and fervently, for God cares not for the effectles prayers of
faithles people. Iere. 11.14. and 14.12.
Of such it is that he says, when they cry unto me in their trouble, I will
not hear them And as the Christian must pray, and pray fervently, so must he
pray continually; for so does the Apostle exhort almost in all his Epistles:
yea and our Savior himself says, Romans 12.^^. Ephe. 6.18. Coll. ^.2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Luke 21.36
Watch and pray continually that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these
things that shall come to pass; and that ye may stand before the Son of man.
Satan walks about us continually, and he roareth continually for his pray;
and therefore the Christian must pray continually, and so by prayer he shall
frustrate the devil of his pray.

The prayer of Moses made the Israelites to prevail, and Amalek to fail: and
the fervent prayer of such as Christ has drawn out of the muddie water of the
world, as Moses was taken up from among the bulrushes by the rivers brink, and
there upon got his name (for Moses signifies drawn forth or taken out) the
prayer of such I say, overthrows spiritual Amalcek (which is by
interpretation striking, Ezod. 2.3.4.5.
siniting or licking) even all the bloody and butcherly smiters and strikers
of men's souls, and the lickers of their blood.

Sampson by prayer recovered his strength, so that he was avenged upon the
Philistims which had put out his eyes, and put him in prison with fetters on
his feet, and made him a laughing stock, after that they had corrupted
Dalilah to deceive him. And if at any time the consuming and deceiving Dalilah
of our flesh (for Dalilah significth a consumer) consume us and deceive us so
far as to make us Sampson-like to sleep upon her knees, that is to say,
lulle us a sleep in the cradle of security, and shave off the hair of our
head, or bereave us of our spiritual strength, and sell us to the Philistims
of our inordinate affections, which will not fail Philistim-like to put out
the eyes of our understanding, and to put fetters upon our feet, so that we
can not walk in the ways of holiness: If I say at an time we run into such a
miserable mishap, and yet speedily thereafter shall return penitently unto God
by fasting and prayer, humbly and heartily entreating him with Sampson to
restore unto us our former strength, we shall not fail with Sampson to kill
more Philistims then ever we did before; that is, to slay more of our sinful
affections then ever we did at any other time else before our fall. And even as
at the prayer of Samuel, 1. Sam. 7.9.10.
the Lord scattered the Philistims, and put them to the flight, yea made them
to fall before Israel: in like manner at the voice of our prayer, the Philistims
of our fleshly affections shall be scattered and overcome, they shall flee and
fall before the face of our inward man, which is the true Israel, which is by
interpretation prevailing with God.

At David's prayer the counsel of Achitophel was turned into foolishnes. 2.
Sam. 15.31. 2. Kin 1.9.10.11.12.
At Eliahs prayer Ahaziahs messengers whom he had sent to apprehend the
Prophet, were consumed with fire from heauen-At Elishas prayer, 2. King 6.18
the host of Benhadad King of Aram sent likewise by him to apprehend the
Prophet, 2. Kin. 13.14.
was stricken with blindenes. Iehoahaz by his prayer was delivered out of the
servitude of Hazaal King of Aram. 2. King 19.15.16.17.18.19.20.35.
Ezekiah by his prayer was aided of Gods mighty Angel against the King of
Ashur, so that there was killed of his enemies in the camp in one night, an
hundredth four score and five thousand. 2 Chronicles. 20.1.10.23
Finally Iehosephat by his prayer moved God to confound his enemies of Moab,
Ammon and mount Seir, in so notable and admirable a manner, that he made them
to kill one another, so that none of the^ escaped. In the which and other the
like examples, we see the great efficacy of prayer for the confusion of
corporal foes: and yet the virtue of it is greater that does appear in the
repressing of the fury, and disappointing of the policy of our spiritual
enemies. For the prayer of the Christian David that is of Gods beloved one (for
David signifies beloved) or of an Eliah or of an Ezekiah, that is, of one that
has the strength of the Lord, or is strong in the Lord by faith (for both
these words or names do import as much as the Lords strength) the fervent
prayer of such a one I say is able to turn our ghostly enemies subtilty into
folishnes, their sharp sight into blindness, their force into feebleness, and
their fury into faintnes; In one word, the faithful man's fervent prayer
confounds their counsels, disapointeth their policies, turns them to
flight, and gives them the foil. And what wonder though that prayer vanquish
the wicked one, seeing that it has often overcome even the good one him self,
1. Ioh 2.13.14. Mat. 9.17. Exo. 32.10.11.12.13.14 Judges 10.10.0.17
I mean God who is only good, and has even changed his mind from the
punishing of his people?

Admirable then is the force and efficacy of fervent prayer, seeing it is able
to vanquishe the devil against his will, and to overcome God with his will. So
that it is not without great cause that the Apostle S. James says, Iame
5.16.17.
that the prayer of the rightcout man avails much, if it beferuent. And no
doubt but that he does commend unto us the diligent practice of prayer when as
he exhorts us thus, Iam. 4 7 8.
Resist the devil, and he will stee from you; draw near to God, and he will
draw near to you. For by pray r the Christian soul does both resist the
devil, and draw near to God; yea by praying and inuoking of his name we
walk with God as Enoch did. Gen 5.22.24.
And if we walk with God, then dare not the devil though hebe the great
walker and compasser of the world, be so bold as to walk with us. If God be
near us, the devil dare not stir us; no, he will flee away from us, and
keep him self a far off.

CAP. 12. Of the putting on of the spiritual armor, and of the keeping on of
it till the end, by perseverance in fighting against sin and inseruing of God.
Now as God has framed and forged this spiritual armor, for his soldiers to
arm them with all; so does he offer it to every one of us; it rests only
that we take it and put it on. Take unto you the whole armor of God (says the
Apostle) that ye may be able to resist in the evil da^. And because it
avails not that we take it, unless we put it on, therefore the same Apostle
exhorts thus, Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the assaults of the devil. Ephe. 6.11.13.
We can not resist in the evil day, or persist against the evil one without
armor, and that Gods armor, such as the heavenly armour-house does afforde,
and without we take it to us, and put it on. And therefore we must not be so
folish as to refuse it when it is offered us, or to lay it aside when as we
should put it on. It were a great folly for the Christian to presume to fight
without it, and even a greater madness, then if a man should go to the wars
without a weapon. So then it behooves of mere necessity that the spiritual
soldier, whom our great capaine Christ Jesus has pressed out to the field to
fight against Satan, the world and the flesh; that I say, he take to him the
armor of God, if he would be able to resist in the evil day; that is in the
day that the evil one would bring him to an evil end by the perpetrating of an
evil action; for such is the devils aim. He must take the armor, and the
whole armor, for a piece or part of it will not serve the turn. The seven
pieces of it are all of them equally requisite for the extirping and quelling
of the seven capital sins; to the end, that the Christian may become a fit
habitacle for the holy ghost, and a meet recep tacle of his seaue^ principal
gifts.

If Satan epsy any part of our spiritual man unarmed, he will not miss to
work us some mischief, and to wound us in that part with one of his darts,
and that in a deadly manner, if he can; and therefore if we wish to fight
without receiving of any deadly wound, whether in the head or in the heart, at
our adversaries hands, we must take heed that we be armed on al parts. And as
the Christian must take this armor, yea this whole armor, so must he take it
to himself, and for himself: take unto you (says the Apostle) meaning that
every man must play the soldier for him self: Be we young or old, men or
women, rich or poor, noble or base, strong or weak, every one of us must
bear armor upon our own back, and fight for him self as Christ has
foughten for us all. Kings and great men have their armourbearers, but
Christians must have none. Kings have men to fight for the^, but Christians
must fight for themselves. 1. Sam. 17.38.39.40.
David could not go out against Goliath in Saul's armor, and therefore he put
it off, and betook him self to his own staff, his sling and his five
stones; to show us, that in the Christian warrefare each man must fight in his
own armor, with his own faith, charity, and hope, and not with another man's.

And as the Christian must take this armor, and this whole armor, and that to
himself, and for himself, and as he must put it on, and not lay it aside, so
must he continually keep it on, and never put it off. For no man can stand
steadfast in the faith, as the Apostle does exhort, except he stand fast in his
armor, Ephe. 6.11.13
and be a steadfast fighter. He that perseuereth to the end shall be saved, and
he that fighteh to the end shall be crowned. And therefore the Apostle, 1. Tim.
6.12
as he exhorts Timothy to fight the good fight of faith, and to lay hold on
cternall life, in so doing: so he speaks thus of him self, the time of his
departing being nere, I have fought a good fight, 2. Tim. 4.6.7.8.
and have finished my course; I have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for
me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give
me at that day, and not to me only, but unto all them that love his appcoring.
Saint Paul's whole life time from the first hour of his conversion to the last
hour of his dissolution was no other thing but as a day of battle; he began
his fight courageously, he continued in fighting constantly, and ended
triamphantly, and so must we.

Satan's fighting is his tempting, wherefore when the Christian is tempted, let
this both comfort him and encourage him, that thereby he knows that he is not
the Devils subject, but Gods soldier, even the Lords warrior, and the Devils
vanquisher: for no King warreth at any time against his own people, but
against his enemies. When the Devil tempts thee, he makes war against
thee, and consequently thou art none of his subjects, but one of Gods servants.
Endeavor therefore to play the part of a valiant warrior, and pretend neither
the fortitude, nor the multitude of thine enemies for excuse. For the greater
that they be for number and strength, the more shall thou overcome, and the
more glorious shall thy victory be, and the greater thy reward. Likewise, this
ought to encourage us to fight; that we have armor forged for us by the
finger of God, and furnished unto us by the holy Spirit out of the heavenly
armor house of the Lord of hosts. For it is he that aideth and assisteth us,
Isay 43.2. Psalm 50.^5. and 121.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8. 2. These 3.3
and furnishes us with strength to stand fast, to fight and to overcome. And
if we be weak, his fatherly wisdom will not over charge us as the Apostle
teaches. 1. Corr 13.13.
There has no temptation taken you (says the Apostle Paul) but such as
appertains to man: and God is faithful, which will not suffer you to be
tempted above that you be able, but will even give the issue with the
temptation that ye may be able to bear it.

And not only does he give us armor and aid in our Christian warfare,
together with a spiritual strength, but likewise he will give us victory over
all our spiritual enemies through our Lord Jesus Christ, as the same Apostle
does deliver. John 4.4.
Little children (says S. John) ye are of God, and have overcome them: for
greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world; that is, then
Satan the Prince of the world, and the lusts of the flesh, and of the eyes
that are in the world. For all that is borne of God ouercometh the world, 1.
Ioh 5.4.5
and this is the victory that ouercometh the world, even our faith. And
therefore the Apostle exhorts men above all to take unto them the shield of
faith, where with they may quench all the fiery darts of the Devil. For it is
even faith in our Lord Jesus Christ that foyleth all our foes, 1. John
2.13.14.15.16.17. and 4 4. and 5.4. Genesis 4 20 2. King 19.6.7. 1. Sam. 17 46 47.
Iuag. 4.14.15.33.
and wins the field.

Abraham faught against Chedar Laomer, and God gave him victory; so did he to
Ezekiah against Senaherib and to Daurd against Goliath and the Philistims, and
to Debora against Sisera the Captain of Iahin King of Canaan; and if we prove
the children of Abraham by being followers of his faith, and workers of his
works, God shall give us victory against the spiritual Chedar Laomer, which
is by interpretation the generation of bondage, even against our fleshsly
affections which would bring us into bondage spiritually and eternally.

If we endeavor to be Ezekiahs that is, men endued with the strength of the
Lord by faith and holiness, then the spiritual Senaherib which is as much as
the bra^ble of destruction, shall be brought to destruction, together with the
ravling Rabsakehs of our raging affections, even these miserable
master-drinkers (for so much does the word Rabsakeh signify) which drink in
sin as the fish do water. If we be deuote like David and even of the Lords
beloved ones (for David signisieth beloved) then the spiritual Galiah which is
the great Captain of captivity, shall be conquered by the means of the stone
of Christ crucified thrown or flung against his forehead out of the sling of
an effectual faith; and the Philistims of our affections, which are the
authors of our double decay, even in Soul and body (for Philistim as I said
abouesi, gnifieth a doubledecay) shall be discomfited; Finally if we prove such
laborious and dilligent Bees in drawing the honey of holiness out of the sweet
dewy floweres of Christian virtues, as Deborah was (which is by interpretation
a Be) we shall not fail to triumph over the spiritual Iabin, the building
Tyrant of wickedness (for Iabin was a Tyrant, and signifies building) and
over all his Siseras, even over all our sins. So that as when the Lord gave
victory unto the people of Israel over Pharaoh and his people, Exodus 15.
then Moses and the Israelites sung a song of praises: In like manner, when as
we have got the victory over the spiritual Pharaoh through the strength of
Christ, then shall we sing the song of Moses and the song of the Lamb: The
Lord is my strength and praise (shall the victorious Christian say) and he is
become my salvation, he is my God and my father, and I will exalt him. The Lord
is a man of war, his name is Jehovah, spiritual Pharaos Chariot, his host,
and his chosen Captains, even all his hellish hang-men has he drowned in the
red sea of his indignation; the depths of fire and Brimstone have covered them,
they shall sink to the bottom as a stone. Thy right hand O Lord is glorious
in power, thy right hand O Lord, has bruised the enemy: the Lord shall reign
for ever and ever. O death, where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? O
sin where is thy sovereignty? O Satan where is thy power and policy? O hell
where is thy tyranny?

Thanks be unto God which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ, 2. Cori. 15.55.57.
Amen.

CAP. 13. Of Gods ample rewarding of such as fight against sin valiamly, and
continue in his service constantly unto the end.
Never was there any servant so well rewarded of his master for his service,
nor soldier in the field so largely remunerated of his General for his valor
and warly prowess, as shall be Gods servant and soldier for his towardnes and
forwardnes in serving of God, and in fighting against sin and Satan. We
read how Caleb rewarded Othniel for smiting and taking of the town of Debir,
in giving him Achsach his daughter to wife, Josh. 13.15.16.17.18.19.20.
together with fields and springs of water with her for an inheritance. And how
Saul rewarded David for foyling the Philistims by giving him likewise his
daughter Michal to wife, 1. Sam. 17.25. and 28.27.
together with much riches. And if we prove valiant in the spiritual warrefare
and in fighting Gods battles against the Philistims of our fleshly affections,
and against the master Philistim, the spiritual Goliath, the great Captain of
spiritual captivity (as the name does bear) we shall not miss to be
honored with the marriage of the Lamb in the land of the living, which shall
be our inheritance; where we shall be arrayed with pure fine linen and shining,
for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints says S. John even he who saw
the warriers of Christ following him upon white horses clothed with fine linen
white and pure; giving us thereby to understand that the Christian then fights
most valiantly against Satan, when as he endeavors to lead and live a pure
and an unspotted life. And here in true religion does chiefly stand as S. James
teaches Pure religion (says he) and undefiled before God even the father, is
this, to visit the fatherles, and widows in their adversity, and to keep him
self unspotted of the world. White is the color of purity, of grace and of
glory; and therefore it is, that S. John saw none carried in heaven upon white
horses, and arrayed in the white shining robes of glory, but such as had here
on earth covered their inward man with the white linen of an unspotted life,
or at least had washed out the spots and blots of their misbehauiour, with the
salt tears of contrition. So that he that has not worn and borne the white
of integrity and purity, in and on his heart here in this life, shall not
attain to be adorned and decored with the white pearlie Diadenie of glory
upon his head after this life The which thing the holy Psalmist does likewise
teach in these words; Psalm 24.3.4.5.6.
Who shall aseende into the mountain of the Lord? and who shall stand in his
holy place? even he that has innocent hands, and a pure heart: which has not
lift up his mind unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive a
blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation. This is
the generation of them that seek him, of them that seek thy face. None shall
stand in Gods holy mountain, but such as have here harbored holiness in their
hearts; Heb. 12.14
for without holiness no man shall see the Lord, says the Apostle; and the man
that seeks not Gods face here, shall not see his face hereafter.

And as the good servants of God shall be clothed with fine white linen in
sign of purity and integrity, so shall they bear palms in their hands in
sign of victory and felicity. And therefore blessed S. John saw those that
stood before the throne, Revel. 7.9.
and before the Lamb, not only clothed with long white robes, but also having
palms in their hands.

K. Belshazzar commanded Daniel to be clothed with purple, Dan. 5.16.29
and a chain of gold to be put about his neck, and made him to be proclaimed
the third ruler in the kingdom for his wisdom, in reading the writing of the
Angel upon the wall, and in showing the interpretation thereof. And Joseph for
his exceeding great wisdom, showed in expounding of Pharaos dream was so
highly honored, Genesis 41.40 41.42.43. Psalm. 105 17.18.19.20.21.22.
that the king took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph's
finger, and arrayed him in garments of fine linen, and put a golden chain
about his neck, and set him over his house, and over the whole land, and made
him to sit upon the best Charet he had save one.

And no doubt but the King of Kings will highly honor his good servants that
have honored him in this life, according to his promise, saying, 1. Samu. 2.30.
Them that honor me I will honor. He will even honor his Daniels and his
Joseph's, that is, all his vprightand perfect ones (for Joseph signifies perfect)
which do begin in their young years with Daniel and Joseph to serve and
honor him, and do constantly continue in his service still increasing and
growing in grace and in godliness, and always aiming at Christian perfection
whereunto our Savior does exhort us, saying, Ye shall therefore be perfect as
your Father which is in heaven, Mat. 5.46.
is perfect. The King of Egypt took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon
Joseph's, and arrayed him in garments of fine linen, and put a gold chain about
his neck, and the King of Kings will one day say unto his servants concerning
such a man as has served him with an upright heart, Luk 15.22.23.
Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and
shoes on his feet; bring forth the white wedding garment with the rest of the
nuptial ornaments, and let him be clothed, and adorned therewith, and let him
sit down to feast at the table of God (will he say) for such is his promise.
Reave. 7.11 17.28. and 3.5.
To him that ouercometh (says the Lord Jesus to St. John) will I give to eat
of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God: he that
ouercometh shall not be hurt of the second death. To him that ouercometh will I
give to eat of the Manna that is hid, and will give him a white stone, and in
the stone a new name written, which no man knows saving he that receaueth it:
Even as I received of my father, so will I give him the morning star. He that
ouercometh, shall be clothed in white array, and I will not put out his name out
of the Book of life, but I will confess his name before my father, and before
his Angels. King Pharao set Joseph upon the best charet he had save one, but
our king will honor his good and perfect servant yet in an higher manner;
Revel. 3.21
To him that ouercometh (says our king Christ Jesus) will I grant to sit with
me in my throne, even as I overcame, and sit with my father in his throne
Finally as Joseph was set over Pharaohs house, and over the whole land of
Egypt; so God will make his good and perfect servant ruler of all his goods.
Revel. 2.26 27. and 3.12.
To him that ouercometh (says he) will I give power over nations, and he shall
rult them with a rod of iron: and as the vessels of a potter shall they be
broken. Him that ouercometh will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God, and
he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the
name of the City of my God which is the new Jerusalem, which comes down out
of heaven from my God, and I will write upon him my new name. Even thus shall
it be don unto the man that has served Christ constantly by holiness and newnes
of life; for the new name and the new Jerusalem, and the new wine the spirit of
God speaks of in the scripture, are ordained only for new creatures. And
therefore the Apostle does exhort thus; 2. Corr. 5.17
If any man be in Christ, let him be a new creature: thereby giving us to
understand, that no man after this life shall see Christ in the new Jerusalem;
but he that in this life has followed his footsteps by newnes of life. And
this is that thing which is intimated unto us by the evangelical Prophet S.
John when as he tells us that he saw all things made new. Revel. 21.1 2.^ and
19.7.8 9 and 14.3.
For he saw a new heaven, and a new earth, and a new Jerusalem, coming down
from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride trimmed for her husband. He saw
the lambs wife arrayed with pure fine linen which was likewise new, and the
supper which he saw made for the marriage of the Lamb, was in like manner new;
for he that sat upon the throne said, behold I make all things new. And as
the things which he saw with his eyes were new, so the music which he heard
with his ears was semblably new; for he heard a new song sung by the harpers
of God upon a ten stringed instrument. And therefore questionles S. John saw
none invited to that new marriage to eat of that new banquet, and to drinck of
that new wine with Christ in the new Jerusalem, to wear that new wedding
garment, and to receive the impression of that new name, and in one word, to
hear the joyful melody of that new music; but such as did here in this old
earth (where all things are old) indeauoure to be new creatures by newnes of
life. As for all old creatures, that is, such as do follow the crooked
footsteps of old Adams corruption by carnalitie and sensuality, and are not
made new by the renouation of the holy ghost, after the likeness of the new
Adam, when al old things shall pass away, they shall perish and pass away
likewise with them. Psalm 125.1
But the new creture shall be as mount Si on which cannot be removed, but
remains for ever, and shall enjoy all the new things above named. Reave. 21.7
for he that ouercometh (says our great Captain Christ Jesus) shall inherit
all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my son. Est. 6.8.9.10.11
and 8.2.15.
Mordecaie for his fidelity and good service, at the appointment of king
Ahasuerosh, was arrayed in royal apparel, in white, purple and blew, and a
ring of gold was put on his finger, and a crown of gold was set upon his
head, and he him self was set to ride upon the kings horse through the street
of the city of Shushan, and they proclaimed before him, Thus shall it be done
unto the man whom the King will honor; and the city of Shushan rejoiced and
was glad. In like manner our great Ahasuerosh, our great Prince and head (for
Ahasuerosh, signifies a Prince or head, as he was indeed a great prince) he
will exalt and honor all his good and well deserving Mordecaies even all the
children of contrition (for Mordecaie signifies so much) which have in this
life honored God by their holy living, and have humbled them selves under his
hand for their sins. No, the Christian that has played the good servant and
stout soldier in fighting manfully under Christ's Banner against sin and
Satan, and has perseuered in his service unto the end, and consequently has
overcome, he shall not miss of a far more glorious reward by a thousand
degrees then ever king Ahasuerosh could give. The royal apparel that this
king gave Mordecaie was no better then a rag, if it be compared with the good
Christians glorious wedding garment: and what is a kings corruptible crown
being compared with the incorruptible Crown of glory, which shall be set upon
the head of the heavenly minded man in the kingdom of heaven? for the crown
that we run, and serve and fight for, is an incorruptible crown, 1. Corr.
9.25.
so does blessed S. Paul call it, and likewise the great Apostle S. Peter who
calls it the incorruptible crown of glory. 1. Pet 5.4.
S. James calls it the crown of life. Iame 1.12
Blessed is the man (says he) that endures Tentation, for when he is tried,
he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that
love him. Reut. 2.10.
So does blessed S. John or rather our Savior him self call it in the
Revelation, Be thou faithful unto the death (says he) and I will give thee
the crown of life. In one word, the crown that shall be set upon the good
Christians head, is the crown of life, immortality and glory, which he shall
wear in the kingdom of heaven, which is the place of life, immortality and
glory.

Thus then we see how that temptation is to the godly the high way of heavenly
happiness and honor: Let the Christian then endure temptation and he is
blessed, and let him overcome temptation and he shall be Crowned, and that with
an incorruptible Crown.

Thus shall he one day, being arrayed in fine white linen, ride Mordecay-like,
upon a fair white horse, with a Crown of incorruptible Gold upon his head;
Reu. 19.13 14.
(for Saint John saw Christ's warriors thus arrayed, riding upon white Horses)
he shall I say ride through the streets of Shushan, which is above, Ester.
6.10.11. and 8.15.16.
and is the true City of ioyfulnes, more fair and sweeter a thousand fold
then the Lilly or the Rose (for Schushan signifies a Lilly or Rose, or
ioyfulnes) and Gods Heralds shall proclaim before him: Thus shall the
perseuering Christian be honored in Heaven, who has honored God on Earth.
And the City of Shushan which is above, even the holy City new Jerusalem,
Revel 21.2 11. etc.
which Saint John saw discending out of heaven from God, having the glory of
God and shining as a Iasper-stone clear and precious, whose wall is of Jasper,
and the street of pure Gold, and the foundations of twelve precious stones,
and the Gates of twelve pearls, and has no need of Sun or Moon to shine
in it, for the Lamb is the light of it; and whereinto no unclean thing can
enter: even this selfsame glorious City shall be glad and rejoice in the day
that our great Kings well deserving Mordecaies shall go through the street
thereof in royal apparel of red and white, with a great Crown of
incorruptible gold upon their heads. Finally, Est. 8.16.17.
that day shall be a feast day for Men and Angels, and God himself shall be
the great Master of the feast, where they shall eat of the fruit of the Tree
of life, which is in the mids of the Paradise of God, Reu. 27.17 and 7.17.
and 21.6. and 22.1.
and of the hidden Manna, and drink of the water of life, which Saint John saw
clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb: even
such a water as is sweeter then the sweetest wine, and is both water and wine,
and both the best water and the best wine that ever either well or vine did
yield, or yet any man did ever drink. All men at the first set forth good
wine, but God shall bring forth the best wine last: Reave. 21.5. Mat. 26.29
for he that makes all things new, shall also make a new wine for the marriage
feast of the Lamb and his Spouse. Only it belongs to us to make our selves
new vessels for the receiving of this new wine, by newnes of life; for if no
man puts new wine into old vessels, Math. 9.17
as our Savior says, then truly God will much less put his new wine into
old vessels. And therefore if we desire to drink of this new wine, in the
new Jerusalem, and in the Celler of God; let us now endeavor to put on the new
man, (as I said before) which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness, Ephe. 4.23.24.
according as the Apostle exhorts, and so in that great feast day, we shall
sit down at his Table and his fruit shall be sweet unto our mouth, he shall
bring us into his wine-celler, Cant. 2.3.4.5
and Love shall be his Banner over us, and the Christian Soul shall then say
unto our Spouse, stay me with flaggons, and comfort me with apples; for I am
sick of love.

Thus in the kingdom of heaven the godly shall see and hear nothing but
sweetness, and ioyfulnesse; nothing but love, life, and light. Revel.
21.4.5.6. and 2.7.
Then there shall be no more sorrow, for God shall cheer us; no more pain,
for Christ shall ease us: no more weeping nor crying, for Christ shall comfort
us, and wipe away all tears from our eyes; nor no more death, for God will
give us to cate of the tree of life, and to drink of the water of life. He
will give us water, but yet such a water as shall be wine, and a sweeter water
then the sweetest wine, as I have already said. To conclude, if earthly wine
has such a property to make glad the heart of man, how much more shall this
heavenly wine rejoice the soul of man? and what marvel though that such new
heavenly wine, make the glorified Soul sing a new heavenly song, even a new
Halleluiah Let us be glad and roioyce, and give glory to him? Chiefly when as
we shall hear our sweet Savior inuiting us in this manner. Eat o friends,
drink and make you merry o well-beloved: drink (shall he say) even the spiced
wine, and new wine of the pomegranate: and it being the time appointed for the
consummation of the Godlies joy, by him who has said it: I will create
Jerusalem as a rejoicing, and her people as a joy; and I will rejoice in
Jerusalem, and joy in my people. God shall then joy in us, and we shall joy in
him, with joy unspeakable and glorious: For the things which eye has not
seen, neither ear has heard, neither came into men's heart, are which God
has prepared for them that love him:

To whom alone be glory.

FINIS.
LONDON

Printed by E. Alde, for Ed. White dwelling nere the little north-dore of
Paul's, at the sign of the Gun. 1612.


