THE VICKERS CHALLENGE. CLAIMING A MAINTENANCE AS DVE BY PROOFS OVT OF THE
GOSPEL.

Wherein is manifested, that there is a Competencie due unto them.

By IOS: MEENE, Vicker.

LONDON: Printed, And are to be sold by Nicholas Vavasour, at his shop in the
Inner Temple near the Church. 1640.

Deo Optimo Maximo Patri, Filio, Spiritui Sancto, Deo Trino and uni;
Cui Ecclesia cognita and chara, tanquam oculi pupilla: and a quo ejus Ministri
duplici honor digni habentur; Sacrilegii autem Iudici justissimo, vindici
infensissimo:
Minuta duo cum vidua illa paupercula in Evangelio; seu potius minutum unum
piae volu^tatis caetera omnia minuta comprehendens idem etiam ipsum hoc
sequenti opusculo complexum, in gazophylacium divinum humillime mittit
humillimus, minimus in Divinis Minister.

Joshua Mien.

To the judicious and indifferent Reader, etc.
A Preface apologeticall.
THere are sundry learned and religious Treatises extant in the behalf of the
Clergy for their competent maintenance, and touching their right unto the
tithes.

To omit the Ancients and forreigue Authors, observe how no few of our own
Nation have labored in this necessary and pious subject: as the right Reverend
Fathers in God, the Lord Bishop Andrews, the Lord Bishop Carlton, etc.

Moreover, the right Worshipful Sir Henry Spilman, Sir James Sempell, Doctor
Tillessie, Doctor Mayer, Doctor Rives, Master Hooker, Master Roberts: from some
of whose Works in this kind, I do freely acknowledge my self to have received
no small furtherance.

There are likewise other famous Writers besides, which although altogether
unknown to me, shall nevertheless with these spoken of, be immortalized by
their devout and solid lines to this purpose. Although alas too true it is,
that through the deep-rooted corruption of this deplorate season, their
excellent endeavors this way have not attained a wished event. Whereupon some
may censure my pains herein at this present, as audacious and fruitless.

Yet I conceive it cannot be amiss to continue discourse in a case of that
consequence: neither is it reason to leave our just claim, whiles we
wrongfully lose our true right.

Moreover, the bringing of the matter into frequent mention (though in a weaker
manner) may prove a successful means to make those godly and judicious
Authors to be better read over and again revolved, whose arguments well
considered will appear sufficient to confound the adversary, and to end the
controversy. It may also put men of the best ability in mindeto manage the
business.

Further the manifold dangers of execrable facriledge ought to stir up every
competent person to devise and apply all possible remedies against her
perilous overspreading.

Surely the profane supposall that it was never divinely appointed for the
Ministers of the Gospel to be mayntained with tithes, etc. But to live as it
were, upon stipendarie Alms, is an error inweeded in the minds of no few
folks of more then ordinary wealth and place.

And the accursed contagion thereof does daily diffuse it self far and near,
yea, and that not seldom, into worser degrees.

Insomuch that now no few fear not nor blush to find fault with the payment
of the tenths, not only nuder cavil of an obliterate and cancelled Judicial
current amongst the Israelites: but also under discredit of a Leviticall and
unlawful Ceremony, disanulled at the coming of Christ.

This grievous mischief in these perverse times seems grown to that great
height, that now any parcel of a Sermon in the right of the Church, though
never so properly deduced from the text, and never so piously intended,
procures for the most part, a common hatred and uncharitable scandal of a
covetous and trouble some man.

I could exemplify thus much without traveling far from my own Parish, and
with no little sorrow show at large what a world of unconscionable customs,
and compositions are most obstinately, and overpowringly maint ained against
the Church, by fockes of eminent wealth, and credit, besides the ordinary
ranks.

Moreover I might mention, that no less ridiculous then injurious wresting of
the Statute of case of tithe wood, that the Mother freeth the Daughter, namely
if the body be above twenty years old, then the top, although put to firing
must be freed from tithing; which most unjust absurdity findoth,
notwithstanding no few Patrones, even amongst some of the Law-professours, to
the extreme prejudice of the Gospel.

I might yet remember some worser matter, namely glebelands detained by sundry
persons of no small wealth and esteem in this world, from the Church,
appearing nevertheless upon record, Terriers, and other sufficient
testimonies, ploinely to belong thereunto.

Surely when as I seriously consider the worldly wisdom, wealth and place
relucent in some of those that deal thus unjustly with the Church: Behold the
charitoblest construction, which I can make of their actions, is to fear they
are unfortiuately lapsed into the foresaid error against tithing, etc. And so
whiles they pretand only to allow us necessaries, they unconscionably leave us
to all extremities.

Finally, the publishing of this Treatise proceeds not forth without the
private encouragements of some of my learned brethren of the Clergy.

To conclude, the most gracious God seems in these days to have in a
specialler manner compassionately looked upon the calamitous estate of his
oppressed Church, by sending us a Prince very propitiously inclined for her
good: He has also vouchsafed us many pious Prelates; noble and honorable
personages, Judges, Lawyers, and some other Eaymen of no little worth, devoutly
tendering in their proper ranks, therelief and right of the Church.

Neither is the paternall good will of my religiously indulgent Diocesan to
succor my distressed Vicaridge a matter of small moment to animate. Moreover
the courteous favor of that learned and virtuous Knight Sir Nathanael Brent in
this kind to my self in particular, besides others. I may justly add the
good Offices done me this way, by our Right Worshipful Archdeacons in this
Diocese, Doctor Binge and Master White: Also the free and honest counsel in
this case of Doctor Talbot, indeared unto the Clergy by his affection, and
fidelity toward them.

Last of all, the promised assistance of my very worthy friend and wonted
refuge, in many malevolent and Sacrilegious projects, and practices against me
in my Parish, namely the Right Worshipful Master Thomas Talbot Esquire, etc.
the glory of the place were he lives.

The general condolement and clamor, through the whole Country, of all well
affected children of the Church. (which know this miserable Vicaridge) at the
extreme disproportion between the great burden of the Cure, and the poor
pittance of the means to sustain it with.

Surely, none of these premises but have some force and weight: And therefore
all of them considered together, cannot but prove very ponderous to induce, and
persuade me for Sions sake not to hold my peace, and remain silent: But
rather (in the willingly acknowledged weakness and slenderness of my
abilities) to employ my best endeavors, as a dutiful Son, in the humble
service of our holy and venerable Mother the Church.

And in all reverence and lowliness of mind, I cheerfully submit them unto
the Censure of my Ecclesiastical Superiors.

Farewell in the Author of all welfare, Christ Jesus; to whom, with the Father
and the Holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be all honor and glory for
evermore. Amen.

Thy Servant in the Lord, Joshua Meene.

1 Cor. 9 chap. part of the 9 verse. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox
that treads out the corn.


THe Ox knows his owner (the Prophet Jsaiah expresses) I might thus invert
the words in a mystical sense; Many an owner knows not his Ox. For if he
did take meet notice of him as he ought, it would be a means to make him change
the company of his cruel muzzles, into competent maintenance.

But as a righteous man regards the life, of his beast, so the bowels of the
wicked are cruel, Solomon shows. These times of Church-robberie might in
some sort be said to resemble the season of Jobs calamity; The Oxen were
plowing, and the Asses feeding besides them.

It falls out in these days of ours quite contrary unto the discourse, Genesis
41. of King Pharaohs dream: for behold the fat Oxen, the high fleshed Bulls
of Bashan do eat up the lean ones by devouring their due means. How should
they then be strong to labor, that there be no breaking in nor going out, no
complaining in our streets, Psalm. 144.

Let us pray the Lord of the great harvest, Luke 10. that he would send forth
laborers into his field, and into his Barn, and that they may be liberally
allowed whatsoever is requisite for their painful places. And that through his
grace, the men of this world may be drawn and moved to practice this divine
precept: Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn.

Our Apostle here appears like that excellent householder in the Gospel,
which brings forth out of his treasury things new and old: for when as he had
alleged, what liberty he might have justly assumed to himself in sundry
other particulars; lo he proceeds to a further instance touching that
freedom he could also rightly take, by virtue of his ministerial function,
in the matter of maintenance.

To warrant the goodness of this his claim and interest, he seems to fetch
aid and support out of the old Testament. For confirmation of this point, to
raise likewise fit supplies of fresh forces to the same purpose out of the new.

The sense of the words, and the several parts of this Text shall receive
their dispatch together.

Observe then first the commander, secondly, the person commanded: thirdly, the
command it self: fourthly, the reason of the command.

1 Touching the Commander. If we consider him as he is supreme; behold he is
the eternal Lawgiver. But if we regard him as he is subordinate, then we must
remember Moses his servant.

2 Touching the person commanded in the word thou, let us comprehend in this
circumstance, primarily the children of Israel: secondarily, all people.

3 Touching the command it self in this clause, shall not muzzle the mouth of
the Ox. Aquinas admonishes to understand this sentence: first literally of
Oxen, which Ainsworth affirms, are here named but for an instance, all other
sorts of laboring and useful beasts being likewise meant under that term:
secondly, spiritually, of the Ministers of the world, the may in no sort be
muzzled. Or at the Chaldee Paraphrast renders it, have their mouths tied up
with the cruel cords of sacrilege.

The sense for the Oxen is plain as the words sound, (says Abulensis) but yet
it is not the principal; for the sense which concerns the Ministers is
chief, and especially intended of the holy Ghost.

4 Touching the reason of the command thus rehearsed, that treads out the
corn; or as others read it, when he treads, in his treading or threshing:
In those days flayles were not in use, but the feet of beasts, Hos. 10. other
whiles wheels, sometime stones, Isa. 28.

One of the Hebrew Rabbines records a law current in that nation, with a
penalty upon the offending person; How the beast must not be hindered from
feeding in his plowing, sowing, reaping the crop, treading out the corn,
carriage of burdens, etc. All which (Expositours write) must be mystically
reflected upon the Evangelicall Priests. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the
Ox, etc.

The doctrine from the premises may be collected in this form: The Ministers
of the Gospel which labor in getting out and exhibiting the grain of Gods
word unto the people, must in no wise be debarred from the means of their meet
maintenance in that respect.

For proof of this point: first, we will muster up together the arguments of
our Apostle in this present chapter: secondly, we will adjoyne some
collateral places for confirmation of the premises: thirdly, we will
express the certainty of our proposition from the nature and exigencie of the
place of the Ministry: fourthly, we will declare the truth of this doctrine
from the duenesse of tithes by divine right to the Ministers of the Gospel:
fifthly, we will prove the point by discourse of the unequal condition of
Impropriations: sixthly, we will demonstrate our observation from the recital
of sundry inconveniences, which are incurred through defect of its due
execution.

A threefold cord is not quickly broken, was part of King Salomons Sermon.
Ecclesiastes 4. the same strength in persuasion befalls this sixefold
combination. Thou shall not muzzle. etc.

1 We will muster up together the arguments of our Apostle in this present
chapter: wherein we might not amiss profess, how he unclaspeth a double
volume touching the case; namely, the book of nature, and the book of Gods
word.

In the book of nature, first we may behold him arguing the matter with an
assembly of similitudes gathered together from the vocations of war and
peace, verse 7. Who goes a warfare at any time at his own charges? who
planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a
flock, and eats not of the milk of it?

As then soldiers have deservedly their due stipends: as husbandmen reap
their answerable fruits: as shepherds receive their pastoral profits: Surely
so must the spiritual Ministers, the chariots and horsemen of Israel, the
Captains of Christian companies under the great General our Lord Jesus, have
their full pay and wages. So must the mystical husbandmen in the Vineyard and
Garden of his Church, freely participate of the grapes and fruits of their
pains and plantations. So must the shepherds of men's souls receive meet
benefit from among their tended flocks, and be fed with the milk of nurcing
fathers and nurcing mothers breasts.

As the Soldier meriteth his military stipend, the vineyard-planter his wine,
the Shepherd his wool: So must the spiritual Pastors (representing all these
callings in a diverse kind) be thought to deserve, and indeed receive liberal
recompense for their labors.

2. Herein we might see our Apostle making his matter good from the manner of
other Teachers: their example he assumeth as sufficient evidence for himself.
Since their practice was to take of the people means for their maintenance,
and it was a lawful course for them so to do; The consequence then seemed
very good and justifiable for him to use no less liberty.

Yea being a chief Apostle, a principal Teacher, he appeared to have so much
the more license herein the sundry ordinary Ministers. Thus verse 12. If others
be partakers of this power over you, are not we rather?

Dux milite major, ratem qui temperat, anteit remigis officium: If the common
Soldier may justly challenge a competent part of the spoil, then may the
General well expect a richer portion, a prey of diverse colors of needleworke,
Judges 5. And if the Mariner can rightly claim any privilege, then can the
Pilot lawfully demand matters of more pre-eminence.

So where a simple Priest has a sufficient interest, much more an Apostle, a
Prelate has a title in a higher degree prevalent.

2 In the book of Gods word, Saint Paul does assure this matter with an
invincible power of divine decrees. Say J these things as a man (he
expostulateth) or says not the law the same also? for it is written, he
shows, in the law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that
treads out the corn.

Does God take care for Oxen? or says he it altogether for our sakes? no doubt
this is, that he that ploweth should plow in hope, and he that thresheth in
hope, should be partaker of his hope, verses. 8.9.10.

The Apostle here appears with a Prolepsis in his speeches; for he preventeth
that objection, which some might perchance oppose against these similitudes
assumed from worldly things, because of the difference of humane matters from
divine: wherefore he confirms the dictate of natural reason with the
determination of the law of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 25.

The argument is drawn in this place, first, from the lesser to the greater:
if Gods providence be thus good and gracious toward Oxen, surely then it
shines in a more excellent manner of care for the children of men.

His statute touching Oxen, Saint Ambrose tells us, was not intended there to
stay, and to stretch no further; but it meant more especially humane creatures,
most of all the Ministers of the Gospel.

When as then the eyes of all living wights wait upon the Lord, and he gives
them their meat in due season, he opens his hand and sarisfieth the desire of
every creature: he gives to the beast his food, and to the young Ravens that
cry, he causes the grass to grow for the cattle, he sends the Springs
into the valleys to give them drink, and that the wild Asses may quench their
thirst. He appoints the fowls of the heaven their habitation, which sing
among the branches, the Cedars to make their nests, and for the Storke an house
of fur trees: the high hills a refuge for the wild Goats, and the rocks for
the Conies, as we read in the Psalmist. Besides, the Sparrowes, (two of which
are sold for a farthing) be under his protection, Matthew. 6. yea, he has
vouchsafed to make a solemn law and constitution in the behalf of oxen for
their allowance.

Certainly then his pleasure is plain, his precept is perpetual, that the
spiritual oxen of the Clergy, which labor in the field of his Church, must
never be muzzled from enjoying the just means of their painful places.

If under the example of the Ox (as Rabbi Solomon infers) a due provision
of sustence for every laboring beast is enacted, and no unequal dealing
touching them dispensed with.

Behold then the Ecclesiastical toylers must do it in hope, and follow their
work with fruition of reward: yea indeed ruling well, and being diligent in
word and doctrine, be counted worthy of double honor, for the Scripture says,
Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out the corn, and the labourer is
worthy of his reward, 1 Timothy 5.

Thus the bruit beasts (as Athanasius and Chrysostom also conceive) which at
first were made for the use of men, are like wise here mentioned not so much
for themselves, as most for their sakes. Thou shall not muzzle, etc.

2 Our Apostle evinceth his assertion by undeniable terms of comparison, or he
draws an argument from the greater to the less: Jf we have sown unto you
spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things,
verse 11. As if he should have said, if we provide for your souls, it is a
poor recompense that you should provide for our bodies, because as the soul
far way excels the body, so the food for the soul very much surmounteth
the price and worth of bodily sood.

If we of the Ministry bring you bags which wax not old, a treasure in the
heavens that fails not, whereas neither thiese approaches, nor moath
corrupts, Luke 12. Then open your earthly purses, grudge not your transitory
treasures in that manner which Almighty God has commanded for our maintenance.

If we bring you Matthew. 13. that one pearl of great price; that invaluable
treasure hid in a field; lose it not then by sparing of cost, cast it not away
for fear of charge, but imitate that devout and wise Merchant man there
commended, who forsook and sold any worldly thing he had, for to buy that
field, to purchase that goodly pearl.

Quae vos nobis rependitis nequaquam collatis in vos beneficiis respondent: nos
aterna, spiritualiae, coelestia offerimus; vos fluxa, temporalia, caduca,
fragilia refertis. Alas would men make an impartial estimate in this matter,
they would soon then conclude with themselves, that there is no proportionable
comparison between those good things they bring to their Pastors, and those
glad tidings brought by their Ministers unto them, between the bread of the
earth, and the bread of heaven, between the meat which perishes, and the meat
which indureth.

Quis ignorant spiritualia carnalibus esse multo praestantiora? what is the
temporal tithe which Parishioners return their Priests, if we consider the
eternal truth which the Priests teach their Parishioners? what, seems the
sheaves of corn to stand in any terms of worth with their sentences of
comfort? how vile appear their payments to the virtue of their prayers? how
poor are their offerings to the price of their orations? O fortunatos nimium,
bona sisua norint, agricolas! Oh happy country men if they knew their own
advantage in this change; if they would well count what huge and heavenly odds
of gain they get by reason of this permutation!

Let me expostulate a little with them to inform them aright. Is the expense of
corruptible Mammon equivalent to the purchase of celestial Sermons? Is the
gift of glebes of answerable value to the gain of godliness? are Lammas
profits of like excellency as the fruits of Paradise?

Can the contents of this present wilderness countervaile the commodities of
the land of promise? does dross equal gold? will water match wines? may earth
mate heaven? can vanity compare with eternity?

Surely, I would wish those worldly minded persons, which presume upon such
disproportionable paradoxes, to anoint their eyes with eye salve, that they
may see, Apocalypse 3. Then they will not only soon discern an infinite
distance between the virtue and worth of these severals, but moreover
certainly determine touching this point, Romans 15. If they have been made
partakers of their spiritual things, their duty also is to minister unto them
in carnal things, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth, etc.

3 Our Apostle fortifieth his case with an argument from Gods ordinance in this
wise; Do not ye know that they which minister about holy things, live of the
things of the Temple? and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the
Altar? even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel, verses 13.14.

What God the Father primarily constituted in this case, was not afterward
cancelled by God the Son, says Aretius, for there is the same reason always
subsisting of conserving the worship of God. And that indeed was amongst all
nations (he notes) by a public maintenance. This public work requires
public wages, Aquinas writes.

Wherefore some have here supposed, how the condition of this place has a
twofold reflection, namely upon the Priests of the Lord, and the Priests of the
Gentiles. Ipsa naturalis ratio hoc habet, ut quis inde vivat unde laborat:
Saint Ambrose affirms, how even natural reason alleges thus much, that
folks must look to live of that function, wherein they labor.

By a divine law in the old Testament, the Ministers had a public and
certain provision of means ordained for their liberal maintenance, therefore
much more the Ministers of the new Testament, because their Ministry is the
most excellent.

The Priests of the Heathens had likewise this privilege; good reason then
that the Priests of the Christians should receive herein no less, but rather a
large allowance.

If any would plead, why pretend you the Law of Moses unto us, who are not now
obliged to these antiquated rules living under the Gospel?

Behold Saint Paul in this place opposes against them the divine appointment
afresh: But if they replied, when did that appear? we answer, even in that
season, when our Savior Christ sent forth his Disciples, inhibiting them to
make provision for their own selves, as most due unto them from others in
regard for their labor and pains: threatening also such as welcomed them not
in this contribution besides attention.

Calvin here collected how the Ministers, should not live on those whom they
teach, as depending upon alms (according to the error of the Anabaptists) but
upon the Gospel.

For the Lord says Theophylact, has so determined the matter, by enacting in
the new Testament. Laws conformable to the old. So that after what manner he
had anciently set down, that he who serves about the Altar, must live of the
Altar.

So now he likewise shows, how the Evangelicall Preachers, must not live
barely of the peoples allowance, but of the Gospel, least perchance their
auditors would wax proud and domineering over them, through aswelling conceit,
that they had their means from them, and so were beholding unto them.

The maintenance then of the Ministry (it is here manifest) ought not to be
eleemosynarie, or upon benevolence: but a settled and affixed portion: namely
the tith of the increase of the fruits of the earth.

For these seem fittest by Gods own ordinance of them; first, to the
Leviticall Priesthood, and secondly, after the change of that Service, by way
of intailement of them to the Ministers of the Gospel. Whereby (Saint
Chrysostom declares) the Priests which by right receive them, may not be
upbraded; and the Parishioners, who are bound to pay them, must not boast nor
be puffed up.

Thou shall not muzzle the mouth etc. we are now secondly, to adjoyne some
collateral places for confirmation of the premises. I will not be tedious
with instances, the tender of this one place unto you, Galatians the 6. may
seem sufficient: Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate unto him that
teaches in all good things. Be not deceived: God is not mocked: for whatsoever
a man sows, that shall he also reap, etc. Saint Paul in this passage
appears to use very significant speeches for the purpose. It is not amiss to
examine them in a serious manner, that we may the more evidently perceive, what
a necessary duty lies upon the Laity to render back a good return of
temporals unto the Ministers of the Gospel.

The first word which he uses is (...), let him communicate; by this term
Saint Chryostome tells us how he intimates that there must be (...), a
vicissitude and intercourse, a flux and reflux of heavenly and earthly things,
between the Priest and the Parish. Justice it self challenges thus much, for
men to express their due thankfulness toward their Teachers, by bountiful
recompencing of their Pastoral labors with abundant supplies of all
conveniences.

Secondly, he uses the word (...), which term may be taken for the
delivering of any doctrine, by the organ of the voice to instruct others in the
mysteries of the Christian Religion. The Apostle therefore in this place,
appears to put a plain difference between the laboring and lazy
Ministers, between the diligent Bees and idle Drones, between the industrious
treaders out of the corn, and the voluptuous caters up of the corn.

There must be ratio dati et accepti, says Arboreus, a true reckoning on both
sides; the Pastor must piously employ his talent, and the Parishioner must
profitably reply in his element; the Minister must perform his part, and the
Auditour must do his duty: the Sower must reap, and the receiver must return
a croppe with increase.

Thirdly, we meet with the manner of communication subjoyned, (...) in all
good things: not in a few, but in all; love, reverence, and maintenance,
Athanasius notes, expressing al liberality toward them, Saint Chryostome
observes. Which they may very well fulfill (these Fathers affirm) as
receiving much more, then they can return.

This is a rule says Doctor Mayer to supply the Ministers with all
necessaries; especially (as is most agreeable to the divine Law) the people are
hereby enjoined freely and willingly to communicate in all those goods, which
be the several increases of their fruits of the earth unto them.

Surely this verse seems very powerful against no small number of covetous
worldlings. Some will impart nothing at all to their Pastors maintenance, but
only perforce: some will expend in this case but a poor and unworthy pittance.
Some besides wretched miserableness use wicked deceit and fraud in their
payments. They pretend ill trading, how their corn is thin, their cattle did
not thrive, their fruits were few, etc. the times are hard, their charge is
great, their means be small, etc. But this I say, he that sows sparingly
shall reap sparingly, and he which sows bounlifully shall reap
bountifully. 2 Corinthians 3. These covetous Idolaters carry themselves clean
contrary to the Apostles precept: behold he pleads for liberality, but they
practice parsimony; he is for sincerity, but they for subtilty; he desires
plaindealing, but they delight in impostures.

Let not then men thus impiously err in this enjoined communicatio^ of their
goods. It is best for every one to take heed of deceitful excuses in this
kind, Anselmus admonishes; because although humane creatures may be often
deluded, yet the alseeing Lord, the searcher of the heart and the reins is
never gone beyond. These cunning pretexts may coozen many men, but the Lord
does easily discern through the closest mist of they Sacrilegious falsehood,
Saint Hierome shows.

This sin is much greater then you suppose, says Aretius, God is not mocked,
there will follow a doomesday book, a reckoning season, when as such base
minded Earthwormes shall reap as they have sown; namely, for their corrupt
and unconscionable dealing, the proper wages thereof, that is to say, eternal
death and damnation.

These Church-robbing sins, which now not seldom minister matter of laughter
to profane worldlings, and seem but venial in their seduced imaginations,
will then show forth a scarlet color, a crimson die of a mournful and mortal
nature amongst the greatest and most grievous offenses. Thou shall not muzzle
the mouth, etc.

Thirdly, we are to express the nature of our proposition, from the nature
and exigency of the place of the Ministry. It is the complaint of learned and
religious Bishop Davenant, Imperita plebecula feriari nos arbitratur totos
dies, nec aliquid negotii habere postquam Templo pedem extulerimus: The
ignorant Common people imagines that we make many holi-dayes, and that we
have nothing to do but only at Church.

Nevertheless, our case is clean otherwise; for besides the outward exercise
of our Pastoral function, behold, there is, of not a perpetual, yet a daily
burden of prayer, meditation, study, etc. Imposed upon our shoulders; so that
the truth is, we never loyter less, then when we are thought to be most at
leisure.

It is impossible to sustain these and sundry other painful incumbencies,
proper to our places without sufficiency, and affluence of competent
maintenance.

The want of this, may well occasion the Clergy to impute the fault of failing
in these duties unto the iniquity of the times, and the penuriousnesse of the
people, even as victorious Annibal cried out, negando supplementum, vos
retraxistis, how he was perforce drawn out of almost Conquered Jtaly, by the
Carthaginians pernicious parsimony.

If ver erat aeternum, per se dabat omnia t^llus: the golden age were still in
esse, with a free will offering of all delights and necessaries. If bread and
fish rained voluntarily down from Heaven, as is reported to have fallen in the
days of the Emperor Otho the third.

Were the doctrine of the Jewish Talmud, verified for the present in this
Island, touching the free and ready preparedness of all manner of Victuals.
Could we attain to have the Angels our Caters with the Heremite Or in the
desert of Thebaies: or with another fabulous bird of the same feather Saint
Alpias, to live a longer space here on earth without hunger and thirst.

Were we able to walk as far with bread and water, as the Prophet Elijah
went 1 Kings, 19. Or might our poor and small measure of provision
miraculously multiply like the Widows little cruse of oil, and handful of
meal into many indeficient vessels 1 Kings 17. and 2 Kings 4.

Or would a few loaves and fishes suffice to feed thousands, and increase into
sundry basketfuls of fragments Matthew 14. Could our clothes (like the
Israelites in their forty years travail through the deserts) continue without
waxing old upon us, and our shoes hold good without wast and decay on our
feet, Deuteronomy, 29.

If a Manna honey-dew could still be gathered, during the term of our mortal
pilgrimage: or such a sweet shower did mellifluously drop upon our drowping
spirits, as Antoninus affirms to have descended upon the Christian Host,
marching out of Antioch against the cruel Turk Corbonach, whereby a
cheerful vigor of mind and body, confirmed them in all the occurrences of
that dangerous expedition.

Were we Chameleon complexion'd to feed on the air; or mouthlesse like the
Indian Astomi, to live by odor; Then should Sacrilegious depredation and
spoil be borne with more patience, and not bring so much harm and prejudice.
Thou shall not muzzle the mouth, etc.

Moreover, whereas (contrary to Anabaptists humors, who abide no Books but the
Bible, and some of them not so much as that) a good Library is the most
necessary Magazin and storehouse, for to make meet provision of Sacred food
for men's souls.

Yea also to discover and discomfit the wild Boares of the wood, the ravenous
Wolves, and crafty Foxes; namely Tyrants, Machiavellians, Infidels, Heretics,
Hypocrites, Profanistes, Schismatiques, which continually watch occasion to
surprise, worry, and devour the Flock. Were now as easy and cheap a way at
our wishes, to get this same needful company of meet Books; as we read how
once a Ship came floating into Alexandria of the own accord full fraught with
Armor to furnish their wants.

Or were not the expensive precepts of Hospitality and alms deeds, of
necessity to be performed for discharge of duty and example to the flock.

Or would the Almighty and most glorious God, the bountiful giver of all
Majesty, riches and honor, the benign bestower of all precious blessings
well please and take it, that even not seldom in an ordinary man's house there
appears a stately structure, a fair Cupboard of plate, a sumptuous furniture,
a costly table, a seemly attendance, a stable of good Geldings, etc.

And yet will he be contented that his divine house shall remain, in as bad
condition many times as a ruinous, sordid, and confused cottage; with a course
carpet, a home spunne cloth to cover his holy-board, with a poor Parsonage, a
beggarly Vicaridge, a threadbare coat, a hungry table etc. With the worst and
most refuse tith for his tenthes; with poverty, neglect, and baseness for his
Service and Ministers?

Do ye thus requite the Lord, oh foolish people and unwise: Deuteronomie 32?
Is this unworthy and blind partialty agreeable to the due of his glory, to the
dignity of Christian souls, to the direction of Ecclesiastical decency, to
the excellency of the Clergies profession, to the credit of our Religion?

Or were these and the like particulars, impropriate upon our own private
respects, and not chiefly concerning the honor of God, the propagation of the
Gospel, the welfare of the people?

Then Barbarus has segetes, we could the better suffer with wronged
Mephibosheth the Sacrilegious Ziba to take all. Then tithes, oblations, and
glebes might be detracted from the Clergy, with a great deal less grief and
injury to themselves, also with much smaller harm and inconvenience to their
Cures.

But now since proportionable means are the necessary nerves of proceeding
forward in every function: since money is the requisite fountain, which
feeds with her supplementall waters each river of humane actions and
temporal affairs.

Certainly then the Priests Office must never be grudged, nor depri^ed of
that like provisionall privilege and allowance which indeed we use not to
deny our selves, nor others in the exercise of inferior professions of far
smaller consequences; yea we ought to afford, what is requisite in this kind
unto our very laboring beasts. For, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox
that treads out the corn.

Fourthly, we are to declare the truth of this doctrine, from the dunesse of
tithes by divine right to the Ministers of the Gospel.

Sundry well devoted children of the Church, Clergy and Laity have religiously
labored in this laudable subject. Their lines to this purpose would shine as
most clear and resplendent lights, did not miserable men when light is come
into the world, love darkness rather then light. John. 3.

Nothing hinders a good cause more from prevailing, then the perverse
unconscionablenesse of covetous minded people, opposing the right for their
own respects. Comes not this hence, of the evil lusts that war in their
members, James 4.5.

And because this natural corruption, is the very fountain of sundry folks
wilful contradiction, I suppose one strong argument for the duenesse of tithes
by divine decree, might aptly be fetched forth in that regard.

Surely, when as men are bound to honor the Lord with their substance.
Proverbes 3. But they are bold to break this blessed Commandment, and usually
prefer their wealth in the place of God, I mervaile not for my part, why the
Apostle Paul has named covetousness Idolatry.

Although then I had much rather refer you to the excellent labors of
others: Nevertheless, since this particular is propounded among the rest for
confirmation of our collected doctrine: It seems best not to pass it over in
silence, but to afford it a brief discourse.

Let us then speak a little in this case of tiths. First, touching their
primary intimation, and institution in the old Testament. Secondly, concerning
their posteriour continuation under the Gospel.

First, touching the primary intimation, and institution of tiths in the old
Testament. Before the Law, men having not the Law, were a law unto themselves,
and showed the work of the Law in their hearts, Romans, 2. Many things were
prescribed in the times of Moses by direct injunction, which were practiced of
holy men says Pererins, long before that season, by a natural instinct and by
divine inspiration. The Jews (I have read) supposed the oblations of Cain not
to have been acceptable unto God, for so much as the ears which he tendered,
were penurious and not replenished. Tertullian tells that Cains offering met
with disesteeme, because quod offerebat non recte dividebat, he dealt it not
rightly. But whether he offended in the number or nature, in the manner or
measure, or in all; I imagine not so necessary to determine precisely.

It is enough for proof of the point, that we must know, even when the Church
was in her Infancy, yet then before the Law, Cain and Abel were instructed
(either by tradition, or else by natural reason) that a chief part of
whatsoever the earth yielded unto them, was payable to the Lords peculiar
worship.

The next piece of antiquity to our purpose, appears in the memorable
passages between Abraham and Mel^hisedech; (...): The Patriarch with a hearty
freeness divided unto him a tenth part of al, yea even of the spoils; and the
Priest tithed him as having authority.

The conclusion is demonstrative from the type to the truth, from Melchisedech
to Christ, for the (...) of the one is transferred into the (...) upon this
other. As blessing then, and tithing were extant in the Priesthood of
Melchisedech, so are they most evident in the Priesthood of Christ: which shall
more appear hereafter.

As all sinned in the loins of Adam, so all are tithed in the loins of
Abraham, Lyra affirms. Behold this Patriarch who had the promises, did by
this his action bind all his seed, both the children of his flesh and the
children of his faith.

It then we will be happily taken up; into his Paternall bosom after our
bodily dissolution, we must also make him a Father of our thankfulness: if
we receive blessings in him, we ought not refuse to pay tiths in him. Thou
shall not muzzle the mouth, etc.

Old Jacobs turn is next: observe (as the learned think) that his Vision
concerns his whole posterity. It follows then (they infer) that his vow
of giving surely the Tenth unto God, is no less largely obligatorie, yea upon
all the families of the earth to be blessed in his seed, Genesis. 28. The two
former points of Jacobs vow; namely, first that the Lord should be his God.
Secondly, how that Pillar should be Gods House, pass without controversy to
be perpetual, touching a general foundation of Religion, and of Sacred
houses for divine exercises.

But the third particular of conferring tiths to the Lords worship and Service,
meets with much exception against all good reason; because what would become
of the two other, if this latter did not supply liberal maintenance?

The Lord says Ferus, needed none of Jacobs gifts, nevertheless the holy
Patriarch knew it was his duty to confer toward the maintenance of his divine
Service and worship; although the precept of tithing was not yet extant, yet
the law of nature did dictate that we ought liberally to contribute unto these
Sacred performances out of our proper goods and substance.

Hereupon the Priests amongst the Gentiles had in all places a liberal
sustentation and respect.

Jacob he concludes appears herein, to be much more piously perfect then
we are; lo he long before the written Law unconstrained, of his own free will,
voweth tiths unto God. But we are so far remote off from his devotion, that in
stead of paying we purloine them, in lieu of giving we take away.

Now if any one he adds, be forward to reply, That the law of tithes did
appertain unto the old Testament, and so it is now abrogated; he answers how
the law of nature stands still in vigor, which requires no less then the
performance of our Doctrine. Also he says how the law of charity ought to be
of that force, as to give more then the tenths in the times of necessity: yea
if occasion urges the whole for Christ's sake, who has given himself wholly
for us.

Neither (as Doctor Willet notes) does our Jacobs vow at this present intimate
any neglect of this duty in him before, since it is lawful for a Christian to
tie himself by a new vow to perform that unto God, which he is otherwise
bound to accomplish, and has bin wont to put in practice. For by these means
we may whet and better our weak and dull devotions.

Finally, the question here moved by some disaffected folks unto the Church:
To whom Jacob paid his tiths? seems unnecessary, and indeed not mannerly
dealing with the divine word. Sem and Heber supposed by sundry to be the men,
deceased long before: But the Altars, the sacrifice, the worship, the service
of Almighty God (who lives for ever) were the objects of our thankful
Patriarchs pious vow: And this he performed unto the Lord, whiles he
consecrated the tenth part of his goods unto religious uses. Cajetan and Mercer
consent to this purpose. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox etc.

Tithes and the Law were not twins of one time. Brentius notes them for no
new invention of the Leviticall Priests, but a thing long before accustomed of
the Patriarchs, in way of thanksgiving and devotion.

Yea the very Gentiles, some by the light of nature, some by tradition from the
sons of Noah; held this for a principle: That they were bound to honor the
al-giving God with their riches; whereupon many of them paid tiths.

Thus the Law was but a confirmer, and Levi but an observer of that maintenance
long before offered, and devoted unto divine Services. Therefore these tenths
are fondly by some imagined to be ceremonial, and by others judicial. The
men of this world make them any thing, with a mind to pay nothing: but from the
beginning it was not so. Matthew 19. The first borne were then the Priests, and
they received tiths due to the Priesthood. As soon as that Sacred name is
spoken of in the holy Scripture, behold there likewise mentioned the payment of
tiths, that calling brought on that condition: the Priesthood and tiths seem
things reciprocate. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth. etc.

This same divinely inspired practice did afterward proceed into precept. We
may hear Almighty God, not in a sense of generality, but in a signification of
special propriety, claiming them as his own origin all right. Leviticus 27.
And all the tiths of the Land, whether of the seed of the Land, or of the fruit
of the tree, is the Lords: It is holy unto the Lord. And concerning the tiths
of the herd, or of the flock, even of whatsoever passes under the rod, the
tenth shall be holy unto the Lord.

Master Calvin upon the place concludes tiths Gods proper right, and royal
revenue. He has a common right most amply diffused in regard of his creation
and providence: Every beast of the Forest, and the cattle upon a thousand
hills, the fowls of the mountain, and the wild beasts of the field. Psame,
50. All are his, and hold of his good pleasure.

But he has a special right unto tiths as his own reserved demeanes: they
belong to his Majesty independantly: so they were solemnly proclaimed in
Sinai above twenty years at least before their assignation to the Levites.

Thus it appears, although he had not appointed them to have been their
portion, yet had they been still his: he vouchsafes (Master Calvin's phrase
is) to substitute or surrogate them into his own place touching the tiths: he
adds how Abraham paid into the hands of Melchisedech, what indeed be ought
unto God.

Our due acknowledgement of all fruits and increase to come from the Lords
goodness, is witnessed by our tribute of tithes to him, which when he
demands he requires not ours, but his own.

The most gracious God has been pleased to make a deputation of this right,
to such persons who minister unto him in holy things, throughout all ages, as
well before Moses, as under the time of his Law, moreover in the succeeding
season of the Gospel.

So that what his Majesty proclaimed, Numbers 18. Behold, J have given the
children of Levi all the tenth in Israel for an inheritance, for their service
which they serve, even the Service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation; It
appertains unto the whole company of his Priests whiles the world endures in
respect of their Sacred employment.

Although God gave the tiths to the Levites, yet did he not first found them in
that Incorporation, but only transferred his own right to that order, so long
as it should continue. And after that expired, lo the same right descended (as
it were by entaile) to the succeeding ministry of the Gospel.

Since then the Lords certain right, and demand of tithes has been openly
confirmed by his own public Statute: And since that his good pleasure has
solemnly appointed them for the holy Service sake, unto his divine Ministers in
all times.

How dares then the contemptible creature disanull the decrees of the
incomprehensible Creator? What a marvelous impudency seems it in humane
mortality to transmute the ordinances of the omnipotent Majesty?

How audacious does the vile dust of man appear, for to vary and alter the
celestial Laws of his unchangeable maker? Lo, he has required the tenth,
but where did he ever remit it? He has bound us in the obligation of his
precept, but where did he ever cancel it?

Why presumes any one to usurp upon an impious liberty, when as his Highness
has vouchsafed no privilege nor license? Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of
the ox etc.

Tiths seem neither Ceremonial nor Judicial, neither typical nor civil.

Touching the former: no proof is made of any repute: the ceremonies of Moses
Law were so ordained, as they did prefigure, and were similitudes of heavenly
things, standing in meats, and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal
rites, until the time of reformation. Hebrews 9. and they lived no longer,
then whiles Christ came, unto whom they looked.

But neither had tithes any ceremonial institution, being separated for the
necessary use and maintenance of the Levites: neither though they looked toward
Christ, did they breath their last gasp at his blessed birth, for then might
the moral Laws have also expired at the same period.

Touching the latter: they seem no Judicials, for they concerned properly the
Commonwealth, and these were peculiar to the Priesthood: they pertained to
policy, these to piety: they were no Judges of things Sacerdotall and sacred,
these had an Ecclesiastical nature, and a being before the order of Levi, and
the time of Moses was taken notice of.

They are consecrate to God, man may not meddle with them, but only by virtue
of his Sovereign right: when men make use of them, as of the Lords allowance
or wages: mark then, that this is not for our natural or civil work, but
for Religion, the divine worship.

Wherefore we must not imagine the tenths as things in common use, but separate
by God himself for his spiritual service and servants, so they ought to
continue without humane reversall.

For what the Lord has once established, and enacted, and limited within the
listes o^ no express space of time; Behold, that must remain, as the lasting
of the Laws of the Medes and Persians are anciently written of, unchangeable
for ever, until the same God himself does repeal them, who at first ratified
them.

Whiles his divine Service endures, the tiths which are appropriate to him,
and thereunto deputed by him, must likewise keep their course of continuance.
Surely, they which vainly suppose, that his sovereign statutes may be dealt
with like a nose of wax, or a leaden rule, namely altered and wrested according
to covetous men's corrupt humors, shall verily find him at length to breaks
them with a rod of iron, and to dash them in pieces like a potters vessel:
Psam. 2. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth, etc.

Secondly, concerning the Posteriour continuation of the right of tiths under
the Gospel: that may be entreated of in this twofold manner: namely, either by
divine constitution, or else by humane consecration.

First, touching the continuation of the right of the tiths under the Gospel,
by divine constitution. It is enough, Gualter writes to know, that the duties
payable of old in this kind, ought to be transferred unto the Church of the
New Testament. For although the Leviticall Priesthood be abolished, and legal
sacrifices have ceased; yet notwithstanding the ministry of the Gospel still
remains, and therefore the means of their living must in no wise be
diminished.

Some of the learned have alleged in this sense, our Savior Christ's answer
Matthew 22. When as the deceitful Pharisees sought so subtly to circumvent
him; Render (says he) to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the
things that are Gods.

Caesar must receive his tribute according to the image superscribed upon the
coin, God must receive his claim according to the purport of his Law in that
case provided.

We read in the 23. Chapter of the same Evangelist, how our Lord Jesus
reproving the hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees, for making a goodly show
of an upright conscience in their tithing, even of the smallest particulars,
when as they omitted the weightier matters of the Law; lo he does thus at last
conclude, These ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.

Saint Augustine, Chrysostom, with sundry famous Authors besides expound this
instance to our purpose. I mervaile then, how a great many miserable
Earthwormes most vainly imagine to mount up aloft, into the heaven of bliss,
coming very far short of the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees in
this case; when as our Savior says, except your righteousness shall exceed
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter
into the Kingdom of heaven.

Neither is their cavil of any sufficient force, how the alleged place only
concerned the Israelites under the Levite Priesthood; Because as the Lord
Bishop Andrews observes, whereas other Pharisaicall scrupulosities premised
in the chapter meet with a brand of abrogation, this still remains with a
mark of approbation.

Neither dare I suppose, that the interest of the Lord solemnly established in
the old Testament, does thus sodamely expire in the New, unless his own self
had signified unto us a resignation of his right.

It is written Matthew. 11. Verily I say unto you among them that are borne of
women, there has not risen a greater then John the Baptist: notwithstanding
he that is least in the Kingdom of heaven, is greater then he. Meaning, that
for so much as John Baptist was next unto Christ in time, above all the
Prophets, which ever lived before him, his happiness went therefore beyond
them in that high respect for he saw what they desired to see, and saw not.

Because also he was of a more worthy calling, for he might be reported to
have pointed out Christ with the finger of a fuller discovery, which others
could not descry, but only afar off.

Thus likewise those men which succeeded John in this sacred Ministry, namely
the Apostle, and their successors to the end of the world, are happier in a
higher degree, and of a more excellent calling then John the Baptist, because
living in the resplendent season of the much gloriouser illumination of the
Gospel.

Doctor Downham examining the particulars of the Levites profits, affirms,
how they amounted to a far greater measure for the maintenance of that small
tribe, then all the Bishoprics, Benefices, Colledgelands, or whatsoever other
Ecclesiastical emoluments do yet remain, yea although the Index
expurgatorius of sacrilegious inquisition had not with that extreme tyranny
invaded, and over-runne them.

Why should then the Evangelicall Sun so marveilously surmounting the
glimmering Moon shine of the Law, in the sweet of saving knowledge, suffer so
missebe-seeming an eclipse in the most disproportionable means of Ministerial
maintenance, and not rather exceed the other in necessary abundance, as it does
in notable brightness?

If the ministration of condemnation be glorious, much more does the
ministration of righteousness exceed in glory. 2 Corinthians. 3. when as the
Minister of the Gospel has succeeded the Levite in the Ministry, and is the
Minister of a better Testament, what cause can be then conceived, but that he
ought also to succeed him in the stipend or allowance?

Quatis ratio spraecepti tale praeceptum: the Civilians tell us, it is right
that the Law should not expire as long as the reason of it remains. Moreover
reason, equity, and sacred Scripture requite, that the worthier wages belong to
the worthier Calling. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth, etc.

Further observe how the 13. and 14. verses of this Chapter, as likewise
Galatians 6. will (if well considered) that the decree touching tiths in the
old Testament is not dissolved in the new, but still continued, and the
practice of the former a president for the latter.

For that same maintenance which the Apostle Saint Paul in those places makes
mention of, is most aptly expounded by Scripture to be the tenth part.

And though the manner of portion in them places, seem in some men's sight left
undetermined, yet if we may explain Scripture by Scripture (as indeed such a
mutual intercourse should be between the old and new Testament) then
doubtless the clear phrases of the one may easily declare the obscurer speech
of the other: And so by the context of holy writ the tenth will soon come to
be discovered, and Gods ordinance there repeated by the Apostle, be preserved
inviolable, and carnal conceits without warrant, be discarded, and this divine
Law endure in force and vigor. Thou shall not muzzle. etc.

The seventh Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews seems a strong champion
in this case. Now consider how great this man was, unto whom even the Patriarch
Abraham gave the tenth of the spoils.

And verily they that are of the sons of Levi, who receive the Office of the
Priesthood, have a commandment to take tiths of the people, according to the
Law, that is of their brethren, though they came out of the loins of Abraham.

But he whose descent is not counted from them, received tiths of Abraham, and
blessed him that had the promises.

And without all contradiction the less is blessed of the better. And here men
that die receive tiths, but there he receives them of whom it is witnessed
that he lives. And as I may so say, Levi also who received tiths, paid tiths
in Abraham. For he was yet in the loins of his Father when Melchisedech met
him. etc.

Levi in Abraham decimatus est, quoniam in lumbis ejus fuit, quando decimas
dedit sacerdoti Melchisedech: Saint Augustine has left written that Levi was
tithed in Abraham, because he was in his loins, when he gave tiths to the
Priest Melchisedech.

I conceive the scope of this Scripture is to manifest, and magnify the high
and honorable condition of Melchisedech, and consequently of Christ Jesus. But
one maine argument for Melchisedecs admirable greatness, is drawn by our
Apostle from his receiving tiths of him, whose offspring the tribe of Levi
(then in Abraham's loins) afterward took tiths.

For (...), he tithed Abraham, taking the tenth part of him as his due, and not
given.

Neither may we affirm that Melchisedecs admirable greatness is since
unhappily eclipsed, and fallen into wane, but rather he is as ample and evident
still as ever he was, because he is the Priest of God for ever, a Priest that
never dies; and so his Priesthood and the rights of it never cease.

But certainly his greatness in his antitype Christ, cannot be concluded to
be still the same, if Christ has no right to take tiths, for this indeed
appears the chiefest, and most urged of the two notable arguments to declare
his greatness.

This argument of Pererius may be said to concern the point; The Priesthood
of Melchisedec has been more excellent then the Leviticall Priesthood. But
Christ has been a Priest after the order of Melchisedech: therefore the
Priesthood of Christ is more excellent then the Leviticall Priesthood.

The minor proposition is manifest, Psalm. 110. and the major is proved by
Saint Paul in a twofold manner, partly because Melchisedech blessed Abraham,
principally because he received tiths of him.

What then was due and paid to Melchisedech, is also due and payable to Christ,
else he were not a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech, if he
should fail in something to be as Melchisedech was: But to grant that seems
absurd, because he is after his order, as the Priests of the Law were after
Aarons.

Since then tiths were due and paid to Melchisedech, doubtless they are due
and ought to be paid unto Christ: And so consequently to his servants the
Ministers of the Gospel, who are Christ representatively, and in whom he
blesses, and refreshes with the bread and wine of the holy Sacrament, and of
heavenly consolations the faithful, which are weary and ready otherwise to
saint in their spiritual warrefare.

Neither was Abraham's payment of tiths voluntary, but of duty: for were must
note how Melchisedech was the image of Christ and his Church: Abraham figured
forth the Congregation of the faithful.

Although then Levi received tiths afterward by a particular grant from God for
the time, yet he paid them generally with the Congregation in the loins of
Abraham unto the Priesthood of Christ, here personed by Melchisedech: which
being perpetual, and an image of this in the Gospel, may well note unto us,
that this duty of tithing ought also to be perpetual.

Saint Chrysostom conceives Abraham to have been herein our Tutour; and
whiles he pays tiths, not to a Priest offering up Leviticall sacrifices, but
administering bread and wine (the elements of the Evangelicall Sacrament) it
intimates sufficiently that men must now pay their tiths to the Ministers of
the Gospel.

Moreover, if the order of Priesthood here spoken of be an eternal order, and
yet such an order as to whom the tiths are due (which plainly appears in the
Chapter alleged) surely then, let the Priest be either Melchisedech the type,
or Christ the Antitype, yet the same matter must remain still evinced, namely
that tiths must always continue to the end of the world, being the rightful
due of an enduring Priesthood.

To this purpose may be applied these words of Master Calvin on the place; The
Apostle affirms the dignity of Melchisedechs Priesthood to be for ever, and
that of the Priesthood of Levi but temporary. The life of this latter
Priesthood was one day to be dissolved, even as the lives of men liquid expire.

Yet no Scripture speaking of tiths paid to Melchisedech, says any thing of
his death, wherefore the right of his Priesthood was not to cease but continue.

The latter Law did not derogate from the former, the right belonging of old to
Melchisedech, is not now repealed by another Law given of God by Moses, whereby
to turn over that right unto the Levites.

Saint Paul prevented that conceit, cum dicit ad tempus decimas Levitis
solutas, showing that tiths were paid to the Levites but for a certain season,
because they might not live ever.

But Melchisedech being immortal, retains unto the end what God has once
given him; namely the dignity, duty, yea and the rights of the Priesthood,
which are declared to be the tiths, etc.

The 13.14. etc. verses of this 7. Chapter with some other passages therein,
will determine the things spoken under the name of Melchisedech upon Christ
without question.

Behold then he is the rightful receiver of tiths, in his Evangelicall
Priesthood, even by witness of the new Testament.

As under the Law tiths were not so much the Levites at Gods in the Levites,
they receiving them as deputed by him to take this sacred tribute.

Even so likewise before the Law, not so much Melchisedech, as the Lord in
Melchisedech did receive tiths. Now under the Gospel, not so much the
Ministers of the Gospel, as he that is our blessed Lord Jesus Christ in the
Ministers of the Gospel, does by divine right take the tithes.

Miserable then are those wretches which dare defraud him, by depriving his
Ministers, and regard not this precept. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth etc.

Although whiles Christ lived on earth, the Leviticall Priesthood being not
abrogated, had the tithes. Moreover he and his Apostles leading a kind of
traveling life from place to place, could not conveniently receive them; yet
intermission for a time must not be thought to infringe their due right; no
more then the suspension of circumcision for forty years space in the
wilderness, did disannull that.

The Apostles also and their primitive successors took the price of whole
fields, and possessions of those which converted to the Church, and professed
the Gospel; whereby they had meet means to maintain their own selves, and
the poor brethren.

That course continued about two hundred years after Christ, and the practice
of it multiplied into a very great proportion.

Then the state of the Church being settled, the ancient Fathers taught tithes
to be thus due, general councels decreed them so, and public authority
renewed the payment of them.

To this purpose the Lord Bishop Andrews brings in Cyprian, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Origin, Augustine, Chrysostom, Hierome, etc. Pronouncing the
detainers of tithes to be invaders of other men's goods: how neither less nor
worse must be paid: how the offenders in this sort have no due fear of God,
not true sense of repentance;

Yea to be void of all thankful memory, of the divine liberality and bounty to
wards them. How such wretches seem wickeder then the Scribes and Pharisees,
who durst meddle with nothing for their proper uses, before they had first of
all separated the tenthes, fearing else a curse to fall upon them for
defrauding the Lord.

He also produces some Orthodox Councels, which strictly decreed decimarum
pensiones et paraeciarum divisiones, the payments of tithes and divisions of
Parishes: Also show the ordinances of divine Laws in this case, and the
Excommunication of refractory offenders in this point.

He also rehearses some instances out of the Canon and Civil Laws, which
anciently accounted Parishes and tithes, Clergy and tenths etc. to be (...)
reciprocate and convertible, and they did enjoyne the true payments of them
under extreme penalties.

Neither did sundry old constitutions, provide only for honest dealing in
prediall tithes, but also their care extended to have those which are of a
personal nature to be well paid. They had in conscience a notable ground for
this, out of that memorable place: Galatians 6.

From which Aquinas affirms, how all things whatsoever a man possesses, be
contained under the carnal things mentioned by the Apostle, and therefore he
inferteth that tithes ought to be paid out of all our goods etc.

Thus much was worthily projected in the reign of our late King Henry the
eight, and more largely deliberated and allowed by many of the Lords spiritual
and temporal, besides sundry other eminent persons, when the last Edward
sweyghed our English Scepter: who (as Master Studley writes) willingly
confirmed this religious, just, and necessary resolution, for all men of
traffic, sciences, trades, etc. that they should put in practice the custom
of the City of London, for the payment of personal tithes: Alleging there
could be no conscience for Farmours, Plowmen, Shepherds, etc. to return the
tenth, and nevertheless that the persons of this gainful condition would
presume themselves to be free and exempted.

It seems then an imagination void of all true conscience and devotion
(whether we examine it by the light of nature, or by the brightness of grace)
for any people to pretend, and plead an immunity, from liberal contributing to
the maintenance of their spiritual Pastors. It is also irreverently opposite
against the opinion and practice of venerable antiquity, and contrary to my
text. Thou shall not muzzle etc.

Finally if the words of a few, otherwise supposing Autors (whether grave
divines or judicious Lawyers be well pondered) I conceive in effect they
speak to the point, I am sure to the purpose of my text.

For all of them unanimously plead against wronging the Church, and for a
liberal allowance to the Clergy, to furnish and maintain themselves and their
families, to keep hospitality, to relieve the poor.

Solutio decimarum Sacerdotibus est de jure divino, quatenus inde sustentantur,
says Gerson, they hold them divinely precepted in these respects.

Yea, the Doctor and Student acknowledge it, to be grounded upon the law of
reason, that every one is bound to honor God of his proper substance, by
giving a meet portion of his temporal goods unto the Minister, to him of
things spiritual.

That treatise further affirms, how there is no cause why the people of the
new Law ought to pay less, to the Ministers of the new Law, then the people of
the old Testament gave to the Ministers of the old Testament. For the people of
the new Law, be bound to greater things then the people of the old Law were:
Matthew 5. And the sacrifice of the old Law was not so honorable as the
sacrifice of the new Law is. For the sacrifice of the old Law was only the
figure, but the sacrifice of the new Law is the thing that is figured: that was
the shadow, this is the truth.

To conclude, most of them commend the old tithing course: Insomuch as no few
of these profess in Master Perkins speeches; doubtless had not God himself
in the old Testament taken such strict orders for the livings of the Levites,
they had been put to no less extremities, then is the ministry of this age,
which is many times so miserably muzzeled, as no merciful man would suffer his
beast. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn.

Secondly, touching the continuation of the tithes under the Gospel by humane
consecration. Admit as some vainly surmise, that the payment of the tithes
were merely a Mosaicall mandate: from which men under the Gospel are made
free; yet because nature has taught men to honor God with their substance:
and for that the most true and sure way to perform thus much, is by making and
rendering him payment in kind, out of the very self same tiches, which through
his gracious blessing the earth continually brings forth.

And since that besides, Scripture has left us an evident example of that
particular proportion, which for moral considerations has been determined
most fit and meet by them, whose wisdom could best of all judge. Furthermore,
seeing that the Church of Christ has long ago entered into the like obligation
of tithing; me thinks then in these days this question seems vain and
superfluous, whether tithes be due by divine right or no?

Doctor Downham accordingly declares that tithes are due to Christian
Ministers by vow: Christian Commonweales and Councels having consecrated them
to God, and his Church: neither is it now meet time, after vows to make this
manner of enquiry, nor to endeavor for to alter them without divine
dispensation and sufficient satisfaction.

For grant at the first that it might have been imagined a doubtful and
disputable matter, yet now our case appears to hold a clear correspondence
with theirs unto whom Saint Peter spoke Acts 5.

Whiles it remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not
in thine ewne power? Why have thou conceived this thing in thine heart? thou
have not lied unto men, but unto God.

If then it were not lawful for Ananias and Saphira under pretense of Religion
to sell their Land, as if they would have given it to the Church, and yet
concealed and detracted part thereof, for which we read their horrible tragedy
in the aforesaid Chapter.

Then is it much more unlawful to detain and withhold any part from the
Church, which we never gave, but it was rightly the Churches just possession
before we were borne.

The general current of grave authority runs this way, that whatsoever has
been lawfully given to religion, can never be taken away again, unless
redeemed with a greater price, Leviticus 27.

The reason is easily thus rendered, because the goods of the Church are holy
things, and therefore not to be profaned, which offense is then committed,
when as they are withdrawn from the Lords Service.

The 250 censers of the seditious sinners. Numbers 16. might not be profaned
because they had been hallowed, for by the Lords own direction Moses
appointed Eleazar to take them out of the burning, and to make of the broad
plates for a covering to the Altar, alleging their consecration and offering
up before him.

Neither can the evil lives of some Ministers (much less incroaching
sacrilege) justly alienate those tithes, glebes and oblations, which have
been hallowed and offered up unto Gods Service.

For certainly although in substance the tithes, the glebes, and other goods
of the Church, seem the same that all other are, out of which they he taken.

As for example sake, the water, the bread and the wine in the Sacraments, are
all one with other water, bread, and wine; yet in regard of the use thereof,
behold we must conceive no small difference: since they are made holy and
sacred by dedication.

Therefore as it were horrible villainy to abuse the elements in the Sacraments:
so is it execrable robbery to profane the tithes, the glebes and other goods
of the Church, and to pervert them from the religious end of their first
institution, unto secular (and so sacrilegious) occasions.

The title and right then which man had in any of these things (which seemed in
his own arbittement either to give or reserve) before his donation of them to
the Church, does by the act, and from the time of any such dedication, remain
the proper possession of God until the worlds end, unless himself renounce
or releaseth it.

Good reason it should be thus, since equity has taught us, that every one
ought to enjoy his own, and what is ours no other can alienate from us,
without our deliberate consent.

No man having past his voluntary agreement or deed may at his pleasure change
it to the prejudice of another. Should we then wickedly dare to deal worse
with our good God, the^ his gracious Majesty has permitted any other men to
deal with us? When our tithes etc. might probably have appeared our own, we
had fair color of liberty to use and dispose them as our selves thought good;
but having once made them his whose they are, having consecrated them to his
worship and Service; Let us wisely be warned by other folks fearful
examples, what a heinous crime it is, even but to wash and clip that coin
which carries on it the mark of God, the token of his divine insculpture.

He reckons all these by the form of his own speeches for his own
possessions. It must needs then be a most dangerous matter for the children of
men sacrilegiously to invade them, and to despoile his Ministers (unto whom he
has deputed them) from the fruition of them. Thou shall not muzzle etc.

Moreover it seems a point of no small moment, and a thing very worthy our
consideration, that the true meaning of all such as honored the Lord with
their substance, was to invest him with the propriety of what they dedicated
unto him.

Witness the style of ancient grants. Thus in magna charta: we have given
unto God, both for us and our heirs for ever. Thus Charles the Great; we know
that the goods of the Church are the sacred endowments of God: To the Lord our
God we offer and dedicate whatsoever we deliver unto his Church.

Thus the Laws Imperial make some-things to belong by right of nature,
indifferently to every man; some to be the certain goods and possessions of
Commonweales, some to appertain unto several Corporations and Companies, some
to be privately men's own in particular; some to be separate quite from all men.

This last branch comprehends things sacred and holy, because thereof God
alone is owner.

Nullius autem sunt res Sacrae, et religiosae, et Sanctae; quod enim divini
juris est, id nullius in bonis est* Sacred, religious and holy things can never
be in the right of Laymens incroachment. That which is the Lords ought to be
free from secular claim and usurpation. Thus we might read in the Laws of
Charles the Great: There is not an Act more honorable, then by all means to
defend and amplify the patrimony of Religion: Nor any more hateful and
impious Constitution, then to impair those possessions, which devout men in
former times, when they gave them unto holy uses, were wont in the most solemn
place of Gods Church, and in the presence of their Ghostly Superiors, to make
(as they thought) inviolable, by words of fearful execration in this wise.

These things we offer to God, from whom, if any man take them away (which we
hope no man will attempt to do.) But if any shall go about it, let his account
be without favor in the last day, when he comes to receive the doom, which
is due for sacrilege against that Lord and God unto whom we dedicate the same.

Oh consider this ye that forget God and his Saints, in the frequency and
senselessenesse of this soul and cursed sin, lest he tear you in pieces,
and there be none to deliver.

Thus the best and most renowned Prelates of the Church of Christ, have rather
in this consideration sustained the cruel wrath, then yielded to satisfy the
sacrilegious desire of their greatest Commanders on earth, coveting by evil
advise and Council, that which most willingly they should have suffered God to
enjoy, etc. Thou shall not muzzle etc.

Some person may chance move this question; can the goods of the Church, these
consecrated things in no case be alienated? I answer, certain causes there
are, wherein it is not obscure, but the Lord himself does license and warrant
how we may safely presume him as willing to forgo for our benefit, as always
to use and convert to our benefit, whatsoever our religion, has honored him
withal.

But here is an intolerable mischief, under this may be, many things which by
no means must be, pass for current and without control in this sacrilegious
world.

We deny not but occasions of many consequence may sometimes be incident,
wherein the welfare and danger of the Church be also involved with the
Commonwealth occurrences. We also suppose the safety of the people in sundry
cases to be a supreme Law.

We know that Kings and Princes, are the breath of our Nosthrills: Wherefore
Church and Commonwealth must concur in necessary care, and loyal duty
toward them.

Thus the learned apply these examples of Ahimelech the Priest, giving unto
David the hallowed bread, etc. Of Hezekiah giving the silves in the house of
the Lord, and the gold of the doors of the Temple to Senacherib King of
Assyria, for to purchase his own, and people peace.

Thus our Savior Christ, in defense of his disciples plucking the ears of
corn etc. alleges the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath
Mark 2.

Thus Saint Augustine did cause the very consecrated vessels of the Church to
be broken and coined, for the relief of the poor, in a time of extreme
necessity and famine.

After this manner the ancient Bishop Acacius redeemed seven thousand captives,
out of most miserable bondage. All which and the like savor of Christian
charity, but they dissent from the common course of accursed Church-robbery.

Finally, we wish that those which object some divines against the divine right
of tithes, would for the safety of their consciences, but faithfully observe
and practice those honest rules, which the learned men do strictly propound in
this point.

1 That there must be just cause of so doing. 3 What is alienated must be
employed to some good use in the Church or Commonwealth. 3 There must be
reserved a sufficient (not a surmised) maintenance for an able Ministry and
relief of the poor. 4 No good member of the Church, can in conscience seek
the harm and hinderance of the same. Then would my text be better obeyed. Thou
shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn. 5 I am to
make good the truth of our mentioned doctrine, by discourse of the unequal
condition of Impropriations.
Now as the doctrine does induce this subject into question, so I intend my
following speech hereof at this present, only according to the drift of my
doctrine, namely, against those unjust and irreligious Impropriatours, which
debar the laboring Ministers of the Gospel, from the means of their meet
maintenance.

Tithes (we may collect) continued in sacred esteem and possession some four
thousand years before our blessed Saviors Incarnation. After his happy birth
passed also about six hundred more, before the profane hands of impious
sacrilege durst invade, and violate these Ecclesiastical rights.

Then, horresco referens, I tremble to relate it; there happened a disastrous
season of hatching hateful monsters. Behold Mahomet acted the false Prophet in
Arabia, Boniface played the Antichrist in Rome, Phocas most cruelly murdered
his Master Mauritius in Constantinople, and traytrously usurped the Empire: At
which time likewise Carolus Martellus in the Western parts under color of
defense, incroached in this kind upon the Church.

And notwithstanding, his fair promises (as credible Authors affirm) to
restore the tithes, etc. lent and entrusted (we are told) unto him, during the
Barbarians cruel incursions, he salsifyed his faith, and frustrated the
Clergies hope, by a wicked and wrongful alienation.

The old saying, nulla fiaes pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur, touch
military men's infidelity and profaneness appeared abundantly, verified in this
martial and ambitious Prince.

The city Tours upon the Loyre continues a lasting rrophy of his most
triumphant victory. But his high towering humor reciprocating with the
Babylonian beast for their own respects, and binding his soldiets to his
aspiring service with the unlawful nervs of the Church, remains a notorious
monument of irreligion not of liberality.

The very Sarasins whom he slew, would have exclaimed against such evil
dealing with their Priests. Sundry writers of that time, suffered him not to
escape without sharp censure, yea some of them pursue the chase of him until
a fearful vision of infernal pains and torments undertook him, great pity
it was that so glorious a Commander blemished his illustrious self by giving
such occasion. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox, etc.

There was an age when Christian Religion ran a strong by as of building
Monasteries, and endowing them with large revenues: a firm opinion of the
piety and charity or those which were cloystered in them procured this ample
benevolence.

Their laudable beginnings in devotion, hospitality, and sundry alme^deeds were
answerable. But in process of time; their idleness bred luxury to undo their
devotion, and their luxury engendered avarice to destroy their charity: and then
many whole Benefices seemed not seldom too few for one Monasteries devouring
swallow. Men of no worth served their Churches, and spared them wages.

These men (says one) never of Gods making, but mere creatures of the Pope,
notwithstanding his Fatherhoods protection, and no few opportunities of free
corruption, did not yet so deeply degenerate, but that one of their utter
enemies, Master Leaver in a Sermon before King Edward the sixth, etc. yields
them this testimony.

Whereas fifty tun bellied Monks filled their paunches, kept up their house,
and relieved the whole country round about them: There has succeeded in their
place and generation of greedy guts, devouring the whole house, and making
great pillage throughout a whole country, yet cannot be satisfied.

He mentions also a world of fair pretenses of good works at these
Monasteries dissolution, vanished into nothing but delusion, and depravation.

Moreover as at the first the Monks took but a small pension for themselves,
from the appropriate Churches, and left all the rest to the officiating Vicars;
but reditus tantum superfluos, a few overplus rents which might well be spared
says Panormitan, quando fructus sunt sufficientes et abundantes Clerico, when
the other profits are abundantly sufficient for the Incumbent: non amplius quam
quinquagesimam partem, no more then the fiftieth part, is a rule in a certain
Council of Toledo.

So when as they waxed exorbitant and immoderate, their holy Father himself
(as they held him) inhibited and confined their insatiable greediness, as
tending to the discredit of the Papacy, the ruin of Parish Churches, and decay
of religion in all places.

Hereupon Pope Alexander the third, commands in York and Worcester a
reformation, and that the Bishops should admit none of their presentation,
without a liberal provision for the Vicars uses.

The contrary he calls extirpandae consuetudinis vitium, a wicked custom to
be rooted out.

Clement the third proceeded further against them, and in case they did not
provide and present accordingly, he then ordered from them that power to the
Ordinary.

Clement the fourth confirmed and enlarged the former decrees. Clement the
fifth, whetted still a sharper edge upon the former Constitutions, and
threatened Ecclesiastical censures upon the persisting delinquents.

Moreover it is known, how the Popes (for sear of others negligence) had
their Apostolical Conservators in the Vicars behalfes. Neither passed any
Appropriations from the Sea of Rome without special provisoes for these
purposes, as Petrus Rebuffus witnesses. And this text was frequently alleged
against them, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treads out the
corn.

You may soon see then by that which has been said, how most of our modern
Impropriatours come far short of the very Monks and Popes in piety and honest
dealing toward the Church.

That learned man above mentioned, termed these sorts of sacrilegious abuses in
his time, perniciem et exitium totius Reipublicae Christianae, the bane and
destruction of the whole Christian Commonwealth.

Surely, if he had lived in this worser age of ours, and beheld the cunning
and cruel multiplication and increase of this direful monster, he would have
fallen into most bitter exclamation against it, and in some manner have
resembled it to the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place where
it ought not.

Alas, it has waxed apace to the waste of the Church: It has quickly
augmented into a viperous brood, no less deformed then ravenous, which make no
meet conscience (according to divine command) of the welfare of our holy
mother the Church, and of the maintenance of Christ's Clergy therein, the
spiritual Pastors; but take to themselves the houses of God in possession.
Psalm. 84. with a hellish greediness. Neither seemed the light of this
serpentine Monster any better aspected then this bodily composed shape: For
certainly if his evil eyes had well he held the Son of righteousness, such
a gracious influence of supernall illumination should the^ have shined upon
the^, as they would never thus (contrary to the light of divine religion and
natural reason) have insatiably coveted to muzzle the mouth of the painful
ox, and suffer some slow-bellyed Cretian beasts to devour the grain.

Nor allow the layterers the reward of the laborers: nor starve the
industrious workman, and pamper up the idle person with his appointed portion.

The rules amongst the best Lawyers, in this case run with a primary respect
unto the Service of the Churches before any others necessities. The Vicar which
excriseth the Cure must be preferred above all other persons, whither exempt or
not exempted, Religious or Laicke, Ecclesiastical or Secular, Cloister and
Chapter, etc. be the words of Bowichius and Rebuffus.

Neither do they suppose a bare sustentation to be sufficient; perchance they
write, he shall not be driven into the extremes of want: yet nevertheless the
portion may be much incompetent, if we regard a due and decent fashion
(according to the convenience and dignity of the Ministerial calling) in their
meat, drink and clothing and other congruencies.

It is not fit they should be enforced to feed fabis et aliis vilibus cibariis,
with course fare and mean diet; nor yet their garments to be of the lowest
rank: nec sibi debent coquere, neither may they want necessary and seemly
attendance of servants. For as that Benefice is incompetent, which does not
well suffice to the maintenance of the Incumbent, and those which are necessary
to serve about him.

So these grave and judicious Authors affirm, that whenever the Vicars
portion comes in question, considerabitur in iis honestas, nt honoretur in
iis officium sacerdotale, the excellency of the Priesthood with the due
requisites, must be worthily considerd and honored, Thou shall not muzzle the
etc.

Heu dedecus ingens! Fie then upon it, when the Impropriatour boasts that he
knows how to abound, but the Incumbent is compelled to bewail that he
knows how to be abased; when as the Impropriatour laugheth that he knows
how to be full, but the Incumbent must lament, that he knows how to be
hungry and suffer need.

This is a most unequal parting of Saint Paul's entire speech, Philippians
fourth, and against the tenor of my text.

It savoureth of no good piety nor conscience, that the Priest like Plinies
fish Lutarius, should perform a great deal of labor for food; But the
Impropriatour, like the Egyptian fish Sargus, should ravine up the meat.

The sacrilegious would verify the saying of the woman of Canaan Matthew 15.
upon Clergy men; The Dogs eat of the crummes, which fall from their Masters
table: And so far as they can, transform the Ministry into the Jesuit
Acostaes poor fish Rambos, which is feign to sustain it self upon those
refuse pittances, that slip out of the devouring mouths of the insatiable
Tiburons.

It was an old and authentical plea in the behalf of the officiating
Ministers for their preeminence, Vicarius agit de damno vitando, monasterium
vero de lucro captando* how the Vicars labor for the good of the soul, but
the Impropriatours endeavor for the goods of the world.

What sign of equity can then be seen in so strange and sinister, sic vos non
vobis; for the Clergy Bees to do all the business in collecting the honey and
composing the combs, and the Impropriators drones, ignavium pecus, to consume
and devour up all the honey, the reward of the others work?

For the spiritual Shepherds to keep and to feed the flocks, and
nevertheless, the carnal Impropriatours to carry away the fleeces, to reap
the profits?

For these birds of the Altar to sing, and wait upon the Altar, and yet those
banes of the Altar to go away with the benefit of the Altar? For these Oxen of
the Priesthood to plow painefully, and yet the profane Impropriatours to
muzzle them shamefully? Thou shall not muzzle etc.

The Emperor Augustus Caesar, hearing how cruelly King Herod had dealt with
his hopeful children, affirmed that it was better to be one of Herod's Swine
then his Son, because Hogs had their privilege in Judea inviolably
preserved, but Herod's children were tyrannoussy murdered, against that
prerogative which God and nature had given them.

Thus might we profess in like manner, that the condition of the
Impropriatours oxen seems much more fairly tolerable, then the state and
fortune of their Vicars and hirelings. Those have commonly their meet and
convenient provender to strengthen them unto their appointed task and
business.

But the ordinary portion of these is to serve and sterve, to work and want,
to be earnest in season, and out of season, yet without any due respect, and
reason had of them in that deserving regard.

We may justly complain at the miserable indignity of our case, with the words
of Bildad, Job. 18. wherefore are we counted as beasts, and reputed vile in
your sight? or rather, why are we worse contemned and baselier reckoned of
then bruit creatures?

These pitiless sorts of oppressors resemble Pharaoh Necoh, killing tyrants
indeed, to grant these Israelites no sufficient straw, and yet to exact the
full tale of the bricke^, as when they had it; to bereave these Churchlampes of
their requisite oil, and yet to remit nothing of their cantinuall burning:

To clippe off the helpefull wings of these sacred birds, and yet to enforce
them unto a wonted flight of ministerial offices; to cut asunder the useful
sinews of these men of God, and yet to call upon them to run the race that
is set before them: to disarme these Soldiers of Christ from their necessary
provision and weapons, and yet in praelia trudere inermes, to urge them into
warfare, and thrust them upon the front of the battle.

To deny fit tools and meet materials, and yet to constrain these mystical
Architects for to toil and build, as if they had abundance: to suppress the
means of all decent performance, and yet to press the practice of all manner
of duties; whith holds no good quarter with the rule of my text: Thou shall
not muzzle etc.

Upon a strange surfit which some ill tempered Clergy men, once took by a
sudden overflow of outward prosperity, after a long time of persecution, arose
the proverb of the Churches daughter riches which undid her Mother.

Here was need to reform the disorderly and peccant members, but not to remove
the divinely appropriate means, to apply a remedy, not to oppose a ruin.

What an unconscionable and cruel inequality is then discernable in the
Impropriatours course, which by one ravenous mouth of sacrilege, do devour
both mother and daughter; spoiling Christ and swallowing up his Spouse; robbing
the Lord, and ruinating the labourer?

What cares the Atheist for honest payment of his tithes, when as he has
despised all true religion? What faithfulness may we find in the Papists
touching this point of tenths, since that he distasteth our present religion?

But the Protestant Impropriattour seems to surpass them both in excess of
Church robbery: For he teaches that a man should not steal, and yet himself
steals, he abhors idols, and yet he commits sacrilege: he says a man
should avoid adultery, and yet he runs a whoring after his own inventions:
he makes his, boast of the Law, and yet through breaking of the Law he
dishonors God, and causes his Name to be blasphemed among the Gentiles,
Romans 2.

Will a man rob God? yet they have robbed him in his tithes and offerings, and
so are cursed with a curse: Malachi. 3.

This was at the siege of Jerusalem, one of Josephus grievous expostulations
against John and others of the seditious; if any man should take from thee thy
daily food, no doubt, but thou would account him thine enemy: can thou
then hope that God, whom thou have deprived of daily Sacrifice, will assist
thee?

These Impropriatours, which debar the laboring Ministers of the word, from
their liberal maintenance, deal no better with the Lord touching his worship
and Service; what favor then can they flatter themselves with to find at his
hand, without hearty repentance?

Time and custom with some color of authority have taken away the sense of
this sin, and turned the remorselesse offenders into the brazen faced
impudency of Solomon's harlot, Proverbs 30. Such is the way of an adulterous
Woman, she eats and wipeth her mouth, and says, I have done no wickedness.

Some serpentine Patrons of these usurpers upon the Clergies patrimony are
content to permit (where they cannot prohibit) a continuation of tithes still
to the Minnistery, per vim exemplarem, by imitation of the Jewish state ordered
by the Almighty; but not per vim oblig ativam, by any binding force under the
Gospel.

Our divine right to the tithes is already (in a stipulation to our propounded
doctrine) manifoldly made good. But admit we had (as they saine and suggest) no
obligatory warrant, but only an exemplary virtue to plead for our interests,
yet this seems enough to shoot such Iulianizers through with their own
shaftes.

For where can the Impropriatours show so much color to countenance their
secrilegious encroachments?

Did ever the Indiciall Laws of the Jews afford them any such exemplary
matter, to maintain their case with? No surely, for Nature, Law, Gospel, Jew
and Gentile, Grecian and Barbarian have often given the voices of their
practices and protestations, against all such invaders of the Priests
inheritance.

And yet, (tell it not in Gath, neither publish it within the wall of Askelon,
let not the uncircumcised know of it) there are many persons named Christians,
who to mount up themselves into the highest rooms of worldly Magnificoes, make
no conscience to diminish and cast down the Ministers of the word, into the
lowest center of miserable mendicants.

No small scandal to our Religion is this contumacy against the divine
Injunction, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth etc.

The Apostle Paul affirms Romans 15. that the strong ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak, this is a general rule concerning all sorts.

But the Impropriatour(whose brow is brass, whose neck is an iron sinew, and
whose heart is as hard as flint) he regards it with the least, although it
binds him with the most. He rampeth like a strong Lion upon the prey of the
benefit, but he leaves the whole burden to oppress the weak Incumbent.

We are told Deuteronomy 22. Thou shall not see thy brothers ass, or his ox
fall down by the way, and hide thy self from them; thou shall surely help him
to lift them up again; yea, be they the beasts of him that hates thee. Exo. 23

But alas, there are too many Savage beasts in other places besides Ephesus. 1
Corinthians. 15. Namely cruel and brutish men ( Theophylact and Primasius
interpret the words) which practice nothing more then to oppress down the
painful Paul's of the Clergy, and to let them lie in all extremity.

We read 1 John 3. Who so has this worlds good, and sees his brother need and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of GOD in
him?

Nevertheless, whiles these impious Belshazzars may drink and quaffe with
their companions in the golden and silver vessels taken out of the house of God
Daniel. 5. whiles this merciless brood, may with the rich glutton, be clothed
in purple and sine linen, and fare sumptuously every day. Luke. 16.

They have small compassion at the Lazarus of the spoiled Ministry, which want
not seldom, the refuse, that fall from their rich Tables: yet they have small
remorse at the Lazarus of many famishing souls; sterved through the accursed
means of their execrable sacrilege.

They have small respect at the grievous consequences of their corrupt example,
because upon the opening of this bottomless pit, a gross and dismal smoke
arises, by reason of which the Sun and the air are darkened. Apocalypse. 9.
fugere pudor, verumque, fidesque; in quorum subiere locum fraudesque dolique,
infidiaeque, et vis, et amor sceleratus habendi: All true devotion and pious
affection to the Church consumed away; and there pressed into their place all
manner of covetous circumvention and sacrilegious rapine. Thou shall not
muzzlee the mouth, etc.

Behold from hence also a swerving world of lesser Church thieves took heart
afresh to commit manifold spoil upon the Clergy. They excuse themselves by the
Impropriators ravening up total Benefices, to purloine and invade smaller
parcels of tithes and glebes.

Like the Pirate, who justified his robbing of the meaner Seafaring
passengers, with a few Galleys; because Alexander the Great, with huge Armies
and Navies pillaged and preyed upon whole Kingdoms and Provinces.

No mervaile then that this Impropriation Monster, meets with so bad mention
not only among grave Divines, but also great Lawyers.

The Lord chief Justice Cook, that late was, observed out of Ecclesiastical
History, how Julian the Apostata having a purpose wholly to ruin the
profession of Christianity, from which himself had foully revolted; used not
the sword (as other persecutors did) but took away the means of the
Ministry, etc.

This crafty Fox well knew that the depriving them of these, would necessarily
draw on the destruction of the other. And thus divelish is the profane
Impropriatours dealing.

He utters at last this prophetical sentence, the decay of the revenues of
the holy Church, will one day be the subversion of the Service of God, and of
his Religion.

Learned Plowden in his Commentaries writes of this observation long since by
our reverend Judges, how the Monks perfidious purloining all the chief
profits to themselves, from the poor Vicars, ushered in a world of wicked
abuses. And this is the profane Impropriatours impious case.

He adds, as the revenue of the Parish Church decayed, so likewise did
preaching. The Emperor Justinian was wont to affirm, that from the beggary of
the Ministry, follows the subversion of that holy order, and consequently of
true Religion. But herein the notorious Impropriators must be appealed as
grievously guilty.

These sacred horse-leaches which never are satiated, Prover. 30. they have
little regard to the fearful judgment of God, who, at length without
repentance and restitution, will verify upon them Solomans divinely inspired
saying; It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy.

The King will question how they came in hither, not having a wedding garment?
And bids his servantes bind them hand and foot, and take them away, and cast
them into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Matthew. 22. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treads out the
corn.

6. We demonstrate our observation from the recital of sundry inco^veniences
which are incurred through defect of its due execution; when as the painful
Ministers are deprived of their competent maintenance.

1 We set down the decay of true Religion. Doctor Andrews a Prelate of famous
memory, discovers an indissolvable combination between sacred manners, sacred
means, sacred persons, and sacred revenues.

These he accounts so closely connexed, as the devouring of the one is the
violation of them all. And whiles the Laity would swallow the last, they
subvert the rest.

It may be granted indeed to come for the most part to pass, that when the
portions of the Levites are not given them, they flee every one to his field,
Nehemiah 13. Alas, in their absence* where is the teaching Priest? but the
wants of him brings men to be without the true God, and witbout Law, 2. Chron
15.

For Romans 10. How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and
how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they
hear without a Preacher? and how shall they preach except they be sent?

And how may we presume that the Lord will vouchsafe to send them which bring
glad tidings of good things, and preach the Gospel of peace, unless men
thought their feet more beautiful, and gave them better welcome.

But verily if this indignation happen, then Proverbs 29 There is no vision,
then the people must needs perish. For behold then the days come, says the
Lord God, that I will send a famine into the Land, not a famine of bread, uor a
thirst for water, but of hearing the Word of the Lord. And they shall wander
from Sea to Sea, and from the North even to the East; they shall run too and
fro to seek the Word of the Lord, and shall not find it, Amos 8.

Monstrous then is the mischief and misery of this insatiable and direful
voracitie of sacred revenues, so consequently of sacred persons, of sacred
manners, of sacred means: And in the execrable ravine of them, lo, these
mystical Canibals swallow up also humane creatures souls.

-- Quis talia faendo Myrmidonum,
Dolopumve, aut duri miles Vlyssi,
Temperet a lachrymis? --
What stony hearted person would not distill down showers of tears at such a
spiritual destruction? Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge, who eat
up my people as they eat bread, and call not upon the Lord? Ps. 14.

Honor is the nurse of good Arts; Preferment is the promoter of Virtues: a
liberal stipend allureth the valiant Soldiers unto service: good wages
attract the greatest laborers best diligence: the richness of the prize
adds winged speed unto the runners of a race; the sufficient furniture of the
rack and manger does strengthen the work of the toylsome oxen: the plants of
the Sanctuary will not well prosper, without the waters of the Sanctuary supple
and refresh them: Ezech. 47.

Hezekiah commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem to give the portion of
the Priests and the Levites, that they might be encouraged in the Law of the
Lord.

Demosthenes told the Athenians how they must not expect to find such men, who
to do them service, would be willing to undo their own selves.

Neither is it to be thought, that men of excellent parts and eminent hopes can
be readily won unto this divine profession (Master Perkins complayneth)
whiles the sacred Ministry is so frequently compelled to perform a laborious
travail in the shameful and tedious path way of beggary, and much contempt
over-dowdeth the Clergy.

God in his Law (he further shows) took a strict order to prevent this
mischief touching the livings of the Levits. If he had not so ordained, it is
like the corruption of men might have driven them to no less extremities, then
are the Ministers of this age, who now (under the Gospel) be left much
unprovided, although deserving to be best rewarded.

He commends the children of this world (meaning the Papists) as much wiser
in their kind concerning this point, then the Church of God, which he
affirms to be a notorious blemish unto the reformed profession, likewise a
lamentable eclypse unto the beauty and brightness of Religion.

Lest therefore the number of able Pastors should decrease apace, and the
knowledge of the Gospel among us decay with them as fast: he does earnestly
wish and admonish both Supetiours and Inferiors to be careful and jealous in
their several places for providing a sufficient remedy against this dangerous
inconvenience.

For Panormitan well observes, Adtennitatem Beneficiorum necessario sequitur
ignorantia sacerdotum: An unlearned and disable Ministry is for the most part
occasioned from the poorness of Ecclesiastical Livings.

And Pope Alexander the Third blaming the horrible avarice and abuse of many
Impropriating Monks, adds this as the cursed fruit of so vile and impious a
practice, That in those Regions scarce could there be found any Parochial
Priest, who had even so much as a small portion of skill in the liberal Arts.
From whence (Pope Clement the Third truly declared) pericula imminent animarum,
the grievous dangers of humane creatures souls do grow on apace.

If men held in as deer a regard their immortal souls, as they generally do
their corruptible bodies, then would they never thus basely grudge unto the
Pastors of them a liberal affluence of all necessaries: so that no want of
worthy respect, nor of time, nor of means, might discourage them from making
meet and manifold provision to lead, to feed, to fold to defend their flocks.

But whereas the needful springs of these due supplies become dry or diverted,
Behold there the very life of the Ministers duty, and the peoples edification
languisheth.

The sheep will range and scatter up and down at their own pleasures: Sordent
quae possunt semper haberi, All their longing is for strange Novelties, with
unworthy neglect of their own Pastors, and so through their sides they wound
Religion.

The Shepherd (whose living is little better then an Alms) is overmuch laden
with the study of looking for himself and his family, he cannot care as he
ought, for his Cure. Hereupon his own pressures and exigences confine the
precious liberty of his place into obsequious slavery.

Thus whiles they fear to be thought enemies for telling the truth, they fall
by flattery to trade for untrusty friends: they act the fawning Parasites in
stead of faithful Preachers: and not daring to profess themselves honest
Freemen of Verona, they appear the servile vassals of London and Placentia:
because composed to praise and please, but not to reprove and pierce.

The sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, Ephesians. 6. they bear in
vain, for they have no courage to cry aloud, not to spare, to lift up their
voices like trumpets, and to show the people their transgressions, Esaias 58.

Necessity insinuates a safer seeming course, namely, to sooth up their sins,
whose benevolence they always need, and whose evil will they are not able to
undergo. Thus they proclayme peace, and there was no peace: and one built up a
wall, and so others dawbed it with untempered mortar, and sow pillows to all
arm-holes, Ezech. 13. to the dishonor of God, to the ruin of Religion, to the
destruction of souls.

Hinc prima mali labes: this pestilent mischief sprung from the impious neglect
of this precept: Thou shall not muzzle the mouth, etc.

I allege two profane derogation from God, first in his honor; Because, when
as 2. Cor. 5. We are Ambassadors for Christ, it follows then according to our
Saviors saying, Luke 10. He that hears you hears me, and he that
despises you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that seut
me.

Earthly Princes (in respect of themselves interessed) be never wont to
dispense with wrong and disgraces done their Messengers, but expect in all
places their worthy entertainment: witness David's revenge upon Hanun the King
of the children of Ammon for this abuse: Also for the like offense, the utter
subversion of the famous City Corinth by the Romans.

Surely the Almighty Lord must be imagined much more sensible of contempt and
injuries offered against those whom he sends, in regard of his supreme
Majesty interested with his delegated servants.

Behold in his speech unto the Prophet Samuel, What he says unto all his
Ministers; they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me. He that
honors the Priest, honnoureth God, and he that despises the Priest, by
little and little falls to this also, that he will use reproach against God
himself, Saint Chrysostom shows.

But how should this requisite honor be duly performed without his meet and
appointed Ministers. Again, how should those Ministers of his sufficiently
attend their Function without answerable mayntenance? But sacrilege despoyling
them of that, does consequently derogate from God in his honor.

2. It derogateth from God in his rightful claim and interest. The earth it
the Lords, and the fullness thereof, the world and they that dwell therein, Psalm.
24. Consideret homo quod omnia Dei sunt per quae vivit, sine terra, sine
flumina, sine semina: Saint Augustine advises man to remember, that all the
means of his life come from God. Yea, he induces his Majesty thus
expostulating this case; Meus est homo quem feci; mea est terra quam collis;
mea sunt semina quae spargis: mea animalia quae fatigas: mei sunt imbres and
pluviae: and ventorum flamina mea sunt: meus est Solis calor: omnia vivendi
alimenta mea, etc.

Mine is the Man whom I have made; mine is the Land which the labourer tilleth;
mine are the seeds which the Husbandmen sow: mine are the beasts which be
toyled and wearied in the work: mine are the soaking showers and refreshfull
rains: the cherishing winds receive also from me their welcome wings; the
comfortable heat of the Sun is mine; I am likewise the Lord of all the Elements
whereby thou live.

Since then God is the supreme owner of all, and from his free bounty flows our
total maintenance, the duty of justice and gratitude binds us to render
something back for a token of his Sovereignty, and a testimony of our thanks.

Irenaeus writes, that it was the use of the Church through the World in his
time, and received from the Apostles; to offer some things of the blessings
that they lived by, as the first fruits thereof to him, who gave these things
unto them.

Now qui dignatus est totum dare, decimaem a nobis dignatur repetere, God that
vouchsafed to give us the whole, vouchsafes also to require back again the
tenth. This most munificent bestower of all the rest, reserveth only but that
part unto himself (for that his holy Word proclaymeth to be his inheritance,
separate to his service) and a portion out of the other nine parts to relieve
and supply the poor.

Whosoever therefore (says the same Augustine) is desirous either to gain unto
himself a gracious reward; or to entreat an indulgent remission of his sins;
let him conscionably pay the tenth to the Clergy, and out of the residue parts,
let him charitably compassionate the poor.

Oh mankind (he further adds) empty of zealous devotion, but full of
perfidious defraudation, since thou can not but know, that all good things
which thou enjoyest are the Lords, what an unthankful heart then have thou oh
unworthy wretch, to return nothing back again of his own to the giver of all
things demanding it? Lo what he requires is a due debt and tribute: thou
can not deny it, thou must not diminish it, thou may not delay it, Thou
shall not muzzle the mouth, etc.

3. This sacrilegious usurpation of the Ministers maintenance does derogate
from God in his wisdom: There are many learned persons (and some of their
opinions extant in print) although not so resolutely holding tithes to be due
by divine right, yet they conceive no course else so apt and indifferent for
the Clergies provision as by the payment of them.

And this the reason which they allege herein, because every politic Law is
to be supposed the more right and equal, by how much it resembles and
approaches nearer to the Law of the same kind, which the Lord has ordained
amongst the Hebrews.

But it is certain that the Law of God among the Israelites was for the payment
of tithes unto the Misters which officiated in holy duties, as well in one
place of that Country as in another: and therefore the continuance of them
still to the same purpose seems very requisite.

Moreover, it is a common maxim, Vetus lex nulla antiquanda est, quae neque
imbecillis sit, neqne inutilis; no old Law is to be abrogated, which neither is
too weak nor unprofitable.

When as therefore no want of worth, no waste of strength, no wane of utility
can be discovered in this divinely enacted Statute touching tithes for the
Ministers.

For Gualter on Matthew 23, says, Quae justior ratio excogitari potest alendi
ministros, quam ut ex decimis vivant? What juster course can be devised? what
better reason may be imagined for the Clergies maintenance, then to receive the
means hereof by the payment of tithes?

Surely then it savoureth of no good discretion nor conscience in man (as if he
presumed himself wiser than his Maker) to disanull this Law. Thou shall not
muzzle the mouth, etc.

3. I urge that the withholding competent maintenance from the laboring
Ministers is contrary unto legal right in sundry respects.

Doctor Rives observes that both the ancient grants of Appropriations, and the
forms of confirming them from Rome run in this manner; saving the sustentation
of the Vicar, and the right of the Bishop; reserving to us and our successors
free power, when as it behooves, of supplying and augmenting the Vicars
portion, out of the tithes, etc. for his better undergoing the burden of his
Cure, and charges payable therout,

Yea, he infers out Ludovieus Romanus, that the Solution of procurations was
pro modo facultatum Ecclesiae, as the Church has ability to spare them. For
thus is the mind and words of the Law says Hostiensis, ut Ecclesia ultra
posse non gravetur, the visitor must bear his own charges, rather then be
grievous unto the Church.

Moreover how the Laws of the Land consent herewith in favor of the
distressed Vicar, he alleges some Statutes in the reign of Edward the third,
Richard the second, and Henry the fourth, that the Diocesan of the place, in
the concession of any Appropriation should discreetly and piously ordain a
yearly sum of money for relief of the poor, and the Vicar to be well and
sufficiently endowed.

At length he professes, that he could never know of any Statute, made since
the Abbey-dissolution either abrogative or derogatory, to the Common Laws in
his case.

And when as those monastical houses, etc. were put down, the King and his
heirs for ever were by the statute to hold them, in the same ample manner as
the Abbot then had in the right of his place: And saving to all persons, Bodies
politic and their Successors, all such right, claim, title, interest,
possession, rent-charges, Annuities, Leases, Farms, Offices, Fees, Portions,
Penfrons, etc.

These words seem of much efficacy and extent. I infer from them; a Vicar
had at the time of dissolution, right, claim, and interest to so much of the
Appropriate Rectory as was requisite for his congruous, and competent
maintenance: this right is therefore still reserved to him and his Successors.

Had the Monasteries continued, this action bad been good against them: and
that they well knew, and thereupon sought to fortify themselves against it, by
the Incumbents oath, bond, and by purchase of the Popes privilege.

So now they being dissolved, the action holds still good against the
Impropriatours succeeding in the Abbots place.

The Diocesan likewise at that season, had a right of power, and Jurisdiction
in himself, whenever the Abbot presented a Clerk unto him for institution,
not to admit him without a convenient portion, assigned for his maintenance.
Which if the Abbot performed not within the time limited, then had the Bishop
right in himself to collate the Vicaridge, and to make a fit allowance at his
discretion, out of the sequestered fruits and profits of the Appropriation.

And in case of relectancy and disobedience, the Diocesan, might compel the
Abbot by Ecclesiastical censure, and if he stood refractory, there followed
imprisonment by the secular power, without-baile or mainprize, until the order
were obeyed.

And if he presented not at all, the Bishop then had that right devolved unto
him as in case of lapse. Therefore this right remains safe unto the Diocesans
still against the Impropriatours: And they indeed, as with no good conscience;
so against just law incroach, and usurp upon all these rights. Moreover, it
savoureth of a disposition both une quall, and unmercifull in these
Impropriatours, to oppose a new augmentation of Vicaridge endowments; because
(besides of many damnable customers defalcations) the rates of all things are
now inhaunsed unto higher prices: in which respect, day laborers arc allowed
by Law to raise their wages: Further, although King Henry the eight dissolved
the Monasteries, yet he continued that Religion still, that brought the Vicars
(beyond their portion) a great part of their maintenance, in oblations,
altarages, confession, profits, Masse-moneys, and such like Fees.

Seeing therefore that now a pious reformation, has put these out of date and
use, just reason and equity require a supply, and recompense to the Vicars in
lieu of them.

Finally, since tithes were given in consideration of preaching the word, and
ministering the Sacraments, unto the payers of them: Beneficium non debetur nisi
propter officium, spiritual benefices and spiritual offices should be
relatives.

What Justice then appears, for the people to be driven for to pay unto the
Improptiatours, the tenth which never do Minister unto them, in the sacred
exercises of the Service of God; And those of that divine function which
perform these parts toward them, are put off with so poor and base a
parcel; as that learned and pious Civilian-Docter Rives has in regard
thereof, this written wish; Our horse-boyes wages are not great,
Would God our Vicars ware no worse.


Woe unto him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may
set his nest on high: he has consulted shame to his house, and finned against
his soul. For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the
timber shall answer it, Habakkuk. 2.

Let the perverse usurpers of tithes, glebes, etc. please their fancies and
prevaricate with others, under a misseterme of their turning into Chattels and
Lay-fees. If they had quite lost (through their forced alienation) the quality
and nature of Church duties and goods, why were the profane intruders upon
them feign to be enabled by favor of a Statute in the three and thirtieth of
Henry the eight, to sue for them in Ecclesiastical Courts, and not have
recovered them at the Common Law?

Surely then they cease not their continual cries against the unrighteous
detainers of them, with the stone in the wall, with the beam out of the
rafter, and with the hedge unto the field; this is not our place, let us
return, etc. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth, etc.

4. I object farther, this profane defrauding of the Ministers in their
maintenance, appears wilfully to shut the eyes against the light of natural
reason, which shines forth with the luster of this conclusion, that the
workman ought in equity to have his wages, and the laborers deserve to
receive their reward.

This seems a character so deeply engraven in common reason, as although the
direful hands of impious sacrilege, be shamefully audacious to incroach upon
the substance of the tithes, etc. yet are they not sufficiently able to
extinguish the stampes of it is truth.

Namely, that the excellency of the Clergies labor (being in quality and
industry, in place and pains supereminent above others must needs aptly
challenge the most worthy stipend and best temuneration.

To this purpose the Lord Archbishop Sands, affirms that there is no state
(though of that height, as fear, honor, obedience and tribute is due to it)
which may more rightly challenge a competent and sufficient living, then the
Ministers of the word of God.

Wherefore those which repine at the reasonable maintenance of them, they seem
to have put out the very light of nature in themselves.

5 Because this hinderance and detraction of the spiritual Pastors portion is
very averse, and degenerate from the conceit and course of venerable Antiquity.

For decimae erant ante legem sub consilis; in lege sub praecepto, post legem
in liberate Spiritus, the payment of tenths, before the Law seemed to subsist
under counsel, and in the time thereof they stood firm by precept, and when
as that was once expired, still they are good in the Evangelicall liberty of
the Spirit.

As in the season of the old Law, the affection of the faithful people unto
the Temple and Service there spared no expenses: yea, some of the chiefest
Princes of the Gentiles, Cyrus, Artaxerxes, Darins, Alexander Magnus, Ptolomeus
Philadelphus, Antiochus Epiphanes, etc. showed themselves in this sort
exceedingly bounteous.

So since the birth of our Savior Christ, the pious munificence of Emperors,
Kings, etc. also the jealous devotion of Christian people ran in the current of
continual addition to the Churches patrimony, but not in substraction from her
propriety.

The Clergy held their Lands free from Taxes and Impositions, their children
held their Inheritance with like freedom in honor of their Fathers
Priesthood.

But now a long time, since hellish iniquity has abounded, the holy love of
the most part of our Christian World is waxed cold: the doleful tune of the
desolate Churches Song is thus sad and lamentable, Isaiah 24. My leanness, my
leanness, woe unto me: the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously; yea,
the treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously.

King James of excellent memory employed in some places of his Realms, pious
wisdom and power for a relief of our Sions shameful distress. He gave
moreover many thousand Acres of good ground to the Irish Churches, an
illustrious monument of his religious liberality.

Our now most gracious King (God be thanked) follows the devout footsteps of
his happy Father in paternall protection and favor of his Clergy. His
Majesty's Sovereigne power and sanctified disposition is able and willing with
the precious balm of heavenly justice, to cure this otherwise unrecoverable
and inveterate ulcer, and to compel the due practice of this divine precept:
Thou shall not muzzle the month, etc.

6. I allege when the maintenance of the Ministers lies at such a low ebb,
it usually occasioneth Schism in the Church, and Faction of the State;
especially (as for the most part comes to pass) where poor beneficed
Parishes are most populous.

Amongst sundry wise and learned persons sacrilege has been concluded the
profane mother of these deformed daughters.

It is no less lamentable then shameful to consider some Clergy men (through
defect of a legal provision) being stung with the, smart of want, and put to
extremity, they are forced to submit their necks unto a slavish yoke of servile
dependence, and base engagement unto their wealthier people, who are able to
succor and support them.

They are bound to the base peace of obsequious flattery by the cruel chain
of intolerable necessity: so they dare not but quietly digest, whatsoever
these inordinately do, either in conversation of life, or by confusion at
Church, either in the rudeness of their works, or by the irregularity of their
worship.

Neither durst they refuse to stand as they set them, for single Ciphers, and
suffer them patiently to number their sums (at their own pleasures) with the
figures of such idolized Ministers as they most fancy, whether Paul or Apollo,
or Cephas: yea, I wish there wanted cause sometimes to add, be he Martin
Mar-prelate, or Julian, or Judas, or Satan transforming himself into an Angel
of light, they may scarce murmr at his preferment.

Moreover, whiles the Clergy remains miserably oppressed with poverty (which
contempt of their persons, and neglect of their Ministry usually accompany) so
long does that necessity of theirs, being of an active nature, seem to call in
many of them a continual scrutiny of devises and shifts for the succor and
relief of it self.

And because those courses which swim against the common stream of government,
and nevertheless carry an external countenance of piety and sincerity, have
ever appeared most prevalent for the promotion of sinister designs; they
palliate their subtle practice under this specious habit.

Thus they declaim against the corruption of the times, and bitterly inveigh
against the Ceremonies and Polity of the Church.

It is their usual property to speak evil of those which are in Authority:
chiefly they draw our the sharp sword of Schismatic censure against
Ecclesiastical Superiors.

The drift of their whole doctrine concerning them sounds always With this
Anabaptisticall accent, down with them to the ground.

They never preach against Church-robbery, nor press in any Sermon the true
payment of tithes. But for their own peculiar interests (without any due
distinguishment of different reasons) they persuade this Paradoxe, how when the
Church is poorest, she is purest.

And whereas the ancient Fathers determined out of the sacred Scriptures, that
God is to be worshipped with some liberal return of his own bounty. And how he
must be thankfully acknowledged for the munificent Lord and Donor of all
blessings, by a devout and free-hearted reflux, and rendering back again a meet
and sufficient portion of the good things and benefits given us, to his honor
and service.

Such sentences they insimulate to favor of Popish superstition, and whiles
they are sure God has no necessity, they are as secure to do him no duty:
condemning for an error in opinion to offer unto him, but commending as a mayn
ingredient of Reformation to take away from his Church.

Thus having by these plausible insinuations skrewed themselves into a world of
the peoples affections, unto whom nothing for the most part, is wont to be more
grateful and pleasing, then liberty of censure, matter of innovation,
disorder, singularity, and Religion at their own price (which is next cost
nothing) lo, They get private gains out of the public losses; and having
brought conformable Ministers out of a good conceit into an evil estimation
with their Parishes, they climb up by their breaches, and supply themselves
with benevolences arising out of t he others ruins.

These crooked practices have already had their dangerous consequences: the
world has seldom been without many bleeding witnesses hereof. Germany in
particular may be wayle not only her flain thousands with Saul, nor ten
thousands with David, but her handred thousands.

For Schism is not accustomed to stay long confined in the Church, but she is
likewise wont to disseminate Faction in the State.

Archbishop Sands (of excellent memory for the cause of the Gospel) preached at
Paul's Cross, that by reason of the want of worthy wages unto these workmen for
salvation, this mischief spreads wider, and regards as little the Throne of
David, as the Chair of Moses, the Scepter as the Book, the Prince a the
Prophet, the Civil a the Ecclesiastical State.

Thus as unity and peace between the Sovereign and the Subjects, and withal
the people mutually among themselves, comprehends the true and proper glory of
earthly Kingdoms, typically figuring the celestial unity in blessedness and
eminency of the Triumphant Church of God.

So Schism and Division of any people into variety of opinions and affections,
is the bane and subversion of a Church and Nation, resembling the confusions
and perturbations of Satan's infernal Regiment.

But these will never be totally suppressed, nor can there want wicked
instruments to encourage the Subjects for to run a course of contrariety and
opposition to the laws and personal practice of the Prince himself, in
matters conversant about the exercise of Religion.

Neither shall we be free from the hazard of perilous Faction in our State by
occasion hereof, until the establishment of a proportionable mayntenance for
the spiritual Pastors does arm and animate them by example and doctrine to
teach and practice (without pusillanimous dread or dependence upon any man
(religious and loyal obedience; the giving to God the things which are Gods,
and unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's: the fear of the Lord, and the
honor of the King. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth, etc.

7. I allege the divine curses against bad and dishonest tithing; therefore
still rather where a requisite supply and provision for the sufficient
mayntenance of spiritual Pastors is wanting.

It is manifest, Malac. 3. that as upon the performance of this duty, a
mavelous prosperity of the several fruits of the ground, a gracious opening
of the windows of Heaven, and the pouring down plentiful showers of blessings
are promised: So for the neglect and contempt of this notable present, confider
in the same Chapter most grievous maledictions threatened.

Our Elders (Saint Augustine expresses) had a happy abundance of all good
things, because they were faithful in the paying to God his tenths, and unto
Caesar his Tribute. But since that devotion of tithing waxed cold, sacrilegious
persons have by their covetousness in that kind, defrauded themselves of a
double blessing; namely of the promises of this life, and of the life to come.

Other exactions arise to punish their execrable avarice: what is stolen from
the Church cannot be preserved in the chest, what is grudged toward the
Sanctuary is urged into the treasury: when men murmr to give the tenth they
are made to forego the total.

Dabis impio militi quod non vis dare Sacerdoti, whiles men deprive the
careful Ministers, they become a spoil to the cruel soldiers. The Lord is
always ready and liberal to bless; but the wicked perverseness of man
opposes wretched impediments to hinder it: for he would have God bestow all
things upon him, and yet he will offer nothing again unto this bountiful
owner of all things.

Quid faceres, si novem partibus sibi sumptis tibi decimans reliquisset? What
could thou do, if he took all the nine parts to himself, and left the
tenth only unto thee?

Thus indeed he not seldom deals when as he withholdeth his former and
latter rain, to wither and waste away thy wished harvest with a woeful
drought: or when he smites thy fruits with unseasonable storms of hayle: or
blasteth them with extremity of untimely Frosts.

And so thou grievously failest of thy covetous and greedy computation, the
nine parts being taken away from thee, because thou refusedst to pay the tenth
which the Lord requited.

For this is his most righteous course to turn them unto the tenth, which will
not offer to him the tenth: to punish them with want, which famish those which
work.

Witness either the proper experience of offending persons, or else the events
of their posterities, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads
out the corn.

The use of the whole premises is to admonish all sorts of Christians to
practice the doctrine of my text: to tithe and confer toward their Ministers
mayntenance, according to the rules of holy Writ, within the compass of their
several vocations.

Private persons must apply themselves unto Christians patience: the properly
have no warrantable power to redress and alter public inconveniences.

Nevertheless they must omit the duty of diligent, and zealous prayer unto
God, who is able and willing to help and succor. They must appear likewise
cheerful and forward in any legal course, to procure a remedy against these
sacrilegious encroachments and usurpations.

They ought faithfully herein to aid and further their Ministers by liberal
contribution, and all other justifiable assistances, they (poor men for the
most part) are least able to undergo expenses: And as the nature of their
Calling affords commonly small leisure, so concerning temporal affairs they
have but little skill and experience.

Oh how liberally do the wise children of this world in their generations, see
their Lawyers in matters appertaining to their outward estates; yea not seldom
in strifes and contentions, which come from the evil lusts that war in their
members.

Moreover if a sickness seizes on their bodies, they spare neither horses,
nor Caroches, nor pieces, no travail nor cost for a Physician.

Is it possible then that such a multitude of them will show their selves so
base and blockish, as to grudge and repine almost at every penny that they part
with, to the heavenly Physicians of their souls? when as notwithstanding the
certainty is, that upon the health and happiness of the soul, all the good
promises, all true welfare of body and estate depend.

Let none then miserably pinch and spare in cases of this kind, which indeed
be Gods cause, and wherein the prosperity of their souls, their bodies, their
posterities be very deeply interessed.

Personages of Superior place and ability, as they have the best means, so in
no wise may they slack behind in cheerful employment of them, in every
loyal and lawful occasion, to releeve and right our holy and venerable mother
the Church. They will find at length, nothing to be more noble, pious, nor
remunerable.

Finally, I beseech all sorts, touching the reverend Clergies maintenance, to
take into serious consideration; that the God of equity has in his divine
wisdom, and goodness built his ordinance hereof, upon a fair foundation of
equality in all points, and for all persons.

We cannot stray if we swerve not from it: we shall not go wrong, if we
regard this rectitude, and err not through the crookedness of our own
inventions.

The goods peradventure, of half the Christian world consist neither in
Pasture nor Tillage, neither in corn, nor pulse, nor cattle, nor Fruits. A
profane madenesse it is to imagine such a manifold number, and populous
multitude to be free, and exempted from this manner of sacred payment.

As if they acknowledged no supreme Head, of whom to hold their riches and
substance in Chief, nor yet considered, how they had their souls under the
cure of his Highness Deputies.

Behold then both prediall and personal tithes, must yearly be yielded to
supply the Lords-Service, with the Ministry thereunto, and to satisfy all
folks with a course of indifferency.

Now although the Clergy ought to endeavor carefully, nor to be overcome with
evil, but to overcome evil with goodness. And (as Saint Cyprian charge)
the Priests receiving the tithes of the increase, etc. ought not sluggishly to
retire from the Altar, sed nocte d^^que spiritualibus inservire, but night and
day to attend upon spiritual things; and that under extreme penalties
specified in the holy Scriptures.

For (to remember us of our duty, and to cut the comb of Church-robbery)
Panormitan witnesses, Iustitutio Beneficiorum fundamentum suscepit finaliter
propter cultum divinum, implicantem divinorum ministerium deservientium in
divinis co loco ubi instituuntur, the final end of the institution and
foundation of Ecclesiastical Benefices has been for the divine worship, and
the Ministry that serve therein, in those places, whereas Churchlivings are
ordained.

Yet dream not, that the unworthiness of the Pastoral Incumbent, will
discharge the Laytie from these duties; for it this reason were current, it
must in like manner run upon all other ranks in their kind, and so raise a
ruinous confusion upon all degrees.

Remember therefore the case is not only man's, but Gods especially. Mark how
this eternal wellspring of mercy, and goodness demands back again an
honest return of this little portion; and that (without question) not to
benefit himself, but to do us the more good, says Augustine.

Oh homines stulti, quid mali imper at Deus, ut non mereatur audiri? Oh foolish
men insensible of your own profits, what hurt does the Lord command, that you
hold him not worthy the hearing?

That little which he asks, he allotteth to the Ministers of his Word and
Sacraments unto us. Now since these actions and agents be not of man's
invention or pleasure to constitute, but of his own Divine appointment and
choice; why should we then make any doubt or scruple, but that his glorious
Mejestie will likewise have means and revenues, tithes, and offerings of his
own reserved to himself, for to sustain these holy duties, and sacred
Officers.

Have a care then every Christian person, (according to thy estate and calling)
to discharge thy conscience in paying thy tithes faithfully. Which Saint
Ambrose terms neither less nor worse, our of thy Corn, thy Wine, thy Oil,
thy Fruits, thy Cattle, they Garden, thy Traffic, thy Hunting, etc.

Quicunque recognoverit in se quod fidelster non dederit decimas emendet quod
minus fecit. Whosoever can call to mind that he has failed in any particular,
he is bound in conscience to amend, and to his power for to make restitution.

Delay not, pay speedily, Exodus 22. Grudge not, murmurre not, Deuteronomy 26.
Do it with gladness: Ecclesiasticus 35. Be a cheerful giver, 2 Corinthians. 9.

Pretend no sacrilegious customs for thy excuse: the Popes themselves allowed
this for a Principle, Revocatur privilegium, si ex post facto incipit enormiter
esse nocivum, An abrogation of their own privileges when they grew to be very
grievous and hurtful.

A wrongful possession cannot be warranted by any prescription of time. What
is not right at first becomes still more crooked by continuance. Custom
against the Divine and Natural Law is no better then corruption.

Consuetudo non praestabit ubi per jus expressum reprobatur: it ought to be of
no validity, whereas it affronteth equity and piety.

I will not say in the words of a learned Civilian, All have robbed, and
therefore all are bound to make restitution; but it behooves every person to put
the hallowed things out of his house, Deuteronomy. 26. to usurp nothing to the
offense of his conscience, to the hinderance of Religion: in no wise to
diminish but rather to augment the Ministers mayntenance, remembering evermore
this didivine precept, Thou shall muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out
the Corn.

Soli Deo, Laus and Gloria. AMEN.
FINIS.

