The Universal Principle;

THE COMMON JUSTICE OF THE WORLD, AND THE ROYAL LAW OF LOVE: Delivered in a
Sermon at the Assizes in Dorchester, the 23. day of July, Anno Dom. 1629.

By I. M. Rector of CATISTOCKE.

Vnusquisque quod sibi fieri non vult, alteri nequaquam faciat. Qui sic facit
peccatum non nutrit.

Augustinus. Sermon. 62. ad fratres in Eremo. LONDON, Printed for JOHN
SMITHVVIKE. An. Dom. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND Nobly descended, HENRY HASTINGS Esquire, one of
his MAJESTY'S Justices of Peace, and one of the Deputy Lieftenants in the
County of Dorset.
YOur approbation of that Sermon which was preached at the Assizes last in
Dorchester, with your good countenance, and loving speeches, which it pleased
you then to use unto me for the same: has emboldened me, and made me presume,
to let it come to the view of the world; for which I humbly entreat your
favorable acceptance, and your Patronage and Protection against them that
shall be found auerse or with any sinister affection to tax or traduce the
same. Thus wishing unto you yours, many good and joyful New-yeares, with the
best welfare and happiness, that can be desired or imagined, I leave you to
the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls; and rest,

Catistocke, Ian. 1. Your Worships to be commanded. JOHN MAYO.

To the Reader.
Courteous and charitable READER, I was very loath to make my weakness known
unto others, which is best known to my self, but being ouerintreated by some
special friends of mine; I was at last induced to yield unto their desire, and
to have this published. Feign I would, but I cannot please all. I hope I shall
please the best, such as make conscience of their ways, and do as the would
be done unto. Which, if it were as well followed and practiced, as it is
spoken of and commended; we should have amongst us more fruits of the spirit,
and less works of the flesh, more piety, peace and charity, and less
profaneness, suits, troubles and injuries, then we have in these days. Read
therefore, and censure charitably. Pardon I pray thee what is amiss by any
defects or imperfections, and in the fear of the Lord;

Fac alijs fieri quod cupis ipse tibi. Thine in Christ Jesus; IOH. MAYO.

THE UNIVERSAL PRINCIPLE.
MAT. 7. VERSE 12. Therefore, whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
even so do ye to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets.


THese words are the words of our Savior CHRIST to his Disciples when he
was upon the Mount; and there opened his mouth and taught them, the first time
that ever was in public.

Which words contain in them two principal parts; A general Rule of Justice,
taken out of a Collation of Similies, and a reason or testimonial Confirmation
of the same. A general rule of Justice out of a Collation of Similies in these
words; Therefore whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so do ye
to them; The reason or testimonial Confirmation of the same in these words;
for this is the Law and the Prophets.

Therefore.] This word concludes and inferres our Savior Christ's intent and
purpose, and shows the scope and the sum of that which is precedent in the
Chapter; namely, that to do to others as we would be done unto our selves, is
the Law and the Prophets, that is, the sum of doctrine set down in the Law
and the Prophets.

Whatsoever ye would,] or, all things whatsoever ye would, rationabili and
discreta voluntate, says Dionysius Carthusianus upon this place;
rationabiliter, vtiliter, and fideliter, says Gorran upon this place; for we
may not do to others, as we would be done unto our selves, in one thing, or in
some things, or in such things as we list our selves: but in all just, honest,
lawful and reasonable things whatsoever. And therefore Peter Lumbard the
Master of the Sentences, in lib. 3. distinct. 37. tells us how these words are
to be taken and understood, de bonis quae inuicem exhibere debemus: And
Aretius upon this place tells us, how they are an universal phrase of speaking,
which (says he) must soberly he understood; for we may not wantonly play
with them, but refer them to that natural Rule, To do unto others as we would
be done unto our selves.

That men should do unto you.] Not God, nor Angels, but men: because many
things may be done unto us by them, which we cannot do to them again. By
Men is here meant the Sons of Men, as Iunius and Tremelius will have it; or
by men is here meant our neighbors, as Dionysius Carthusianus upon this place
will have it: for these words are a recapitulation of the commandments of the
second table which concerns our duty toward our neighbor, and by our
Neighbor, toward all men. And this most plainly and positiuely expressed by
our Savior Christ in Math. 22. Chap. at the 37.39. and 40. verses.

Even so do ye to them.] this word, (...), So, is redundant, says Piscator
upon this place. And yet (says he) it notes the argument of Similies: for as
we would have comfort and counsel to be given unto us by others: so we must
give it to them again. And as we would have mercy, compassion and all other
things expedient to be shown unto us by others, so we must show it to them
likewise: because natural reason and inducement ought to bring us to know that
it is our duty no less to love others then our selves: and to do no worse
unto them, then we would they should do unto us. And therefore this Natural
reason and inducement has drawn these several Rules and Canons, for the
better direction of our lives: Because we would take no hurt, we therefore our
selves must do none. Since we would not be extremely dealt with all; we our
selves must avoid all extremity in our dealing: we must utterly abstain from
all violence and wrong to others, seeing willing by we would have none done to
our selves.

For this is the law and the Prophets,] that is, the doctrine and meaning of
the Moral Law of Moses and the Prophets, do all teach and tend to this end to
have us do to others as we would be done to our selves; for hereby our love
is shown to others, which love is all in all, the end and the fulfilling of
the law, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 13.8. Owe nothing to any man but this, to
love one another: for he that loves another, has fulfilled the Law.

For this is the Law.] The Law in general is the very wisdom of Nature, the
rule of right and reason, and a directive rule unto goodness of operation. And
it is used for all kind of doctrrine that does prescribe any thing. And
therefore of the Hebrews it is called Thorah, of Thor, which is ordinauit, or
(as some will have it) of Iadah, which is Docuit; because it teaches every one
his duty both toward God and man. And in this sense the Gospel is called a
Law as appears by the Prophet Esaias in Chap. 2. verse 3.

But the Law in special (...) by excellency does show all the old testament,
as appears by the Apostle Paul, Romans 3.19. By Law here is meant, the moral Law
of Moses called (...) which is a perpetual rule of living well; unto which the
manners of all people are to be directed, and subjected both toward God and
toward their Neighbor. And this is most briefly and plainly set down in the
Decalogue or ten commandments; the matter or object of which is the love of
God and the love of our neighbor, which love of our neighbor is nothing else,
but to do, as we would be done unto.

And the Prophets.] There were Prophets in special, and Prophets in general.
Prophets in special, were they that did excel in wisdom, by the singular
gift of the holy Ghost, and did foretell things to come, either to the Church
or to any of the faithful. Such were Agabus, and the 4 daughters of Philip the
Evangelist. Prophets in general, were they that did excel in the singular
gift of interpreting the Scriptures. And such are the learned Interpreters of
the Scripture at this day, as appears by the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 14.29.32.

There were Priests and Prophets, but there was a difference between them. The
Priests were always out of the tribe of Leui, the Prophets out of other
tribes. The Priests were not only to pray and to teach, but to administer holy
things: the Prophets did not so. The Priests might err as Aaron, but the
Prophets, as far forth as they were Prophets, and inspired with the spirit of
the Lord, could not err. And therefore the spirit of Prophecy, was given to
Elisha, as it was to Elias 2. King. 2.15.

True Prophets were called Seers, as in 1. Sa. 9.9. They were called Seers,
because they did Prophecy by visions or apparations object to the eye or the
mind: or as S. Jerome tells us in his Epistle to Paulinus, quia videbant eum,
quem ^aeteri non vedebant. They did prophecy either by dreams sent from
above, or by express word, or by an inward inspiration of the spirit of God,
or by the apparition of an Angel representing God, or by the mouth of God
himself familiarly speaking unto them, as he speak to Moses, to whom he is
said to speak mouth to mouth as in Numb 12.8. To this purpose the Apostle S.
Paul speaks in Heb. 1.1. and 2 where he says; At sundry times, and in diverse
manners, God in the old time, spoke unto our Fathers by the Prophets; But is
these last days he has spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has made heir
of all things. By his Son he tells us what the Law is: by his Son he tells us
what the Prophets are: by his Son he tells us, how the Law and the Prophets are
nothing else, but to do unto others, as we would be done unto our selves.
Therefore whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so do ye to
them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.

The point of Doctrine and observation that arises from hence may be this. To
do as we would be done unto, is a general rule of Justice, and he sum of
the Law and the Prophets.

Although this Point is so plain and pregnant, that it need no farther
discourse, nor any more proof to be assured of his goodness, because as soon
as it is alleged, yet it is acknowledged to be good; yet give me leave, I
beseech you to go farther with it, and to show unto you the dignity of it,
with the Author and affirmation, the benefit of it with the effects, and the
necessity of it, with the subjects, objects, and the end. And to prove and
approve all this by testimony of Scriptures, examples of Scriptures, testimony
of ancient Fathers, and late writers, Emperors, Kings Philosophers, and
heathen people, led only by instinct of Nature.

Great is the dignity of this general rule of Justice, not only because it is
a Principle of Law and Nature, the root of Justice, the foundation of equity,
and Lex inscripta scripta, as S. Ambrose tells us in vision 5. upon the 10.
Chapter of the Revel But because it is a prescript rule of our Savior Christ
himself. It was his own speech an blessed counsel to his Disciples. It was a
breath of his mouth, who was not as a man that he should lie, nor as the son
of man that he should repent. And it was not by him barely spoken, but
affirmatively spoken; because as the Law is of greater perfection, so that
which is affirmative, is of greater perfection also, though affirmative
precepts, as the Schoolmen tells us, obligant semper, non pro semper, sed
tantum in loco and tempore necessitatis. And it was by him not only
affirmatively spoken, but it was strongly also inferred, concluded, and pithily
urged to his disciples above any other thing.

Therefore whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so do ye to
them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. The benefit of this general rule
of Justice is great, and the effects good and goldly; for it will cause every
one of us to live honestly and uprightly in his place and calling, and never to
bind any one of these three sins together; which by many and too many are
bound together in this age: Perjury, false testimony, injury.

This will make us draw near unto Christ's example, and to follow his steps.
And this will still produce in us these effects, to love God truly, our
neighbor unfeignedly, and to give unto every one his due and his duty, without
any wrong or injury.

The effects of this general rule of Justice, cannot better be opened, then S.
Austen does open them, in lib. 3. Cap. 14. de doct. Chrift, where he says
thus, Facere alijs quod tibi vis fieri, sententia est, etc. To do as thou
wouldeft be done unto, is a sentence which all nations under heaven have agreed
upon. Refer this sentence (says he) to the love of God, and it extinguisheth
all heinous offenses: refer this sentence to the love of thy neighbor, and
it banisheth all grievous wrongs out of the world.

The necessity of this general rule of Justice is great, in respect of the
subjects, the objects, and the end. The subjects, because we are all Christians
and brethren, and have one and the same God for our Creator, one and the same
Christ for our Savior, and one and the same holy Ghost for our sanctifier and
preserver. The objects, because it respects right, and the good government of
humane societies: and the end, because it was ordained by Christ himself for
the general good one of another, teaching us not only to be privative in
ceasing to do ill, but still to be positive in doing good one to another.

We are not sent into this world only to speak well, but to do well, and to
do well and truly that which belongs to our several places and callings. It
is better to do and say not, then to say, and do not; speculation is not so
hard as practice. It is much more easy for any one to know then to do, to
discourse then to work; and to believe as he ought, then to live as he should.
And therefore our Savior Christ and his disciples in all their speeches, and
in all their writings do specially admonish us to do well, and do speak much
more of things to be done, then of things to be spok^n; and much more of
virtuous living, then of right bele^uing: for, non verbased aduerbia
corenantur. The Lord our God is said to love Aduerbs. He respects not how good,
but how well those things are which we do; and our Savior Christ himself
began (...) to do and to teach; first to do, and then to teach, Act. 1. verse
1.

Testimonies of Scriptures.
In Leuit. 19 verse 11. we read how the Lord our God commanded Moses to speak
unto all the congregation of Israel, and to say thus unto them in a negative
precept: Ye shall not steal, nor deal falsely, nor lie one to another; which
is in effect, ye shall not do to others, but as ye would be done unto your
selves.

To bias gave this general rule of Justice to his son, but in a negative
precept also, which binds at all times. My Son (says he) that which thou
would not have others to do unto thee, do not to them at any time. Tob.
chap. 4. verse 15.

Our Savior Christ not only in Mat. 7 12. but also in Luke 6.31. gave this
general rule of Justice again to his Disciples, and to a great company of
people that came from Judea and Jerusalem, and from the coasts of Tire and
Sidon to hear him. And as ye would that men should do to you, so do ye to
them likewise.

The Apostle S. Paul gave this general rule of Justice to Titus his natural
son according to the common faith, as appears (...) ^is 2 Chap. to Titus 11.
and 12. verses, where he says thus, The grace of God which brings salvation
unto all men, has appeared, and teaches us, that we should live soberly
righteously and godly in this present world. To live righteously, what is it
any other thing in effect, then to do as we would be done unto?

Examples of Scriptures.
Obadiah, the governor of Ahabs house, remembered and followed this general
rule of Justice, to do, as he would be done unto, for when Iezabel destroyed
the Prophets of the Lord, he took an hundred Prophets, and hid them by fifties
in acaue, and fed them with bread and water. 1. King. 18. That good widow of
Sarepta remembered and followed this general rule of Justice, to do as she
would be done unto; for she took pity and compassion upon Elias, relieved
him in his greatest necessity, and sustained him with part of that poor
pittance that was left her, 1. King. chapter 17.

Samuel offered to God by his Mother, thrice called and made a Prophet,
remembrad and followed this general rule of Justice, to do as he would be
done unto; for, he boldly and stoutly stood up unto all Israel and said, Whose
Ox have I taken? or, whose Ass have I taken? or, whom have I done wrong to?
or, whom have I hurt? That was not all; he left not there, but went father and
said, At whose hands have I received any bribes to blind mine eyes therewith,
1, Sam. 12.3.

Simeon in Jerusalem, Cornelius in Cesarea, and Lidia the seller of purple in
the City of the Thiatirians. And the very Barbarians, as in Act 28.2. remembered
and followed this general rule of Justice, to do as they would be done unto;
for they gently entreated Paul and his company when they came to shore in the
I Will Melita, kindled a good fire and received every one of them.

Testimony of ancient Fathers.
That mirror of understanding, and learned Father S. Austin in l. 1. cap. vlt.
conf. in his ser. ad frat. in eremo, in a tract which he writes de december
chordis, speaks there of this general rule of Justice, and specially in his
96. Sermon de tempore; where he says thus; December precepta ad duo illa
referuntur vt diligamus Deum and Proximum. Et duo illa ad vnum illud, quod vnum
est; Quod tibi non vis, alteri ne feceris. Ibi december, ibi duo continentur
praecepta.

That mellifluous Father S. Bernard in his 77. Epistle, and in a tract which he
writes de triplici bonorum genere, calls to do as we would be done unto,
naturalem legem societatis cui concordat Euangelium, Haec est lex naturalis
societatis (says he) vt omnia quaecunque nobis fieri velimus, alijs faciamus.

Peter Lumbard, the master of the Sentences, approues this same in lib. 3.
distinct. 37. where speaking of the commandments of the second Table, calls to
do as we would be done unto; naturalem legem, cui concordat Euangelium, and
lex moralis praeceptionis. Hoc veritas scripsit in cord hominis (says
Lumbard) and quia non legebatur in cord, iterauit in tabulis, vt voce
forinsecus admota, rediret ad cor.

S. Ambrose vision 4. in 8. chap. of the Revel, speaking there of the holy men
that lived before the flood, says thus of them; Quamuis nullum legem nisi
naturalem habuerunt, tamen hoc quibuscunque poterant suasisse conati sunt, vt
Deum creatorem suum timerent and ligerent, and quod quis pati non vellet,
alteri non faceret.

Gregory the great, in lib. 10. Moral. in cap. 11. of Job. in the beginning of
the Chapter, tells us there, That to do as we would be done unto, is commanded
and commended both in the old and new Testament, says he, per iustum Tobiam,
and in the new Testament, per veritatem ipsam, which is our Savior Christ.
Quibus duobus (says Gregory) vtriusque testamenti mandatis, per vnum malitia
compescitur, per aliud benignitas prorogatur.

To these may be added Gratian in his golden Decrees, 1. part. 1. dictinct.
the first words of all the book which are these, Genus humanum duobus regitur,
naturali videlicet iure and moribus: natural ius est, quod in in lege and
Euangelio continetur, quo quisque iubetur alij facere, quod sibi vult fieri,
and prohibetur alij infer, quod sibi nollet fieri,

Testimony of late writers.
Zuinglius has written at large upon this, in 7. Chap. Mat. in page 28.29. And
there he tells us, how our Savior Christ does call it, fundamentum naturalis
iuris, because he was the reformer of our nature corrupted by Adam.

Aretius upon this place tells us the like, how these words are a natural Law
and the precepts of right are, as he there tells us; honest viuere, alterum non
laedere, ius suum cuique tribuere.

Beza, Bullinger, Calvin, Hemingius, Piscator, with many others, all agree and
concur in this; that to do as we would be done unto, is a general rule of
Justice, a Sentence teaching all charity, humanity, moderation and good
dealing one to another, and a sentence (as it were) pointing out the way to
eternal bliss and happiness.

Alexander Seuerus the Emperor, had this for his Symbol, Emperors.
as Bullinger tells us in Decade 11. Sermon. 1. page 93. This (says Bullinger)
he had often in his mouth: this he commanded to be engraven and written in his
Palace, and other of his buildings. Hoc coluit in larario suo (says
Bullinger.) and when any one of his disorderly soldiers was to be punished,
he would have this spoken unto him by the voice of a Crier. Quod tibi hoc
alteri.

Traian the Emperor, a great obseruer of Justice, and called the Darling of
Mankind, would very often say, how he himself and all others* must do as
they would be done unto; and how Subjects ought to be such toward their
Prince, as they would have their Prince to be toward them.

It is written in the life of Augustus the Emperor, how one Zonaras did often
remember this general rule of Justice to Augustus the Emperor, and would say
to him, Siipse alijs feceris, quae tibi fieri velles, non peccabis quippiam,
omnia suauissime and feliciter administrabis, and nullo cum periculo vitam
deges.

That learned Lawyer Vlpian, principal Counceller to Alexander Seuerus the
Emperor, framed this as as a Constitution, which is found in the Pandects,
that is, the volume of the Civil Law, called the Digests. And this was done by
the commandment of Justinian, that learned and worthy Emperor.

That of our wise, Kings.
worthy, learned, and of blessed and happy memory King James deceased, may
serve for all the rest in his Basilicon doron, li. 2. page 6. where showing to
his Son Prince Henry what forms were to be used with other Princes, he says
thus unto him, Use all other Princes as thy brethren, honestly and kindly.
Strive with every one of them in courtesy and in kindness, and as with all men,
so specially with them be plain and truthfull ever keeping that Christian
Rule, to do as ye would be done unto. Where we see King James calls it a
Christian rule, and would have his Son Prince Henry ever to keep it.

Philosophers and Heathen people.
Pythagoras and Plato, Socrates and Xenophon with many others, taught this
Philosophy and general rule of Justice, to do as they would be done unto, and
very carefully observed it in their life and conversation. So did Solon and
Aristides among the Athenians, Agesilaus and Lycurgus among the Lacedaemonians,
Curious Fabricius, and Numa Pompilius among the Romans, Xamelzis among the
Goths, Zaleuchus among the Locrians, Trismegistus among the Egyptians, and
Dunwallo Mulmutius among the old Brittons of this Land. Nay more, and that
which is very strange. That diuilish Impostor, and damnable wretch Mahomet has
recommended this general rule of Justice, to do as we would be done unto, and
has inserted it among the 8. Ordinances, which he left to the Musalmans,
telling them how they were sent down from heaven by the Angel Gabriel.

This also the heathen have not obscurely insinuated, by making Themis, which
is Law or right, a Goddess* by building a Temple unto her in Beoetia, and by
making her to be the Daughter of Heaven and earth; for heaven and earth do
applaud this general rule of Justice, to do as we would be done unto: it is
the Royal Law of Love; it was taught by our Savior Christ, delivered by the
law of Nature, and observed by Heathen people, led only by instinct of Nature.

Seeing then that the dignity of this general rule of Justice is so great
with the Author and affirmation, the benefit of it is so great with the
effects, and the necessity of it is so great, with the subjects, objects, and
the end. And seeing this is proved and approved by testimonies of Scriptures,
examples of Scriptures, testimonies of ancient Fathers and late Writers,
Emperors, Kings, and Philosophers, and Heathen people led by instinct of
Nature. It is fit and worthy to be remembered and followed of us, and to be
written upon the tables of our hearts with the point of a Diamond, that it may
never be forgotten; for it is old Philosophy and Christian Religion; it is the
end and the scope of all the Commandments of the second Table, and the only
type and token of every good Christian. Therefore, whatsoever ye would that
men should do to you, even so do ye to them; for this is the Law and the
Prophets.

That learned Father S. Austin in his 54. Epistle, tells us there, that we may
occupare negotiosissimum in Republica virum proemio; we may not hold a man of
the greatest employment in the Commonweal with a long preface. If not with a
long Preface, then not with a long discourse. Pardon therefore my boldness
(right honorable and reverend Judges) if I first speak to you, and tell you,
that this general rule of Justice, to do as ye would be done unto, is fit and
worthy to be remembered of you who are loquentes leges, chief guardians of
justice, and Altars unto which such fly for succor and relief, as are
wronged and iniuried. By this you shall take Gallioes course, as it is in Act.
18.16. to drive away frivolous and injurious suites from the judgment seat. By
this you shall be faithful Stewards of the highest Judge; and by this you
shall keep safe and sound those two Salts that are in you, the Salt of
knowledge, and the Salt of Conscience; which Salt of Conscience is the inward
Court wherein the highest Judge of all does sit.

This general rule of Justice is fit to be remembered and followed of you also,
who are Magistrates, and in the Commission of peace, the Princes eyes to see
withal, and the Princes hands to work withal, the Ephori of the
Commonweal, and the Ouer-seers of common quietness. This will make you good
and just, like Iosoph of Arimathea. This will make Justice in you never to draw
her breath faintly, or to be perverted with any fear or favor, passion or
precipitation, malice or presumption; and this will make you like Atropos to
cut off the web of many debates and quarrels at home among your neighbors, and
to be of that worthy Lord Judge Dyers mind, who when there came before him any
controversies of poor men to be tried at the Assizes, would vually say, that
either the parties themselves were wilful, or their neighbors at home
uncharitable, because their suites were not quietly ended at home. Many poor
men's suits may be quietly ended at home by you, who are the Judges eyes. It is
well known that some of you do so. O that all would do so. It is a blessed
action to do so; for, Blessed are the peacemakers.

This general rule of Justice is fit also to be remembered and followed of you
who practice and profess the Laws, and plead present matters for your
Clients; for this will make you square, sound, and sincere in all your actions,
and to avoid all those foul aspersions and scandals that are cast upon you of
bribery, corruption, and extortion, of spinning out suits to the downfall of
the Clients estates of wrangling and wrestling as the Greek Sophisters were
wont to do, to make the worse the better: and that which is worst inded, of
animating and setting of some malicious make-bates to sow Cadmus teeth abroad,
and like Salamanders still to live in the fire of debate and discord among
their neighbors.

The Law is of masculine force, as Saint Austin tells us upon the 59. Psalm;
for though in the Latin tongue it is of the feminine gender, yet in the Greek
tongue it is of the masculine gender, because it is of more masculine force and
power, Regit, and non regitur. It rules, and it does not rule with any respect
of persons, or with any floting, or imaginary affection: for if it has but one
soul, which is reason; and one only function which is the peace and
quietness of States and Commonweals: which peace and quietness of States
and Commonweals, shall the better be established and continued, if you follow
this general rule of Justice, to do as you would be done unto.

This Christian and general rule of Justice is fit to be remembered ad followed
of you who are Actors and commence suites; of you that are witnesses to
testify and give in evidence; of you that are Iuries, and bring in verdicts;
and of you that be Constables, and exhibit Bills. O this will make you never
to open the sluices of any favor, fear or partiality to any, never to strain
out gnats, and to swallow down Camels, and never to be so rash with your
mouths as to say, Sibboleth, Judge. 12.6.
for Shiboleth, great for little, or little for great, cold for hot, or hot for
cold, manslaughter for wilful murder, or wilful murder for manslaughter.

This Christian and general rule of Justice, is fit to be remembered and
followed of all you that be here present, of what age or condition, rank or
fashion soever ye be; for by this you shall never be barbarous nor cruel one
to another; you shall never statue nor strip one another, and never seek the
downfall and confusion one of another by any unjust means, or injurious
courses.

We are all by nature lovers of our selves, and willingly we would have no
harm nor hurt done to our selves; the like we must do unto others; we may not
harm nor hurt them in their bodies, goods or name; for what says Solomon in
Pro. 3.29. Intend none hurt to thy neighbor, seeing he does dwell without fear
by thee.

The love of our neighbor is no mean matter, It is not meanly graced by our
Savior Christ himself; for there are but ten commandments, and no less them
six of them concerns our neighbor. These 10. are contracted into two; one of
them is our neighbors. The first is great; the second is like unto it, which
is our neighbors; the Law and the Prophets depend upon the one, and the Law
and the Prophets depend upon the other. This is plainly proved by the Apostle,
Gal. 5.14. All the Law is fulfulfilled in one word, which is this, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self.

The Mathematicians tell us, that of all figures, a a Circle is the most
absolute, because the beginning and the end concurres in one. Such is this
general rule of Justice. It comes from Christ in grace, and ends in Christ by
the works of grace. The then that neglect this general rule of Justice, and
do not as they would be done unto, have little or no grace in them; they can
hope to hear well of none but of cowards and flatterers; and they can never
have a good Conscience in them, which is a continual feast, and the best
friend that is in the world. Plerique faman, pauci conscientiam verentur, says
Seneca, they little respect that, they can play fast and loose with that at
their pleasure, and they can make it of what size or fashion they list
themselves. They can use it as Procrustes the Giant did those whom he laid in
his bed; when they were too long, he had an axe to cut them shorter; and when
they were too short, he had a rack to stretch them longer. Conscientia est
cordis scientia, and Gods golden dowry bestowed upon the soul: and yet it has
had them worst hap, that any word had in the world, in the Common weal, and
especially in the Church of Christ; for never as yet could it be found in her
full sillables at once, but some syllable or other was wanting in her.
Fasciculus temporum tells us this, in A.D. 1426.

In the Apostles time (says he) there was con and sci, but entia was wanting;
they had the endowment of the spirit, but not the endowment of possessions.
Afterward there was con and entia, but sci was wanting, they were not the
learned men. But in my time (says he) con and sci are both gone, and there
is nothing left but entia, they have all the Honors, Mannours, and fat of the
Land. But we may now say that it is come round about again, and it is with us
as it was at the first; we have con and sci, but our entia are called in
question by many embeziled, and by too many envied and thought too much.

O nauis referunt in the noui fluctus.
O quid agis? fortiter occupaportum.
We may now well entertain and renew that allegorical speech of the Lyricke
Poet; O ship, new waves come and dash upon thee! O what do thou? manfully
and strongly hold and keep thine harbor and thy haven.

Certainly, people are never miserable till conscience turns their enemy, then
they are miserable indeed; for, Nocte dieque suum gestabunt pectore testem, Cui
non sanus erit. They shall carry about their witness night and day; which
witness dies not.

We shall all die, but our Conscience shall not die; we may lose our selves,
but we cannot lose our Conscience; the light of it may be shadowed for a time,
but it cannot be clean put out. It shall appear with us at the day of
judgment, and then it shall speak with us or against us. If against us, then
most miserable wretches shall we be; for then it shall be said unto us; Depart
ye cursed into everlasting fire. But if it shall be with us; then blessed and
and happy shall we be; for then it shall be said unto us, Come, ye blessed ^f
my Father, inberite the Kingdom of heaven prepared for you from the beginning
of the world.

I fear the time is past, and willingly I would not be tedious unto you. I
will therefore conclude, and commit you and commend you to the Author of this
general rule of Justice, Christ Jesus our Savior: begging and beseeching him
to bless, sanctify, guide and direct you all that you may still remember and
follow this general rule of Justice, to do as ye would be done unto in all
your actions, and in all your life and conversation; that so you may live in
the fear, die in the favor, rest in the peace, rise in the power, and at last
remain with him in everlasting glory, to whom with the Father, etc.

FINIS.

