THE Laudable Life, And Deplorable Death, of our late peerlesse Prince HENRY.
Briefly represented.

Together, with some other Poemes, in honor both of our most gracious
Sovereign King James his auspicious entry to this Crown, and also of his
most hopeful Children, Prince Charles and Princess Elizabeth's happy entry
into this world.

By I. M. Master of Arts.

LONDON Printed by Edw: Allde, for Thomas Pauier, dwelling near the Royal
Exchange, at the sign of the Cats and parrat. 1612.

TO OUR LATE PEERLESSE PRINCE HENRY'S dear Brother and Sister, PRINCE CHARLES
AND PRINCESS ELIZABETH Infants of Albion, of greatest hope, all happiness.
Thrice hopeful CHARLES, graceful ELIZABETH
Great Britains Hearts-ioy, Europs brightest beams
Lo what my Muse, though mournful, mused has
In laud of our late Lilly of Saint JAMES:
All Europes object, and the flower of Knights,
Mirror of manhood, wonderment of wights.
The Life of him whom every heart did love,
The Death of him whom each heart does condole
These lines do limme, while Christ him crowns above;
And that his fame far flee's twixt Pole and Pole:
This duties Birth I trust ye will it take
In the best worth, for worthy HENRY'S sake.
Of your Highnesses The right humble Servant: James Maxwell.

To the Reader.
Lo here is the Pattern of Prince HENRY'S parts
Of HENRY'S four the fair Epitomie,
Learned like the First; stout, toward, th'hope of hearts,
Like to the Fi^t once chief of Chivalry:
Like to the Sixth, devout, mild, innocent,
Like to the Seau'ntn, wise, thriftie, provident.
THE MEMORABLE LIFE AND DEATH OF OUR LATE Peerless Prince HENRY.
1
MAN'S life full well is likened to a flower, Man is like a flower that either
withers through age, or is plucked in his Prime.

which growing up does grace a Gardens air
with sweetest smell, but withreth in an hour:
Or else is plucked for sent, or color fair:
Look on these lines; they shall unto thy sense
Of this likeness give perfect evidence.
2
A plant of price they offer to thy view, the subject of this Legend is such a
flower as was not withred through age, but was plucked in the Spring for the
sweetness thereof.

Plucked in the Spring by the great Owners hand;
Of whom each flower has being, shape, and hue,
And at whose beck they flourish, fall or stand:
A flower which twice ten summers had not seen,
When it became as though it had not been.
3 God carries him self as a Gardner, or rather as the owner of a Garden among
the flowers of mortal me^, every day as it were taking a survey of the same.

Great Jove one day as he did walk along
Did find this flower, so fragrant, fair and sweet,
This Lilly-rose that filled all Albien
With his sweet sent, he said this flower's more meet
For to perfume the Paradise of Saints,
Then for to spring among earths fading plants.
4
The blessed Angels gather up the souls of virtuous men, as men do pluck or
gather sweet flowers for their pleasure.
Which having said, lo troops of Angels bright,
Post-haste from heaven, upon S. Leonards day,
In the Spring garden at Saint James light,
And thence our lovely Lilly fetch away:
Then home they haste scaling the starrie skies,
Leaving behind them blacknes, shrikes and cries.
5
The Angels rejoice at the dissolution of the souls and bodies of the good,
but men do mourn; the exaltation and presence of the Soul brings solace to
the one; the Souls absence and the Bodies corruption, brings sorrow to the
other.
Good Lord what discords were in th'accents then
Which men and Angels made with heart and voice!
Angels had solace, sorrow seas'd on men;
Men sighed and sob'd whilst Angels did rejoice:
Angels were glad, but men were grieved sore,
Angels did sing, whilst men did shout and roar.
6
Angels and Saints in the supernall quire
With sweetest songs that day did celebrate,
Blessed HENRY'S soul unto great Jove so dear
With heavenly Hymns they did congratulate:
With how great mirth did they this Antheme sing
Welcome sweer Saint the son of Britains King!
7
The day of Prince Henry's death, was both a feasting day and a fasting day,
the one to Angels, the other to men: He yielded up the Ghost into Gods hands
the same day of the week, and about the same time of the day that Christ Jesus
did yield his into the hands of his Father; to wit, on friday the sixth day of
the week, being likewise the sixth day of the ninth month, when he was not
full 19 years old.
Dear HENRY'S death thus made a fest'uall day
T'immortall wights, to men much otherwise,
For from their hearts all gladness fled away,
So soon as he had shut his Eagles eyes:
Which made them cry, is our brave HENRY gone,
The joy of Hearts, the Hope of Albion?
8
The fairest flower that er'e in Britains I Will,
Did sprout or spring, or Sun did ever see,
Whose fragrant smell diffused many mile
Filled Sea and Land from Wales to Virginie.
Orcades and Gades, west; East, both South and North,
Did smell the sent which this sweet flower sent forth.
9
A wight I ween, whose worth both far and near, Prince Henry's piety and
fear of God.

Made each eye love him, each tongue speak his praise;
Whose piety, faith, and religious fear;
His fame and name shall to the heavens raise:
It was his daily practice twice to pray,
And praise his God; this was his use always.
10
A peerlesse part in him all have observed, His admirable and laudable
abstinence from swearing cursing and banning.

He never did Gods sacred name profane;
He never cursed; for which he has deserved,
That all should sing and celebrate his name:
To Gods blessed word he bare great Reverence,
And Sermons heard with humble diligence.
11 His knowledge in Divinity, and both learned and modest discourse.

In talking of points of Divinity,
Great was his wit, his judgment and his skill;
Men did admire the matchless modesty,
Which did appear in his talk ever still:
Most father-like in his discourses sweet,
Skillful and grave, quick, ornate, and discreet.
12
His knowledge of humane Sciences and Arts.
In every art he had more then a taste;
For in each science of Philosophy,
He knew those things that did become him best,
And as did serve his mind to beautify:
I mean the choicest things of every art,
This peerless Prince had laid up in his heart.
13
And as he was to God deuotious,
His loyal obedience to Father and mother, and his auersenes from Absolomes
aspiring mind.
Reading each day his word with reverence;
So to his parents most obsequious
Was he always with loyal diligence.
What er'e he knew to be their mind and will,
Most readily he did it aye fulfill.
14
So far was he inclined not to rebel,
With Absalom, who hellishly did aim
His King and father David to expel;
So far I say was Henry from this strain;
That from his Cradle to his mournful end,
He never did his father once offend.
15
O happy father to have such a Son;
As never did by any wretched ways,
So much as once provoke his passion,
By word or work! O wonder of our days!
The Saint of Sons, thus may we him enstile,
The choysest child of many million mile.
16
What shall I say of the affection,
This heau'n-bred Prince did bear unto his Brother? His love and affection
toward his Brother and Sister.

Charles our Hearts-ioy, the choice of Albion;
Whose towardnes does tell he is another
Great-hearted HENRY, borne by starrie fate,
This Islands honor to perpetuate.
17
With what kindness did he his Sister cherish,
Eliza's grace, one of the Graces three?
That Princess rare that like a Rose does flourish,
Filling each eye with her mild Courtesy:
whose happy breeding, worthy inclination,
Makes her admired, desired of every Nation.
18
The great respect he bare unto the Peers, His respect toward the Peers,
Prelates and all Preachers.

Pastors and Prelates, and all men of worth,
Shall be remembered of succeeding years,
which shall him praise, and his fair parts set forth,
Extolling HENRY'S great humanity,
His mildness and his affability.
19
Princes had proof and good experience,
By costly presents, feasts and sumptuous shows,
His magnifice^ce toward foreign Princes and Potentates,
Of HENRYES much admired magnificence,
And Heroicke Heart; this thing all Europe knows.
Spain, Germany, with Italy and France,
In this respect must his brave Name advance.
20
His gratitude and bounty toward his household servants.
The care he had of his choice Servants all,
Them to encourage and to gratify;
Shall be spoke of, so long as ever shall
An house be kept by Prince of Britanie.
His bounty, thrift, his household government,
Been marked well, they are a wonderment.
21.
His great train and attendance with his discretion in making choice of worthy
servants to be nearest himself.
Seau'n hundredth souls his service did attend,
Which of him did reap daily maintenance,
Unto them all his bounty did extend,
His helpful hand, his cheerful countenance:
Yet none were near him, but of worthy parts,
For valor, warrefare, languages, or arts.
22
His great thrift in building, planting and repairing.
To plant and build he had a great delight,
Old ruins his sole presence did repair;
Orchards and Gardens forthwith at his sight
Began to sprout and spring, to flourish fair:
Ask of fair Richmond standing by the Thames,
If this be true; or yet of his S. James.
23
His liberality toward Scholars.
His glory was good Scholars to propine,
With large ensigns of his benignity:
As great Mecenas of the Muses nine;
Which shall not suffer his brave name to die,
So long as Pindus or Mount Helicon,
Shall be in place his praises to expone.
24
Likewise to Soldiers and to valiant Wights, His bounty toward Captains and
Soldiers.

Large was his love, and liberality;
It was his pride to pass whole days and nights
Among such men, and in their company:
To ride great horses, and to handle arms,
To hear the Drums and Trumpets sound alarmes.
25.
To Vault and leap, to wrestle, ride and run,
Hardly to lie, and coursely for to feed, His warrelike exercises.

To play at Foiles, to use both Pike and Gunne,
Both sword and shield at every pinch and need:
To run at Ring, at Tilt and Turnament,
Were the delights of Albions Ornament.
26
To learn all warre-like feats great was his care,
As for to rank a troop, to fortify,
T'assige a Fort, to scale a wall, and there
T'erect the ensigns of brave Victory:
To Abide heat, cold, and Souldier-like to sleep,
But a short while, good Sentinel to keep.
27 His temperance and sobriety.

What shall I speak of his sobriety?
His ordered living, and his abstinence,
His shunning of all superfluity,
In diet, drink, apparel, and expense.
Base Drunkenness he hated as the Devil,
So did he Sloth the schoole-mistris of Evil.
28
His continence and chastity.
With wine or Venus never was defiled,
The Rosy body of this worthy wight,
With lusts allurements was he never beguiled;
Eguatius and Cuspinianus de Caesaribus in Henrice Sancto.
But pure and chaste remained both day and night:
HENRY the Saint that worthy Emperor,
Was not more chaste, then HENRY Britains flower.
29
A wondrous thing it is, yet very sure,
That such a Prince should live so continent,
Where were so many objects to allure
His eyes and ears, his senses to inchant:
Since then this Soul so chaste was and divine,
Let all chaste hands heap Roses on his shrine.
30
Scotland has brought forth but two prince Henry's, and both of them were of
most virtuous disposition, and of extraordinary expectation, and died young
before their Fathers: the first Prince Henry was the grand child of holy queen
Margeret, eldest daughter of Prince Edward the outlavv son and heir of
Edmond Iron-side King of England* The second and last Prince Henry was the
great great grandchild of Queen Margarete, the eldest daughter of Henry the
seventh King of England. Read hereof the Chronicles of both Countries.
Two hopeful HENRY'S much admired for worth,
The clime of Scotland heertofore has bred,
The choicest flowers that ever soil brought forth;
Both's fate it was to make this I Will to shed
Huge streams of tears, for that in youthful Prime
Such wights of worth should fall before their time.
31
The first Prince Henry was Saint David's child,
That peerlesse Prince borne of Saint Margaret,
And King Malcolme; which of this seuer'd I Will
By birth did both the Royal bloods unite:
The next did likewise from a Margaret spring,
The Gemme of James our Isles uniting King.
32
Likewise that Sainted Prince of Hungary, Munsterus in Hugaria Auentinus in
Annalibus Boiorum. Antonius Bonfinius Michael Ritius de rebus Hungary, in S.
Stephano and Emerico. Cuspinianus in Henrico sancto. Saint Henry Emeric Prince
of Hungary died young and before his Father, as did our Henry Frederick Prince
of Britannie.

King saint Steuens Son, named HENRY EMERICK
That holy Prince did in his springtime die;
As did our hearts-ioy HENRY FRIDERICK:
Whose holy life shall get him lasting praise,
And him enstile the wonder of our days.
33
Ten days did last loved Henry's hid disease,
During which space, his heau'n-bred breast did burn
With divine love; in God was all his Ease;
Mediciners could do no more, but mourn.
And good cause why; seeing their Phisicke-art,
No help could give to heal great Britains Heart.
34
Thus in the month that martyred Edmond fell, In the month of November Saint
Edmond King of England suffered his Martyrdom, and both king Henry the 3. and
our peereles Prince Henry did die, the one leaving his Kingdom to Edward the
1. the other his Prince-dome to Charles the 1.

Once Englands King, whose faith him made a Saint:
Henry our hope, who did in faith excel,
In hope, and love, his holy soul up sent.
To Christ's own Court; a soul so full of grace,
That it was worthy of no lower place.
35
Ado Treuirensis in Martyrolog. and alii plures.

S. Leonard was a Confessor, and St. Felix a Martyr.


Saint Leonards day near to All Saints was his last,
That Is likewise named Saint Felixs martyr-day;
Saint James they call the place from whence he past,
In the arms of Saints to live with Saints for aye:
Thus Persons, Times, and places circumstance,
Do HENRY'S Souls Saints-honour all advance.
36
Prince Henry a bright star soon Ecclipsed.
Lo Norths bright Star thus has of late gone down
In the South-point of this united Land:
His too swift course has made him set too soon,
When as his beams did blase over sea and sand.
Our Orb too base it was this Star to bear;
For it was worthy of an higher sphere.
37
Prince Henry a rare Pearl soon lost.
Lo the rare Pearl, that we of late have lost,
A peerlesse Pearl, the Lodestone of this I Will;
Whose worth did draw from every land and coast,
The eyes of strangers many thousand mile:
But this heart-drawing stone great James his Gem
More worthy was t'adorne Jove's Diadem.
38
Prince Henry a fair flour soon plucked.
Lo how the fragrant Lilly of this land,
The hands of Angels have plucked up in haste,
Presenting it into Iehouah's hand;
For this Rose-Lilly did become him best:
Saints Paradise good Lord how it adornes!
where flowers are free from thistles and from thorns.
39
A Star, a Pearl, a Flower since we have lost,
Bright, rare, and fair, if we have cause to mourn
God wot, man wot; Prince Henry alive the solace of hearts; but dead, the
sorrow of hearts.
lo that which cheered us most
Now does it to our greatest sorrow turn:
HENRY alive did lighten every part
But HENRY dead sends sorrow to each heart.
40
One thing there is our sorrow may assuage Prince Charles is like a Phoenix
risen out of Prince Henry's Phoenixcinder, to be a Cordial and comfort to our
hearts.

And heal our heart-breake, which is, when we see
Heau'n-fauord Charles of such hope in prime age
Borne to prolong this Islands unity:
So often as I behold brave HENRY'S brother,
Me thincks I see a Phoenix from his Cinder.
41
Look on his face, Prince Charles the viue rese^blance of Prince Henry's both
body and mind.
and surely ye shall see
How HENRY'S face in Charles his does revive;
Mark then his grace, wit, mildness, modesty,
And all the goods, which God does to him give:
Ye'le say with me, that there was never another
More like to one, then Charles is to his brother.
42
Mark but his courage when he runs at Ring, Prince Charles his graceful and
virtuous inclination, toward, and courageous disposition, godly education,
memory, wit and understanding even in his youthful age of 12. years.

His towardness and his dexterity,
Which promises that he shall honor bring
One day by his brave acts to Brittannie:
Ye'le wish unto this tender toward Knight
Long for to live in health, wealth, honors hight.
43
Mark th'vnderstanding of his youthful prime,
His answers quick, his wit, his memory,
When any Chapter of the Book divine
He reads, or any human history:
Ye'le wonder with me to hear him rehearse
The sum and sense of each leaf, page, or verse.
44
Brittans bless God for such a toward youth
As does succeed in our brave HENRY'S place,
Pray unto God for him with mind and mouth,
VVish him always the heap of hap and grace;
That sweet CHARLES may for ever flourish till
That great Charles chair with honors hight he fill.
PEERLESS PRINCE HENRY'S Epitaph in his own four Languages.
1. Epitaph.
Fair Europes Phoenix, and great Britains bliss,
The Soldiers solace, and the Scholars joy,
Both Mars and Muses minion, he it is
Whose timeles death does young and old annoy:
HENRY our hope, and all the worlds wonder
His soul heauen-rapt has left us but his cinder.
2.
Look how the mighty Macedonian King
Surnamed the great, did perish in his prime,
Right so we see fall in his flourie Spring
Great-hearted HENRY long before the time;
Here rests his Rosy corpse chaste, void of vice:
His Lilly-soule perfumes all Paradise.
3
Le Phoenix de l'Europe and la fleur de cest age,
Le soulas des Scauants, and des Soldats la gloire:
HENRY ce ieun' Heroes, tant beau, brave saint and sage:
Cy gist laissant a tous de son los la memoire:
Tandis que durera le Soleil, Terre, ou Onde,
Son beau nom fleurira par tous les pais du monde.
4.
Hic jacet Europae Phoenix, gentisque Britannae
Gloria Martigenum, gaudia Pieridum;
Flos iuuenum, laus magna senum, lux alma bonorum,
HENRICUS patriae spesque decusque suae:
Corpus habet Tumulum, famam capit orbis, Olympum
Spiritus, aeterno sic fruiturque Deo.
5
Vt perit in primo Pellaeus flore Iuuentae,
Carpitur Autumnum sicut et ante suum;
Praepropere sic iste sui flos occidit aeui
Henricus, dio maximus ingenio:
Fit Superum consors claro Diademate fulgens,
Linquit et aeternum Nomen in ore virum.
6
(...),
(...).
(...):
(...).
(...)
(...).
7
(...)
(...).
A POEM, SHOWING HOW THAT BOTH THEOLOGY AND Astrology, do pronounce the
time of his Majesty's entering to this Crown, to be auspicious and happy.
The Argument
AT what time God the Father entered into the world by the Creation thereof, and
God the Son Christ Jesus entered into the world for the renouation of the
same, by the assumption of our flesh in blessed Mary's Womb, at the self same
time James the Son of Marie entered to his new Kingdom.

1 God began to make the world in the Springtime: and about the self same
time thereof that answers to the 25. day of March according to the common
consent of Greek and Latin Theologians, and all Astrologians.

If that the time be blessed when God began
To make the mass of this fair Globy frame:
Or if the time be blessed, he molded Man
First of the Earth, for to rule in the same:
Then blessed the time wherein great James began
T'vnite the Crowns of this great I Will of Man.
2
This mother-time wherein all things were framed
By Gods all-working word, which was his hand,
Was fittest time, wherein should be proclaimed
The joyful news of this united Land:
Britains believe: the Worker and the Time,
Of this great work; both make it mere divine
5
At the feast of the annuntiation, Christ Jesus the Son of Mary entered into the
world by the assumption of our flesh, and Charles James the son of Marie
entered to his new Kingdom.
For if the Time be blessed God did descend,
From Heaven to Earth, a Man for to be made,
In Mary's womb, for us which did offend;
To the end man's sin on JESUS might be laid:
Then blessed the time, when Mary's JAMES came down
From North to South, to bear great Britains crown.
4
For at what time unspotted MARY'S child
Came down from God, Eues ill race to rescue
From death and hell, to make an union
Twixt God and man thus reconciled a new:
At the same time, a matchles MARY'S child
Came to unite men with men in this I Will.
5
Robert the 2 and the first of the Stewart-Kings in Scotland, and James the 6.
and the first of the Stewart-kings in England, began both of them their reign
in both kingdoms, at the feast of the Annuntiation. See Boethius, Leslaeus,
Buchananus and Stowe in their Chronicles.
Thus MARY'S time has been auspicious
To MARY'S seed, and to the royal stem
Of STEWARDS name, sprung from the valorous
Britannish Bruce, borne to Norths Diadem:
For in both lands the first of STEWARDS line
That e're bare Crown began both at this time.
6
When Phoebus shining in his Rammie sign
The first of signs, and rules the head of man,
Was running from the night-days-equall Line; At what time the fun which is the
prime of stars, was running in Aries which is the prime of signs, at the
same time the prime Star of the North by his motion began to inlighten the
two Hemispheres of this Ilish Orb.

The Norths bright Star with beamie face began,
Surueying South and North both far and near,
For to o're-shine the two halues of his sphere.
7
And fit it was, that this high head of Isles, Ptolomeus, Albumazar, Fo^tanus,
Cardanus and Ranzoniun do place under the influence of Aries which is the head
of signs, the head of man which is the head of earthly creatures, and under
the head of the same head sign called Aries, they place great Britannie which
is the head of Islands.

Great Britains I Will, a royal head should see:
T'unite her ends, though distant many miles;
When the head-signe was in his Royalty:
Which in Man's Body challenges the Head,
And does his force over Albions Island shed.
8
Als when the Sun did run his Giants race, At what time the Sun was
moving in the sign of Leo or the Lio^ which is the Suns own house, the Lion
of the North at he same time received the Crown of the South.

Mounted upon the starrie Lions back;
Then did the Lilly-Lyon show his face
In glory great; when he the style did take:
To be surnamed King of great Britanie,
Norths Prince of peace, and Pearl of unity.
9
Yea Iuda's-Lyon that delights to feed In the Revelation Christ Jesus is
called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and in the Canticles he remains among
the Lillies, and the Lion environed with Lillies, is a chief part of Charles
James his royal arms.

Amidst the fragrant Lillies of the field,
Did wish our Gemme goodluck, (and eeke his Seed)
Which bear's a Lilly-lyon in his shield;
Even Judah's Lion man-like sweetly smiled,
To see our Lion, Britains King enstil'd.
10
At S. James feast was happily King JAMES crowned.
S. JAMES who like-wise was a MARY'S child,
Held feast that day, that King James bare this Crown:
First on his head, as Monarch of this I Will;
Congratulate he did his new renown:
Wishing that our King JAMES of Albion,
Might match in hap King James King of Aragon and Valence, the first of that
name, the uniter of two kingdoms and both the son and the grandson of a Marie
was surnamed the fortunate or happy: see Marinaeus in the 10. Book of his
Spanish History.
JAMES of Aragon.
11
Thou Jacobs Harp, which he holds in his arms,
Take up a tune out of thine own accord:
Sing peace on Earth, and end to all alarmes
Here in the Land of thy Concording Lord;
Play David's Harp, how pleasant is it to see,
Britains to live in love and unity?
12
Orpheus, David's, and our Jacobs Harp is the Symbol of concord: see Orus
Apollo and Pierius in their Hieroglyphics.
Sweet Orpheus Harp add new strength to thy strings,
And tame the wild beasts of our passions;
Let melody, mounted on ayrie wings,
Charm and dechase our fierce affections:
That Britains borne may live in rest and Love
United ay, till Christ come from above.
13
Come Prince of Peace, unite us all in one
In Faith and Love, perfect us more and more,
Make JAMES the author of that Union, The most glorious works that can enter
into any Princes heart or hand are these two, the pacification and reunion of
the divided Catholic Church, and the restoration and reunion of the divided
and diminished Christian Empire: and it is the Authors most hearty wish, that
it would please God to make the hapfull Father the instrument of the one, and
the hopeful son the instrument of the other.

Which was amongs first Christians of before:
And let not his brave Charles his head go down
Before he bear Charles or Constantines Crowns
Make hell-hatcht Turks amazed to flee and fall
Before his face, till he be Lord of all.
A Poem showing the Excellency of our Sovereign King JAMES his HAND, that
gives both health and wealth, instanced in his Curing of the Kings evil by
touching the same, in hanging an Angel of Gold about the neck of the diseased
and in giving the poorer sort money toward the charges of their journey.
The Argument.
KIng JAMES is called of God to be the Curer of the Kings Evil; in private
persons corporally; in the Body of this I Will politically; in the Pope and the
whole Catholic Church Ecclesiastically.

1
Great King it was mine hap of late to see,
And to behold the virtues of your HAND;
When as from your blessed Seat of Majesty;
Before Gods Priests, which did about you stand;
Your sacred Touch did serve for Medicine
To such as with Kings-ill had plagued been.
2
Upon which sight my Muse with speed began
To meditate these presents in the praise
Of your right HAND blessed both of God and man;
The force whereof must needs your honor raise:
Since that the sole Touch of it does much more,
Then Medicines all in curing of this sore.
3 Professed physicians take gold of their patients and yet oftentimes give
them not health for their gold, but our great Physician gives his patients,
gold, and health also.

Physicians, when they do under go
The Cure of this or any other ill;
Are wont to reap some Angels one or more
At the sicks hands; thus they their purses fill:
Always they take; but often none ease do give
To such as do with sores tormented live.
4
Far otherwise it fares with our Leeche,
Apollo's heir, this Islands Aesculape;
He to his sick does golden Angels reeche
Out of his hand; and makes them to escape:
Which makes our Leeche the Lord of Leeches all;
For health and wealth both from his fingers fall.
5
Queen Maulde which was great English Beauclerkes heir, Polydorus Virgilius.
R. Holinsbed. I. Pox. I. Stow in Henrico 1.

And eke the Niece of Scots Malcolme our King,
Who for a time the style of Empress bare
Returning home, S. JAMES his HAND did bring
Unto her Father; who to dignifie
The same, did found rich Readings Monast'rie.
6
S. JAMES his HAND which this fair Lady brought
Into this Land, from the imperial parts,
(For ought I know) has not such wonders wrought,
As has the HAND of JAMES, our King of Hearts:
The honored Hand of S. JAMES dead, I say,
wrought never such Cures as K. James Hand this day.
7
King James his Hand wrought an admirable, yea an incompar^ble cure, when he
set together again the Back and the Belly of this two-parted Britannish Body.
Which deed of this North-South-descended Dame,
(For of both lands she had the royal blood)
Did signify, that once one of this Name,
I mean of JAMES, unto great Britains good,
Having united in his Body one
Both bloods, should join the halues of Albion.
8
If dead S. James his Hand in place had been
At that blessed Time, King James the South did see,
Me thinks it would have grown both fresh and green
At the first Touch of JAMES of Britanie:
Even the revived Hand of S. James dead
On S. James Day had crowned K. James his Head.
9
O happy Britains that thus have in One
A just, wise, Prince, a prompt Philosopher,
A pregnant Poet, a Physician,
A deep Divine, a sweet-tongued Orator;
A King James a Prince, a Philosopher, a Physician, a Poet, in one word another
Apollo.
Curer both of Kings, and poor Man's Evil;
What would ye more, a King James a Curer of Kings (if they would be cured) by
wholesome admonition, and a curer of the Kings evil in private persons by
manual imposition, and a curer yet of another evil (which the Author calls
the poor man's evil) by bounteous subuention. King * James played the chaser,
yea the danter of the devil in his voyage to Denmark, where he soyled al his
forces and scattered his troops of wicked witches in the mids of the
Cimbrianesea.
chaser of the devil.
10
O happy Britains to have such an Head!
With such an heart, such an health-giuing Hand,
Approved of God, of man, of quick and dead;
Guarded of Angels both by Sea and Land;
Thrice happy Britains I must needs you style,
If that ye weigh Gods blessing of this I Will.
11
Bless Britains all great Jove for giving you,
T'vnite this I Will, such a heau'n-fauord King,
Let North and South reere up a A Temple of concord or peace to the God of
peace and concord.
Temple now:
And joining hearts and hands thus let them sing;
Long live King JAMES our Saluer and our Saint
North's Prince of Peace, Mont- Syons The Oliue-tree is the symbol of peace in
Orus Apollo and Pierius: and our Prince of peace is like an Olive tree planted
in the Mount-Sion of the Church with Christ's own hand.
oliue-plant.
12.
And thou great James whom God has blessed thus
With his best things, with might and majesty,
Ascribe with heart and hand religious
All praise and laud unto the Trinity:
To Christ's sick Church put to your healing hand;
Cure The Kings-euill of the Church is her divisions to be cured by the hands
of kings and the heads of moderate men.
her kings-euil, chase sects from Christen-land.
13
Play The Author alludeth to David's curing of Saul, and his chasing away of his
evil Spirit by the harmony of his Harp. The Harp is always the Symbol of
concord, but most properly in our Kings person, in regard of his mild
moderation and singular inclination to Christian concord, the very crown of
all his other qualities.
David's part, our Curer and our King
In Saul's behalf, even the Musition,
With your sweet Harp, cease not to play and sing;
Till that ye prove Pope Paul's physician:
Touch still the strings of your Concording Harp,
Till Saul's discording Sp'rit from him depart.
14
But if that Saul out of his frantic mood
Pluck up a spear to pearce you for your play
Or in his fury render ill for Good;
Then grant great Jove that one day see I may
Great JAMES Empyring, from S. Angels top
Reaching an Angel to the The Pope (whose chief Court and chamber is in the
Castle called S. Angel) is so subject unto the Kings-euill, though he will not
be subject unto Kings, that he cannot be cured but by the hand of a king: and
if a King on earth cannot, or will not cure him; then the King of heaven cure
him for the good of his Church.
plagued Pope.
A Poem, representing a mystical May Pole of a Palm Tree from holy
Palestine, decored with a May-Crowne of sweet Cedar from Mount- Lebanon, and
ouer-topt with an Oliue-plant from holy Mount- Sion.

Presented in hearts Earnest wish on May Day being the holy May Day is the
commemoration of Philip and James
Day of S. S. James Bishop of Jerusalem in Eusebius, and Hieronymus
Ecclesiastical History, is named Iustus, and Nazaraeus for his integrity and
chastity.
JAMES the Son of Marie once the most holy Bishop of the Holy Land, so highly
renowned for his integrity and chastity.

Unto King James the Son of Marie Lord of the Ireland is called the holy
Island by Festus Au^enus, so is Lindefarne in Northumberland by Beda in his
History, of old the seat of the holy Scottish Father Aidanus Primate of
Northumberland.
holy Island, Simbolising with the other both in Name and notable parts.

Planted in the mids of his Spring-garden of S. JAMES there perpetually to
spring and sprout until Prince Charles his hopeful hand, quicken this
Conceit.

1
BEhold the May that home to JAMES I bring
(In hearts desire) this day that youthful bands,
Fetch From the fields and Forests flourishing
The tallest Trees and boughs with busy hands;
Their towns, their streets, and dwellings to decore
With Spring-times pride, and fragrant Flora's store.
2
A May Pole such the like was never seen
For matters (yet unmatched) Excellency,
All the May-daies that yet have ever been
Since May began or Mayes Meaning the Queen of May.
Mayd-monarchie:
In no profane place did my May first stand,
It Is such a May as yields the The Palm Tree is proper to Palestine called
commonly the holy land, see Dioscrides and Gesnerus de Palma.
holy land.
3
The Palm Tree is the simbole of patience, fortitude, victory in Orus Apollo,
and Pierius.
The holy Palm almost the prime of Trees,
The sacred Symbol of praised patience
Was fittest to present his holy Eyes;
Whose patient Sp'rit all men must reverence:
Mild Jesus having on mild James his face
Engraven the clear Image of this Grace.
Aristoteles Theophrastus, Plinius, Dioscorides, Gesnerus de Palma.

The Palm Tree is the simbole or sign of victory even in the Revelation.


4
This Tryumph-tree the more it is beaten down
The more it bends up with matchles might;
Bow down his back, behold he rises soon,
Resembling most a wrastler strong and wight:
Hence is the Palm, the sign of Victory
Of Fortitude and Magnanimity.
5
In which respect this May's most fit for him,
Whose Virtues valor does thus vanquish Vice,
As Cruelty, Pride, Lust, and Mammons sin;
A Victory that mak's him happy thrice:
As for his State, the more men it debase
The more God mountes it to an higher place.
6
Grow Princely Palm in despite of disdain,
Put forth apace your chief branche from your back
Till it o're-top France, To wit Imperially, for these words do bear only a
wish for the restoration of the divided Christian Empire.
Almanie and Spain
With Rome and Greece, and bring the Turk to wrack;
Christ Jesus help Prince Charles his hopeful hand
To bear the Palm through out the Holy Land.
7
Upon this Palm, A Cedar-crowne from Lebanon for our Solomon, the Samori of
Albion.
Lo a sweet Cedar-crowne
Fetched from the top of lofty Lebanon,
For Frankincense is fit for the Renown
Of such a King as aims at Union:
Who God-like labors to unite us all
In faith and love, that vpstart sects may fall,
8
Lo here the Symbol of this holy peace, The Oliue-tree is the simbole of
peace not only in Orus and Pierius, but likewise in Moses his Genesis.

An Oliue-plant his May-crowne does decore,
Whose softning Oil bedeweth all his face,
And makes it sweet and shining more and more:
Drop Oil of peace down from Mount- Olives hill
On James his head till full Christ's Church thou fill.
9
O happy sight to see great Britains King
One day descending from Mount- Oliuet!
O happy song, to here the Hebrews sing!
For joy of heart James to congratulate:
Blessed be the King that comes in JESUS Name
To christen Jews and Crown Jerusalem.
10
Great JESUS grant, that as one of the Name
of More Apostolical Preachers of peace of the name of James, of old, and more
lovers of Christian concord at this day, of the same name of James, then of any
other. S. James of old, did direct an Epistle to the dispersed believing Jews
for the furthering of their Christian conversation, and King James (I hope)
will do the like one day to the same, now misbeleeuing and more dispersed
nation, for the furthering of their Christian conversion and collection: Even
so come Lord Jesus, come and unite both Jews and Gentiles in one.
peace-bred James was the first that did bear
The Bishops office in Jerusalem;
So may our James that sacred Sea vpreare:
That Jews with Gentiles united in one
Next Jesus may serve James of Albion.
A Congratulation of the most hopeful Prince CHARLES his auspitious Entry
into the world, Prince Charles his birth-time was both a royal time and a
religious time.
and Nativity, which was the 19 of November 1600 being the festival day both
of S. ELIZABETH the renowned Daughter of Andrew King of Hungary and the Eve of
the Commemoration of S. Edmond the Martyr once the most Christian King of
East-England; and the third day after the Coronation-day of the most renowned
Princess ELIZABETH our late Queen of Famous memory.

1
Go to my Muse with mirth some Sonets sing
In honor of the blessed Nativity
Of sweet Prince Charles borne of a Queen and King,
Whose Name and Fame shall live in memory,
So long as Phoebus rolling in his Spheere
Shall bring forth days or seasons of the year.
2
The Sun which is the Lord of life and light Jupiter which is called the
prime of planets for felicity has his house and hearts-ioy in the sign of
Sagittarius under which Prince Charles was borne.

To every thing that Nature here below
Does form or frame; when Charles first came in sight
Did his bright beams from Jove's chief house him show
That day he did in Sagittarie shine,
Which starrie wits do call Jove's royal sign.
3
And fit it was that the best Planets house
Should Lodge the Sun, the day so sweet a child
First saw his light; an hour auspicious
Was due unto the hope of Britains I Will;
I mean to CHARLES ordained by starrie fate
This Islands honor to perpetuate.
4.
Sagittarius is a sign enclining to beauty of body, quickness of wit, and
goodness of understanding: also a certain martial and Mercuriall star called
the right ankle of the celestial waineman did arise a little before Prince
Charles his birth, as it were to make him ready to go to meet and welcome our
Martial and Mercuriall young Prince coming into the world.
Sol in this Sign does frame a feature fair,
A lovely face, a comely personage;
And does incline to know all things that are
Worthy of knowledge, to be quick and sage;
When e're these two the Horoscope do hold
They do incline to be wise, brave, and bold.
5
Likewise to be just and ingenuous.
Trusty and secret, constant, mild and grave,
Nimble of Body and laborious;
Yet such a one shall adversaries have;
Which shall oppose his great felicity,
But he preuailes and gets the victory.
Sagittariu^ is a sign masculine and enclining to manhood, besides that Mars
the planet of manhood, was in this manly sign the day of Prince Charles his
birth.
6
To riding, shooting, exercise of Arms
Much does the foresaid Horoscope incline:
Besides that Mars who moves all alarmes,
That day did in Jove's Sagittarie shine;
In such aspect as well does signify
Highness, renown, brave acts of chivalry.
7
Of Captains, Soldiers and all men of war
Beloved for his great munificence; Sagittarius is a southern sign and has
it under the best countries of Europe, beside the happy Arabia, and the
Horoscope in this sign does incline men to go and see the said countries with
good success.

His toward prowess spreads his name right far,
Through Sagittaries secret influence,
For under it are Spain, France, Italy,
High-Dutch-land, Dalmace, Hungar', Arabie,
8
A happy fortune thus it does betide Sole in Sagittario Horoscopante qui
nascitur paterna^ haereditatem consequetur.

With joyful success both by Sea and Land,
A name renowned throughout the world so wide:
A wise-bold heart with a victorious hand.
Yea more according to the starrie fate
At home he must enjoy his fathers state.
9
Nouembers month into the light did send Vespasion and Tratane were both of
them famous for their fortitude, courage, wisdom, warlik prowess, justice,
modesty, clemency, bounty, and liberality, toward Scholars and Soldiers;
whereof read Suetonius, Dion, and Aurelius Victor in their Histories. Henry
the 4. was likewise a Prince of great understanding, and of quick wit;
eloquent, liberal, and in war both foreward and fortunate; he fought more
fields then M. Marcellus or yet Julius Caesar, and always with a victorious
issue, whereof read Baptista Egnatius, and Cuspinianus in the Emperors lives.

Three worthy Caesar's wise, and valorous,
Vespasian, Traiane the choice of men,
Henry the fourth a Prince victorious;
Who sixty times did with his sword and shield
Always bring home great honor from the field.
10
Charles Duke of Burgundy and Brabant, was a Prince of exceeding great
magnanimity; and even from his lowest years, much addicted to warrelike
exercises, patient of cold and heat, hunger and thirst, and both temperate and
continent, free from luxury and lechery, and the most toward wight of his
time, of whom read Pontus Heuterus in his History of Burgundy.
The same month bare Prince Charles of Burgundy,
Surnamed the bold, a Chieftaine stern and stout,
Who many times brought home brave victory,
And did his prowess prove at many a rout:
Lewis of France much feared his force and might
And had the worse by him in field and fight.
11
Philip Prince Palatine of Rhine, is renowned for his warrelike prowess and
singular wisdom the was a great favorer both of Scholars and Soldiers, and
was chosen General of the Imperial forces, both by Charles the fifth, and
Ferdinand the first Emperors: of his prowess, read in Melchior Suterus
History of the Hungarian war: and Augustinus Brunnius in his Catalogue of
the Palatine Princes.
Philip the brave Prince Palatine of Rhine
For his rare courage called the Bellicous,
Was borne about our young Prince Charles his time
Whom here I name for his acts chiualrous;
Which he did show under great Charles of Spain,
Then Emperor, in defense of Vienne.
12
Twenty sore assaults Soliman had made
The famous City for to take by might;
Whole sixty thousand fell down by his blade;
Yet forward Philip was not turned to flight:
But valiantly did in defending stay,
Till that the Turks were feign to flee their way.
13
* Great Archer-King the sovereign Lord of all
Who did ordain Prince Charles to see the light
In th'archer-signe which brings a fat all fall, In the Revelation Christ is
painted out as a crowned archer riding on a white horse, with a bow in his
hand, going forth to conquer and overcome: and in Astrology Caput Draconis or
the Dragons head has his fall in the sign of the Archer, under the which
Prince Charles was borne to be an instrument one day, by his sharp arrows of
the Turkish Dragons fall and final overthrow.

To Dragons-head; strengthen this tender Knight;
Guide thou his Arrow and direct his Dart
To pierce the Turkish Dragons head and heart.
14
Stout Castriote, George Castriote a Prince of incomparable courage,
magnanimity and strength of body, entered to his Princedome of Albanie in the
south about the same time that Prince Charles was borne to be Duke of Albanie
in the North, and afterward succeeded to his brother Prince Henry in the
Princedome of Britannie. Of the Turks he was called Scanderbeg which is
another Alexander the great, for his great valor: and of the Christians, in
whose cause he showed an admirable fortitude against the Turks in many battles
and fields, he was called Chrssts soldier and Champion: he lived in great
honor reputation and fame, in despite of the Turks the space of 63. years:
of whom read Marinus Barletius in his life, Velaterranus in his description of
Macedonie, Aeneas Syluius in his Europe, and Paulus Iouius in his Turkish
Commentaries.
whom Scanderbeg they call
A second Pyrrhus valiant, bold and brave,
The Turkish Troops that often did apall
And in the field full often the foil them gave
About the time of Charles Nativity
Began to be named Prince of Albanie.
15
O happy sight to see Prince Charles one day Castriote alias Scanderbeg was
Duke of Albanie in the south, and our Charles is Duke o Albanie in the North.

With Castriote once chief of chivalry
Against the Turks his Banner to display,
That as he is named the Duke of Albanie:
So men may him a Scanderbeg enstile
Th'horror of Turks, the Hector of this I Will.
16
Christ Jesus name our Charles of Britanie
With Scanderbeg, thy Soldier and thy Knight,
Add unto his one Nothern Albanie
Six In the Geographie of Ptolemaeus, Strab^, Plinius and Stephanus there do
occur six countries and Cities in the east and south, which bear the name of
Albanie, and they lie in Greece, Arabie, Armenie, Galacie, and Italy, or
thereabout; and the seventh Albanie is in the North of Britannie, being a part
of Scotland, and the first Dukedom of Prince Charles, whom Christ enable to
unite them Imperially all in one.
Albanies, choose him thy fields to fight
Against Mahomet, and give him for his bire
Constantines Town with the proud Turks Empire.
17
Prince Albert Marquise of Brandenburg for his incomparable valor called the
Achiles of Germany, was borne on the 19. of Noue^ber, even as our Prince
Charles was: see Nicholaus Reusnerus in Diario Historico, a brief description
of whose incomparable valor, and magnanimity, is to be read in the
Genealogicall works of Elias Reusnerus and Hieronymus Henninges, as also in
the Electorall Catalogue of Augustinus Brunnius.
For month and day, at the same very time
That matchles Marquise first did see the light,
Who was the honor of the German Clime
Whose name Albert Almans Achilles hight:
A Prince for fortune, courage, warlike arts
Wisdom and worth, renowned in all parts.
18
A Martial Body, a Mercuriall mind,
An ornate Tongue, with an undaunted heart,
Most happily were in this Prince combinde,
His prowess was spoke of in every part:
Witness his wars in Prusse and Polonie
In Silese, Boheme, and all Almanie.
19
Many a troop this Dutch Achilles led,
His fiercest foes he brought them on their back,
Of Challengers right often the blood he shed,
Scaled many a wall; and strongest towns did take:
Was ay the first that entered in the field,
And ay the last that laid down sword and shield.
20
Albert was matchles in all martial plays, Prince Albert did 17. times run
against men all armed and threw them in the dust, he himself having no more
armor on him except his helmet and shield.

Of Iusting, tilting, and of Tournament,
The only man remarked in those days
Who never incurred disgrace or detriment:
Yet he unarmed, did seauenteene times in Ioust
Hurl men all-armd from horseback in the dust.
21
Years seauentie one this worthy wight did live
In great renown, with honor, hap, and fame;
Great Jove to our young Charles vouchsafe to give
The like long life with brave Albertus name:
As often as I see sweet Charles run at Ring,
Me thinks his Sp'rite did from Albertus spring.
22
Great God of Arms grant honored Alberts heart,
His hand and hap to Charles great Britains stay;
Grant him to prove his Prowess in each part
As he was borne in Alberts month and day;
Make him be named the Achilles Britannick,
As Albert was the Achilles Germanick.
A Congratulation of the happy Birth of the most graceful Princes ELIZABETH,
which was the 19. of August 1596. being the festival day of the holy Matrone
and Martyr S. Thecla, and the next day after the Commemoration of the most
religious, and renowned Empress S. Helen Daughter of Coilus King of Britanie,
and the Mother of the first Christian Emperor Constantine the great, who was
borne in the ancient and honorable City of York.

1
The Sun being entered into Virgo which is both a feminine sign, and the house
of the feminine planet Venus, they brought forth into the light Princess
Elizabeth to be the flower of the feminine sex.
Muse sing the Birth of loved Eliza's grace
The flower of Virgins, whom the Virgin-signe
When as the Sun did there begin his race;
Sent to the light; both did their force combine
With Venus, who in that Sign has her house
To grace us with a Virgin virtuous.
2
Virgo is a sign enclining to beauty of body and bounty of mind.
In this Sign Phoebus frames a lovely face,
A comely feature, and a stature tall;
Upon the heart he heaps his richest grace
Of prudence, knowledge, bounty; and withal,
Inclines to be kind and officious,
shamefast, and grave, just, and ingenuous.
3
All which are furthered by the good aspect
Of the other stars, which in that hour did shine
So happily; that we may well expect,
Of this choice wight, such things as are divine;
For they incline to magnanimity,
To gentleness and liberality.
4
The Horoscope in Virgo wealth does yield,
For it disposes to be provident,
In all things that belong to house or field, Sol in Virgin Horoscopans facit
puellam ingeniosam, ^erecundam, beneuolam, officiosam, prouidam, quae viro
nubet circa 16. annum and parturiet primo genitum eleganti forma.

To be thriftie, watchful and diligent:
The married state, (if that the art be true)
Unto her sixteenth year is fit and due.
5
Jerusalem is subject to her sign, These Cities are under the sign of Virgo
under which Princess Elizabeth was borne.

Corinth and Rhodes, Pauie and Toulouse Town
Basil, with the brave Heidelberg of Rhine
Paris and Lions Cities of Renown:
And though I know not, which her must befall
Yet this I know that she deserves them all.
6 Probus the Emperor was born the same month and day that our Proba Princess
Elizabeth was borne on: he was a wight renowned for his notable parts of
wisdom, fortitude, valiancie and vigilancie in war, wherein he was both
foreward and fortunate, whereof read Vopiscus and Cuspinianus in his life.

Six Emperors Eliza's time did send
Into the light, two only will I name
Probus the prime of old Romes princely men,
whose virtues worth did spread ech-where his fame:
The day and month of whose Birth was all one
With that of our brave Rose of Albion.
7
Maximilian the 2. the most worthy son of a most worthy father Ferdinand the
1. was a Prince wonderful wise just, moderat, clement, mild, affable, and
bountiful to Scholars and soldiers, of whom read in Historia Augusta,
The other is brave Maximilian
Whom men the second of that name enstile,
Whose worth went through all Germany and Spain,
With Italy, through every Land and I Will:
A Prince renowned for his beneficence,
His wisdom, Justice and his temperance.
8
Fridericke the 1. and Fridericke the fifth Prince Palatines of Rhine, were
borne in the month of August the 1. on the 1. day, and the fifth on the
foureteenth, whereof read Nicholaus Reusnerus in his Diarium, and Augustinus
Brunnius in his Catal^gus Electorum.
To Caesar's two, two Princes we may join
From Caesar's sprung, and from the greatest Kings,
Two Friderick Prince Palatines of Rhine;
The First, the Fifth, whose fame with feathered wings
He Is far and wide, from filu'rie Thames to Tweede
From fruitful Kent unto Kintires heed.
Frederick the first defended himself valiantly against his many strong
enemies, Duks Marquises, and Earls, besides Bishops; he took Charles
Marquise of Baden, Vld^ricus of Wirtemberg, John Bishop of Meaux, being all
banded against him in warlike manner and with them their whole Nobility, with
five hundredth Knights, and carried them away captive into his City of
Heidelberg, and there kept them the space of eleven months, till at what time
they had ransomed themselves whereof read Sebastianus Munster^s in his
Germany, Ia^^us Wymp^elingius, in his Epitome rerum Germanicarum; and
Augustinus Brunnius in his Catalogue of the Palatine Princes.
9
Fred'rick the first call d the Victorious
Is magnified for his martial deeds,
And prowess great; a Prince magnanimous
That of true worth, had both the fruits and seeds;
Fred'rick the fifth who now adornes this I Will
One day shall brook first Fred'ricks honored style.
10
Eliza's birth was on S. Theclas day
That matchles matron, Of S. Thecla the renowned Matrone and Martyr, read
Eusebius, Euagrius and Nicephorus Ecclesiastical Histories.
that rare Martyred wight
Whose constant faith, and fervent zeal for ay
Shall be extolled, and had in honors hight:
And now me thinks her piety and faith
Do all revive in graced Elizabeth.
11
Me thinks I see Eliza in her prime
Begin to follow the religious path
Of that Princess still honored to this time, S. Elizabeth daughter of Andrew
King of Hungary is much renowned for her fervent piety toward God and her
charity toward the poor whom she liberally relieved; and the sick, unto
whom she was wont with her own hands to minister both medicine and meat, yea
her costliest ornaments, she converted them to their use for the supply of
their wants, of whom read Iacobus Montanus in her life.

Under the name of Saint Elizabeth:
Who was the daughter of fair Hungary
As she is the daughter of great Britanie.
A parent to the poor Eliza was
Nine hundredth souls she daily did maintain
This worlds wealth she did esteem but trash,
True godliness was aye her greatest gain;
To fast and pray, to help the poor in need
To salve the sick, the fatherless to feed.
12.
S. Hellene once a daughter of this I Will
King Coilus child, S. Helens day is the 18. of August, and our Eliza's
birthday the nineteenth.
and great Constantines Mother
Whose praise was spread from Caluarie to Kyle,
For piety was even such another:
Eliza's grace first saw fair Phoebus raye
The next unto S. Helens holy day.
13
Great Jesus grant to our Eliza's grace
S. Helens fortune, and her Empresse-fate
S. Helene the daughter of Co^^us King of Britains and the worthiest Empress
that ever was in the world, so much renowned for her piety, charity and
liberality: she founded and builded about 32. Churches, she lived the space
of 80. years in health, wealth, with honors Imperial hight, of whom read
Eusebius, Nicephorus, Eutropius, and Orosius, in their Histories.
That as they both are of the Royal race,
Of British Kings, so she may imitate
S. Helens zeal, and so reap for her hyre
Helens long life, Helens Crown of Empire.
FINIS.

