Henry the 2d. surnamed Short mantle, King of England, Duke of Normandy and
Aquitaine, Earl of Poicteres. and Anjou: Lord of Ireland. etc


THE REIGN OF KING HENRY THE SECOND,

Written in Seven Books.

By his Majesty's Command.

Invalidas vires Rex excitat, and juvat idem Qui jubet; obsequium sufficit esse
meum. Auson. LONDON,

Printed by A. M. for Benjamin Fisher, dwelling in Aldersgate-streete at the
sign of the Talbot. 1633.

TO THE SACRED MAJESTY OF CHARLES,
BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, AND IRELAND, DEFENDER OF
THE FAITH, etc.

THIS HISTORICAL POEM, BORNE BY HIS COMMAND, AND NOT TO LIVE BUT BY HIS
GRACIOUS ACCEPTANCE, IS HVMBLY DEDICATED BY THE AVTHOR,

His Majesty's most obedient Subject and Servant

THO. MAY.

THE REIGN OF King HENRY the Second.
The First Book.
The Argument of the first Book.
The happy part of Henry's reign is shown.
His first Triumphant years and high renown.
His peace and power Enyo grieves to see;
And to disturb his long tranquillity
Descending down to Lucifer below
She craves some Vices aid, to overthrow
The causes of it: there those tragike times
Of Stephens reign, and Englands civil crimes
So lately past, Enyo does relate;
And shows with grief King Henry's present state*
The Fiend foretells what sudden change shall be
Of Englands peace, and his felicity.
THe Second Henry, first Plantagenet,
The first of Englands royal Kings, that set
Victorious footing on the Irish-shore,
And taught that warrelike nation to adore
A foreign Scepter, sound ye Muses forth.
Declare how much his high Heroike worth
By storms of spiteful fortune often assailed,
As oft'gainst fortunes spiteful storms prevailed.
His glorious reign, but wrapped in various fate,
And, though triumphant, yet unfortunate.
How his great Virtues were too saddly try'de
By rebel Subjects, by the Papal pride,
And his own Childrens strange impiety.
By opposition to eclipse his high
And great Renown, or higher to advance
The fame of his undaunted puissance.
Vouchsafe, dread Sovereign Charles, with that most clear
And gracious eye, with which you use to cheer
Poor suppliants, while destinyes attend
Your royal doom, to view these lines, and lend
Your favors influence, which can infuse
Virtue alone into an English Muse.
She else would tremble to approach too nigh
So pure a mind, so great a Majesty.
Vouchsafe to read the actions of a King
Your noble Ancestour; and what we sing
In Henry's reign, that may be true renown,
Accept it, Sr. as Prologue to your own,
Until this Muse, or some more happy strain
May sing your Virtues, and unaequall'd Reign.
Those civil swords, that did so lately stayne
The land with slaughter, now were sheathed again.
The rents of State were closed, the wounds were cur'de,
Peace by victorious Henry was secur'de,
And justice waited on his awful throne
Without control; all fears, all faction,
That took beginning with King Stephen's reign,
With him descended to the grave again.
Stephen deceased, the Crown of England now
Came by accord t'empale young Henry's brow,
Which was before by right of birth his due.
But he, least England too too long should rue
In blood and slaughter their ambitious strife,
Came to accords of peace, and during life
Of Stephen, respited his royal right.
Now like bright Phoebus to the longing sight
Of all the People did young Henry ri^e;
Before whose rays all past calamities
Like mists did vanish: no sadd clouds accloy
The air of England; with loud showtes of joy
The People flock, the Peers their wealth display
To grace his wished for Coronation day.
His brave achievements, and that early fame
Which he in France had gained, had made his name
Already loved in England and admired.
Him all the people for their Lord desired,
And now possessed of him, take fair presage
Such youth would end in a triumphant age.
Then, as when once the chariot of the Sun
Had been misguided by bold Phaeton,
Jove walked the round, and veiw'd with careful eye
If heaven were safe; then from the starry sky
Descending down, surveyed the scorched ground,
And there repaired the ruins that he found;
To their dry channells he called back the floods,
And with fresh verdure clothed the seindged woods,
Renewed the herbage, and redress ordained
For all that wronged Nature had sustein'd:
So Henry stablish'd in the Regal throne
Iove-like surveyes his large dominion,
To see what parts of state might be decayed,
What rents so long a civil war had made.
With physic fit he purges from the State
Those humors, that did stir, and swell so late,
Digests the relics, and by Princely arts,
And policy, corroborates the parts.
And first of all, those troops of forreiners,
That from all parts during the civil wars
Resorted hither to seek spoil and prey,
He banishes, that at the appointed day
Within the coasts no strangers did remain,
Restoring England to it self again.
And least the Crown should want for that expense,
That must support the high magnificence
Of such a Monarchy, into his hands
He boldly seizes all the royal lands,
Which either greatest men did uncontrolled
In those tumultuous times unjustly hold;
Or else King Stephen to support so badd
And weak a title, as (they knew) he had,
Had given freely, as rewards to tie
Their truth to him against their loyalty.
Nor did King Henry vindicate alone
The state and wealth of his Imperial Crown,
But the just power, and with a puissant hand
Settled that sure obedience through the land;
That to his awful Scepter did belong.
The greatest Peers, that were before too strong
To be commanded, he by force compelled
To yield to him the Castles that they held.
And all the midland forts he rased down
(The strength of nothing but rebellion.)
Nor, though as yet presumptuous Mortimer
Had not forgot the late licentious war,
But strove to guard against his Sovereign
By lawless arms the strength that he had taken,
Could he resist the King, enforced to yield
To him those three strong Castles that he held.
Well did this reformation suite the thought
Of such a great Heroike King, who brought
Besides his persons worth, and true esteem,
So lov'de a title to the Crown with him.
Not from the Norman Conqueror did he
Deduce alone his royal pedigree:
But from the ancient Saxon Kings beside,
As lineall heir to Edmund Ironside;
And in his happy birth did so conjoyne
The conquering Norman and old Saxon line.
Which hearty love and reverence to his throne
From all the English people justly won.
Who now forgate, pleased with his lawful power,
That they were servants to a Conqueror*
Great Grandchild, by the Femall side, was he
To Margaret the Queen of Scotland; she
Daughter to Edward, son to Ironside;
Whose royal birth and blood was dignified
By twenty fair descents of Saxon Kings.
All which the happy birth of Henry brings
The more to England to endeare his reign.
And here your self, most Gracious Sovereign,
Your ancient right to Englands Crown may see.
In Scotlands royal blood your pedigree
Is farther drawn; and no known king, as you,
So long a title to two Crowns can show.
Then to the North with puissant Arms he makes
A prudent Voyage, and by Conquests takes
(To keep entire his kingdoms ancient bounds)
From Malcolme King of Scotland, all those grounds
That to the Crown of England did belong.
No Cities could withstand, no forts so strong,
But yield to Henryes force. there, with the rest
Newcastle, Carleill he again possessed.
But least injustice any stain should be
To his great deeds, in thankful memory
Of what King Malcolme in the wars had done
For the Empress Mawde, he gives him Huntingdon
A midd-land County, rich, and fitter far
For the b^hoofe of both; from whence no war
Nor troubles could arise, and which before
Had been possessed by Malcolmes Ancestor.
Yet did one deed with sad injustice blot
The reputation he before had got;
Whilst too must thirsting for increase of lands,
He seized out of his brothers Geoffrey's hands
The Earldome of Aniou; forgetting both
The sacred ties of Nature and of Oath;
That Oath which once so solemnly he swore.
His Father Geoffry Anious Earl, before
Knowing that Henry was, by birth, to be
Both Englands King, and Duke of Normandy,
Had given that Earldome to his second son
Geoffrey, and put him in possession
Of three the strongest Castles in the Land.
But falling sick, when deaths approaching hand
He felt, mistrusting that hi^ eldest Son
The potent Henry might, when he was gone,
Diss^ize young Geoffrey, made his Barons swear
(For at his death Prince Henry was not there)
That his dead corpse should not enterred be
Till Henry had been sworn to ratify
His will; Prince Henry, though unwillingly,
Yet rather then his fathers hearse should lie
Vnbury'd still, that Oath before them took.
Which afterward, when Englands King, he broke;
And, though possessed of so many lands
And large estates, out of his brother's hands
That Earldom took by force of arms away;
And did, in lieu, a yearly pension pay.
But though the King could for that oath obtain
A dis^ensation from Pope Adrian,
A higher power (it seemed) would not dispense;
But afterward in kind did recompense
that foul misdeede. for when King Henry meant
To John his youngest son the government
Of those three Castles; thence his eldest son
Took first pretense for that rebellion
Against his father. so what injury
Impiety had wrought, Impiety
Revenged; and scourged by an unnatural son
What was against nature by a br^ther done.
Yet could not Henry's deeds of highest fame
Teach stubborn Wales to tremble at his name,
Or fear to offend him by rebellious war,
Till she had felt him there a conqueror,
And been herself enforced to implore
His grace and favor, with one triumph more
T'en^ich his conquering head; not all her great
Rough woods could yield her soldiers safe retreat;
Nor could those high and craggy mountains be
Of proof against Henry's magnanimity.
Although the Welsh relied not on the aid
Of hills and woods: their Prince was not afraid
To join in battle with the English strength;
Where though stout Owen and his powers at length
Subd^'de, did yield themselves, yet so they fought,
That they true fame to Henry's conquest brought.
Who now triumphant back to England goes,
And leaves strong forts to aw rebellious foes,
^o guard the coasts and marches, and appear
^e lasting trophies of his conquests there.
Those large dominions which he held in France,
The fame alone of his great puissance
Preserved from tumults, from rebellions free,
Or fear of any foreign enemy.
King Lewis himself was there too weak a foe
To do him damage, or his power orethrow
Beyond the seas; yet though each neighboring state
With envy trembled at the prosperous fate
Of Englands King; such moderation he
Had showed, so ruled his power with equity,
Seeking no lawless and unjust increase,
That Europe then possessed a happy peace.
This peace when feirce Enyo had beheld,
And saw all seeds of war and faction quel'd,
She sighed and wept; for naught could pleasing be
To that dire maid but wars calamity:
Naught but dissension did to her seem good;
No sights but feilds and rivers stained with blood
Were her delightsome prospects. into air
She mounts, and filled with fury and despair
Shakes, as she flies, her now-extinguish'd brand,
Which gives no blaze at all, then taking stand
Above the shore of fruitful Normandy
Upon a lofty cliffe, viewes from on high
Great Henry's large dominions, that extend
From Scotland Northward to the Southern end
Of spacious rance, which those high mountains bound
Named from Pirenes death* ore all that ground
She sees, and gnashes for disdain to see,
No streaming Ensigns, no hostility;
The murdrous swords to sythes were turned again,
And cheerful plowmen till the fertile plain;
The heardsmen hear their bullocks gently lough,
And their own folds the fearelesse shepherds know.
Am I then banished quite? shall Peace (quoth she)
Boast through these lands so great a victory
Over Enyo? will no power orethrow
These nations quiet rest! if heaven allow
This lethargy, and still would have it so:
I will descend, and see what hell can do.
A spacious cave there was (not often before
Descried by mortal eye) within that shore
Which wealthy France does to the North display,
And Britains Ocean bounds. thither they say,
The wise Dulichyan Hero, by advi^e
Of beauteous Circe came to sacrifice,
And there restored, by blood of bullocks slain,
To silent ghosts the use of speech again.
Through that dark vault did Phoebus nere shoot ray,
Nor ever glided beam of cheerful day.
The grove of Proserpine oreshadow'd quite
That dismal shore, and damps of drery night
Condensed the air; no birds those boughs did grace,
Nor with sweet music cheered the balefull place;
No Tritons played, nor did blew Proteus feed
His scaly ^locke, nor fair Halcyon breed
Beneath the shelter of so sadd a shore:
But greisly fiends and furyes evermore
In hideous shapes did to the cave repair,
And ghosts sad^ murmurs did afright the air,
Who in unnumber'd companies attend.
Thither the feirce Enyo did descend,
And all her strongest arts and charmings bring
To hold converse with Hells infernal king.
The Feind himself was busy far below,
And ran with gnashing envy too and fro
To find out plotts of ruin, and survey
His Master-vices, who fast chained lay
In adamantine cavernes; and from thence
(So pleased the great Creators providence
To curb their might for mankindes sake, least all
The world should in a quick confusion fall)
With all their force at once, and licensed power
They cannot go; for soon they would devour
All states, all lands, and work more tragic woe
Then earthquakes, fires, or pestilence can do.
Within their several denns the Vices lay;
And ore the doors proud pictures did display
What several feats and conquests they had wrought,
What States, what kingdoms they to ruin brought.
For of destroying households, or the fall
Of private men they made no boast at all.
And as stern Aeolus is forced to lock
The boistrous winds in caves of strongest rock
By Jove's command, lest, if they wholly go,
They should all woods, all cities overthrow,
And bear down all that did before them stand,
Confounding Neptunes kingdom with the land.
Yet have those winds still leave in some degree
(Though they disdain such petty liberty)
To range abroad, to make their natures known,
To shake some weakly ^ounded houses down,
Oreturne some aged Oaks, and now and than
To cause a shipwreck on the Ocean.
Even so these hellish monsters, though great Jove
Permit them not in their full strength to move,
Are acting mischei^e every day, and go
Contriving here and there designs of woe,
And work (though they almost such work despise)
The wrack of private men and families;
But to effect a great and public woe
Without a special license cannot go:
Hither, while Lucifer did thus survey
His Master-Vices, as they chained lay,
He bad them bring Enyo down below,
For then to the upper cave he would not go.
What would thou crave (quoth he) what black design
What stratagem t'enlarge thy power or mine
Has made Enyo hither take her flight?
The furious Maid replies; great Prince of night,
It Is not my cause alone that makes me come
(As fearing general peace in Christendom)
Thy cause is joined; I fear if that peace be,
Such wars as more will hurt thy Monarchy.
Then briefly thus; full fifteen years are gone
Since potent Henry wore the English crown,
Possessed besides, in wealthy France of more
Strong lands, then do the crown of France adore,
Blessed with a numerous issue, and by none
Annoyed, disturbed by no rebellion,
Nor foreign foes; and lest French Lewis should be
His foe (though too too weak;) a^inity
Ioines them; fair Margaret is by wedlock tied
To young Prince Henry; Britains heire's affy'd
To Geoffrey his third son, who comes to add
That Duchy too, to what before he had
In France; it did not seem enough that he
Before possessed Maine, Aniou, Normandy,
Nor that he did by Eleanor obtain
Poi^tou besides, and fertile Aquitaine.
What war dares menace such strong power as he
Possesses now? what fortune (woe is me)
Has chang'de the times? with what delight could I
(If now not crossed by this tranquillity)
Remember Stephen's reign, and tragic times?
Oh heavens what slaughters, then, what civil crimes
Did England see, when on her frighted Coast
The Empress Maude was landed with her host,
And came by arms to claim her royal right?
What sudden tumults rose, and did afright
The wretched people? different passions then
Made sad divisions in the hearts of men.
Some wept, some feared, some sadly took their arms,
And with intent to cure their countries harms
Prepared to wound her more; some did not know
What side to take, or where they might bestow
Their rage or love, before each mourning eye
Did forms of fire, of blood, and slaughter fly.
Within themselves their passions made arise
Such things as they imagined prodigies;
With thoughts confused the people rushed to arms;
No noise in England but my loud alarmes
Was heard; the war long carried to and fro
At Lincoln wholly met at last, and now
All hoped one battle would the right decide.
No field was ever with more fury tried,
Nor rage ere met more aequall rage, as they
That saw the slaughters of that dismal day,
Could justly tell; till great Augustaes right,
Whose powers renowned Gloucester led in fight,
Prevailed at last; there after he in vain
Had showed rare valor, was king Stephen taken,
And to the conquering Empress captive brought.
Then turned the State. who would not then have thought
All civil wars had ended quite, when she
Had on her side both right and victory?
The people all congratulate her state;
But soon begin to pity St^phens fa^e,
And too hard durance. who a king had been,
Then pinched in irons lay. his weeping Queen
For her dear Lord did to the Empress sue,
But all in vain. the wars from thence renew;
Again the discontented people rise
In aid of Stephens faction, and surprise
Glosters brave Earl, Augustaes General
Then seemed the like calamities to fall
On both the parties, and in aequall pain
Of durance did the king and Earl remain
Accord was made, but not an end to make
Of civil war, nor for their countries sake,
But to release their own captivity,
And in exchange they set each other free.
From this accord with greater fury far
Through all the kingdom rose the civil war.
For those sad changes had not pacified
But more incensed the chiefes of either side.
Whose wrath the people felt; all kinds of woe
The wretched Realm was forced to undergo.
The countries pillaged, castles lost and won,
Rich cloisters robbed, the fairest cities down
Or rased or burned, in ^ude heaps did ly;
As Wiltons pittyed sack could testify
By Glosters furious army burned with fire.
Nor thee fair Worster, in king Stephens ire
Could all thy beauteous structure save from wrack;
In fatal flames thy walls and houses crack.
Through what great hazards did both Princes run?
How hardly often escape destru^tion!
What need I tell how Stephen forced to fly
From Gloster's powers, forfooke his treasury
At Wilton Abbey? how the Empress fled
When least she seemed to fly (supposed dead)
And like a coarse was carried through her (...)
So to escape? what need I now disclose
How after she, when she i^ Oxford lay
Straightly beseig'd by Stephen, got away?
No strength of friends at all, no parleys there
Could free her person; Winter rescued her,
And the cold season strove to mock the foe.
December raged, the Northern winds did blow,
And by their power had glazed the silver flood
Of neere-adjoyning Thames, whose waters stood
Congealed still; ore which the snow around
Had fallen, and with white fleeces clothed the ground;
When the wise Empress clothed alike in white
Forsook the town, and past along by night,
Deluding so the watches careful eyes.
They thought the snow had moov'd, or did surmise
Their opticke spirits had disturbed been,
Not clear, and they tumultuously had seen.
Fixed objects often do seem in motions so.
Thus then securely did the Empress go,
And was received with joy to Walingford.
Nor then did England bleed alone; her Lord
Anious great Earl by feirce and bloody war
Was winning Normandy in right of her.
Those, those were times; but now, (ah woe is me)
Great Lucifer, if this tranquillity
Without disturbance hold in Christendom,
I fear for thee a far worse war will come.
Thy Saracens shall rue the Christians peace,
And feel their conquering swords. what large increase
Of territories, honor, and of fame
Through farthest Asia will the Christian name
Acquire? what bounds, alas, would Salem know
If potent Henry to this war should go?
If he should there the English cross advance?
His aid they all will seek; his puissance
Will Salems feeble king implore to join
Against those foes that threaten Palaestine.
Therefore in time this peaceful knot divide.
Enyo ceased; when Lucifer reply'de;
Thy just complaint, heroike Maid, I hear;
But do not doubt the power of Lucifer.
Those instruments, that I from hence shall bring,
Will soon divert it all, and make this king,
Whose strength the world so much admires, and fea^*
Whom now they deem so blessed, ere many years
Into themselves revolve again, to be
The pity of his foes; nature for me
Against herself is working. come and veiw
My champions here that shall with speed pursue
What I design. with that he leads her by
The denns, where all along his Vi^es ly.
There in her den^ lay pompous Luxury
Stretched out at length; no Vice could boast such hi^h
And general victories as she had won.
Of which proud trophies there at large were shown.
Besides small States and kingdoms ruined,
Those mighty Monarchies, that had orespread
The spacious earth, and stretched their conquering arm*
From Pole to Pole, by her ^nsuaring charms
Were quite consumed. there lay imperial Rome,
That vanquish^ all the worl'd, by her overcome.
Fettered was the old Assyrian Lion there,
The Grecian Leopard, and the Persian Bear,
With others numberless lamenting by,
Examples of the power of luxury.
Next with erected looks Ambition stood,
Whose trophies all were portrayed forth in blood.
Under his feet Law and religion
He trampled down; sacked cities there were shown,
Rivers and feilds with slaughter overspread,
And stained with blood which his wild sons had shed.
There Ninus image stood, who first of all
By lawless arms and slaughter did enthrall
The quiet nations, that lived free till then,
And first took pride to triumph over men.
There was Sesostres figured; there the son
Of Philip lay, whose dire ambition
Not all the spacious earth could satisfy.
Swift as the lightning did his conquests fly
from Greece to farthest Eastern lands, and like
Some dire contagion, through the world did strike
Death and destruction; purple were the floods
Of every region with their natives bloods.
Next him tha^ Roman lay, who first of all
Captived his country; there were figured all
His wars and mischiefs, and what ever woes
Through all the world by dire ambition rose.
Next to that Fiend lay pale Revenge; with gore
His ghastly visage was all sprinkled ore.
The hate he bore to others, had quite reft
Him of all love unto himself, and left
No place for nature. ore his den were shown
Such tragedies and sad destruction
As would dissolve true humane hearts to hear,
And from the furies selves enforce a tear.
Those bloody slaughters there to veiw were brought,
Which Jacobs cruel sons in Shechem wrought,
When all the Males but newly circumcised
To their revengfull rage were sacrificed.
There the slain youth of Alexandrialy
By Caracalla's vengefull butchery,
The captived fate of Spain was there displayed,
Which wrathful ^ulian in revenge betrayed
To Pagan Moors, and ruined so his own
Sad house, his country and religion.
Not all these sacred bonds with him prevail,
When he beholds his ravished daughter wail,
Wring her white hands, and that fair bosom strike,
That too much pleased the lustful Rhoderike.
The next Sedition lay, not like the rest
Was he attired, nor in his looks expressed
Hatred to heaven and virtues laws; but he
Pretends religion, law, or liberty,
Seeming to adore what he did most orethrow,
And would persuade virtue to be a foe
To peace and lawful power. above his den
For boasting trophies hung such robes, as when
Old Sparta stood, her Ephori did wear,
And Romes bold Tribunes. Stories carved there
Of his atcheivements numberless were s^ene,
Such as the Gracch^s fact^ous stirs had been
In ancient Rome, and such as were the crimes,
that often wracked Greece in her most potent times,
Such as learned Athens, and bold Sparta knew,
And from their ablest soldiers often did rue.
Next to that Vice lay foul Impiety
At large displayed, the cursed enemy
Of natures best and holiest laws; through all
Her loathsome den unthankful vipers crawle.
Above those stories were displayed, which show
How much the Monarchy of Hell did owe
^or peoples wrack to that abhorred Vice.
There were Mycenae's balefull tragedies,
And all the woes that fatal The^es had wrought.
There false Medea, when away she brought
Her own betrayed countries spoils, before
Her weeping father Aeta peicemeale tore
Her brother's limbs, and strewn them ore the field.
There with the same impiety she killed
Her own two sons, and through the air apace
By draggons drawn, she fled from Iason's face.
There strong Alcathoe king Nisus town
By S^yllaes impious treason was orethrowne,
And sacked with fire and sword; the wretched maid
Had from her lofty sounding tower surveyed
King Minos host, and doting on her fair
Foes face, cut off her fathers purple hair.
This, this is she, this is the Vice must go
(Quoth Lu^ifer) to work the overthrow
Of Englands peace; Impiety shall do
What ever thy designs can reach unto.
She shall ascend to England, and possess
The breasts of Henri's sons; with what success^
Enyo fear not; I have seen the boys.
Though yet but young; I mark, to swell my joys,
Such forward signs of their ambition,
They soon will by Impiety be blown
Up into such attempts, as that thy brand
Shall quickly blaze again through every land
That Henry rules. this is the cause that he
Continues yet in his prosperity,
His sons are not of age. they, they must grow
Their fathers only ruin, th'overthrow
Of all his weal. besides to further our
De^gue in this; and lend us present power,
(...) king himself consents; who governed by
(...) dotage and disastrous policy
Does now entend to crown his eldest son.
Soon as his feasts at Windsore shall be done,
Where now, with William Scotland's king, he lies,
Shall Westminst^r see these solemnityes.
The^e see how soon ^mpiety shall fire
The young kings breast, and make him more aspire
The more his father gives, and though of late
Sedition well have wrought upon the State
By Becket, who these five years has been fled,
And yet that strife is not extinguished;
No wars from thence grow, nor has thy desire
Enyo, been fulfilled; that fa^tious fire
Has burnt no cities, nor has blood at all
Been drawn in that; be sure in this there shall.
Impiety shall do it* the Feind here ends,
And pleased Enyo from the cave ascends.
THE REIGN OF King HENRY the Second.
The Second Book.
The Argument of the second Book.
King H^nry Crowns at Westminster, his son:
But soon beginns to fear what he had done.
He feasts the King of Scotland at his Court.
Among the tempting beauties that resort
To that great festival, he falls in Love
With Rosamond, armed Pallas from above
Appears to Henry's sleep: chides him, as slow
In his affairs of Ireland; and does show
What lasting honor that great I Will shall be
To him, and his victorious progeny.
NOw had great Henry his design declared
To crown his Son, and all that state prepared
That might befit the great solemnity,
The Peers and people all approove what he
Rashly decrees, and in the triumph join.
Withglittering pomp the streets of London shine.
Their wealth the greatest Citizens display
To grace young Henry's Coronation day.
But most of all, though least discerning why,
Unusual joy the Vulgar testify.
Not good but new things please the peoples eyes.
Nor dooes King Henry in his love surmise
That all the face of England, all the state
Were witnesses enough to celebrate
His sons high honor; but King William too
Arrived from Scotland, must be brought to do
His homage to him as to Englands King,
And with him must his brother David bring.
The sacred oil, in banished Becket's stead,
Is by Yorkes Prelate powered upon his head;
The Diadem, which was possessed before,
Empales his brow; whilst all the Peers adore
Two Suns at once, and, ill presaging, see
(What after proov'd) a fatal prodigy.
How ill Imperial Majesty can brook
A sharer, seek not far; nor need you look
S^oryes, whose credit time has ruined quite;
Nor need you read what old Tragaedians write
Of this ^add Theme, or east your pitying eyes
V^on the Theban brothers tragoedyes,
O^ brothers blood, that Romes first walls did stayne.
The s^arious heavens (as Poets wisely feign)
Brook'd not old Saturn and his Jupiter.
By every age, and dire examples near
To us, how often has this sadd truth been proov'd?
How many sons and fathers have been moov'd
To parricide, to set themselves but free
From that, which Henry makes himself to be,
Rivall'd in reign? but if he still retain
Full Regal power, what more do thou obtain
By this thy father's kind donation,
Young King, then title and a fruitless throne?
How vain thy Scepter is, when thou shall see
The power divided from the dignity?
Yet do not so mistake thy fate; no less,
Nay greater far esteem thy happiness
Then if thou now were seized of all alone.
The ^ares and dangers waiting on a Crown
Have made some fear the burden, or despise
That sacred jewel of unvalewed price.
A prudent King, when he awhile surveyed
The glittering splendor, that his Crown displayed,
Was sighing heard to say, if those that view
Far off thy flattering gloryes only, knew
How many cares and g^efes in thee are found,
They would be loath to take thee upp from ground.
This wisest Monarch, if he now should see
Thy royal State, young King, would envy thee,
And count thee happy sure, that do alone
Wear, without cares, the glories of a Crown,
That from the burden of a King art free,
Invested only with the dignity.
Yet this prerogative b^ings no content
To thee, that seem to want the accomplishment
Of royalty, the power and Regal s^ay.
Nothing (alas) this Coronation day
Has brought thee to, but to a nearer sight
Of what thou have not, nor is yet thy right.
Thy stirring mind meets torture with a throne,
But Tantalized in dominion.
The cause (alas) of woes that must ensue,
And thy great father too too soon shall rue.
That days solemnity in truest state
The Court of England strove to celebrate,
And with such great magnificence as might
The Majesty of that high presence fit;
Where all at once three Kings, two Queens were met,
Besides so many high borne Princes, great
In same and wealth. the feasting boords were filled
With what this Island or ^ich France could yield.
Such cates as those, with which old Poets feigned
In Thessaly the Gods were entertained
At s^lver-footed Thetis bridal feast,
Where love himself vouchsafed to be a guest.
Where aged Chiron waited at the board,
And brought what air, earth, waters could af^ord,
When all rich Tempe, and the adjoining seas
Were searched, besides what then the Najades,
What young Palaemon, Glaucus, and the green
Sea-nymphs had brought to grace their beauteous queen.
The choicest Wines that France or Spain could yield
In cupps of gold, studded with gemms were filled,
And antique Gobletts, where the Carver strove
To aequall natures skill; beasts seemed to moove,
And precious birds their glistering wings displayed.
The fair and m^ssy vessels that convey^d
The feast to them, did far in their high rates
Exceed the value of those sumptuous cates.
King Henry wanton with excess of joy,
Which now he thought no fortune could destroy
(How soon deceived! how soon enforc'de to find
The error in his ill-presaging mind)
To testify a great affection,
And grace the state of his young-crowned Son,
Himself, as sewer, will vouchsafe to wait
Upon his son; who sitts in Regal state,
And to his table the first dish present.
The Lords and Princes all with one c^nsent
Applaud the King's great love, but secretly
Are stroke with wonder these strange rites to see.
Some seek examples for it; some within
Themselves, do sadly from that sight divine;
When Yorkes Archbishop the young King bespake;
Rejoice, my Princely son, and freely take
The comfort of your state; no Monarch (know)
On Earth has such a servitour as you.
With that the Prelate gently smiled; but he
Polydore Vi^gil in H. 2*
With a proud look replies; why wonder ye?
Or think these rites so strange my Father ^ooes?
My birth is far more Royal (well he knows)
Then his. he only by the Mothers side
With high Imperial blood was dignify'de;
His father was but Anjous Earl; but I
Derive from both my Parents royalty,
A King and Queen. they all with wonder hear;
King Henry sighed, and began even then to ^eare
What after might ensue from such a pride.
But at that triumph he resolved to hide
His fears or griefs. instead of which, the Court
Was filled with Revells, with all Royal sport,
All shows that high magnificence could give*
There art in strange varietyes did strive
Both to perplexe and please the eyes of all,
^ut nature more. for to the festival
From every part the choicest beauties came.
There, like a fire aetheriall, every Dame
Did blaze, more bright then Elements could make*
While from the Countries they all flocked to take
Survey of Kingly gloryes, while they sought
To view the luster of a Court, they brought
The luster with them, and might seem to be
Themselves that splendor, that they came to see*
Amidd'st those sparkling beauties Cupid sat
Loves powerful God, and ruled in highest state,
Armed with his fires and shafts, resolved to be
In Henry's Court a greater King then he,
Whose yoke the King must suffer. On the state
Of Cupid there the little Loves did wait.
Throughout the Court they took their wanton flight
With wings unseene, and, when they list, would light
Upon the Ladies shoulders, or their breasts,
Their Ruffes, or tires; they feel not those light guests
Which they give harbor to; Bold License there,
Sweet reconciled Anger, blushing Fear*
Unsafe Delight, did with pale Watching fly,
Desiring tears with Wanton perjury,
And all the rest. They say the beauteous Queen
Of Love her self upon that day was seen
Approaching London; up clear Thames his stream
Borne on a sounding Triton's back she came.
The River smoothed his face to entertain
The Queen of Love with her lig^t footed train.
The silver Swans ador'de her all (...) way,
And churking did their snow-white wings display.
The river-nymphes, that saw her coming, thought
Some sweet achievement now was to be wrought,
That Cupid sure had promised her to see
Some high exploit, some royal victory,
As that, when once he made imperial Jove
Lough like a Bull for fair Europaes Love,
Or when he made rough Neptune ^eele his fire,
Or warmed chaste Cynthiaes bosom with desire,
And made her court the Shepherd. such a one
Loves Queen now looked for from her conquering son*
Nor was her expectation void; she found
As much as she could hope, a royal wound.
No less then Henry's noble breast must be
The trophee of her Cupids victory.
Henry's pleased eyes now wandered every where
Among those Stars, that made his Court their Sphaere,
(For such they seemed, and no less bright they showed,
Although of different light and magnitude*)
Often could he change the o^jects of his eye
With fresh delight, praise the v^riety
Without distracted thoughts, till like the Queen
Of light, fair Cinthia, Rosamund was seen.
There did he fix; there his amazed eye
Forgot all pleasure of variety,
And gazed alone upon her matchless hew.
False Cupid laughed, and thence in triumph slew.
Too much (alas) found Henry's wounded breast
How much her beauty did outshine the rest.
So golden Venus amongst the Sea-nymphs, so
Did Deidamia amongst her sisters show,
When she inflamed the young Achilles heart,
As Rosamund appeared. each single part
Of Loves rich dower, which she alone possessed,
Had been enough to fire a vulgar breast,
And in another raise high beauties fame.
Into her form all several Cupids came,
And all the Graces their perfection showed.
Nature confessed she had too much bestowed
On one rich mixture, which alone must wear
All her fair liveries; pure whiteness there
Nor red alone must beauties colors show.
Blew pleads a title, since her veins are so;
Even black it self placed in her eye is bright,
And seems to be the color of the light.
As they are hers, all ^ormes, all colors please.
Henry, the more he looks, does more increase
His flame; and whether he should check desire,
And go about to quench so sweet a fire;
Or feed the flame, he cannot yet resolve.
A thousand thoughts does his sick breast revolve,
Sometimes he seeks to cure the wound, and cast
Out Cupids ^atall shaft; but still more fast
The arrow sticks, and goes more deep into
His wounded heart; ensnared fishes so
When they have once received the baited hook,
The more they plunge, the deeper still are struck.
So when by chance the stately Stag is shot,
In vain he strives against fate; it boots him not
Through all the ^orrests, lawnes, and feilds to take
His speedy course; no force, no flight can shake
The mortal shaft out of his wounded side.
It boots not Henry to survey the pride
Of other beauties now; conve^se with all
The Princes met at his great festival,
Or fix himself on the solemnities,
The sports and revells of his court. His eyes
Can recompense him with no sight at all,
Nor yield him pleasure aequall to the thrall
They brought him to, by sight of Rosamund.
No thoughts of state have power t'allay his wound.
Sometimes he yields to Loves imperial flame;
Resolves to count her favor straight; but shame
Restraines that thought. His servants all discern
A change; but are afraid the cause to learn.
It Is not the crowning ( Henry) of thy son
(Though that shall breed ^ sad confusion)
Can make thee less then king, or dis-inthrone
Thee half so much, as love of her has done.
That makes thee humbly sue: makes thee become
Thy self a subject, forced to abide the doom
That sovereign beauty shall be pleased to give.
Thou, mighty Prince, whose high Prerogative
Aequall to fate it self, used to bestow
Or death or life on suppliants, art now
Thy self an humble suppliant, and bound
To sue for health to beauteous Rosamund.
While thus the Princes met do celebra^e
In feasts and revells young king Henry's sta^e,
And London's filled with several jollityes,
Swift-winged fame from thence to Paris flies,
Where then the French king Lewis kept his (...)*
And fill's his jealous ears with this repo^;
Young Henry on the royal throne is set
Without his wife the Princes^e (...)
(Though Lewis his daughter.) je^lousy can (...)
A reason quickly to torment his mind.
That reason flattering Cou^tiers aggravate,
And those that love the troubles of a State
The factious spirits, that seek from thence (...)*
What other reason can there be (say they)
Unless contemptuous scorn of thee and France,
That Henry singly should his son advance
Without his wife, nor let young Margaret be
A sharer in her husbands dignity?
What end of his, or what design had been
Made frustrate else, had she been crowned Queen?
These slight surmi^es are too soon approved,
And for just reasons taken; the King is moved
To g^ound a war on these, resolved (although
No hopes invite him) to be Henry's foe;
Forced by miscalled honor to pursue
What most of all he would himself eschew.
Honor is to a man a tyrant then,
When honors laws he seeks from other men,
Not finds them in himself; when he attends
Not real truth, but fame, which still depends
On others breaths; yet makes a man to go
'^ainst his own passions, and his reason too.
Nor must king Lewis his fury stay so long,
As fairly to expostulate the wrong,
To send his grievance first, then to defy,
And be a just and royal enemy.
Those fiery spirits, that too much fear a peace,
That discontents betwixt the Kings would cease,
And no swords drawn at all, if that were done,
Still urge king Lewis; with speed, say they, go on.
There Is no advantage in a course so slow;
It Is best to be, before you seem, a foe.
Before the news to Henry's ear can fly,
With fire and sword invade his Normandy.
Mean time king Henry fearelesse of the blow
Of war, was mastered by a greater foe,
Enforced to yield to Cupids powerful bow.
The triumphs all were done; king William now
Had with Prince David taken their leaves, and from
The court of England were returning home,
By English Lords attended on their way.
The court seemed naked, robbed of that bright array,
And beauteous splendor it so lately wore:
How much unlike the place it was before!
How solitary now! but Henry's mind
That change, which others think of, cannot find,
No other absence can he feel but one:
His dearest life fair Rosamund was gone
To grace the country with her presence now.
The wounded lover did by this time know
Her birth and country. thither flies his heart,
And from his palace, nay himself, would part.
Or else contrives to bring a gemme so bright
To court, and place her nearer to his sight.
No kingly pleasures, no magnificence
Can taste; no musicke's sweet while she is thence.
So when the fair Calisto did remain
In woods a huntresse of Dianaes train,
And wore her quiver, when enamored Jove
Beheld her matchless beauty from above,
^he woods before heavens palace please his eye;
Before the starry regions of the sky
He loves The Arcadian forests to survay.
Not those bright houses, nor the milky way
All paved with silver Stars do seem so clear.
The woods are heaven while fair Cali^to's there.
^une then began; and roses graced the Spring.
Into his garden walks the Love-sicke King
To seek a sweet retreat, with her alone
^o feast his pleased imagination.
There while he viewed the Queen of flowers, his flame
Increased, and took fresh fuel from the name;
For her the blushing rose must praised be,
And scorned again, because it is not she.
No roses can (quoth he) be fragrant else;
Th^re is no spring but where Lord Clifford dwells.
^hus vainly run his thoughts upon the flower,
While gentle birds about his ^hady bower
Tune their soft notes, and by degrees sweet sleep
Through all his wearyed senses began to creep,
As if fair Venus pitying his sad plight,
Would send him now by dream some short delight,
And, what his waking eye could not have found,
Present in sleep, the shape of Rosamund.
But Heaven was more propitious to his fame,
And for Love-dreames, a Nobler vision came.
Honors bright Goddess, that heroike maid
That issu'de from the brain of Jove, array'de
In all her radiant gloryes came, before
Whose face the Cupids fledd; her right hand bore
The warlike Lance, her left Medusaes head;
Her golden plumed Helm, both full of dread
And Majesty, such rays of splendor yields
As rising Phoebus, when far off he guilds
The Eastern Clouds; her eyes wore Starry light,
But fixed, not twinkling, like weak humane ^ight,
Nor did she seem by stepps at all to go,
Or stirring several Limbs, as mortals do,
But one sole motion through the air to make.
Thus she appeared, and thus the King bespake:
Forgetful Henry wake; the Fates provide
While thou art sleeping, Fame for thee, and chide
Thy dull delays. how long to thee in vain
Shall Ireland yield her self, and court thy reign?
Ireland, that must hereafter bring a style
So great to thy posterity, that I Will,
The most enduring part of thy renown,
And best addition to fair Englands Crown?
Ten years have turned into themselves again
Since that late Pope deceased Adrian
Did freely send by John of ^alisbury
The grant of Irelands sovereignty to thee,
And with it sent that ring, to be a sure
And lasting sign of thy investiture
Into that sacred honor. can thou wear
The precious Emrauld on thy finger there,
And yet so long forget with what intent
Thou then did take that royal ornament,
That marriage token? wi^t thou now refuse
The spouse, thou did with such affection choose?
Let not the thoughts of fa^tious Becket now,
Nor what Church-threats, or censures thence may grow
Divert thee from this happy enterprise.
Think not that troubles may in France arise
Through thy short absence; since no stirs at home,
No loss that to those provinces can come,
Can countervaile such great and lasting gain.
That Western Ila^d, as the ^ates ordain,
To thy Victorious seed, through every age,
Shall be, a great and constant heritage,
An I flourish then, when all those Provinces,
All those ri^h lands thou do in France possess,
(...) from the English Crown divided be.
When thy most ancient right, fair Normandy
It self is gone, together with rich Maine,
With Brettaine, Aniou, Poictou, Aquitane;
Although how often shall France, before those days,
Be scourged? What trophes shall the English raise
In every part and province, which no power
Shall ere extinguish, nor strong time devour?
When all amazed Christendom shall see
The Arms of England twice with victory
To graspe great France, and once to seize her Crown,
And wear't in uncontrolled possession;
When Caesar's deeds against the ancient Gauls
Shall be out done by English Generals;
And three famed battles shall exceed what he
Achieved against his strongest enemy
Stout Vercingentorix; that Prince his fall,
Arvaricum's ^am'd sack, and the end of all
Alexia taken, to each several field
Of Cressy, Poictiers, Agincourt shall yield.
But Ireland, which by easy victory
Without a war almost shall yield to thee,
Shall to thy royal heirs remain; although
Before that Kingdom to perfection grow,
And be established in a quiet Reign,
^ft horrid wars, and bloody fields shall stayne
^er face in future times, and loud alarmes
^ft to the world shall fame the English arms,
And raise the glory of Elisaes name.
A virgin Queen shall all rebellion tame,
And to her rule in spite of Spaines proud fate,
That spacious ^and wholly vindicate.
There wise King James shall spread the English Law,
And by divinest skill (like Orpheus) draw
Those ruder people to a civil life,
And well established Peace; all jarres and stri^e
Shall fly before his most auspicious reign.
This is that Prince, by whom high heavens ordeine
The long wished marriage of two royal lands.
Bri^aines united I Will to his commands
And sacred Scepter shall obedient be.
Who after long and blessed tranquillity
Shall leave those States to his heroik son
Renowned Charles; in whose pure breast alone
All regal virtues shall inhabit, joined
With those that make a spotless priva^e mind,
Who shall refrain, pleased with just power alone,
All the licentious pleasures of a throne,
And by example govern, pleased to be
A King in virtue as in Royalty.
The troubles now, tha^ threaten Normandy,
(...) sent to wake thee from this Lethargy,
And bring thee Nobler thoughts; and now was rest
Q^ite banished from wakened Henry's breast.
He with amazed thoughts looked up and (...);
But when his eyes were open, the sight was gone;
And yet on Ireland wholly ran his thought.
When sudden tidings to his ear were brought
Of what King Lewis of France, beyond the Seas
Had then attempted against his Provinces;
At which moov'd Henry arms; and crosses ore
As swift as thought, unto the Norman-shore.
THE REIGN OF King HENRY the Second.
The Third Book.
The Argument of the third Book.
The Kings of France and England at Vendome
Without a battle, to agreement come.
Henry returned to England, meets again
With beauteous Rosamund, and dooes obtain
His wanton suit. he builds for her a rare,
And sumptuous bower. stout Becket's famous jarre
This book declares, and dooes at large relate
By what degrees it had disturbed the state.
His Sovereigns pardon Becket dooes obtain,
And to his See returns in peace again.
Soon were those storms, that threatened Normandy,
Blown ore again; and that hostility
That Lewis of France in unadvised ire
Had rashly harbored, did as soon expire
Before that any dire effects it wrought.
A peace King Henry's armed presence brought,
Who now in France arrived. at Vendosme
To enterview the two great Kings do come.
There Lewis decla^es his cause; that wrong was done
To him and France, when Henry crowned his son,
And with like state (befitting) had not set
That Crown upon the head of Margaret
His Princely spouse. but this, which first did seem
A cause of just hostility to him,
Was there controlled by all, and judged to be
On sound advise, a lighter injury
Then that the hand of War should it decide.
For such a wrong a promise satisfy'de;
Which Henry freely gave, and did maintain;
That he, ere long would crown his son again;
And then young Margaret should full sharer be
In all her Husbands state and dignity.
Then to perform what he had promised there,
Since these late-raised storms allayed were,
Back into England Henry crossed again;
And in his noble breast 'gann entertain
The thought of Ireland's conquest now; although
He yet in person did not mean to go;
But unto Dermot the Irish Prince he gave
Free leave from any of his Realms to have
What Voluntaryes he could carry ore,
That might hereafter to the Irish sho^e
Prepare his passage, and begin the wars
On fitter terms, but not those high affairs
Of War and Fame could keep imperious Love
From tyrannizing, nor much less remoove
His force, that had before found entrance ther^.
Again to him did Rosamund appear.
And what ensued, declare my Muse, resound
The love of Henry and fair Rosamund;
Thou know it Erato, thou, that to give
My pen a true intelligence, did dive
So lately down into the Elysian groves,
And there beheld'st the seat of tragic Loves,
That far renowned shade of Mirtles, where
The beauteous troop of Love-slaine dames appear,
And wear the marks of their sad ruins yet.
Upon those gloomy grounds no flowers are set
But such alone, which (as old Poets sing)
Did from wail'd deaths, and tragike changes spring.
Such as the pale-faced Daffadill, that from
That too too beauteous boy's self-love did come,
And purple Hyacinth, that first took growth
From that so much lamented Spartan youth;
Adonis short-lived flower of crimson hew,
That from fair Venus sprinkled Nectar grew
Dooes there appear, by whom is sadly set
The pining Clyties pale-leav'd Violet.
Thou Erato, within that Myrtle grove
Saw those famed Ladies, whom their own sad love
Or others love had ruined, wandering there;
Thou saw the Theban Semele appear,
W^o too too late complained of amorous Jove,
And now condemned her own ambitious Love.
There with the fatal shaft did Procris stand,
Who yet forgave her Lord's mistaking hand;
Fair Dido too, of life and crown bereft,
B^ whom the perjured Trojan's sword was left;
And there by Aspes destroyed, sent from above
In all her gloryes to the Elysian grove
^at Cleopatra walked; there thou did see
The Lesbian Sappho, sadd Eryphile,
The wa^ling Phaedra, shamed Pasiphae,
C^st ^hisbe, and incestuous Canace;
Wit^ them the much lamented Sestian Maid,
And thousands more; whom whilst thine eyes surveyed
Thou saw the second Henry's Paramour
Fair Rosamund within that gloomy bower
Among the rest, and, now returned relate
The circumstances of her love and fate.
While those late stirs detained the King in France,
By power of Cupid's godhead, or by chance
To Court the beauteous Rosamund had been
Brought up, to wait on Elianor the Queen.
There did the longing eyes of Henry find
Their brightest bliss; the wishes of his mind
There met their bound, and her at court, to whom
He had resolved the Court it self should come.
It Was then too late for him to check desire,
Or to suppress so strong and sweet a fire
When he had seen his love again so soon.
A longer absence might perchance have done
That cure on him; short absence hurt him more,
And made his wound far greater then before,
Absence not long enough to root out quite
All love, increases love at second sight.
So fares it now with Henry, who pursues
His amorous wishes, taught by Love to use
All those rich aides that Nature could allow,
That birth and hight of fortune could bestow.
For him his persons worth, his deeds of glory,
His royal gifts the strongest oratory
Do proudly plead. all subject-wits must move
(As second causes serve the will of love)
For him, that he may his desires enjoy;
And great enough are his desires t'employ
All aides. in this fair suite you might descry
The charms of beauty, power of majesty,
And all that ancient Poets sung of Love,
When they ascribed it to Imperial Jove.
When he a bull would for Europa be,
A shower of gold for beauteous Danae,
A Swanne for Leda, with a thousand more
Such shapes, to woe and win fair Dames. why so
Could he change shapes, and gain in them so much?
Because he was great Jove, his power was such.
But why should Jove himself vouchsafe to take
Such humble forms as these? why should he make
Himself a bull, a swanne, a golden shower?
Because so great was Loves commanding power.
And nothing else was shadowed in those things,
But power of beauty, and the power of Kings.
How often in Court the royal Henry strove
By secret favors to endeare his love
To Rosamund, yet to delude the eyes
Of Elianor, and her officious spies!
How many spies a jealous Queen may find!
Some bounty makes: some Dames an envious mind
Works to that cruel office, to betray
And ruin her, that is more graced then they.
Fair Rosamund so young and inocent,
She could not fully sound the kings intent,
Yet loves the grace he does her, loves the thought
Of that effect which her own beauty wrought;
And though she feel no flames reciprocal,
Nor Cupid's golden shaft against her at all
Had been discharged, she loves king Henry's flame
As her own trophee. there is no beauteous Dame
But in that kind's unjust. they often strive
To gain love there, where they refuse to give;
And spread their proudly charming nets, t'enthrall
All hearts, but cherish few or none at all.
They joy that men are forced to make the suite,
Yet too much grudge that men should reap the fruit
Of their desires; and wish those hearts to have,
Which they resolve to ruin, not to save.
But Cupid often is just, and by degrees
(while they foresee not) works his servants ease,
Making those beauties, while they boast the fame
Of firing hearts, approach too near the flame,
And be themselves at last, the selfsame way,
By which they meant to triumph, made a prey.
The open Court, in Henry's own surmise
Was thought a place too full of ears and eyes,
Too full of eminence to woo and win
A maid so coy, so young and bashful, in.
That love, that he to her had then declared
By graces at the Court, had but prepared
Her mind, and taught her how to entertain
That parley that must his full suite obtain.
A fair retreat of greater privacy
Removed from London, then was sought, where he
Might lodge that jewel which he meant to enjoy,
With other agents fitting to employ.
An ancient Dame skilled in those arts was found
To aid the kings desires; of most profound
And subtle wit, of winning speech was she;
And such in all, ^he might be thought to be
No Beldame, but wise Venus lurking in
A Beldames shape, fair Rosamund to win.
False Venus for her ends, has often done so;
And once, as Homer's wisest Muse did show,
She took the shape of an old Spartan Dame,
In Hellens breast to blow Loves powerful flame,
And subtly win her to the Trojan's bed.
Perchance this Dame was Venus, or else bred
In all her arts, and subtle sure as she;
Who now by Henry was employed to be
The chiefest Agent in his amorous ends;
Upon whose skill his sweetest hope depends.
No farther distance then, at ease, a day
Might reach from London, stood the place, which they
Had chose for beauteous Rosamund to bide,
Within a forest, rarely beautified
Without, by all that nature could afford;
Within the house it self was richly stored
(As guess you may) with what a bounteous King
To please his dearest Mistres eye would bring.
The place it self did seem his suit to move,
And intimate a silent plea for love.
Such was that bower, where often the Paphian Queen
With young Anchises was on Ida seen.
About this house such groves, springs, gardens were,
As Poets placed in Loves region, where
The Westwinds ever blow, fair youth does stay,
And keeps from thence old age and care away.
To this delicious country house is she
Conducted by a trusty company
Appointed by the King on her to wait,
And do her service in the higest state;
While Henry's love is in such gifts expressed
As might have power to tempt the chastest breast.
And each day courts her with a richer shower
Then rained on Danae in the brazen tower.
The subtle Dame that waited on her there,
On all occasions filled her tender ear
With Henry's praise and fame, striving t'endeare
His bounty and unaequall'd love to her.
Into a spacious gallery they went,
Where well-wrought pictures did to life present
Those things, which ancient tales or stories told;
Which whilst fair Rosamund did pleased behold,
And, entertained with fresh variety,
To several pictures often removed her eye,
The cunning Dame picked some; nor would she name
Those beauties, that had been of loosest fame:
But chose the coyest out; behold (quoth she)
My noble daughter, the severity
Of Dian' there, by which Actaeon died,
Cause unawares her naked limbs he spied.
Yet this (forsooth) sour Goddess (turn your eye
The the other way) by Pan of Arcady
Is caught, and with a toy of no esteem
A white-fleec'd Ram. see how she follows him
Into the grove, and does not there disdain
In kindest sort to ease a Lovers pain.
See Atalanta the swift running maid,
Whose cruel beauty to sad death betrayed
So many noble youths, at last by one
For three gold apples willingly is won,
And yields her beauty to Hippomenes.
Oh Gods* what precious gifts indeed are these.
What is a white fleeced Ram, or golden ball
Compared to what the greatest Lord of all
This Western world great Henry can bestow!
Nay blush not fair one; this conceit just now
Run cross my breast; nor was it in my thought
That gifts could merit, or true love be bought.
But where true love does reign, gifts may express;
And that alone is great men's happiness,
That by so brave a way, as gifts, can show
That love, that poor ones are enforced to do
By sighs and tears, and many times too late
By pining death. behold that cruel fate
In Iphis there, that hangs himself; and see
The fair but scornesull Anaxarete,
Who with dry eyes beholds poor Iphis death,
Whom only love of her had reft of breath.
The Gods themselves were moved her spite to see,
And in revenge of such a cruelty
Turned her to stone. replies fair Rosamund,
If love have power to make so deep a wound,
Has he not justice too? those two should be
Inseparable in a Deity.
Why fits he not his shafts to both the parts,
And wounds reciprocally Lovers hearts?
That sure were justice. I remember, I
Once read and pittyed Iphis tragedy,
And wondered that her cruelty was such
To kill a heart, to whom she owed so much,
And thought what I in such a case should do.
The subtle Dame straight answers; and would thou
Be juster fair one? since we here are free,
I Will boldly speak; a Monarch pines for thee.
And what the difference is 'twixt slighting him
And vulgar loves, weigh in a just esteem.
I do not speak it only 'cause a King
in power a greater recompense can bring
For love then others: juster reasons far
And truer, fairest Rosamund, there are.
As kings have greater souls, so they in love
Do feel far stronger passions then can move
A private breast: besides those spirits that reign
Ore other people, less can brook disdain.
It therefore double cruelty must prove
To give a stern repulse to those, whose love
Is both in nature strongest, and beside
Less patient a denial to abide.
But most of all consider at how great
And high a value Monarchs lives are set;
If they should dye for love, that sway the fate
Of nations, borne to change the worlds estate,
Or settle it; to judge of peace and war;
Oh what respects of private honor are
To be in balance put with these. but let
Me speak in more particular; as great,
As high a fortune would from Henry's love
Accrue to Rosamund, should death remove
Queen Elianor away, as Englands thron^
And royal title. nor can death alone
Divide her from him; a divorce may do it,
And her unkindnesses may move him to it.
She was divorced before from Lewis of France;
He brook'd her not; great Henry did advance
Her lessened state again to royalty
By leave obtein'd from Rome: and may not he
Again reject her? may not Rome be won?
And that for Henry, which for Lewi^ was done?
Oh could thou Fortunes gracious proffers use?
While thus alone they were discoursing, news
Was brought them up, the King was lighted there.
Fair Rosamund was struck with sudden fear,
Yet such a fear as did contain a kind
Of joy, and twixt the two perplexed her mind*
Nor had she leisure to dispute the case,
The King himself so soon appeared in place.
Who with so sweet a kiss salutes his love,
That in his lips his soul did seem to moove,
And meet the object it desired so much.
His powerful language Cupid aides; and such
His whole deportment was, as most might moove,
And seem to challenge, by desert, a love.
Oh what beseidged chastity could long
Hold out against so many and so strong
Assaults? such cruel snares, as there were laid,
What beauty could escape? the noble Maid
At last (alas) is won to his delight.
Within whose arms he spends the wanton night.
The unlawful fruit of his desires he tastes,
And by that action with dishonor blasts
The pitied sweetness of so fresh a Rose.
Yet thence, when time maturely shall disclose
Her burdened womb, (the fates had so decreed)
A brave and Noble offspring must proceed
William surnamed Long-sword, after by
His right of Marriage Earl of Salisbury,
And made the happy father of a fair
And Noble issue, by that Earl domes heir.
Great Henry now possessed of that bright gemme,
Which almost aequall to his Diadem
His longing fancy often had prized before,
In this sweet trance could slumber evermore;
Here could he dwell, arrived at the height
Of his desires, and ravished with delight,
Contemning fame, could be a while content
To lay aside the cares of government,
And only feast on Loves transporting joys.
But soon a weighty business destroys
His short delight. the Pope is discontent
That Becket suffers so long banishment;
And, intermixing threats, requires an end
Of this debate. King Lewis of France a friend
To Becket's side, and other Princes too
Are forward, for their own respects to show
Themselves complyers to the Popes desire.
Hence Henry's wisdom fears some raging fire
Of war, while he is absent, might break forth
Beyond the seas, and thinks it therefore worth
His passage ore; assured that the sight
Of him in arms would those weak Princes fright.
But yet before the King from hence depart,
For thee, the dearest jewel of his heart
Fair Rosamund (as fearing where to hyde
So sweet a pledge) his loving cares provide.
A sumptuous bower did he at Woodstock build,
Whose structure by Daedalian art was filled
With winding Mazes, and perplexed ways;
Which who so enters, still deceived strayes
Unless by guidance of a clew of thread
Through those obscure Maeanders he be led.
There with all objects that delight might lend,
And with such chosen servants to attend
And guard her, as had still been faithful known,
Dooes Henry leave this beauteous Paragon;
And swiftly passing into Normandy
Finds there no stirs. in peace and amity
King Lewis and the Earl of ^loys near Ambois were
Both met, to parley with King Henry there;
And mediate with him for Becket's peace,
That all dissension now at last might cease.
Six years in exile had the Prelate lived
By France supported, since he first had striv'de
Against his King, and for the Clergy cause
Oppos'de himself against the royal laws.
Which made the name of Becket sound so far.
Declare, my Muse, from whence this fatal jarre
Arose; and from the original relate
By what degrees it had disturbed the State.
The English Clergy (if we trust record
Of The Monk of Nuborough. lib. 2. has all this.
Monks then living) at that time was stord
With all the blessings temporal; they flowed
In wealth; with strange immunityes endowed;
And wanted naught, but what they ought to have,
Knowledge and piety; which essence gave
First to that sacred style of Clergymen.
Who dooes not know what fatal darkness then
The mourning face of Europe had orespread?
How all the Arts and Sciences were fled,
And learnings sun, to these dark regions set,
Was not recovered from Arabia yet.
As much did wisest writers of those times
Complain of their licentious Clergyes crimes.
The powerful Prelates strove not to correct
The vices of their Clerks, but to protect
Their persons against the justice of the State,
And to affrout the civil Magistrate;
And pleading privilege, opposed to stand
Not against the Vice but Justice of the Land.
The meaner Clerks by this impunity
With greater boldness durst offend. that high
And sacred order (so it ought to be)
Was grown a refuge for impiety,
And not a burden but an ease to men,
Which worst of people sought; and thither then
As to a place of safety Vices fledd,
And Justice only thence was banished.
An hundred murders done by Clergymen
The Monk of Nuborough. Ibidem.
And more, in those nine years that Henry then
Had reigned ore England, were before him proov'd,
At which King Henry was in justice moov'd;
Since it appeared no punishments at all,
Or those too unproportionably small,
Too slight for that abhorred and crying sin
On the delinquents had inflicted been
By those that claimed the power to punish them.
King Henry weighing in a just esteem
How much the Land and State was wronged then
By this pretended power of Clergymen,
Strove to revive those ancient Laws, which were
Established by his Royal Grandfather
Wise Henry Beauclarke to secure the State,
And from the Papal claymes to vindicate
The Royal power. those Laws, while Stephen kept
Unjustly Englands Crown, a while had slept;
Nor durst that King that had so weak a cause,
So bad a title, to maintain those Laws
In contestation against the power of Rome.
Then is the time for Papal claymes to come,
When Kings estates are in distress, and stand
On doubtful terms, as almost every land
Of Christendom has been too sadly taught.
King Stephen knew not against whom he fought.
He thought the Empress Maude alone had been
The foe to his estate; but Rome stepped in.
So in the age that followed, when King John
Unjustly did ascend the Regal throne,
And Englands Peers in arms against him rose,
King John supposed he had no other foes
But only them; against them his strength he bent*
But found a sterner foe Pope Innocent.
It Was he that watched their trials, and his prey
That side was sure to be, that lost the day,
(So Crows on Armies wait.) because King John
Could not against them guard his usurped Crown
The Pope claymes that: which whenthe King resignes,
His Holiness straight to the King enclines,
Whom he before had cursed. the right was try'de,
When the Popes power, and ends were ratified.
To Arthur and the realm the wrong was done;
To Innocent the satisfaction.
Those wholesome Laws the noble Henry striv'de
To have by act of Parliament reviv'de,
Which he had therefore called at Westminster.
The Prelates there and Peers assembled were.
The Peers and Commons all approov'de the Laws;
Some Prelates only judging that the cause
Of holy Church would be impeached thereby,
Refused by their assent to ratify
The Kings desire; others more moderate,
Who weighed how great a profit to the State
Loss of a shadow from the Church would be,
Would gladly yield. amongst those that did deny
Becket was stoutest in resolve, as he
Was highest far in place and dignity.
He was the stay of all, and kept the rest
From then assenting to the Kings request.
But how this famous Becket grew in state,
And whence he sprung, Calliope, relate.
A London Citizen by birth he was,
But of an active spirit, and for place
Of high employments ever seemed to be
By nature molded, borne for dignity.
The gracious fortunes of his youth had brought
Him first to Court attendance, and there taught
Him all those wily garbes; from thence the war
Received him as an able Soldier;
In which he came to be implanted high
In Henryes grace, then Duke of Normandy.
Who, when he first gained Englands royal power,
Created Becket his Lord-Chancellour.
Oh haddst thou there great Henry, stayed thy grace,
And not advanced him to that higher place,
More happy far (perchance) had Becket lived,
Nor on those terms had King and Clergy strived.
Thou hadd'st not then that sad example been
Of paenitence, nor had Religion seen
Those fooleryes that heathens may deryde,
When Becket was so strangely Deify'de.
But Canterburyes Prelate Theobald dead,
The King promoted Becket in his stead,
Though the wise Empress (whose direction
In other things was followed by her son)
Mislik'de the choice; so all the Clergy did,
As then their speech and writings Hovden. Chronicon de passione and mi^aculis
Thomae.
testify'de,
That he a Courtier and a Soldier
Not learned enough, was far unfit to wear
So high a Mitre* but the Kings sole grace
Was strength enough to lift him to the place.
Which by those factious stirs that must ensue,
Shall both the King himself, and Becket rue.
But now when he deny'de to give assent
Unto those laws proposde in Parliament,
The King was moov'de; the other Bishops all
Fearing his wrath, from Becket's party fall.
He stiffely stands alone, although to gain
Him to his side, the King had striv'de in vain.
Pope Alexander, though he knew the cause
To be his own, and g^eatly feared those laws,
Yet since his Papal diade^ did stand
On doubtful te^mes, and The Emperors strong hand
Did then support the Antipope, he strove
In every thing to keep King Henryes love.
He therefore wrote to Becket to assent
Without all clauses, to the Kings intent.
Becket repaires to Woodstock to the King,
Humbly submits himself, and promising
That he now freely without any clause
Of reservation, would accept the Laws,
Is by the King received to grace again;
Who much rejoices, thinking that the maine
Opposer of him, now was grown his own.
A Council straight he calls at Clarendon
Assured that all the Bishops now would sign
What he proposed to them; the rest incline
To his desire; Becket revolts again,
Seems to repent his promise, to complain
That he in that had rashly sinned before,
And in that kind resolves to sin no more.
The King deluded, and enrag'de at this
So unexpected a revolt of his,
Threatens the Archbishop; but a Princes threats
Cannot prevail with him; nor all the entreats
Ofth' other Bishops, and those Peers that love
The quiet of the State, have power to moove
His resolution* now the fatal wound
Was grown past cure; nor must this kingdom bound
The maladyes of such a spreading sore.
King Henry's filled with gr^efe and scorn; the more
His great soul weighs the meannesse of his foe,
The more his wrath fed by disdain does grow.
He grieves, yet scorns to grieve. so when a net,
Which treacherous hunters in the woods have set,
To b^ ^ snare for smaller beasts, does stay
(By chance) a noble Lion in his way,
The royal beast with greater shame then grief
Tears his base bonds, and almost scorns releife.
The more King Henry calls to mind how he
Had raisd this Becket from a low degree
Against the wills of all, he still does find
More fuel for his wrath-enflamed mind.
At last resolved he cites him to appear
Before his Judges, and to answer there
Upon account for such large sums, as he
When Chancellor of England formerly
Had from the King detayn'd, for Seignioryes
Unjustly held, for proud enormityes,
And disobedience in a high degree
Unto the King, his state and dignity.
To these will Becket scarce vouchsafe replies,
But (being no Layman) at their Courts denies
At all to answer, or obey their doom,
From thence appealing to the Court of Rome.
But that discharged him not; the Parliament
(Then at Math. Paris.
Northhampton) did with one consent
Confiscate all his goods; the Bishops there
Gervase of Dover.
Pronounc'de him by the mouth of Chichester
To be a perjured and a factious man;
Disclaimed him for their Metropolitan,
And all obedience to him. Becket now
Wearied with these calamityes that grow
And fearing worse disgraces every day,
(...) secret me^nes at last to escape away,
And from the kingdom in disguise is gone
To plead his cause before the Papal throne.
Oh what unwearyed Muse at large cantell
Each several jarre that from that day befell?
How Becke^ to the Pope resigned his Pall?
How in his wrath king Henry banished all
Beckets allies and kin? how often against Rome
In contestation he was forced to come,
The Papal power against the royal right?
How often it was debated in the sight
Of Christendom? how Henry by entreats
Sometimes, and sometimes, like a King with threats
Main^ain'd his cause? how often the dreadful doom
And interdicting thunderbolt of Rome
Was feared in England? and for Beckets jarre
Whole nations likely to be drawn to war?
How often did foreign Princes interpose,
Some to increase the wound, and some to close?
How many vain Commissions had been spent?
How many fruitless Legacies were sent?
How many days of bootlesse parleys set?
How of^ with him the King in person met?
Seven years had past since this debate began;
Six^ years had Becke^ as a banished man,
At Pontinew, and Saint Columba lived
Maintained by Lewis of France, who often had strived
Or seemed to strive (and so had Flanders Lord)
In vain (till now) in making this accord.
But now accord (although in vain^) is made.
For though King Lewis and Bloy^es Earl persuade
King Henry all offenses to forget
That part before, and Becket to submit;
Though both agreement make, and Becket be
With Henry's leave returned to his See,
The Church from thence no lasting concord finds.
Seldom is factious fire in haughty minds
Extinguished but by death* it often, like fire
Suppressed, breaks forth again, and blazes higher.
This end ends not the strife, nor draws more nigh
The Churches peace, but Beckets tragaedy.
THE REIGN OF King HENRY the Second.
The Fourth Book.
The Argument of the fourth Book.
The o^casion here, and Noble deeds are shown
That first brought Ireland to the English Crown.
From Wales Earl Strongbow and Fitz-Stevans bring
(In aid of Dermot Leinsters banished King)
Their forces ore. Archbishop Becket slain
D^oes with his blood his own Cathedral stain.
King Henry sends to plead his innocence
Before the Pope; to England goes; from thence
Himself in person into Ireland sails;
In which his power without a war prevails,
And gains that land without the aid of swords.
In royal state he feasts the Irish Lords;
And hears the w^nders of that I Will. thence he
To England sails, and th^nce to Normandy.
Fair Floras pride into the Earth again
Was sunk; cold Winter had begun his reign,
And summond beauteous daylight to restore
To night those hours, which he had stolen before.
King Henry then in Normandy resolved
To make abode, and in his thoughts revolved
Th'a^aires of Ireland. tidings daily came
From thence, and spread his valiant servants fame,
What noble actions they had there achieved,
How many towns already were received
By that small strength which they transported ore
From Southern Wales unto the Irish shore.
Fame had already filled his Princely ear
With what Fitz-Stephens, what Fitz-Girald there
What noble Raimond had with handfulls won,
And private men against a Land had done;
Be^des what great Earl Strongbow's actions were,
(...) was already grown the Islands fear.
Fame is not only due (though louder far
She needs must speak of those) to deeds that are
By potent Monarchs or huge armies done,
That change the worlds estate, and overrunne
With speed the farthest spreading Emperies.
No deeds of worth can fame at all despise,
Though done by few and those the meanest men;
Nor did she only sound Romes glories then
When Pompeys lawrell'd Chariot showed at once
The vanquished West and Eastern nations:
Nor when great Caesar's triumphs did extend
From farthest Thule to Cyrenes end:
She did record Romes infant honors too;
What poor Quirinus could against Tatius do:
What Tullus then against Alba wrought; and now
Who does not Numa and Aegeria know?
How king Porsenna did for Tarquin come?
How ^ocles kept the bridge? how Claelia swumme?
The worthy deeds of her beginning age
Gave to her after greatness fair presage:
Her greatness after gave this age renown,
And made her infant honors clearly known.
Their noble deeds in Ireland gave presage
Of her full conquest in this later age:
Her conquest now shall their first deeds renown
As long as Ireland serves the English crown.
The year before, when first the Western winds
Blew on the waters, when all various kinds
Of flowers began to beautify the spring,
(In aid of D^rmot, Leinsters banished King,
To whom that promise was engaged before)
The brave Fitz-Stephans lanching from the shore
Of Wales, with three tall ships accompanied
With his stout brother by the mothers side
( Fitzgerald) safely crossed the Ocean,
And with their Soldiers landed at the Banne
A little creek near Wexford, then scarce named,
But ever since by his arrival famed.
The ^ext day after on the self same shore
Maurice de Pendergast with two ships more
(Part of Fitz-Stephens company) arrived;
And there by joyful Dermot were received;
Who by that Prince his guidance, and his aid
With The English colors and their arms displayed
With dauntlesse courage, able to supply
The want of number in their company,
To Wexford martch'd; which by assault they won
The country near together, with the town,
Dermot Mac Morough, for such valor showed,
Upon Fitz-Stephans thankefully bestowed.
There planted they; that town of all the rest
Was first by English victory possessed,
And has a lasting colony remained;
Which through all changes ever has retained
The English manners, their attire, and (though
With Irish somewhat mixed) their language too.
When famous Strongbow had in Wales received
The news of what Fitz-Stephans had achieved,
With ^resh supplies unto the Irish shore
He sends his friend the valiant Reimond ore,
And shortly after with far greater bands
The noble Earl himself in Ireland lands
Within the bay of Waterford; which town
The next day after by assault he won.
Thither king Dermot came, and brought with him
His beauteous daughter Eua, Irelands gemme,
The precious cause which drew the Earl so far,
The fair reward of his victorious war.
This beauteous Lady, when her father fled
For aid to England, then was promised
To noble Strongbow, and with her for doure
The Inheritance of Leinsters regal power*
Which here the King performs, and with as high
A state as might befit their dignity
The marriage rites are celebrated now.
Mars smooths the horrors of his wrinckled brow,
And folds his bloody colors up a while:
The Paphian Queen in that delicious smile,
With which she charms the Thracian God, appears;
His purple robe the pleased Hymen wears,
While Dermot gives (with right of all those lands)
His beauteous daughter into Strongbow's hands.
Nor was this marriage managed alone
By those two Deities; but from his throne
Great Jove looked down, and made that knot to be
A work belonging to his Deity;
By which himself did into union bring
Two spacious lands; and by that marriage ring,
Which noble Strongbow to his bride combined,
To Englands crown the Realm of Ireland joined.
A Ladies love, when Dermot was decayed
In state and power, first brought this foreign aid,
And to his native land did him restore.
A Ladies love had banished him before,
And of his crown and country him bereft.
The King of Meth had in an Island left
(While he far off into the land removed)
His fair but wanton Queen, who long had loved
This Dermot ^einsters king with flames unchaste.
His love on her, as here is on him was placed.*
Her Lords departure, from her seife, or fame
Had Dermot learned, and to the ^land came;
Where soon he gained his wish; a willing prey
From thence he took the wanton Queen away.
Then, as when once the ^rojan Paris came,
And stole from Greece that far renowned Dame,
'Twas not her husbands strength alone that sought
Revenge: a cause o^ that foul nature brought
All Greece in Arms; the Princes joined in one,
And drew a thousand ships to Ilion-
So when this Prince his fatal Hellen gained:
The land was moved, her wronged lord complained
T'ambitious Rhotherike Connaughts King, who claimed
The style of Irelands Monarch, and had aimed
At conquest of the land* he wondrous glad
Of such a fair pretense, as now he had,
Raised his own forces, and against Leinsters King
Did all the incensed neighbour-Princes bring.
Whose force when Dermot could no way withstand,
Bereft ^f all his strengths, he fled the land,
And to great Henry's royal Court; whom fame
Then spoke the greatest king in Europe, came.
The King, that then remained in Aquitaine,
This Irish Prince did gladly entertain,
Whom after feasting and magnificent
Rewards bestowed, he with free license sent
To England; there to gather without let
What voluntaries he from thence could get.
In Southern Wales Earl Strongbow then remained,
Fitz-Stephans too* whose aid the King obtained
On fair conditions. to Fitz-Stephans he
(If won) did promise Wexfords seigniory,
On The Earl his daughter Eva to bestow,
Which promises were both performed now.
The marriage feasts of Strongbow now were done,
The revells ended all, and Mars begun
Again his threatening colors to display,
When The Earl and old king Dermot ganne to weigh
What acts remained further to be done,
And leaving there sufficient garrison,
Through Leinster all along they took their way,
For Dublin bent; the country open lay
To their victorious arms on every side.
No foe durst meet them, or their force abide.
Proud Rhoderike himself swelled with the style
Of universal Monarch of the I Will,
Was glad to lurk within his proper bounds,
And keep those safe retreates, the boggy grounds
Which in his own peculiar Connagh lay.
Thus unresisted Strongbow kept his way,
Till he at last to Dublin came, which soon
By force, and terror of his name he won.
Feign would my Muse in this fair field proceed.
Of Irelands conquest, and each noble deed
A^cheived there; of trophies rais*d, to fame
The arms of England and great Henry's name
Feign would she sing. but Beckets fatal jarre
Again revives, and from a nobler war
Draws back her eager flight* and turns again
Her song ^riumphant to a tragic strain.
By this King Henry in his active mind
Great deeds and foreign conquests had designed
Secure from trouble (as in vain he thought)
Since Beckets peace and reconcilement wrought)
That might twixt State and Clergy rise at home.
When lo from England swift-wing'd fame was come,
And to his grieved ear sad tidings brought
What reakes his stout Archbishop there had wrought
Since last he did his dignity obtain,
And to his See returned in peace again,
That amongst his fellow Bishops, some of late
He did suspend, some excommunicate
For actions past before (from whence it plain
Appeared, old grudges were revived again)
As al^ that were, when Henry crowned his son,
Assistants at the coronation
With Yorkes Archbishop; for that office he
Claimed to belong to Canterburies See.
Nor would he then absolve them, though in their
Behalf, a Suitor young King Henry were.
While this was rumor'd there, to second fame,
To old King Henry the wronged Bishops came,
And to his ear declared their grievances.
He vexed at Beckets wilful stubbornness,
Such words (though general) in his choler spoke
As in some breasts too deep impression took.
Four knights, that heard, by chance, the kings discourse,
As Morvile, Tracy, Britain, and Fitz-Vrse,
(Unhappy men) inflamed with such a rage
And erring zeal, as no succeeding age
Shall ever praise, resolve in heat to do
For Henry's sake, what Henry's self must rue,
And their sad memories as long as fame
Has wings or tongues, shall feel in lasting shame.
From Normandy without the Kings consent,
These four unhappy Knights for England went,
To execute what they had there designed,
And fondly thought would please their Sovereigns mind
Archbishop Becket's death; but found too soon
What fatal service they to him had done.
How sad a cure, fond wretches, have you found?
For balm, you power in poison to the wound,
And make that death, which then was but a sore.
King Henryes cause is lost for evermore
If Becket suffer so; your selves are lost,
The King must suffer; all, but Rome are crossed.
While Becket bleedes, while you bear lasting stain,
While Henry grieves* the Pope alone shall gain.
^ate seemed to pity Henry, and decree
That he meane-while should breath in Normandy,
And from his England absent should remain
Whilst England was defiled with such a stain
To Canterbury the four Knights at last
Armed with their followers came, and freely past
Into the Bishop's palace; their intent
Unknown, had filled with fear and wonderment
The peoples hearts, who flocking up and down
Af^ighted all but Becket; he alone,
Whose head that sudden danger threatened, he
In looks and gesture unappall'd, and free
From all dismay, their coming did receive,
And fearelesse answers to their threatenings give,
As if his courage strove not to assuage
At all, but to exasperate their rage.
Nor could that stoutnesse hasten on his fate
So soon; but or their faultring hands forgate
To act it then: or else unhappy they
Not fully yet resolved upon the way,
A while for Counsel, did retire from him,
How much the respite of that little time
Did afterward increase their monstrous guilt!
Else in the Palace had his blood been spilt,
And not the sacred Temple made to be
The seat of that inhumane butchery.
Which on their crime by circumstance of place,
Must set a fouler and more horrid face.
While thus the Knights reti^e; the Monks in care
Of Beckt's safety, to himself declare
How great a danger he was in; desire
That from the Palace straight he would retire,
And to the Church for safeguard fly: but he
Too full of fatal magnanimity
Disdaines to stir; but there resolves to stay.
By force, at last, they hurry him away,
When words prevail not; and (in vain alas)
Into the Temple as a safer place
Convey his person. but not all the awe
Which so Divine a place from men should draw,
Not all the r^verend Roabes that Becket wore,
Nor the high and sacred o^ice which he bore
(When once those furious Knights were entered in)
Kept him from death, nor them from deadly sin.
In all his Roabes, the great Archbishop slain
Did with his blood his own Cathedral stayne.
How much did every fatal circumstance
In this abhorred act of theirs, advance
Thy ^ame, oh Becket? their unhallowed rage
Made thee not only pitied by the age,
But worshipped too. for them no infamy
Is thought enough, no dignity for thee.
How ill the people in so blind an age
Can keep a mean in reverence, or in rage?
They first pronounce thee innocent to be,
A Martyr then, and then a Deity.
To thee they all will pray; and to thy Tomb
Shall greatest Kings in adoration come;
Even he, to whom thou living owd'st thy knee,
Before thy shrine shall prostrate worship thee.
Whose gorg^ous wealth and luster shall outshine
All other shrines; as relics most divine,
Not only shall thy nobler parts be worn
In gold and gemmes; but men shall strive t'adorne
Thy meanest garments, and obeisance do
To thy ridiculously-holy shoo.
Thither from far shall Pilgrims come to pray.
Aurea legenda in vita Thomae.
Nay, in her danger once a bird (they say)
(Could we believe that any bird would be
Of such a Christian faith) did pray to thee.
Soon to King Henry, then in Normandy,
Did this sad news of Becket's murder fly,
And filled his pensive soul with heaviness.
For well he judg'de (nor proov'd it any less)
'Twould be by all the Christian Princes thought
That that foul deed by his command was wrought.
But more he grieved that he had rashly spoke
Such words before in Chollers heat, as took
That bad impression in the Knights. alas
He grieved to think into how sad a ^ase
Those wretched men had plunged themselves to do
Him service, as they thought. they durst not now
Appear at all. into the North they fledd,
And there alone their lives in sorrow ledd;
And all of them (if we may trust to fame)
Within four years to ends untimely came.
King Lewis of France, or for the love he bore
To slaughtered Becket (showed so often before,)
Or else for envy at the high renown
And power of Henry, that eclipsed his own
(Since now Religion gave him fair pretense)
Pursued his ends, with all the vehemence
Of words or prayers, to exasperate
Pope Alexander against King Henry's state,
Beseeching him, he would avenge with ali
The arms of holy Church, the unworthy fall
And cruel murder of so dear a son.
The like had other neighboring Princes done.
But Henry full of fears dispatched from thence
Embass^dours to plead his innocence
Before the Pope, and there to testify
What grief he took for Becket's tragaedy,
Beseeching him he would be pleased to send
His Legates thither, that might hear, and end
So sad a cause; for much he feared from Rome
An Interdiction against his Realms would come.
But soon the matter could not have an end.
The fates were pleased it should a while depend
Until successes of a fairer kind
Had given some ease to Henry's grieved mind,
And Irelands conquest prosperously gained
Allayed the sorrow he for this sustained.
His thoughts are wholly bent on Ireland now;
In person thither he entends to go;
And, fearing interruptions, to prevent
What Bulls or mischiefs might from Rome be sent
To trouble England, ere he leave the Land
Of Normandy, he lays a straight command
On the officers of ev^ry Port to see
That no Briefe-carrier, without certainty
Of his estate, intent, and business
Should be permitted thence to cross the Seas.
Nor long in England did the King abide;
No cause of stay was there, but to provide
Such force and fit retinew, as from thence
Might guard him ore in high Magnificence
To Irelands conquest, like himself; which soon
Unto the height of his desires was done.
At Milford-haven by the Kings command
His whole retinue met; a gallant band
Of English gentry waited on the shore
In glittering arms to follow Henry ore;
Whose luster might to those rude Irish bring
Astonishment, and show how great a King
D^d now arrive to take possession there;
Whose name before they had been taught to fear
By what Earl Strong-^ow in that region,
And brave Fitz Stephans with the rest had done.
B^t oh (too cruel chance) how near almost
Had all that valor and themselves be^ne lost
B^ Henry's former jealousies? he heard
Of their renowned and prosperous deeds; and feared
That so much puissance by them was shown
Not to advance his honor but their own,
And for themselves that they had conquered there.
Some envious spirits fed his jealous fear;
^or which he made a Proclamation
No Victuals, Armor, or Munition
Should from his Kingdoms be transported ore
For Strongbow's succor, to the Irish shore;
And that his Subjects, that did there remain,
before next Easter should return again;
This Proclam^tion had so much distressed
(Not long before) ^arle Strongbow and the rest,
That all* which had bin conquered in that coast,
And the^ themselves had u^terly been lost,
If (...) valor had not strove with fate,
(...) them. what need I here relate
(...) (...), R^imond, and Fitz*Girald were
(...) in (...), and their action there?
When (...) great Kings with all the strength almost
That could be levied in th'adjoyning coast
(...) these worthies, how they iss^'d out
With courages miraculously stout,
And with succ^sse as high; and marched that day
(...) all their foes with victory away?
Or how Miles Cogan chased the King of Meth
Away from Dublin walls and in the death
Of many thousands sealed his victory?
Or how Fitz-Stephans, with a company
(Too small almost to be believed) did guard
His fort near Wexford town, besiedged hard
By full three thousand Irish, when no strength
No force could make him yield, until at length
A false report the perj^r'd foes devised,
And with the hazard of t^eir souls, surprised
Fitz-Stephans body? these calamityes
Did through King Henry's jealousies arise
Against those that planted first that Irish coast.
And time it was, ere all again were lost,
The King himself upon that shore should land,
Whose force no Irish Princes durst withstand.
Novembers cold had robbed the forest trees
Of all their dress; and Winter began to freeze
Small lakes; when not the season of the year
(Though judged by some untimely) nor the fear
Of those rough Irish Seas had power to keep
The King from passing ore; into the deep
They put, and hoised sails; the Eastern wind
Blew fair, and furthered what the King designed.
By whose auspicious gales he safely come
To land at Waterford; when swiftest Fame
Through every part of Ireland flies, to bring
The feared arrival of so great a King.
And what that fame had wrought was quickly seen,
So soon came Irelands greatest Princes in;
Dermon Mac Arth the Prince of Cork, while yet
The King stayed there, came freely to submit
Himself a subject to him; and the like
Did D^nold do, the Prince of Limericke.
Who, to procure his peace, swore fealty.
Both whom great Henry sent away with high
And rich rewards: and placed in the Towns
Of Cork, and Limricke English Garrisons.
The King when this at Waterford was done,
Leaving Fi^z-Barnard to maintain the town,
Marched with his gallant troops in fair array
^o Dublin ward, where ere he made his stay,
The greatest Lords of all the Countries nigh,
As Ophelan the King of Ossory,
And Ororike of Meth, to Henry came;
With other Princes of the highest name
As Mac Talewie, O Carell, Ochadese,
Othwely, Gillmeholoch. all of these
In person did submit themselves; agree
To be his vassalls, and swear fealty.
But Rotherike, that ^ore the Monarchs name
And King of Connaught then, no nearer came
Then to that famous river Shenin's side,
Which his rough Connaught does from Meth divide,
And there was met by Hugh de Lacy, and
Fitz-Aldeline sent by the Kings command
To take his hostages; which freely there
He did deliver and allegiance swear.
By his example all the greatest Lords
Did freely yield to Henry's name. no swords
To gain that land were drawn; no blood was lost;
No war so great an Islands conquest cost.
Now Christmas was; which in all heights of state
The royal Henry strove to celebrate;
That those rude Irish people there might see
And reverence so great a Majesty.
Who flock in greatest companies, to gaze
At this unusual luster; with amaze
They see his great attendance, and admire
His sumptuous plate, his servants rich attire;
While plentious Ireland to their feasting boords
The Seas provisions and the lands affoords.
Down with the Irish Kings great Henry sat.
So showed of old Imperial Caesar's state,
When barbarous kings great Rome did entertain:
Who viewed with wonder such a Monarch's train,
And gorgeous court. such did old Poets strive
To make those feasts, which Jove was pleased to give
To rural Deities, and to admit
The Sylvans rough, and rusticke Faunes to sit
At his caelestiall board; while wondering they
The radiant glories of great Jove survay;
While they behold the beauteous Trojan stand
A waiter by; and from his snow-white hand
Give cups; and ravished with the sound, admire
To hear bright Phoebus and the lovely quire
Of his nine daughters to heavens glorious King
The Pallenaean triumphs sweetly sing.
As much as those rude people wondered at
King Henry's sumptuous court, and royal state:
As much the English Courtiers did admire
The Irish Princes fashions and attire,
Their different garbes and gestures; while each eye
Is pleased in viewing such variety,
And to each other both afford delight.
When wine and Cates had weakened appetite,
The noble Henry with a smiling cheer
Offers discourses, longing much to hear
More of their countries nature, thus at last
To Dublins reverend Prelate, who was placed
Not far from him at board, the King began;
Grave Father, since I know your wisdom can
Dive deep into the qualities and state
Of things, and search what old records relate
Too much abstruse for vulgar brains to find;
From your deep skill inform our longing mind,
Of what wise Nature for this spacious I Will
Has wrought in tempers of the air and soil,
And those famed wonders, where she does display
Prodigious power, and leaves her usual way,
As if she meant to mock the purblinde eye
And feeble search of our Philosophy.
Loud fame has spread them (though obscurely) ore
All parts of this our Western world; nor more
Was scorched Afric famed by elder time
For breeding wonders, then your Irish clime
Has been to us renowned for her rare
And strange endowments. to our ear declare
What you grave Father by tradition
Or by experience know* the King had done;
Attentive silence all the Princes make;
When thus the Bishop, humbly bowing, spoke.
If I relate by Henry's high command
The wondrous treasures of my native land,
Let him be pleased with a gracious ear
To censure all; if I endeavor here
Not, what is smoothly probable, to show,
But that which is (although most strangely) true.
Yet there let naught seem strange, where we unfold
The works of him that could do what he would;
Nor let us say some things against nature be,
Because such things as those we seldom see:
We know not what is natural; but call
Those acts, which God does often, natural;
Where if we weighed with a religious eye
The power of doing, not the frequency,
All things alike in strangeness to our thought
Would be, which he in the creation wrought.
But in those rare and wondrous things may we
The freedom of that great Creator see;
When he at first the course of things ordained,
And Nature within certain bounds restrained,
That laws of seeds and seasons may be known,
He did not then at all confine his own
Almighty power; but whensoere he will
Works against the common course of Nature still,
Those works may we view with a wondering eye,
And take delight in that variety.
Such prodigies the most are seen (as some
Have thought) in Isles and places farthest from
The center of the world; as here they may
Behold, that do this Western I Will survay.
But ere we mention those rare wonders here,
So please great Henry, to his sacred ear
We will at first in general unfold
What temper, fruits, and wealth the land does hold,
Her wholesome air; her blessings manifold;
That you great King may in that glass behold
Th'Almightie's love to you, that gave so soon
So easily, so much to Englands crown.
Ireland is fair, though rudely clad, although
She want that dress that other Nymphs can show,
Who by long wealth and art are civilized.
Nor therefore let this land be de^pis'd,
As if that Nature negligent had been
In moulding her, or there no care were seen
Of Jove at all. rare are th'endowments, know
That he at first did on this I Will bestow.
And largely may for humane health suffice.
Although she want the pompous merchandise
Which Eastern countries to the world afford;
Though not with purple, nor rich scarlet stored;
Although the silk worms precious toil she want
To cloth for show her gay inhabi^ant;
Though from the wounded en^railes of her ground
No gold be dug, no precious pearls be found
Within these lakes, nor from the glistering rocks
Rich diamonds gathered. plentious are her flocks
And grain. she wants the means of those sad crimes
That do infest the gaudy Eastern clymes;
She brings no poisons, such as guilty gold,
And cups of choicest gemmes too often hold.
Her harmless grounds no balefull herbs do bear,
Nor Aconite can Stepdames gather here,
Arachne's poison is not understood,
Nor those sad plagues, which from Medusaes blood
In Affricke grew, and through all lands were spread.
This I Will alone nere felt the Gorgons head.
Most aequall temper does this Island hold.
When Phoebus sits in Capricorn, the cold
May well be suffered without Vulc^ns aid,
And Cancer's heat endured without a shade.
In winters cold, as Summers heat, the field
Is richly clothed, and does fresh herbage yield.
From whence in June we are not forced to mow;
Nor do our cattle stalls in winter know.
Within this air no sad contagions breed;
Nor does this land the aid of Phoebus need.
Without diseases they enjoy their breath,
And know no mean twixt perfect health and death.
Silu* Giraldus Cambr. relates all these wonders.
But if those things that more prodigious are,
You be desirous in particular
To hear related: few amongst many take.
In Mounsters Northern part there is a lake,
Within whose bosom two famed Islands stand;
The one far greater in extent of land
Then the other is; of nature strange; into
The greater I Will no woman ere could go,
Nor any female creature, but straight died.
The experiment in beasts we often have tried;
And often observed in birds. from places nigh
Male birds securely to that Island fly,
And pick the blossoms from each budding stem.
Thither the females dare not follow them,
As if by nature they were taught to fly
The hidden cause of that mortality.
But in the lesser I Will none dye at all,
Which they the Island of the living call.
For in that Island often have many men
By extreme sickness long tormented been,
When nature seemed quite spent, and they in vain
Have wished for death, but could not death obtain,
Till that in boats into the Island by
They have been carried, and there straight they dye.
Another I Will, which Aren named is,
Within the Western part of Connaughtlyes,
In which men's bodies dead unburied ly
In open air, yet never putrify.
Children through many ages in that place
Their father's, grandsire's, and great grandsire's face
Unchanged see and know* they need not carve
Fair Statues, nor draw pictures to preserve
The memory of their dead ancestors;
By which men know deceased Emperors.
In stead of Statues their own bodies ly
Discerned and known by their posterity.
Another wonder does that Island yield.
All parts of ^reland else with mice are filled;
But there no mice breed, nor can live upon
That ground; if thither they be brought, they run
With have to drown themselves in water nigh;
Or if prevented, instantly they die.
A Well there is in Mounster to be seen;
Within whose water whosoere has been
Once drenched, his hair straight takes a hoary die.
Another fountain of quite contrary
Effect to that, in Vlster springs* for there
Those that have washed once, how old so ere,
Shall never after have an hoary hair.
Thither the beauteous women do repair;
And all those curious men that too much fear
The Ensigns of old age, are bathed there.
In Connaught on a mountains highest ground
Far from the Sea is a fresh fountain found;
Whose waters, like the Seas set tides, each day
Do twice flow up, and twice do ebb away.
Not far from Wexford lies a piece of ground
In Leinster Province, where no Rattes are found.
They breed not there, nor brought can live at all.
If you will trust Fame for the original
And cause of this, a curse denounced there was
By S. Yuorus Bishop of the place
Against all Ratts (whose books by chance they tore)
And they from thence were banished evermore.
A spacious quantity of Meadow ground
In Connaught lies; where biting Fleas abound,
And do so much the hapless place infest,
It lies forsaken both by man and beast.
The useless soil in vain is fruitful there.
What less then miracle can this appear?
And show to us, that if the Almighty please,
The least of all his Creatures can disseize
Man of a dwelling. so when all that store
Of his most wondrous judgments heretofore
On sinful Egypt he was pleased to bring;
Not all the forces of so great a King
Against Lice, flies, froggs had power to guard the land;
Nor their invasion could a^ all withstand.
Some other meadow g^ounds, quite contrary
To these in nature do in Leinsterly.
Where the rich soil in pasture so abounds,
If grazing cattle cover all those grounds,
They feel no want; what grass they eat by days
The dewy night back to the land repayes;
And what famed Maro of that wealthy field
In Mantua spoke, these meadows truly yield.
But so myraculously temperate
Prooves Irelands air sometimes, Wolves have of late
In middst of bare December whelped been,
And young-hatch'd Crows at Christmas have bin seen.
What need I speak of that famed Willow tree.
At Glindelachan; which was known to be
Changed from his nature (though it yet appear
In outward form a Willow) and each year
Brings forth fair Apples, that have proov'd of strange
And medcinable virtue still? that change
The common people, as divinely rare,
Imputed to S. Keiwin's powerful prayer;
Or to your sacred ear relate the story
Of our S. Patrick's famous Purgatory?
Nine dismal caves there are in one of those
If any man by night himself repose,
Such most unsufferable torments there
(As humane nature scarce has power to bear)
He shall endur^. the silly folk suppose
^he pains of Hell not much exceeding those.
But if that all the prodigyes we know
Of truth in Ireland, or all those that so
Are by the common people thought to be,
We should relate; your sacred Majesty
Would first be wearied: day would first be done
Ere through those wonders our discourse could run.
With that the Bishop his relation ceased.
Great Henry gave him thanks; and highly pleased
To hear the nature of his new-gain'd land,
Rewards those Irish with a bounteous hand
That on his Royal Court did then attend,
And that this action might to happy end
Be brought, and Ireland settled in a blessed
And sure estate; beginning at the best
Of cares (God's service,) he to Dublin then
A Synod calls of the Irish Clergymen;
With whom were many English Prelat^ joined;
To sift the state of Irelands Church, and find
What errors had by time crept in, to be
The blemishes of Christian purity.
While thus great Henry labors to secure
His new-gaind Realm, to leave it in a sure
And peaceful state; from these his wished affair^
He is diverted by more tragic cares.
Sad news to him, (though secretly) are brought
Of what the fiend Impiety had wrought
In his bold sons; their inclinations now
And bad designs beyond concealment grow.
Enough to break a tender fathers heart.
But of his sorrow this was but a part;
(Although alas, he were enforced to see
In this unnatural conspiracy
His life and kingly state endangered were)
For other tidings to increase his fear
Came flying ore (as mischiefs ever join,
Not singly come) Albert and Theodine
Were by Pope Alexander sent from Rome
As Legates, and to Normandy were come,
There to examine Becket's murder now,
With power not only to enquire and know,
But punish it, and interdict at once
All great King Henry's large dominions,
Unless that he himself in person there
Upon their summons did forthwith appear.
And now the feast of Easter was at hand,
King Henry grieved that from his new gained land
He was so soon enforced to part away,
Before well settled; yet because delay
On the other side did seem so dangerous;
Of those affairs he briefly does dispose;
Makes Hugh de Lacy chief Iustitiar,
And to the chiefest Captains each a share
Of government he leaves. then crosses ore,
And with a prosperous wind upon the shore
Of Wales arrives; but making then no stay
At all in England, sails with speed away
To Normandy, to meet the Legates there.
And does before them personally swear
That he commanded not that horrid deed;
But for those words that rashly did proceed
Out of his mouth, and might be thought to be
The mooving cause of that black tragaedy,
He is contented to what penance fit
The Pope or they enjoyne him, to submit.
THE REIGN OF King HENRY the Second.
The Fifth Book.
The Argument of the fifth Book.
Against their Father Henry's impious Sons
Raise War through all his large dominions
By foreign Princes backed. the old King's success
On every side, and wondrous happiness.
King Lewis of France is chasd from Normandy;
And Chesters Earl surprised in Brettainy.
At Farneham field the Earl of Leister's taken,
And almost all his warrelike Flemmings slain*
The King of Scotland by a little band
Is taken prisoner in Northumberland.
To Becket's shrine old Henry pensive goes;
Then freely pardons all his yiedling foes.
T^kes in the Forts that were against him manned,
And without bloodshed quiets all the land.
The woeful news of murdered Rosamund
Amidd'st these joys his bleeding heart does wound.
A truce twixt Lewis and him. young Richard gets
Poictou; but when King Henry comes, submits,
And by his father is sent forth to win
His yet-offending brothers from their sin.
NOw did those fatal and unnatural jarres
Disclose themselves, and more then civil wars
Began to make afflicted England bleed;
While Henryes foes from Henryes loins proceed.
From Hell to Earth did that accursed fiend
The Viper-hair'd Impiety ascend
TO infect the Royal household; such was she
As ancient Poets made Megaera be,
That loved no wars, but twixt near kindred bred,
No blood, but such as sons or brothers shed;
Such wars whose trials must be ever bad,
Whose conquests must be loss, and triumphs sad.
Twixt Pelops sons it was she that bred despite,
It Was she that made the Theban brothers fight,
That made Atrides impiously be slain,
And impiously to be revenged again.
She now through France, through England sounds alarmes,
And Henry's sons against their father arms.
Henry the son (too soon crowned King) on slight
Pr^tences of a wrong resolves to fight
Against his dear Father. in that black design
Richard and Geoffrey with their brother join
(As then was thought) incensed by the spleen
And jealousies of Elianor the Queen.
With them the Earls of Chester, Leister too;
And Bigot Norfolkes Ea^le, with many more
'Domestick Rebels join. nor did so bad
So impious a cause as theirs (oh sadd
Crime of the Fates) want foreign aiders too,
For all the Christian Princes near, as though
They understood not what Rebellion were,
Nor treason knew, to the unjust side, adhaere.
King Lewis of France assists his son in Law,
And to that party Scotlands King does draw;
That side does Philip Earl of Flanders take;
So much old Henry's state now seemed to shake
As nothing almost but the immediate hand
Of heaven alone had power to make him stand.
Why do you Princes such Rebellion love?
Such sadd examples against your selves approove,
You that are Kings and Fathers? is it hate
O^ envy borne to Henry's prosperous state
That mooves you ^hus? alas, you do not show
A skil^ull hate to him in arming so.
Your arming makes those wars that were before
Wars civil only, to be so no more,
But gives the grieved father hope to share
A glorious triumph from a tragic war;
For else the conquest which great Henry had
Ore his own sons and subjects had been sad.
The King of Scotland must a prisoner be,
And Lewis with shame often chased from Normandy,
Lest noble Henry should triumph ore none,
But only sons and subjects of his own.
And you most gracious Sovereign, borne to be
Th'admir'd example of true piety
To your deceased Father; with an eye
Secure, may read your virtues contrary
In Henry's sons. and read it, Sir; true story
That brands their names, will sound your endless glory.
King James, whilst living, did behold, and blessed
Your piety; of what you since expressed
No little part, the wondering people all
Beheld, and honored at his funeral;
But most of all is, what we daily see,
Your pious truth to his dear memory.
So may our Princely Hope (let God above
Be pleased) young Charles by your example prove,
And such unto your self hereafter be
As you to blessed James in piety.
The foes in this great combination tied
Invade King Henry's lands on every side.
While Scotlands King falls on Northumberland,
While Chesters Earl, and Fulgiers armed stand
To seize the towns of Britain; Lewis of France
With young King Henry all their force advance
For Normandy, attempting to surprise
Vernoul, a town that in the confines lies.
Thus like a Lion roused on every side,
Old Henry's prudence must at once provide
For all assaults; and first in person he
To succor Vernoul martches speedily.
Which Lewis of France by treachery that day
Had taken; but left it straight, and fled away.
The English King pursues, and in his course
Surprises many forts of his by force.
Nor durst the King of France, of all the time
That war endured, in field encounter him,
But making short incursions, as for prey,
Would never stand the trial of a day.
From thence with winged speed old Henry goes,
To meet in Brettaine with his rebel foes;
But Chesters Earl and ^ulgiers durst not bide
His puissance; but fled and fortified
Themselves within the castle Dole; which he
Str^ightly besieged, and won it speedily.
There Chesters Earl into his hands he got,
With fourscore other prisoners of note.
While thus in France the conquering King proceeds,
Heavens potent hand assists their valiant deeds,
That loyal wars for him in England made.
The Northern parts does Scotlands King invade.
To whose resistance, their most able men
The noble Lucy, Lord chief Justice then,
And Bohun, Constable of England, bring,
And stay the progress of that warrelike King.
There whilst with loyal and courageous hearts
They guard the North, in Englands Eastern parts
Arise warr^s fiercer; where with numerous bands
Of warlike Flemmings furious Leister lands.
With him does Bigot Earl of Norfolk join.
There their rebellious forces they combine
To wast their native soil. the woeful fame
Of which to brave Bohun, and Lucy came.
Who hea^ing this conclude with Scotlands King
A speedy truce, and all their forces bring
Into the Eastern parts; where fates provide
Fresh strength to succor injured Henry's side.
The loyal Earls of Gloucester, Arundel,
And Cornwall there are met, provided well
Of all munition, in their just design
With noble Lucy and Bohun to join.
The Lords all met, to Farneham march away.
There was the trial of that bloody day
Ordained. there Leister with his Flemish troops
Comes to encounter them. with different hopes,
Though aequall fury, the two armies fought;
The Flemmings prey, the English freedom sought,
To chase from thence the forreiners away.
Long doubtful stood the trial of the day.
When thus the lo^all Lords their soldiers cheer;
Now let your truth and loyalty appear
Brave Englishmen; nor is it Henry's right
Against rebels arms for which alone you fight,
And to revenge your wronged Prince; (although
That were engagement great and high enough)
You fight lest England should be made a spoil
To vagrant thieves; or (more) your native soil
Here suffer conquest by a foreign sword,
And after ages in black leaves record
The fatal field of Farneham. fortune meant
In this to keep your valors innocent,
Though rebel Leister make a civil war,
He frees you from it, since his soldiers are
All forreiners; in fight you need not fear
To wound at all your native country there,
Nor shed your kindreds blood; the foe frees you
From those foul crimes which he intends to do,
(Fight against his Sovereign, friends, and native land.)
What great advantage on our side does stand!
Our arms are loyal, against a foreign foe;
His wars both civil, and rebellious too.
Such speeches from the Lords had raised high
The English virtue; they all wished to dye
Rather then see, what else they sadly feared.
On one side Englands woeful state appeared.
On the other side the justice of so brave
A cause, fresh vigor to their spirits gave.
The Flemmings armed with resolve as great,
Whose desperate fortunes on that day were set,
And no hope left beyond, came fiercely on,
Breathing out nothing but destruction,
To gain the price of their adventures there,
Or to their foes to leave a conquest dear.
So near the flocks fight hungry beasts of prey;
So fight brave dogs to chase the wolves away
As then the English and the Flemmings fought.
How many tragedies that day were wrought!
How were the fields with slaughter covered ore!
How was th'adjoyning river stained with gore!
At last bright justice rose, and by the laws
Of God and nature ballancing the cause,
Gave a full conquest to the English side.
But so the desperate Flemmings fell and died,
As in their deaths it plainly might appear
With what resolves they had encountered there.
Ten thousand of them in the field were slain;
Their great Commander Leisters Earl was taken,
With him his Amazonian Countess too
Was taken prisoner, and many more.
Who by the conquering Earls were speedily
Sent out of England into Normandy,
And to old Henry brought, where then he lay,
With joyful news of that victorious day.
One of the strongest propps young Henry had*
And bold'st supporter of a war so bad
Is now removed, ambitious Leister, he
Who most had soothed the sons impiety,
And against the father been most insolent,
Is at his mercy now a prisoner sent.
The King forbeares revenge, and does disdain
With any show of cruelty to stain
The joy of this success; but keeps him there
As war had made him, only prisoner.
But Englands wretched state by one success
Could not be rescued wholly from distress,
Against which so great conspiracies did aim.
For second news from thence to Henry cam^
By Richard then elect of Winch^ster
That other forces had arrived there
By that rebellious Earl of Norfolk brought;
By whom outrageous mischiefs had been wrought,
And the Eastern parts of England much annoyed;
That stately Norwich was with fire destroyed,
That greater woes are feared every day;
That the Earl of Flanders then at Gravelin lay
With young King Henry, purposed to invade
England with all the strength that they had made.
The King is moved to hear his countries woe,
And to her rescue straight resolves to go
In person* then with his accustomed speed,
By which he found his actions still succeed,
(For all his acts and march^s still did show
Such speed, that Lewis of France would often avow
He thought King Henry did not go but fly)
Prepares to cross the seas from N^rmandy.
And takes aboard, besi^es his faithful men,
Those Lords with him that were his prisoners the^
Leister, and Chesters Earls, with many more.
But when he hoys'd his sails, cross winds began blow,
The Seas grow rough, as if the Seas conspired
And winds to cross what he so much desired.
King Henry sighs, and lifting his sad eyes
To heaven, thus speaks; oh God, thou only wise,
If my entents in E^gland may succeed,
If her afflicted state my pre^ence need,
And that my safe arrival there may be
Her health, and cure of all her malady,
Then grant me passage thou, whose only beck
Has power the winds and swelling Seas to check:
But if my presence to her coast may prove
More cause of woes, and fiercer tumults move,
If my revenging hand may lance the sore
Too deep, and make it greater then before,
Let these cross winds still keep me from that shore;
Oh let me never see my England more.
Rather then these my arms should only gain
My right; and not the nations peace maintain,
Let me loose all, and my unthankefull son
Before his time po^sesse her as his own.
Rather then seat a long and tragic war
Within her bleeding bosom; far oh far
Let my sad state from thence be banished.
Too much already has that Island bled
For Princes strifes and Soveraigneties dire love.
Oh if my landing may auspicious prove
For Englands peace, and quench all factious fire,
Let winds and Seas consent to my desire.
His pious prayer was heard; the swelling Maine
Smoothed his rough face, the wind turned fair again*
And gave presage to his rejoicing mind
Of what success he should in England find.
By which his navy soon is wafted ore,
And at Southampton safely set on shore.
Departing thence, before he seek his foes,
Or realms sick parts, in Pensive wise he goes
Himself to visit slaughtered Becket's shrine;
(Whether the Lega^es did before enjoyne
That paenitence, or that 'twere voluntary.)
At three miles di^ance off from Canterbury,
The King himself alighting from his horse
Does barefoote Hoved^n.
thither take his pensive course,
Whilst pains with his humiliation meet,
And ruthlesse stones do cut his tender feet,
Leaving the peoples wondering eyes, from thence
A bloody tracke of his sharp paenitence.
But when he came to slaughtered Becket's shrine,
Oh there (could worship greater then divine
Have been) he had performed it; on his face
He prostrate fell, and weeping kissed the place,
Which yet of Becket's murder bore the stain.
There with submissive praye^s he strove to gain
Pardon for that which others wrought, and he
Was guilty of, but accidentally.
But yet, as if no tears could expiate,
Nor prayers could cleanse so foul a crime as that,
(To such esteem in that blind age's thought
Was this supposed Martyr Becket brought)
The pensive King goes farther; bares his back,
And on his flesh refuses not to take
Rod-stripes from each blind Monk that there did live*
Which they as freely to their Sovereign give.
A strange example sure! but let the sage
Nor censure them, nor Henry, but the age.
But ere great Henry from that city went,
More glorious news (as if changed Fortune meant
To recompense him for her threats so late,
And now on all sides make him fortunate)
Was thither brought to his rejoicing ear,
That Scotlands King was taken prisoner
The warlike William Parvus.
William, who had made, almost
Without resistance, on the Northern coast
So many inrodes, such rich spoils had won,
And so much wrack in several places done.
Huge was his army, but by different ways
D^spers'd they sought securely for their preyes
Ranging abroad, and pillaging without
Control, the towns, and hamlets round about.
Stoutvile, Glanvile, Vrsy, Ballioll, Vinfriville.
Five gallant Yorkshire Knights, whom glorious Fame
Was pleased to grace, to Alnwicke Castle came;
To enter thither secretly they meant.
The misty weather favored their intent;
Unseen they came; although the strength were small
(For but four hundred horse were they in all)
Such prize to them did friendly fame ordain,
As greatest armies have been proud to gain,
A captive Monarch. from the Castle towers
They viewed far off the scattered Scottish powers.
Whose armie's greatest part from thence was gone,
And led by several Captains, marched on
To spoil some other parts. the Knights at last,
Who in their active thoughts did hourly cast
Some brave designs, by scouts, that had descried
The Scotts proceedings all, were certify'd
Which way King William with small guards abroad
Was gone; and thither with their troops they rode,
Oretooke, and charged him there; the King, although
Amazed to meet so suddenly a foe,
Did not forget he was a King, but made
As brave resistance as the strength he had
Would give him leave. the trumpets sound in vain
To draw to rescue of their Sovereign
His straggling troops; whom sweetness of the prey
Had carried thence, and scattered every way.
The Knights prevail; the King's surprised there,
And to New Castle borne a prisoner.
(Oh mock of fortune!) he that entered late
The English bounds so strong a Potentate,
Guarded with Will. Parv^.
fourscore thousand Soldiers,
As if he sought to gain by (...) wars
The Kingdome's conquest; not a meaner prey,
By this small troop is captive borne away.
Pleased with this news triumphant Henry goes
From thence to London; where with all true shows
Of joy and duty they received their King,
And with an army marches thence to bring
The realms sick parts unto their former state.
No town, no fort, how proud so ere of late,
And strongly manned, durst now resist or stay
His course; fame opens him a bloodlesse way.
Huntingdon Castle's yielded to his hands.
Nor durst Earl Bigot with his Flemmish bands,
That lately struck such terror through the land,
Resist his Lord; but into Henry's hand
Did freely yield Bungay and Fremingham
His two strong forts, and humbly kneeling came
To sue for mercy, which he there obtained.
The like did Ferrers Darbies Earl, and gained
His pardon too, contented now to yield
Those two strong Castles, which he long had held.
As much stout Mowbray was enforced to do,
And with himself resigned his Castle too.
So did the forts then kept in Leisters name;
And to Northampton Duresmes Prelate came
To give three Castles freely to the King.
Thither did then the Knights of Yorkshire bring
Their royal captive Scotlands King; and there
Presented him as Henry's prisoner.
Who could have hoped to fin^e such blessed success
From such a war? what greater happiness
Could ore-joy'd Henry in his largest thought
Have wished to see, or all the stars have wrought?
So high a conquest gained by fame alone?
So many Castles without slaughter won?
No blood in purging of rebellion shed?
And in three weeks all England q^ieted
Without the sword? no fields with slaughter stained?
What Prince ore sons and subjects ever gained
So just and true a triumph? or could see
In civil war a joyful victory?
This conquest was ore hearts, not bodies wrought.
And 'twas the hand of heaven, not Henry fought.
But killing grief (as if unconstant fate
Already 'ganne to envy Henry's state)
Amidd'st these triumphs comes; and all the joy
Of this success must one sad death destroy.
How deep (alas) do Loves disasters wound!
The woeful news of murdered Rosamund
Was now to royal Henry brought. Oh what
Pathetike tongue can at the height relate
How much he grieved? a starre-crost lovers woe
No living tongue can tell; they only know,
Whom such a cause as that, has reav'd of breath.
If those sad Ghosts should from the shades of death
Arise, not they themselves could speak that woe,
Which no expression once but death could show.
Yet may the Muse, since Muses are divine,
Unfold those depths* thou saddest of the Nine,
Inspire my thoughts, and lend thy skill to me,
Oh tune thy heavyest notes, Melpomene,
And to the world in fitting accents sound*
The tragic fate of fairest Rosamund.
Whilst old King Henry was beyond the Seas
Detained in war, to guard those Provinces,
And scattered parts of his dominions
Against Lewis of France, and his unnatural sons;
Whilst England shaken was with loud alarmes,
And filled with foreign and rebellious arms;
Pale Nemesis, that had possessed before
The jealous breast of raging Elianor,
In far more horrid shapes was entered now,
And all her wrongs in doubled forms did show;
^ongst which (the deepest piercing wrong) she found
Her bed despised for love of Rosamund.
Then madd she raves; it is not the subtilty
Of that Daedalian Labyrinth (quoth she)
Shall hide the strumpet from my vengefull hand;
Nor can her doting champion Henry stand
Against me now to guard his Paramour.
If through the winding Mazes of her bower
No art nor skill can pass: the World shall know
A Queens revenge; the house I Will overthrow,
Level those Iustfull buildings with the ground,
And in their ruins tomb his Rosamund.
There let him seek her mangled limbs. oh draw
To my assistance just Rhamnusia;
I do not strive a* rival to remoove;
It Is now too late to seek a husbands love:
I seek revenge alone, and in what part
I may most deeply wound false Henry's heart.
The fairer, and the more beloved, that she
Is now: the sweeter my revenge will be.
Oh grant that Henry to his Rosamund
May feel desire as great as ere was found
In man; as great as beauty ere could moove;
To which add all the Matrimonial love
He owes to me; that when his flame is such,
The death of her may make his grief as much.
In nothing now but Rosamund alone
Can I afflict his heart; what could be done
In all his other comforts, has been tried.
I have already drawn his sons to side
Against their father in unnatural jarre
And raised him up from his own loins a war.
What could old Poets make Medea more
Against false Jason do, t^en Elianor
*Against him has done, when Rosamund is dead?
Besides Creusaes death, Medea shed
Her childrens blood before their fathers eyes.
But I, in stead of those mad tragedies
(In which my self with him should bear a part)
Can by his children more torment his heart.
Their deaths, perchance, (though murdered) could not be
So much his grief as their impiety.
In which they now proceed; their fathers crown
Is by their arms into the hazard thrown.
And to the full revenge I have begun
Does nothing want but her destruction.
At Oxford then, with this revengefull mind,
The Queen abode, a fitting time to find
For execution of her black intents,
Whilst every day her cruel instruments
Were lurking near to Woodstocke, to descry
A way to act this balefull tragedy.
Fair Rosamund within her bower of late
(While these sad storms had shaken Henry's state,
And he from England last had absent been)
Retired her self; nor had that star been seen
To shine abroad, or with her luster grace
The woods, or walks adjoining to the place.
About those places, while the times were free,
Often with a train of her attendants, she
For pleasure walked; and, like the huntresse Queen
With her light Nymphs, was by the people seen.
Thither the country Ladds and Swains, that near
To Woodstock dwelt, would come to gaze on her.
Their jolly Maygames there would they present,
Their harmless sports, and rustic merryment
To give this beauteous Paragon delight.
Nor that officious service would she slight:
But their rude pastimes gently entertain.
When of^ some forward, and ambitious swain,
That durst presume (unhappy Ladd) to look
Too near that sparkling beauty, planet-strooke
Returned from thence, and his hard hap did wail.
What now (alas) can Wake, or Fair avail
His lovesick mind? no Whitsunale can please,
No Iingling Morris-dances give him ease;
The Pipe and Tabor have no sound at all;
Nor to the May Pole can his measures call,
Although invited by the merryest Lasses.
How little for those former joys he passes?
But sits at home with folded arms; or goes
To carue on Beeches-barkes his piercing woes,
And too ambitious love. Cupid, they say,
Had stoll'n from Venus then; and lurking lay
About the fields and villages, that nigh
To Woodstock were, as once in Arcady
He did before, and taught the rural swains
Loves oratory, and persuasive strains.
But now fair Rosamund had from the sight
Of all withdrawn* as in a cloud, her light
Envelop'd lay, and she immured close
Within her Bower, since these sad stirs arose,
For fear of cruel foes; relying on
The strength and safeguard of the place alone:
If any place of strength enough could be
Against a Queens enraged jealousy.
Now came that fatal day, ordayn'd to see
The eclipse of beauty, and for ever be
Accurs't by woeful lovers. all alone
Into her chamber Rosamund was gone;
Where (as if fates into her soul had sent
A secret notice of their dire intent)
Afflicting thoughts possessed her as she sat.
She sadly weighed her own unhappy state,
Her feared dangers, and how far (alas)
From her relief engaged Henry was.
But most of all, while pearly dropps distained
Her rosy cheeks, she secretly complained,
And wail'd her honors loss, wishing in vain
She could recall her Virgin state again;
When that unblemished form, so much admired,
Was by a thousand noble youths desired,
And might have moov'd a Monarchs lawful flame.
Sometimes she thought how some more happy Dame
By such a beauty, as was hers, had won
From meanest birth, the honor of a Throne,
And what to some could highest glories gain,
To her had purchased nothing but a stayne.
There when she found her crime, she checked again
That high aspiring thought, and gann complain
How much (alas) the too too dazeling light
Of Royal luster had misled her sight;
Oh then she wished her beauties nere had been
Renowned: that she had nere at Court been seen:
Nor too much pleased enamored Henry's eye.
While thus she sadly mused, a ruthful cry
Had pierced her tender ear, and in the sound
Was named (she thought) unhappy Rosamund.
(^he cry was uttered by her grieved Maid,
From whom that clew was taken, that betrayed
Her Ladies life,) and while she doubting feared,
Too soon the fatal certainty appeared;
For with her train the wrathful Queen was there.
Oh who can tell what cold and killing fear
Through every part of Rosamund was struck?
The rosy tincture her sweet cheeks forsook,
And like an Ivory statue did she show
Of life and motion reft. had she been so
Transformed in deed, how kind the fates had been
How pitiful to her? nay to the Queen?
To free her guilty hand from such a crime,
So sadd and foul, as no succeeding time
But shall with grief condemn. yet had she been
A Statue; and looked so: the jealous Queen
Perchance on that her cruelty had shown,
Least Henry should have turned Pygmalion,
And for a St^tues love her bed forsook.
The Queens attendants with remorse are struck;
Even she herself did seem to entertain
Some ruth; but straight Revenge returned again,
And filled her furious breast. Strumpet (quoth She)
I need not speak at all; my sight may be
Enough expression of my wrongs, and what
The consequence must prove of such a hate.
Here, take this poisoned cup, (for in her hand
A poisoned cup she had,) and do not stand
To parley now: but drink it presently,
Or else by tortures be resolved to dye.
Thy doom is set. pale trembling Rosamund
Receives the cup, and kneeling on the ground;
When dull amazement somewhat had forsook
Her breast, thus humbly to the Queen she spoke.
I dare not hope you should so far relent
Great Queen, as to forgive the punishment
That to my foul offense is justly due.
Nor will I vainly plead excuse, to show
By what strong arts I was at first betrayed,
Or tell how many subtle snares were laid
To catch mine honor. these, though nere so true,
Can bring no recompense at all to you,
Nor just excuse to my abhorred crime.
Instead of sudden death, I crave but time,
Which shall be styled no time of life but death.
In which I may with my condemned breath,
While grief and p^nnance make me hourly dye,
Pour out my prayer^ for your p^osperity.
Or take revenge on this off^ding face,
That did procure your wrong, and my disgrace.
Make poisonous leprosies orespread my skin;
And punish that, that made your Henry sin.
Better content will such a vengeance give
To you; that he should loath me whilst I live,
Then that he should extend (if thus I dye)
His lasting pity to my memory,
And you be forced to see, when I am dead,
Those tears perchance, which he for me will shed,
For though my worthless self deserve from him
No tears in death: yet when he weighs my crime,
Of which he knows how great a part was his,
And what I suffer as a sacrifice
For that offense; twill grieve his soul to be
The cause of such a double tragaedy.
No more (replied the furious Queen) have done;
Delay no longer, least thy choice be gone,
And that a sterner death for thee remain.
No more did Rosamund entreat in vain;
But forced to hard necessity to yield,
Drunk of the fatal potion that she held.
And with it entered the grimme tyrant death.
Yet gave such respite, that her dying breath
Might beg forgiveness from the heavenly throne*
And pardon those, that her destruction
Had doubly wrought. forgive, oh Lord, said she,
Him that dishonored, her that murdered me.
Yet let me speak, for truths sake, angry Queen;
If you had spared my life, I might have been
In time to come the example of your glory;
Not of your shame, as now. for when the story
Of hapless Rosamund is read; the best
And holiest people, as they will dete^t
My crime, and call it foul: they will abhor,
And call unjust the rage of Elianor.
And in this act of yours it will be thought
Hing Henry's sorrow, not his love you sought.
And now so far the venoms force assailed
Her vital parts, that lif^ with language failed.
That well built palace, where the Graces made
Their chief abode, where thousand Cupids played,
And cowch'd their shafts; whose structure did delight
Even natures self, is now demolished quite,
Nere to be raised again. the untimely stroke
Of death, that precious Cabinet has broake,
That Henry's pleased heart so long had held.
With sudden mourning now the house is filled;
Nor can the Queens attendants, though they fear
Her wrath, from weeping at that sight forbear.
There well they could, while that fair hearse thy view,
Believe the ancient emblem to be true;
And think pale death and winged Cupid now
Their quivers had mistook. untimely so
By rough North blasts do blooming Roses fade*
So crushed falls the Lillyes tender blade.
Her hearse at Godstow Abbey they enterre.
Where sad and lasting monuments of her
For many years did to the world remain.
Naught did the Queen by this dire slaughter gain*
But more her Lords displeasure aggravate;
And now, when he returned in prosperous state,
This act was cause, together with that crime
Of raising his unnatural sons against him,
That she so long in prison was detained,
And, whilst he lived, her freedom never gained.
But Henry's troubles find not yet an end,
Whose cares beyond the English shores extend,
As if one kingdoms burden could not be
Enough for his great magnanimity.
The yet-perplex'd affairs of Normandy
Invite his presence next; where fates decree
Almost as easy peace shall be obtained
As England late had by his presence gained.
Now did King Lewis and young King Henry lie
Beseiging faithful Roane in Normandy.
To whose relief the brave old Henry goes;
But first with care and prudence does dispose
The settled state of England to his mind;
And loath to leave at liberty behind
So great a firebrand as his jealous Queen
Fierce Elianor in this late war had been,
Commits her person to close custody;
Then musters all his martial company,
And Caesar-like transporting all his ^tore
Of great and princely prisoners, crosses ore,
As if he went to triumph, not to fight.
Nor proov'd it less indeed; for even the sight
Alone of so renowned and feared a Chief
As old King Henry, was fair Roanes relief.
King Lewis of France no longer meant to stay,
Nor on the trial of one doubtful day
To set his fortunes; yet ashamed that he
Should seem to fly before his enemy,
And fearing that disgrace, encamped lay
Himself a while; and first conveyed away
From thence the sick and weakest of his men,
And with the rest in order followed then.
For uncontrolled had Henry entered Roane,
Set open the gates, and beat the rampires down,
Levelled the trenches all, that stopped the way,
And dared the French to trial of the day.
But Lewis retir'de, and weighing in sadd thought
What small advantage his designs had wrought
Or for himself, or those whom he intended
To aid, now wished this bootelesse war were ended;
And thoughts of peace he wholly entertained.
And since he knew a peace might be obtained
(As then it stood) with ease from Englands King
And love besides, in laboring to bring
The sons in too; and that the old King would seem
For such a savor much obliged to him;
A reverend Bishop he to Henry sent,
Who signified the Christian King's intent
To work that pious and Religious peace,
That wars so sad and impious now might cease
Twixt sons and Father; nature made the way,
And joyful Henry named the meeting day;
^ho, though successful ever in that war,
Was still a father, not a conqueror.
Then to Gisors with joy he goes; to whom
King Lewis of France, and young King Henry come.
Where though no perfect un^on could be wrought
(For young Prince Richard was not thither brought,
Who still was fiercely warring in Poictou)
Yet something's done* and as a prologue now
To that fair peace, which afterward ensued,
A truce both Henryes, and King Lewis conclude.
Fierce Richard, though King Henryes second son,
Yet borne to sit on Englands royal throne,
Had all the time of these unnatural jarres
Against his father, made victorious wars
Within Poictou; in which few towns remained,
But that Prince Richard the whole land had gained.
This is that Hero, who by deeds of fame
Shall gain through all succeeding times the name
Of Lions-heart; whose deeds as far shall sound
^s lies the farthest Verge of Christian ground;
Who by deserved honors fetched from far
Shall wash the stain of this rebellious war
From off his sacred memory again;
And conquests great against Saracens obtain.
From him the dreadful Saladine sh all fly.
Philip of France his envious enemy
Shall fear the force of his victorious hand,
And rue it often. he in his time shall stand
The eclipse of other Christian Princes fame,
And only terror of the Pagan name.
After the true concluded at Gisors,
Into Poictou with all his martial force
The old King Henry marches against his son;
At whose arrival every fort and town,
Which Richard not by love, but force, had gained
Straight yield themselves into his Fathers hand;
Whose Marches almost no resistance find.
When young Prince Richard (with perplexed mind)
Had heard his father's coming and success,
He storms, and taxes of perfidiousnesse
King Lewis of France, and young King Henry, that
Had thus forsaken their confaederate;
But yet resolves (too proudly) not to yield
At all; but stand the trial of a field
Against his father; and with impious hopes
unto the field draws all his Martial Tropes.
From whence Kings Henry's army was not far.
And now too near approached the wicked war.
Some pious Soldiers 'gann those mischiefs fear
Which they should act, as well as suffer, there.
Richard's great heart began to yield to shame,
And feel the reverence of a fathers name.
Sometimes his stubborn courage raised him high;
Sometimes again relenting Piety
Checked those proud thoughts; and in so bad a cause
Told him how great a crime his valor was.
Yet had not Piety alone the power
To curb his spirit; his father every hour
Encreast in men, and Justice, with a tide
Of strength flowed in, to vindicate her side.
Why stood'st thou out ( Richard) so long a time?
It Is now too late to free thy self from crime
Though thou submit. the world may justly say
It was not true repentance, but dismay.
Thou could no longer cheer thy fainting troops;
And not thy resolution, but thy hopes
Forsake thee here. that act will termed be
Despai^e, which had before been piety,
But thank the weakness of thy army now,
That made thee see (though late) and disallow
That horrid guilt, before that lives it cost,
Or blood by thy impiety were lost.
Struck with remorse, at last young Richard throws
His late rebellious arms aside, and goes
To his offended father, to present
Himself a sad and humble paenitent.
There on his knees, for that unkind offense
He pardon craves; no other eloquence
But tears and sighs his grief had power to use.
No other pleas were strong in his excuse.
The royal father meets with tears of joy
Those tears; and pardons him the noblest way;
With kind embraces liftes him from the ground;
And in his rich paternall love had found,
Instead of chiding him for what was done,
A way to praise him by comparison,
That of the brothers he submitted first;
As if the father had forgot that erst
He aequall to the rest astray had gone,
Remembering Richards paenitence alone.
So much King Henry's wondrous goodness wrough^
On Richard's noble nature, as it brought
Fr^sh tears from him; and though it pardoned, more
Did seem to aggravate the offense before.
Yet such encouragement from thence he took,
As thus, when tears would give him leave, he spoke;
Sir, your preventing grace has taken from me
So far the need of all apology
As I should only speak my thankfulness,
If any language could so much express.
But that my dutious deeds shall better show*
And for the first true service I can do,
Vouchsafe me leave, great Sir, to go and win
My yet offending brothers from their sin.
Let me be there employed; I shall prevail
In that, when other advocates will fail,
When foreign Princes for their own close ends
Shall faintly speak, when false and factious friends
In their misdeedes shall flatter them; shall I
By true example check impiety;
I, that have sinned happily in this
To make them know how good our Father is.
Which (most accursed) I had not grace to know,
Till by offending I had found it so.
More had he uttered; but King Henry there
Cut off his speech, almost or ejoy'd to hear
That thing proposed, which was his chief intent;
And then with fair and kind encouragement
For that design dispach'd his Son away,
Himself resolved in Normandy to stay.
And thankful Richard with a joy as high
Goes to perform the pious Legacy.
THE REIGN OF King HENRY the Second.
The Sixth Book.
The Argument of the sixth Book.
Betwixt Ambois and Tours, the Sons are brought
To meet their Father. perfect peace is wrought;
A Peace is made with France and Scotland too.
From Normandy the two King Henryes go,
Great signs of joy in England every where
Are showed, to welcome their arrival there.
The King his Realm of England does divide*
Into six circuits; and for each provide*
Judges Itinerant. what great resort
Was seen at onee in Henry's stately Court.
His happiness, his power, and high renoune,
His daughters royal marriages are shown.
Old Henry does refuse the proffred Crown
Of Palaestine to take. Henry the son
Rebels again; and does repentant dye.
The third son Geoffrey's w^full tragaedy.
NOw did victorious Henry's wish succeed.
With such effectual diligence and speed
Had young Prince Richard with his Brothers wrough^,
That both of the^ he to their father brought
Betwixt Ambois and Tours. there first of all
Are di^ontents and jarres unnatural
By (...) King Henry's prudence made to cease;
There first is wro^ght a full and final peace.
The sonne^ a^e taught to hate their impious crime,
And vow o^edience for the future time.
Nor does the fathers wisdom think he does
E^ugh, if for the present ^e compose
This fatal strife; but careful to prevent
The causes of all future discontent
He lends a gentle ear, while they express
In humble sort their former grievances;
He grants their just demands, and does advance
With liberal hand their yearly maintenance,
Which had before bin justly thought to be
Too small for them. and that this enmity
Might not alone be ended, but forgot
On every side* the lands un^ustly got,
While this sad war remained, are every where
Restored again, and every prisoner
Without a ransom on both sides set free.
And all their followers in that state to be
As when the war began. with Henry there
A peace King Lewis and The Earl of Flanders swear;
And that the friendship may be firmly tied,
Adela Lewis his daughter is affy'd
To Princely Richard; to remain, till she
Should come of age, in Henry's custody.
There to conclude these sad dissentions,
Richard and Geoff^y, Henry's younger sons
A personal homage to their father do;
Which young King Henry freely offered too;
But that the father suff^ed not; since he
Invested was in regal dignity.
White-winged Concord come from heaven above
(Concord, of all estates the joy and love,
Whose sacred arms the spacious world infold,
And that mixed fabric from dissolving hold)
On Henry's countries now was pleased to light.
With her, her lately banished sister, bright
As she, fair Piety, did not disdain,
Descending down, to visit earth again.
She that from Englands Court had lately fled,
As once from Argos tragic towers she did,
When Atreus feast did her pure soul affright,
And made the Sun obscure his mourning light.
Nor does the presence of bright Phoebus more
Comfort earths drooping face, when to restore
Her fragrant Wardrobe, he returns in spring,
Then Pi^ty, and blessed Concord bring
True joy to humane hearts. the King in thought
Is recompensed for what the fates had wrought
So lately against him. his two younger sons
He sends away to their dominions,
And wise men with them; Geoffrey to remain
In Brettaine, Richard in his Aquitaine,
There, with their several Counsels, to advise
The best for their estates and dignities.
The two King Henryes, father and the son
Through every part of their dominion
Upon that side the Sea, a progress take,
To cure the wounds of that late war, and make
The rents all whole again; then from that coast
The Seas for England they together crossed.
But oh what Muse can at the height relate
The joy that Englands long-afflicted state
Expressed to welcome their arrival there?
Or show how all the ways from Porchmouth, where
They landed first, and thence to London rode,
Were filled with people numberless, and strow'd
With such green dress, as then the spring could show,
And Sol from Taurus gilded horns bestow
Upon the cheered earth, as if that then
The season had consented with the men.
How did the air with acclamations sound!
When in that joyous sight the people found
Their happiness; they saw two Kings as one,
Distracting not the quiet of a throne,
And, as a glorious wonder, might descry
Two Suns at once, and yet a peaceful sky.
This sight more joy'd the hearts of people now,
Then any triumph of a war could do.
Nor could the greatest conquest, by the blood
Of slaughtered nations purchased, be so good.
So did The Italian youths follow in throngs
Their laurell'd charriots with triumphant songs,
When captive Kings were brought, when woeful stories
Of ruined lands were made their envied glories.
Before this triumph no sad captives go
To wail in chains their woeful overthrow;
No pale dejected looks, no hearts afraid
Are found, no envied glories are displayed;
But gentle peace does with a gracious eye
Appear, and lead the fair solemnity.
Whose crown of olive does more glorious show
Then any victor's laurel wreath could do.
One Court, one table now receives again
Whom late this spacious I Will could not contain
(As f^iends) within blew Neptune's watery arms;
And they whose presence filled with wars alarmes
So often of late great France and England too,
Without wars fear are seen together now;
And promise, like the Oebalian friendly stars,
Health to the late distressed Mariners.
Nor does King Henry spend in wanton ease
The Halcyon days of this his happy peace:
But like a wise and noble Potentate,
^o cure the sad diseases of his state,
He first begins (as first it ought to be)
With holy Church. the sin of Simony,
Which those corrupted times too much had filled,
A Synod to that end at London held
By wholesome laws and canons did restrain.
From thence old Henry fully to maintain
His honor, goes in person, and repaires
Some breaches of the late unhappy wars;
And many Castles of the inner land,
Which had in those rebellious times been manned,
And kept against himself, he rases down,
As Leister, Walton, Groby, Huntington.
To deeds of justice then he turned his mind,
And first of all the English Kings did find
That happy course, applauded till this day,
To give his subjects by an easier way
The use of justice. England he divides
Into six circuites; and for each provides
Three reverend Justices itinerant;
That all his subjects farthest off, whom want
Would not per^it so great a way to come,
Might meet bright Justice twice a year at home;
And that offenses there where they were done,
Might be to Judges made more clearly known.
A glorious act, which shall for ever fame
To after times the second Henry's name.
Those mighty kings who by such specious deeds
As founding towers or stately Pyramids
Would raise their names, and by that vast expense
Do seek the fame of high magnificence,
Do not deserve, by those proud works they raise,
So true an honor, nor such lasting praise
As he, whose wis^dome to good manners dr^wes
The minds of men by founding wholesome laws,
And planting perfect justice in a state.
Those let the vainer people wonder at;
By those a state shows fair; by this it lives:
They outward beauty; this true essence gives.
But now, my fair Calliope, relate
How high, how glorious was old Henry's state
In this so happy and established peace!
When all dissentions on such terms did cease
As he himself could wish! when his command
Was feared in Wales: when Englands happy land
Was well assured: Scotlands strength dismayed:
And conquered Ireland quietly obeyed
His powerful scepter; when he did possess
Without control those stately Provinces
Of France, which stretched even to the bounds of Spain,
From Normandy to farthest Aquitaine.
That King of Connaught, Roderike the stout,
He that in Ireland had so long stood out
Against The English power, does now to England send
Ambassadors on Henry to attend,
To yield himself to his protection
A tributary to the English Crown.
And now through Europe the loud voice of fame
So wide had spread this potent Monarchs name,
That from the farthest part^ of Christendom
Ambassadors of greatest Princes come,
To hold their leagues and amity with him;
And London saw (so high was his esteem)
In his great Court at once th'Embassadours
Of the two mighty Christian Emperors
The East and Western Caesar's both; in whom
The ancient honor of Imperial Rome
Divided lives; the Duke of Saxony,
The Earl of Flanders, King of Sicily;
From all these Legates at one time resort,
Together seen in Henry's stately Court.
Nor do the Princes weigh his power alone,
But wisdom too, and (as to Solomon)
Send far to crave his counsel and advise;
As two great Kings, when difference did aris^
About the bounds of their dominion,
Alphonso then King of Castile was one,
The Other his uncle Sanctio of Navarre;
Who loath that the ungentle hand of war
Should judge the cause, to prudent Henry send,
With power for him to hear and ^ake an end;
Which ^e determines in so brave a way,
That both the Kings are pleased, and both obey.
And young Alphonso sends, after the strife
Had end, to crave of Henry for his wife
(With full assurance of an ample doure)
His second daughter lovely Elianour.
Who was according to that King's demand,
Sent with a rich attendance to his land,
And there received with joy, and highest state;
Where they their wished Nuptials celebrate.
His eldest daughter Maude before had he
Bestowed on Henry Duke of Saxony
Surnamed the Lion, from whose happy womb
The fates ordain great Emperors shall come.
And in this happy year did Henry too
His third and youngest daughter Ioane bestow
On noble William King of Sicily;
Attended hence with fit solemnity.
Nor did it seem enough to favoring fate
That Henry's glorious and majesticke state
Through Europe only should be honored;
Even to the farthest bounds of Asia spread
The fame of his great power and happiness.
The holy land was brought to sad distress
By strength of faithless Saracens oppressed.
Great Saladine the terror of the East,
That powerful Soldane that possessed the throne
And diadem of stately Babylon,
With all that the old Assyrian Monarchs held,
Whose unresisted puissance had quell d
The strength of all those parts, and into thrall
Had brought the other Pagan Princes all,
Entitled King of Kings and Lord of Lords,
Against the Christians turned his conquering swords,
And now had entered with that p^oud design,
Upon the bounds of fearful Pa^aestine;
His dreadful host had past fair Iordanes flood,
Sacked towns adjoining, and in Christian blood
Pursued the conquest ^n; great fear of him
Possessed the Princes of ^erusalem,
Who all consult about their present state.
Their king old Baldwin was deceased of la^e,
And to his nephew, then a child (no more
Then five years old) had left the regal power*
Too weak his tender age is thought to bear
That weight, when such a threatening war so near
Their walls is brought: the Princes all consent
To offer up their crown and government
To some redoubted Christian Monarch's ^and,
Whose power might guard their now-endanger'd land;
And with one voice agree in He^ry's name.
To him, as to the Prince of greatest fame,
And best to them for wealth and prowess known,
They mean to tender Salems royal Crown.
And for Ambassador to him they choose
The Reverend Patriarch Heraclius,
Who bears along with him (to be a sign
That by the general vote of Palaestin^
This royal tender was to Henry made)
Things of the greatest note that kingdom had;
The keys of that so much renowned place,
Which our dear Savior's happy birth did grace:
And of that honored tomb, which did contain
His blessed body, till it rose again;
The keys of David's stately Tower: with them
The royal standart of Jerusalem.
Thus Fates for absent Henry did ordain
Their highest graces; but (alas) in vain,
As afterward it proved, when to the King
Those honored signs the Patriarch did bring.
For he too much perplexed about his own
Affairs at home, refused that sacred Crown:
Although the Patriarch did strive to show
That title was by right of birth his due,
And (...) the law^ull heir of Salems Throne,
A^ being Geoffrey, Earl of A^iou's son,
Whose brother, F^lke Plantagen^t, had been
Before (...) King of Palaestine.
And though Pope Lucius had for that intent
Persuasive ^etters to great Henry sent,
He still refu^'d. God, for the Christians sin,
Was not at tha^ time pleased to incline
His (...) to succor their afflicted state,
Nor any other Christian Potentate,
Till (a^l ^oo late) sad news was brought to them
That Saladine had taken Jerusalem.
But long great Henry in that blissful state
Could not abid^; the course of en^ious fate
Soon wrought a change with him. Before the Sun
Had twice thr^ugh his celestial Zodiake ^unne,
Deep^ alterations in some minds appeared,
And dangers thence the people justly ^ear'd.
That happy Genius, which of late did guide
The affairs of England, now in grief 'gan hide
His glorious head, lamenting to be gone;
The dat^ of Henry's prosperous days was done;
and naught but troubles from that time ensu'de,
And tragic woes. Oh sad vicissitu^e
Of earthly things! to what untimely end
Are all the fading glories that attend
Upon the State of greatest Monarchs, brought!
What safety can by policy be wrought?
Or rest be found on Fortunes rest^esse wheel?
Tossed humane states are here enforced to feel
Her kingdom such, as floating vessels find
The stormy Ocean, when each boisterous wind
Let loose from Ae^l's Adamantine cav^s,
Rush forth, and roll into impetuous waves
The Seas whole waters; when sometimes on high
The raised Bark does seem to kiss the Sky:
Sometimes from that great height descending down,
Does seem to fall as low as Acheron.
Such is the fra^ condition of man's state;
Such contrarieties the turning fate
Of Henry found; to him d^d Fortune seem
In all her favors and her frowns (...).
The former re^ts, which dire Impiety
Ha^ made in Henry's roy^ll family,
Had well b^ene cur'de again, an^ closed all
Without effects so sad and tragical,
As all the Land from thence did justly fear^.
On easie^ terms was peace established there
Then men could hope, and gentler salves did serve,
Then wounds so fester'd seemed to deserve.
So ^hen the gracious God was pleased) but see
How ^ull of danger all relapses be.
In humane states how s^ldome permanent
Is perfect health! deserved punishment,
Which heaven is pleased to respite for a time,
It often pays home upon a second crime.
Henry the son in ^eart revolts again
From his indulgent father. Signs too plain
His honest servants saw, and sighed to see.
His aims on every opportunity
^ spirit so young and ^ot could not conceal.
And now it seemed no human skill could heal
^h' inveterate sickness of his impious mind.
God, for old Henry's sins, did justly find
M^anes, by his sons, the father to chastise,
And yet to punish their impieties.
So double woe is to the father sent,
Who feels their crimes, and then their punishment.
Richard, the second son, that held (...),
And Aquitaine, for them, refused to do
To young King H^nry p^rsonall Homage, though
Their father Henry had commanded so.
Yet Richard soon (...), and tend^rs it;
Bu^ his imperious brother with despite
(...) then to take it from his hands.
A strong desire to seize on R^chards lands
Young Henry had. Full well he knew that all
The Barons of those Provinces would fall
Gladly from Richards sterner government,
Who had before declared their intent.
With him in this his brother Geoffrey joined,
Who to his father bore as false a mind.
With Richard's lands they mean themselves to make
Strong against their Father; and entend to take
Thence the first step to their dis^oyalty.
Riihard in wrath departs from Normandy,
Returning home to fortify and manne
His holds within Poictou and Aquitaine,
And by his brothers is pursued. He finds
A great estrangement in the Barons minds;
And is enfor^'d, by their revolt dismayed,
To crave his father old King Henry's aid.
Who with an army thither straight repaires,
Yet not to make, but to compound the wars.
There young King Henry labors to maintain
The Barons of Poictou and Aquitaine
Against Richar^s great complaints, and underhand
For his own ends, persuades them to withstand
His fathers force, and not at all submit.
Old Henry labors by persuasions fit
To pacifi^ these new* bred enmities,
And venturing of himself to p^rleys, twice
Miraculously escaped foul tre^sons hand.
Once a true servant, that did next him stand,
Instead of him, was with an arrow slain,
Nor was the traitor found; and when again
He made approach* a barbed shaft, that from
The adjoining Castle did with fury come,
Had pierced his royal breast, had not his horse
Advanced his head, and ^ne the arrows force,
By which himself, to save his master, died.
By these abhorred treasons terrified,
The King no more would venture, but prepares
To curb the Barons, and his Sons by wars.
But that a juster stronger hand must do;
The ^ternall Judge of all the world had so
D^creed, that (...) sword should spared be
In punishing his sons impiety.
That he himself, whose just and certain hand
No creature can prevent, no force withstand,
Whose sacred will the Elements obey,
And all the Stars do serve, would take a way
Without old Henry's aid, or crime at all,
Without a war so much unnatural,
To punish guilt, that justice should be done,
Yet the old King but lose, not kill a son.
Now young King Henry at Martell prepares
To meet his father in rebellious wars;
By by a Dysentery death assailes
His youth, and spite of youth or strength prevails.
The sharp malignant humor did corrode
His guts; and thence, while there the pain abode,
A speed ng feav^r seized his vital part.
Oppressed Nature past the help o^ art,
Beyond all hope o^ cure, lay languishing.
When Paenitence from heavens eternal King
To save this dying Prince his so^e, is sent,
And sweeten so his bodies punishment.
Now late alas (though not too late) did he
Feel, and bewail his first impiety.
And to his father humbly sent, to crave
His pardon now; which he as freely gave,
Yet durst not trust himself in person there,
(The late foul treasons justly made him fear^)
But to declare a true forgiveness, sent
His Ring to him. Which when the paenitent
And dying Prince received, ^e humbly kissed,
While floods of tears his contrite heart expressed.
Then he conju^'d hi^ servants, that did ^tand
About him, to fulfil^ his last command;
Which they in all per^ormed as they swore.
A bed of ashes on the Chamber ^loore
They strewn, and thither pensive sackcloth brought*
Then from his royal Couch, so richly wrought
With various work, with gold embroidered o^e,
They took him down* the kingly robes he wore
They stripped him of, and put the sackcloth on,
Then on the bed of ashes laid him down.
This (quoth the dying king) this is the way
To heavens bright palace; and this sad array
Is fa^re more glorious in the Almighty's eye
Then purple, silks, or rich embroydery,
And sooner enters heaven; though that be high,
No step's so near it as humility.
It Is not frail mortals gorgeous dress, that there
Can rich at all, or beautiful appear,
Since 'twixt the Glories of earths greatest throne,
And bliss of Saints is no comparison.
Wail not my early death; no (...) is re^t
Too soon of breath, to whom a time is left
Of paenitence. I had untimely died,
Had these late wars in my rebellious pride
Cut off my youth, and left my name to be
The cursed example of impiety.
And thou, my wronged father, in this low
And humble state vouchsafe again to know
(What impious I had once forgot) thy son,
No more thy rival in the regal throne.
Which whilst I sought, I labored to destroy
The Royal root, from wh^nce I grew so high.
I crave no interest in thy fortunes now,
But onel^ that that Nature can bestow,
The blessing of a child. Seeking thy throne
I grew unworthy to be called thy son.
Forbear, you lasting Registers of time,
To name my title, lest you speak my crime.
Or if the truth of story must do so,
Be just, and publish my repentance too.
How ere, when Englands Kings are named, let me
From that high Catalogue excluded be.
And witness you, my friends, when I am gone,
I died no King, but Henry's pensive son.
With that the Fever his strong heart assailes,
And against resisting Natures force prevails.
From his young breast the struggling spirit flies,
And night eternal closes up his eyes.
Soon was the news to old King Henry brought;
When different sorrow powerful Nature wrought
In his great soul. Sometimes he wailes a son
In flower of all his youth untimely gone:
Sometimes he joys to hear that paenitence,
That washed away the stain of his offense.
Yet thence again ^low tears, as cause to prove
His sorrow good, and iu^tifie his love.
So Henry wept, in all respects but one,
As holy David did for Absal^n.
They both lost sons; both wail'd their sons offense:
Yet David heard no signs of paenitence
In his slain Absalon* that could ^t all
Give comfort to his grief spiritual.
Had Absalon ^or his abhorred offense
Left marks behind him of true paenitence
Instead of that great pillars pride, which he
Had raised before to keep his memory,
Far less (no doubt) in that respect alone,
Had David mourned for h^s slaughtered son.
The grief that Henry took, though wondrous great,
Yet could not make him his just wrath forget
Against the Barons of Poictou, from whom
The cause of these rebellions first did come.
He draws his martial forces up, to press
With narrow siege the Town of Li^oges.
Which soon was rendered to his powerful hand,
And with that Town and Castle, all the Land;
The Barons pardon crave; wi^h them his son
Prince Geoffrey comes; upon submission
The King forgives his son, and is content
To take of them an easy punishment.
But though a fathers dear affection
Twice freely pardoned this offending son:
Soon after did the hand of God on high
Pursue with vengeance the impiety
Of young Princ^ Geoffr^y. At a Turneament
In Paris held, to which this Geoffrey went
With other Lords in youthful bravery,
To prove his active strength and chevalry,
He fell together with his horse; the blow
So sorely bruised his body, that although
He presently expired not in the place,
(For God in mercy lent him such a space
Of time to breath, he might repenting call
To him for Grace) yet of that ^a tall fall
(As it appeared plain) in all the pride
Of his fresh youth, he shortly after died.
Lib. 7. HENRY the Second.
The Argument of the seventh Book.
Prince John King Henry's youngest son is sent
To take the charge of Irelands government.
'Twixt Henry and King Philip several jarres
And quarrels rise, that threaten daily wars.
A reverend Prelate by the Pope employed
Betwixt the Kings all difference to decide,
Persuades them both an holy war to make.
Both Kings, with Philip Earl of Flanders, take
The Cross upon them. But their good intents
Are crossed again by fatal accidents;
And both the Kings against each other bent
Towarre again. Richard in discontent
His father leaves, and takes King Philip's part.
Ensuing losses break old Henry's heart.
THus is the King of half his store bereft;
Two sons untim^ly dead; two sons are le^
The seeming comforts of his age; as who
Could think but living children should be so?
Oh who would not suppofe that to have seen
Two youthful sons before him dead, had been
A grievous c^rse and punishment to him?
But he, that sees old Henry's end, will deem
His living sons to be his curse, and say
God pitied him in taking two away.
For furious Ri^hard, who was eldest now,
And heir apparent to the Crown (as though
His brother's deaths could no examples be
To show the vengeance of Impiety)
Soon after against his father raises war
Of worse and sadder consequence by far
Then all the rest had been; they caused his smart:
But this of Richard breaks his bleeding heart.
The Realm of Ireland Henry did entend
To John his youngest son; and to that end
Had from Pope Urban got a grant before
That he might freely leave, as successor,
Which son he pleased in Irelands government.
Thither is John with ^it attendance sent
(But twelve years old) to make him early known,
And loved among those people, as his own.
To rule among them as their Governor;
But not invested in the Regal power.
The example of his eldest son, whom he
Before advanced to royal dignity
Too soon (alas,) had made him justly fear
The same from others. But unhappy there
This Prince his too too early rule did prove.
Instead of gaining that rude Nations love;
Which by a sweet demeanor had been won,
(For they, as every barbarous Nation,
Although they know not what is true respect:
Yet, if respected, wondrously affect.)
The youthful Gallants of that Prince his Court
Could not re^raine, bur in a scorne^ull sort
The Natives rude behaviors did deride*
And so distasteful was their mocking pride
To those plain people; they began to hate
Whom else they would have honored, and forgate
That loyal love and reverence, which before
They to the English King and Nation bore.
From thence sad wars the Irish Princes moved;
Which by the loss of men and treasure, proved
Unhappy to the English side; till from
His government young John was called home,
And left it, after an expensive war,
In worse estate then when he entered far.
Now daily quarrels 'twixt the Realms of France.
And England grow. Fresh cause of variance
From all occasions does the active mind
Of young King Philip against old Henry find.
Sometimes he c^aimes Gisors, and other lands
By Henry held from him; somet^mes demands
The Princess Adela, his sister (now
Of perfect age) to be delivered to
Her husband Richard, Henry's eldest son,
According to the old conclusion,
Which in her father Lewis his time was made;
Or else he is resolved to invade
King Henry's Provinces, while he delays
His answer; forces on both sides they raise;
While neighbour-Princes kindly enterpose,
And strive these breaches 'twixt the Kings to close,
Nor perfect peace, nor constant war ensn'd;
Their truces often broke, were often renewed:
The sword often drawn, and often was sheathed again.
While this so jarring concord did remain,
Betwixt the Kings; sad news was brought to them
That Saladine had taken Jerusalem,
Discomfited the Noble Christian host;
And with their slaughter ^ad through all that coast
Seized the towns of strength into his hands.
These woeful tidings through all Christian lands
In Europe flew; excitements every where
From Pulpits sounded in the peoples ear,
To aid their brother-Christians in the East,
And take revenge on Pagans that oppressed
The holy land. For this great purpose some
Religious Prelates sent through Christendom^
To several Courts of greatest Princes came,
To draw their succors. One of greatest name William, Archbishop of Try.

In that employment; who most seemed to advance
The cause, that Prelate was, who then in France
Labored to draw these armed Kings from thence.
And turn their swords against the Saracens.
Betwixt Gisors and Try, a day was set
For enterview; where these two Monarchs met*
Their royal armies slay'd not far srom thence.
No p^ace was wrought upon the conference
(Though thither Philip Earl of Flanders came,
A powerful Prince, and one of honored name,
With Noble purpose to atone their jarres,
And to prevent so sad and causeless wars)
Till this grave Prelate to the place was come,
And for the general cause of Christendom
Thus humbly spoke; Most puissant Kings, and you
Renowned Earl, let it in season now
Be thought to speak, what borne upon the wings
Of Fame, already through all Europe rings,
The tragic slaughter of our Christian host,
And sacred Salem to vile Pagans lost,
Since by those Christians sufferings, God for you
Sets open the way to highest honors now.
Let that brave cause engage these arms of yours.
Thither, great Kings, transport your conquering powers,
And for the name of your Redeemer, move
A war^e more just than any peace can prove;
(Much more) a juster war then this can be.
For when the foes of Christianity
Do rage; if peace it self, at such a time,
May in the Christian world be judged a crime,
What crime is that, when they to war can go,
Yet not against him that ought to be their foe?
But for him rather? (Let me freely speak)
When Christian Princes against each other wreake
Their wrath at sucst a time; what side so ere
Be beat, the holy cause must suffer there;
And every death, when your fierce battles join,
A Champion takes from bleeding Palaestine.
God (sure) decreed I should prevail with you,
Because he lets me find you armed now,
When I am come to speak. Your breasts are not
Becalmed with peace; your active spirits are hot;
And what should hinder you from Salems war,
Since you have met a juster cause by far
Then that that moved this heat, that raised these arms
I do not seek to still these loud alarmes,
But to direct them to an object right,
Where godly zeal, not sinful wrath shall fight;
That shall renown you in all times to come,
And crown your dying men with martyrdom.
Do you for honor fight? (as who would make
A war at all if not for honors sake?)
Behold where truest honor may be gained;
When by your arms his cause shall be maintained,
Who is the fountain of it; he that gave
To you those royal glories that you have,
And claymes some quitall by your service showed.
What fame so great as that of gratitude?
Even Fame it self, which in some wars is made
The highest prize, for which great Kings invade
Each others lands, in this more glorious war
Is a small part of the reward; for far
More happy recompense ordained is
For this religious deed, eternal bliss.
Go, vindicate that (once most happy) land
So graced by heaven, and with victorious hand
Redeem those sacred monuments, that lie
Detained by Pagans in obscurity,
Which to the faithful world would more be known;
And Christian Poets shall hereafter crown
In deathlesse songs, together with the fames
Of that loved Country, your victorious names*
If Homers Poem could so far renown
That ^oy, the long-besieged Phrygian Town:
If he could give her very ruins fame,
And lend each field, each stone a pleasing name:
What in this sacred subject may be done?
A theme, disdaining all comparison?
In which for wit they shall not need to toil,
The plentious matter will so (...) their style.
Instead of Ida's hill, and famed grove,
Which their fictitious gods (they say) did love,
And often descended down from heaven to grace:
Their theme shall be each truly honored place,
Which glorious Angels often have hallowed,
Where our blessed Lord himself vouchsafed to tread.
Instead of ^riam's Palace, or the Cave
Where Pa^is once his fatal judgment gave;
Instead of young Anchises b^idall wood,
Or that famed rock, where fair Hesion stood:
Shall they discourse of David's Tower, the Cave
Which once unto that holy Baptist gave
Abode on earth; or where Elias stood
When lifted up; and make ^aire Iordans flood,
And Kedrons torrent, in true fame surpass
What Simois, or silver Xanthus was.
But whither has my zeal transported me?
Or what is this so like an ecstasy?
Let me return again. Great Kings I see
Your Noble thoughts already working be
In ^his brave cause. I will presume to add
No more ^ut this; now let your goodness glad
All Christian hearts; in friendships bands combine;
And think you have no foe but Saladine.
With that he ceased; the Princes all are moved;
And in their looks already had approved
The Bishop's speech; when Henry thus began
TO express his thoughts; Let it become the man
Of greatest age, to show he does forsake
The worlds vain pomp and honor first, to take
This holy Cross, and fight for Palaestine.
We think it no dishonor to begin
To seek a peace at Philip's hand; nor can
We fear, for such a cause, that any man
Will think distrust in these our wars at home,
And not the love we bear to Christendom,
Engages us; since we resolve to go,
And by that soldiers pilgrimage to show
No rest from arms is sought, when we so ^arre
In person march, to meet a noble war.
On that shall Henry's thoughts be wholly set.
And if King Philip's resolutions meet
With mine in this, and yours brave Earl, to stand
Another Champion for the holy Land;
Then, Princes, join your armed hands with mine,
And let our peace bring war to Saladine.
They both agree to what old Henry spoke;
With that they kindly all embrace, and take
The holy cross before the Bishop there.
And that a ^ifference plainly might appear
Among their crossed soldiers; they agree
Those cr^sses shall in several colors be
Worn by the Na^ions; the English shall be seen
In white: in red the French: the Flemmi^gs green.
And now at home to ^ettle all affairs,
To their own Realms from thence each Prince repaires,
To levy money, and prov^sions make
For that great voyage they entend to take.
For when they took the Cross, it was ag^eed
Betwixt the Kings, and by the Pope d^creed
That all, as well the C^ergy a^ the Lay,
Within each Land should be enforced to pay
Of their revenues the tenth part, unto
This war, unless they would in person go.
And for a sum in present to be made,
The tenth of all the movables they had
Should levied be for preparation.
In every part of his dominion
B^yond the Seas, this order Henry gave.
And thence to England crossed the Se^, to have
The Edict put in execution there;
(...) his wealthiest subjects every where,
From who^e estates he mig^t large sums collect.
Two hundred (...) he did select
I^ London; and in York an hundred more;
The like entending in all Towns to do.
King Philip so; so the Earl of Flanders did,
In their (...) treasure to provide.
But what malignant spirit then did reign,
To make so pious an intention vain?
How were their noble preparation crossed?
And that revenge against the Panyms lost?
Al^s, what Stars malevolent aspect
Could take such sad and tragical effect
Against King Henry, as to overthrow
That happiness, that seemed so near him now?
How true a Fame might his last days ^ave won!
With what content might those gray hairs have gone
Down to the grave, if in that holy w^rre
He happily haddy'd, though never so far
From off his native land? H^ had not then
With such unworthy cares distracted b^ene
As after must ensue* nor forced to see
Again a sonn's ab^orr'd impiety.
But Fates to Henry's age had not ordained
So great a happiness; sad woes remained
To vex his state, and break his bleeding heart.
Do thou, Calliope, declare in part
What obscure cause produced (...) so strange,
And wrought this sudden, and unlooked for change.
Reim^nd Th^louses Earl had off^r'd wrong
(Alt^ough bu^ slight) to some that d^d belong
To Richard o^ (...), King (...) son.
Thence grew so great an alteration.
For fierce young Richard, with his armed bands
(F^rst raised for better war) invad^s the Lands
Of Reimond stra^ght, and wast^ his Country near
With fire and sword, ^urprising Cast^s there.
At the Earle's complaint Philip o^ France was moved,
And to King Henry sent; whose answer proved
No satisfaction: (...) Philip then
Invaded Berry with his choysest m^n,
And took ^en Towns and Castl^s ^uddenly
from H^nry there; who straight to Normandy
From England with a m^ghty a^my goes:
Now on both sides the wars with fury rose.
The holy voyage is fo^got; in vain
The ne^ghbour-Princes of this jarre complain:
In vain the Pope entreats or threatens now.
The incensed Kings go farther on: although
Young Richard, Henry's son, from whom at first
(...) breach b^gan, is b^ the L^gate cursed.
N^ enterviewes, no parleyes can do good;
Though under (...) old famous Elm, that stood
(...) (...) and (...) the Kings twice me^.
(...), when the wrongs were thought on both sides great,
Instead of peace, a jarrearose, that more
Deprest King Henry, then all wars before.
Philip, ^or Richard of P^ictois, demands
Ad^la there again from Henry's hands,
Offers the promised dower, requiring that
The old King, for certainty of Richard's state,
Would now assure him the inheritance
Of all his Lands in England, and in France.
And to that end that homage should be done
By all the Lords; that John his yo^nger son,
To whom the father's favor did incline,
Should straight be sent to war in Palaesti^.
To these demands whilst Henry does refuse
To yield assent, a sadder woe ensues:
In indignation Richard straight forsakes
His aged Father; and himself betakes
Whol^y to Philip King of France his side.
And firmest friendship 'twixt these two is tied.
With Richard many of the Barons go:
(...) her self forsakes old Henry too.
When now proud Philip, in disdain that from
This enterview no peac^ at all d^d come,
Fels down that aged Flme, whose spreading shade
So often the place of parley had been made
'Twixt France and Engla^d's mighty King^, and swore
That place should never hold a parley more.
Sad did the ruins of so famed a tree
To all the pitying people seem to be,
Whose honored shade had many ages been
More then a royal Court; where often was seen
Such state, as one Imp^riall house (although
Of gorgeous structure) could but seldom show;
Nor one whole kingdom at ^ time cont^ine;
Two rival Kings together to remain
Beneath the covert of a shady tree,
Where only Nature made their Canopy.
Those old religious trees, that heretofore
Great Conquerours spoils, and boasting trophies bore,
Sacred to Mars, or to (...) name,
Were not more hon^ur'd, or inde^t to Fame
Then was this stately Elm; not 'cause that there
The Druides, when Druid^s there were
Among the ancient Gauls, had prayed, or done
Their barbarous rites and superstition;
Nor that the Fawnes and Dryades h^d made
Their nightly bowers, and ipor^ed in the shade:
But 'cause the people^ pride had loved to show
The place, where Kings did stand at enterview.
This El^e was felled by Philip in his r^ge,
Of Henry's following death a s^d presage.
Now too too weak is old King Henry's side
For those proud ^oes,) that so unj^stly tied
In combination, threaten his estate;
By his own son and soldiers left of late,
And by those weapons wounded, that should guard
His royal person. While the Fates so hard
Oppressed his grieved soul, in discontent
To his beloved City Mauns he went,
Hi^ place of birth, and high in his esteem,
Bu^ angry Fortune will not leave to him
That City now; Mauns must be taken away.
Thither, while he does with small forces stay;
(For but seven ^undred soldiers guard their King)
Philip of France and furious Rich^rd bring
A potent army. For the towns defense
The King too weak, is forced to fly from thence,
And to abandon that beloved Town.
He that had never fled before, nor known
What 'twas to fear pursuing enemies,
From his own son, and young King Phili^ flies.
And, looking back on that forsaken Town,
Curses the impious prowess of his son.
Philip and Richards unresisted powers
March further up, with ease surprising Tours.
Upon which loss another da^ is set
For ^nterview, and both the Kings are met
Not far from Turw^n. Where, although that clear
The Sky at their first meeting did appear,
Yet on the sudden from a swelling cloud
The thunder issued with report so loud,
It st^ooke a terror into every heart
Ore all the fields; and twice (they say) did part
The Kings a sunder; once with such a force,
King Henry there had fallen from off his horse,
Had not his servants held him up. How ere,
It was decreed that Henry's honor there
Should ^all far lower, and he suffer more
Then all his puissant reign had felt before.
He that had given conditions still, that never
Had taken any, from what foe soever,
Yields now to all conditions they demand;
Yields to deliver into Philip's hand
Adela now; and for those Provinces,
Which in that continent he did possess,
To do him homage; lets his Barons swear
Allegiance to his son Prince (...) there;
An^ yields to pay for ^harges of the war
Two thousand marks to Philip, and so far
His N^ble heart, not used to bow, was broke,
That his grieved spirit within three days forsook
The earthly mansion. For a Fever joined
Wi^h the afflicting anguish of his mind.
Whose forces soon dis^olv'd that house of clay.
A^ Ch^non then this dying Monarch lay.
When to increase the anguish of his thought,
And more disturb his peace, a scrowle was brought,
And (by ill fate) presented to him there,
Containing all their names, that did adhaere
In this conspiracy to Philip's side.
Where first of all his hapless eye espied
The name of John his son (whither that he
Were truly one of that conspiracy,
Or some of Richard's followers, to remove
Before King Henry died, that wondrous love,
Which toward John he seemed of late to bear
Above the other, falsely wrote him there.)
From thence extremity of passions
Surprised his soul. He cursed his impious sons,
Cursed his own birth; and had despairing died,
Had not Diviner counsel come to guide
His griefs aright, and by Religions laws
Direct his wounded conscience to the cause
Of those his sufferings, making the disease
The cure, and troubled thoughts the way to peace.
Wailing his sins, into the Temple there
He bids them his yet-living body bear,
Where he before the holy altar placed
In humble (...) breaths out his l^st;
And of so great a Monarch now remains
No more on ear^h, then what a tomb contains,
Who lately ore so many Lands did reign,
From Scotlands bounds, to farthest Aquitaine.
A Prince in peace of highest Majesty;
In war too great to find an enemy:
In power above his neighbor Princes far;
Who, though his sword were often ^rawne to war,
His own conditions without battles wrought,
Lived still victorious, though he seldom fought,
And might have seemed above the reach of Fate,
But that himself his greatest foes begat;
Wronged by that power which he had made, and crossed
By those of whom he had deserved most;
Blessed o^t miraculously; o^t again
Beyond belief deprest; his various reign
Tempered with all extremities of Fate;
And though triumphant, yet unfortunate*
FINIS.
THE DESCRIPTION OF KING HENRY THE SECOND, WITH A SHORT SURVEY of the changes
in his REIGN.
IT has been a custom of old Historians, when they record the actions of
great Princes, to deliver also some Characters of their persons and peculiar
dispositions; that the curiosity of succeeding times, who pry deeply into
those men, whose lives were of so great moment in the world, might beefully
satisfied and delighted. It will not therefore be amiss to deliver a
Character of King Henry the Second; a Monarch greater in Fame and Territories
than any Christian King, that then lived* He was a man (as we find recorded)
of a just stature, a strong and healthful constitution; but somewhat gross,
more by the inclination of Nature, then by any fault either of intemperance or
sloth. For besides the sparenesse and sobriety of his diet, he vexed his body
with continual labor, and to overcome his natural fat^esse, was almost
immoderate in all his exercises. He was of a ruddy complexion, his head was
large, his eyes gray, whose aspect was terrible in his anger; his voice was
hoarse and hollow. He was a Prince of great affability, facetious in
discourse; and when he was free from anger, or important business, ^ee was
^ost pleasant and Courtly in his whole conversation. Eloquent he was by nature,
and (which was rare then) very learned. The best histories, which in those dark
times could be gotten in Christendom, he had perused with diligence, and by
the benefit of an extraordinary memory did retain them perfectly. He was very
hardy in enduring either labo^r, or extremities of the seasons; courageous in
war: but not rash, and willing to try all ways before the chance of a
battle; yet when there was occasion, very resolute, and so much feared by
those Princes that had to do with him, that he was never put to any great
field. He was more kind in honoring the memories of his soldiers that were
slain, then he was in rewarding those that were alive; and never seemed truly
to value his best Captains, till after they were dead. Exceeding frugall and
parsimonious he was, (almost below the dignity of a King) but it proved happy
to his affairs. Though in private he were very sparing, ^et abroad he
appeared often in great magnificence; his bounty to some poor Princes, and
those large sums, which he disbursed to the holy war, might teach the
worl^ that he was not covetous, but wisely provident* The greatest tax that
was laid upon him by those that lived in the same age, was his too too often
breaking of his promises; a fault that many Princes, great in other virtues,
have been guilty of. He was exceeding fond of all his children, especially in
their childish age, before their carriage had deserved either way; which showed
that Nature only wrought that strong affection in him. Yet there, where he
most loved; and by those of whom he had most deserved, it pleased God, he
tasted the greatest crosses; his Sons were his scourges, and the only
instruments that did, or (in l^kelihood) could shake the felicity of so
puissant a Monarc^. So great a contrariety there seemed to be between his
affection to them, and the return of theirs to him. He appeared in nothing
almost of a tender nature, but in loving them; and might have been thought
fomewhat severe in disposition, if he had not been a father, to show the
contrary: they were in general of a Noble deportment, taxed in their times
almost of no unjust or bad act^ons, but their ingratitude and disobedience to
him: and had carried a repute of the Noblest Princes, if they had not at all
been Sons. But perchance it pleased God by the fruit of his loins to punish
those sins of the flesh to which the King was so much addicted. He was
noted, more then any Prince of his time, to be given to the love of women; but
especially after the displeasure conceived against his wife Queen Elianor (as
a stirrer up of his Sons against him) when he altogether forbore her bed,
he was grown careless of the voice of Fame, and strove not at all to hide
his wanton affections. All his virtues (which indeed were many) had occasion
often to be known by the varieties of his reign, in which felicity and
crosses did so often ^ceed each other, they were not only tried, but declared
to the world. For very remarkable were the alterations of Fortune (if we
consider all things) which happened in the reign of this great Prince. Of
which if you will take a brief survey, consider it divided as it were into
five Acts; for as one says, Tanquam fabula est vita hominis.

Let the first eight years of his reign (or thereabouts) be counted for the
first Act. Where the bravery and wisdom of his youth (for but 24. years of
age was he) enough appeared in settling the kingdom, and vindicating the rights
of his royal Crown, after so long a confusion, and so many calamities of
civil war. He^ expelled the strangers out of the Realm, which in St^phans
time had bin the diseases of it. He providently settled not only the revenues
but the authority of his Crown (as before appears) and fitly disposed of all
the Castles and strong holds; which he either kept in his own power, or quite
demolished. He maintained the ancient bounds and honor of the Realm not only
in the North, but against the Welsh. Beyond the Seas he suf^ered no damage, but
gained upon all occasions. K. Lewis and he were sometimes likely to have come
to battle; b^t peace was made, and King Lewis content rather to sit down with
some little loss, then contend with so puissant a foe. Chaumont he took from
him, and seized (against his will) upon Nants in Britain: this was indeed the
time of K H^nry's greatest felicity in which he enjoyed his dignity without
any vexations, and the people, that had long been afflicted with miserable
times, did truly rejoice in their new King. And during these years, as a
farther blessing to him, and security to the kingdom, the Queen was
fruitful, and bare him three Sons.

For the second Act, we may consider his next eleven or twelve years; in
which time, though he suffered nothing by the hand of war, as not molested
by rebels at home, nor threatened at all by foreign enemies: yet by the
opposition of one Churchman he found a long and wearisome vexation. For almost
all this time did that famous jarre of Archbishop Becket, and at the last his
lamentable murder a^flict King Henry, and exceedingly disturb the quiet of
his mind. The particulars at large have appeared in the foregoing story, and
shall not here trouble the Reader. Yet in this encumbered time, his State and
Dignity had great additions; of which the happiest was that easy accession of
the Realm of Ireland unto his Scepter. And another (considering the present
occasions of state) of as much importance to him, the gaining of the Duchy of
Britain to his third Son Geoffrey. Which he with great wisdom and
industry obtained in the nonage of that young Lady Constantia, the daughter
an^ heir of Coran Duke of Britain, then deceased. Hitherto his happiness
was not at all impaired, nor he afflicted with any thing but the dissension of
Archbishop Becket. His times of danger, and great sufferings now ensue.

Let therefore the three following years of his reign be taken for the third
Act; in which the Scene is altogether changed, and instead of a glorious and
happy reign, nothing but afflictions, and the extremest dangers that could be
feared, threaten not only his Crown, but life also. This is the time of that
great revolt of his three Sons from him; besides so mighty a confederacy joined
with them, as Lewis King of France, William King of Scotland, David his
brother, Philip Earl of Flanders, Matthew Earl of Boloigne, Theobald Earl of
Bloys, besides so many of the greatest and strongest English Peers, as the
Earls of Leister, Chester, and Norfolk, with the Lord Mowbray, and diverse
others. No part of al his large dominions was free from war; Normandy invaded
by Lewis of France, and young King Henry, Aquitaine by his Son Richard
possessed against him, as the Duchy of Britain was by Geoffrey. The Northern
parts of England were all wasted by the great strength of William K. of
Scotland, and the Eastern parts much afflicted by those mercenary troops of
Flemmings, which the Earl of Leister brought over, besides the forces of the
Earl o^ Nor^olk. This great Monarch, whose felicity was so lately the envy of
his neighbour-Princes, is now become the pity of them all; and the injuries
done to his estate and person, are much lamented by some Princes too far off
to lend him succor. But be hold the turning of Fortune again; it pleased God
again to lift him from this depth of calamity, to the height of honor* He
now found the benefit of his frugality; and that large treasure, which he
before had gathered, was his great assistance in procuring mercenarie soldiers
to his side; besides some faithful Lords there were, (whom we have named in
the story) that were deeply moved at their masters injuries; and so Nobly
served him, that within three years after the beginning of these combustions,
King Henry, according to his own wishes, beheld a happy and victorious end of
them, as is before expressed.

Let the fourth Act continue about seven years that next ensued, a time of
honor, and highest happiness to this great King; after his troubles were
allended according to his wish, the King of France daunted, the martial King
of Scotland his prisoner, all rebels under his feet; his Sons brought to
acknowledge their duty, and all his large dominions in great security. While
the mightiest Monarchs of the Christian world admired his wisdom and great
success, astonished almost at so wonderful a change as they now beheld. His
sumptuous Court was filled with congratulating Ambassadors; of whom at one
time there were more seen, then ever had been together in the Court of
England; as namely from the two Christian Emperors, Manuel of Constantinople,
and Frederike of the Romans, from the Kings of Navarre, and Aragon, ^om the
Archbishop of Triers, and the Earl of Flanders. During the time of this
happiness, he married his two youngest daughters (for the eldest was married
before to the Duke of Saxony) to the Kings of Sicily and Arragon. He called
Parliaments, in which according to his mind, he was furnished with treasure,
he wisely settled the estates of Church and Commonwealth, and besides many
other wholesome and happy constitutions, he first appointed Judges Itinerant for
the six circuits of the Realm of England.

The last and tragical Act may be considered in the five following years,
until the end of his reign and lif^. The date of his felicity was now
expired; and nothing followed but trouble and calamity. The beginning of which
was a second revolt of his two Sons, Henry and Geoffrey, which was soon
taken off by the untimely death of both the Princes (as is before declared in
the Poem;) besides the ill success in the affairs of Ireland under the
government of John his youngest son. Those troubles that arose from Philip
King of France, and prevailed against Henry in his old age, more then any enemy
had been able to do before: which had not fallen so heavily upon him, if
Richard (then his eldest son) had not unnaturally forsaken his father, and
joined in confederacy with King Philip. That miserable dissension broke the
heart of old King Henry, and was the end both of his reign and life.

FINIS.
THE SINGLE, AND COMPARATIVE CHARACTERS OF HENRY the Son, and RICHARD.
LEt it not seem impertinent (if the Reader thereby may be informed or
delighted) to deliver the Characters of these two Princes the eldest Sons of
King Henry the Second, who bore so great and stirring parts in the history of
their fathers reign. They were Princes of greatest eminence in those times,
and upon whom the eyes of Christendom were most set; a large Stage they had to
act upon; and early occasions to discover their worth. They were both tall of
stature beyond the ordinary height of men; of comely visage, and majesticall
presence; for courage and magnanimity they were thought equal; and both
admired for royal virtue, though of a nature different. Henry was beloved for
his sweetness: Richard honored for his gravi^. Henry was affable and wondrous
liberal: Richard severe and full of constancy. Henry was addicte^ to martial
sports and pastimes: Richard more inclined ^o war it self: One was Courtly:
the other serious. One beloved for mercy: the other feared for Justice. The one
a refuge: the other a terror to all offenders. Two Princes brothers of so great
worth; and yet so diverse, have seldom been observed. Yet well might they
spring from one root; their father Henry in the mixture of his nature was
known to contain both their different Characters; and judged to have a mind
(as one ^peakes of Augustus Caesar) full of variety.

How much the sweetness and lovely carriage of young King Henry had won upon
the world, let one observation (which some of his own time thought like a
miracle) teach us to judge. How strange was it, that a young Prince rising in
arms against his father, possessed neither of lands nor treasure, much less
of a good or just cause, was followed almost by all the neighboring world
against a King of so large a territory, and so full of treasure* that in this
great defection from him, he was able, almost with mercenary souldier^ to
vindicate his right against all those potent enemies* This young Prince had
gained to his side not only his brothers Richard and Geoffrey, and most of the
great Nobility of England, but the Kings of France and Scotland, the Earl of
Flanders, and many other great foreign Princes. So many rich gifts of mind
and body were heaped on this young Henry (says a Writer of his time) that
Nature, as it were envying what she had bestowed, soyled it again with one
stain, the vice of ingratitude, and disobedieuce to so good a father. Which
sin of his was thought the cause that plucked down Divine vengeance, and
untimely cut off that flourishing youth which was judged worthy (if God had
prolonged it) to have ruled a greater Empire.

The severity and industrious courage of Richard the second Son let this
declare; the Earldom of Poictou, and the Duchy of Aquitaine, which were the
inheritance of his mother Eleanor, were committed to his government whilst he
was very young. Yet in that tender age (so manly were his virtues, so awefull
was the hand which he carried over the rebellious and stubborn subjects of
those Countries, that he soon reduced them to a more quiet state, and settled
obedience, then any of their former Princes had ever done. As he was stout in
the action of war; so was he constant and unwearied in pursuing his fortune,
and making the full use of any success, according to that mark that Lucan
gives of Julius Caelar:

Nil credens actum cum quid superesset agendum. He was so severe in punishing
their offenses, that he began (so great a resemblance sometimes has vice with
virtue) to be taxed of cruelty, till the wiser sort had fully considered the
quality of his actions, and the necessity of such proceedings. How prevalent he
was in the managing of wars (to omit those great and high exploits, which he
afterward achieved when he was King of England) by this one sad observation
we may somewhat i^dge; after the untimely deaths of his two brothers, Henry and
Geoffrey, when he only of the Sons was left at man's estate; and unnaturally
warred against his father; assisted only by Philip King of France, he more
prevailed then his brother Henry with a far greater confederacy had been
able to do in the foregoing wars* Henry the Son had many and great Princes
(as before we showed) that sided with him. And yet so victorious an end did
old King Henry make of that business, that he saw his greatest and most
glorious times after the conclusion of that war; but when Ric^ard revolted
from him, assisted only by Philip of France, the father was enforced to suffer
more, and stoop lower than any imagined that a Prince of so great a spirit and
power could ever have bin brought unto. By which finally his heart was broken,
and a period set to all his worldly glory. Richard in that was more unhappy
than his brother Henry, that his unna^urall wars we^e able to give so deep and
uncurable a wound to his fathers heart, and lent him no time at all to obtain
his pardon, as Henry had done, nor could the father live to be a witness of
Richards forrow and true repentance, as he had been of the others. Which
notwithstanding was many ways, after the death of old King Henry, testified by
Richard; and last of all, when himself was dying, he commanded his servants to
bury him at Fonteverard; and lay him acrosse at his fathers feet, to whom his
disloyalty and unnatural revolt (as he with grief acknowledged) had been so
great a cross.

FINIS.

