A BRIEF rehearsal and description, of the Coronatio^ of the hye and myghti
Prince Maximilian King of Romans, Boheme Hungeri andc. Don at the famus city
of Francford in the year of owr lord 1562. the month of November, with the
coming in of the great Turcks Emba^ssater, and of the presents by him gyven,
and other things worthy to be known.

printer's or publisher's device

Newli prented in Gaunte, the 27* of August M.CCCCC.LXV.

FIRST YT IS TO (...) have been do^ the like at amy time, since the great
Charles King of France, and Empereur of Rome. Nor: as yt is not posssible, to
tell all the Royal preparation and sumptuus provision, so is yt nether nedful at
this time but only touching some special points thereof, the gentel reader that
has not seen, nor herd the like before, may refresh his mind a lyttel with the
noveltie of the matter, and content him self wythal.

Hier follows the Names of Dukes Marquesssis, Princis, Lords, and other high
Estats wych came to the Caronation.

Electers or Coruesters.
The bushop of Trier. The bushop of Cole^. The bushop of Men's. The Conte
Palatin or Palsgraue. The Marquis Brandenburg. The Duke of Saxon. Embassaters.
The Duke of Ascot for the King of Spain The Popes Emb. The French Kings Emb
The King of Portingals Emb. The King. of Denemarcks Em. The great Turks Em.
The Duke of Pomerans. The Venetians. The Duke of Mantua The Duke of Ferrara.
Other estats. T^^ ^uke of Bavier. The Duke of C^^ue. The Duke of Lorain. The
Duke of W^^tenberg. The Duke of Makelburg. T^^ ^^ince of Orange. The Lansgrave.
The Count Egmond. The Count Horn. The Count Hoghstrate^ Ladies. The Quen of
Bohem, her dowghter and 2. yo^g sons. The Duches of Lorain and her Dowghter.
The Duches of Bavier. The Duches of Saxon, with manny other great ladies and
damsels unknown, and no^bers of Lords, Ereles, Barons, Knyghts, Squyers and
Gentilme^, wych neither them self, among them self were al known: nor yeat their
names, or number is possible to remembe^.

All wych company of nobiliti first ass^^bled and com toguyther at Frankford,
about the 20. day of November the year aforsayd, There abode, for the coming
of Ferdinando. Emperor and King Maximilian his eldest son (whose Coronation we
now speak of) coming toguither out of Bohemia and those est parts of Germany.
Wych being arived with in one days Iournei, all the afforsayd noblemen with
(...) traynes well appointed, and mounted a^k, in number about 5000. horsis,
rood fourth of the city the morning, in good order about 12. Ynglish mile to
receyve the Emperor, and his son coming on the way from Augusta, wych being
then Joined with the emperor and his trayn returned toghuyther to Frankford the
same evenyng after son set, and then the hoole number toguither was thowght to
be 40000. horsis in all. And they rade al with dagges at their saddelbows, and
everi man a hearen leash and a lyttel bugle horn about his nek hu^terlyk, and
in his hat an oken bra^che with faded russet leaves as token of winter. The^
about sonset came before in to the city all their carriage with wago^s,
carts, moyles and horsis, in great number and camels 4. Wythi^ 4. days after,
was bylt up within the great cathedral church scaffoldes rownd about, stagies,
particions and seats, convenient and as apertayned for such a cor^nation, and
from the said church to the town hawle half an English mile long the way
planked even, with timber, where these princis should passafoot after the
coronatio^ to dinner The Turck with his company in rych and sayr apparel, had
got astandyng in a corner hows to se the passsing of this po^pe, on who^ was
more gasyng of people, then was upon Emperor, King or any thing elsbesyde.
Affter the ceremonies of coronation, with long and sole^ masssong, about 3.
aclock at after none, the emperor with his son on the left hand and both having
rich and precius crowns apo^ their heds, and robes of crimosin furred with
ermines, came from the church afoot apo^ this pla^ked way, unto the town
palace, where the dinner was prepared and next before the^ went the 6.
Corvesters, likewise apareled and the residu of the other nobiliti each man in
his degree, and certain officers were appointed to cast and strew abrod monoy new
coined, among the people both of silver and gold. And in the greatest market
place, wych was before the Palace was acou^duct made, runnyng co^tinuali with
wyn, both whyt and red wych poor people fet away that would and there beside was
a timber house erect, with in the wych was a mighti great ox put on a broche,
and roasted hwole head, legs, fete and tail and all except the skyn and bowels,
and with in the boddy was farced and stuffed diverse sorts of other small 4.
footed beasts, and foul of sowndri Kinds, as valow dear, hare, kyd, lam,
pygg, co^nye, squyrel, swan, goose, heron, byttour, malard, phesant, pecok,
capo^, partricg, quayle, p^gio^, wodcock, curlu, plover, snyt, blackbur^
thrush, larck, and so from the greatest foul to the lest, and unto the veari
wren, and tytmose, wych after 2. days, and as many nights rosting, was divided
among the people to yeat the same day of the coronatio^. The Emperor then at
dinner sat under ariche cloth ofestat next thewaule, and King Maximilian over
against him near the end, at the same table, and no mo parsons but they 2. then
were there 6. other tabels prepared within the same hawle for the six Coruesters,
to syteche by him self but they sarved in the first course to the emperor, and
the King, and the rest of the Dukes and Noblemen sat at dyvers tables there
beside some 16. some 20. some. 24. at a table toguyther in order acording to their
degreis. The Duke of Saxon: lord marshal, by enheritance, that day mesured
ottes in the market place, with apec^ of silver. Within ij. days after came
the Turks Embassator to the^perours palace and presented him with an amblyng
bay puystant stead, 4. camels furnished, and certain ancient Vessel and
dyshys, of pursela^, and other old momuments late fownd under the earth, with
in the temple of Sa^ta Sophia in Co^sta^tinople, he roode thorowgh the strets
to and fro, with 6. companions also an horsbak, be in agown of cloth of gold,
and the other in cry mosin vellet, and before him a foot a 30. sarvants and
slaves booted, and with spores a foot long fro the heal to the rowel, he him
self is a Christian man renegat and born in Polonia. There war also ru^nyng with
horsis at the ryng al one day, and King Maximilia^ began, and all the Dukes and
other Noblemen followed, affter wych tryu^ph within 4. days the emperor first
departed, by water to Men's, and the King the next day with his Queen by land to
Augusta. And every, lord and other Gentilman his way, home to his own country,
and last of all the Turk, wych as he was co^ducted In, with 40. or 50. armed
men a horsbak, so was he lykwyse safe conveyed back again, that no rude people
should mysvse him upon the way.

FINIS.
Sic transit gloria mundi.

