A NEW EIGHTFOLD PROBATION OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLANDS DIVINE CONSTITVTION,
PROOVED BY MANY PREGnant arguments, to be much more complete then any Geneuian
in the world against the contrary assertion of the fifty three
petitioner-preachers of Scotland in their petition presented in the late
Parliament to the Kings most excellent Majesty.

With a ten-folde probation of the same Churches doctrine touching one of the
most important points of our Creed, which is of our Saviors descending into
Hell,

BY JAMES MAXVVELL Master of Arts, etc.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN LEGATT, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1617.

Psalm. 122. verse 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, let them prosper that
love thee. Isay 41.8, 9, 25. Thou Jacob, whom I have chosen, I have taken thee
from the ends of the earth, and called thee before the chief thereof, and
said unto thee, thou art my Servant, etc. I have raised up from the North, and
he shall come: from the East Sun shall he call upon my Name. TO THE MOST
LEARNED, RELIGIOUS AND RENOWNED PRINCE JAMES the Concorder, King of Britain,
France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, all felicity.
Most gracious and redoubted Sovereign.
INEVER read those words of the Evangelical Prophet prefixed in the former
page; (and I have read them often;) but as often did I think of Almighty Gods
raising of you our Jacob from the North, and ends of the earth, to perform
the part of his Select Servant for the especial good of his Church: and even,
so often did I call to mind your gracious endeauours for the farthering of the
glorious work of Unity and Concord amongst divided Christians: but more
especially, according to your Royal and proper interest, among your own
vnvniformed Britains. Wherefore persuading my self, that it is both the duty
of all good Christians to applaude your mest Christian and Commendable
endeauours and designs; and the part of all your good subjects to concur
with your Majesty in so worthy a work, for the advancing thereof; I have
brought unto the building of this spiritual Temple of Concord and Peace, two
stones, to wit two Treatises penned and framed to the common peoples capacity.
Such as they are, I do humbly exhibit both here together into your Royal
hands, to dispose of according to your most gracious and wise pleasure, and as
ye shall think good for them; for whose good they are intended. The first
Treatise, contains an eightfold probation of the divine and perfect
constitution of the Church of England, the which I do demonstrate to be much
more complete then any Genenian form wheresoever in the world, for a moderate,
quiet and calm refutation of a certain contrary assertion contained in the
three and fifty preachers of Scotlands petition presented unto your Majesty in
the late Parliament. And though there were many reasons; which might induce me
to dedicate the same unto your Royal Majesty; yet nothing moved me so much
thereunto, as that the demonstration which I do use, is drawn out of the
divine Book of the Revelation of Saint John the divine; the which I may in a
manner call the Book of King James the divine, a demonstration that no writer
has used, before me so far as I know^ for I suppose, that no divine will or
can deny; but that (...) ^he Book of the Revelation is contained a
representation both of the Church Triumphant in Heaven by such external or
sensible signs or shows, as were most fit to represent the same by; and
likewise of the Church militant on earth, such as it was to be after our
Saviors ascensien in the two times of persecution and peace, aye until the
last period of his glorious coming to judgment. For as the beloved and divine
man of God Moses, made the Tabernacle according to the pattern or modele
showed him in the mount; as the Scripture speaks; so our Savior Christ's
beloved and divine disciple Saint John represents unto us the form and
fashion of the militant Church, according to the pattern of the Triumphant,
showed unto him by revelation in the I Will of Pathmos. So that (in the opinion of
all divines) amongst the many particular Churches, that are on earth, that
which is likest unto the Church in heaven, must needs be the diuinest and
best; and that so much the more because that our Savior himself has taught
us to pray and say daily, thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Now
that the Church of England does more nearly resemble the heavenly Church, then
the Geneuian does; I make it apparent by eight pregnant proofs, and
irrefragable arguments; founded and grounded all of them in Gods written word,
especially in the foresaid divine book of Saint John's Revelation. 1. in that
the Church of England is more divine, or God-like then the Geneuian, in her
supreme Gouerner on earth, the Prince. 2. in that she is more Angelical, or
Angel-like in her secondary Governors of Archbishops and Bishops. 3. more
celestial or heauen-like for holiness. 4. more heaven like for humble
reverence. 5. more heauen-like for harmony. 6. more heauen-like for habit. 7.
more heauen-like for local decency, Church-implements conueniency,
Church-seruice solemnity, and sacramental ceremonies. 8. and lastly, more
heauen-like for honor of the ministry. In the handling of which eight
arguments, I do demonstrate the lawfulness, vtility, and conueniencie of the
chief rites used in the Church of England, as namely of holy days, of
standing up at the reading of the Gospel, of kneeling at the rehearsal of the
Law, and in receiving the holy Sacrament, of Church^musicke consisting of song
and Organs, of the Church habit of Surplice and Rotchet, of the comely
Structure and ornaments of Churches, of having a Font with a standing Table for
the celebration of the Sacraments, and of signing with the cross in Baptism;
for the which I do produce thirteen arguments all grounded in Gods word. I
do likewise justify the title of Priest given to the inferiors of the
ministry, and of Lord given to the superiors by diverse good reasons: and by
thirteen arguments I prove the lawfulnes and equity of paying tithes to the
ministers under the Gospel, adding thereunto an Invectiue against the Genevian
or Puritan impure sin of sacrilege. And in handling the first of the eight
branches of this our new demonstration, which is, that the Church of England is
more divine or God-like then the Geneuian in her supreme Governor on earth; I
do procue these six important points after following, most part against the
common contrary opinions of Romans and Geneuians; first that the Kingly power
is immediately from God, and not from man, by eight Testimonies of Scripture and
three arguments. Secondly that the kingly dignity is absolutely greater then
the priestly, and of all other the diuinest, by eight arguments. Thirdly that
christian kings are not mere laymen, but of a mixed condition partly,
ecclesiastical and partly secular, by ten sacred examples and three arguments.
Fourthly that kings are lawgiuers unto their people, and have power of God to
make laws for the good both of church and commonwealth, by six arguments.
Fifthly that kings are to be honorably and magnificently maintained, and that
God has allotted them a certain competent portion of their subjects goods
Sixthly, and lastly, that Kings are endowed with a sacred immunity from all
manner of coercion and censure spiritual or temporal at their subjects hands.
The which thing I procue against Romans and Geneuians by seventeen arguments,
And this is the sum of the first Book which I most humbly commend unto your
majesty's patronage; the other being only a brief of a certain part of a
larger work, I have begun in Latin, contains a ten-fold probation of the
doctrine of the Church of England touching our Sauicurs local descending in
his soul after death into the hell of the damned, against the different and
repugnant dostrines of Genenians and Romans the which I do dedicate unto the
Reverend prelates and pastors of the Church of Scotland. The verity of which
doctrine I do show and confirm 1. by Typical prefiguration both personal and
real, 2. by prophetical praediction. 3. by holy Scriptures pregnant
historical allusion. 4. by Evangelical asseueration, 5. by apostolical
explication, 6 by all christians catholicall confession, 7, by three and forty
ancient doctors and fathers vnanime and harmonious profession, besides some
six or seven Councels. 8. by thirty chief protestant writers ingenuous
reception and subscription, besides some particular reformed Churches. 9. by
irrefragable reason and demonstration. 10. and lastly, by the consideration of
the diverse gross absurdities, impieties, contradictions, and ridiculous
expositions that they have committed, which have oppugned this ancient
doctrine of the Church of England or dissented from the same. And here I will
likewise profess publicly, that in case our precise Divines can but show as
great variety, and as good solidity of arguments and reasons, even for all
their opinions joined together, wherein they do dissent from the Church of
England, as I shall show for this one point only, that I shall not be ashamed
to retract my present opinions, wherein I do dissent from them, and subscribe
unto theirs, and so become as precise, as ever I was known to be once before.
And thus have I briefly laid open unto your Majesty the sum and substance of
these two little books, which I have written of late for the furthering of a
perfect uniformity both in doctrine and discipline in the Churches of these two
Kingdoms; and even for the persuading and enducing of my dear Country men to
the reception of the ancient primitive form of Church, such as it was in the
days of glorious Constantine the great, and during the purer time of the first
five hundredth years; which is one of your Majesty's most christian and
commendable desires and designs, worthy of the memory and celebration of all
succeding ages, the which, I pray the God of unity and verity that ye may as
happily atchieue, as ye do holily wish it and worthily have begunst. That so
the Church of Scotland may in your Majesty's blessed time receive the
consummation and accomplishment of her reformation from England, like as from
her, she had the inchoation or beginning thereof, as our own history, does
witness: and that as the said Church has already received of England their
English Bible and Psalme-Booke, so may she now likewise receive her Liturgy or
Seruice-booke with the whole rites and orders contained therein. And though I
be happily the first of my Country that ever wrote thus earnestly in defense of
the Church of England; yet let not my dear Contrymen, (unto whom God is my
witness, I do daily wish all manner of happiness) think that I have done it
out of any worldly respect to private profit, benefit or benefice either
already confered, or hereafter to be confered upon me; by Prince or Prelate,
but out of a mere affection to verity and unity and to the pure primitive
Church. The truth of which my protestation may hence appear in part, in that
these ten year past that I have lived in England, I was at no time a Suter
unto your Majesty nor yet beholding to any Bishop, nor ever aimed at any
benefice; as being at this hour and intending to continue ever hereafter a
Layman; notwithstanding that the learned and reverend Deane of Exeter, Doctor
Sutcliffe, the nominated Provost of that begun Controuersial College, which
bears your Majesty's name, has chosen me to be a fellow and an Antiquary
thereof. So that my dear countrymen shall have no cause I hope to charge me with
any preposterous affection or flattering humor in the behalf of England;
seeing that I have no purpose of aspiring to Church preferment amongst them,
who have worthy Scholars enough of their own and most complete Preachers to
brook their Benefices. Neither shall the learned ministry of my country take
it evil, that a layman should thus meddle in Ecclesiastical matters, if it
shall please them to consider, how that a layman may with greateringenuity and
indifferency handle such an argument as this is, then a Churchman who might
happily be suspected offlatterie or favor in the behalf of one churches
formemore then another, and that merely for love of preferment, from the which
kind of suspicion, one of my fashion is free. And as for capacity requisite
in the handling of this argument, I am content, they should have no better
opinion of me then the course of my life and stadies in their own good
judgment may challeng at their hands: abreefe narration whereof, I thought
good, by your Majesty's gracious leave, here to insert, not out of any humor
of ostentation, but only that it may thereby appear, that though I be a
layman; yet I have spent a good part of my time in the study of divinity,
unto the which, I was known at home, so much to have addicted my self, that
at the age of 19. years, and even before, I proceeded Master of Arts, I was
requested of some of our Ministry to preach by way of exercise: And though I
did refuse to condescend unto their earnest desire proceeding from their good
opinion of me, for the which course I was not a little commended of that
learned and renowned Divine of good memory, (Master Robert Rollock) who
disliked the unripe forwardness of some young spirits, howsoever otherwise of
great towardness; yet I ommitted not my private study of diuinttie, but
followed the same assiduonsly, being thereunto encouraged by the the foresaid
Reuered Divine, who had diuerted me from my intended voyaege into Denmark,
toward the famous and noble Philosopher and Astrologian Tycho Brahe, with whom
I thought to have prosecuted my begun Mathematical studies, and so persuaded
me to finish my Academicall course in the learned College of Edinburgh,
before I went to travail. And there being past some seventeen years since
the time I proceeded Master of arts, and went beyond sea, which was in the
year 1601. I have all this while given my mind wholly to good letters, and
as well divine as humane. For three years of the said space I spent in the
private study of Philosophy, in considering of the more noble and choice
questions, that have been moved or disputed by the followers of Aristotle,
but especially of divine Plato, unto whom I was always more devoted, and of
the renowned Egyptian Philosopher Hermes Trismegistus; following therein the
example of those four famous Italian Philosophers, Franciscus and Ioannes
Picus Mirandula, Marsilius Ficinus, and Franciscus Patricius. Other three years
I spent in reading and pondering the Church questions and controversies of our
time, as they have been learnedly and diligently debated on both hands, by
diverse great Divines of these days. One year I spent in perusing some forty
treatises, discourses, commentaries, and consuitations written by some of the
more moderate and ingenuous, tending to pacification. Five years I spent in
reading and perusing some of the choicest books of the Doctors of the Church,
Greeks and Latins, and of the more renowned amongst the Schoolmen, and
other five I spent in perusing political and historical works penned by
diverse authors, especially Italians and Germans: together with the Genealogies
of the Kings and Princes of Christendom. And for some clearer evidence and
proof of this studious pastime, besides some ten little things already
published in english, most part upon divine and moral arguments, namely, the
Looking glass of grace and glory, the Treasure of tranquillity, the Mirror of
religious men and godly Matrons, the Golden art or the right way of enriching,
the Game of concord and union, admirable Prophecies of 24. famous Roman
catholics, touching the deformation and reformation of Rome, two Pamphlets
containing some seven short Poems in honor of your Majesty, and your noble
children, together with these two present Treatises written of late in defense
of the Church of Englands discipline and doctrine, besides these ten little
exercises, I say, I have written diverse things in Latin upon Philosophical,
Historical, and Political arguments, but most of all upon Theological
points: for being once a follower of the most precise sort, and even a
professed Puritan as they term it, I began at nineteen years of age, to
write in Latin two books against Popery; one of the which I have entitled,
of the admirable Antipathie or contrariety of Theology and Papalogie, or of
Gods word and the Popes. Wherein I point forth the oppositions and
contradictions between the Scripture and the Roman doctrine, from the
beginning of the Bible unto the end thereof, going through every chapter of both
Testaments; answerable whereunto I have divided the said work into two parts,
the first containing an hundred and forty nine Sections, the second an hundred
and thirty: and it has bin seen and well liked of some learned Scholars. The
other is a description of the Tyranny which was to be exercised upon the
militant Church, according to the tenure of the two noble prophesies of Daniel
and Saint John; where I do entreat of the authors, instruments, duration,
beginning, manner and ending of those great troubles: and do compare the
opinions of writers, together touching the foresaid circumstances with the
reasons thereof: a work of no small labor consisting of eighteen large
Sections or Chapters, and was by me dedicated unto the Church and College of
Edinburgh, where I took my degree, and therefore I sent it home out of France
with my Coosin M. William Maxwell of Kauens, to be presented accordingly;
though as I understood since, it was the fortune of my Book, to fall into the
hands of M. John Welshe, then a famous Preacher in those parts; who borrowed
the same for a few days, but not delivering it again, carried the same away
with him into France, and has kept it until this hour. I have likewise
written in Latin another Book called Romase redarguens, or Rome rebuking and
reproouing her self: Wherein I do prove by the express Testimonies of
Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Monks, Friars, Prophets, Prophetesses,
Schoolmen, and Cell-women of the Church of Rome, that she stands in need of
reformation, against the contrary assertion of the learned Jesuit Martinus
Becanus. The Prophetical part, (if so I may call it,) of which work, I did
publish of late in English, a Book containing a collection of more then an
hundred strange Prophesies vtteredin former times touching the deformation, and
reformation of Rome, by twenty four famous Romane-Catholikes, whereof some
twelve have been canonized for Saints, to wit, seven men, and five women. I
have likewise written a disputation or disquisition touching the seat of
Satan: whether it was to be in the North, as the Romish Doctors do hold, or
in the South, where I prove against the Roman Doctors by Scripture and
nature, by Theology and Astrology, by Philosophy and History, how that the
North is absolutely the most divine, eminent and excellent, the very seat of
God, and not of Satan, and the chief receptacle of his Church. Another
disputation and disquisition I have written touching the seat of souls, where
I refute the Popish opinions of Purgatory, Limbus Patrum, Limbus infantium, and
the like hollow habitations of souls within the earth, and I do show that the
ancient Fathers, knewne more places but three at most, as the Greeks do at
this day; Paradise; Heaven and Hell. In the same I do refute the erroneous
opinions of Romans and Geneuians, Papists and Puritanes touching our Saviors
descending into hell, and prove the doctrine of the Church of England touching
that article to be only orthodoxe; a brief of which part of that Book, I have
here published in English. And in the same larger work, I do defend the
salvation of Salomons soul against Cardinal Bellarmine, and others, iumping
with him in that improbable and uncharitable opinion. Another disputation I
have written in Latin upon the Invocation of Saints, against the Roman Knight
of Saint Peter Gaspar Scioppius, against whose allegations of Scripture, and
probations fetched from thence: I who am a layman like himself, howsoever
inferior for humane letters and titles do employ some 28. arguments fetched
not only from Scriptures, but also from Greek and Latin Fathers, besides
Philosophers, Poets, and Historians: and the same Method and manner of
probation, I do use in a certain Theological and Historical Plea against
the learned Jesuit James Gretser, for the pre-eminence of the Emperor, and
Kings above Popes, Patriarchs, Archbishops and Bishops, and generally of all
Priests, and for their mixed condition of Ecclesiastical and civil. Lastly, I
have written a Treatise called Catholico-Iacobus, Catholico. Britannus; wherein
I do demonstrate the true Catholicisme of Britains, and do evidently prove
that your Majesty and your subjects have all those things, that Gods word
requires, to make men true Christians and Catholics, against the contrary
assertion of the learned French Archbishop, Cardinal James Perron. The which
two Treatises last mentioned, written in defense of King James, and this
Church, against two learned and famous Roman Catholics of the name of James,
by your Majesty's subject and servant of the same Name, shall be (God willing)
shortly published for the first laick fruits of that begun College, which
bears the name of King James, whereof I am to be a Fellow. The which
premises being considered, I hope the more easily to gain the Church of
Scotlands good opinion, and that they shall not charge me with incapacitie to
handle such a weighty argument as this, having written so much in matters
belonging to Church and Religion. To be brief, thus have I spent these
seventeen years years of my private and obscure life, since I proceeded
Master of Arts, and went beyond sea, in giving my self to study and
contemplation, endeavoring to know much, and to contentation, in no wise
coveting after much; and to Temperance and Continency, Whereof I take the
all-knowing God and his chaste Angels to witness. And now these my poor
labors, such as they are, I most humbly lay down at your Royal feet, begging
your Majesty's most honorable patronage and acceptance, and in praying the God
of Unity and Verity, to give them a blessing for the furthering of your most
Christian desire, and glorious design, so that we may even in your own happy
days, see with our eyes the full accomplishment thereof, to the glory of his
name; the comfort of his Church, the good of great Britain, and your Majesty's
eternal honor. So prays daily

YOUR MAJESTY'S Most humble subject and servant, and even the grandchilde of
your most Noble Grandmothers and Mothers household servant, William Maxwell
son to the Lord of Kirkonnell, and in his life man at arms to the most
Christian King JAMES MAXVVELL.

THE CONTENTS OF THESE TWO BOOKS.
1 THat Unity and Concord in matters belonging to Gods Worship amongst
Christians, especially Protestants, and more especially amongst Britains, both
for reason of Church, and reason of State is to be by all means desired and
endeavored. Sect. 1.2.3. 2. That one Churches constitution is more perfect and
complete then another, and that the less perfect ought to conform it self
unto the more perfect. Sect. 4.5 3. That the constitution of the Church of
England is much more perfect then an Geneuian whatsoever, or wheresoever. Sect.
6. 4. That the Church of England is more Divine and God-like in the supreme
Governor, the Sovereign Prince then the Geneuian. Sect. 7.8. 5. That the
Kingly power is immediately from God, and not from man as both Romans and
Geneuians do hold, proved by eight testimonies of Scripture and three
irrefragable arguments. Sect. 9. 6. That the kingly dignity is absolutely
greater then the priestly, and of all other the diuinest, contrary to the
opinion of Romans and Geneuians, proved by eight arguments. Sect. 10. 7. That
Kings are not mere laymen, but mixed of an ecclesiastical and secular
condition, contrary to the opinion of Romans and Geneuians, proved by three
arguments, and ten examples of Kings that have exercised spiritual power for
the good of the Church. Sect. 11. 8. That Kings are Law-giuers to their people,
and have power of God to make laws for the good both of Church and
Commonweal, proved by six arguments. Sect. 12. 9. That Kings are to be
honorable and magnificently maintained, and that God has allotted them a
certain portion of their subjects goods. Sect. 13. 10. That Kings are endued
with a Sacred immunitie from all manner of coercion, and censure spiritual or
temporal at their subjects hands, proved against Romans and Geneuians by 17.
arguments. Sect. 14. 11. That the Church of England is more Angelical or
Angel-like in her secondary Governors of Archbishops and Bishops. Sect. 15.
12. That their is an imparitie or inequality amongst Gods Ministers in the
Church triumphant in heaven, and that their has been always the like
imparitie in the Church militant on earth, first under the Law, then under the
Gospel; and as well in the time of Christ and his Apostles, as of their
successors. Sect. 15. 13. That the Church of England is more heauen-like for
holiness, where the conueniency of holydaies besides the Sunday, is proved
and demonstrated by unanswerable arguments. Sect. 16. 14. That the Church of
England is more heauen-like then the Geneuian for humble reverence, where the
conueniencie of the gestures of standing up at the reading of the Gospel,
capping or bowing at the name of Jesus, of kneeling at the rehearsing of the
Law, and especially at the receiving of the holy Sacrament is declared and
proved. Sect. 17. 15. That the Church of England is more heauen-like then the
Geneuian, for harmony, where the conueniency of Church-musicke consisting of
voices and organes and other instruments is declared. Sect. 18. 16 That the
Church of England is more heauen-like then the Geneuian for habit, where the
conueniencie and decency of Church-habites, as of the Surplisse and Rotchet is
proved. Sect. 19. 17. That the Church of England is more Heauen-like then the
Geneuian, for local decency, Church-implements conueniency, Church-seruice
solemnity, and sacrament all ceremony; where the conueniencie of a Font or the
Ministration of Baptism, and of a standing Table for the celebration of the
Lords Supper is declared, and the use of the ceremony of the sign of the
Cross in Baptism proved most lawful and commendable by 13. arguments. Sec.
20. 18. That the Church of England is more heauen-like then the Geneuian for
honor of the Ministry, where the lawfulness of the style of Priest amongst
the Ministers of the Gospel, and likewise of the style of Lord, conferred on
the reverend Gonernours of the Church is declared, and the Geneuian-church
governors of Lay Elders proved to be a thing unlawful and absurd. Sect. 21.
19. That the maintenance of the Ministry is more divine, heauen-like and
honorable in the church of England, then in the Geneuian, where the perpetual
maintenance of Tithes is proved, and the Geneuian sin of sacrilege
exagitated and showed to be more heinous then heathenish Idolatry. Sect. 21.
20. The diversity and repugnancie of the opinions of divines touching our
Saviors descending into hell, briefly propounded. Tract. 2. 21. The doctrine
of the church of England touching the foresaid point demonstrated to be only
orthodoxall by a Ten-folde probation. Tract. 2.
A Primitive pattern for the Church of Scotland.
Sect. 1.
Unity and Concord amongst Christians, especially amongst Protestants or
reformed professors, but more especially amongst Britains, Psalm. 133.1, 2, 3.
Ioh. 17, 20, 21, 22, 23. 1. Pet. 3.8. Heb. 12.14.
as they that are the worshippers of one and the same true God, the servants of
one and the same only Savior Jesus Christ, the children of one Church, and the
subjects of one and the same Sovereign, is in the judgment of all them that
are truly wise, of all other things most to be desired and endeavored, as a
thing most pleasing to God, and most profitable to man.

Sect. 2.
Unity and Concord is to be desired and endeavored in all things, but
especially in those things, Psalm. 122.6. Romans 15.6. 1. Cor. 1.10, 11, and 3, 3,
4. Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5 Phil. 3.16.
that concern Gods worship, the salvation of men's souls, and the good
constitution of the Church: because by the means and occasion of discord and
dissension, such as be without, are scandalized, and still kept out of the
Church; and those that are within, are so pitifully distracted, that either
they are driven out of the Church, or if they stay still in it, they prove no
better then dull or dead members of the Church, (much like the parts of a
blasted body,) for lack of true devotion and spiritual life. For whilst we
contend about verity, we loose unity, and striving about the shadows of
ceremony and circumstance, we slip from the body and substance; opinion
oppresses piety, faction undermines faith, controversy quelleth charity,
and reasoning rooteth up religion.

Sect. 3.
The procuring, furthering and preserving of Unity and Concord in the Church
appertains principally unto the Christian Prince, Isay 49.23. Exodus 4.16. and
22.8. Psalm. 82.1.6. Ioh. 10.34, 35 Math. 5.9. 2. Tim. 2.24, 25.
whom God has called to be a nursing-father unto his Church, and has honored
most highly, with the style of the Son of the most high, and even of a God, to
put him in mind of his care and study for the things of God, and the good of
his Church which principally consists in the Unity thereof, and next it
appertains unto the Pastors, who are to join with the Prince in this
glorious work; whom of all other it becomes least to be men of strife and
contention, or instruments of discord and division, seeing that the God of
peace has called them to be Messengers and makers of peace and Union.

Sect. 4.
Amongst the many particular Churches that are at this day divided from
themselves, one from another, whether in doctrine or discipline, in substance
or circumstance, there is a difference in perfection; and I think no man
doubts of it, but that one Church may be of a more perfect and complete
constitution, then another Church: yea we are so far from doubting any thing
of this point, that every professor holds the Church that he is off to be
the more perfect then that which he disclaimeth.

Sect. 5.
It being most certain that the particular divided Churches are not alike
perfect; it stands the less perfect in hand to conform it self unto that
which shall by the light of Gods word and good reason appear to be more
perfect; both because our Savior Christ commands all Christians to aspire
unto perfection, saying, Mat. 5.48. Phil. 3.15.16 Coloss. 1.28. Heb. 6.1.
Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father which is in heaven, is perfect, and the
Apostle exhorts all men to be led forward to perfection, and because that
this is the only way to knit up the Churches in Concord and Unity, and to draw
them to an uniformity.

Sect. 6.
Amongst the particular reformed Churches: that of England is more perfect and
complete in many respects then any Church reformed after the fashion of Geneua,
contrary to the petitioners assertion, and namely, then that of Scotland, whose
form and constitution was merely Geneuian, before that our sacred Sovereign
divinely enspired began the second reformation thereof, tending to the
conformation of it with England, or rather with the Primitive, whereunto it is
much more like then the other.

Sect. 7.
The perfection of the english Church is apparent whether we compare her with
the Church of God, and the blessed Spirits in heaven, or with the Church of God
and believing men on earth, before Christ's time, in his time, or after his
time: or whether we respect the warrant and authority of Gods word or man's, of
divinity or humanity, of Scripture or nature, of religion or reason; or
whether we respect her essential perfections and parts for piety or charity,
faith or repentance, devotion or reverence, illumination or sanctification,
doctrine or discipline, substance or circumstance, service or ceremony, order
or decency, the honor and dignity of Prince or of Pastors, with the
edification and consolation of the whole people.

Sect. 8.
Considering that the pregnantest proof that can be brought of a particular
Churches perfection, The Church of England more divine and God-like then the
Geneuian.
and painting out as it were to the life, the analogy and affinity, likeness
or resemblance, that it has with that Church which is known to be absolutely
the most divine, complete, and perfect. I shall therefore prove in this
present discourse by many places of Scripture, especially of that most divine
part of it called the Revelation of Saint John the divine, that the Church of
England is much more divine, and far liker the Church of God in heaven, then
any Geneuian Church is, and therefore much more perfect, contrary to to the
Petitionerslate assertion. For seeing that as often as in praying the Lords
prayer we say, Mat. 6.9.10.
thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, we do desire of God with all
our hearts, that his Church on earth militant, may be every day more and more
conformable and like unto his Church in heaven triumphant, which we believe
and confess to be the most perfect; it must needs follow that the more conform
a Church on earth be unto the Church in heaven, the more it finds and
feels the efficacy and force of our Lords prayer, and the nearer that it
does resemble the Church in heaven, the perfiter must it be: for that thing is
the more perfect, which is the more like unto the most perfect. And that the
Church of England is much liker the Church that is above, then the Geneuian is,
it may appear by comparing the constitutions of the two Churches together. And
first I say that the Church of England is liker unto Gods Church in heaven,
then any other Church Geneuian or Roman, as being more divine and God-like in
respect of the supreme Governor. For like as the Sovereign governor of the
Church in heaven consisting of those blessed Spirits which Saint John saw
almost beyond number in the presence of the throne of God serving him day and
night in his Temple, Ruele. 4, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. and 5.8, 9, 10, 11,
14. and 7.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 19.1. and 21.1, 2, 3. Exodus 15.18. 1.
Sam. 8.7. Psalm. 2.6. and 30 9, and 22.28. and 24.7, 8, 9, 10. and 29.10. Genesis
2.20. Exodus 3.1, 2, 3 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. and 4.16. and 7.1. and 22.28. Psalm.
82.1.6, and 95.3. and 50.1.
is such a one as is both God and King: so the Sovereign Governor of the
Church of England is such a one, as is both a King and a God on earth: for in
the holy Scripture we know that Kings are called Gods, as God himself is
called a King. And even God himself has called Kings by this name, and not any
creature: for Adam gave al other things their names, but could not give this:
for none but God can give this name. Thou shall be to Aaron as God (said the
Lord to Moses) whom he had made a sovereign Prince over his people. And
again, I have made thee a God to Pharaoh: and Moses calls the sovereign
Judges by the name of Gods, saying, thou shall not rail upon the Gods, for so
it is in the original, and the Psalmist to the same purpose (speaks thus) God
stands in the assembly of Gods, he judges among Gods: and again, he brings
in the great God speaking thus of his little Gods, I have said ye are Gods, and
ye are all children of the most high.

Sect. 9.
In that Kings are called Gods, That the Kingly dignity is immediately from
God.
we learn six notable lessons hereafter following, The first, that the
kingly power is immediately of and from God, and not of man, as both Geneuians
and Romans most erroniously do hold: for none can make of a man a God on
earth, but God in heaven, neither is it in the power of man to make one Gods
servant or minister, but we must leave it unto God himself to choose and
ordain his own servants. And truly if the King were ordained of man as he is
for the good of man, (and therefore is by Saint Peter called an ordinance of
man) the Apostle Paul would never have named him Gods servant and minister, but
man's. 1. Pet. 2.13. Romans 13.4.1. Chron, 29.23.
The King sits in the Lords throne, (says the holy Chronicler) now it
belongs not unto man to set another man in Gods seat, but must let this
alone for God himself to do. The throne is Gods and not man's, Psalm. 21.3.1.
Sam. 9.15, 16, 17, and 10, 1, 24, and 13, 13, 14, and 16, 1, 2. 1. King. 3.7.
and 10.9. 1, Chr, 29, 29 2, Chro, 2.11 Nehe 13, 26. Dan. 4.14.23. Proverbs
8.15.16. Wisd. 6.1, 2.3. Romans 13.1, 4.
and he that sits in it is Gods minister and not man's, yea he is of God,
called God, for man cannot make a man God, and therefore Kings are immediately
from God, and not from man, an argument that all the Geneuians and Romans in
the world, shall never be able to answer. And therefore to shut up this first
lesson (for in our work of kingly controversies, we disputeit more largely and
accurately) three Kings, David, Salomor, Hiram, one Queen of Sheba, one
Prince, Nehemiah, one high Priest Samuel, one chief Prophet Daniel, one
principal Apostle Paul, yea Gods Angel and God himself do all of them anouch
that kings are chosen of God, nominated, sent, crowned, created and set in Gods
throne by God himself, and not by man.

Sect. 9.
The second lesson that we learn here is that the kingly dignity is of all
other dignities absolutely the greatest and the diuinest, That the kingly
dignity is the diuinest and greatest of all other. Revel. 2. and 3. Psalm. 82.6.
Dan. 3.26, and 6.20. Ioh. 15.14, 15.
and not the priestly, as both Roman and Geneuians do erroniously suppose. For
first as none can be greater in heaven then the God of heaven, or so great: so
none in earth can be greater then he, who is called of God to be a God on
earth, nor none can beso great. Secondly, as the highest style that can be
given to any, is given to Kings, so a lower style is given to Prelates and
Priests, for they are in the Scripture no where called Gods, but well are they
named Angels, so that as the Angels in heaven are inferior to the God of
heaven, so are the Angels on earth, to wit, the chief Priests and Prelates
inferior unto the Gods on earth; which are Sovereign Princes: thirdly,
Princes are called the children of the most high, where as Churchmen are
instiled only the servants and friends of the most high. Psalm. 21.3. 1. Chron.
29.23.
Fourthly, God puts a crown of gold upon the Kings head, and he sets
him in his own throne to sit there for God as God; so that as the Apostle
(speaking of the inferioritie of the Angels of heaven being compared with
Christ the anointed of the Lord) says, unto which of the Angels said he at
any time, Heb. 1.13.14.
sit at my right hand till I make thine enemies thy footstool, are they not
all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for their sakes, which shall be
heirs of salvation? In like manner may it be said in this matter, touching the
inferioritie of the Angels on earth, that is prelates, being compared with the
Lords Christ and anointed one, the Sovereign Prince, unto which of the Angels
on earth (for Prelates are called Angels in the Revelation seven or eight
times) said the Lord ever, sit in my throne, Revel. 1.20. and 2.1.8, 12, 18,
and 3, 1, 7, 14.
as he says unto Kings? yea I have sought much in reading and could never
find in old Testament, or new, in Scripture or Father Greek or Latin, that
ever the Lord said, immediately or mediately unto the great Archangel himself
that sits in S. Angel, sit thou in my throne; for no man takes, or at least
should take this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was
David, or Solomon. What are the angels on earth else then, but as ministering
spirits sent forth by the Gods on earth, 2. Chro. 17, 7, 8, 9. Exodus, 32.21.22.
Numb. 12, 11 1. King, 1.33, 34. 2, Chton, 29, 11. Exodus 5.1, 4, 20, and, 1,
6.8, 20. and, 10, 20. and 9, 8, and 10, 3, and. 11, 10, and 12, 1. Psalm, 77,
20. 2, Chron, 24, 12, 13, 14, and, 31, 13.
the Christian Ichosophats, to teach in Judah through all the Cities of their
kingdoms to minister the holy Sacraments to them that shall be heirs of
Salvation, and to govern the Church. Fifthly, the high priest Aaron calls the
Sovereign Prince Moses his Lord: and Solomon a king is called Zadoks the high
Priest Lord, Ezekiah a king calls the priests his sons: which does argue the
superiority and majesty of kings, for the Lord is superior to his servant,
and the Son inferior to his father. Sixthly, the Spirit of God every where
places Kings before the chief Priests; Moses and Aaron, the King and
Iehoiada, Ezekiab the King and Azariah the chief of the house of God, and
prefers the Princely dignity before the priestly where they meet in one
and the same person. Moses in Genesis, Genesis 14, 18, Heb. 7, 1, Exodus 19.6, 1.
Pet. 2.9, Revel. 1.6, and, 4.10.
and Saint Paul to the Hebrews do observe this order in Melchisedech whom
they name a King and a Priest. The same Moses or rather the Lord himself
calls his people a kingdom of Priests or a royal Priesthood, as speaks
Saint Peter; and Saint, John in the Reauelation has these words, and made us
Kings and Priests unto God, and the same words are used of the four and twenty
Elders. Seventh ly, Psalm. 2, 6, and, 20, 9, and 24, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 29, 10,
and 95, 3, and 98, 6, Esther 13, 9, 15, and, 14, 3, 12. Revel. 1.5, and, 15, 3,
and 17, 14, and 19, 16, 1. Tim. 6, 15. Mat. 28, 18, 1. Cor, 15, 25 26, 27.
Philip. 2, 8, 9, 10, 11, Heb, 2, 7, 8, 9 10, 17, 18. Reuela. 1.5. and 19.16.
the greatest glory and dignity in heaven is the Kingly and the highest title
or style, that is given to God in the old Testament, or to our Savior Christ
in the new, is to be called a King, a King of glory, a King for ever, a great
King above all Gods, the King almighty, a king of Gods, the Prince of the
Kings of the earth, the Lord of Lords, the king of Saints, and King of Kings,
and thus is he called four times in the book of the divine Revelation, which
is questionles the greatest and highest style, that Christ has, and by many
degrees greater and higher, then his priestly style of high priest after the
order of Melchisedech: for this style he had on earth in the state of his
humility, whereas he was not an actual king, until he rose, ascended into
heaven, and received all power in heaven and earth, as the Sovereign King of
both, at the hands of his Father, according as both Gospel and Epistle do
testify. Wherefore also the kingly dignity is the greatest on earth, and such
as do represent Christ in his kingly dignity as Christian kings do, are
greater and more eminent then those that represent him in his Priestly
dignity; Mat. 22, 23, Dan, 2, 34, 45. 1. Pet. 2.17.
that is then Priests, Bishops Archbishops, or Patriarchs. Eighthly and lastly,
the honor of the king is commanded next unto the honor of Godin holy
Scripture, Give unto God the things which are Gods, and give unto Caesar the
things which are Casurs, says our great Caesar, who as Daniel speaks; is the
Stone, that was without hand, cut of the mountain, of the blessed Virgin
Mary, and even the corner stone of the Church. Fear God, honor the King,
says Saint Peter another stone, yea, Ioh. 1.42, Galat. 2, 9. Psalm. 118, 22,
Isay. 28, 16. Mat. 21.42. Mark. 12, 10. Luke 20.17. Act. 4.11. Romans 9.33, 1.
Pet. 2, 7. Ioh. 1.42, Galat. 2.9,
a pillar and chief stone of the Church, whom I wish the Pope may immitate,
in this and all other Christian duties. To be brief (for in our royal
controversies and disputations we do handle this question more accurately,
and employe besides Scriptures, the fathers, Greeks and, Latins, the
Schoolmen, Philosophers, Politicians, Poets and Historians both sacred, and
profane, to prove the truth of this point, against the ilearned Jesuit James
Gretser) in the creation of Solomon, ^t is said that the people bowed down
their heads, and worshipped the Lord, and the King. So that it is more then
manifest, that the King is the person next unto God, in power, dignity,
honor, and authority, 1. Chron, 29, 20.
and thersore greater: and higher then the greatest and highest priest, of them
all.

Sect. 11.
The third lesson that we learn hence, to wit, That kings are not laymen but
of a mixed condition.
in that kings are called Gods, is that Kings, are called of God to be nursing
Fathers unto the Church, and have a special power about the things of God, and
consequently that they are not mere laymen as both Jesuits and Geneuians,
Papists and Puritans do hold, but of a mixed condition, partly
Ecclesiastical, and partly civil or secular, as in our latin workbefore
named shall be largely proved both by Theology, and by Philosophy and history.
For the present; I say that the truth her of is apparent in Scripture, by
precept made unto Kings, by the practice of kings, under the law, and by
Prophecy of Kings to be fulfilled under the Gospel. And first it does appear
by precept, in that Kings are enjoined in the Scripture to make themselves able
for the mannaging of the things of God, Deuteronomy. 17, 18, 19. Psalm. 2, 10, Wise. 6,
1. Ioh. 10, 34.
for they are enjoined to study Gods word diligently, to read in his Law
continually, to be wise and learned exceedingly: and therefore our Savior,
teaches us that Kings are called Gods, because the word of God, was given unto
them, meaning Principally, and to the end that they might govern Church and
commonwealth according to God, and for God, as his vicares or deputies, on
earth. Secondly it does appear by the practice of Kings under the law, Exodus
39, 43. Josh. 3, and 6, and 22, 1.6. 2. Sam. 5, 6, 21 and 6, 12. 1. Kings 2, 27
35, and 5, 5. and 8.14, 15, 10, 22. 2. King. 18, 4, and 23, 4.5. and 24, 21,
22, 23, 24, 25. 1. Chron. 13, 1, 2, 3. and, 15, 1, 2, 3.4, 11, 16. 2. Chron,
15, 8, 9, 10, 16, and 17, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 19, 8. and 20, 3, and, 24, 4.5,
6, 7, 8, and, 29, 4, 5, 11, 15, 18, 21, 25, 27, 30, 31, and 31, 2.10, 11. 1.
King. 2.27, 35, 2. Chron. 19, 11. Isay 49, 22, 23.
and not only of those that were both Princes, and Prophets, as were Moses,
David and Salomen, but also of those that were mere Princes without the
Prophetical gift, such as were Ioshnah, Asa, Ichosaphat, Ioash, Ezekiah,
Josias and Manasses; they have co^man ded the Priests, yea even the chief
priests to do the parts of their office, and appointed them to their courses
and charges, they have placed and displaced the high Priests, themselves, they
have suppressed Idolatry, removed and deposed, yea put to death Idolatrous
Priests, broken down the Idols, restored religion, to her purity, assembled
both the priests to bring up the ark of the Lord, and the people to celebrate
the passover, and to serve God, have read the law publicly in the audience of
the people, proclaimed fasts, and prayed for them, and blessed them likewise in
the house of the Lord. Thirdly the Ecclesiastical power of Princes does
appear by prophecy, for the Evangelical Prophet Isay when he foretold the
conversion of the Kings of the gentiles to the Christian faith he likewise
prophesied of their Ecclesiastical place and power, of being Nursing Fathers
unto the Church saying; Thus says the Lord God behold I will lift up mine
hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people, and they shall
bring thy sons (meaning the Churches children) in their arms, and thy
Daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders; and Kings shall be thy
nursing Fathers, and Queens shall be thy nurses. And in our Latin work of
royal Controversies, we shall show how this Prophecy has been accomplished
in the person of Christian Princes, Kings and Emperors, and how they have
exercised that part of the Ecclesiastical power, which stands in the
supreme government of the Church. To wit that they have made laws of
ecclesiastical matters, and for the confirmation of faith, have tried matters
of heresy and punished heretics, rooted out and suppressed I dolatry,
exhorted and converted nations to the Christian faith, instituted Bishops, and
sent them to preach, placed pastors in the Church, called counsels and
presided in the same.

Sect. 12
The fourth thing that we learn of this style of God given to Kings by God
himself, That kings are lawgiuers unto their people.
is that Kings are Lawgiuers unto their people, that is to say, that they have
power from God to decree, and make laws for the good government of their
kingdom, and not only that they are appointed for the custody, exposition and
execution of laws, made or to be made by the people, as some phanaticall
spirits sprung from the Lema^nian lake have supposed. The people are law-takers
not lawmakers, and law-keepers, not law-giuers; for the law-giuing power is a
divine power, and therefore belongs to God, or to him whom he has called by
the name of God, to make laws for God, and in his name, for the good of the
people. And this does appear by diverse sound and infallible arguments drawn
from Gods word. First in that Moses gave laws and civil ordinances unto his
people of the Hebrews, wrote, Exodus 18.15, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
delivered and declared them, and appointed inferior Magistrates for the
execution of them, to wit, the seventy Elders, whereby we see how that the
execution of laws appertains to the inferior Magistrates, not to the
Sovereign; but that it is his part to make laws, to give and expound them,
like as it is the peoples part to take them and keep them. Secondly, that
Princes are law-giuers, it does appear in that the Lord commands the King
to write unto himself the law of God, to keep it with him, and to read
therein all the days of his life. Now to what end all this? questionless,
that he may learn there by to be like Moses, even a faithful servant of God
in all his house, Numb. 12.7. Heb. 3.2.5.
and over all his house, and not only that he might keep Gods law the better
in his own person, but also, that he might deliver the same to his people as
Moses did, Exodus 24.34 Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. Ioh. 10.34, 35
to be observed of them: and that the laws he should make himself, might be
conformable to Gods laws: for as God the King almighty is the Lawgiuer of
Kings, so Kings, whom God has called Gods, are the Law-giuers of their people.
Thirdly this does appear in that Solomon calls Man's law, the word of the
mouth of the King, and the Kings word, like as the law of God every where in
the Scripture is called Gods word, Eccl. 8.2, 3, 4. Psalm 119.1, 4, 5, 9, 10,
13, 16, 17. Exodus 24.28.
and the ten commandments the ten words of Gods mouth. I advertise thee to
take heed to the mouth of the King (says the Spirit of God by Solomon) and to
the word of the eath of God. Where the word of the King is, there is power, and
who shall say unto him what do thou? Fourthly this does appear, in that
questionless the more divine power does belong unto the Prince, Psalm. 82.1, 6.
1. Chron. 29.23.
to whom God has both given his own divine name, (and not to the people) and
has set him in his own throne. Now to make a law is the most divine thing
that can be done of a man, and therefore it appertains unto the Prince, that
sits in Gods throne, and not to the people, that stand before the throne.
Fifthly the eternal wisdom says, By me Kings reign and Princes decree
instice, Prou. 8.15, 16
By me Princes rule, and the Nobles and all the Judges of the earth: out of
which place, it is more then manifest that it belongs to Kings and rulers to
make decrees and laws of justice, and to prescribe rules of upright living
unto their Subjects. Sixthly and lastly it is said of Kings in the Scripture,
(and to their highest commendation) that they have made certain good laws and
decrees for the glory of God, and the good of their people: Dan. 3.29. and
6.25, 26.
thus Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel, made a decree or law, that every people,
nation and language which should speak any blasphemy against the God of
Shadrach, Messach and Abednego, should be drawn in pieces, and that their
houses should be made a iakes, and Darius King of Medes and Persians, made a
law or decree; that in all the dominion of his kingdom, men should tremble and
fear before the God of Daniel: and by these six arguments it is more then
evident that the Prince, (and he principally) has an affirmative voice, and
not only a negative in the assembly of his estates. The which thing we shall
prove likewise by political and philosophical arguments in our Latin work
of Kingly controversies.

Sect. 13.
The fifth lesson that we learn, That Kings are to be liberally and honorably
mainfained. Prou. 3.9, 10.
in that Kings are of God, called Gods, is this, as we must honor God with our
riches, and the oblation of our hands, according as Solomon exhorts, saying,
Honor the Lord with thy riches, etc: so must we likewise honor them whom God
has called Gods, to wit, Sovereign Princes, whom when as we honor with our
riches in giving them a portion thereof, for their honorable provision, then
we honor God himself with our riches, as Solomon exhorts all men to do,
that would have God to bless them with abundance. And truly, if we would be
loath to let God want (if he were subject to want in his own person, as man
is) then ought we likewise be loath to let the Prince want, who represents
God, and therefore is called God, to teach us, that what we bestow upon him we
offer unto God and in whose person God oftentimes carries himself as one that
wants, and stands in need of our help. And if we would willingly,
cheerfully and without murmuring bestow upon our most bountiful Father, our
goods in whole or in half, then truly we ought not to murmr or grudge to
bestow upon Princes (whom God has called by the name of the children of the
most High) a convenient portion of the same, Psalm. 82.6.
at lest for their fathers sake. So that the good Christian subject when he
sees a King, especially a Christian King, and such a one as besides his divine
power is adorned with the divine qualities and perfections of wisdom, bounty,
justice and mercy, he ought to think with himself, that he sees God in man's
likeness, and when such a King asks subsidy or relief at his subjects
hands, they ought to show themselves, as willing and ready thereunto, as they
should, if God himself in man's likeness were come down amongst men to
require a sacrifice or oblation at their hands. And though it be true that
that Almighty God does not stand in need of any thing we have, (for he is
alsufficient in himself) yet we must think that it is his pleasure to carry
himself oftentimes, as one that does need in the person of the Prince, the
Priest and the Poor. And this he does, to try whether we love Almighty God
and our neighbor better then our goods, or no, and to know by the effect, if
we have as yet attained to this perfection, as to give unto God all that we
have, if he should require it at our hands; for the man that will grudge to
give a part unto Gods Image and chief Minister for his sake, will never be
willing to forsake all for Gods sake: no he would never be willing to bestow
his whole goods upon God himself, that will refuse or repine to give a part
unto his chief Minister. And contrariwise, the man that does cheerfully
bestow upon the Prince, in regard that he is Gods Image, Deputy and Minister,
( For he is the Minister of God for thy wealth says the Apostle and for this
cause ye pay also tribute, Rom 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
for they are Gods Ministers) does in so doing evidently show that he loves
God better then his gold, and goodness better then his goods, and that he
would make no difficulty to bestow most willingly 6all that he has upon God,
yea to forsake his whole goods for Gods sake. But of this matter of the Princes
maintenance I have entreated elsewhere, in another work published some two or
three years ago, called the Golden art, or the right way of enriching,
dedicated to the two Royal cities of these two kingdoms, but much more
copiously in another work of Kingly Controversies not as yet finished, where I
do discourse of the particular manner of the maintenance of Princes amongst
Gods people, both according to Scripture, the Judgment of divines, and
Politicians, and according to the several customs of kingdoms. And there I
show 1. that the sovereign Prince, is not Lord of the whole goods of his
subjects, and that his right does not extend over their whole faculties, as
some flatterers of Princes do falsely and dangerously hold them in hand.
Secondly, that the sovereign Prince has a right only to a certain
proportionable portion of the subjects goods. Thirdly, that as God and not man
is the institutor, author and ordainer of Kings, so is he the appointer of
their portion, and the prescriber of their manner of maintenance: for if God
has ordained and instituted Kings to be his Ministers and Servants, for the
government of his people, as we have already showed that he has; then must it
needs be true, that the same God has taken order for their maintenance. And
truly seeing that all wise and good masters do provide for their servants, and
allow them means for their sustenance and maintenance, it were a thing most
unbeseeming the wisdom and goodness of God, who is the Master of masters, both
for wisdom and goodness, to think that he has not as great care, and taken
at least as good order, for the maintenance of his servants, namely of Kings,
as other men being masters, have taken and do take for theirs. God does
always that which is most fitting, and therefore he has designed and
ordained the particular manner of the Princes maintenance: for it is most
fitting that the master should prescribe and appoint the quantity of his own
servants wages. And it was so fit that God should do it, that it was not fit
nor expedient to refer the doing thereof, unto the will or discretion of man.
It was not fit that it should be remitted to the will of the Prince himself,
for he might perhaps require more then enough, as for example, the half,
third, fourth, or fifth part of the subjects goods, neither was it fit that it
should be referred to the discretion of the people; for they lightly might
allow the Prince less then enough; and therefore God has taken order for this
thing himself, and not left it for man to do. Romans 14.4.
For as the Apostle says, Who art thou that iudgest another man's servant? so
may it be well said in this matter; who art thou that take upon thee to
share out a portion or allowance for another man's servant, yea for Gods own
chief servant? does not such an office properly belong unto God? Fourthly,
that God has set down the manner of the Princes maintenance, and has
specified the quantity of his portion in some place of his word, and that he
has done it in the fittest place that could be for that purpose: for except
it were so, it should not appear, when it is, that a Prince plays the
Exactor, for seeing that he has a right unto a certain portion of his
subjects goods (as all do grant) how shall they know, when it is that he
craves more then he ought, except there be some law to determine his
portion, and to inhibite him to leuy any more then the quantity thereof does
permit. In one word, Exaction in a Prince is the transgressing of Gods law, and
not the breaking of some humane statute or decree; and therefore there must be
a certain special law in Gods word, touching the quantity of the Princes
portion, as well as there is of the Priests, the one being as important as the
other, and Princes being Gods Ministers and Servants as well as Priests, and so
consequently to be maintained as well as they. Yea it behooved so much the more,
because that Sovereign Princes or Kings are Gods Ministers in a higher, more
eminent and honorable degree and kind, then Priests are, as has been before
abundantly showed. So that it is not likely that the Spirit of God would have
omitted so important a point as this is; being such as that without the
certain knowledge thereof, neither can Sovereigns nor Subjects do their
duty to one another. For neither can they know when it is that the Sovereign
keeps himself within the bounds of equity and moderation, or contrariwise
that he debordeth into oppression, extortion, or exaction; neither yet when it
is, that the subject offends by detention or diminution of his Sovereigns
due. Seeing then it was so necessary for the quiet, just, and upright
constitution of a kingdom amongst Gods people, that the Kings portion should
be specified as well as the Priests, we need not doubt, but that the Spirit of
God has proposed the same, some where in holy Scripture, and even in that
place which was of all other the most convenient for such a purpose; and what
place of Scripture so convenient as that wherein the first institution of Kings
amongst amongst Gods people is propounded and expounded? The which place,
because some Geneuians and modern divine have monstrously misconstered, I shall
refute their error (God-willing) other where by 13 unanswerable arguments. And
amongst other probations, we shall show it by the Hebrew Text, the Chaldaick
Thargums or Paraphrases, the Greek translation of the Septuagints, the Latin
translations of Hieronymus, Pagninus, Vatablus, Munsterus, Leo, Montanus, with
the old English, and namely, that the word MISHPAT, which is translated (...)
in Greek, and in Latin Ius or Lex, is always taken in the Scripture, and in
no fewer then 210. places for the upright judgment of God, and of the Kings
and Judges of the earth, and no where for unjust and tyrannical government, or
for a Princes abusiue power; as some modern writers have understood it most
grossly in that same place of Scripture, whereupon the resolution of this
question does wholly depend: a thing which I wish our divines should well
consider, that they do not run into their error; 1. Sam. 8.9.10, 11.21, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17.
in expounding those words of the Prophet Samuel. But of this more in another
work. In the mean time I would entreat all good subjects to beware of
charging, either now or hereafter, their Prince with the odious aspersion of
Exaction, unless they can show that he requires and receives more of his
people, then the law of God does allow him; but that they would honor him with
their best opinion, not only of a just and upright Prince, but even of an
indulgent, and beneficent Father, incase it shall be well and sufficiently
proved unto them, that he is so far from the injustice, of requiring or
taking from them any part of their own, that he even releaseth and gives them
a part of his own, which is indulgencie, bounty and beneficence, and in a
word: that he is content for his loving subjects further ease, to levy much
less then Gods law does allow him, for the maintenance of himself, his chief
officers in the Commonwealth and in the Court, and of his other servants at
home or abroad, in peace and in war.

Sect. 14.
The sixth and last lesson that we learn, That kings are free from all manner
of coercion and censure.
in that Kings are called Gods, is that Almighty God in giving them this name,
even his own name, has exempted them from all manner of violence, coercion or
censure at their subjects and inferiors hands; where as our Geneuites as well
as Jesuits, and Caluinists, as well as Papists do hold the contrary; for both
of them will have Sovereign Princes subject to coercion, excommunication and
deprivation: a doctrine and opinion, repugnant I dare say both to Theology and
Philosophy, to Divinity and Humanity, as we shall (God willing) show at large
other where. For the present, because in this work we thought good for
soliditie and breuities sake to employ only testimonies of Scripture and some
reasons derived from thence, it shall suffice that we show and confute the
impiety and absurdity, yea the vnlearnednesse and stupiditie of this doctrine
of Geneua and Rome, by these 17 reasons after following. The which if any
Divine can answer sufficiently and soundly, or bring better reason for the
contrary opinion, I shall not be ashamed to change the opinion that I now hold,
and subscribe to theirs, and freely confess this of mine to be as blockish
and unlearned, as now I hold theirs to be. First, God himself by his servant
Moses says unto every Subject, Thou shall not rail upon the Gods, Exodus 22,
28.
nor speak evil of the Ruler of thy people: if it be not lawful to rail
upon the Prince, then must it be as unlawful to rage or rise up against him;
and if we must beware of vehement words in his behalf, then much more, of
violent deeds: and if the subjects must not speak evil of their Ruler or
Sovereign, then they cannot excommunicate him: for whosoever excommunicateth a
Prince, must needs speak the greatest evil of a Prince that can be, even
that he is a most wicked man, and fitter to be Satan's slave then Gods
servant. Ecclesiast. 10.20.
To the same purpose appertains that other precept or prohibition of the
Spirit of God, by the mouth of Solomon, proclaimed to subjects, Curse not the
Prince, no not in thy thought: if it be not lawful to curse the King, then is
it not lawful to excommunicate him; 1, Chron. 29.23. Psalm. 21.3.
let both Rome rage, and Geneua iangle as much as they can to the contrary.
Secondly, God has set the King in his throne, and set on his head with his
own hand a crown of pure gold; now who can say that it is fitting or comely
that any man or order of men, especially subjects, and such as stand before the
throne, should offer violence to him that sits in the throne, or put out the
hand to thrust him out of the throne, or to pull off the crown that God has
put upon his head. Thirdly, It is the most high, (says the holy Angel and the
Prophet Daniel, Dan. 4.22.28.29. Proverb. 21.1
to King Nebuchadnezzar) that bears rule over the Kingdom of men, and gives
it to whomsoever he will: The Kings heart is in the hands of the Lord, as the
rivers of waters, he turns it whither soever it pleases him (says Solomon)
and therefore the most high is the only Ruler, Curber, Connerter, and Scourger
of Kings, and men must not be so bold, as to take Gods proper office upon
them: for in so doing, they commit a greater offense against God, then does the
greatest Tyrant that can be, in plaguing and persecuting his people. For no
subject, one or more, ecclesiastical or secular can meddle in such a matter as
this, without impeaching God of a notable imperfection: for either they must
think that God sees not the wickedness of the tyrannous or idolatrous King,
which is to deny his divine omniscience and absolute knowledge, or if he sees
it, that he cares not for it, which is to deny his divine providence, and to
charge him with humane negligence; or if he care for it, that he is either
unable to revenge it without the hand of the Kings own subject, which is to
deny his divine omnipotency, and to brand him with humane infirmity, or else
that he is unwilling to revenge it; which is to charge him both with injustice
and want of mercy. Whence it follows, that such subjects as would correct
their Sovereign, do both make God no God, and make themselves God: in a word,
such a subject is David's fool, Psalm. 53.1.2. These. 2.4.
that has said in his heart, there is no God, except perhaps himself, and so
becomes such an Antichristian Anti-god, as exalts himself both above Gods
God on earth the King, and above the God in heaven, in taking his proper place
and office upon him. No, Josh. 6.8, 10, 11 12, cap. Judge. 1.2.6, 7, and, 3, 15,
16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 26, 27, 28, 1. Sam. 13, and. 15. and. 22, and 31 1. King.
16, and 22. 2. King. 16. and 25. 2. Chron. 28. and 33. Exodus 14, 28, and 15, 4.
Dan. 4.22, 28 29, 30. 1. King. 1, 2, 3, 4, 16, 17, and 15, 4, 5. 2. Chron. 26,
16, 17, 18, 19 20, 21.
God needs not the hand of any subject, to be revenged on a wicked Prince,
for he can stir up other Princes and people or foreign persons against him,
as we read, that he did against these Kings of Jericho, of Ai, and of the
Amorites, against Adonibezek King of Canaan, Eglon King of Meab, Saul, Ahab,
Ahaz, Manasseth, and Zedekias, Kings of Judah and Israel: or he can make the
wicked King (as it were with his own hand) execute Gods vengeance upon himself:
thus he suffered Saul to slay himself, and Zimri to burn himself. And as he
will not employ a Princes own subjects in such a business, so he needs not
to use the hand and power of any person whatsoever; for God can drown the
wicked Prince in the water or sea with Pharaoh, or he can strike him with
madness with Nebuchadnezzar, or he can burst him or break his neck with
Ahazias, or can strike him with leprosy like Vzziah or Azariah. The very
elements, and beasts of the field are at his beck and bidding, the beasts to
devour, the fire to burn, the air to infect, the water to drown, and the
earth to swallow up such Princes, as God will be avenged on, yea he has armies
of painful and shameful diseases, of worms, of mice and of lice to consume
and vex wicked Kings with. Dan. 4, 10, 11 12, 13, 14, 22 23, 28, 29, 30. and
5.6, 7, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28 2. Micha. 6.9. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 11, 12, 13, 14 15,
16, 17, 18 28.
And as the Angels of God (which are his highest creatures) smote
Nebuchadnezzar with madness, and drove him from amongst men, to dwell with the
beasts of the field, and so deprived him of his kingdom for a time (for those
Noters and Geneuian Glossers are deceived, that do think his own subjects
did depose him for tyranny) and as another Angel did write upon the wall, the
sentence of King Belschazzars destruction; so the worms that are the Lords
lowest creatures, conspired to vex the wicked tyrant Antiochus the cruel
persecuter of the Jews, that he died miserably; and both these creatures
together, the highest in heaven, act 12.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 21, 22, 23
and the lowest on earth, did at Gods appointment concur to plague Herod the
persecutor of the Christians, who had vexed many of the faithful, killed James
and imprisoned Peter: for the Angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not
glory unto God, so that he was eaten up of worms. Thus we see how God gets
glory, when he corrects wicked Kings with his own hands, 1. Sam 13.9, 10,
11, 12, 13 14, and 15, 1, 2 3, 8, 9, 10 11, 16, 17, 22, 23 and 19, 20, 22, 23,
26, 28, cap. 1. King. 16.30, 31, 32, and 17, 18, 19, 20 21, 22, cap, 2. King.
21, 1, 2, 3, 4.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 16 2. Chron. 33.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
whereas he is robbed of his glory by such subjects as dare take the rod, as
it were out of Gods hands, and put it into their own, to scourge Kings with.
Fourthly, the people of God under the old Testament did not imprison or depose
their most wicked Princes, such as were Saul, Ahab, and Manasses, nor did the
high Priests excommunicate them for their cruelty, tyranny, apostasy and
idolatry, persecution and seduction; and therefore the people of God under the
new Testament ought to do the like, in following the example of their piety
and patience in the behalf of bad Princes; otherwise Christians should come
short of the Jews in moral perfections, which were absurd. Fifthly, the
constitution and creation of Kings is of God and not not of man, it is Gods
hand only that can make a King, according as he says himself, By me Kings
reign, and as we have proved above in the first lesson, and therefore the
deposition of Kings, Proverb. 8.15
and their coercion, belongs likewise to God, and not to the Kings own
subjects, for the power is equal in the one and the other. And therefore we
see that the voice that deposed Nebuchadnezzer, came from heaven. Dan. 4.22,
28, 29.
Thy kingdom is departed from thee, like as the Angel and the Prophet do both
of them avouch, that it is the most high that gives the kingdom to whomsoever
he will. Sixthly in the new Testament Christ and his appostles, do oftentimes
command subjects to give unto Kings, but no where they bid take away or
withhold any thing from Kings, howsoever unworthy, neither tribute and living
by detention, nor liberty by incarceration, nor Kingship by deprivation, nor
life by civil (or rather uncivil and sinful) execution, nor the benefits of
the Church and kingdom of heaven, by hellish excommunication. Give (says the
King of Kings) unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, like as he had
commanded, Peter his very prime Apostle to give the Kings Receiver poll money
for them two, Mat. 22, 17, 21, and, 17, 24, 25, 26, 27, Mark. 12, 14, 15, 16,
17. Mat. 10.1, 2. 1. Pet. 2.17. Romans 13, 1, 2, 24.
give (says he) the twenty pence unto them for me and thee, and the same
prime Apostle, commands all subjects both spiritual and temporal persons,
even as many as have Souls, (for his fellow Saint Paul says let every soul
besubiect to princes) to fear God and honor the King, Ergo subjects must not
dishonor the King by coercion, incarceration, excommunication or deprivation.
Yea Saint Peter's Successor himself (if he has any) has no power to dishonor
the King, whom God has honored with his crown and throne, let him be never
so unworthy in his conceit, nor to expose him to the dishonor, or danger of
any of his subjects, by his censure of excommunication, or sentence of
deprivation. Our Savior bids give to Kings, Saint Peter gave to Kings' and
bids give them honor, and so does S. Paul, saying, Give to all men their duty,
Romans 13.7.
tribute to whom ye owe tribute, custom, to whom cnstome, fear to whom
fear, honor to whom ye owe houour. And no where they bid take away any thing
from Kings: and therefore such men as take away from Kings their livings
liberty or life, or the benefits of the Church, Gods kingdom, or their own
do disobey God, the father of Kings, and obey the devil the dishonourer, and
debaser of kings. Seventhly, we do not read in Gods word that ever a King was
delivered unto Satan; so that it wants example; and as for precept, the very
formal words used in the institution of excommunication by our Lord, do show
that it was never intended for Kings, by the Spirit of God. For besides they
were not as yet within the bosom of the Church, Mat. 18, 15, 16, 17.
by calling, when it was ordained, those words; If thy brother trespass
against thee, If thy brother hoare thee, If thy brother hear thee not, If thy
brother refuse to hear the Church also, do evidently, and pregnantly euince,
that excommunication is a censure of an offending brother, 1. Cor. 5.12.
not of the father of the people. And therefore the Apostle entreating of
excommunication, extends it no further, then unto such a one as is called a
brother. If any that is called a brother (says he) be a formcatour, 2 Thessalonians.
3.13.14, 15.
or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner,
with such a one eat not, neither company together; and again, And ye
brethren be not weary in well doing, if any man (to wit being a brother) obey
not our sayings, note him by a letter, and have no compante with him, that he
may be ashamed; yet count him not as an enemy but admonish him as abrother.
And though it be true that the believing Sovereign as well as the Subject is a
brother in Christianity, and might well have been so called by our blessed
Savior, and his Apostle, yet I say it does not appear that they understood by
the title of brother in those places, but such as did then believe the Gospel,
who were all subjects, for as yet there were no believing Sovereigns; yea both
our Saviors and the Apostles words do euince that a King though he be a
believer and so a brother, yet that he can not be brought in amongst those
excommunicable brothers, because the excommunicated brother must be unto the
other brethren as an Heathen and a Publican, as our Savior commands, that is
to say, they must avoid his conversation, and decline his company, and flee
his familiarity, as the Aposlle expounds it. But so it is that subjects can
not by any means shun or abhor the presence and conversation of their
Sovereign, both because of duty, and because of necessity. As for duty, the
laws of nature and of Scripture, of reason and religion, of Church and State,
do oblige subjects to do their duty to their Sovereign be he never so bad;
and therefore they must repair unto his presence and converse with him,
whenever it pleases him to command. And as for necessity; subjects can not
choose but repair to the Prince to have iuslice, and such other help as they
sland in need of at his hands. And therefore I say, though both Rome and Geneua
should join their iarring and warring wits together, yet they shall never be
able to solue or satisfy this argument, Mat. 18.17. 1. Cor. 5.5.9.11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. 1. Tim. 1.20.
all excommunicated persons presence, society and company, is to be shunned
as a Heathens, a Publicanes, or which is worse, as a man's delivered to the
Devil. But no Kings presence, society and conversation can be shunned of
their subjects, for both duty and necessity bind them to the contrary. Ergo
no Kings can be excommunicated: or thus; the effects of excommunication can not
have place in the person of a Prince, as for example, his presence and
conversation can not be declined of his subjects, without both sin and their
great hurt, and therefore the censure it self has no place in Princes.
Ninthly, the excommunication of an universality or multitude, as of a whole
city, Body, Commonwealth or kingdom is in the judgment of all, thought a
thing unlawful; and semblably the excommunication of the Sovereign, as he
that represents the whole Body of his kingdom, must be unlawful: neither
can the head be punished without the sensible hurt of the whole body. Tenthly,
God is a God of order and not of disorder or confusion, 1. Cor. 14.33.
as the Apostle speaks, and therefore he has not given the inferiors power
to punish corporally or spiritually their superiors, for this were most
contrary to order, and consequently he has not given subjects any power upon
their Sovereign, nor Priests any power to punish Princes; for both people and
priests be inferiors, and their Sovereign is their superior; they are as
members of the body taken severally, the commons as feet, the Nobles as hands,
the Priests as eyes: or they are as the body, being taken coniunctly, but the
Sovereign is as the head, higher then all the other members, and above the
whole body, and as the soul more divine, excellent and eminent then the whole
body; the subjects are as servants, the Sovereign as the Master or Lord, the
people as the children, and the Prince as their common father. It is against
good nature and order, for the inferior members to rise or rebel against the
supreme member, for the body to beat or break the own head, and it is
repugnant both to good nature and grace, for children to stretch forth the hand
to chastise or punish their father be he never so furious. And as for the
chiefe^ Priests and Prelates they are as Angels and Archangels, indeed, but the
Sovereign Prince, is as the God of Angels and Archangels far above their
reach. Eleuenthly, if it belongs not unto one man or more men to beat,
punish, judge or condemn another man's servant as the Apostle S. lames
teaches, saying, Who art thou that iudgest another man? Iam. 4.12, Romans 14.4.
and the Apostle S. Paul likewise, saying, Who art thou that condemnest another
man's servant? then it belongs much less to one man or more to judge, punish,
excommunicate, depose or condemn Gods chief servant; Rom, 13 4.
now the Prince is Gods servant, says the same Aposlle and in the same Epistle
to the Romans (and I wish that both Romans and Geneuians would weigh those
words better then they do) and therefore who is he that condemns such a
servant, as is not only another man's servant, but even the best man's servant,
to with Christ's, and his chief servant, yea Gods servant? He stands or
falls to his own master, says the Apostle, and that is, neither the Pope of
Rome, nor the master Minister of Geneua; but God and Christ; who will not have
his servant subject to the proud censure eitheir of the Roman Consistory, or
of the Geneuian Presbytery. The Apostle would not presume to judge them that
are without the Church, because they belonged to Gods judgment in propriety,
what have I to do to judge them also which are without says he, do ye not
judge them that are within? but God judges them that are without, and shall we
think that he would have presumed to judge those that God has placed above
the Church, I mean Christian Princes, 1. Cor. 5.12.13.
who though they be within the bosom of the Church as Christians, yet are they
without or above the reach of the hands of the Church, as the nursing-fathers
and heads of the Church on earth, under Christ the Sovereign King of the
Church, whose immediate servants they are, and therefore as his peculiars are
subject to nones judgment but his only. Twelfthly, if servants must be subject
to their masters with all fear, and not only to the good and courteous, but
also to the froward, as the Apostle Saint Peter teaches; 1. Pet. 2.13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21 22, 23.
then must subjects be loy all and dutiful to their Sovereign, and not only
to the good, but also to the evil; for as the family is a little kingdom, and
the master of the family, a little king, and the sons and sernants of the
family, are the subjects of this little kingdom; so is the kingdom a great
family, the King the great master of this great family, and his subjects are
the children and servants of the same family. Thirteenthly, if the Angels of
heavens Church, from their heavenly seats and habitations, do not exclaim or
give out railing judgment against Princes before the Lord, though they see and
know their wickedness much better then men do, 2. Pet. 2.10, 11
and that they be above them in dignity, power and place, as the Aposlle S.
Peter does avouch and witness; then much less must the Angels of the Church on
earth, Roman or Geneuian, from their earthly seats, and pulpits, Consistories
or Presbyteries exclaim against Princes, be they never so wicked, or yet
proclaim any railing judgment against them, seeing they are not only
inferior unto the Angels in heaven which spare them, but even unto the Princes
themselves, which are Gods by their place, though in their persons they were
never so profane. And I wish with all my heart that the great Angel that
sits in S. Angel, would now at last learn this Angelical lesson, of those
Angelical Doctors in heaven, and of his own supposed Evangelical Predecessor
Saint Peter, who professes in express words, that it is one of the properties
of false Prophets to despise Princes, and to speak evil of them that are in
dignity and authority; Jude. v. 8.9, 10
Where as the Angels which are greater both in power and might, give not
railing Judgment against them, and the same thing is said of Saint Jude.
Fourtenthly, if a most holy Angel, yea even Michael, the highest Archangel
durst not rail upon the devil, who is all wickedness, nor blame him with
cursed speaking, when as he strone against him, and disputed about the body of
Moses, as the holy Apostle Jude witnesses, how then dare subjects, which be
sinful men themselves rail upon the Prince, or how dare either the Roman
Archangel that sits in S. Angel, or the Angelings of Geneua, from their
consist orie or presbytery, or yet from their pulpits pronounce any curse or
excommunication against Princes, or deliver them unto the devil, though they
were liker little devils, then little Gods on earth, by reason of their wicked
living? And if we must not so much as rail upon wicked Kings, nor revile and
diffame them with our tongues, much less must we hurt them with our hands, or
offer their persons any violence. If ye love them which love you, (says our
Savior,) and dee good to them which do good to you, what thank have ye, or
what reward? Mat. 5.46, 47, Luke 6.32, 33
do not the Publicanes and sinners even the same? and the like may be said in
this case, if Christians love and loyally obey such Princes as love them, and
if they speak well of such governors, as do well to them, and submit
themselves to such Princes as are virtuous, godly and just, what thank, or
what reward have they, or what singular work do they worthy of a singular
reward? do not the heathen and infidels, even the same? and as our Savior
said to his Disciples, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, and not only of publicanes and sinners, Mat. 5.10.
ye shall not enter into the kingdom of God; So may it be said to Christian
subjects, except your obedience, subjection and patience, in the behalf of
your Princes and Rulers exceed the obedience, subjection and patience of
heathen and unbelieving subjects in the behalf of their Sovereigns, ye
cannot be subjects of the kingdom of heaven.

Fifteenthly, Subjects ought to be most tender and careful of the salvation
of their Sovereign, and therefore they ought not to seclude him from the use
of the ordinary means of his amendment, his sanctification and salvation; as
from the hearing of the word, the prayers of the Church, and the receiving of
the Sacrament.

Sixteenthly, a wicked Prince in receiving the Sacrament, either receives it
worthily and penitently, and so is pardoned, or else unworthily and
impenitently, and so is plagued of God, according to that of the Apostle, He
that eats and drinks unworthily, 1. Cor. 11.28.29.
eats and drinks his own damnation, because he discerns not the Lords
body, and so he is either made better or worse; if better, then it should not
have been well done to keep him from the Communion, if worse, then God
himself has punished and plagued him with his own hand, which is much more
fit, then that any of his own Subjects should presume to punish him. So that
it is every way more for the glory of God and the good of the Church, that a
Prince be admitted to the Sacrament, then that he be secluded there-fro; for
either Gods mercy is manifested, when as receiving it worthily and well, he
amendeth his manners, or his justice is executed and notified, when as
receiving it unworthily, he runs into some greater sin, or incurreth some
temporal or spiritual judgment, and both the ways Gods glory is more and
more demonstrated, and the Church edified by so notable an example.
Seuenteenthly and lastly, our most blessed Savior when he exhorts us unto
perfection, (says thus,) Love your enemies, Mat. 5.44, 45, 48. Luke 6.27, 28,
35.
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, pray for them
which hurt you wrongfully, trouble and persecute you, that ye may be the
children of your Father which is in heaven, who is kind and good, both unto
the good and the evil; and the Apostle Saint Paul writing to the Romans says
the same: Bless them which persecute you, Bless and curse not, recompense to
no man evil for evil, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto
wrath, for it is written, vengeance is mine, Romans 12.14, 17, 19, 21.
I will repay says the Lord. Whereof it follows, that if Princes be our
foes, which ought to be our friends, yea our fathers, and so both hate us and
hurt us which are their subjects: yet we ought to love them, and help them
what we can, though they do evil to us, yet we ought to do good to them,
though they oppress and persecute us, yet we ought to pray for them, though
they speak evil of us, yet we ought to speak well of them, though they
grieve us, yet we ought not to grudge against them, though they require too
much of us, and more then we can well spare, yet we ought not to refuse them,
much less to resist them, or rebel against them: though they have many
imperfections, yet we ought not to aggrauate them, or blaze them abroad by
slandrous words or infamous writes: yea rather we ought to extenuate and to
lessen them, hide them, cover them, and excuse them. Finally though they seek
to kill both our bodies and our souls, yet we ought to seek the preservation
of their bodies, and the salvation of their souls; and in so doing we subjects
shall be perfect as the children of the most high, and our reward shall be great
and inestimable in the heavens.

Sect. 15. The Church of England more Angelical or Angellike.

We have showed at large the perfection of the Church of England in regard of
the divine condition of the supreme Governor thereof upon earth, which is the
King, whom God himself has called by the name of God, as he that has his
royal power immediately from God, and not from man, contrary to the opinion of
Romans and Geneuians, and whose dignity is absolutely the greatest and
diuinest of all other, and much more eminent then the Priestly, contrary to the
opinion of the same, and whose person and power is mixed of ecclesiastical and
civil, as he that is not a mere layman, contrary to the opinion of them
likewise, and whose Majesty and dignity is inviolable, and not liable to any
kind of censure or punishment at the hands of man, spiritual or temporal,
otherwise then both Romans and Geneuians would make us believe, in all which
points for all their iumping together, they err most grossly, and the Church
of England holds or thodoxally. Now in the next place we shall prove the
perfection of the same Church by showing how that she is more Angelical or
Angel-like in respect of the secondary Governors of the Church, and
consequently liker unto Gods Church in heaven then any Geneuian Church is. For
like as in the Church of God in heaven, God himself governs soueraignely and
supreamely, as Monarch and King, and the Archangells do govern the inferior
Angels secondarily as Senators, and the twenty four crowned Elders, which are
of the blessed Spirits of men do govern the inferior spirits, as we may
learn by some ten chapters of the Revelation, and as all ancient Divines do
deliver; so in the Church of England, the Sovereign Prince as God, and for
God, does govern it supreamely upon earth, and secondarily the Archbishops,
Colloss. 1.16, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
as Archangels do preside above the Bishops, which again as Angels (and so
are they called in the same Divine Revelation, seven times in two chapters) do
govern the inferior Ministers of the Word and Sacraments; and these again
like unto those more perfect spirits or souls of men, Reuela. 45, 7, 8, 9, 12,
14, 15 16, and 19. cap. Revel. 2.1, 8, 12, 18, and 3, 1, 7, 14,
do govern the lay multitude of men and women. So that the Anglicane or
English Church is more Angelical or Angel-like then the Geneuian is, which
admits no such Angelical distinction and order of Ministers; for there they
are equal, and neither like the Angels in heaven, which have their chief
Princes, Dan. 10.13, and 12.1. Ju^e verse. 9. Revel. 12.7. Colos. 1.16. Revel.
9.11. and 12.7.
and their inferiors, as namely, Michael the Archangel and his Angels; even
Thrones, Domimons, Principalities, Powers, as the Apostle speaks, nor like
the Devils in hell; which are better ordered, as having a distinction of
degrees, for the Angel-king of the bottomless pit, otherwise called the
Dragon, has many black Angels under him; whence it follows that the
Anglicane Church as being the more Angelical or Angel-like is perfiter then
the Geneuian by far.

And truly I can not wonder enough of this paritie of theirs from whence they
had it, for it is more then manifest, that they had it not from heaven, nor yet
from hell, as has been before showed; belike they have learned it of the
Grasshoppers, that leap about the banks of the Lemannian lake, for they have no
King, yet go they forth all by bands says Solomon. From the Church of God
under the law they had it not, for they had their high Priests their principal
or chief Priests, and their inferior Priests, Exodus 28. Leuit. 8. Numb. 3.
and, 4, and, 8, and, 18, 1. Chron. 9. and 15, and 16, and, 24, and 25, and 26
2. King. 23. Nehem. 12. Heb. 5, 5, 6, 10 Mat. 10, 1, 2, and 28, 16, Mark, 3.14,
and 6, 7, Luke 6, 13, and 9, 1, Act. 1.22, 16, and 2, 14, and, 6, 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, and, 8, 5, 6, 14, 15, 16, 17, and, 19, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 Cor. 12.28, 29.
Ephesians 4.11.12.
and likewise among the Levites some were superiors, and some inferiors, some
were as Lords and chief Fathers, and other some as sons and followers. Nor
had they their paritie and equality of Church Ministers from the Church of God
under the Gospel, such as it was in the days of Christ and his Apostles, for
our Savior himself was as the high Priest, the Apostles as the chief
Priests, the seventy Disciples as the inferior Priests, and the Deacons as the
Levites: and no man that has his right wits, will say that the Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, and Pastors mentioned by the Apostle Paul as ordained
of God in the Church, were all equal in dignity and office. Neither had they
their paritie of pastors from the Church, such as it was after the Apostles
days, for within the first five hundredth years we read in the Ecclesiastical
histories, how that the Church was governed by Patriarchs and Arch bishops
representing the twelve Apostles, and by Bishops representing the Evangelists.
Yea in the very Apostles days, there were Bishops which had under them
inferior Pastors, as S. James Bishop of lerusalem, S. Peter Bishop of
Antioch, S. Paul Bishop of Rome, S. Mark Bishop of Alexandria: and if we will
not believe the Ecclesiastical history of the Primitive Church, yet let us
believe the Epistles of the Apostle Paul, who enstileth Timothy the
Evangelist, 2. Tim. 4. Tit. 3. 1. Tim. 5.22, Tit. 1 5,
the first Bishop of the Church of Ephesus, and Titus another Evangelist, first
Bishop of the Church of the Cretians, and testifies that by virtue of their
function, they did ordain presbyters or inferior pastors in those Churches,
for ordination argues demonstratiuely the superiority of the ordainer, and
the inferioritie of the ordained, Act. 20, 17, 18 1. Tim. 3.1, 2, and, 5.17,
19, Tit. 1 5.6, 7,
and without such inequality, their can be neither ordination nor order. And
though it be true that in the Scripture, the names of Bishop and Presbyter or
Pastor, be taken indifferently for one and the same office, yet that does
argue only that every Pastor or Presbyter is and may be called a Bishop in
respect of his people or parish, over which he is placed, so that he may be
called a Bishop above the Laity, but it does not argue that their were no
superior Bishops above those Bishops of the Laity; to ordain, order and
direct them, which were Bishops of a more eminent degree, and distinct from the
other; these Bishops, Presbyters and Pastors above the Clergy, and those
Bishops, Presbyters and Pastors above the Laity, and consequently inferior
unto the former, wherefore I could wish that learned men would not lean so
much as they do, to that argument taken from the indifferency of those two
words (...) and (...) seeing the question and controversy is not verbal but
real, for the question is not, if all the Ministers of the Church may be
called by the common name of Pastor, Presbyter and Bishop; but if all those
that are called by the common name, ought to be of equal dignity and
authority? or whether or no there ought to be amongst the multitude of
Ministers, some superiors to govern, and some inferiors to be governed, for
good orders sake, and to be called for distinctions sake, by different names,
applying or appropriating the common name of Bishop to the superior, and the
common name of Presbyter, Priest or Pastor to the inferior? And truly in the
time of my own Puritanisme and Geneuisme, I was wont to press this verbal
argument as much as any man, to prove thereby the paritie of pastors; and
there is not another argument to that purpose worth a pin; but in the end I
found it both fallacious and frivolous, for in the Scriptures, Kings, Apostles,
Act. 6. Romans 13, 4, 1. Cor. 4, 1. Colosi. 1.25, 1 Thessalonians. 3.2, 1. Tim. 3.8.12
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Deacous are called by the common name of
(...), Ministers or servants of God, and yet their Ministrations and services
are not of the same nature, nor of equal dignity, and the two names of
presbyter or elder being referred to office and not to age, and of Governor
or Ruler or Ouerseer, are conucrtible; for every Elder is a Governor, and
every Governor is on Elder, and yet the Elderships and Governments are
distinct; Numb. 11, 16.17, Ezra. 10.8, Luke 22.66, Act. 20.17,
for some are called Lay Elders or elders of the people, to wit, in temporal
matters, and those were the Magistrates of the lewish Commonwealth, and others
are called Elders of the Church, to wit Governors of the people, in spiritual
matters; as Ministers of the Word and Sacraments; so that both the one and the
other were Elders and Governors, and yet they were of different and distinct
kinds, the one temporal Elders and Governors of the people, in the
Commonweal, the other spiritual Elders and Governors of the same people in
the Church; and semblably, these spiritual Governors of the Church and
Ministers of the word, both Bishops and Presbyters or Priests, are called by
the common name of Presbyters, Priests and Elders, and likewise by the common
name of Episcopi, Bishops, Superintendents or Overseers, and yet they differ
both in the object of their office, and in their degree: for the one are chief
Priests and Elders of the Church, and the other are inferior Priests and
Elders of the same Church; the one are Bishops, Superintendents and Overseers
of the Laity or people in spiritual things, but the other are Bishops,
Superintendents and Overseers of the Clergy, as well as of the Laity; and of
their inferior priests and pastors, as well as of the people in the same
spiritual things. In a word, the Church of God being the best ordered Body
that can be, behooved to consist of Superiors to govern, and of Inferiors to
be governed, to wit, of these two ranks, Clergy and Laitte, and as the
Laity was to be governed by the Clergy, as the children by the fathers, and
scholars by their masters; so the Clergy being a great multitude was to have
order and government in it self, and therefore behooved to consist of
superiors and inferiors likewise And to these overseers of the Church were
assigned different names and titles for distinctions sake; the Overseers or
Rulers of the Church in the quarters of the world, were called Patriarchs, the
Ouerseer and Ruler of the Church of a whole kingdom was called a Primate, the
Overseers and Rulers of the Clergy or Church in the several Provinces of a
kingdom were called Archbishops, and the Overseers or Rulers of the same
Clergy in a diocese or shiere, were called Bishops, like as the Overseers of
the Laity or people in a parish, were called Presbyters, Priests or Pastors,
for in the last Section of this work; wherein we do entreat more at large of
the honorable titles and maintenance of the ministry, we show likewise, how
that the Ministers of the Gospel, ought not to disclaim the honorable style
and title of Priests. Thus we see how that there must needs be imparitie and
inequality amongst Ministers, except we mean to make them a multitude
without order and government, or else give them from Geneua Lay-gouernours; for
amongst them, the Elders of the Church which be lay men, being more in number
(to pass over their Lay-deacons) do govern the Ministers being the smaller
number; judge and censure them, both in life and doctrine; and so are they well
served, because they refused to be governed by men of their own order, to
wit, by Bishops, therefore God has given them over to be deluded, derided,
debased, and dishonored by the Lay government of those whom they ought to
govern and rule as the Shepherd his sheep, the father his children, the
schoolmaster his scholars, for amongst the Geneuians it is quite contrary,
where the Lay Elders as being more in number, do overrule the Ministers as
has been said. But thanks be unto Almighty God; for raising up a Jacob from
the North, Isay. 41.8, 9, 25. Revel. 1.20. and 12.7
and calling him from the ends of the earth to do him service in restoring of
his Church in the North, to the ancient Angelical form, and in banishing out
of it, the Grashopper-gouernment of Geneua; and let all Britains, North, and
South, Proverb. 30.27.
even as many as do love the likeness of Ierusalems Angels, better then of
Geneuian Grasshoppers, say Amen.

Sect. 16
Thirdly the Church of England is more like the Church in heaven for holiness,
then the Geneuian is; The Church of England more heauen-like for holiness. Isay
6.1, 2, 3 Reul. 4. and 5.8, 12.13. and 7.15
for in heaven the Angels and blessed Spirits keep every day holy, incessantly
praising God and saying, holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts, the whole
world is full of his glory, so says the evangelical Prophet Isay in the old
Testament, and divine S. John in the new says, that they cease not day nor
night to say and to sing, holy, holy, holy, Lord God almighty, which was, and
which is, and which is to come, and that they serve him day and night in his
Temple, saying, Praise and honor and glory and power, be unto him that
sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever more, and the four said
Amen. Now the Church of England is far holier then the Geneuian, because the
Geneuians are not so holy as the Jews were, nor have not so many holy days as
they had: for besides the two and fifty Sabbaths of the year, Exodus 12.14, 15,
16, 17, 18. and 13.6.7. and 20.8, 9, 10. and 23.12, 14, 15, 16, 17. and 38.18.
Deuteronomy. 16. Ester 9.17, 18, 19, 21, 26, 27, 28, 29. 30, 31. 1. Machab. 4.43, 44,
52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59.
which are the Geneuian holy days, they had other holy days, and festiuities,
which they did observe, as of the Passover, of the first fruits, of
Tabernacles, and of Purim instituted by Queen Ester and Mordecai, and of the
dedication of the Altar, instituted by Machabaeus. But the English like good
Christians, which should not come short of the Jews in doing of holy duties,
but either match them or surmou^t them, have besides the two and fifty.
Sundaies of the year, set apart to the performing of holy duties, about thirty
holy days more, in honor of God and of our Savior Christ: and moreover they
have in diverse places, as namely, in Cathedral Churches frequent holy
assemblies, yea daily, for the holy service of God morning and evening, and in
other Parochial Churches, they have holy assemblies for Gods service on
Wodnesday, Friday, and Saturday, every week throughout the year, and besides
these, they have frequent holy assemblies on other days of the week, upon the
religious occasions of Christenings, Weddings, Burials, Mind days, and
Lectures, where the people pray and praise God, and hear the word of God read
or expounded in a Sermon. So that if there be any holiness placed in praying
unto God, and in praising of his name publicly in the congregation, a thing
which no man that is in his right wits will deny, or if holiness of life may
be helped any whit by such frequent assemblies and Sermons, it must needs
follow that the Church of England has more holiness then the Genenian,
because she has many more of such holy assemblies for service and sermons,
prayers and praises then the other has. And that these were observed in the
primitive Church within the first five hundredth years, many holy days besides
the Sunday, and even the same that are at this day observed in England, we
shall prove it more particularly by alleging the testimonies and authorities
of the Church Greeks and Latins in another work called Dies Domini; which
contains diverse disputations, and discourses upon the times of the worlds
beginning, lasting, ending, according to the Scriptures, and the opinions of
Hebrews, Greeks and Latins, Divines, Philosophers, Historians and
Schoolmen; and in it we do also entreat of the holy times of the Church.
But because that many do so misconceiue of holy days, as if they were only
fit for the Popes holiness, and for hypocrites, which is as damnable and
deuillish opinion as ever hell hatched in the disgrace of true holiness,
without which, the Apostle says, Heb. 12.14.
no man shall ever see God; therefore let me entreat and beseech my
Countrymen for the most holy Gods sake, to ask them these few questions.
First, if the attaining of holiness, and the doing of religious duties be not
the chief end of good Christians in this life? which I hope will not be
denied. Secondly, if religious assemblies, and holy meetings be not the proper
means of attaining unto true holiness? the which I take will be granted.
Thirdly if the frequencie of such holy assemblies, be not in all likeli-hoode
a more ready and easy means for men to attain unto holiness, and to do
religious duties, then the raritie thereof? in a word, which of the two is most
likely, that a man should attain unto true holiness by repairing unto holy
assemblies or places, often or seldom? and me thinks no man that is in his
good wits will deny, but that often repairing to the holy house of the most
holy God, for the doing of holy duties, as to pray unto God for our selves, and
for others, to praise his name for benefits and blessings, spiritual and
temporal, to sing Psalms, to hear Gods word, and the Sermons of his
servants, and the like is a more direct means to attain unto holiness, then
seldom repairing as namely once in the week. Lastly, I demand, if it were
not an excellent thing, and a happy condition, if men could set apart, a part
of every day in the year to Gods service, and to meet together in the holy
Congregation, for the performing of such holy duties: and if the necessities of
humane life will not let us have the leisure to do so, if at least the next
best is not to be done, which is to have as many holy days as possibly we can,
and as better one then none, so better more, then one only; and many then
few: that so we may the more neetely resemble those Church Members in heaven,
which keep every day holy, according as we do pray daily, taught by our
Lord, saying, Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy
Kingdom come, thy will be done in earth, (that is in the Church militant) as
it is in heaven, or in the Church triumphant.

Sect. 17.
Fourthly, as the Church of England is more like the Church of God and Angels
for heavenly holiness, The Church England more heaven like for humble
reverence.
then the Geneuian is, so is she more like the same in heavenly and humble
reverence, and in the expression thereof by religious gestures. In the Church
of God and blessed spirits, the Angels and Saints are painted out, covering
their faces, standing before the throne, kneeling and falling before it on
their faces, uncovering of their heads, and casting of their crowns before the
throne, and most submissely worshipping of God, Isay. 6.1, 2, Ezech. 1.24, 25,
and 10, 3, 19 Dan. 7.9, 10, Zach. 6, 4, 5, Job. 1.6, and 2, 1. Revel. 4, 10,
and 5, 8.14, and 7, 1, 9, 10, 11, 12, and, 8, 2.
as we may read in the prophesies of Isay, Ezechiel, Daniel, Zachary, in the
book of Job, and in the Revelation of S. John in many places: for S. John
beheld and saw a great multitude, which no man could number of all nations and
kinreds, and people and tongues, standing (not sitting) before the throne, and
before the lamb, and saying with a loud voice, Salvation comes of our God,
that sits upon the throne, and of the lamb. And he saw all the Angels
likewise standing round about the throne, and the Elders kneeling: yea falling
before the same throne on their faces, and worshipping God and saying; Amen,
Praise and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and might
be unto our God for evermore, Amen. And in the Church of England answerably
hereunto, the Preachers do reverently uncover their heads, not only in
praying, but also in preaching and expounding Gods words, and in the orations
or sermons, in honor of his name, like as those holy Elders or Priests in
heaven do, which uncover their heads, and cast their crowns before the
throne: whereas the Geneuians and French in preaching, do irreverently cover
their heads, and not with a Church cap or bonnet (which were more tolerable)
but with their ordinary and usual hats, more like millars or maltmen, then
Gods Ministers; though in Scotland I confess they follow the godly and comely
fashion of England in preaching, with their heads uncovered, and not the capped
custom of Geneua: and God grant they may do so in many other matters, where
they have as good reason, and namely in kneeling humbly, not only in making
confession of their sins unto God, but also at the repetition of the law of
God, or ten commandments, as they do in England, and in standing up
reverently in making confession of their faith, at the rehearsal of the Creed,
and at the reading of the Gospel. The which gestures are to be used, both for
reverence and for signification; for reverence because their is no man so
ignorant or blockish, but understands that kneeling and standing up are much
more reverent, humble and respectfull gestures then sitting, and therefore in
the doing of such religious duties to God wards, are to be used. And for
signification, because that as by kneeling at the rehearsing of the law, we
do profess and confess our misery and wretchedness, occasioned by the fall
in the first Adam, and do humbly ask God mercy, for transgressing his
commandments; so by our standing up at the reading of the Gospel, or
rehearsing of the Creed, or articles of faith, we profess and acknowledge
that our rising after the fall, and our standing by Grace, were caused by the
second Adam Christ. So that by these reverent and significant gestures, we do
put our selves in mind of the chief matters, that concern salvation, we show
how that we stand in Gods favor by faith, as also we declare and notify, how
that we ought to be always ready to defend the faith. And truly the man that
will not do so much as stand up reverently upon his feet, when the Minister
makes a public confession of faith in the name of the people, does argue that
his faith wants the feet of devout affections, and ten to one, but it
wants likewise the hands of charitable actions. He himself loves sitting,
and I fear me, least his faith love too much creeping or lying along upon the
ground, whereunto it is as it were tied by the tail, so that he can not mind
heavenly matters. Moreover in the Church of England, they use reverently to
uncover their heads, and bow or kneel at the naming of Jesus, in resemblance
of the holy Elders in heaven, which uncover their heads, and bow before the
Lamb Christ Jesus, as said is, and that both in imitation of the first
Christians, within the first five hundredth years, and because the holy Apostle
does join the bodily obeisance of bowing or kneeling at the name of Jesus,
with the duty of the tongues Confessing of his name: for writing to the
Philippians, thus he says, Christ humbled himself and became obedient unto
the death of the cross. Philip. 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Wherefore God has also highly exalted him, and given him a name above every
name, that at the name of Jesus, should every knee bow, and that every tongue
should confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord unto the glory of God the
Father. Christ this only Son of God, had humbled himself as man, for man's
sake below all men, and therefore God the father exalted him as man above all
men, Heb. 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 1. Cor. 15, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 1. Tim. 6.15,
Revel. 17.14, and 19, 16, and 1, 5.
and made him the head and Monarch, both of men and Angels, the King of kings,
and Lord of lords blessed for ever, as the same Apostle otherwhere teaches.
And this his royal exaltation, all Christians are bound to acknowledge, by
Confession of Tongue, and by the obeisance or bowing of the body, and the
uncovering of the head. And that it is a Christian and a commendable custom, I
prove it thus: All action or gesture, that declares the subjection of the
creature to Jesus Christ, as the King of all mankind, must needs be a
Christian and commendable gesture or action; But the bowing of the body or
knee, and the uncovering of the head at the pronouncing of the name of Jesus,
are gestures and actions declaring our subjection to Jesus, as the King of
mankind, especially of his Church, and therefore they are Christian and
commendable. Again, it becomes good Christians to take all occasions they
can of performing Christian duties; now it is a Christian duty, and one of the
chiefest, to thank God for the work of our salvation, for loving us so
dearly; as that he would give his only begotten Son to be our Savior, and
to express our thankfulness by some religious and reverent gesture. Now what
better occasion can there be offered of doing this duty, then when we hear
that name pronounced, which signifies a Savior, and puts us in mind of
our Salvation, as the ringing of the bell puts us in mind of coming to
Church, and which is both his proper name, his royal name, and therefore to be
ciuilly honored, his diuinest name, and therefore to be religiously
worshipped, and of all his other names the most comfortable to miserable
mankind? In a word all Christians are bound to honor, magnify and bless
Gods name at all times, in all places, and upon all occasions, but especially
and principally in the public congregation, when we hear his principal and
most maiesticall name pronounced, which is Jesus, under the Gospel to
Christians, as Jehovah was under the law to jews. Lastly, to conclude this
point of the English Churches Reverence, I say that it appears yet more, in
their religious gesture used in receiving the holy Sacrament, which they do
not standing, as at some hunters breakfast with the French, nor sitting as an
ordinary supper with the Scottish, but humbly kneeling and bowing upon their
knee as Gods humble guests, acknowledging themselves unworthy to stand or sit
down at his Table, so long as we are in this life laden with sin, and do
want the wedding garment, of such perfect and inherent righteousness as we
shall have in the kingdom of heaven; where we shall have the honor to sit
down with the Lamb at Gods board: for then we shall be made his glorified
guests, when we shall be fully freed from sin, Revel. 19.7, 8, 9. Mat.
15.22, 23 24, 25, 26, 27 and 22, 11, 12,
and arraied in the white robes of inherent righteousness, as it is in the
Revelation. Whereas so long as we are here upon earth, we cannot for our life,
quite cast off old Adams skinnecoate of origin all corruption, nor yet put off
perfitly the rotten rags of actual unrighteousness; which makes us with the
Cananite to creep (as it were) under Christ's Table, and to be content for the
time of this sinful life to gather up the crummes. But because that our
Geneuits for all that, are disposed to be as bold and homely at the Board of
heaven, as they are in their own houses, and do condemn this reverent gesture
of kneeling, therefore I must entreat my dear Contrymen to give me leave to
ask them a few questions. And first, if it be not only lawful, but also
convenient and necessary to receive the Sacrament with the greatest reverence
and humility that can be, and I think it will not be denied? Secondly, if it
be not lawful, yea convenient and necessary to use some one external
gesture or other in receiving the Sacrament, which I take will also be
granted? Thirdly, if it be not only lawful, but also convenient and almost
necessary to use that gesture which does most signify and declare, and
usually accompany the greatest humility and reverence? and what other gesture
can this be but kneeling, which is more reverent then standing, like as this
is more reverent then sitting? and therefore Saint John saw the four and
twenty Elders first sitting upon seats, then rising and standing, Revel. 4.4,
10. and 5.6, 7, 8, 14
and after that falling down or kneeling before the Lamb, in imitation
whereof, all good Christians ought to kneel before the holy Lamb, when they
receive his blessed body as it were, out of his own heavenly hands, for the
spiritual food of their souls, which do assuredly feed upon his flesh by
faith in a mystical, spiritual, and sacramental manner. Again, I ask of
our Geneuites, if it be not lawful to thank God in receiving of the Sacrament
of thanksgiving which I think will not be denied? In the next place I ask if
it be not lawful to use in our thanksgiving, the gesture that the servants of
God have always used in their other religious thanksgiuings? and if not, why
shall that gesture which is lawful in all other religious thanksgiuings, be
unlawful in this? and if it be lawful in this as well as in all other then let
them show me what other gesture it was but kneeling? and if kneeling be the
fittest gesture for the expressing of a most humble thanksgiving, such as we
should offer unto God in this Sacrament of thanksgiving, then why do we not
kneel with the Church of England, rather then sit, or stand after the
homely, yea unholy and vnhumble manner of Geneua.

Sect. 18.
Fifthly, The Church of England more heanen-like for harmony. Revel. 5.8, 9.
and 14.2, 3. and 15.2, 3, 4. and 19.
the Church of England is more like the Church of God in heaven, for heavenly
harmony, then the Geneuian is; for in Gods Church in heaven, those holy and
unspotted Priests are painted out in seven or eight places of the Revelation,
singing new songs unto God in most melodious manner, both with voices and
instruments, and namely with Harpes: and answerable thereunto in the English
Church we have the harmonious consort and musical concord of voices and
instruments, especially of Organes in the praising of God with Hymns, Psalms
and songs. The which kind of musical instrument being as it were animated
with the melody of Singing-mens voices, does most of all other represent that
which Saint John heard in heaven, like a voice of a great multitude, and as the
voice of many waters, and as the voice of strong thundrings saying and singing,
HALLELVIAH. Of the which my sticall music, I shall (God willing) deliver many
notable considerations, and most comfortable Contemplations in our work called
Dies Domini. And there I shall prove both by Scriptures and Fathers authority,
and by irrefragable reasons euidencie, the lawfulness and commendablenesse of
the musical consent of voices and instruments in the service of God; and that
the alternatiue Church singing of the Quire, divided into two parts, is
conformable unto the manner of the heavenly Churches music, as may be
gathered out of the prophecy of Isay, who in his vision of the majesty of God
and his glorious Seraphims, Isay. 6.1, 2, 3,
says that one cried to another and said, holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of
Hosts, the whole world is full of his glory. And truley the Doctors of the
Church, and other ecclesiastical writers do witness in express words, as
shall be showed in our said work, that the first Christians were wont to sit
one for against another, as we see they do now adays in the Quire, and to
inuit or cohort alternatiuely or by turns, one another to the praising of
God, by singing of Psalms. So that I cannot but wonder how our Geneuians can
say any thing against so ancient and christian a custom, or yet against the
using of some instruments in the singing of Psalms, especially when as the
word Psalm does signify either the melody of the instrument or Organ alone,
or else the harmony of the isntrumental noise and the musical voice going
together; so that indeed there cannot be a Psalm, there may well be a Song
without an instruments sound, and if we have our Psalms originally from
Jerusalem, and not from Rome, from the Prophet David and not from the Pope, why
may we not with the same David use in struments and organes, especially when as
the Spirit of God by him exhorts men thereunto, so often in the same Book of
the Psalms, which we read and sing every day, in our Churches? yea with such
an exhortation he shuts up his Psalms, saying, Praise ye him with
Virginals and Organes. Psalm. 150.4. 1. Cor. 14, 26 Ephesians. 5.18, 19, 20, Coloss.
3.16.
And that we might know that the praising of God upon instruments, was not a
mere lewish Ceremony, and to last only until the coming of Christ, and no
longer; the Apostle Saint Paul writing to the Corinthians, shows that the
Christians in his time, in their assemblies, were wont to sing Psalms, that is
to say, to join the melody of instruments with spiritual hymns and songs,
for so much does the word Psalm in Greek signify: and therefore the same
Apostle distinguished between Psalms and Songs, both in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, and in his Epistle to the Colossians, where he exhorts the
faithful to the melodious singing of Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs. But
if neither the example of king David and the Church of Jerusalem, both in King
David's time and Saint James the first Bishop thereof, nor the practice of the
Primitive Church within the first 500. years, can induce us to a liking of
this kind of Church music and of Organs melody; yet let this move us to
like it, that the Pope does dislike it, for otherwise he would not want Organs
in his chapel, as he does, whereof I gather this new argument in favor of
Organs, at least for the Kings Chapel. If it be fit that our Kings Chapel,
be unlike unto the Popes, then is it fit that their be Organs in our Kings
Chapel, for there are none in the Popes; but the former is fit at least in the
opinion of Puritaines and Precisians, which would feign, we were unlike the
Pope in each indifferent thing, and therefore the latter is fit likewise.

Sect. 19.
Sixthly, The Church of England more heauen-like for habit.
as the English Church, is more heavenly for harmony, and therein resembles
nearer the Church of God and Angels, then the Geneuian does, so is she more
heavenly, for habit. The ministers of the triumphant Church, even those
blessed spirits, that do offer up incessantly the sweet incense and sacrifice
of praise unto God, are said to be suited in pure white linen, as we may
read in the Revelation in some ten or eleven places in six several chapters,
Revel. 3.4, 5.18, and 4, 4, and 6, 11, and 7, 9, 13, 14, and 15, 6, and 19, 8,
14, Dan. 10.5, and 12.6, Ezech. 9.2.3, Mat. 28.1, 2.3 Mark. 16.5, John 20, 12
besides that the Angels when ever they assumed humane shapes, always appeared
in white, as we may read often, both in the old and new Testament. For this
color has been in all ages, and in all Churches thought the most comely, and
convenient to be used in the doing of divine service, and the most suitable to
sanctity purity and glory. Answerably whereunto in the Church of England,
our Evangelical ministers, when they do divine service, or celebrate the
Sacraments both for distinction and decency, and likewise for a signification
of purity and sanctity, do put on a white linen garment commonly called a
Surplisse, and the Bishop bears and wears a white Rotchet; where as our
Geneuians are all for Baals and Beelzebubs black, and had rather be in habit
like hell then heaven, rather like the Angels of the bottomless pit, which
dwell in darkness, and whose loathsome liuerie is blackenesse, then like the
Angels of Paradise, which dwell in brightness, and whose liuerie is light, and
whiter then the finest and purest laune. But, white, say they, must be
abandoned, because it has bin abused in Popery; and by the like reason,
black should be forborne because Baals priests have abused it to idolatry,
and had the name of Chemarims, 2. King. 23.5, Hos. 10.5.
because they wore black garments, or Goneuagownes in their ministration,
witness the very Geneua note it self upon the place marked in the margin.
But it is a thing resolved amongst all the judicious and wise, that the abuse
of a thing, does not take away the right use thereof, and that the children of
the Church are not tied to be unlike unto the very enemies of it, Revel. 13.11.
and idolaters in every thing. For we may read in the Revelation, how that
Christ and Antichrist are to resemble one another in some things; for the Beast
is said to have two horns like unto the Lamb. 2. Cor. 11.13 14, 15. Mat. 7
15, and. 10, 16.
And S. Paul unto the Corinthians tells us that Satan will be like unto the
Angels of light in some things, and his false Apostles and Ministers, will be
like unto the Apostles and Ministers of Christ: and in the Gospel of S.
Matthew, the Apostles and Ministers of Christ are likened to sheep, and the
very false Prophets will be like them in somethings, for they come in sheep
clothing. So that both Gospel and Epistle besides prophecy, may teach the
Ministers of Christ, not to forsake their own liuerie, which is white, wherein
they resemble God and his Angels, and the blessed spirits, because that others
perhaps do abuse it; yea rather because that some do so, the Ministers of
Christ ought to use it still, to the end that by their example such as do
abuse it, may be brought to use it aright, and so should we do in other
ceremonies of the like nature.

Sect. 20.
Seventhly, The Church of England more heauen-like for local decency
Churchimplements conueniencie, churchseruice solemnity and sacramental
ceremony. Reuelat. 3.12 and 7.15, and 11 1, 2, 19, and 14, 15, 17, and 15, 5,
6, 8, and 16, 1, 7, 17, and 21, Psalm. 45, 13, 14 Isay 60, 13, 17. Revel. 4.1.
2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, and 5, 1, 6, 7, 11 13.
the Church of England is liker the Church that is in heaven then the Geneuian
is, in local decency, Church-implements conueniencie, in Church-seruice
solemnity, and in sacramental ceremony. And this is true, whether we look
unto the costlinesse and comeliness of the Churches of England, which are much
liker that stately Temple and glorious golden city new Jerusalem described in
the Revelation, then are the base contemptible buildings after the Geneuian
form. For we must remember how that though the Church be all glorious
within, yet all her glory is not within, but a good part of it is without, or
to be seen and discerned by the eye, as the royal Prophet teaches, and the
Evangelical Prophet testifies, foretelling that God was to have his house and
the place of his feet amongst Christians, to be glorious both for matter and
manner, structure and furniture. Or whether we look more particularly unto the
splendor and magnificence of the Kings Chapel, much like unto that stately
Throne which blessed S. John saw, set in heaven for the almighty King to sit
on, or yet of the Cathedral Churches, the Seas of the reverend Bishops, much
like unto those four and twenty seats round about the throne, whereon the
four and twenty Princely and Priestly Elders do sit: or whether we look
unto the conueniencie of the seats of the Quire in each Cathedral Church,
appointed for the holy singing men to sit in; who like unto those holy Elders,
and the younger Quiristers, again, like unto those Harping Virgins, which
follow the Lamb, and do sing most sweetly before the throne and the Elders,
both joining their melodious voices together make a sweet consort, and send
forth Psalms and Songs of praise unto him that sits upon the throne, and
unto the Lamb, to be lauded for evermore. And as the hearts of these our
singing Elders, and Virgin-yongers, are like those Harpes of God, which Saint
John saw in the hands of the Elders and yongers in heaven; so the holy,
heavenly and harmonious anthemes and accents of these Harpes or Hearts, being
strung and tuned by Gods own finger, conjoined with the musical and
artificial thunder of our Church-organes, do most resemble the heavenly
harmony which Saint John heard as the sound of many waters, and as the sound
of strong thunderings, and as the voice of harpes, harping with their harpes,
and singing and saying, HALLELVIAH; the which kind of harmony such Geneuian
ears as can not endure here on earth, had best to stay still about the
brinkes of the Lemannian lake, and hold as far from heaven, as they possibly
can: for what a gods name should they do in heaven, except they loved heavens
harmony, even our Churches musical melody, better then they do? And as our
comely Churches do resemble the corners, courts and chambers of the stately
Temple, that Saint John saw opened in heaven, our Kings Chapel, the heavenly
Kings throne, our Cathedral Churches, those Princely and Priestly Elders
seats, our harmonious Organes, those heavenly harpes which Saint John saw in
the hands of those skillful Quiristers some like old men, and some like young
boys, and so well resembled by ours, and as our Quiristers Psalms and Songs,
do resemble their new songs, Reuelat. 8. and, 9. and, 10, 5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8
and as they are most like one another in their white habites, and heavenly
HALLELVIAHS, so do our Church-belles and chimes resemble those Angelical
trumpets and thunders seven in number, which blessed Saint John heard, our
Church-Bible answers to that great sealed Book, our Service and Psalme-booke
to that little opened book, our Evangelical Priests reading of the Bible to
the Lambs reading, and vnsealing of that sealed Book, Reuela. 1.2.8 9, 11,
and 14, 1 6.7, and 21, 14, and 22, 1, 3,
our Church angelspreaching of the Gospel, to the Preaching of Angels which
Saint John heard, the Pulpit answers to Mount Sion, whereon he saw the Lamb
standing, or rather to that Tree of life, bearing twelve manner of fruits; for
from thence the word of life is delinered by the learned and reverend Bishops,
as it were from the mouth of the Lambs, twelve Apostles, twelve times in the
year, the first Lords day of every month. To be brief our Church-font with
Holy Water for the celebration of Baptism, does answer unto that glassie Sea
or river of water of life clear as crystal proceeding out of the throne of
God, and of the Lamb, our Euangelical Priests Crosse-siguing the baptized on
the forehead, and our Angelical Bishops sealing and confirming of the Virgin
servants of our God (which by Baptism had been bathed and washed, Reuela.
4.6. and 6.9, and. 7, 2, 3.4, and 14, 1, 2, 3, 4.
and so made fit to follow the Lamb) do answer unto the Angels signing and
sealing of the Servants of God on the forehead; our Sacrament all holy bread
of life, answers to that hidden Manna of heaven, promised to him that
overcomes; our Lords supper to the Lambs supper; Reuela. 2.17. and 6.9, and
8, 3, 4, 5, and 19, 13 and 11, 1, 19, and 19, 9.
our Church golden and silver Basins and Cups for the ministration of the
holy Sacrament, to the Angels golden Censer; and our Church, Table for the
ministration and celebration of the same Sacrament, answers unto the Golden
Altar which Saint John saw before Gods throne. And who can say otherwise but
that a Font and a Church-Table are two implements or instruments, as requisite
to be in enery Church for the ministration of the Sacraments, as a Pulpit is
requisite for the delinerie of Sermons, and for the reading and preaching of
the word. And thus have I made it apparent, to all such as have but common
sense and understanding, that the Church of England is much and many degrees
liker then the Geneuian, to the Church that Saint John saw in heaven: so that
as many of us as do love heaven, cannot but exceedingly like the form of the
English Church, and better then that of Geneua: and we may well say it, that
the form of the Church of England, and not that of Geneua, was revealed and
represented to our divine Prophet. For the Revelation contains a prophetical
representation of the Church of Christ, and of the form and constitution
thereof, such as it was to be after our Saviors ascension in the two times of
persecution and peace, until his last coming to judgment, to confound his
foes, and to glorify his friends and elect children; as I do show more
particularly in another work in Latin, entreating of the persecution and
peace of the militant Church, according to the holy prophesies of Daniel and
Saint John, a book that I began at the age of nineteen years: wherein all
the opinions of ancient and modern writers, and even of the learned of both
Religions, touching the authors, instruments, duration, beginning, manner and
ending of the persecution or troubles, and of the tranquillity and peace of the
Church are propounded and compared together, with their reasons and arguments
debated, and many errors refuted. Now because I have said in this Section,
that the Church of England is liker to the Church of God in heaven (in the
matter of sacramental or symbolicall ceremony) then the Geneuian is, and have
given an instance thereof in their Signing of Christ's newborn babes on the
forehead with the sign of the Cross in Baptism, Ezech. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Reuelat. 7.1, 2 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
like as the Angels in heaven are said in Ezekiel to sign them that sorrow and
mourn, upon the fore thead with the Crosse-like letter Thau, and in the
Revelation of Saint John, to sign the foreheads of Gods servants with the
seal of God. I have thought good to insist a little longer upon the matter of
this ceremony, and to prove the lawful, commendable, and Christian use of it,
by many arguments, and even some new ones of our own meditation. Our first
argument is thus: both the Prophet, Ezekiel in the old Testament, and the
Prophet S. John in the new, have prophesied of the conversion of the Jews to
the faith of Christ, by the Angels signing of them in the forehead, as the
letter of the word does bear in both places, the which the ancient Doctors
of the Church have understood of the Sign of the Cross to be received at the
hands of the Church in their Baptism; as no divine that ever read the Fathers,
dare deny: whereby they shall profess that they are no more ashamed of his
Cross, or scandalized at the ignominy of it as their forefathers had been,
1. Cor. 1.23.
to whom it proved a stumbling block, (as the Apostle speaks) but that they
glory in it, and believe to be made blessed by it, even to be saved by
Christ's suffering on that same Cross, which their forefathers had once set up
to slay and destroy him by. Wherefore if our Geneuians would have the Jews to
be converted to their Church, they must needs receive from England, or rather
from the primitive Church, the sacred sign of the cross, that they may have
it to christen the Jews with; otherwise they will not go to Geneua for
Christendom, nor to Scotland neither, nor to any reformed Church of their
fashion. Secondly, in all reason and common sense, it is convenient that the
Jews being converted, should declare by some sensible sign, that they are no
more ashamed of Chrisls cross, but well ashamed of their own cursed course in
crucifying him, that came to cure them; and though there were not any mention
at all made in holy Scripture, of their signing or sealing in the foreshead (as
there is most expressly) yet should it be lawful for them to declare by some
external gesture or act, as well as by words of mouth, their Christian
disposition of this kind. Thirdly, as it tends much to the glory of God, in
that he can bring light out of darkness, life out of death, salvation out of
destruction, nobility and fame out of ignominy and shame, and honor, out of
dishonor, so it tends to the edification of the Church, that this admirable
working of our most glorious and wise God, be declared and made as notorious
as it can be, with all conueniencie, both by words of profession and gestures
of signification; and consequently it tends to the edification of the Church,
that the Jews should declare by the sign of the cross, that they do
acknowledge God to have drawn admirably blessing and honor, out of the
dishonor and curse of the cross, and salvation out of destruction. It is a
most Christian confession for Jew or Gentile, especially the Jew, to confess
and acknowledge, that the Cross which they once set up with their hands in
dishonor of Christ, yea more for an instrument of his destruction, Almighty
God has made it the in strument of their highest honor, and happiest
condition, even of their salvation; and therefore the outward expression of
this confession by a gesture, Mat. 28, 18, 19
external act or sign of the hands, must needs be Christian and commendable.
Fourthly, our Savior Christ commanding to teach and baptize both Jews and
Gentiles, commands questionless to express and declare the nature and use
of Baptism, and consequently commands to use the sign of the cross, for
this ceremony serves to declare the nature and use of this Sacrament, in that
thereby we are baptized into the death of Christ upon the cross, and that our
old man is crucified with him, and even nailed to his cross, as the Apostle
speaks saying, Romans 6.4, 5, 6 7, 8, Philip. 2.8, Coloss. 2.12, Galat. 2, 19,
and 5, 24.
Know ye not that all we which have bin baptized into Jesus Christ, have been
baptized into his death? we are buried then with him by Baptism, into his
death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
father, so we also should walk in newness of life, For if we be planted
with him to the similitude of his death, even so shall we be to the
simi-litude of his resurrection, knowing this that our old man is crucified
with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed. Whereby we are taught
that in Baptism their must be a three-folde similitude or representation, to
wit of Christ's dying, burying and rising bodily and of our dying, burying and
rising spiritually with him. Now I ask what similitude there is in Baptism of
Christ's ignominous death upon the cross, or of his bodily crucifying, and of
the spiritual crucifying of our old man with him, setting aside the sign of
the cross? The sprinkling on of the water does represent only a shedding of
his blood, but not necessarily a shedding of it until death, for Christ might
have shed his blood without dying. And as for the immersion or dipping of the
baptized body into the water, it does represent his burying directly, like as
the emersion or rising of the body out of the water, represents his rising
out of the grave, but it does not directly represent his dying: and though it
does by way of consequence represent his death, in respect that ordinarily none
are buried but the dead, yet it does not for all that set before our eyes the
kind of his death, nor yet the accursed and ignominious manner thereof, which
are two circumstances of especial moment and consideration. For our Saviors
death, was not a natural death; for he died not in his bed (as we say) and so
was buried, but the death that he died was a violent death and wrought by the
hand of man. Neither was it an easy or an honest violent death, but the most
painful and shameful of all other, and even an accursed death, as both in
the law, and in the Epistle of the Gospel we are taught: all which
circumstances are represented and set before our eyes only by this ceremony of
the sign of the cross. Deuteronomy. 2.23. Gal. 3.13.
Fifthly, if it be lawful for a Minister to express the mysteries and meaning
of the Scripture of God by a Sermon, as every one will grant that it is; then
shall it be as lawful to express the mysteries of Gods Sacrament by a
ceremony: for there is the like reason, for the one and for the other. For
seeing the Sacrament of God, as well as the word of God has something to be
explicated and declared, and that the best explication and declaration is made
by things of the like nature, it follows that as the audible word is
explicated and declared by a sermon and by words to the ear, so the visible
Sacrament being a ceremony, is to be explicated and declared by a ceremony to
the eye, such as is the sign of the cross: he that adds unto word or
Sacrament for perfection is a blasphemer and a deceiuer, but he that adds
unto word or Sacrament, either other words and rites for explanation and
declaration is a true Doctor. Sixthly, by this sign the Church does confess
her own misery and wretchedness, in that we did even crucify Christ with
our sinful hands by our sins, as much as the Jews did that set up the cross
with their unhallowed hands; this confession is lawful and good, and therefore
the declaration of it by a sensible sign, can not be vnlawfvll or evil.
Seauenthly, Galat. 3.13. Ephesians. 2.14.15, 16, 17,
by this sign the Church confesses her faith in Christ crucified, that he
has redeemed us from the curse of the law by the curse of his cross, and
reconciled us unto God by the blessed peace of his cross, as the Apostle
speaks; this confession is Christian, and therefore the declaration thereof
by a sensible sign, external act or gesture of the body cannot be
Antichristian, as our Geneuians would have us to believe. Eighthly, by this
sign the Church declaclareth her Christian disposition and resolution, of
fighting under the banner of Christ against sin and Satan, and of suffering
persecution for the cross of Christ (as the Apostle speaks) she declares
her Christian endeavor in crucifying the flesh with the affections and lusts
thereof, Galat. 5.24, and 6, 12, 14,
and testifies her faithful affection, in not being ashamed of the cross of
Christ, but that she glories and rejoices in it, according to that of the
Apostle. God forbid that I should rejoice, Mat. 26.39. Mark 14.35. Act. 7.60.
and 9.40. and. 20.36. Ephesians. 3.14. Luke 18.13. Mat. 14.19. Ioh. 11.41. and
17.1. 1. Tim. 2.8. 1. Cor. 11.4.
but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified
unto me, and I unto the world. This disposition, resolution, endeavor and
affection, is most commendable and Christian^, and therefore the testification,
declaration or notification thereof, must needs be so likewise. For if it be
lawful and laudable for the Church to declare the inward humility of the
heart, by the outward bowing of the body or knees; and the casting down of the
eyes, the inward sorrow of the soul for sin, by an external beating of the
breast; the inward confidence or affiance in God, in expecting at his hands,
every good thing, by the visible lifting up of the hands and eyes unto heaven;
and finally the internal reverence of the heart, by an external bare head:
why may not the same Church as well declare the inward rejoicing and glorying of
the heart in the cross of Christ, by such a sensible sign made with the
hands, especially it being made with the hands of the Minister, who is the
likest to use it aright, and the best able to free it from abuse? Ninethly the
Church may and ought to use that outward act, which the Spirit of God himself
does design, Eze. 9.4, 5, 6. Revel. 7.1, 2, 3 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
for the expressing of his own inward action; but the Spirit of God does
design the outward act of signing, for the expressing of his own inward
action of spiritual sealing; as both Ezekiel in the old Testament, and Saint
John in the new do witness: and therefore the Church may and ought to use the
same outward act of signing. Tenthly the Church is bound to declare and notify
the grace of Gods Spirit, working in men, and even to make men as sensible of
the works of Gods Spirit in them, as they can conveniently: now it is one of
the works of Gods Spirit, and a chief work too, to seal men in their souls
inwardly, and to stamp them as it were with the print of his Image, unto the
day of redemption, 2. Cor. 1.22. and 5.5. Ephesians. 1.13. and 4.30.
(as the Apostle speaks) and therefore for the Church to make men sensible of
this internal and mystical sealing of Gods Spirit, by the means of such a
convenient and decent sensible sign, as that of the Cross (though there were
no particular mention at all made in the whole Scripture, of any such external
gesture or act of signing on the forehead) must needs be lawful and
commendable. Eleuenthly, by this Sign the Church puts her children in mind
of their own misery, and of Gods mercy, of Christ's love toward them, and of
their duty and affection toward him, for his unspeakable love, and therefore
it tends to edification. Twelfthly this ceremony was received and practiced
of the primitive Church, neither is there any ecclesiastical writer or Father,
Greek or Latin, but makes honorable mention of it, as we shall show
particularly in our Commentaries of the persecution and peace of the Church;
and therefore we ought to use it now, if it were no more but to show our
conformity with the primitive Church: for the daughter ought to follow the
footesteps of her mother in all lawful and commendable actions, and ought not
to depart from her, otherwise she shall both dishonor her mother, and
discredit her self. And questionless, the want of this primitive ceremony
and others the like in some reformed Churches, has brought a most dangerous
discredit upon the reformation, and made it obnoxious unto the suspicion and
odious imputation of the same novelty, in the very substance, which it
carries amongst them in the out side and circumstance. And therefore those
venerable Bishops that reformed the Church of England, considering wisely with
themselves, how that men are so apt to censure of the inside by the outside,
especially in Church matters, and to judge of doctrine and piety, by the
external discipline and ceremony, retained still the primitive discipline and
ancient ceremonies of that Church, but banished the abuses. And would to God
the Church of Geneua had done the like; for so our common adversaries should
not have had so good and just cause as they have, to hit them in the teeth with
their novelty, as though their Church had newly crept or leapt out of the
Leman nian lake, or had been conceived of Calvin and borne of Beza.
Thirtenthly and lastly, the enemies of the sign of the cross, can not bring
so much as one good authority or probable argument for their opinion: not the
letter of the Scripture; for they see that the letter favors it both in the
old Testament and new; not the sense of the Scripture, as it has been
delivered by the fathers of the Church, for they know, that they are all for
it, and as for reasons derived from the light of nature, or Scripture, from
Theology or Philosophy, Divinity or humanity, they can bring none, worth
the hearing, (for I have read diligently their books and was once a Puritan
my self) except it be this one, The Church of Rome has abused the sign of
the cross, and therefore the reformed Church ought to forbear it, least we
should seem to favor or follow their abuses. But I wonder but they should
remember better that old maxim, abusus non tollit vsum, some folks abusing
of a thing, does not hinder or let, but that others may use it aright. And do
they not think that the Church of Rome, does abuse praying and preaching, and
Churches, and pulpits, and kneeling, and Godfathers and Godmothers as well as
crossing, and yet we do not forbear these things, because of their abuse;
neither is there any reason why we should do so, but rather great reason to
the contrary. The Church of Rome does abuse ceremonies; and therefore the
reformed Church ought to use them aright, to the end that in so doing she may
both show her self like and conform unto her Mother the Primitive Church, and
by her good example do what she can, out of Christian charity to reform and
amend her straying sister the deformed Romish Church. And so I end this my
plain disputation for the sign of the cross in Baptism, beseeching my
countrymen to take it in good part, even for his sake that suffered upon the
Cross. The Church of England more heaven like for honor of the Ministry.


Sect. 21.
Eighthly the Church of England is liker then the Geneuian, to the heavenly
Church in the dignity and honorable estate of the Ministry. In heaven Gods
Ministers are honored with the holiest style of Priests, and with the highest
style of Princes; for as under the highest of Priests, they are Priests, so
under the highest of Princes they are Princes. And therefore we read in the
Revelation how that blessed Saint John calls the Bishops of the seven
Churches by the honorable styles of Kings and Angels, Revel a. 1.4, 5 6, and
2. and 3. and. 5.3, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, and 7, 10, 12, and 8, 3.4.
and the four and twenty Elders do magnify the Lamb for making them unto
God Kings and Priests, to reign or rule upon the earth. Answerably whereunto
in the Church of England, the reverend Fathers of the Church are graced by the
Sovereign Prince, representing the Lamb and the Lion of the tribe of Judah,
with the honorable title and dignity of Lords and Barons. And good reason
surely, seeing that the Governors of the Church under the Gospel, are to be
rather more then less honored, then were the Governors of the Church under
the law, in so far as the Ministry of the Gospel is much more honorable
and glorious then that of the law, 2. Cor. 3.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
as the Apostle expressly avouches. And that the Ministers and Governors of
the Church under the old Testament were called by honorable titles it may
appear in that Moses a prophet, Exodus 3. and 4, 16, and 18, 1. Sam. 1.3.9, 15,
and 7, 8, 9, 10, 15, 16, 17, Deuteronomy. 17, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 2. Chron. 17, 7, and
19, 8, 9.10, 11, Ezech. 44, 24, 1. Sam. 1.9.14, 15, 16, 17 18, 26, and 4, 18 1.
King. 17, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.21, 22, 23, 24, and 18,
3, 4, 7, 9, 12, 13, 2. King. 1.13, 14, and 4, 1, 2, 16, 27, 28, 37, and 5, 15,
16, 17, 18, and 8, 9, 12, Act. 10.25, and 16.24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, Gen 40.8,
and 41, 14, 15, 16, 25, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, Dan. 2.28, 29 30, 36, 48, 49 and 5,
29, and 6, 1 2, 3. Psalm. 45.9, 13, 16,
was likewise a Prince, Eli and Samuel Priests, were Princes and Judges, and
the Priests judged of some civil causes, together with the other temporal
Judges. The chief Priests which taught the people of Judah, are called Princes,
whom King Iehesophat had appointed to be Judges under him, both in
ecclessiastical and temporal causes, as between blood and blood, between law
and precept, statutes and judgments. Anna, called Eli the the chief Priest
her Lord, the widow of Zarepta, the widow of Bethel, the Shunamite
Gentlewoman, Obadiah King Achabs steward, the good Captain sent by King
Ahaziah, Naeamen the King of Syrta his General, Hazael one of the Princes of
Benhadad King of Aram, did all of them honor the chief Prophets of God, Eliah
and Elisha, with the style of Lords, and bowed before them. And so did
Cornelius the Captain, and likewise the Iaylor, to the blessed Apostles, Peter
and Paul; to pass over, that Joseph a Patriarch and a Prophet of the Church,
was likewise a chief Prince under the King of Egypt, even the next unto the
King, Daniel another chief Prophet of the Church, was likewise a Prince, and
the next person to the King of Babel Nebuchadnezzar, and his three fellows,
Shadrach, Messach, and Abednego, were made Governors over the Provinces of
Babel, and the same Prophet Daniel, was by King Belshazzar made the third Ruler
in the kingdom, and by King Darius, the first and chief Ruler over the whole
kingdom. And the Prophet David prophesying of the splendor and dignity of
the Fathers of the Church, under the Gospel, uses these words, In stead of thy
Fathers, shall thy Children be, thou shall make them Princes through all the
earth; meaning that of the Children of the Church, there should be chosen such
as should be Fathers and Rulers of the Church, as Archbishops, and Bishops,
which should be honored throughout the whole Christian world, as Lords and
Princes. For the holy Prophet, as he describes typically Christ, as the King
of the Catholic Church, and none but he to be King; and the Church as the
Queen and Spouse of this King, so does be signify unto us, that the Princes
of this King and kingdom, are the Rulers and Governors of the Church above
named, which of the Children of the Church should be made Fathers of the
Church, and should be honored as Princes, as has binsaid. And this prophecy
is most clearly accomplished and verified in the Church of England, not of
Geneua, nor any Geneuian; unto whose Ministers God has not granted so much
honor, as they who have unhappily dishonored and debased themselves, in
bringing in their Lay Elders to be Church governors, in stead of the Bishops.
I say they have debased themselves most ridiculously, because that they have
submitted themselves, who should be as Fathers and Schoolemasters, unto their
own children and Scholars: for by those Lay Elders they are elected, they are
judged and censured, in matters both of life and doctrine, they are suspended
or removed from their ministry: and yet they are but mere Laymen,
generally void of learning, as being for the most part tradesmen and
artificers, and some country gentlemen. So that there is as great disorder in
the Geneuian Church, and as gross absurdity as if the children should command
their Fathers in the house, or the Scholars correct their Masters in the
School, or as if the Sheep should pull the pastoral crook out of their
Sheepheards hand. And though that our Geneuians do derive their Lay Elders and
Eldership, from the Synedrie of the Jews, (for I grant them with all my
heart, that the chief perfections of the Jewish Church, ought to be found in
the Christian Church, which thing if they understood well, they should see
their gross errors) yet I must tell them that they have nothing like but the
name. For first the Jewish Elders were inferior magistrates ordained primarily
by the Sovereign and chiefest magistrate Moses to assist him in matters of
Judgment; Numbers. 11.16, 17, Ezr. 10.8, Luke 22.66, Act. 5.27.
whereas the Geneuia^ are not Judges or any such public persons, appointed by
the Prince, but private persons picked out of the Parish by the Preacher, and
some other with him. Secondly, the Jewish Elders judged and censured the
Laity, and therefore were called the Elders of the people, whereas the Geneuia^
presume to censure and correct their Clergy. Thirdly and lastly the Jewish
Elders concurred with the Princes of the Priests as their assistants or
officers in matters of judgment and debate, but the Geneuian have no Princes
of Priests, Deuteronomy. 17.8.9.10.11, 12,2. Chron. 19, 8, 9, 10.11, Ezech. 44.4.
or Prince-Church governors, as Primates, Archbishops or Bishops, to give
assistance unto: whereby it does appear that the Judges and Justices of Peace
in England, are like those Elders of the Jews, especially the Judges of
Ecclesiastical courts called by the names of Chancellor, Commissary, Deane of
the Arches, Official and the like, and in no wise the Elders after the
Geneuian form. Moreover as the Ministers of the heavenly Church are called
Priests, so are the Ministers of the Church of England honored, Revel. 4.8, 9,
10.11, and 5, 8 and 7, 10, 12, and 8, 3, 4, Heb. 13.15. Hos. 14.3,
with the same holy title and style. Those Angelical Priests do offer up unto
God the spiritual sacrifice of prayer and praise; and answerably thereunto our
English Evangelical Priests offer unto God, the like spiritual sacrifice, as
the Apostle prescribes saying, Let us therefore by him offer the sacrifice of
praise, always to God, that is, the fruit of the lips which confess his
name. Public prayer and praise is a sacrifice: and therefore, the Minister that
offers it is a Priest, neither could he bless publicly the people, except
he were a Priest (for Church-benediction is a part of the Priests function)
nor yet Minister any of the two Sacraments, in both which there is a spiritual
sacrifice; for by Baptism our bodies and souls are offered unto God by the
hand of his Priest, Romans 12.1. Mat. 26.27.28, 29, 30. and. 28, 19, Ioh. 6.32,
33 41, 51, Reave l. 2, 17,
a reasonable and living sacrifice, and in the Eucharist or Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, he offers unto God in our name the spiritual sacrifice of
thanksgiving, for giving the substance of his blessed body, both corporally
for us, a bloody sacrifice upon the cross, and spiritually unto us in the
Sacrament of bread and wine, and even for feeding of us in a my sticall and
supernatural manner with his flesh, which is that hidden Manna of heaven,
Revel. 1.4, 5, 6, and 5.10, Heb. 7.15, 17, 21, 24, 26, 28, and 8, 1, 2, 3.
promised in the Revelation to those that overcome. To be brief, the blessed
Apostle Saint John writing unto the Angels or Bishops of the seven Churches of
Asia, calls them Priests, like as the four and twenty Elders in heaven, do
call themselves Priests; and Jesus Christ himself is called a Priest, yea
more, an high or chief Priest, and consequently must have inferior Priests
under him. And such are the Ministers of the Gospel in England; the which
style whilst our Genenians cannot endure, no more then the white Surplisse,
and the artificial singing; I wonder what they mean to do in heaven, where
Saint John saw so many Priests, so many white habits, and heard such harmony
and musical melody. Now the honorable titles that God has vouchsafed his
Ministers, do show that it is his will, Deuteronomy. 10, 9, and 12, 19, and 24, 23,
25, Numb. 18.12 13, 17, 18, 19 20, 21, 2, 23 24, 1. Cor. 9.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, Heb. 10. 1. Tim. 5.17, 18,
they should have a more honorable maintenance, then Geneua does allow them in
their beggarly contributions. The Priests and Ministers of the Gospel, have
succeeded into the room of the legal Priests and Ministers of the Tabernacle,
and therefore they have succeeded to their maintenance, and so much the more
because these serve him in a more excellent manner then the other did. And if
he would not have his Ministers to beg under the law, or yet to depend upon
popular beneuolences, shall we think that he would have his Ministers under
the Gospel, to be subject to such a beggarly condition? Every provident and
wise master provides for his household and servants; Leuit. 27.30, 31, 32.
Deuteronomy. 12.17, 18, 19, and 14, 22, 23, 27, 29 and 26, Numb. 18. Nehem. 10.35, 36,
37, 38 39. Josh. 13.14, 33. 2. Chron. 31.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, Ezech. 44, 28 29, 30,
2. Tim. 2.6. Luke 10.2.7. 1. Tim. 5.18. Mat. 9.37, 38.
wherefore it follows, that God, who is the most provident and wise Master of
all other, has provided for the maintenance of his household servants, and we
know none other, but first fruits and tithes: all laborers have certain
standing wages, the Ministers of the Gospel are Gods laborers, therefore they
ought to have their standing wages likewise, and we read of none other, except
first fruits and tithes. And therefore we see how our Savior forbids his
Apostles to go from house to house, telling them that the workman is worthy
of his hire. And truly if he would not have his Apostles to go from house to
house, even in that time when tithes were withholden from them by the Jewish
clergy; shall we think that now when the Jewish clergy is abolished, he
would have his Ministers of the Gospel to go from house to house, or yet to
send from house to house, to beg the peoples beneuolences? Those that
withheld from Christ's Apostles and Ministers, the duty of first fruits and
tithes, were such as persecuted both them and Christ, and crucified him in the
end; Deuteronomy. 10, 9, and 12, 19, and 14, 23.29, 2. Chron. 31.4. Proverb. 3.9, 10.
and such God spoiling Gospellers, as do now adays withhold the Church-rents
from Churchmen, what do they else but persecute Gods Ministers, and crucify
Christ daily in his members? The ends of paying first fruits and tithes unto
Gods Priests are perpetual, to wit, that the Ministers of God may be
maintained, and not forsaken, but more and more encouraged in the service of
God, that God may be honored with our riches, and acknowledged to be our
great Landlord and good Lord, that we may learn to fear the Lord, and that
he may bless us in all the works of our hands, that so our store may be
increased, and our barnes filled with abundance: are not Christians Gods
tenants, farmers and vassals as well as were the Jews? and do we not hold all
that we have of God as well as they? and are we not bound to pay our annual
rents unto God as duly and truly as they? and what reason have Christians to
forsake their Ministers more then the Jews had? and do not the one deserve
as well to be liberally maintained and encouraged in their work as the other?
and have not Christians as great cause to learn to fear God, as the Jews
had? finally do not Christians desire as earnestly as the Jews did, to be
blessed in the works of their hands, and in the increase of their store?
wherefore it follows necessarily that we Christians must pay our Tithes as
truly and duly as did the Jews. 1. Tim. 5 17, 18. 1. Cor. 9.7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14.
And therefore the blessed Apostle, as he commends unto Christians the
honorable and liberal maintenance of the Mininistery, right diligently,
writing to the Corinthians, and even proves by the law of Moses, the right
that the Ministers of the Gospel, have unto our carnal things and even unto
such carnal things as both Moses does prescribe in his Law, and the Apostle
himself does mention, entreating of this matter, comprehending them under
these two kinds, the fruits of the field, and the flocks of the fold; so
writing to the Galathians, he enioyneth in express words, Heb 13.7, Galat. 6.6,
every one that is taught in the word, to make him that has taught him,
partaker of all his goods. The people must give a part of their goods unto
their Pastors, as the Apostle prescribes, and all do acknowledge to be
reasonable, now this part must either be equal unto the Leuiticall part, or
greater then it, or else smaller. To give them a smaller, were a most
unreasonable indiscretion, and a more then beastly ingratitude, and if they
will not, nor cannot bestow a greater, such as indeed it ought to be, 2 Cor.
3.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
(for look how far the ministry of the Gospel is more excellent then that
of the law, so much the more ample and liberal ought to be the maintenance of
the Ministers of the Gospel, then was that of the Ministers of the Tabernacle)
yet at least for shame, they must give an equal portion with that of the
legal Priests. Lastly to shut up this our reasoning for the perpetuity of
tithes and for the honorable maintenance of Christ's servants (for hereof we
have written more amply in a work published some few years ago called the
Golden art or the right way of Enriching dedicated to the two most famous and
royal Cities of these two kingdoms) I say that the holy Scripture sets
down the paying of these yearly Church-rents amongst moral duties, and
accounts of Sacrilege, not as if it were the transgression of a ceremonial
ordinance, but even the violation of a moral law. Will a man spoil his Gods,
(says the Lord God by his Prophet Malachie) yet ye have spoiled me in tithes
and in offerings. Malacha. 3, 8. Proverb. 3.9, 10, and 20.25,
Honor the Lord (says Solomon) with thy riches, and with the first, fruits
of all thine increase, so shall thy barnes be filled with abundance, and thy
press shall burst with new wine. But it is a destruction for a man to devour
that which is sanctified: meaning that the man who will not honor God with
first fruits and tithes, but does devour the holy things, and commits
sacrilege, brings destruction upon himself, his soul, his body, his goods,
and his house. Thon that say a man should not commite adultery, Romans 2.22,
breakest thou wedlock? (says the Apostle) and thou that abhorrest Idols
do thou committ sacrilege? as if he should say, thou that detestest the
honoring of a false God will thou nevertheless spoil and dishonor the true
God; whereby we are given to understand, that sacrilege is not only a
transgression of the moral law, but that it is even a double sin, compounded
of robbery and Idolatry, and consequently a more detestable and abbominable
evil then Idolatry it self. For the Idolater with his heart, his body and
substance, yea sometimes with the blood of his dearest children honoreth a
false God, Leuit. 18.21. and. 20.2. 2. King. 23.10. and 16.3. and 17.17. Ierem.
7.31
yet thinking that it is the true God indeed he does thus worship; whereas the
sacrilegious God-spoyler robs the true God of his own. The Idolater is
careful to worship some God, but the God-spoyler cares for no God at all; a
false god he does not know, and it is well; and the true God he will not
acknowledge, which is a worse part then the others blind worshipping of a false
god. For the Idolater being misled with an erroneous opinion, makes and takes
that to be God which is not God, for ignorantly of an Idol he makes God;
whereas the sacrilegious God-spoyler maliciously even wittingly and willingly
of the true God makes no God at all but a mere Idol: otherwise he durst not
be so bold as to rob him of his right, for it is an infallible maxim, that a
man will never rob or spoil him whom he loves honoreth or fears.

O how ugly then is the sin of sacrilege that bears nevertheless such a
sway in this I Will, but especially in the North! O how horrible an iniquity is
it for men of might to pull out of Gods mouth the diet of the Church to put it
into their own, and to fill the bellies of their hounds and their horses with
the meat of Gods ministers! It is a sin of that high nature, that because of
it, God has said unto us, as once he said unto the people of Israel upon the
like occasion, Malach. 3.9, 10.11. Amos. 4.6.7, 8, 9, 10. Isay. 16.9.10. Hag.
1.10. and 2.18.
ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have spoiled me, even this whole nation
(but blessed be our Sovereign for laboring to remove this curse from our
nation) and that he has sometimes sent scarceness of bread, and cleanenesse
of teeth in our Cities and towns; sometimes has with holden the rain from us
when there were yet three months to the harvest; and shut the windows of
heaven upon us and stayed the rain till the fruits of the earth were destroyed
with drought, sometimes has smitten our fruits with blasting and mildew, and
sent the palmer worm to devour the fruits of our trees, yea made our singing
and shouting for joy in barnest to cease, and made us drunk with our tears,
for that the heaven above us was stayed from dew, and the earth under us from
yielding her increase. For this abominable sin God has sometimes sent the
pestilence amongst us to rage in most violent manner, to consume our bodies and
the fire to burn, and the water to ouerflowe our towns, lands, houses and
habitations. In one word, it is this horrible sin of Sacrilege that has
overthrown the strength and glory of diverse mighty and wealthy houses; God in
most just judgment shutting such from their inheritance as were so audacious
and bold as to rob him of his. The sacrilegious God-spoyler is the man which
(as Job speaks) has stretched out his hand against God, Job. 15.6.27.
and made himself strong against the almighty, therefore God shall run upon
him, even upon his neck, and against the most thick part of his shield
because he has covered his face with his fatness, and has collopes in his
flanks, as if the holy man should say, because this God-spoyling Anti God has
presumed to shut God from his inheritance, and has taken from him his Tithes
and has made himself fat with Gods meat which he has pulled out of the
hands and mouths of his ministers, Verse. 29.30.31.32.33.34.
therefore God shall be avenged on him, he shall not be rich always, neither
shall his substance continue, neither shall he prolong the perfection thereof
in the earth, he shall never depart out of darkness, the flame shall dry up
his branches, and he shall go away with the breath of his mouth. His branch
shall not be green, but shall be cut off before his day, and the congregation
of the Hypocrites shall be desolate: and who is so great an hypocrite as the
sacrilegious Church robber, who being an impure God-spoyler indeed will needs
in the mean time be esteemed a pure Gospeller and one of the precisest
professors of the reformed Church? He may well make himself merry with the
meat of Gods Ministers, as profane Balthazar did with the golden and silver
vessel of Gods house, Dan. 5.1, 2, 3 4.5. Job. 20.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
but he shall know in the end, that the rejoicing of the wicked shall have an
end; and (as Zophar speaks) that the joy of hypocrites is but a moment.
Though his excellency mount up to the heaven, and his head reach unto the
clouds, yet shall he perish for ever like his dung, and they which have seen
him, shall say, where is he? he shall flee away as a dream, and they shall not
find him, he shall pass away as a vision of the night, so that the eye which
had seen shall do so no more, and his place shall see him no more: as if he
should say; though he were never so great and mighty a man, that robs Gods
Church, yea though his height did reach unto heaven, yet for all his height, he
shall not enter into heaven, but shall fall to the earth like his own dung,
and his sacrilegious soul shall stink, Verse. 10.
more vilely then his dung amids hell flames. His children shall flatter the
poor, and his hands shall restore his substance, as if he should say; because
the father through pride and tyranny oppressed the poor, and spoiled Gods
Ministers, therefore God shall make the posterity of that man, for poverty
and want to beg his bread at other poor folks doors; yea that thing which
the sacrilegious father took away by violence, Verse. 15, 16 17.
his barnes shall be brought to restore again by force. He has devoured
substance, and he shall vomit it; for God shall draw it out of his belly,
seeing to him it belongs, and in lieu thereof, he shall suck the gall of
Aspes, and the Vipers tongue shall slay him; that is, his portion shall be
with hypocrites, and the generation of vipers, for the old Serpent that wicked
viper shall slay his soul, he shall not see the rivers, nor the floods and
streams of honey and butter, that is to say, he shall not taste of the
happiness of the heavenly Canaan. He on earth shut God from his inheritance
on earth, but in the end, God shall shut him out of the earth, and debar him
from heaven, and hurl him headlong into hell. He shall restore the labor, and
shall devour no more, even according to the substance, shall be his exchange,
Verse. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23
and he shall enjoy it no more. For he has undone many, he has forsaken the
poor, and has spoiled houses which he built not even Church-mens houses, yea
Gods house, and God himself has he spoiled. Surely he shall feel no
quietness in his body, neither shall he reserve of that which he desired,
there shall none of his meat beleft, therefore none of his shall hope for his
goods. As if he should say, because he would needs devour Gods meat, and
the diet of his Ministers, therefore God shall send the deuourer to eat up his
meat. For when he shall be filled with his abundance, that is, with Gods
portion and Church men's provision, He shall be in pain, and the hand of all
the wicked shall assail him: that is to say; because he was so wicked as to
stretch out his hand to spoil God; therefore God shall make many wicked men's
hands to spoil him: He shall be about to fill his belly, to wit, with Gods
Ministers meat, but God shall send upon him his fierce wrath, and shall cause
to rain upon him, even upon his meat. As if he should say, Gods Ministers
meat shall do him no good; for God shall either draw it out of his belly, or
else he shall turn it in the midst of his bowels into the gall of aspes. And
not only shall God draw his own Ministers meat out of the God-spoilers
miserable belly, but he shall also draw the sacrilegious soul out of the
devouring body, and it shall burn in the fire that is not blown, that is, in
hell fire that needs no blowing. The heaven shall declare his wickedness
(for he was so wicked and impious, Verse 26, 27, 28, 29,
as to spoil the God of heaven) and the earth shall rise up against him (for
he was so ungracious, as to rob Gods Ministers and household servants on
earth) the increase of his house shall go away, it shall flow away in the day
of his wrath. As if he should say, the man's house that is increased, builded or
reared up, by the decrease or robbery of Gods house, it shall not always
stand, the grease and fatness of it shall flow away like water, the pelf and
wealth thereof, shall vanish and melt away like the fat of Lambs, or as does
the snow before the Sun. Such is the portion of the wicked from God, and the
heritage that he shall have at Gods hands; as if he should say, desolation and
destruction in substance, in body and soul, shall be the portion and heritage
of all impenitent vnrestoring God-spoilers, unworthy of the title of
Gospellers, men worse then idolaters, which do indeed turn the true God into
an idol, as the other do an idol into God, and worship and fear, neither true
nor false deity. A false God they know not, and the true God they will not
acknowledge; for otherwise they would stand in awe, to spoil God of his
portion, and to bereave him of his inheritance. And therefore to shut up this
pleading for Gods Priests and their honorable maintenance, let me pray and
beseech all Britains, especially my dear countrymen of Scotland, that if
they desire either to be rich here, or happy hereafter, that they would be
bountiful and liberal to Gods servants, and that every man that has taken from
the Church any thing, or withholden from Churchmen their Tithes in whole or in
part by sacrilegious impropriation or wicked usurpation, Luke 19.8.
that he would restore with repenting Zacheus fourefolde, or at least the
principal stock, which he has in his hands. Let him I say, listen with all
diligence and conscience unto the precept of the most high uttered by the mouth
of his prophet Malachie saying, Malach. 3.10.11.12.
bring every Tithe into the storehouse that there may be meat in mine house,
and prove me withal, says the Lord of hoasts, If I will not open the windows
of heaven unto you, and power you out a blessing without measure; and I will
reprove the deuourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruit of the
ground, neither shall your vine be barren in the field says the Lord of
hoastes, and all nations shall call you blessed because ye shall be a pleasant
land. Lastly, let us all listen unto the godly and grave exhortation of wise
king Solomon; saying honor the Lord with thy substance and with the first
fruits of all thine increase, Proverb. 3.9,
so shall thy barnes be filled with abundance and thy press shall ouerflow
with new wine; and let us with our whole hearts applaude our own Salomons
glorious and divine endeauours tending to the perfect constitution of our
Church, and to the advancing of Almighty Gods sincere worship: and let us
bless the God of Jacob, for raising up unto us from the North, a Jacob, to be
aninstrument of such blessedness unto both North and South, according to that
which he once promised by his Prophet, Isay. 4 3, 6. Isay. 4.1, 25.
I will say to the North, give, and to the South, keep not back. And again,
I have raised up from the North, and be shall come, from the east Sun shall
he call upon my name: and yet again, Verse. 8.9, 10.11, 12,
speaking of the conversion of the Islands and ends of the earth unto Christ,
as if he pointed at our Jacob, Thou Jacob, whom I have chosen, I have taken
thee from the ends of the earth, and called thee before the chief thereof,
and said unto thee, thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, be not afraid, for
I am with thee, behold all they that provoke thee, shall be ashamed, and they
that strive with thee shall perish. Even blessed be the God of Jacob for giving
us a Jacob to be the instrument of so great blessedness unto this I Will, and to
the Church thereof, and grant that we may with both hands and hearts lay hold
on such blessed occasions, as he does now tender us, by the hand of his blessed
Jacob, for the amending of the defects of our Church, where through all nations
may call us a blessed people. Amen.

FINIS.
A DEMONSTRATIVE DEFENSE OR TENFOLD PROBATION OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE CHVRCH OF
ENGLAND TOUCHING one of the most important points of our Creed, necessary to be
understood of all Christians, which is of our Saviors descending into hell
after death, to bind and subdue Satan, etc.

Written for the information and satisfaction of many men's minds touching so
weighty a matter, but especially for the furthering of the Church of Scotlands
full conformity with that of England.

BY JAMES MAXVVELL Master of Arts, etc.

PSALM. 122. verse 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, let them prosper that
love thee. LONDON, Printed by JOHN LEGATT, Printer to the University of
Cambridge. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHERS IN GOD, THE ARCHBISHOPS, AND BISHOPS, HIS VERY
GOOD LORDS, AND OTHER LEARNED AND GRAVE PASTOVRS OF THE CHVRCH OF SCOTLAND,
JAMES MAXWELL WISHES, PEACE, UNITY AND CONCORD FROM THE GOD OF CONCORD, AND
PRINCE OF PEACE, AND HVMBLY DEDICATETH FOR A TESTIMONY OF HIS DVTY, THIS
PRESENT TREATISE OF CHRIST'S DESCENDING INTO HELL.

A Demonstration of Christ's Descending into Hell.
LIke as the dissensions and differences in matter of faith between Christian
and Christian, Greek and Latin, Papist and Protestant, have proved the
greatest scandal and offense, to those that are without the bosom of the
Church, and the greatest hinderance of both Jews and Gentiles conversion unto
Christ, that ever the hand of hell brought into the world, or the devil did
devise; so the contentions and dissentions, the divisions and differences,
arising between Protestant and Protestant (which have a number of new
denominations such as sorrow and shame will not so much as once suffer me to
mention) have proved questionless the greatest scandal of our reformed
profession, and the chiefest cause of many Papists auersenesse from
Reformation. And this may sufficiently appear by their daily obiecting, and
hitting us in the teeth with our divisions and differences, and telling us that
our Church is so far denoide of Unity, that even the reformed subjects of
one and the same Sovereign cannot be brought to an agreement in the matters
and manner of Gods worship. Witness, say they, there repugnant expositions
upon that article or particle of faith, touching Christ's descending into hell,
their discrepant doctrines touching the Princes ecclesiastical power, their
general auersenesse from Prelacie, with their differences in matter of
ceremony, Sacramental Ministry, and Church-sernice. And what other thing
else (say they) can it be, but a manifest token of a weak and ruinous
Religion, to say no worse, when as the professors thereof, Mat. 12.25. Mark.
3.24.25 Luke 11.17.
can neither agree with other Christians, nor yet with themselves according to
that saying of our Savior, Every kingdom or house divided against it self
shall be brought to desolation? For the preventing of which evil, and the
remooning of which cursed scandal and cause of offense, seeing that Almighty
God has raised up our Sovereign, and endued him with a most divine Spirit,
both for pregnancie, and peaceablenesse, far beyond all the other Princes of
the earth, yea and far beyond many professed divines; Isay. 41, 5, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 20, 21, 25.
and that he has even chosen our Jacob, and taken him from the ends of the
earth, and called him before the chief thereof, (to speak with the
Evangelical Prophet Isay) to be the chief instrument of so glorious a work;
let us in the consideration thereof, both acknowledge the inestimablenesse of
the blessing that Almighty God offers us, by the hand of his servant, (for
Concord and Unity, especially in the matters of God, is an inestimable
blessing unto man, and a thing most acceptable and agreeable unto God) and let
us likewise acknowledge the fanourable providence of God toward us, disposing
all things as for our greatest good, so for our chief comfort and contentment;
in that he has been graciously pleased to pick out a King of the North, to
be the Bringer and Brocher of this blessing unto us, according to that in the
Prophet, saying, I have raised up from the North, and he shall come, Isay.
41.25,
from the East Sun shall he call upon my name: and even such a King of the
North, as has loved us so dearly as he has done, and who would not for all
the kingdoms of the world, bring the Church of God, or his own native
Country, into any corrupt or dishonorable condition. No, I dare take it upon
my soul, that it is his zeal and love toward the glory of God, the honor
and credit of our Country, and the happy and more perfect constitution of our
Church, that has set him a work, about so blessed a business, as the working
of a perfect agreement and full conformity between the Churches of these two
kingdoms. For I suppose that no man is so far deuoide of common sense, but
sees sufficiently how that both Piety and Policy, Religion of Church and
Reason of State, do require that Britains, which are the worshippers of one
true God, the servants of one Savior, the children of one Church, and the
subjects of one and the same Sovereign, should agree in all things belonging
to Gods worship, especially. in all matters of faith, such as is this present
point of Christ's descending into hell. The which though all Christians do
profess to believe according to the letter, yet we can not say that our
verbal or literal profession thereof, is seconded with a solid consent in
the meaning and sense. For first the Papists understand it of Christ's
descending in his soul to a certain region or habitacle of hell, called
Limbus Patrum to deliver the fathers; an opinion void of all good warrant: for
we shall make it more then apparent In our Latin disputation of the seat of
souls, both by Scripture and Doctors, by authority and arguments, that the
souls of the believing people under the law, went not down into any corner of
hell, (for all that they can say to the contrary, and though Zuinglius join
with them herein) but to Paradise. And as for our Protestant writers, we see
how some, namely, the Geneuians expound it of Christ's suffering the sorrows of
hell in his soul before his death, denying his descending in soul after death
into hell, to deliver the faithful from descending thither, and to conquer and
bind Satan in his own strongest hold, (though Mr. Calvin did not deny his
foresaid local descending after death, but acknowledged it;) others expound it
idly of Christ's burial, others of his continuance in the grave under the power
thereof for three days; others of his translating into the state of the dead,
and others most ridiculously have delivered that by the descending of Christ's
soul into hell, is to be understood, no other thing but the ascending thereof
into heaven: all which opinions are false, fanaticall and frivolous; and the
doctrine of the Church of England, and of some other reformed Protestants of
Germany, is only orthodoxe, and true; to wit that our Saviors soul being
severed from the Body, which lay in the grave three days, went down into the
very loathsome dungeon of the damned, for our sakes (and not into any superior
Limbus Patrum as Papists do dream) partly to deliver his elect children from
descending thither, and partly to bind Satan in chains of darkness, and to
triumph over him in his strongest hold. The which doctrine is verified and
justified both by Scriptures authority, and Churches testimony, even both by
Gods word and man's. First, by typical prefiguration, secondly by prophetical
prediction, thirdly by pregnant historical allusion, fourthly by evangelical
explication and application, fifthly by apostolical asseueration, sixthly by all
ancient Christians common and Catholic confession, seventhly by Primitive
Doctors consent and vnanime profession, eighthly by the most part of learned
Protestants ingenuous reception, and subscription, ninthly by irrefragable
reason and demonstration, tenthly and lastly, by the consideration of such
opposions, dissentions and contradictions as the oppugners of our Saviors
local descending have fallen into about this point, and of the absurd,
unlearned, and ridiculous, yea impious expositions, that the Genenians have
devised of such Scriptures as do most clearly euince the truth of this article.
The impiousnesse of which their doctrine shall appear by our showing, how in
some things they do iumpe with the Jewish enemies and opposers of the Messiah
his suffering death, and descending into hell, to destroy the author of death;
and in some things with the ancient Heretics Arrians and Apollinarians, which
did deny our Saviors humane reasonable soul: and therefore did expound those
places of Scripture, wherein mention is made of the being of our Saviors soul
in hell after his death, in the same manner that the Geneuians, and other
vpstarts have done of the preciser sort, Whereas the Doctors of the Primitive
Church, which oppugned those heretics, did expound them as the Church of
England: I mean the reverend Bishops and other learned Doctors thereof, that
have been since the days of King Edward the sixth, of famous memory, until
this present time of the happy reign of our most learned and religious
Sovereign King James the sixth. Which being well considered, the Church of
Scotland shall see, how that they have a thousand times better reason for them,
to join with the Church of England, and with the ancient orthodoxe, and true
Catholic Christians, then to iumpe with the new Geneuians or any of the
condemned heretics in the expounding such places of Scripture.

I.
And first I say that there is in the Scripture, Genesis 37.24, Jonah. 1.17. and
2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
typical prefiguration both personal and real, of our Saviors descending
into hell; namely, Joseph's putting into the pit without water; by his brethren
mentioned in the 37. chapter of Genesis; and Jonah his being in the belly of
the Whale in the midst of the sea three days and three nights, as it is in the
first and second chapters of his prophecy. And therein our Savior himself
affirms that Jonah was a type or figure of him, and that his foresaid
condition was a figure or sign of his own being after death in the heart of
the earth, Mat. 12.39.40,
as it is in the twelfth of S. Matthewes Gospel, for as Jonas, (says our
Savior) was three days and three nights in the whales belly, so shall the
son of man be three days and three nights, in the beart of the earth. The
which cannot be understood of our Saviors burial, as our Geneuians would make
us believe; for his grave was not near the heart of the earth, nor Christ's
body was not in the belly of the earth, but both were in the head, face, or top
of the earth, and not within it, but without it, for it was a tomb hewn out
of a rock as it is in the Gospel, and so those words of Jonah were verified
in the person of Jesus really, Mat. 27.60.
Out of the belly of hell cried I, and again, Thou have brought up my soul
from the pit: for as Ionab was in the midst of danger, without danger, in the
bottom of the sea, without being drowned, so was our Redeemer Jesus in the
midst of danger without danger, and even in the bottom of the fiery pit
without being burned, or consumed thereby; as Jonah was in the belly of the
Whale without being destroyed, so was Jesus his soul in Leuiathans belly,
which is hell, without being devoured of Leuiathan, the roaring and denouring
Lion. And as Jonah as brought up from the bottom of the sea; so was Jesus his
soul, brought up from the bottom of the pit, wherein is no water, but all
fire, and is so deep that it is said to be without bottom. And as Joseph's
being in that pit without water, and Ionahs being in the Whales belly, and in
the bottom of the sea, were personal types and prefigurations of our Saviors
being in hell, so have we in the Scripture, real types and prefigurations
thereof, for as the bloody Sacrifices of the law, did shadow out our Saviors
bloody sacrificing of his blessed Body upon the Cross for our sins, in which
doing he shut up all those bodily and bloody sacrifices, with a solemn
Consummatum est, saying, it is finished; so the burnt offerings of the law, did
fore show how our Savior should offer his soul for an holocaust or burnt
offering, Ioh. 19.30.
according as the Euangelical Prophet Isay had fore told, saying in the fifty
three chapter: He was taken out from prison and from judgment, and was cut out
of the land of the living; for the transgression of my people was he plagued,
Isay. 53.8, 9, 10.11.12.
he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death, though he
had done no wickedness, and he shall make his soul an offering for sin,
etc. He shall divide the spoil with the strong, because he had powered out
his soul unto death. In which words the Prophet points out our Saviors
imprisonment, araignement, judgment, execution, the crucifying and burying of
his body, which was the bloody sacrifice, that put an end unto all bloody
sacrifices, with his pouring out of his soul unto death, and making it an
offering for sin, to wit a burnt offering. Where observe well, that though
our Savior offered his very soul, to be a burnt offering for the expiation of
the sins of our souls, as he had done before, his body for a bloody
sacrifice to expiate the sins of our bodies, yet had not the flames of hell
any power thereupon, in which respect the three children were a type of him, in
their walking in the midst of the seven times hot fiery furnace, Dan. 3.21,
22, 23, 24, 25 26, 27, and 6, 16, 22, 23,
without any hurt, as it is in the third of Daniel. Yea Daniel himself being
in the Lions den, without any harm, as it is in the sixth chapter, was a type
and figure of our Saviors conquering condition in hell; that though he had
offered the Lamb of his blessed body to the shambles of the shame full and
accursed cross to be slain, and the Turtleedoue of his divine soul to the
hot furnace to be burnt: (such burning love he bare us) yet could not hell
fire take any hold thereon, but was free among the dead, as it is in the eighty
eight Psalm, that is to say, Psalm. 88.4, 5, 6
free from the tormenting flames and pains of hell fire. And though he was laid
in the lowest pit in darkness and in the deep (as the Psalmist there
subioyneth, immediately prophesying of Christ's descending into the lowest hell,
and not into any upper Limbus patrum) and that he was brought down into the
devils dark dungeon, into the den of the roaring and devouring Lion, to have
seized upon his soul, and to have kept it captive; yet was the devil
disappointed, and was so far from detaining our Saviors soul in captivity,
as that he himself was by him captiuated and bound up in chains of darkness;
for the Apostle to the Ephesians, Ephesians 4.8.
testifies that he led captivity captive. So that he that did once lie down,
and couch as a Lion (as the Patriarch Jacob in blessing his Son Judah
prophesied of Jesus, Genesis 49.6. Revel. 5.5.
the Lion of the tribe of Judah,) so soon as the denouring old Lion the
devil, having him in his den, began to rowse and stir him up, and to
encounter with him, (for then was the King of heavens great Lion baiting) he
left of to be Couchant, and became Rampant, and graspling with him, gave him
the foil, and entered to the spoil, according as Jacob had prophesied,
saying, Judah as a Lions whelpe, Isay 53.12.
shall thou come up from the spoil, and Isay likewise (in the place before
alleged) saying, He shall divide the spoil with the strong, and as the A
postle in the Epistle to the Colossians testifies that he did, saying, and
has spoiled the principalities and powers, Colos. 2.15.
and has made a show of them openly.

II.
Secondly our Saviors descent into hell, is in the Scripture not only by
typical prefigurations, both personal and real, as has bin now showed; but
also by express prophetical predictions. For David, who was both a type and a
Prophet of Christ, prophesies of it in many places, Psalm. 16.10. and 18.5. and
30.3. and 88.6.
and namely, in the 16. Psalm saying, Thou wile not leave my soul in hell,
and in the 18. The sorrows of hell hane compassed me, and in the 13. Lord thou
have led forth my soul out of hell, and in the 88, Thou have laid me in the
lowest pit, in darkness and in the depth: and so has Zachary prophesied of
his descending into the very dungeon of the damned, Zach. 9.11, 12
(and not into any Limbus patrum as the Papists suppose) when he says in his
ninth chapter, prophesying there of Christ. I have loosed thy prisoners out of
the pit, wherein is no water. And if any one ask what these prisoners were,
that were thus loosed by our Saviors descending; I answer, that all the elect
souls of Gods children were in effect prisoners of hell, and that they were
indeed delivered and loosed out of that prison, by the virtue of Christ's
personal descending, though they were not presentially and personally there
themselves. For God does deliver men from dangers and evils tam praeueniendo
quam subueniendo, as well by prevention before the fall, as by subuention, when
they have fallen. The Roman Doctors indeed, expound this place of Christ's
descending into a certain black border of hell, which they call Limbus
patrum, to deliver the Patriarchs souls from thence: for as for the pit or
prison of the damned, from thence they hold there is no redemption. But truly
they are deceived in their opinion, for the pit or prison whereunto our Savior
did descend, is called the lowest pit in the Scripture, and so must needs be
the prison of the damned; Thou have laid me in the lowest pit in darkness,
Psalm. 88.6.
and in the deep, (says the Prophet David) prophesying of his Sons descending
into the Iowest hell. And the Prophet Zachary calling it a pit without water,
intimates that it is a pit full of fire, and consequently no Limbus patrum,
nor black border of hell fire, but hell fire it self. And in our Latin
disputation of the Seat of Souls, as we shall prove both by Scriptures
authority, and Fathers testimony; that the souls of the faithful Jews
before Christ, were in no subterraneall pit or prison, but in Paradise: so
shall we dispute another noble question, whether or no, the souls of the
virtuous Gentiles were delivered from the lowest pit, Zach 9.11, 12 Psalm.
107.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
at our Saviors descending, and whether this place of Zachary of our Saviors
loosing of those prisoners of hope out of the pit, wherein is no water, and that
of the Psalmist, of the breaking of the bonds of such as did dwell in
darkness, and sit in the shadow of death: and that of the Prophet Isay, Isay
61.1
prophesying of our Saviors preaching liberty to the captives, and to them
that are bound, Luke 418. 1. Pet. 3.18, 19 20. and 4.5, 6.
the opening of the prison, as it is likewise in the Gospel of S. Luke, and
those words of S. Peter, when he says that our Savior being dead in his
body, but quick or living in his Spirit (for so reads the Syrian text) went
by the same Spirit and preached to the Spirits in prison, which were in times
past disobedient. And finally, those other words of the same Apostle, for unto
this purpose was the Gospel preached also unto the dead, that they might be
condemned according to men in the flesh, but might live according to God in the
spirit: Isay 53.12. Mat. 12.29. Ephesians. 4.8. Colos. 2.15.
whether I say these places of Scripture and others the like wherein mention is
made of our Saviors spoiling of hell and Satan, and of his leading captivity
captive, may perhaps be probably understood of his powerful and merciful
delivering from hell, some of the souls of the virtuous Gentiles, as of their
Philosophers, Law giuers, Governors, Kings, Queens, and other private persons
renowned for their wisdom, prudence, fortitude, temperance, bounty, chastity,
justice, mercy, and generally for their civil carriage, and moral
conversation, such as were Hermes Trismegistus, Zoroaster, Socrates, Plato,
Aristotle, Pythagoras, Homer, Phocilides, Theognis, Epictetus, Cicero, and such
as were Hercules, Theseus, Cyrus, Solon, Lycurgus, Aristides, Cimon, Timotheus,
Epamis nondas, Tarina, Camilla, Nicaula, Pauthaea, Penelope, Artemisia, and
others the like. For my own part I do profess such love to those virtuous
wights, for their virtues sake, that I had rather condemn twenty such
opinions, as that of the subterraneall Limbus patrum, then to damn eternally
the soul of one Socrates, or of one Cyrus, let alone of a Solomon: concerning
whom, we shall likewise dispute the question, whether his soul went to
Paradise, or to the hell of the damned; and shall prove the salvation of his
soul, against Cardinal Bellarmine, and other his Romish damners, by many
authorities and arguments.

III.
Thirdly our Saviors descending into hell, Job 38.17.
is in the Scripture by pregnant historical allusion. In the book of Job the
greek interpreters allude thereunto most evidently, for the English of the
Septuagints reading of the 17. verse of the 38. chapter is thus, Were the gates
of hell opened unto thee for fear, and did the Porters of hell at the sight of
thee, shrink for fear? and in the translation according to the hebrew, it is
thus, Have the gates of death been opened unto thee, or have thou seen the
gates of the shadow of death? and in the Gospel, Mat. 12.24, 25 26, 29, 28,
29.
our Savior himself alludeth disertly thereunto, when he says in the
Gospel, Else how can a man enter into a strong man's hold, except he first
bind the strong man, and then spoil his house: where note, how that
immediately before, he spoke of his casting out of devils, and his ouercomming
of them, which argues that Christ was to conquer the devil; for all his
strength in his own house, and both to foil him, and spoil him in his own
strongest hold.

IIII.
Fourthly, our Saviors local descending into hell is in the Scripture, by
Evangelical explication or application; for S. Matthew in the same twelfth
chapter, Mat. 12.39, 40
where he entreats of our Saviors casting out of devils, and of his entering
into the strong man's house to bind him and spoil him, testifies, that Jonah
in his being three days and three nights in the Whales belly, was a type or
figure of our Saviors being three days and three nights in the heart of the
earth; which cannot be understood of the place of his Body, but of the seat of
his soul, as we have showed before.

V.
Fifthly, Mat. 10.2. Act. 2.26.27, 30.31.
Christ's local descent into hell, is in Scripture by Apostolical
asseueration. For first, S. Peter the prime Apostle in the second of the Acts,
mentioning both the parts of our Saviors humanity, to wit his soul and
flesh, shows how God had preordained that neither should his soul be subject
to detention or destruction in hell, nor yet his body to detention or
corruption in the grave: Psalm. 16.8, 9,
and he expounds the Prophet David's words, in the sixteenth Psalm: Thou will
not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see
corruption, of the resurrection of Christ; that his soul should not be left in
hell, neither his flesh should see corruption. For as the resurrection could
not be atchiued without a combination of Christ's body and his soul; 1. Pet.
3.18.19 and, 4.6,
so it behooved the soul, as well to rise in a manner out of hell, where it lay
down like the Lion couchant of the tribe of Judah; as the body to rise out of
the grave or tomb, where it was laid. The same Apostle in his first Epistle
teaches the same doctrine, in two several places; the one where he says that
Christ being put to death, concerning the flesh, but quickened in the Spirit
(according to the greek text, or being quick and living in the Spirit,
according to the Syrian) went by the same Spirit, and preached unto the Spirits
in prison; the other, where he says that the Gospel was preached unto the
dead, to the end that they might live according to God in the Spirit. And as S.
Peter, the prime Apostle (for so the Scripture calls him) in the three places
now alleged affirms Christ's descending into hell in his soul, Mat. 10.2,
Mark. 3.16.
so S. Paul in as many places does the like. The first place is in the tenth to
the Romans where he affirms both his ascending into heaven, and his
descending into the deep or bottomless pit which is hell. Romans 10.6.7.
Say not in thine heart (says he) who shall ascend into heaven that is to
bring Christ from above? or who shall descend into the (a byssus) deep or
bottomless pit, that is to bring Christ from the dead? where note that the
Greek word abyssus, which our English have translated, the deep is never
taken for the grave, but for hell and the bottomless pit, it is often taken,
as in Luke the eight, Luke 8.31. Reuela. 9.1.2.11 and 11.7. and
20.1.3.7.10.14.15.
in the ninth of the Revelation thrice, in the eleventh once, and in the
twentieth twice; where it is likewise called Satan's prison, and the lake of
fire and brimstone. The second place where S. Paul teaches Christ's descent
into hell, is the fourth to the Ephesians, thus, Now in that he ascended, what
is it, but that be also descended first into the lowest parts of the earth?
where the lower or lowest parts of the earth can signify no other thing but
that, Ephesians. 4.8.9, 10.
which he calls the deep or bottomless pit in the Epistle to the Romans;
for as he makes an express opposition between ascending and descending,
which are contrary motions, so does he between the two opposite places, to wit,
the highest part of heaven, and the lowest part of the earth. The third and the
last place is the second to the Colossians, where speaking of our Saviors
Mediatourship, he uses these words amongst other, Colos. 2.15.
And has spoiled the principalities and powers, and has made a show of them
openly, and has triumpbed over them in himself; for so reads the Syrian
text, and the Greek text likewise in most part of books, together with the
Latin of Saint Hierome, of Erasmus, of Delanus, of Castalso, of Stephanus, of
the Tigurins or Leo Judah, and of Arrias Montanus; where as the Geneuian
translation of Beza attributes this triumph to Christ on the Cross, contrary
to the common translation, and exposition of ten of the Doctors of the
Primitive Church, as shall be showed other where. And truly Christ did
triumph over the Principalities and powers when as he did bind Satan, and by
his presence terrify the whole infernal forces, the which thing he did not
on the cross, for there he suffered himself to be foiled and overcome; but
he did it in Satan's own house, and strongest hold. So that his triumph
began in hell, in respect of his souls divine vanquishing of the devil, like
as it began in the grave, in respect of his Bodies powerful rising from death
to life; and it was finished both in soul and body, when he gloriously
ascended into heaven. So that they are mightily deceived which do think our
Savior triumphed over Satan and hell upon the cross; for atriumph does
always follow upon a perfect victory, and does not go before it, much less
before the conflict, as our Geneuians would ridiculously have it. Thus we see
twenty express passages of Scripture for our Saviors descending into hell
after death, (for so many have we alleged from the first to the last,) where
as the Geneuians can not produce so much as one text bearing, that Christ's
soul went not to hell: only out of two texts in the Gospel, they draw an
argument against his descending; the one in that he said to the penitent
thief, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise: Ioh. 23.43.46,
the other in that he said a dying; Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit:
but neither does the one nor the other argument conclude punctually. First the
argument does not follow; Christ's Spirit was in his fathers hands, Ergo it was
not in hell; for Gods hands is in hell as well as in heaven, according to that
of the Psalmist, speaking of our Savior, belike by way of prophecy; If I
ascend into heaven thou art there, if I lie down in hell thou art there; Psalm.
139, 8,
yea the hand of the Father was with his Son in hell, in a fatherly manner
fortifying him, in his conflict against the fury of the whole infernal
forces, like as his hand and Spirit, was with him to raise him up from the
dead, Romans 8.11.
as the Apostle teaches. Neither does the other argument follow, Christ was
that day or night in Paradise; Ergo he did not descend into hell; for to speak
nothing of his being in Paradise in his Godhead, I say that in his very soul
he might without all repugnancie; have gone first to Paradise, which was the
place due unto him, being considered as a most perfect and just man, free from
sin; and afterward to hell, which was the place due to all sinners, and even
to him, in so far as he became the pledge, and surety for sinners, a
sufferer for them both of death and dishonor, and a deliverer of them from
sin and Satan, from Gods hatred and hell. But Godwilling in our Latin
disputation of the Seat of souls, we shall handle the point of our Saviors
going to Paradise more accurately; where we shall likewise dispute the
question of the place, situation, existence, and use of the terrestrial
Paradise, and shall by certain probable arguments make it apparent; how that
it was created in the heart of the world upwards, like as hell was created in
the heart of the earth downwards. And there shall we refute an error of the
learned Spanish Jesuit Pererius and of our Geneuians touching the
nonexistence of Paradise; like as in our work called Dies Domini, which
delivers the doctrine of Hebrews, Greeks and Latins, Theologians,
Philosophers and Historians; touching the worlds beginning, lasting and ending,
we do refute the same Jesuits, and some of our own Protestants common
error touching the worlds beginning, in the month of September; and that by
diverse new arguments, besides the authorities of Theologians, Astrologians and
Philosophers.

VI.
Sixthly, as the holy Scripture does avouch our Saviors descending into hell,
in his soul after death, in the foresaid five respects; so does the Catholic
or universal Churches common Confession of faith auerre it; as may appear by
our common Creed, commonly called the Creed of the Apostles, wherein after the
mention of our Saviors burial, is immediately subioyned his descending into
hell, like as after his rising from the dead, he is said to have ascended into
heaven. Neither could this point have been expressed in plainer words then it
is, for plainness was fittest for the expression of the common faith of
Christians. The motion of ascending and the place thereof heaven, are both of
them taken literally and properly; and therefore their contraries, descending
and hell must likewise be properly taken, without running to a figure. And we
may as well deny that in the Creed, ascending signifies a local motion
upwards, and that heaven signifies the seat of God, and the receptacle of the
blessed Spirits, and with all, say that by our Saviors ascending into heaven,
is signified no other thing else, but his enjoying of some spiritual solace
and heavenly joy; as to deny that his descending is a local motion
downwards, and that hell is the seat of Satan and of his slaves, and as to
say with the Genenians, that by Christ's descending into hell, is nothing else
meant, but his feeling of some spiritual sorrows or hellish horror. If hell
must be taken by a figure in the Creed, then heaven in the same Creed shall
be but another figure; and so should our Creed be but a Creed of figures, and
our faith, a faith of figures. And to say that there are many Creedes and
confessions of faith (wherein there is no mention made of Christ's descending
into hell) it does not argue that the authors and makers of those confessions,
did not believe this point: for other clauses are likewise often wanting, as
namely, in the Nicene Creed, these words, Borne of the Virgin Mary, he was
buried, he sits on the right hand of God, I believe the Catholic Church,
the communion of Saints, the resurrestion of the body, and the life
everlasting, as well as those words, he descended into hell. And yet the
Fathers (no doubt) were as well persuaded of these things they left out, as they
were of those things they put in. Again, it is sufficient that in none of the
Creedes and confessions that ever were published above threescore, the
descending of Christ into hell is denied: for ye shall not read in one of
them all, such a clause, I believe that Christ's soul being severed from the
body, went not down into hell, but ascended up into heaven. But not only is
it not denied so much as in one Creed of many: but also it is affirmed
expressly, in some Creedes, as namely, in that of the Apostles, and in that of
Saint Athanasius, and implicitly it is in all the Creedes and confessions that
ever were made, for more then fifteen hundredth years together: for it is
implied in the word suffered, and in the word died. For in Christ the
Mediators death, are these three parts; the separation of the soul from the
body, the collocation of the body being dead in the grave, as being the bodies
chamber of death, and the migration of the severed soul into the black house
of death, which is hell; where it behooued the souls of all men to be
imprisoned, except the Son of God, by descending into that dungeon, had
delivered and exempted all believing souls from descending. Psalm, 107.14, 16.
Job 38.17.
For he it was that brake those gates of brass, and brast the bars of iron
asunder, and to him the gates of hell and of death were opened for fear. It is
certain that Christ's soul went to some place after death, and in the Creed
we find no place mentioned, but hell, or heaven: now in it there is mention
made, of his descending into hell after death, but there is no mention made of
his souls ascending, until at what time being risen, after forty days aboade
with his Disciples, he ascended visibly, in his whole humane nature. And that
he ascended not into heaven, before that time, we may gather it out of his
own words to Mary Magdalen, Ioh. 20.17.
saying, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father; and there is not
so much as one letter in the whole Scripture, that shows that our Savior was
to ascend twice to heaven, or that his soul was to descend twice from heaven:
the which double descension and ascension, are inferred necessarily of the
Geneuian doctrine. And as the word died, in the Creed, does imply our Saviors
descending in soul, to the house of death, though not to dye, (for Christ's
soul could not dye) but to overcome death, and to destroy the author of death,
the devil, (as the Apostle speaks) so does the word of suffering the like.
1. Cor. 15.55. Heb. 2.14.
For Christ suffered the greatest humiliation and deiection that could be, for
man's cause, and therefore it behooued his soul to be humbled unto hell, and
without this he had not been subjected to the highest degree of humiliation
in his soul, as he was to be, answerably to the humiliation of his body,
which was in the highest degree, even unto the death of the cross: like as for
that cause God exalted him, both in body and soul, in the highest degree,
Philip. 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
(as the Apostle teaches.) So that we see that Christ's local descending into
hell, is denied in no Creed, but expressed in some, and implied in all.

VII.
Seauenthly, the local descent of Christ's soul into hell, is confirmed by the
common consent, and constant profession of the Doctors of the primitive Church,
in their Sermons, Homilies, Commentaries, Expositions and Glosses, upon the
places of Scripture above alleged, about twenty in number; and upon the
Creed, especially this article thereof, as shall be showed more particularly
in our Latin work by the express testimonies of these three and forty
Fathers, Doctors, and writers, Hebrews, Greeks and Latins, Thaddaeus,
Ignatius, Justinius Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullianus, Origines, Cyprianus,
Arnobius, Lactantius, Eusebius, Athanasius, Hilarious, Socrates, Basilius,
Gregorius Nazianzenus, Ambrosius, Hieronimus, Ruffinus, Epiphanius,
Chrysostomus, Augustinus, Cassianus, Caesarius, Philippus Presbyter, Cyrillus,
Primasius, Euthymius, Theodoretus, Leo, Vigilius, Fulgentius, Cassiodorus,
Beda, Titus Bostrensis, Didimus, Ioannes Damascenus, Theophylactus, Oecumenius,
Bernardus, Prudentius, Petrus Chrysologus, Rabbi Hoccadosh, Rab. Simeon:
whereunto shall be added, some six or seven Councels, as of Ephesus,
Chalcedon, Alexandria, Constantinople, Toledo, Arles and others. So that if the
Fathers of the Church have any weight or authority amongst the Geneuians, they
shall soon see themselves in a manifest error which God grant they may as
soon amend.

VIII.
Eighthly, Christ's local descent into hell after death, is confirmed by the
ingenuous reception and subscription of the most part of learned protestant
writers, as we shall show in our Latin work, by the testimonies of some
thirty; to wit, Luther, Calum, Peter Martyr, Bullmger, Pomeran, Pelican,
Chytraeus, Aepinus, Bucer, Illyricus, Selneccer, Lossius, Hemingius, Aretius,
Rulandus, Marlerat, Vrbanus Rhegius, Lauater, Vitus Theodorus, Mylius,
Musculus, Mollerus, Westhemerus, Heresbachius, Felinus, our countrymen
Alexander Alesius, or Aeleis, Bishop Latimer, and Robert Samuel Martyrs, Deane
Nowell, Master Fox, with the reverend Bishops and learned Doctors of Fngland,
in the time of King Edward the sixth, and afterward, to this present day of the
happy reign of King James the sixth, together with the whole Lutheran
Protestants in Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Poland, Boheme, Hungary, and other
parts of Germany, with some of those, whom they call Caluinians; as namely,
that most learned and judicious Italian divine, Hieronymus Zanchius.

IX.
Ninethly, the doctrine of Christ's local descending into hell, is proved by
irrefragable reasons: for first the doctrine of the Church of England does
illustrate, commend and magnify, the love of God toward mankind, where as
the doctrine of Geneua obscureth, ecclypseth, and diminishes it, exceeding
much. For it is an argument of great love, that the Son of God would daigne
to descend from his throne, and seat of majesty, into this earth of vilitie
and misery, which is his foote-stoole: but it is an argument of far greater
love, that for our sakes, he would yet desce^d lower, even so low, as to take
upon him the shape of a servant, and in that shape to suffer so shameful a
death, as that upon the cross; but it argues the highest degree of love that
could be, in that for our sakes he would descend so low as into the lowest
hell, the vile and loathsome dungeon of the damned, to the end that we should
not descend thither, nor be damned. Secondly, the very Ground, whereupon the
Geneuians do found their doctrine of Christ's suffering the pangs of hell, does
prove pregnantly this very point, which they deny of Christ's descending into
hell in his soul. The ground is this, It behooued the Mediator of sinful
mankind to suffer what was due to sinful mankind, whereupon it follows
necessarily, that he suffered the highest degree of humiliation, to wit to be
humbled unto hell in his soul, as his Body was humbled unto the shame of the
cross, and the grave, for sinful mankind had deserved this deiection, and
should have been humbled so far for his sinful and proud rebelling against
God, if our Redeemer had not humbled himself in our stead and for our sakes to
exempt, and deliver us from this ignominy. Yea their very doctrine is
contradictory to it self, for they hold that Christ was to suffer the torments
of hell in his soul, and yet they will not have him go to hell; which two
assertions cannot well stand together; for though that the soul may feel the
horror, or apprehend the fear and terror of hell, out of hell, Psalm. 18.4, 5,
Mat. 26.37.38 39, 42, 46, Mar. 14.33 34, 35, 36, and 15, 34,
and that our Saviors soul did so in the garden and upon the cross,
according as the Prophet David had prophesied, of him saying, the sorrows of
death and of hell, have compassed me about, and as our Savior said of
himself, My soul is very heavy even unto the death, and as the Evangelists
do testify of him, that he began to wax sorrowful: and grievously
troubled, to be afraid and in great beauinesse, and even in such an agony
upon the apprehension of the fearful cup of Gods wrath, that he sweat drops
of blood, and afterward cried out, that he felt himself in a manner forsaken
of his Father, for our sakes for a while; all which soule-suffering, the
Apostle Peter calls by the name of the sorrows of death, and David, the
sorrows of hell; though I say that our Savior suffered in his soul for our
sakes, these horrors and terrors of hell, in the very garden and on the
cross, yet he could not suffer the pangs, pains, or torments of hell, without
being in hell, no more then one can enjoy, the joys of heaven out of heaven.
But the truth is, that Christ's soul was no more capable of those torments of
hell, then it was of desperation or damnation. And though he descended into
hell, yet it was not to suffer torment, but only the highest degree of
humiliation and debasement, and with all to begin his highest exaltation in the
same very place, where his lowest humiliation did end. Thirdly, the doctrine of
the Church of England does magnify and set out the Majesty of Christ's
victory and conquest, where as the doctrine of Geneua does obscure and
diminish the Majesty thereof. For who knows not, but that it is a greater
glory for a King or Captain to vanquish and conquer his enemy in his own
kingdom, and to make his enemies own palace his prison, then to do it
elsewhere? Wherefore seeing our Savior achieved the greatest, and the most
glorious conquest that ever was, and triumphed the most magnificently; Mat.
12.29.
we must needs believe, that he did it in Satan's the strong ones own house,
castle and kingdom, as it is in the Gospel, and as the Church of England
together with the Primitive does believe and teach; and not that he did it out
of hell, or on the cross, as they iargon at Geneua.

X.
Tenthly and lastly, the verity of the Church of Englands doctrine touching
our Saviors descending into hell, may appear by the contradictions,
oppositions, and dissentions, and fanaticall expositions of such as have
oppugned it, or dissented from it; some expounding those words, he descended
into hell, of our Saviors burial, others of his detention in the grave, and
the most part of his suffering the pains and torments of hell, in the garden,
and on the cross; some have expounded it of his translating into the state of
the dead, and some have been so fanaticall, as to say, that his descending
into hell, means no other matter but the ascending of his soul into heaven
after death. And as some of them have most unlearnedly and ridiculously
understood heaven by hell in the Creed, and ascending by descending, which is
all one with the taking water for fire, or God for the devil, so have they as
unlearnedly and ridiculously construed diverse other places of Scripture. In the
sixteen Psalm, by the Hebrew word NEPHESH, Psalm. 16, 10. Act. 2.27.
and in the second of the Acts by the Greek (...) (both which do signify
the soul) they understand the body, which is the contrary part, and the other
half of man, a thing that no learning divine or humane will suffer. And though
a man perhaps might excuse such a simple or single Ignoramus as this; yet how
can he excuse it, when it is doubled? for those Geneuians will have the word
soul to signify the body and a dead body, which in all learning divine, or
humane, signifies always a living substance; and either the principal part,
which is the soul, and that properly, or else the whole person, figuratively.
And as these admirable Metamorphosers of Geneua, turn in one place hell into
heaven and descending into ascending, even black into white, and in another
place, Christ's living soul they turn into his dead Body; so do they turn
hell into the grave, for the Hebrew word SHEOL; and the Greek word (...),
which do properly and principally signify hell (as the learned in these
languages do well know, and as we shall show particularly otherwhere, by
alleging the testimonies of the best Hebricians and Grecians) but especially
when the word of Soul is thereunto annexed, as it is in the sixteenth Psalm,
and in the second of the Acts, they do translate Grave and not Hell; which is
not only the secondary and improper signification of those two words, but also
quite repugnant to those texts of Scripture, wherein mention is made of the
condition of Christ's soul: For though it be true that the said two words do
sometimes signify the grave, yet it is but secondarily and improperly, and
when the word of Body or flesh is joined thereunto, but never when the word of
Soul, is annexed, as it is in those two places of Scripture, and because they
see the absurdity that should ensue of saying that Christ's soul should be
buried in a grave, therefore for preventing one absurdity, they run into
another: for as they turn hell into grave, so do they Christ's living soul
into his dead body, the most blockish and stockish abusing of Scripture, that
ever was heard tell off: yea more, the most impious, for in so doing they join
with the professed enemies of Christ both Jews, Arrian, and Apollinarian
Heretics. For first such Geneuian expositors join with the Jews, who (as
Aepinus the Protestant Superintendent of Hamburge, writes upon the sixteenth
Psalm) to overthrow the certainty of our faith, concerning Christ's descension
into hell and his resurrection, did by the word soul, understand life, (though
it be not so bad, nor so far fetched as Bezas dead body) and by the word
hell, they understand grave, as the Geneuians do. And next they join and
iumpe with the old Arrian and Apollinarian Heretics, which denied our
Saviors true humane soul, and therefore understood those Scriptures as the
Geneuians do, and not as the orthodoxe fathers understood them, that out of
those Scriptures, refuted their fooleries, as Athanasius, Theodoretus,
Epiphanius, Cyprianus, Augustinus, Fulgentius, Hieronymus, Ambrosius, Philippus
Presbyter, Ruffinus, Cassiodorus, Euthymius, Beda, Petrus Chrysologus, and
others whom the Church of England does follow: all which shall be (God-willing)
particularly proved in our Latin work. And the Geneuians do join with the
same Apollinarian heretics in understanding by the Spirit of Christ in the
third chapter of the first Epistle of Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 3.18.19.
his Divinity or Godhead, and not his humane Spirit; though the other half
of his humanity, to wit his flesh be there mentioned with it: like as in the
same text, they turn Christ's person, into Noah's, and Christ's preaching in
Spirit unto dead men's spirits after his passion, into Noah's preaching in body
unto living men, many hundredth years before the passion, and incarnation.
Where note how that contrary to all learning divine and humane, they expound
the word Spirit of a living man, and not of the soul of one deceased. And in
the same absurd manner, they turn Christ's wrestling upon the cross, into
triumphing, and make him to sing his own triumph before his full and absolute
victory. Finally, as in expounding the Gospel they turn the heart or middle
of the earth into a Tomb, Math. 12.40. and 27.60.
which was not so much as within the foreskin (if I may so speak) of the
earth, so in expounding the Epistle, they turn the lower or lowest parts of
the earth, Ephesians. 4.8.9.
whereinto our Saviors soul descended, into the vpmost parts or surface of
the earth, where in body he conuersed, when he was upon earth. So that they
turning thus vpside down, both in Gospel and Epistle as they do, we have as
little cause to iumpe or join with Geneua in this point, as we have to run
with Rome for the finding out of their fanaticall Limbus Patrum.

And thus I have by a ten-fold probation, cleared the truth of the doctrine of
the Church of England touching our Saviors descending into hell, and have with
all dispelled the clouds and mistes, both of Roman and Geneuian opinions. For
as it is most certain that our Saviors soul did after death descend into
hell, which our Geneuians do most unlearnedly and ignorantly deny, so is it
as certain, that he descended into the very lowest hell, and not to any upper
region or subterraneall Limbus Patrum, to deliver the Fathers, as the Romans
do imagine; for we shall prove both by Scriptures and Fathers, and many
pregnant reasons, that they went presently after death into Paradise; and that
there is no other Limbus or lodge for Fathers or Infants either, but it, nor no
other Purgatory after this life, but the fire of Gods Spirit in the same
Paradise. And in the same work, we shall likewise dispute the question,
whether our Savior went first into Paradise, before he went down to hell; and
whether the souls of the Patriarchs, went in his company, to be witnesses of
his victory in hell? wherefore I would wish with all my heart, that for the
furthering of the peace of the Church, both Romans and Geneuians, Papists and
Puritanes would subscribe unto the doctrine of the Church of England in this
point, and borrow from her the gold of this orthodoxall doctrine, as they
would she should borrow from them some thing that they can show as good warrant
for, as the Church of England can do for this. And let them both, do as they
please, one thing I dare undertake to prove by public disputation, in any
College in Christendom, and shall shall do it, (God willing) before a few
years go about, in King James his College; that the Romans cannot show so
much Scripture, and so many testimonies of Fathers, nor so many pregnant
reasons, for any two positions or opinions that they differ in from the Church
of England, as we shall show for this one, touching Christ's descending into
the dungeon of the damned, to deliver us from descending. And again, that all
the Geneuians in Christendom (though they should join their whole wits
together) shall never be able to show so many authorities, testimonies,
reasons and arguments, fetched from Scriptures, Fathers, and Doctors, for the
probation of the whole opinions, that they differ in from the Church of
England, as we shall show for the probation of this one position, only against
them. The which being well considered, I hope my Country men will not be so
fond of every Gloss, that goes forth from Geneua, as to take all to be
undoubtedly true; and that hereafter they will not applaude promiscuously all
their pedling and paltrie opinions; seeing some of them are so absurd and
ridiculous, and other some so unlearned and impious as we have now showed and
can show; how that they commit the like incongruities, absurdities, errors and
impieties in their popular paritie, amongst Ministers, in their lay-presbytery,
in their exploding of Prelacie, in their denying of the Christian Princes
Ecclesiastical faculty and sacred immunitie from secular coercion and
ecclesiastical censure: and to be brief, in their suppressing and opposing of
such religious ceremonies, and solemnities as have been used of the ancient
Christians through out the whole world, in the most flourishing and prospering
ages of the Church. The which errors and defects, I pray the God of Unity and
Verity to give them grace speedily to amend. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
IN the Epistle, page 6. line 19. for enough read enough, In the Contents numb.
9. for honorable in some copies read honorably, and number. 17. after sont, read
for, in stead of or, in some copies. In the first Treat. p. 10. lin. 17 in some
copies put out whenever, p. 35. lin. 9. for fabulous read frivolous, page 56.
lin. 17. for he overseers, read the overseers, page 40. lin 11. for Churchmen
being, read Church Members, page 45. lin 23. for the other, read their other,
page 51. lin. 29. between resembled and ours, read, by, in some copies, p. 71
l. 10. after had seen, add him. Tract. 2. page 10. line 31. in some copies
read Tarina for Taxina, and Artemisia for Artenisia, page 16. lin. 6. for the
death, read the dead.


