A waying and considering of the INTERIM by the honourworthy and highly learned
PHILLIP MELANCTHON.

Translated into English by John Rogers. 1548.

To the Reader.
BEcause I with great grief have now often heard, (most dear Reader) that ye
highly learned and no less godly, ientle and loving man Phillip Melancthon is
highlye belyed, in that a great sort openly say that he has denied the
truth, or (that I may use their own words) recanted (which thing they say
only to hyndre the furtheraunce of Gods truth) I could do no less, but
turn into our English speech, and also put out, this little treatise of his:
not so much for the defense of his most named and known fames sake (which he
has yet hitherto kept undefiled, so that even the greatest enemies of the
gospel neither could nor have said otherwise of him) as for the cou^fortyng
of many godly and christen hertes, which have, been not alytell dismayed and
discouraged through such lies. And verily not without a cause, for his denying
would do more harm to the truth in these last and most perelouse times, than
any tongue or pen can express. And God of his goodness, bountefull mercy,
and great power, grant that that never chance. At this time also, thanks be
to god therefore, he has not only not denied the truth, but also after his
old accustomed christian manier, plainelye confessed and acknowledged it:
which thing this his answer to the Interim, enough witnesses.

And although this his writing be short, and answer not to all the points of
the Interim (for that would ask great labor, and long time) yet it plainly
answers to the greatest misuses and to the very senowes of the Rome bushops
most tryannouse kingdom contained in that book.

He also shows tokens enough in the book, that he will at leisure largelier
write upon many points thereof. I received also a letter with this treatise,
from a another godly and learned man, wherein is written, that other and diverse
learned men in Dutchlande, be in hand to show their meaning in writing, as
touching the same, so that we may be of much better comfort then our
papists would gladly se, yea then many of the good and faithful christen be,
that that Interim will be wtstanded, and not so sone and easily received as ye
papists hope, and many christen fear. This I say chiefelye caused me to
put out this little book, at this time.

But for that there be happily many that know not what that Interim means, for
some. have not seen it, and some have not hard of it, ye and the most
understand not the word, as they that understand no Latin, or not very well,
need dryueth me to show both what it is, and also the meaning of the word.
Interim is a book which was at ye Emperoures Majesty's commau^demet, prynted
and put forth about the beginning of June in this year of our Saviors birthe.
1548. wherein is commanded that all the Cities in Dutchlande that have received
the word of God and made a change of Ceremonies according to the word, shall
reform their Churches again and turn to the old popish ordinances, as a
dog does to that he has spued out, or a washen swyne to the mire.

Thus have ye hard what it is. Now hear what the word signifies or
betokens.

Interim is as much to say, as in the mean season, or, in the mean while.
And therefore have they christened the child and given him this name, because
they will yt we keep all the things commanded and contained in that book, in
ye mean while from this highedutche parliament holden at Auszburg till there be
a general council holden. There they think, (but God sits above in
heaven, and thinks happly otherwise) to make ye matter worsse. For because it
had been an hastye work to have changed all things at once, they of their
great (I had almost said) greuouse and merciless mercy have borne with us in
two things, yt is to say, in y^* Marriage of priests, and receiving of the
communion in both the kinds. But how long? Forsooth Interim, that is, in the
mean while till the General Council come. And think then to bear no longer
with us, no nor with Christ himself, for then they think to be so strong,
that neither Christ himself nor all that will abide by him, shall be able to
withstand them. This is the meaning of the word in English.

Unto this Interim and the meaning thereof has thaboue named Phil. Melancthon
answered, and written this present treatise, and shows to what things a
christen man may agree, and which things may be changed, and which not: in
which treatise ye reader shall well perceive, that he nether has denied the
truth that he has thus long taught and acknowledged, nor yet thinks to
do: which virtue and high gift of God, the almighti father of our lord Jesus
Christ increase in him and all the christen to the honor and glory of his holy
name, increase of his knoweledge, and saving of many souls Amen.

At London in Edward whitchurch house by John Rogers. 1. Augusti. 1548
The answer of. Ph. Me. to the Interim.
THe Prologe newly made to the book Interim, was not brought unto us, and
therefore can we make no mencyon thereof at this time: but we perceive that it
is a very grievous, heavy and perlouse writing, if this be the meaning thereof,
that they condemn our Churches, and that the receiving of this book should
be an acknoweledgyng as it were, yt our churches have hitherto taught
wrongfully, and begone a selfwilly dissencion and division. Therefore is it
needful that all the men of understanding in our Churches answer thereto, for
if we should now our selves deny the known and acknowledged truth, and
bind our selves to the persecucion of the same truth, that were a blaspheming
of God, which should never be forgeuen, from which God graciousely defend
us. And although war and destruction be thretned us, yet must we set more by
Gods word, and not deny the known truth.

SECONDARELy the learning of the son of God and of the forgeuenes of sins,
is also the special Counsel of God, which God of his unspeakable mercy has
declared and opened, and will that all men help to uphold the same learning,
to the intent that they may pray unto him aright and obtain salvation.

Now has the deuell always sought many crafts and wyles from Adams time
hitherto, to quench out this learning, or to darcken it, as thensamples
fearfully declare.

Therefore ought we dylygently to take heed, that we be not drawn from true
and right learning, as God often warns and exorteth us.

THIRDLy let men also consider, if false learning and Idolalatrye should be
again brought in and be gonne in our Churches, how great an offense and
sclaunder should be occasioned therein: for there would many Godly men and women
fall into great heauynes and grief, and the true prayer and calling upon God
should be hindered.

For these great and weighty causes, must we take good head, what we conclude
in this matter.

We strive not of our own frowardness, heeddynesse or pride, as some men lay
to our charges. God which knows all men's hertes, wotteth how gladlye we
would se and have peace oureselues with all our hertes:

But this earnest and strong commandment, that we shall not forsake nor
persecute the known learning of the truth, drives and thrus^heth us to the
defense of the true learning which is preached in our Churhes: And as for the
peril we will put and commit to God.

AND in as much as we now se and feel by the very deed it self that the
Bushoppes and their partakers will receive no agreement: and that the discord
of the learning and certain ceremonies will nevertheless abide, and that they
will make or order no priests for us: it were better that we in deed keep
caulmnesse, quietness, and peace, in our churches, and begin not
unquietness, discord, debate and offfence among our selves.

For this * book will surely not be received in many Countries ^nder^, Inte^
and Cities.

But for as much as the articles in the Book be diverse, some be right and some
be vnrighte, some speak of the chief articles of the belefe which all men
must know and understand, and some of other matters which are not so nedeful
to be known: we will orderly declare our obedient meaning, and that that is
right will we not casu^niose and sophistice strive against, but plainly and
singely acknowledge it, and again that that is unright will we not allow.

THE beginning of the book, as touching the creacion and fall of man, the
original or byrthsinne, and the redemption or raunsoming through Christ, is
right and vnfautye. But afterward in the fourth leaf, in the title of
Justificacion or rightwessemakyng is this fault, that the Book plainly says:
that we be justified or made rightwesse through love, and the same meaning is
also afterward reherced and declared that it may suerly be understood
thereby, that that book is not agreeable with the true learnig which is through
gods grace preached in our Churches, yt a man is made rightwesse before God,
and pleases him, for ourlorde Christ's sake through belefe.

And although the book say in some places, that a man comes to rightwesenes
through belefe, yet is this the meaning of the book, that the belefe is but a
making ready before, and that afterward a man is made rightwesse through
love, as the book also plainly says, yt a man is afterward verily made
rightwesse through love.

And to declare it self playnelyer it says, that there is yet a true belefe
in a man, although he live with an evil conscience, and have not love: And
also that a man is an inheriter of everlasting life, through love.

So that this is in very deed the whole meaning, yt a man is rightwesse, that
is, pleases God, through love and worckes, as the monckes and freers taught
long a gone. And the neadfull learning of belefe is not spoken of, which is
this, although love and a good conscience must be in us, yet are we before
God rightwesse, yt is, we please him through our Savior christ and for his
sake, through ye trust yt we have in him and not because of our pureness or
cleannes. This Article is through Gods grace so declared expounded and set out
in our churches, that we doubt not, but there are very many men which
understand it right well, and can also well judge the book.

We acknowledge and teach also and that diligently and truly, that repentance
and sorowfulnes or grefe of heart, conversion or turning again to God; love, a
good purpose to amend, and a good conscience, must be in the heart, and that
this saying must abide true. Qui non diligit, manet in morte. He that loves
not, abides in death.

There must many neadefull virtues be together, belefe, love, hope, a good
conscience, a good purpose. etc: as this thing is through Gods grace
plenteously preached in our churches.

But yet over and above these virtues must the trust in ye son of God be
there, as is before said, and it must alwaise ouershadow the other virtues for
almaner of virtues be weak in us, and there abides yet much vnclea^nes in
man's heart in this life

Therefore must we cleave and stick to the mediator, and seek grace and
favor through him, for so speaks the psalm, Before the is no man living
rightwes. And Da. 9. says, hear us not because of our rightwesnes, but
because of thy mercy, for the Lords sake.

And so shall we come before God and bring this trust in the son of God with
us, and know, that although love and other virtues be, and must be in us:
that they yet be to weak, and that the trust in, to, and upon the son of
God, must stand suer, vnstirrable and vnouerthrowable, and do that that is
done to our rightwesmakyng.

And if we speak of the rightwesnes poured into us of God (as they call it)
we may not leave out this belefe and living trust, for it is one of the high
and neadfull virtues: Ye this trust wakeneth up counforth, love, prayer or
calling upon God, and life in the heart, as is written. Gall. 2. That I now
live, I live through the belefe in the son of God: And love and counforth
cannot be or abide in the heart, if this belefe and this trust go not before.

So that this is spoken without co^sideracion in the book, ye we befirst made
ryghtwesse indede through love, whereas yet this rightwesnes, yt God is
merciful unto us for ye mediators sake, and that the mediatoure covers and
hides our weakness, ought much more and highlyet to be looked to and esteamed,
then our own love.

And when we be in need, and in earnest prayer or calling upon God, we seek not
love and our own cleannes, but be much more affearde and shrynke for our
wretchedness and sins: and must seek coumforte at the only peacemaker,
which God of his great mercy and wonderful wisdom has appointed us.
Thereof speaks Paul. Justificati fide pacem habemus, after we be made
rightwesse through belefe, we have peace or are at peace.

And that this is the unchangeable voice and meaning of the gospel in the
Church of god from Adams time hitherto, that is plain in the holy Scripture,
and s. Paul sets Abraham's example before our eyes, and declares this
saying: Abraham believed God, and that was counted unto him for rightwesnes.
That is, although Abraham had great and high virtues yet was this his
rightwesnesse before God, and he pleased him, because he believed that God
would be graciouse and favorable to him according as his promise sounded.

And although this understanding of the promise be often at all ages and times
darkened, yet has it abyden and abides among the understanding and perceauyng
christen always, as every godly christen man's own experience that has
understanding, shows.

Therefore is this one fawte in the Book, that it says, love is true
rightwesnes, and fayneth yt belefe is but a knowledge, such a one as is in the
deuels.

And says further, that a man is an inheritour of everlasting life, because he
has love, and so sedeth us to our own works and speaks nothing of this
comfort, that we shall believe, that God suerly receaueth all those to
everlasting life that turn again and amend, and trust upon the son of god,
through such belefe.

But that some say, that we understand not the book, this we let them judge,
that will hereafter largelier write thereupon, if it come abroad and show his
head.

And although men would suttely and wylily excuse it, and gether the
points therein contained here and there together, so is it yet against it self.

For as much then as this Article, how a man is rightwes before god and
pleases god, must be known to all men, that the right honor may be given
to the son of God, and that men may have right true coumforte, must all men
both the learned and the unlearned help to keep the godly learning of the
gospel pure clean and vndarkned. Therefore can we not council that any man
receive the book in this point.

And in as much as it is plain that no creature neither in heaven or earth
ought to change the unchangeable council of God opened in the gospel: we
will through Gods grace, also from henceforthe truly teach the learning of
belefe and good works, as we have now many years preached and taught it in
these churches, for it is so set out in the scripture of God.

OF THE CHVRCHE and Busshops.
FROM the leuenth leaf until the eightenth is said, what ye Church of God
is, and of the order and power of the Bushops, and there be many points
patched in, which will and rightfully may be spoken against and withstanded of
godly and learned men.

But in as much as these sayeinges, almost to the end of the article, be
general, much contaynyng, doubtful and hasty sayings, we will not counsel
yt our most gracyous Unde^stande, because y^ la^me^ can n^ so well answer to
these ma^ters of Bishops powers whi^^ be craftel set out in book: He must be
b^ter learn the^ y^ lord commonly (...) y^ shall sto^ their mo^thes.
Prince meddle much in this Article. It is truth that the church is a
congregation or company gatherd together of the right believing, and that no man
shall divide and disseuer him self from the Church. But than is this the
question, which be those right believing?

And because the disseueryng and parting from the church is made an heavy and
high fault (to our despise and shame, be ye suer) is this our answer for
neade theragaynst, which the book it self acknowledges, that the teachers
must find fault with false learning, and false Godsseruyces. Now if the
withstanders of ye truth will not give place, and yt so discord and debate
follow therevppon, so be the pesecuters of the truth, and specially in needy
weighty matters, fauty before God, and not the poare Godly people that preach
or receive the truth. This is plain, and the saying of S. Paul is known to
many. If an Angel in heaven preach any other gospel, hold him accursed.
But that there be many great erroures and mysvses defended of the Rome bushop
and his, now at this time, that is plain: And the book it self has found
fawte at some erroures, which yet the Counsels holden at Trident and Bono^y
have strengthened.

Let this be enough for the excuse of our churches at this time

We beseech also our most graciouse Prince and his praise worthy land, that
if the Bishops will have us to be obedient to them, that that may be done
with this condycyon and after this facion, that they persecute not the truth,
and set not up again ungodly ceremonies in the land.

Furthermore, this must also be showed, need dryuyng us thereto: Although we
will charge no man to take in hand all these dispuracions which stycke in
this Article, for they be not all a like needful, and some things there be
whereto the suer and steadfast witnesses of the old church be neadefull,
which every man can not seake out, and we keep this labor for our self and
some other: ye every man make his own christen and profitabe acknowledgyng and
declaracio^ for himself vpo^his own ieoperdy as touchi^g these and other
matters: for that yt the book says in this point of the Councels and de
potestate Interpretationis, that is, of the power to expound ye Scripture,
there are many things to be spoken of.

God has gracyously opened his mind and will, those must we hear and receive,
and not, as in worldly kingdoms, give one certain person power to make
exposicions at his pleasure.

Of the sacraments.
OF Chrystenyng there is no strife, and our churches have christenly and with
profet striuen as touching the chrystenyng of children, and other articles
belongyng thereto: and showed good and sure ground against many errors of the
Anabaptists or Againechristeners or twisechristeners, and this our labor has
profitably helped to the declaring of many Artycles.

Of Confirmacion and anoyn* tyng.
OF these things I council also that we strive not, but so much as belongs
to the calling upon or praying unto saints, whereof we will hereafter speak.
And although it displease us that men so praise both these works,
Confirmacio^, and anointing, that they make them like the other Sacraments, and
bind the working of ye holy ghost thereto, whereas it is yet plain, that they
be so pai^ted out but for a show: yet will we not at this time dispute thereof,
and commyt it also to every man's own acknowledgyng.

But we cannot agree unto this blasphemyng of God, yt me^ should charge our
priests to receive and reach out such Anoyntinges and ungodly consecracio^s,
whereof they falsely crake and boast in Pontificalibes and Agenden, ye the holy
ghost, forgeuenes of sins, and other gifts of god and defense against the
deuell, is given thereby, and that they should serve for the health of body and
soul. etc.

Of Repentance.
ALL men of understanding know that before these our days the Monks and
Freers learning in this Article of Repentance was full of great errors and
blyndnesse. They could show no sure cou^forth, ye they taught rather
theragaynst, that we should always abide in doubt of the forgeuenes of
sins. They have also loaded the conscyences with thunpossible tellyng of our
sins, and afterward with the erroures of Satisfaccions, with pardons and
many supersticions and misbelefes.

These self same erroures and mysuses did first raise this strife of the
learning. For Godly preachers which were men of understanding must needs find
fault at such erroures and blaspheinyes of God.

And the learning of Repentance is through gods grace so well and surely
declared, that all men of understanding, acknoweledge that the same christen
declaracio^ taught in our churches is right true and cou^fortable, and also
profitable to the right praying and calling unto god, and to the knowledge of
the gospel.

OF CONFESSION.
COnfession is also diligently kept in our Churches with a good exposicion
thereof, that the absolucion shall be sought therein, for we judge that the privy
absolucion is needful to be kept, for great and weyghtye causes, in as much as
it is a witness, that there is forgeuenes of sins in the Church, and that
they that be fallen after their Christenyng may be again received. It is also
very good that there be some certain acknowledgyng and pullyng down or
lowlines of the heart, so that they that desire absolucion show themselves
repentaunt and sorrowful, and acknowledge that they be sinners and trespacers
before God.

But yet we will not load the conscyences with this perlouse and vnneadful
burden, that they should think it were needful to tell all and every of the
sins that they have done.

And forasmuch as this Article belongs to al men's consciences, we counsel
not that all men agree to this point.

OF satisfaccion.
OF Satisfaccionis much easlyer and Jentlyer spoken in the book, then before
times in the learning of the Monckes and Freers. But the sayings contain many
things in them which have neade of much declaryng. Therefore we also commit
this Article to every man's own declaracyon and acknowledgyng.

OF THE SACRAment of christ's body and bloudde.
In this matter are not our Churches against the book: But if there be any
further declaracyon demanded of any man as touching this Article, him we
suffer to speak thereof through his own confession and acknowledgyng.

OF making or annoynting of prystes.
It displeases not us, that this is reckened in the noumbre of the
Sacraments, if it be right and Chrystenly kept and holden: And we wyshe that
it might be so kept in all manner of lands and countries with great dylygence
that it were not only a ceremonye or a dysguysyng and play, but that they
that be ordained be well heard and instruct or taught, and that there were an
erneste commandment given with ye ceremony, and also that there were
afterward diligent heed taken to the learning and to the manners of the
priests.

OF MARRIAGE.
This Article is neadfull, that in the dyuorcyng of the fautelesse person, the
second marriage be granted.

Therefore is that point in the book as touching this matter, that there may
no further dyuorcemente be made then from bed and bourde, not to be agreed
unto.

OF THE MASS.
The book acknoweledgeth, that the Mass deserves not forgiveness of sins.
That is true. But that they afterward further allege sayings out of the old
and new teachers as touching the oblacion and offering to stre^gthen their
preuy Mass, those be sayings that co^tain many things in them, and it were
very easy to show good suer ground out of. S. Austen and other theragaynst,
that the same sayings belong not to their preuy Mass and oblacion or
offering, for although they call it an offering, yet declare they them selves
thus, that it deseruethe not forgeuenes of Sins. And also that they them
selves offer not the Son to God the father, for that is the own and only
work of the only begotten son, that he offers himself, as the text
speaks Heb: 9, He is gone into the holy place through his own blood, he
stands before the father as a peacemaker for ever, and prays for us, in the
same most preuy counsel, which is the holy place.

But of the offering that men offer, they say it is a thancksgeuing and a
rememberaunce, that is, therewith we through belefe pray for and receive the
forgiveness that is obtained and gotten for the sons sake. And this prayer
and thankesgeuyng shall be made in the dealing out and in the use of the
sacrament, Not of Mass.
as it is commanded and instituted. And the This is the Mass of it self.
ceremony of it self without this worck in the heart, in belefe, prayer and
thankesgeuyng, is no offering.

And let this be enough spoken of the old teachers, whereof we offer our
selves to give furher declaracyon at all times.

And because there lies much of this matter, in that that it belongs to all
chrystendome, and for that that the Mass is through many erroures comen in to
great misuse: for which God undoubtedly punysheth the world, as it is written,
whosoever unworthily uses the Sacrament, makes himself gylty of the Body and
blood of Christ: ought men with great earnest to seek and help to keep,
maintain, and uphold, the truth of this Article, to the honor of God and
salvation of men.

And this is also one of thartycles which belongs in general to all menue
both learned and unlearned. Wherefore thortely to answer to this question.

Whether the preuy Mass, or the Mass without a company taking it to gether
be to be set up again? This is our answer. That we with true meaning,
counsel that we set not up the Mass again that is done without a company
receanyng it together. And the piayne reason why, is this.

There shall no Gods service be ordened or done in the Church, that is not
ordained and commanded in the word of God. And the use of the Sacrament is
so ordained and not otherwise, that the dealyng out and the use be kept and
done, as the son of God says. Take it and eat it. etc. And drink all
thereof. etc. And, do this in my remembrance. And it was also thus holden
many hundredth years in the first church.

Therefore is this first use agreyng with the words of Christ, suerly the
right and true use, and shall be mayntened vpholden and kept, and there shall no
other worckes be set up therein, which are not commanded.

There have not been also always in times paste daily Masses. But at
Alexaundria, which was a great city, was the Communion holden three times a
weke, on sunday, wensdaye and fridaye, and in many other Cities only upon the
Sunday and holy day.

This old goodly and godly custom, is through gods grace with all
reverence, with sermons, Leassons, commandments and thanckesgeuynges,
orderly holden in our Churches.

And if there be any other worck set up in the stead of these, that offense
will wound many hertes, and fear them wholly from the communyon.

There are also mo burdens ha^gyng upon this article of the Mass, as to say,
of the Canon, prayer to Saynctes, and Soull Masses.

The Canon says plainly that this work is holden for the rede^pcion and
raunsoming of the souls. etc. Whereby all the unlearned have understood,
that this work deserves forgeuenes of sines, which meaning is also against
the book.

There be also other unmeet sayings in the Canon, as when the priest prays
that God will take in good worth that offering, as he did Abels offering, where
they yet understand the offering of the sone of God.

To be short, there be so many horrible misuses in the popish custom and
facyon, that we shrynke and quake for fear when we speak of them, and pray
therefore that no man may be loade^ with the setting up of such things.

Of the praying to Saints.
THe praying to a substance yt cannot be seen, which is not by us, gives to
the same substance this honor, that it knows and can judge all men's
hertes and al their thoughts and sighs.

This honor belongs only to the substance of God, wherefore the praying to
Saynctes is not right nor lawful.

And although they have feigned here against that god gives them a several
reuelacyon of such prayer as is made unto them, that is spoken without the
book. For the ^^ripture ^taketh of (...) such ^ng, they ^ne this (...) their
^ne bray^.
And we set theragainst, this high saying: Thou shall call upon or pray unto
thy lord God, and serve him alone.

And where as they also say, that they be prayed unto as servants and
advocates: This answer also is not enough: For the praying unto them is of it
self a witness and token, that they that be not seen, are made almightye, the
while the property which belongs to god almighty, is given unto them.

Secondarily, we may not have other mediators, annexed and set unto Christ,
to be in iointer with him.

Thirdly, it is also openly known to all the world, that men have not only
sought to make the Saints mediators, but yt they have also sought a sundry
help by every one of them.

This great Idolatry should be stre^gthened if that beginning, and prayer to
them, of which the book speaks, be kept and holden.

Fourthly. There may no godsseruice be brought into the church which god has
not ordened in his word: and as for prayig to saints has no commandment of
God, as is openly known.

Fyfthly. Man's heart may not, nor cannot pray, when it knows not whether
such a form of prayer please god or not. And there is no word of god that
teaches us so to pray. Ye there be theragaynst strong commandments, which
teach that only the one godly substance ought to be prayed unto, and yt
through the mediator. And this saying must abide fast and suer, what souer ye
ask of the Father in my name, he will give it you. This only begotten son
is set before us for our Mediator, peacemaker and speaker for.

Hereagaynst says the Book not only of the speaking for us, but also of
the deseruinges of the Saynctes, which is yet more to be rebuked.

And this is a shameful lie, that it says, that Jacob taught his children to
pray unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to him, and expounds the saying Gene. 48.
They shall be called mine and Abraham's and Jsaacs children, that is, I witness
that the promyses which be promised me and Abraham and Isaac, shall inheret
upon them, as upon our aftercomers, that is to say, yt they shall suerly have
one church and order, and that many of them shall be inheritoures of everlasting
life.

This true understanding of the text leaves the book out, and fayneth a false
of praying to Saynetes.

There be also other mo sayings in the Book that are wrong expounded. Hereby
it is plain, yt no man may agree or consent to these Articles of the book,
in which the prayer to Saynctes is commanded and strengthened.

Howbeit it is profitable for many things to know the whole story of the
church from the beginning to the ending, to take witness thereof, that god
vpholdeth his church always, and that god be thanked, that he has opened and
showed himself in the Saynctes.

And also that we teach and strengthen our selves with thinsa^ple of the
Saynctes.

The true stories of the Saynctes are also often alleged of us in Sermons, and
showed to ye people, which thing we will also from henceforth do.

OF Souse Masses.
THese Masses are almost the most commen Ceremonies in Abbayes and in other
churches in manner in all Countries and lands, for they bring money. And
there be many erroures comen into the world through Soulemasses, whereof it is
to long to speak at this time.

But it is also a peruertig of ye Sacrament, ye it is applied for ye deed. For
ye Sacrament was instituted to stir up and stre^gthen ye belefe of the
living, and also for a remembrance.

Now are not the dead present at it: And it is said without any ground, that
the priest deserves them any thing through these Ceremonies.

Therefore may not this Article in the book be conse^ted unto in anywyse, and
the saying of. S. Denise which is alleged as touching the burying, speaks no
whit of the Mass. Where as some also have prayed for the dead, yt makes
nothing at all for the Mass. Let this also be enough thereof at this time.

Of Ceremonies.
IN our Churches are the chief Ceremonies belonging to good order, as Sunday,
and holy days with used and accustomed synging and readyng, not much changed.

We will also keep and hold the same with diligence. And if any man shall
ymagyn any thing in such mean and indifferent things, with the good
Counsel of them that ought to rule the Church, which should serve for more
vnyformitie and good and manerly order, we will gladly help to uphold it. For
we will not strive or braule for such mean things, so far as the christen
use thereof stretches.

We care not also whether men eat flesh or fish. And yet we may not let the
learning of the difference of meats and of the true godsseruyce, in such
mean vnneady things be quenched out, as they were almost before these days
clean quenched out. As S. Austen at his time, and an C. year agone Gerson,
ye and fyftye year agone Wessasus at Bastil, Wesell and Meyntz, and certain
other, have sore complained. For although there be always great heaps of
errors in the Church from the beginning to the ending, yet abides there in
some, the true knowledge of God, true prayer, and better understanding of the
Godly learning, then in the great muititude, and it is Gods will that every
manne be instructed and taught truly and rightly of the true service of God.

But as touching the songs belonging to the Saynctes, thereof have I said,
that the praying to them is not to be received.

Item in as much as we deuyde the Sacrament in our Churches, must those
Processions be left out wherein the one part is carried about.

It is also true and suer, that the Sacraments in their use, as they be
ordened in gods word, are right Sacraments: and not when they be turned to
other strange works to which they be not ordened or institute. Therefore is
that spectacle in ye Procession unright, and ought not to be strengthened or
set up again.

Moreover, This is well known to the withstanders, that the preuy Mass,
prayig to saints, soulemasses, and the Procession, and certain other such
uses, although they might be excused, be yet neadelesse and ieopardouse: And
that that example of setting them up again, strengthens the great erroures
and misuses among the Understand, the withstanders of the truth.
other, and brings them in again into these Churches. They know also that
that offense will sore grieve many godly men, and that much persecucion will
be sought, and many priests and other persons banisshed, prysoned and happily
killed.

And these Countries are now through gods grace furnished with many gifts of
God, more then other Coutreies be, with Churches, with metely good manerly
order, law, a good trade of living, and with prayseworthy scyences: therefore
can we not counsel that we our selves should destroy this metely good
estate and degree, and that against Gods commandment.

And in as much as it is written, That that which is of God, abides, it will
be so found in very deed that although a change should be begone in the
Church in some places, that yet this learning which we preach, will abide in
other lands, so that that Interim will make but small unity.

And where as war is feared herefore, thereof we will show ourlowly and
obedient meaning: That the powers and rulers know what they shall do in this
matter, and what they ought or can do for the defense of the Church. And as
for my person I am through gods grace ready to depart from hence, or if need
be, to suffer.

But yet we do it not of wranglynge or pride, that we council not easelyer and
handsomlyer in this matter. But Gods commandment byndeth us, not to forsake
nor to persecute the knowentrueth. We trust also that this writing will
declare and show it self, that we strive not, for dignite, honor, or riches,
but that we only speak of neadfull learning and true Godsseruyces.

We wyllnot also load the higher powers or other men with such several
disputacyons as may not be well known of all men, but will keep yt for us
and other, to whose calling it belongs to teach other men, yt every one of us
answer and acknowledge his own confession, upon his own Jeoperdie.

It is not also our mind to teach any new or other thing, but only this
one and true learning which through Gods grace is uniformly preached of the
Godly and men of understanding in the Churches of these lands and
countreies, and is acknowledged and approved in both the vniuersytyes Lypsg
and wyttenberg: which we These two ^^iuersiti^^^ be both (...) Duke ^oris
la^d, this time.
know is the true learning and true understanding of the everlasting Catholic
Church from the beginning of the world unto this day. And this is the meaning
of our consyderacion, that these Churches be not brought out of reast and
peace, but that they may abide in praying unto God, and in the true
Godsseruices. For if the consciences be ones wounded with offense, prayer will
be sore weakened, and many sins will follow, as despise and anger against al
religions, from which sins God graciousely save us.

And in as much as it was of late wryte^ unto us, that it is highly forbidden
in the prologe, to preach, teach, or write against this Interim need dryuethe
us with lowlynesse to say thus much, that we will not change the true
learning which we have hitherto preached in our Churches. For no creature
has power or authority to change Gods truth. And no man may also deny or
for sake the known truth. Seig therefore that this Interim is against the
true learning in many Articles, which we have declared, we must neades show
a true declaracyon and answer thereto, which thing we will also do with
christen measure: and will commit the ieoperdye to ye Almighty and everlasting
God, and father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And forasmuch as God of his
unspeakable goodness geathereth him self an everlasting Church, and has
opened his wounderfull counsel thereof, above all men's wisdom and thoughts,
we pray unto him, that he himself will alwayse uphold maintain and keep the
same his learning, and also gather himself an everlasting Church in these
Lands and countries, and grant us thereto good governance and rule. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the Sun over against the
conduite by Edward Whitchurche, the. vi. day of Auguste, the year of our
lord. M. D. XL VIII.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


