A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE GENERAL

ASSEMBLY AT GLASCOE IN THE KINGDOM

Of SCOTLAND, the tenth day of June, 1610.

By GEORGE MERITON Doctor of Divinity, and one of his Matesties Chaplains.

THOU SHALL LABOR FOR PEACE PLENTY

LONDON Printed by William Stansby for Henry Featherstone. 1611.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY AT Glascoe in the Kingdom of
SCOTLAND, the tenth day of June, 1610.
2. COR. 1. 12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience.


THis verse is not complete in it self, but like the face of Ianus, it looks
two ways; backwards and forwards: having a respect unto that which went
before, and a reference also unto the words which follow. It is not my purpose
to handle it by way of relation, but to take it at large in the nature of a
proposition. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience.

There are three kind of people in the world, which are Reioycers: the first
they rejoice; but it is not in a conscience: the second rejoice in a conscience
(as they call it,) but yet without a testimony: the third are like to Paul and
Timathy in this place: their rejoicing is this, the testimony of their
Conscience.

Of the former sort, there are multitudes every where, in every Kingdom: The
world is full of Pro. 15. 21.
Solomon's foolish reioycers. The ambitious minded man, who may fi^ly be
resembled unto the empty balance, that will always be alost; he rejoices in
honor, and it is happiness to get advancement. Pro. 28.
Luke 12.
The wise fool, (that is) the rich man, and greedy miser, whose eyes are
blinded with the dust of the earth, and who gathers matter together with the
Phoenix, to consume himself; he says unto his soul, Live at ease, eat,
drink, glut thy self with pleasures; his joy is in those things which S.
Paul accounts but dongue. It were too long a voyage for me, to run over the
whole world, and to prosecute particulars. In one word, all ungodly men,
rejoice in doing evil, and take great delight in wicked things. Pro 2. 14. But
the joy of these, is but like the foppe of Judas, which made a wider way for
the Devil to enter into him, Delectatio non gaudium, says Aquinas, a delight,
not a joy; or if it be a joy, it is but gaudium vanitatis, non veritatis, says
S. Augustine, a vain and an empty joy, without all sound and inward comfort:
much like the merry madness of drunken men, who are very pleasant for a time,
but recompensed with loathsomeness a long while after: such are all the drunken
delights of the world. Naomi, sweet at the first, pleasant in the beginning,
Ruth. 1. 20.
but Mara and amara, bitter at the last, loathsome in the ending* (...), as
Philo Iudeus calls them, bitter sweet things; not much unlike the joy of
David, after his return from the slaughter of the Amalekites in Ziglag, whose*
wine was mingled 2. Sam. ^.
with water, whose mirth was turned into mourning with the sudden news of the
death of Saul and Jonathan. All rejoicing which proceeds not from a good
conscience, is (says S. Paul) but 2. Cor. 5. 12.
the joy of the face, and not of the heart; and it evermore concludes with
that same sentence of a fool, Non pataram, I had not thought. For as true joy
has his foundation in the Center, and is spread from the Center of the heart,
throughout all the parts of the soul, by the spirit; so false joy comme^h from
the Circumference, it is enforced upon the affections by external objects, it
rests not in the Center, it is not seated in the heart: And therefore though
for a time it may cheer the face, yet if the conscience be bad, it can never
fill the breast. The joy of a wicked man, says Job, it is Job 20. 5.
instar puncti, like a little point or prick. First, in respect of a Circle; a
little point is many times compassed with a very great Circle: such is the joy
of the wicked, like a point in a Circle, compassed round about with a thousand
evils. He may have the map of heaven in his face, but he carries the map
of holl in his heart. He may have Ierasalem the City of peace in his forehead,
but he bears Babylon, that is, confusion in his soul. Secondly, it is instar
puncti, in regard of that point or minute of time which it lasts, Qu^d
incipiendo desinit esse, and desinendo incipit, says Gregory: which is very
short, and suddenly ends; according to Job ^1. 13.
that of Job, They spend their days in wealth, and in the turning of a hand
they go down to hell. Thirdly, it is instar puncti, in regard of the making
of it: for as a point or prick is made with pricking; so is the joy of the
wicked joined with mourning. Risus eum dolor mis^^tur: in laughing the Pro.
14. 13.
heart is sorrowful, and the end of their mirth is much heaulnesse. To
conclude this point; where there is Ignis and Vermis, that is, where there is a
hellish and guilty conscience, there suppose to be (if you please) the greatest
joy that can be, either in honors, or wealth, or pleasures, or knowledge, or in
any thing else of highest title and prerogative in the world, yet is all but
like the sacrifice of Prometheus, which was nothing but dry bones besmeared
with fat, or like to gilded books full of bloody Tragedies. In the midst of
all iollities, the conssience many times cries out, not only Exodus 8. 19.
as the Magicians did, Digitus Dei est hic, the finger of God is here, but also
as it was said of Totilas the Gothe, Flagellum Dei est hic, the scourge of God
is here: and the Devil affrighteth the soul as Haniball did the Romans.
Haniball ad port as, the Devil is at our doors. Let no man therefore ever
comfort himself in any worldly rejoicing, unless it be joined with the
testimony of a good conscience.

The second kind of reioycers rejoice in a conscience, (as they call it) but
yet without a testimony: And as the former sort are ungodly and profane, so
these are seeming-religious; a conscience they say, does guide and admonish
them. Of whom I may well say, as the old man in the Comedy speaks of
certain things, which his young son a yonker did overmuch affect: Nec optima
haec sunt, neque vt ego aequum censeo, verum meltora sunt quem quae deterrima,
These are not of the best fashion, nor as my self could wish, yet better then
those which are the worst of all. So these are not of S. Paul's company, the
best kind of reioycers, nor yet near that sound and sweet comfort, which we
ought to seek after; sed meliores sunt quam qui deterrimi, they are better
then the sormer, which make a Ship-wracke of conscience, and are the worst of
all: those have their consciences seared up ^a judgment most fearful and
lamentable. These have them polluted and troubled, 1. Tim. 4.
sometimes perhaps like the raging Sea, Tit. 1. 15.
which cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and Esaias. 57. 20.
dirt, blinded in their understandings, and erroneous in their wills: and
therefore as S. James speaks, unstable in all their ways. I do not deny
Jam. 1. 8.
but that these men have their kinds of joy, yet let us look a while into the
causes of error in conscience, the better to judge of the manner of their
rejoicing. The first cause of error, is Ignorance; and of this rank are silly
and simple men, who out of ignorance and weakness, being deluded either by
themselves, or by others, do apprehend things for bad, which are good; and for
good, those which are bad, which deceives their souls and causes their
wills for to sin. Lippientibus says Tertullian, singularis Lucerna numerosa
videtur. Bleare eyed men spy two Candles where there is but one. Ignorant
consciences are bleareeyed; yea, sometimes stone blind, they cannot possibly
discern aright: and the joy of these, it is but like a man's that walks in a
dark and cloudie Ioh. 12.
night, who knows not whither he wandereth, full of error, of doubting, of
darkness: for if the understanding (the light of a man be darkened how great
is that darkness? It is our Savior that puts the question, as being a
darkness fitter to be admired, then easy to be esteemed. The second cause of
error in Conscience is Pride, which Mat. 6. 13.
works specially in those, who, as the wise man Pro. 1. 31.
speaks, do eat of the fruit of their own hands, and are filled with their
own devices. Quibus res sordid^ est, says Sen^ca, trita and vulgari via
viuere, unto whom the old way of the Christian world, so generally followed of
all, is either accounted none or nothing worth. It is reported by the Poet of
Chiron, a new fangled fellow, that he was weary of immorrality, and wished to
die. The Athenians having their fill of new wines, for novelties sake, says
Plutarch, would needs drink oils. Zeuxes, as Pliny relates, would not
willingly paint any common picture but Centaures and deformed Monsters* such
giddy men are there in Gods Church, just of the stamp of these, qui ex rebus
nouis claritatem famae venantur, says Gregory, who take delight by their
misshapen opinions, amongst the vulgar sort to magnify themselves. These are
greatly puffed up with a swelling joy, but yet without true substance, like to
their proud understandings, their perverse wills, and their misinformed
consciences. The third cause of error is inordinate affection, evidently seen
in those who yield to their own desires, and are therefore men of a large and
a stretching conscience, having their judgments perished with a longing
appetite, because as Seneca says truly, perit omne Iudicium cum res transit
in affectum; when any thing is seated in the Pange and heat of affection, the
judgment concerning that matter, whatsoever it be is utterly decayed. These
think it a part of good service done to God, a mere case of conscience to
follow so far the sway of their unbridled affections, as either with Saul in
the old Testament, to kill the Prophets, because he hated them; or with Paul
in the new Testament, to make havoc of the Church of Christ for love unto the
Jews. Thus many (according to their several desires) transported with
passion, and having their consciences and affections of equal breadth, grow
presumptuous in their actions; and being deceived by the slattery of their own
hearts, have a large but a very loose rejoicing. The last cause of error is
fearfulness of mind, which contracteth the soul to an ouer-narrow, and too
strict a scantling; entertayning cause of fear where no fear is. Incident
unto this error are men of perplexed minds, trembling at a shadow, and
wounding their souls with strawes. Unto whom Mat. 8. 26.
I may fitly speak, as Christ did once to his, Why are ye so fearful, O ye
of little faith? The ancient and reverend name of a Bishop is as a skarebug
unto them, they start at it as at an Affrican Monster, newly presented unto the
view of the world. These abridge themselue in many things of Christian liberty,
their fear causes misconstruction, and their consciences being full of
cowardice, their joy is like unto them, always pinching, and joined with
perplexity. To conclude this point also, that heavenly consolation which S.
Paul felt, and which every one of us is bound to seek after, it is not to be
found in an ignorant, a perverse, a presumptuous, a perplexed conscience: we
may say of all these, as the Angels said to the women Luke 24.
concerning Christ, Why seek you the living among the dead? a living joy in a
dying Conscience? Non est hic, it is not here. But our rejoicing, says the
Apostle, is this, the restimony of our conscience. Since then this unspeakable
joy of heart cannot be had, but where there is a testimony, let us now enquire
what this testimony of conscience should be, which is thus requisite to a sound
and a hearty joy.

Conscience by Divines is defined to be a knowledge joined with a knowledge;
whereby we know what we know, and understand that of our selves which God
knows of us. By natural condition it is placed betwixt man and God: under
God, and therefore does it yield all subjection unto him: above man, and
therefore has it a power over him, to accuse or excuse him, to fill him full
of sorrow, or exceeding joy. In the exercising of which power, it uses a
testimony. Now even in the Civil Law we are forbidden to admit of every kind
of Testimony promiscually. Vox vnius, est vox nullius, says Baldus, one
witness is no witness. Vnitesti ne Catoni quidem credendum est, says
Hierome, If Cato himself should speak alone, who for his integrity was
feigned by the Poet Iuuenall to come down from heaven ( Tertius de Celo cecidit
Cato) he were not alone to be believed. In the mouth of two or three witnesses
shall every word stand, Deu. 19. v. 15. First then, in the cause of conscience
especially, there is required a competent number, which must make a testimony.
Though one apple be enough to manifest the life of a tree, yet does not one
Swallow make a Summer, neither is one good motion of the mind (though it be of
grace) able to give unto us a sound cause of joy. And as plurality of witnesses
must concur to make a testimony, so again is it needful that they be duly
qualified. The Ciuilian tells us, that unto sufficient witnesses, these
things are required:

Aetas, conditio, sexus, discretio, fama,
Atque fortuna, fides, in testibus ista requiras.
Age, condition, sex, discretion, fame, estate, and faith are to be obscrued
in every witness. And as good choice ought to be made in any case in the world,
then in this of conscience principally, no one thing being of greater
consequence in the life of man, and whereunto (as Baldus speaks of Wills and
Testaments) there may soon be admitted, vitium inu^sibile, a secret and a
hidden error. Here then at once are excluded, as insufficient in the Court of
Conscience for the dispatch of this office, all opinions and variable conceits
of men, al conclusions which are only probable and coniecturall; for these are
childish and in their nonage. Again, the rebellious and unbridled affections
of the heart, which by their condition are no freemen, but in bondage unto
reason, are like Knights of the post, which abuse the Court; and therefore good
reason is there, that when they be too forward they should be rejected. If
Concupiscence would become Amica Curtae, a bufie informer in the Court of
Conscience, trust her not, she is as Informers are, corrupt and infamous. If
Choler be stirring, follow it not, it is but a mad and bedlam passion, like
furious zeal without discretion, and give no fit testimony for a rejoicing
conscience. Love, hatred, envy, malice, and the rest, are womannish and
unfaithful: and he that trusts his own heart is not wise. Prou. 28. ver.
26. Abraham begat Isaac when as Sara was old; the spirit begets joy, when
the affections are the weakest. The testimony of our Conscience must be of good
fame, good years, free, faithful, discreet, evermore joined with verity,
judgment, and justice, as Hierome observes upon the fourth Chapter of
Jeremy. If all these then be insufficient and deceitful, whither shall we
turn us to get this able testimony?

Damascene in his Logique, ascribes this duty to knowledge in the
understanding; which then it rightly performs, when as every thought is
brought into obedience, and all imaginations are subdued unto it. 2. Cor. 10.
ver. 5. It is an uncontrollable Axiom, both in Philosophy and Divinity, that
there is nulla or dinata actio quae proficiscitur a voluntate in intellectum,
that there is no action well ordered which comes from the will, to the
understanding, but the understanding must first beget it, and then the will
bring it forth: he that will sing in the spirit, must first have his
understanding tuned. Sing praises unto God, says David, every one that has
understanding. It is a Psalm. 47. 7.
speech that sauoureth of little learning, to say that a man has more
conscience then science; the contrary is too often true, more science then
conscience: for Conscientia is concludens scientta, a concluding knowledge;
which does necessarily import a precedent understanding. There must be
illumination in the brain, light in the head, before there can be
sanctification in the will, true heat in the heart; and if there be no
proportion betwixt heat and light, the overplus of heat which is in many is
but ignis fat^^s, a foolish fire John Baptist is called a burning and a shining
light, first burning, Job. 5. 35.
then shining: It is true, if he be considered with respect unto others; but
take him in himself alone, then was he Lucens, and ardens, first enlightened,
then enflamed. Lucere vanum, ardere parum, lucere and ardere perfectum, says
S. Bernard. God always begins to renew a man in his understanding: that
which by our fall was first corrupted, is first repaired. The understanding was
first blinded by the Serpents subtlety, and there does God begin to work
every good action. And therefore it is not will, affection, conjecture,
opinion, or any inferior power of the soul, but knowledge in the mind that
must yield a testimony to a rejoicing conscience. And yet not all kind of
knowledge: not natural; for then might the Pagan or Heathen man rejoice: not
Legal; for then were there joy in the bare killing letter of the Law: but
Evangelical, begotten in us by the spirit of GOD, and sown in our hearts by
the preaching of his Word. True it is that by our creation we had a
three-folde knowledge, which was most excellent: first, of all things created:
secondly, of our Creator: thirdly, of our selves. But by our transgression we
are become like brute beasts, void of understanding. We have a threefold
ignorance, in stead of our knowledge. First, of all things created: Secondly,
of God: Thirdly, of our selves. Hence is it that sins are said by S.
Augustine to be the souls darkness, that Gregory calls offenders fools,
and S. Paul the wisdom of the world, enmity unto God. The Map of the whole
world, is wittily comprised in the compass of a fools hood, and Nosce teipsum
in the front thereof; which may serve to tell us, what naturally we are. Those
Animalia sapientie, as Tertullian styles the Philosophers, those profound
wizards of the world, though they had a slender guess, that Minerua should
come from the head of Jupiter, true wisdom from God; yet they feigned her to
be a Virgin, unknown of man. Socrates who was esteemed the wisest amongst
them, confessed of himself, that he knew nothing at all. Many were of opinion,
that all things are but opinions. Thus even in natural things, are we ignorant
in our knowledge, not much unlike a smoking furnace, which voideth up plenty
of fume, yet is void of light; yea our foolish hearts are full of darkness.
Romans 1. verse. 21. As therefore in certain Cities among the Jews (as Philo
reports) it was not permitted to a man of a scandalous life, to put up his
petition to the Senate by himself, but was to move by another, whose life, and
fame, was never impeached; so stands the case with our understanding.
Naturally it is out of temper, and defiled: and therefore in the delivery of
this testimony it may not speak, but by proxy (who is upright and John 2
Epist. 5.
incorrupt) even the Spirit of God, speaking by the word of God. The conscience
must bear me witness by the spirit says S. Paul. Romans 9. verse. 1. and then
let judgment, and will, and affections concur, we are sure to have a true
testimony, and a rejoicing conscience: when as the Spirit of God does testify
unto our spirits, that we are Saints and Sons of God. Romans 8. verse. 16. And
now are we come to that, which was S. Paul's rejoicing, not in any worldly or
outward things: nor yet in an erroneous, or misinformed conscience; but in the
excusing sense of his soul, in regard of God, and in the integrity of his
heart, in respect of man. Proverb. 10.
Wisdom did guide him, and therefore he walked John 1.
boldly; the spirit did bear him witness, and therefore he rejoiced truly; he
built up a Consistory in his soul with judgment, cleansed it with repentance,
and adorned it with love, and so rejoiced in the testimony of his conscience.
This kind of Conscience 1. Tim. 2. is called a good conscience, and in the
second to Tim. 1. a pure conscience: not because it is free from the stain of
Original sin, for it is a certain truth which S. Augustine sets down in
the thirteenth Chapter of his Enchiridion: Malum est quod bonum, and bonum quod
malum. That in this world we have good mingled with our evil, and evil with
our good. We see in part, we know in part, and our Conscience is imperfect, yet
good, and pure, being neither justly accused for things which are past, nor
unjustly delighted with things which are present. Bona, ordinatione
affectionis, pura exclusione criminis: bona, sine duplicitate intentionis,
pura, sine remorsione vermu (as a Schooleman speaks) This kind of Conscience
among the ancient Fathers, has honorable titles given unto it, they call it a
field of blessedness, a garden of delight, the joy of Angels, the house of the
holy Ghost, and the Paradise of the Soul. The joy that flows from it, is
(says S. Bernard) a l^titia, that is, a latitia, a surpassing joy, which
makes a man's heart far wider then his mouth. Chilon, Sophocles, and
Dionysius, died upon a sudden (says Pli^ie) with a greatness of joy, yet was
their joy but a wretched sorrow, in comparison of the good, and pure joy of an
honest conscience. This is no light, nor loud laughter, res seuera est, verum
gaudium, and maximum aliquando, cum parum videtur blandum. True joy is sober,
and seasoned with gravity, and then many times at the highest, when he that
feels it, seems to be at the lowest. Wine may make a man have a merry
heart, yet in the midst of mirth, there may be sadnes^e in the conscience.
Sin may make a man have a heavy heart, yet in the midst of heaviness,
there may be joy in the conscience. Paenitens semper dolet: there is the house
of Mourning; and de dolor semper gaudet (says S. Augustine) here is the house
of rejoicing. So as a good conscience, even in mourning rejoices: all the
sorrows in the world cannot make it wholly sad: yea such is the force of it,
as it turns sorrow and bitterness into joy: Ye shall sorrow (says our
Savior to his disciples) John 16. 20.
but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. Homers Nepenthes was said to have a
special force in it, to take grief away, but it had not the power to turn
grief into joy. Whereas so many Crosses, were Acts 5. 41.
so many consolations unto Christ's Apostles. They triumphed in their
afflictions, for that they were thought worthy to suffer them for their Masters
sake. This made poor Job (as Augustine speaks of him) more happy in
stercore, on the top of a dunghill: then Adam was in nemore, in the midst of
Paradise: because (as himself says) his Job 27. 6.
heart did not reprove him all his days. And whereas the pleasure of the world
turned Lots wife into a pillar of Salt, the delight of conscience turns the
pillar of Salt into Lots wife: so that Lot for a salt pillar shall have a sweet
wife: for his greatest grief, an exceeding comfort. Solomon could not well
tell, what better to compare this conscience Proverb. 15.
unto, then to a feast. A good Conscience (says he) is a continual feast:
what is more pleasant, and more abounding in mirth then a solemn feast? how
can we celebrate the remembrance of any thing better, then by a feast? Pharao
and Herod upon their birth days, could make but a feast. Ahasuerus showed all
his royalty by feasting his Princes and Nobles of his Provinces. So did Caesar
after his triumphs: who is said by Plutarch, to have feasted the Romans, at two
and twenty thousand tables. And how does the Church of Christ solemnize her
Memorials, of the infinite mercies of God bestowed upon her, (as of the Birth,
Resurrection, Ascension, etc. of Jesus Christ, but by her solemn feasts? A
good Conscience is a good feast. The guests are the Trinity, Father, Son,
Apoc. 3.
and holy Ghost: The Ministers are the Angels: the Hebr. 1.
cheer, meat, and wine, (the word and Sacraments) Romans 14.
Proverb. 9. The Music gaudium Spiritus sancti, the joy and peace of the holy
Ghost. O fes^us dies hominis, blessed festival day. But what talk I of a day?
it is continual. Adonaiah made a feast, 1. King's 1.
but when Solomon was proclaimed King, he was daunted upon that sudden news.
Belshazar feasted Dan. 5.
and caroused Iustily; but when he saw the Palm of the hand, that wrote upon
the wall, M^ne, Mean, ^ek^l, Vph^^rsin, his joints were loofened, and his knees
smot together. The feast of Ahasuerus Hester 1. 4.
lasted but a hundred and fourscore days. Sed vis semper epulari, vis ^unquam
tristis esse? or (as Seneca says) will thou turn the whole year into
December? keep a continual feast, and ever be merry? Walk then worthy of
thy vocation, whereunto thou art called, keep a good conscience toward God,
and unblameable before men. For a good conscience is a continual feast. The
meat John 6. 33.
perishes not, and the bread is the bread of life. Et tanto amplius esuritur
quanto amplius comeditur: the more we ea^e, the more we may. The joy is John
16. 22.
everlasting, and never shall any deprive us thereof^ Et huic comparata, omnis
iucunditas maeror est, omnis suanitas, dolor omne dulce amarum, says S.
Bernard: It is a joy alone, beyond all comparison. The Prophet Esaias resembles
it to the joy of harvest, and to Esaias 9. 3.
the rejoicing of men, that divide the spoil. Indeed a husbandman having
(after much toil and travail) long lived in expectation, seeing a goodly
crop, white unto the harvest, cuts down his corn, binds it up in sheaues,
and brings it home with signs, and songs, and shoutes of joy. When the
Egyptians were over thrown in the red sea, then sang Moses and the children
of Israel: Exodus 15.
Miriam also took a Timbrell in her hand, and all the women came out after her
with Timbrels and daunces: there was a general joy, for a general
deliverance: and yet for all that no spoil divided: but when a bloody battle
is sought, the victory obtained, the city entered, the houses rifled, the
riches possessed, the enemy vanquished, O then my soul thou have marched
valiantly, the heart is filled with gladness, and the mouth with laughter, and
the earth does ring with the sound of warlike melody. These be some shadows
of the joys of a good conscience: but the substance is Psalm. 33.
nothing near expressed. David sets down three degrees of this Spiritual
joy. The first is (gaudete) rejoice: the second (exultate) skip and leap for
joy: the third is (iubilate) a word that comes of Iobel, which signifies the
confused noise of Cornets, or Rams horns, made in the year of Iubilee. And
this is such a kind of joy (says Gregory) quod nec supprimatur nec
exprimatur: which can be neither suppressed nor expressed: or if it may be
expressed, voce tantum exprimatur, sed verbis non explicetur: It is a rauishing
joy, which may break forth out of the mouth in a confused noise; yet is not
the mouth able to express that, which the heart conceiueth. What should I say
more? Put all the joys of the world together, and they are not able to
counteruaile a rejoicing Conscience: O blessed Paul then, and most happy men
and women are those, whose rejoicing is this, the testimony of their conscience.

The Doctrines which I raise from hence are partly (general) for our
instruction, partly (special) for the present occasion.

General Doctrine.
FIrst, hereby we learn what a good Conscience is; not a sorrowing conscience,
or one that tortureth the soul, and teareth the heart in pieces, proceeding
from the sense of sin, and apprehension of the heavy wrath of God against us
for the same; but Conscientia sine offendiculo, a Act. 24. 16.
clear conscience is a good conscience, which is not hindered from rejoicing.
The conscience which accuses may be many times, and is in Gods children, a
step unto that which absolueth and feels joy; but where there is a sorrow for
sin without hope of grace, where there is a killing by the old man, and not
a quickening by the new; if we feel the sentence of death in our souls and
not of life in our Savior: although we should recount unto God all our sins
over, and over again in the anguish and bitterness of our souls; though we
should lament like Dragons, and mourn like Ostriches (as the Prophet Micah
speaks) Micah. 1. 8.
yet have we but that part of conscience which even the wicked and reprobates
have. Cainc, Saul, Iud^ were greatly grieved for their sins. Esau Hebr. 12.
17.
lift up his voice and wept bitterly, yet could he find no place of repentance,
and so by consequent for peace of Conscience, though he sought it with Apoc. 7.
13.
tears. The good conscience then excuses, absolueth, rejoices, and the
Saints in heaven follow the Lamb, not in black but in white roabes: the best
men are no mourners, but reioycers; Rejoice These. 1. 5.
always (says S. Paul to the Thessalonians, and to the Philippians) Rejoice
in the Lord always, Phil. 4.
and again I say rejoice.

Paul's conscience did appear by his glorying in it, tanta deb^t esse eius
plenitudo, vt ^manet ab animo in habitum, vt eructet e conscientia, in
superficiem, as Tertullian writes of the modesty of women; it ought to appear
in outward behavior. Away then with all close and lurking consciences, of
which there is no certainty to what way they incline* Conscientia proa re vult
and conspici. It is not afraid of the light, it ^oueth to be seen, like
Drusiss the Roman, who had his house full of windows, that all men might
behold his conuerlation: neither is it improbable, but he that had seen S.
Paul when he wrote this verse, ( Our glorying is this, the testimony of our
conscience) should have perceived the joy of his heart, even in his cheerful
countenance. For a joyful heart makes a cheerful countenance, Pro. 15. ver.
13.

Thirdly, we may hence learn what a woeful case all Heretics, Hypocrites,
Schismatics, and Elisha said to Elias, I will not forsake thee; to meditate in
it day and night. The voice of wisdom has sounded in our streets for the
space of many years together. And Lord we beseech thee to defend the Defender
of the faith, that by his religious care her voice may long be heard amongst
us. If the Lion roareth, all the beasts of the Forest do tremble and quake:
and shall the Lion of the tribe of Judah (deliver his word)? the Lion of the
royal Tribe both of England and Scotland, both love and cherish the word?
Shall wisdom daily cry out unto us, and not be regarded of us? When as Luke
1. 41.
the mother of this Word went unto John Baptists mother, John did skip in his
mothers womb for Ezech 37. 7.
joy; when the Prophet prophesied to the dry 1. These. 4. 16.
bones, ( You dry bones hear the word of the Lord) the dry bones heard it,
and ran together; and at the end of the world the dead shall obey it, and
rise out of their graves. O let us not be worse then Babes in the womb, then
bones upon the earth, then the dead in the graves. It is the power of God unto
salvation; it gives an inheritance with the Saints; it makes a man wise unto
eternal life; it rectisieth the conscience; it is the ground of all true joy.
Let us take heed we be not non proficientes, children in understanding, ever
learning and never the wiser; those that intend truly to rejoice, let them
look into it, for we can neither have a good conscience without the knowledge
of the doctrine of faith, nor yet keep the doctrine of faith without a good
Conscience.

Particular doctrine upon the present occasion.
RIght Honorable, right Reverend, and my beloved brethren of this Kingdom of
Scotland, attend I pray with patience: So it is (as you have heard) that there
is no true joy of conscience, without a sufficient testimony, no sufficient
testimony without precedent knowledge, no knowledge without illumination from
the spirit and from the word. This then ought to teach you, that as all times,
and in all your actions; so most especially at this time, and in this great
Assembly; where there is a general meeting for the good of Gods Church; deeply
to advise, and seriously to look unto the testimonies of your Conscience, that
the end of such a solemn action, may be a sound rejoicing. Consult not (I
beseech you) with opinion, embrace not Conjectures, follow not affection, let
not will bear the swaye; your love, your desires, your zeal, your hatred, and
such like passions of the mind subdue them unto reason, and there is no doubt,
but as you have made a holy beginning; so the conclusion will be with much
rejoicing. But if opinion should prove headstrong, it contectures should go
for proof, if fiery zeal, and blind affection should dispute the cause; if
you will retain (this) because you desire it, or reject ( that) because you
hate it; if rashness should be thought resolution, and faction wisdom,
(which God be thanked we have no cause to suspect, excepting in some few, more
weak then wilful): surely (my Beloved) the issue of such a meeting, could but
be a cause of farther sorrow. For according to the error of the mind, good
things will seem to be bad, and bad things to be good; yea, you will (as Esaias
complayneth) Esaias. 5. 20.
speak good of evil, and evil of good, put darkness for light, and light
for darkness, put bitter for sweet, and sweet for sour, and so come within
that censure of God, which he pronounced against the Israelites for doting
upon the work of their own hands: This people has marred Exodus 32. 9.
all. To instance in four particulars, unto which I am confined.

Order? the Author The Earl of Donbars direction.
where of is the God of beauty, who has created every thing in number, weight,
and measure. Wisdom. 11. ver. 17. Ordo ingressus est cum Creaturis, says
Nazianzene, Order is as old as the world it self. We find it in the Angels,
we may behold it in the heavens, one higher, another lower, one greater,
another lesser: we see it in the earth, in reasonable creatures, in
unreasonable, in sensitive, in senseless, in natural and in civil actions.
And therefore has God much more beautified his Church; has he prescribed
order unto it? We may in no case suppose, that he has left it as monstrous
body, without shape, or as the ancient Chaos, without form; or as the state of
the Nomades, without government; no, but he has made it most lovely, both in
whole, and in parts, as the world well created, as a City well ordered, as a
Ship well guided, as a Cimball well tuned; not only Domus Sapientiae (as Austin
says) the house of wisdom, but Domus ordinis, the house of order also. A
Commonwealth is fitly resembled to the body of a man; and were it not a mad
hearing (trow you) if the feet should say to the head, we will wear the
hatte? if the knees should strive to carry the eyes? or if the shoulders should
claim each of them an ear? But if it were so indeed, what a misshapen body
would this be? Even such a one as might well be wished to the disturbers of a
Kingdom. Wherefore as in a civil government, the hands must be content, that
the feet do go, the teeth well pleased, the tongue tell the whole tale; as the
cares must not desire to see, nor the eyes to hear; as every man must walk as
God has appointed him; so must it be in the Church of God, where some are
eyes, some ears, some head, some 1. Cor 12. 17.
feet; some must be high, some low, some rule, some obey. This comeliness of
order is the beauty of Ephesians. 4. 16.
Gods Church, for beauty is the daughter of order, the more seen the more
admired; and order is the well disposing of equal and unequal things. Behold
then (my beloved) the strength of passion, if it be not restrained. Who would
imagine that Order could be distastefull unto any? seeing it comes from God,
is seen in every creature, and is the mother of all beauty in them, attended
upon with infinite blessings; yet such is the poison which proceeds from
affection, when it is not ruled: as permit it once to give the testimony unto
conscience, and it will cause men to esteem it as a Iubile of joy unto them, to
oppose and withstand order, yea to prefer before it a popular equality, which
ever amongst wise men has been accounted the greatest inequality.

I speak not this to disgrace the Presbytery; it is a name of holy record, and
therefore am I bound to mention it with honor: yet the power which now it
exercises, and place which now it challenges ( Let me speak truth without
offense) as far as ever I could learn is somewhat out of order; and
altogether unknown unto ancient times: if S. Austins rule be good, the
government of the Church by Bishops is Apostolical. For (says he) whatsoever
has been in the Christian Church in all times, and in all places, universally
received without contradiction, is Apostolical. Such is the government of the
Church by Bishops, in all places, in all times received, never opposed, but by
some few Heretics which were condemned. And lest I should be thought to
contend about words; S. Paul tells us in the person of Titus, what these Bishops
were; Not moderators for a year, but particular men having the power of
ordination and jurisdiction, committed Tit. 1. 5.
unto them: For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should continue
to redres^e the things which remain: there is jurisdiction: and should
ordain Elders in every City: here is ordination. And whereas it is objected
that this power was given to one, propter defectum, for that there was not as
yet a body, or company to be capable of it: I answer that Paul sent not Titus
into Crete, as into a new found Island, but ( left) him there; and that he left
him not there to (plant) a Church, (for that was done before) but to redress
some things, which did yet remain. There was therefore before this time a
body, or company: And yet it pleased the Apostle, to put this power into one. I
do confess that when Chrysostoms was banished, one article objected against
him was this; that he did not advise in some weighty causes with his
Presbyters, as he should have done. Here was then Episcopus cum Senatu. A
Bishop with his Senate: but Senatus sine Episcopo, a Senate without a Bishop; a
body without a head was never heard off, till these later days. Let the body
depend upon the head, and we shall not much dislike it, for want of order. I
remember what S. Paul does say of himself, that he was troubled with a care
for all the Churches. 1. Cor. 11. 28.
Had this been spoken of S. Peter; how would the Church of Rome have triumphed?
So say we of Bishops: that we have all times and places, Texts of Scripture, by
a general practice, always understood for the defense of Bishops. And had the
Presbytery such a cloud of witnesses, in the affectation of priority, how
highly would it advance the Ensign of honor? But in comparison of a Bishop, I
must have leave to say unto it, as Christ says unto one, that did choose the
chiefest place: Priend give this I like 1 ^.
man the room, he is more honorable then thou. The consent of all Churches in
all times, together with the warrantise of Gods word, gives precedence in
power, and in place to the Bishop. And here is a ground for a good testimony of
the conscience; wherefore the consequent of an action tending to such an end,
will doubtless be a sound and a holy icy.

Secondly, what was ever esteemed more sweet Orator tells us, that the very name
thereof is sweet, it self much more: like the precious ointment upon the head
of Aaron, that ran down upon his beard, and from his beard to the Psalm 133.
skirts of his clothing. Pacem te poscimus omnes. They are frantique men, that
fall out with peace. The old Gentiles loved her so well, as that they made her
a Goddess. And Tiberius dedicated a Temple unto her in Mount Palatine (as we
may read in Suetonius.) When Salomons Temple was a building, there was not a
stroke heard, nor the noise of a hammer. That King of peace, when he builded a
Temple for the God of peace, would have it even in the doing, to acknowledge
both the end and Author. Josephus gives a reason why the Jews so lovingly did
offer Sacrifice one for another; because ( says he) they held themselves to be
fellows, having one Temple to one God, common to all, being the common God of
all. When Christ came into the world, his Angels did sing a song of peace:
whiles he continued in the world, he preached peace to men: when he went out of
the world, he left his peace as a legacy unto his Church: Acts 2.
In the prime age whereof, the Disciples agreement and peace was such, as if
there had been but one Soul amongst them. In the time of Tertullian (as
himself reports) this was the Romans observation, which they made of the
Christians, Vide vt se inuicem diligunt Christiani. See how these Christians
do love one another; they knew themselves likewise to be fellow members,
having ( Christ Jesus) one head, to one body, common to all, being the common
head of all. Our Religion comes a Religando, whereby (says Nazianzene) those
which belong unto God, are made one with him: Those which be sons of the
Spirit, become hot in love: Those do bear one another burdens, which belong
unto him, that bare all our burdens. Let us come lower unto our selves, Since
the preaching of the Gospel in this Island wherein we live, we have been
kissed with the kisses of peace. Our government has been peace, Esaias 60. 18.
Salvation our walls, and praise our gates. And as Tertullus does to Foelix in
the story of the Acts; so Acts 24.
must we wholly acknowledge in all places, with all thanks to God, that we have
obtained, and do now enjoy many excellent blessings by the means of peace.
Were it not then beyond all measure monstrous, that any should be so tossed
with the tempest of desires, as not to love peace, so sweet in experience, and
embraced of all? The Apostle commands us to keep the unity of the Spirit, in
the Ephesians. 4. 3.
bond of peace, and as far as it is possible to have Romans 12. 18.
p^ace with all men. The Psalmist wills us to seek peace and to ensue it. We
have one God, one Gospel, one King, one Continent. The division of tongues,
was the confusion of Babel. The division of the heart, is the death of the
Soul. The division of minds, is the overthrow of Kingdoms. The division of
Gods people, is the destruction of his Church. If we bite one another, we shall
be consumed one of another. And yet behold, peace may take up Gal. 5. 15.
that complaint that God once made against his people Esaias 1. 2.
Israel. I have nourished and brought up children, but they have rebelled
against me. Mischievous man contents devoted to self love, and fetching the
joy of their Conscience from a deceiptfull testimony; suppose themselves to be
cold in Religion, unless they be hot in faction. And so do they lay about
them, 2. Sam. 24. 18.
as if the Altar stood still upon Araunahs threshing Psalm. 140. 2.
floor. Their study is to stir up strife all the day Tsal. 7. 14.
long. Destruction and vnhappnies is in their ways, and the way of peace they
have not known. They travail with mischief, and in their beds appointed for
rest, they plot how to be turbulent, and to Psalm. 7. 15.
bring forth their ungodliness. And so far are they from desiring of peace
between Church and Kirk, from maintaining of peace between man and man, as
they want many times that love or inclination which one Beast does bear unto
another. If one Sheep be faint, the rest will stand between it and the Sun
till it be comforted; if one Hog be hunted, the whole heard will muster
together to revenge it. It is reported of Bees, that Aegrotante vna,
lamentantur omnes. If one be sick all are sorry: Yea some Beasts are more
kind to mankind, then some men to themselves. In humane story we read of
grateful Lions, of kind Eagles, of trusty Dogs. Qui mori pro Dominis, and
commori cum Dominis parati (as Ambrose writes.) In holy Bible 1. King. 17.
we find that Elias was sedde by Ravens; and that Dan 6. 22.
Daniel was not hurt amongst hungry Lions. O detestandam humane malitiae
crudelitatem? says Cyprian, Aues pascunt; ferae parcunt; homines saeuiunt. O
hateful cruelty, the Birds feed, the beasts favor; but such is the rage of a
misinformed conscience, as that one man will show himself a wolf unto
another. These whersoeuer they be ( I charge not this place) are the troublers
of Israel, are thorns in our eyes, and pricks in our sides, dismembring the
body, and renting the coat of Christ, that same Tunica which was vnica, that
coat without Seame. Out of a false Testimony perhaps they may promise peace
unto themselves, yet (as Hierome says) Tranquillit as ista, tempest as est,
their calm of conscience, will one day prove a storm. The God of Esaias 57. 21.
peace give unto them a true testimony of their conscience, that they, and we,
and all, may jointly sing a sweet song of peace together, and make up a full
consort and harmony of heavenly joy.

Thirdly, obedience to our King is a duty most necessary. Nature commends it,
Scripture commands it, Present danger pleads for it. Rex vnus est apibus,
Dux vnus est Gregibus (says Cyprian.) Among the Bees there is one Master,
amongst the flocks of Sheep one Belweather. The Cranes have their captain,
quem ordine literato sequantur, whom the rest do follow (as Hierome
observes.) Pass we from nature of lesser force, and come we to Scripture of
greater power. Let every Scule Romans 13. 1.
be subject to the authority of higher powers (says S. Paul) A peremptory
proposition, enforced by manifold reasons. First, all powers are of God; the
higher from the highest. Secondly, they bring with them the good of order; for
the powers are ordained. Thirdly, it is sin to disobey them, for ordinance.
Verses.
Fourthly, Judgments temporal and eternal do accompany this sin: They
that resist, damnation. Fistly, Government is the means of our weal he is the
Minister of God, for thy wealth. Wherefore we must obey; not only for fear of
vengeance, but also because of conscience. Our obedience is acceptable to God,
who enioyneth it, and profitable to our selves, who enjoy the good of
government by it: And therefore necessitate finis, and praecepti, both in
respect of end, and of command, it is necessary we should obey. Our Savior
Christ, by his precept and by his practice shows that we owe subjection;
howsoever some would exempt themselves. Christus aliter iussit aliter gessit,
(as S. Bernard Luke 20. 25.
speaks;) He taught otherwise: Give unto John 19. 11.
Caesar that which is Caesar's: He wrought otherwise: for he submitted himself
unto the Roman Magistrate. His Apostles did tread in their Masters steps: Acts
25.
Paul appealed unto Caesar, and appeared before Caesar Jude 8.
as his lawful Governor: S. Jude detested them as false Prophets, who
despised government, and 1. Peter 2. 13.
spoke evil of those that were in authority. S. Peter exhorts all, to submit
themselves to all manner ordinance of man, for the Lords sake. In the days of
the Apostles, Kings, and Governors, were worshippers of Devils, and most
cruel persecutors of the Christian faith. O how are we bound then to honor a
religious King, which is a defendor of the faith, and a nursing Father unto the
Church of God? How needful a thing is it, that his will should be done, who
commands for the truth, and non tam de nobis quam a nobis, and done, I say,
not so much (on us) as ( of us?) If we must yield to the sroward, 1 Peter 2. 13.
with what gladuesse of heart should we express our obedience to the good and
courteous? now as Scripture prescribes this; so does danger plead for it. Rex
est in medio Inimicorum. Though thousands of faithful Subjects stand round
about him, yet many a false hearted Papist presses near unto him. The
Protestants are not more ready to defend him; then the Popish sort, are to
write against him. The One side labor not more to preserve, then the other to
disturb, and overthrow his Kingdoms. Their bloody practices, both at home and
abroad; has stamped them for King-Killers, and made them odious to the world.
Now my beloved, the Preacher Ecclesiast. 4. 12.
tells us, that a threefold cord is not easily broken. Here is Nature,
Scripture, Danger, to bind us in obedience. But alas these are like Sampsons
cords, Judges 15. 14.
but as flax that is burnt with the fire, unto some fiery and surious spirits.
Who when they are in strongest opposition to their King, deem themselves to be
in deepest denotion to their God: then most courageous, when they are most
factious: and stoutest Champions for Christ, when they most contend with his
anointed: scorning men of an obedient would, as if they were but dull and
drowsy fellows. What? (my Brethren) shall nature call upon us; and Scripture
command us; and shall we stop our ears? shall the King be next the fire: (it
is your own phrase, I have learned it from your selves) and will you thrust
him in? will you give him cause to say unto you as Christ to his Apostles. Will
you also forsake me? Has he not a rabble of rebellious Popists to withstand
him? but will his Protestants also resist him? Will you gainsay the godliest,
the wisest, the louingest King, that ever you enjoyed? no; you will not, for
howsoever an erroneous conscience, may make no conscience of disloyalty, yet
your holy Consent in this public business, declares your consciences to be
better informed.

Fourthly, There is almost no greater slavery then to yield Subjection to the
Pope, who is a Clogmaker for Conscience: and whose rules, are Snares to the
Souls of men; who albeit he calls himself the Servant of the Servants of
God; yet, as Austin says of Antichrist, Let us observe, ad quid v^^it, non
quid sonat, what his deeds are, not what are his Job 41.
words; and we shall find him, as Job speaks of the Leuiathan, the King of
the children of pride; and therefore the Master servant of the servants of the
Devil. The power which he now challenges is most extravagant; they call him
Dominum montium, and Dominum vallium, the Lord of the Mountains, and the Lord
of the valleys: and S. Peter's Keys are so improued, as piscatores hominum are
become piscatores imperiorum; Fishers of men, fishers of Monarchies. That
ruffling Priest of Rome dares now be bold, cum Leonibus, tanquam cum Agnis
Ludere, to deprive Kings of their States, to discharge subjects from their
obedience, to incroch upon Quarters, which neither belong to Church, nor
Churchyard: swimming in his Sea, with the bladders of Ambition; drowning the
Church in her own blood, and turning Jerusalem, the City of peace, into
Acheldama the field of blood. Will you endure to hear what this man can do? He
is able iudicially to pardon sins, and to retain them at his pleasure, to
bind and unbind, to play fast and loose like a Iugler; to dispense with an
Oath, if need require, and for (a good child) at a pinch with Gods
commandments. What can he not do, if you will believe him? Pleases it you to
know what his Holiship has done? ( ex vngue Leonem, from a few thing esteem
of the rest) He made the Emperor Frederick to hold his stirrup: Lodowicke to
take his Crown and possessions at his hands: Otho the first, Henry the sift,
Sigismonde, and Charles the first to kiss his feet. Inuenit aliquid infra
genua quo libertatem detruderet, as Seneca speaks of Caligula. He
excommunicated Otho the fourth, Henry the fourth, Philip, and the Fredericks,
first and second. His Bulls have come bellowing, and his Breues blustering,
against the person of a late Noble Queen, and against the purposes of our
Royal King. Will you hear what he is? He is the Son upon the Earth, the
Prince of the world, (and so is the Devil too) an Universal Bishop, not a
mere man, but a God, having plenitudinem potestatis, for these are titles
given him by his Canonists. Time will not suffer me, to describe him as I
would. Enough has becne spoken* to show you that English Ministers are no
Popish Priests, who hold him no better then Meridianus Demon (as Bernard calls
Antichrist) then that noone Devil, who from the hill of pride, has deceived
the world, blinded the people, corrupted the faith, perverted the Scriptures,
confounded Divine and humane Laws. And yet behold once again (my beloved)
whither a blind zeal, of a bad conscience does carry many men? Are not diverse
as fast tied to this man of Sin as the ear of a Slave was wont to be nailed
to the threshold of his Master? If he says come, they come; if go, they go;
if poison, if murder, if practice Treason, if stabbe Kings and Princes, if
run to the Devil, they are ready for to do it; yielding their absolute
obedience, without making question. O the admirable force of Conscience:
vehemens est in vtranque partem, which way soever it takes, it is puissant and
powerful. If it be not well grounded, it prefers parity before Order,
discord before peace, disloyalty before obedience, slavery before freedom:
and as it deals in these, so according to the testimony, true, or false, does
it make or mar all our actions, and fill us with a true or counterfeit joy.
Let it be our care therefore I beseech you, now and ever to look unto our
testimonies. And the God of wisdom guide us with his spirit, and give us
knowledge in his word, that having our understandings illuminated, and our
Consciences sanctified, we may do those things which are pleasing in his
sight, that our hearts abounding with true joy in this life, we may enter into
our Masters joy in the life to come. Hear us dear Father, God of all joy and
comfort, even for Christ's sake, to whom with thee and the holy Spirit, be all
praise, power, and dominion now and for ever. AMEN.

FJNJS.

