Ear and Audition.

Mind and Meditation

Heart and Affection.

Hand and Action.



THE HEAVENLY PROGRESS. By Rich: Middleton.

LONDON Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1617.

TO THE truly Great, and grace-full Prince CHARLES, Prince of WALES.
SIR,
I Well foresee not only how un worthy I may be esteemed to present your
Highness with any furtherances of piety, being already so richly adorned with
plenty of al rare and divine habiliments of the soul; but with all how
vn-welcome I shall be to such as doat on their own shadows, in the mean
while, dis-liking, defacing, and dis commending even the straightest statures
and beautifullest parts in others, who are not of their own hue, constitution,
and complexion. Se^.
For nunquam desunt qui etiam per ornamenta ferient, There will never want some
to wound a man, even through the sides of his best ornaments and graces.

But albeit I presume not of that happiness of learning and judgment, Plin
sccun.
either to act things worth the writing, or write things worth the reading,
which is (I confess) a shred of outward and temporal happiness; yet I hold
it no presumption to affirm (seeing herein I seek not mine own, Phil. 2.21.
but that which is Jesus Christ's) that to go this Heavenly Progress and to
take delight in it, is the true and only way to eteruizer he soul in bliss,
1 Sa. 2.30.
having Gods hand and seal to warrant, that he will honor them that thus honor
him. Ioh. 17.3.
For if it be life eternal to know God and whom he has sent Jesus Christ,
and consequently to know a man's self, then this Progress leading directly
unto both, must needs be worth the going: and if it be true herein (as it is
most true) which that wise Historian spoke in another case, Dinothi aduers.
histor.
absurdissimum est soris multum s^ire, domi prorsus ignarum esse, that it is
most absurd to know many foreign affairs, in the mean while being ignorant
of home business: then whosoever will taste the joys of heaven, must go this
Progress on earth; for this only teaches him to know well both the things at
home in his own soul, and the things from home in heaven, where he would have
his soul.

Happy is that kingdom, family and soul, where wisdom and youth are so one,
that they are never sundered, but sweetly kiss each other: age and wisdom in
the mean time not sequestered from the same condition; For that makes
kingdoms, families and souls eternal: and even this happiness is only
acquired by timely beginning and constantly perseuering to serve God in spirit
and truth, and walk in this Progress.

Therefore it is well observed, that in buildings God and man do hold a
different course; man beginning ever at the foundation, but God at the roof;
he stretched out the heavens before he laid the foundation of the world, by his
natural works, giving us spiritual instruction, to follow, his order, and
ever begin with care of heavenly things: Seek first the kingdom of God and
the righteousness thereof, Mat. 6.33.
is our Saviors direction, to as many as will build mansions in heaven. For as
the building rests on the columns, and the columns on the bases, so the
eternal wel-being of the soul is sustained by faith whose foundation is in
heaven, accompanied with the glorious fruits of the spirit, as the roof at
which all true Christians must begin their spiritual building.

For as we serve God, so he serves us; if we begin late or never, or for
fashion, or for carthly rewards and respects, or faintly, or out of his place
to serve him; he keeps the same cor^^espondency with us: gives us our hearts
desire, but with-all sends leanness into our souls: a false comfort for a
false worship, Psalm. 106.^5.
a false says for a false religion, a false salvation for a false profession.
For he that gives God his lips in stead of his heart, teaches God to give him
stones in stead of bread; and he that ranks him last, and reckons him least,
in the duties of his life, teaches God to set him at the lower end of the
table of his earthly blessings, and to reject him from the enioyment of his
heavenly.

One example for all, as a glass to behold the truth hereof. Whilst Adam
served God, God served him, he consulted for a mansion for him, for meat for
him, for a sweet companion for him: and until he rebelled against him we read
of nothing but his works for Adam; as if he had been hired to work for him:
but when he once lost his innocence, then God took from him whatsoever he had
given him: he lost his wisdom, his peace, his liberty, his glory, his
dwelling: like that man that betwixt Jericho and Jerusalem f^ll among the^ues.
Mat. 25.29
For from him that has not shall be taken away even that he has. God is as
a father delivering a stock to his son to trade with-all, if he husband it
ill at first, he with-draws his hands from ^error blessings. And as they that
try vessels, first put water into them, and then wine when they find them
staunch; so does God with us, he that is faithful in a little, shall be made
ruler over much, and he that begins to lay his foundation in heaven shall end
with a glorious crown in heaven.

Now your highness having most happily taken your pattern from God, and begun
for many years to build from heaven down-wards, making that the corner stone:
my labor in this little Pro-gresse is, to bring some materials to this work,
and show a method how to bring this goodly building to perfection: that seeing
it is not my happiness as Paul to plant, I may be allowed as Apollos to water
those rare and admirable seeds of religion and piety already sown in your
Princely heart. For nihil in te mediocre esse contentus sum, Ier.
to tum summu totum, perfectum esse desidero. Less then exquisite perfection
in all things is less then I desire may be found in you. Therefore as the
Gardener waters his seeds and plants till they spring, and waters them again
till they be above ground, and lastly till they bring forth fruit on the
earth, the seed, the water, the stalk the fruit, and all being from the Lord
of the ha^uest; so must this and such like godly books and sweet sermons be
suffered to water the garden of your heart; seeing they are not only as the
sweet dew of heaven dropping down grace into the soul, but also as so many
little chinkes by which the heart is kept open that the beams of heavenly
knowledge may enter.

And so much the rather is this work now to be entered upon, because as the
foundation is laid, so is the building raised; either soon to ruin or for
ever to remain.

For as the arrow is directed at the first, so does it fly all the way, either
home, over, short, or besides the mark, so that whosoever shall make an ill
beginning, forespeake themselves as it were at the very first. Therefore happy
are they that have the arrow yet in their hand, and day before them. For if we
have not overcome sin in youth before it take root in us, how shall we
struggle with it, when the roaring lion has us in his paws, and when sin
being like an old man that has lost his hearing, will not be charmed, but
tells us it was a custom and could not be left.

And because no man is borne to idleness, nor for himself only, I have
bethought my self of some course, to discharge (at least) some part of my
service and duty to your High and in general to benefit al such as with holy
devotion aspire to perfection in the service of God: Vir. Eneid. lib. 5.
imitating herein Palinurus, who finding that he could not sail against the
wind into Italy, turned his course (with Aeneas his approbation) into Sicily,
where they had before been friendly entertained: It being a point of wisdom,
when a man cannot sail by a fore-wind where he would, (and happily where he
should) to sail by a bowling and side-wind, or at leastwise to cast anchour
where he may. Act. 16.6.
Paul and his companions being forbidden by the spirit to preach the Gospel in
Asia and Bythinia, by a vision appearing to Paul on the night, a certain
Macedonian entreating him to come into Macedonia, and help them, collected
that they were called of the Lord into Macedonia to preach the word; and what
shall I think of my self to whom God would have that ordinary command of his
word to be in stead of Paul's extraordinary vision to him, Heb. 10.24
but that the holy commandment of sharpning and pronoking others to good
works, 1. These. 5.11. Eze k. 13.5
of edisying one another, and of rising up in the gap, and making up the hedge,
has sufficiently animated me, and warranted my adventure in putting Gods
talent to the exchangers, Mat. 25.27
that at his coming he might receive his own with advantage.

I am not ignorant that Aulus Albinus was reproned of Cato because he would
rather deprecari culpam qua^vacare culpa Aul: gell. 11.8.
excuse his fault the^ want a fault, in that himself a Roman borne and
writing a Hystory in Greek, desired pardon, if he chanced to offend in a
strange tongue. Yet Catoes reason excusing such as offend by constraint, and
Albinus case and mine differing much, he being a stranger in that language, but
I at home in mine own element, gives me no small hope of a general pardon,
albeit I should offend in taking on me an office altogether vafit for my weak
and weary shoulders: for I grant this heavy task requires a fuller pen, a
riper judgment, a sweeter singer then my self. Yet when the equity of my
calling, the imploiment in so high a sernice as a Princes Court, and the
necessity of the times and manners called upon me for some duty; and the
importunity of some whose words have much weight and authority with me, had
wrung this work from me, I am the more bold to entreat, that Catoes censure
(if any be) may be made with Catoes equity, because I had rather be without a
fault, then make an excuse for it.

The wise Orator feinedly reproted, Cic. pro deiot.
that therefore applause was not given to Caesar, because he was pressed with
men astonished with admiration: but I must unfeignedly confess that I must
pass by in silence the commendations of this kind of serving God, methodized
in this little work, because the admiration of it, Isa. 6.5.
as the sun beams dazles the sharpness of my weak sight. But as the
Prophet witnesses, when he saw the Lord sitting on his throne, that he was
amazed, because a man of polluted lips vn-worthy to see the glory of God: so
do I ingenuously profess, when I ponder the great Majesty of Gods word, and
the absoiute perfection wherewith he looks to be served, I am struck stark
dambe, because I am a man of polluted lips indeed, of an uncircumcised heart,
and far unfit to express the praise of such wonderful things. Therefore I
willingly leave such luy-bushes to the worldly wisdom of Philosophers,
Physicians, and Lawiers, whose learning (I confess) are good for man's life,
but that life which perishes, excellent, but yet humane, laudable, but yet
mortal, high, but yet most shippery and brittle.

The story roports, Liuy li^. XX
that Hanniball before he would join battle with the Romans, proposed to his
army certain couples of captives contending withtheir swords, that by this
kind of playing conslict the Carthaginians might the more wisely attend, and
the more cheerfully be armed to undertake the condition of a serious sight:
but such is the combat and service, wherein by this little book I must employ
all that purpose to have the victory against sin, Satan, hell, and damnation:
that if they depart from the rule of combat and service prescribed, it is not
the loss of Captives but of Carthaginians, not of Carthaginians but
Christians; not be life of the body but of the soul is in danger; not the law
of man but of God is contemned; not transitory riches, nor health, nor all the
pleasures of life, but even the most blessed possession of the kingdom of
heaven, the eternal salvation of our souls lies at the stake to be lost.

A matter (if ever any) of great consequence, and therefore timely to be
begun, and constantly to be continued. For he that has a great task to be
performed in a short time, is ever provident not to let slip that time. Our
task is our conversion to GOD, our time of return, is this short span of
life, a short time for so sore a task: our wages for this task, is our souls
salvation, therefore no wisdom to mis-pend the least portion of time and to
loose our glorious inheritance in heaven.

It is strange to see our toylings and sweatings for these sub-lunary vanities,
and yet how remiss we are to make our calling and election sure, how negligent
and sloathfull to lay hold on that good part which cannot be taken from us. As
the spider spends her own bowels in spinning sine threeds, and weauing cunning
nets to catch slies, when suddenly a pusse of wind or a bro^me, comes and
marres all that fine fabric: So we torment our selves for the base honors and
baser pleasures of this life, and when we are at the height of all, comes but
one paffe of dis-grace, sickness, or death, and defeats all we did, all we
hoped for. Therefore seeing all do agree that God is to be served, but
dispute of the time, let us take the present time, for youth had need of
legs and age of wings.

I confess indeed that this manner of serving God which I propose is something
strict, uncouth, and unsavory to flesh and blood, but most of all to such whose
glory and greatness all men adore, and also to such whose breasts are full of
milk and bones full of marrow, such as come in no misfortune like other men;
but yet when they shall have their eyes opened to consider the necessity of it,
and that as he said of time, hoc mometu^ vnde pendet aetermitas, Ber.
this is the thing upon which eternal salvation rests, they will submit their
scepters to his service, who has created all creatures, for their service to
maintain their scepters and greatness.

And the rather, because in maximo honor minima licentia est: the greatest
honors have least liberty to sin: and except we being vn-thankfull will
become like beasts, which still drink of the rivers, without ever thinking on
the spring, they must return God great homage for great honors. Vilissimus
reputandus est, Symmachus
nisi praecellat scientia and samlitate, qui est honor praestantior. He is to
be reckoned most vile of all others who excells in honor, except he also excel
in knowledge and sanctity. For as no wife man loves that hawke which catches
him a Lark and eats him a Hen, so neither does God regard that person, who
costs him much as the great and noble do, and yet does him little or no
service at all.

Besides, the example of Kings, Princes, and Nobles, is of much use to the
furtherance of virtue or vice. Jacobs Ewes brought forth sported Lambs
according to the color of the rods before them: and men produce works
conformable to the lives of great personages: but this is a great evil that
good examples have not like force to serve us to goodness, as bad have to
induce us to evil. For as a man struck with the pestilence will sooner insect
a thousand, then so many can help him being insected; so one vicious many may
more easily infect a thousand, then so many can make one vicious man good. For
vice is here in her own foul, and comes up without planting, with no pain,
much more when it is well sor^^^^ied without and well labored too: but ver^^^
is ^^^^anger on earth, like (...) thrown into the ground, which after much
care and labor prospers but slowly, especially in the contagion of these times
which are the dregs and sink of all ages, in which virtue is a prodigious
mouster, and piety a foul crime, or at least sottish simplicity.

It is hard for flocks to feed among thorns, and not leave some of their
wool behind them: so is it hard for an honest man to live amongst such corrupt
and contagious persons, but he must loose some of his innocence. Therefore the
Lacedemonia^s wisely inquired what play-fellowes their children used, for fear
of having them tainted with vice. But above all others, it behoues, great
persons most, not only to have care that they give no ill example, but also
that they take none from such as are about them for as it was wisely said of
worldly Governors, Publius.
that male imperando, summum imperium am^^titur; So by ill government of the
soul, in taking contagious example from others, and giving ill example to
others, is the kingdom of heaven lost, and many by their ill example drawn
into the same downfall.

Alpho^^s^s King of Arragon was wont to say th^^ ^s the Marigold ^orned it
self to the motion of the son, so the p^^ple are turned and tramed after the
manners of the Pim^e R^^ (...), nemo non eadem velit; Sen.
If the King follow holy courses, there is no man but will do the same. For as
from the health of the head, health is derived to every member, and from the
light of the sun, light is communicated to all the world, so from the Prince
and Governor, goodness descends upon all the people. But as the head being
sick and weak, all the other members languish, so the Prince being stained
either with avarice, lust, cruelty, pride, or any intemperancy, all the
subjects decline from equity, reason, and goodness, and accommodate themselves
to the disposition of the Prince. Aen. syl. lib. ^^in res. Alph.
It is storied of the same Alphonsus, that understanding how Pomegranades were
by art made sweet, sauory, and delicate meat, he made thereof this excellent
application: surely even our selves by our industry, and holy art of example
ought to make our subjects better, being of themselves of a fierce and froward
nature. And surely he spoke well of Augustus Caesar, that a good Prince
teaches his people to do well, by doing well himself, and being imperio
maximus, exempto est mayor, great in power, was yet greater in holy example.
For as the Ewes conceived such colored Lambs as the rods were that lay before
them, Genesis 30.
so such as are the Princes actions, such are wont to be the peoples
conceptions, cogitations, and issues. Whence it is, that a Prince should so
observe his own Law, that his subjects might be stirred up to the same, and so
settle himself to the service of God and observation of his Jaws, that all
his people by his good example might be drawn to do the like.

But seeing that as a ship without a Pilot sails not whither it should, but
dasheth it self on the rocks and shelues; and so they who study to serve God,
but yet without God, wanting an order therein, (God being the God of order)
walk in a Labyrinth and maze, falling into doubts whilst they seek
resolution, like Cleophas that talked with Christ, and yet knew not Christ, like
birds fluttering, but yet cannot sly: therefore even the greatest and wisest
stand need to furnish themselves with holy directions, and to labor by all
means for a measure of grace and the fear of God to keep out the
ouer-flowings of ungodliness in our age, wherein vices are become good
manners, and de-bausht humors and profane vanities are past into nature and
turned into complexion. For Gods harvest in this world is but a handful, and
that little remains of people that serve Christ in truth, can fearce get
breath in this corrupt air, it is so contrary to them. They are here as fishes
without water, as the remainders of great massacres, as pieces of plankes after
the wracking of a great ship: such a contagion is spread amongst us all. If
then where God is best known, he be ill se^^ed, how much more where he is not
known indeed at all? If vices be ^^e in the sanctuary, how much more in the
body of the Temple, and dwelling of the wicked? In such a deluge of iniquity
wh^^ hel^^ is there to keep us from drowning, but by sincere serving of God to
work his holy sea^e into our hearts? And if we do this, it will easily be
seen by our lives. For when the kings Porter stands at the gate and suffers
none to come in without examining what he would have, it is an evidence that
the King is within: But when the Porter is absent, and the g^tes open to
receive all that come, it is an argument of the Kings absence; so in a
Christian, when the fear of God is present, which as the Porter shuts the
door of the senses, that they see not, hear not, do not what they list, it
is an argument the Lord of that house that is God himself, is within: but when
fear is away, a free entrance is given to al a man's dissolute desires, it is a
plain demonstration that God is not there.

Nor let Kings and Potentates think themselves freed from this course of
godliness, as if piety rooted out natural affection, and took away all true
liberty; as if a father might not love his child, a husband his wife, or as if
a man might not love his houses, lands, health, riches, and honest recreations
Piety takes not away the good use of these things, but husbands them well to
their good that have them, and of mistresses which they were, but should not
be, makes them all hand-maides to the love and fear of God, as they were not
before piety came, but indeed should be. Therefore Kings and Potentates must
not consider, vnde sint, whence they descended, but qui sint, who they are,
that but men, nor quanti sint, how great they are, but quales sint, how good
they are or should be: nor how potent, but how pious. Therefore one asking
Socrates if the King of Persia were happy, he answered nescio I know not, cum
nescio quam sit doctus qua sit vir boaus, seeing I am ignorant how learned and
good a man he is. Hence the learned Poet calls a noble and religious
government, Virg.
who adornes mankind with the defense and practice of true religion, orders,
laws and discipline, formosi cuslos pecoris, formosior ipse, the shepherd of
a beautiful flock of sheep, himself being far more beautiful and
glorious then his whole flock.

And indeed that holy thirst and desire of knowing and propagating the heavenly
wisdom of God revealed in his word, by reading, meditating, hearing, praying,
and the like, is as necessary to all sorts of men, as well Kings as Keysar^,
for the defense of their good, safety and salvation, as heat and moisture are
necessary to the nourishing of plants, and as convenient and sit nutriment is
to the nature of every thing living. And it is our duty, who labor the
salvation of all sorts of men, and therefore put them in mind of their several
offices and duties, to explode and cast out the vain opinion of those men, who
bind the religious and assiduous reading of the holy Scriptures, and other holy
acts of religion, upon divines only, as if either it consorted not with men of
their ranks and offices, or else that they had no need of it. For do not the
testimonies of sacred Scripture show that these things both by manifest Laws
of God are comanded to all sorts of men, and also are most necessary and
profitable for them? In the ancient Church, when the Priesthood was settled
upon the Tribe of ^^ui only, were there not many Israelites of other tribes for
all that, famous for the study and knowledge of holy Letters? And in the
Primitine Church and down wards, albeit the office of teaching, was ever
committed to a certain sort of men, were there not to all other sorts of
christians many commandments proposed to stir them up to the study of the
sacred Scriptures? what is that extent of wisdom which the Apostle would have
all men draw from the word? Col. 3.16.
what is the sure word of the Prophets, to which all Christians do well to
take heed, as to a light that shines in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19.
till the day dawne, and the day star arise in their hearts? and what are those
commendations of holy Scripture, as to be a light shining through all a man's
life, a doctrine bringing comforts, hope, patience, salvation, a faculty to
consute all doctrines repugnant to the truth, and by the true profession
whereof all good things are promised?

But to Princes, and such as are destinated and appointed to the government of
other men, these duties of piety are chiefly and above all others convenient
and profitable, as many ponderous reasons may infome us. For it is no small
matter that God communicates his own name with them,

And albeit this our eu^^ (...) with such men, as prepa^^ (...) a return into
the o^gly and ^^^^ke cloudy barbarity of error and ignorance, from which by the
singular mercy of God, we have been wondeffully delivered: or (...) h^^e
vtre^ly ^ast off all care of godliness till they be a dying: and who withal
do as well explode and detest, as neglect and contemn, abo^e all other
things, the study of holy Letters, and labor of sanctification: yet al godly
Pote^tates ought to have their minds stirred up to the admiration and exercise
of those studies, by the examples and institutes of their worthy and famous
predecessors.

And if they will not be moved by the examples of most potent, pious and
glorious Princes, as Joseph, David, Solomon, Ichosaphat, Josiah, Ezekiah,
Daniel, Nehemiah, and the like, whose religious care is famous in the sacred
story: yet at the least let them think that they ought to have no less care
of divine things, then the heathen Ca^o, Julius Caesar, Octauius Augustus,
Ply^ius, and before them Alexander Magnus had of humane things.

Besides, if many have thought Agesilau^ that most wise and excellent King of
Sparta, worthy of all commendations, in that he would neither go to bed, nor
rise up, before he had looked into Homer, Panorm.
whom he had called amasium suum, his sweet heart: if Alphonjus King of Arragon
be extolled for reading the Scriptures over fourteen times with glosses and
expositions, and the Emperor Theodosius the second for reading prayers and
singing Psalms every morning with his wife and family; nay if Scipto
Assricanus were for this thought praise worthy, that he ever had in his hands
the books of Xenophous institutions of Cyrus, which yet were rather written
according to the form of a just Empire, then the truth of the History: we
cannot but account those Princes worthy of infinite commendations, who are wont
ever to carry in their hands the books of Moses, the Prophets, Apostles,
Christ himself, and such other issuing from those divine fountains: which are
not only written according to the Image of the best, happiest, and most
acceptable men to God, but also according to the very truth of the story. For
by this their care, they shall bring to pass both more thoroughly to understand
and embrace, and more willingly to promote and defend that doctrine and piety
which by their places they are bound to promote and defend. As it is truly
said quod latet ignotum est, ignoti nulla cupido, what is hid, is unknown,
and unknown, vnloued, and (...), by the sight, the affection is moved. Which
we find justly to fall out in such as have tasted of the waters of the divine
fountain, that albeit they extinguish the desire of all other things, yet do
they so work; that quo plas sunt potae, plus sitiantur aquae, the more you
drink them, the more you desire them. And this your Highness wisdom and
industry in holy things which all men admire in one of your years and honors,
the nobleness of your birth, and largenes of your glory and fortunes makes
more conspicuous and re-markeable to all men. For as the light of a torch, by
how much it is placed in a higher candle-sticke, by so much does it give light
to more in the room: so virtue and goodness albeit the splendour thereof do
every where spread it self, yet does it more largely send forth his beams
when grafted in a high and emine^t person. And it is by the good hand of our
God upon us, so ordered in your Princely person, above the most of your rank
in the world, that as gold and silver are apter mettalls to ingraue precious
stones in, then iron or lead, so is true nobility, but more truly, the
nobleness of your nature, a better subject to imprint any virtue in, then
those of a baser, and lower condition. For as wax is apt to receive al forms,
so true nobility, and most the trueness of your noble nature, is a disposition
fitted by the hand of God, to receive the impression of any virtue. Therefore
God having done so great things for you above others, you must not content your
self to have abandoned one vice, or entertained one virtue, but you must empty
your heart and affections of all the mass of corruptions, and fill the cabinet
of your soul with the rich treasures and lewels of all manner of virtues. For
as one vn-tuned instrument destroies the whole harmony of music, so the defect
of any one virtue, mars the sweet harmony of the soul. And as a bird is staid
from flying away with a little string, yea a strong man in swimming is held
back by a little twig, and often drowned by a little grass growing in the
bottom of the river: so even the least sin hinders our passage into heaven, as
it did Moses from going into Canaan. But especially if sin grow into custom;
for they seldom ever rise that have the mil-ston of ill customs pressing them
down.

Therefore, those that would safely arrive at the heavenly Canaan, must banish
the two pests of ill customs and il companions from them. For when a man once
begins to like of pleasure, and to dally with sin, straight way as many
vanities flock to him as Solomon had concubines. Then he runs over reason,
treads on conscience, goes by the word, and posts to destruction as if he ran
for a kingdom; much like a Lark that retires and falls faster then she
mounted. The Crocodiles egg (they say) is at first no bigger then a Goose
egg; but her issue grows by little and little till it become eighteen foot
long; so sin at first seems but a small matter, but once enter and admit him,
he will fill the house of the soul and prove a monster. And as it grows, so
does the punishment too: an arrow is swift, the Sun is swift, but sin is
swiftest of all: for in a moment it is arraigned on earth, judged in heaven,
and condemned to hell.

O that I might once see great ones turn sin but even their great sins a
begging for want of service, as good servants often go a begging for want of
maintenance. But I am much afraid, that as God looking down from heaven to see
if any would do good and seek after God, said, non est vnus, there is not
one: So this kind of serving God, to shake off om sins, and acquaint our
selves with God, may go from Court to country, from City to village, from
preacher to hearer, and find none that will subscribe to it. Yet is this
required at all our hands under pain of eternal damnation. For as Rebecca had
not only earerings of gold, but bracelets too: so our arms must be adorned as
well as our cares: we must not only have cares to hear well, and mouths to
speak well, but also hands to do well. And how can that be done, if we give
our selves wholly to the pleasures of the flesh? for as moist and plashy
grounds bring forth nothing but frogs: so the belly and watery stomach stuffed
like a tun, brings forth nothing but foggy thoughts, filthy speeches, and
corrupt affections. Therefore Physicians say, that nothing is better for the
body then abstinence, Lawyers say, nothing is beter for the wits, but divines
say nothing is better for the soul.

The story tells us of a bird, with a man's face, but so cruel to man, that it
will kill him; yet afterward seeing her own face in the water, like to that
she killed, incontinent kills her self, because she had killed one like her
self. What then will those men do, that have not only killed one like
themselves, but even their own bodies and souls, by their surfettings,
drunkenness, uncleanness, malice, pride, envy, and other beastly
intemperancies? O why will we not live ten years, or twenty years like
Christians; that we might live not a thousand, but even millions of years like
Angels? How long shall it be a voice from us, a sound to you, and so all the
matter is ended, that we preach or write, all going away like a boy in ones
hand, from our books and sermons, remembering and applying nothing that is said
or read as the stomach except it have power of retention makes no benefit of
the meat: so except we lay up these things in our hearts, reading and
preaching are but in vain.

I will not press your sacred Highn esse out of your Chair of State, as
worthy Gregory did Basil, pulling him out of his Doctors chair from the
profession of Rhetoric to Divinity, saying, Omit ista, and da saluti
^peram, leave these toys and have care of your salvation? for I know well, it
is your principal care to make your calling and election sure: but give me
leave to put you in mind so to manage the things of this life which belong to
profit or pleasure that you ever preserre the things of heaven, and make the
desire of heaven, the moderator of all your pleasures and profits. For the
pleasures of youth are like gilded pills, very bitter; like fresh rivers that
ever end in the sea, loosing their sweet relish in an ocean of saltness.
True zeal cannot flourish under such a delicate gonernme^t, nor yet the
perfect knowledge of God he subject to the paunch.

I know not how it comes to pass that we are afraid to be too holy: and
whereas we have a weight for all kind of metals, a touch stone for gold, and
a measure for grame, and we will not take less then meas^ne, weight, and that
which is good in both, yet we slicke not to ^ut God short of his weight, and
measure; and which worse is, to offer him dross in stead of gold, water in
stead of wine, and chaffer in stead of corn; waighing our service in false
balances, and gruing him false drugs, false and counterfeit stuff, false
worship, shadows for substances.

But let us take heed, for as God after twelve months came to Nebuchadnezar
to take an account of his dreams that he sent him, so will he shortly come to
every of us to take an account of the sermons we have heard, the books we have
read, the talents we have received, the stewardship committed to us, and all
the holy means be has used to win us unto him. Wisdom, and honor, and
greatness, without the sear of God will then do us no more good, then the
Arc did the Philistims, procure our greater plagues. And I doubt much though
light be come amongst us, yet it may truly be said, the Gentiles sit in
darkness and the shadow of death. Therefore let not our own gifts or Gods
infinite goodness to us, in fatuate our hearts. For as Noah was drunk with his
own grapes, so we may easily offend God with our own gifts, and be drunk
with the abundance of his goodnesses.

This dotage of the world should forewarne us as sons of the day and light,
Tert.
with the Eagle and all other birds a cano ad ^^rlum euolare, to mount from the
dung hill of this world, to the exceeding weight of glory in heaven. For
neither are the fowls of the heaven in-tangled and caught, Ambr.
whilst they cut the highest region of the air, but whilst they creep below on
the ground. And to aspire to the future life, we must learn to contemn this
present life; to contemn the present, it behooues us to know it to know it, is
to remove it far from our hearts, and banish it from our affections: for the
things of this world being so near us, do but dazzle the mind, and distract
the judgment. And these beata otia, these blessed times of peaces, these
golden seasons of the Gospel can no otherwise be continued to us, but by
cashiering the vanities of the world and grasping of heaven. Herein (for shame)
outstripping the Heathen Aristippus, who, when some of Syracusa sailing to
Cyrene, asked him, would he command them any thing to his family, answered,
command mine to care for provision of such things as with the owner will swim
ashore in ship wrack: and let us not do this for a sit or a flash, but as
Catelines Soldiers were found dead or alive in the same place they were fust
put, so must we in re-signing our selves wholly to the good pleasure of God
and contemning the vanities and pleasures of the world, be settled and resolved
to dye and live in that re-signation.

The way to do this, is ever to meditare on the last date of our days, when
we shall come to that great audit to give an account of all we have done in the
flesh: for the very thought of death is as a strainer cleansing and purging al
our thoughts, words and actions, like a cloth that has been many times possed
and plunged in the water. And the rather is this meditation prositable, because
death comes sudde^ly as a messenger un looked for. Who would have thought the
enemy should have entered Jerusalem so soon, and made such a sudden and woeful
hauock never to be recovered? who would have thought that Herod should so soon
have been eaten with lice, when the people cried, the voice of God and not of
man? Who would have thought Nebuchadnezzar should so soon have be on turned
out a door to graze like a beast, when he boasted he had built great Babylon,
for the honor of his name may who would have thought that Iezabel should have
been a prey for dogs, and not an care left to season the grave withal? but thus
it is: great Princes and Peers, nay such as are Peerlesse here, must die; and
though they differ from all other in their pomp, honors, pleasures, and
greatness, in their apparel, meat, attendance, and all, shining like the
stars; yet is their end like to the beggars at their gates, and many times
worse, and in fat worser case are they after their deaths, if they have not bin
rich in good works to his glory that made them so rich and glorious. Therefore
this Morieris, thou shall die, is an excellent Motto, for all great ones
especially, it is like a bar in their arms, it will make the proudest veil
and fall his creast.

But what need so many words to so religious, judicious, and well seasoned a
nature, who^ I know to be of the resolution of that ever memorable Alphonsus
King of Arragon, who being highly praised for his nobility, in that he was rex,
regis filius, regis nepos, regis frater: a King, a Kings son, a Kings nephew,
and a Kings brother: answered, I esteem nothing less in this life, then these
vanities, for these are not my commendations, but rather theirs who by their
valor and virtues, righteousness, te^perance, prudence and the like, have
gotten me these kingdoms and honors: nor are kingdoms any thing to the
successors but burdens; and then only become honors if they be received rather
for their virtues, then by testament and succession. This is that only that can
make a man truly noble, both in this life and in a better. Therefore Maximilian
answered one well, suing to him for letters Patents to ennoble him: that it was
in this power to make him rich, but only virtue could make him noble. And as
all, but chiesly those that owe God most, having received most, must shu^ the
corruptions of the world and all ill customs, so must they be careful to avoid
ill company. And to this end, never to suffer David's protestation and practice
in a whole Psalm depart out of their hearts. Psalm. 101.
For as it is great wisdom not only to shun the plague, but even every ragge
that may seem to carry the plague with it: so it is heavenly wisdom not only
to avoid gross and foul sins and sinners, but even all the peccadilia
dwarse-sinnes, and all those sine mincers of sin. For as it is policy not to
go so near the rivers bank as we can for fear of falling in: so it is
heavenly discretion not to come near sin, nor apparent wicked persons that
are not seasoned with the true knowledge of God, the sons of Belial: corrupt
men and reprobate, concerning the faith; enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose
belly is their God, whose end is damnation, whose glory is to their shame,
which mind earthly things, for fear we be ouer-taken and infected before
we be aware. For one sinner destroieth much good, Eccles. 9.18.
nay the breath of a wicked person is even bainfull to the company. Nor let
them ever think that such a companion or such a servant as is not the true
servant of God, Suidas.
can ever be faithful to them. For as the Historian reports, when one changed
his religion to please the King, he was judged to loose his head, and one
appointed to cry at his execution He that keeps not faith toward God, what
sound conscience can he have toward men? therefore in every great house there
would be provision of besoms and wings to sweep down the Spiders webs, and so
by leaving them no place nor means to hurt the harmless slies, the Spider it
self might at last be quite swept our too. Nor let them think that because
they are great, they may use what customs, companions, and servants they
please: For as Alexander to a City of Asia, that offered him half their riches
to desist from war, answered, I came not into Asia with a purpose to take what
you would give me, but that you should retain what I would leave you: so faith
God to them; I came not into your houses or kingdoms, or souls, that you
should condition with me what I should suffer you to do, and to live as you
list; and to take such conditions of you as you would give me, at your
pleasure; but that what conditions I have thought fit to require of you, you
should accept them, and think them best and most happy. For God is our summum
bonum, we must not rest below him, not yet reach above him; below him is
dangerous neglect, above him is damnable presumption. Therefore must we not
love God forour own profit or pleasure, which is the soule-killing custom of
most in the world; for such a one is like a child that faith his prayers that
he may have his breakfast. But we must love him how-soeuer it fare with us,
without any respect of our own good, because he only is worthy of our love,
and nothing is worthy of it but he, and in his love consists all our happiness.

I say there is great need therefore of the practice of this art of serving
God, as this short pro-gresse sets it out; seeing it brings us not only within
the view of the heavenly Canaan, but even into the bosom and communion of his
love. And seeing also we live in the dregs of time, wherein it is come to
pass, that as the waters covered the whole earth, so pride and other monstrous
impieties has covered it again, and not suffered eight persons to escape. For
do we not see the City of God, the holy profession of Jesus Christ, to be
destitute of walls, gates, and guards, and the repair of it either hindered by
sects of men madly furious, or else oppugned by the craft and cunning, and
violent assaults of men either merely epicures, or sottedly superstitious? on
the one side Christ Jesus is utterly cast off by the lust of these most impure
hogs that are ever wallowing in the mire, on the other side the riches and
estate^ of the meaner sort, nay often of the greater sort is exhausted and
utterly rained by the greedy avarice of most cruel and barbarous v^^o^s and
other time-sellers? here shall we see bodies by drunkenness and gluttony
consumed, there by lust, surquedry, and pride and other intemperancies, both
bodies, souls, and ostates ouer-throwne; and all places and persons with
extreme filthiness and fopperies slurred and defiled? to say nothing of whole
Provinces and Kingdoms by intolerable bribery, extortion, symony, sacrilege,
craft, and cruelty, miserably expiled and robbed: and none to be found for all
this, which dare or can meet with these mischiefs: and the most part of men
having so cast off all hope of amendment of these great evils, as that they
think they may be numbered amongst those diseases which are so desperate, as
either by no a^t can be cured, or else whose cure is as dangerous as the
disease?

For though Nebuchadnezzar be dead, yet his pride is come amongst us; though
Sodom be burnt to dust and ashes, yet are her sins remaining (if not
reigning) with us: though Simon Magus be gone, yet has he left the stain of
symony in the highest degree to us: though Iezabel be dead, yet do bribes live
and thrive, and bear away the bell in all business: and men begin to take
courage to commit any sin by example. For when the pillars sink the Temple
falls; when a great tree is hewn down, which is a shade to the beasts, and a
rest to the birds, many leaves, boughs, and twigs, nay the shrubs and lesser
trees are borne down and crushed with it: so many do fall with them, whose
lamps should give light to others, and think it no sin, to sin by example
and for company.

This being so, it is not only necessary that some stand up in the gappe to
turn away the wrath-full dis-pleasure of God from us, but also is fully
confessed that from this Pro-gresse of the soul, most apt and necessary helps
and instructions may be drawn to the use of all sorts of men of our times. For
if we call to mind those heavenly, secret, and wonderful mysteries of our
salvation, also those things by which all mankind is either much furthered, or
greatly hindered in the way to heaven: to conclude, if we call to mind those
things which as well the Church of God, as kingdoms and states stand as much
need of us as the world does of fire and water: we must needs confess, that
in this Pro-gresse are proposed most excellent, necessary, and profitable
things of all men to be known and observed. How great a benefit the diligent
reading thereof may bring to all sorts, accommodating and directing all things
therein to the use of true religion, and increase of holy life, the due
consideration of the parts, and true practice of the passages thereof will
sufficiently declare. For here are shortly and plainly delivered, the true and
only means, faculties and helps to raise man to the highest step of perfection
in glory.

Now for as much as the world is postered with a kind of people resembling
servants and men of low condition, who expecting in the lobbies and out-rooms
their masters coming, and being idle and brainlesse how to bestow their time
well, do take a coal and with fond and filthy phrases, be-sincare the fair
plastered w^ls; I assure my self to meet with some such envious idlebies or
ignora^ts, as most men do, that put themselves upon the worlds stage by
public writings who with the black coal of a blistered tongue will not
stick to bespawle and deprave both the work and the worke-man.

Therefore as those that for some time have bin exercised in some craggy,
difficult and dangerous place, desire much to come into some safe and wished
haven, wherein they may take their rest, and with true pleasure and delight
call to mind their former labors and losses: so I conceive, it much concerns
me to commend these my weak endeauours, to his tutelage, trust and protection,
with whom they may not only be safe, but also of some value and regard. But
seeing no man will either gratefully accept, or greatly delight in, much less
(...) and protect against the mal^ (...) ^^melies and poisonous breath of
carping tongues, those things which are either altogether auerse from his
nature, or removed from his understanding and knowledge; or less fit for his
dignity and greatness: therefore am I to seek some generous and illustrious
person, well understanding and regarding these things, to shroud them (under
his shield) from the tempest of diste^pered tongues. And where may I go to
find such a one, but to your nobleness, (most religious Prince) who has known
the holy Scriptures of a child, 2 Timothy 3.15.
which are able to make you wife to salvation through the faith which is in
Jesus Christ? and who makes conscience to remember your creator in the days
of your youth, Eccle. 12.8
whilst the evil days come not, nor the years wherein you shall say, I have
no pleasure in them?

For there is no writer, that had not need to provide good structure, and great
strength, against the violent and furious waves of malignant tongues: the
Alcyon is said to expose her nest being made of firmly compacted stuff, Plut.
lib. 9.17.
to the shore where the strongest waves do beat; and whatsoever it finds not
sufficiently and soundly composed, it amends and strengthens. Now if the care
and natural love of future issue make the Alcyon so sollicitous to bring up
her young, that she prepares a building which the sea it self cannot
penetrate; I stand excusable in laboring by all means to protect this house
and shelter of the souls refuge, under the shadow of your Princely savor,
against the raging and swelling floods of impious detractors. Therefore to you
alone do I herein rightly address my self, knowing that as when Aeneas was
permitted to carry away any one thing, that he would, he made choice to carry
with him his country Gods; so you will rather choose to give countenance to Gods
cause, and the godly labors of divines therein, then to all other writings
seem they never so profitable, pleasant and glorious: for that of Democritus
as it is well known unto you, so is it well practiced; that two things do rule
the whole world, reward and punishment. And what reward or punishment can be
greater or more just then to accept of the worthy, and reject the worthless
labors of men? seeing you do so wisely judge that as three verses of slow
Euripides style lasts longer then a hundred of the Praecipitant style of
Alcestes, so one sentence of those soule-quickning words which proceed out of
the mouth of God, Val. Max. 3.7.
is more worth then all the eloquence and learning of the world besides.

I know well, that a base countryman passes by the King and salutes him not,
because he knows him not: and a simple peasant of the cuntry, as he walks in
the fields, tramples under his feet many sovereign simples, which the
skillful Apothecaries carefully gather up and preserve: so many unskillful
persons or if cunning Clerks, yet carnal professors will not only pass by
this work, as they do all other of this kind, without saluting it, but even
spitefully tread it under foot, because they cannot sufficiently value the
worth of it. Yet shall the godly wise in this field, find many excellent
herbs of sweet and soueraign operation to every purpose for his souls good.

And for my own part, Cremutius Bulwark shall be my comfort in all the
storms and gust^^ of contagious tongues: Verba mea argu^ntur adeo factorum
innoceus sum. Tacit. annal. 4.
Let them carpe at my words and writings who list, whilst my conscience is
clear from any foul living or offense giving. Towns that have wodden
bridges, do sear least they should be borne down by every flood or increase
of waters, but they that have bridges of stone care not, but only for
extraordinary swellings of waters, so he that has a soul well settled in
Christian moderation, contemns the ordinary excess of injurious tongues, but
such as are weak in godliness are disquieted with every blast of broad and
foul mouthed companions. The bridge of my reputation is not of wood but of
hewn stone, therefore little reckons of any inundations of ungodly censurers.

Only herein is my fear, that I have offended the gracious patience of your
Princely ear, with the ouer-tediousnesse of an unpolished Epistle: and herein
should I faint for fear to displease, were I not with this assurance born up
(out of long observation of your godly courses) that it is voluptas summa, and
quaestus maximus, your greatest pleasure and best gain to please God, Plato.
and gain many unto Christ, making all other learning but chiefly this to be
instar fraeni, like a bridle to restrain you that you be not distracted with
other unnecessary things. Knowing that as it is the glory of the Sun, that so
many thousand stars borrow light from it, so it is your never fading glory,
that so many millions of souls shall borrow light and example from you, to
follow you in this heavenly Progress: and withal remembering that as
Alcibiades not finding Homer with the schoolmaster gave him a box on the care
and went his way; so you will think him vnmeer for your company that follows
you not in this happy Progress of all true pleasure.

Never therefore let it depart out of your Princely mind that whatsoever Gods
gifts are in you, yea even all the gracious occasions and seasons of time for
his service, you owe them all to the Church of Christ: and that God has not
made you Lord Paramount of the goods of body or mind, much less of those
falsely ascribed to Fortune, but his steward to lay them out to his glory, the
salvation and good of others. Which if you shall ever remember and do, God
shall bring you through the Pro-gresse of this miserable life with much increase
of honor and happiness, unto your own desired glorious home in heaven; where
you shall be satisfied with pleasures at his right hand for evermore. Both
which our good God in great mercy confirm and make good unto you, as is the
hearty desire of all that wish well unto our Israel, and the daily service and
prayer

Of your Highness most humble servant, and Chaplain RICH. MIDDLETON.

A Table of the chief points handled in this Book.
The first days Journey.
1. TO hear the word of God with profit contained in three general
observations. page 2. 1. The hearers duty before sermons. page 3. 1. The
hearers must have a right scope and aim in hearing: viz. the glory of God, his
own salvation, and the happiness of Gods Church. page 3. 2. He must labor
to obtain the means appointed to come to that end, which is due preparation
and sanctification. page 4. 3. He must acquaint himself with fifteen moving
causes of sanctification. page 5. 4. With ten general observations belonging
to the sanctification of hearers. page 9 5. He must observe that in private
sanctification before Sermons there are seven things in a parallel of
contraries to be observed. page 19 6. That public sanctification before
sermons, consists in four points, and in three several scopes and ends of
preaching and hearing. page 35 2. In the hearers duty at Sermons consisting in
four points. 1. In attentive hearing. 2. Sound knowledge. 3. Right affection.
4. A serious purpose of practice. page 14 1. The first duty of hearing is first
described. page 47 2. The seauenteene impediments of it are removed, which
cause men altogether to neglect sermons. page 47 And also fourteen impediments
which cause Sermons not to be zealously heard. page 59 3. The aduancements and
helps to attentive hearing are declared. p. 51 Where first are twelve
arguments to move attentive hearing. ibid. 2. Is showed, that in attentive
hearing Sermons six things are required. page 53 3. The impediments are three
ways removed. 1. By instructing men in ten points. 2. By inuiting them which
consists in two points. 3. By the power of the Magistrate. page 55 2. The
second duty is first described, secondly, the twenty impediments of it are
removed. 3. The seauenteene aduancementes and helps of it are declared. page
65 3. The third duty is first described: secondly all those seauenteene
impediments and fourteen before handled are removed and two more declared. 3.
The former aduancements to the two former duties are required and three more
added. page 74 4. The fourth duty is first described, secondly it is showed by
whom application is to be made, namely, first by God, secondly, the Preacher:
thirdly the hearer himself: fourthly, the thirteen impedimentes that hinder
application are removed. And fifthly the six helps to application are
declared, page 82 3. In the hearers duty after Sermons which is of three kinds.
page 108 1 Public in the Church consisting in three points. ibid. 2 Private
at home in three observations. page 111 3. Private and public together in
five respects: where is discoursed of a double censure and visitation both of
the Preacher and hearer: first by the Magistrate of both kinds: secondly, by
God himself when the Magistrate fails in his duty. page 112
The second days journey.
Is to meditate on sacred things comfortably. page 133 1 The matter of
meditation consisting of twelve things. 2 The method and manner of it where.
page 138 1 How to meditate on death three several ways. page 146 2 How to
meditate on the last judgment. page 148 3. How to meditate on the torments of
hell. page 149 4. How to meditate on the glory of heaven. page 158 5. How to
meditate on the things that belong to the knowledge of a man's self. page 162
6. How to meditate on the matter of our sins. page 166 7. How to meditate on
the life of Christ page 170 8. How to meditate on the passion of Christ. page
172 9. How to meditate on the Lords Supper. page 176 10. How to meditate on the
benefits of God. page 179 11. How to meditate on the Saints days. page 182
12. How to meditate on christian virtues. page 183 13. How to meditate on the
creatures of God. page 186 14. How to meditate on the attributes and
perfections of God. page 187 15. How to meditate on the Lords prayer, or any
word of the holy scripture. page 201 16. How to prepare our selves to
meditation, how to accompany it, and how perform it, consisting of sundry
becessary observations. page 214
The third days Journey. Is Prayer.
1 What prayer is, and what kinds of prayer there are. page 241 2 Of cleauen
things required in prayer page 242 3 Of nine requisite duties before prayer
page 258 4 Of four things to be done during the time of prayer. page 260 5 Of
six things to be considered after prayer. ibid. 6 Of mental prayer, which is
of two sorts: wherein first we give thanks to God: secondly we crave
necessaries: thirdly, we offer up our selves, souls and bodies, holy listing
and acceptable sacrifices. page 262 7 Of whom we must ask. page 270 8 How we
must be furnished to ask that we may obtain. page 271 9. Of vocal prayer.
page 273 10. Of mixed prayer, and of the excellency of prayer being one of the
chief acts of religion. page 274
The fourth days Journey. Is holiness of life.
1. How to acquire virtues, and the means of holiness of life, by observing
six short rules. page 294 2. How to attain to sanctity of life, by S.
Bernards two rules: the one consisting of fifteen observations, the other of
twelve. page 298 3. How to attain to sanctity of life by Aquinas his rule
consisting of thirteen observations. page 305 4. Of the necessity of such an
art and method of serving of God in this life, that we may at last come to
reign with him in glory. page 309 5. That this art consists in fowr things. 1.
In observing seven instructions. page 315 2. In three exercises. page 376 3.
In loving of God, and the things a man ought to love. 4. In a daily short
method of practicing such duties as will sanctify our lives.
1. The first instruction is, to labor that the grace of God may make such a
change in us, that we may not seek our selves, or any thing else, but God and
his will. page 315 The second instruction is, that we ever have an eye to the
end by which we are to be directed in the things serving to the reparation of
our souls. page 321 The third instruction is, that it becomes all men but
chiefly sacred persons, to serve God after the most sublime, exact, and perfect
manner. page 339 The fourth instruction is, that the slaughter and ruin which
sin has made in the soul, is the cause that we cannot thus serve God. page
345 The fifth instruction is, that we have in our souls and bodies sufficient
means thus to serve God, if by Gods grace they be quickened and stirred up in
us. page 348 The sixth instruction is; that God is pleased to give unto all that
from the heart do seek him, such power and strength of will, as to desire and
also to detest every thing in a measure, which may please or displease him.
page 355 The seventh instruction is: that there is a way of planting good
habits in the soul, and rooting out the evil customs, and that by the
foresaid instruments of the soul, Gods grace working by them. page 367
2. The first exercise is, the sorrow and repentance for our sins, which
helps much to relieve the soul. page 376 The second exercise is the hatred of
a man's self: where first the manner how every one is to hate himself is
described: secondly why every one ought to hate himself: thirdly how this
hatred may stand with true charity, which begins with the love of ones self.
page 380 The third exercise, is to adorn our selves with virtues for the
beautifying of our souls. page 402
Which is done by these three things: first, by begging help from God:
secondly, by multiplying the acts of virtue: thirdly by restraining the
natural affections and passions of the mind. page 441 1. Of the passion of joy
and how to bridle it. page 445 2. Of the passion of grief and how to restrain
it. page 447 3. Of the passion of hope, and how to limit it. page 455 4. Of the
passion of fear, and how to stint it. page 456 5. Of the passion of hate, and
how to curb it. page 461 6. Of the passion of andacity and boldness and how
to handle it. page 491 7. Of the passion of anger and how to handle it. page
499 8. Of the passion of desperation and how to restrain it. ibid. 9. Of the
passion of love and how to d^ale with it. page 461 10. Of the passion of
abomination and how to use it. page 461 11. Of the passion of desire and
concupiscence and how to bind it. page 472 1. Of the love of God and how it is.
page 531 2. Of the love of our neighbors and what rules are to be observed.
page 578 3. Of the love of our selves, and what considerations are to be used.
page 588 4. The short daily method and rule of practicing such holy duties as
will sanct^fie our lives, by the grace of Gods Spirit. Which consists in six
actions and duties, and at six several times to be performed.
1. Of the duties which are to be done in the former part of the day. The
first duty in the morning is to rise timely, and how to carry our selves at
that time. The second duty is preparation to prayer and how that is to be
done. The third duty is to bestow some time in mental prayer. The fourth duty
is to read some portion of Scripture, and how to do it with profit. The fifth
duty is to prepare our selves to the receiving of the Lo^d^ s^^pe^, which
consists in th^se four considerations.
1. In san^t^ty of life. 2. Rect^tude of intention. 3. Sterring up the
devotion. 4. Prayer for all things nec^ssary both for our selves and others. 1.
Of the sanctity of life, and how it is to be wrought. 2. Of the rect tude of
intention, consisting of ten several observations. Where also are two rules
given for the ordering of our intention, consist^ng of seven several
directions a pe^ce. 3. Of the st^rring up of the devotion, consisting of a
se^u^n fold consideration of Christ's good ^^sse unto us in the institution of
this Sacrament: rest^^ting upon th^se three circumst rices in every of the
seven considerations: first who: secondly to whom: thirdly for what cause he
comes. 4. The ^^se ^f p^^^^^ b^f^r^ the Lords supper; with a form of an
excellent and absolute prayer to that purpose. page 644. The sixth duty is
thanks unto God after the Communion, and how we are to be storred up unto it.
Where are delivered, seven short meditations for the seven days of the
week: every med^tation consisting of five several points. Namely, first in
considering of Christ in several respects toward us. Secondly, in giving God
thanks for 3. things. Thirdly, in detesting our sins. Fourthly, in loving God
with all our hearts. Fifthly, in begging of God seven necessary graces. page
667. The seventh duty is the study of christians, and how they may profit in
learning. page 689. The eight d^ty is examination of the conscience before
dinner. page 699 The ninth duty is our behavior at dinner, and how it is to be
ordered. page 702.

2. The duties of the after noone helping to sanctification of life. The first
d^^y is to bestow some time in reading of holy Scripture, or some other godly
book. page 706 The second duty is the examination of the conscience before
we address our selves to sleep. Where first is showed the necessity of this
duty by three strong demonstrations. Secondly the benefit of it by sour
evident arguments. Thirdly how this duty is to be performed, and what is the
matter about which it is exercised: with five necessary observations concurring
to this examination. First, a commemoration of benefits and humble
thankfulness for them in fifteen circumstances. Secondly, a desire of grace
enabling us to search our hearts. Thirdly, an inquisition of the conscience, to
come to the knowledge of the sins of commission and omission. Fourthly a
detestation of our sins. ^istly, a due censuring of our selves for them. page
714 The third duty is how to compose thy self to sleep. page 772
3. The duties to be done every week. page 774 The first duty is a preparation
to the receiving of the Sacrament; and the manner of it, if the conueniencie of
the time, place, persons, customs, and the like will suffer, or do require
it. page 784 The second duty is to hear the word preached.
4. The duties to be done every Month. page 791 The thing chiefly to be done is
this; that at the least one day, or some convenient time be set apart to
examine the conscience and to rectify it.
5. The duties to be done every year. page 794 That which is here never to be
omitted is, that every year some special time be set apart for the renewing of
the mind, seeing our vices do increase as our years, and we wax old in sin.
And how that is to be.
6. The duties to be done at all times of every Christian. p. 805 1. Our duties
unto God in seuaen acts. The first act of the presence of God. Secondly the
love of God. Thirdly, the fear of God. Fourthly the zeal of Gods glory.
Fifthly, the praise of God. Sixthly thankfulness to God. Seauenthly a
resignation of our selves to the will of God. 2. Our duties to our brethren in
seven actions: the first is to behold God in our brother. The second is to
love him as our selves, the third is affability and good example, the fourth is
honor: the fifth is to bear their infirmities: the sixth is to help them: the
seventh is to live circumspectly. page 807 3. Our duties to our selves in
seven actions. First is modesty. Secondly, contempt of our selves. Thirdly, a
general abnegation and denial of our selves. Fourthly, subduing the flesh.
Fifthly, tranquillity of mind. Sixthly, discretion. Seventhly, prayer.

Lastly, three potent demonstrations and reasons to persuade all men, but
especially great ones, thus exactly to serve God: if they mean to rest with
him for ever.

THE HEAVENLY PROGRESS, OR, The Souls Journey to Heaven.
AS there is no Art or Profession that can be profitably learned, except some
fit Method and Order be observed therein; Even Nature it self in all her
courses keeping due order, and both Art and Nature teaching us, that the great
God is the God of Order: so, much less can that most sovereign and heavenly
knowledge of the right serving of God, which is the Art of Arts, and perfection
of Nature, be taught and learned of any Christian, without some sound
direction and order be prescribed, which may as well delight the soul to
apprehend, as guide it to follow the true path that leads it to eternal rest:
for which cause (amongst such as have bestowed their pains and arguments of
like nature, but not fully and only to this end) I have deemed it a work of
much consequence to frame this Progress of the Soul, wherein by sour labors
or days iournies of the Soul, I do orderly and fully discourse, whatsoever
may be requisite in the true service of God.

The first Journey that the Soul must make toward Heaven, is, to hear the
word of God with benefit.
That this may be duly performed, it suffices not, that the Preacher be
skillful, to divide the word of Truth aright, and therein be diligent to do
his duty; but it is further required, that the Hearer also be not wanting on
his own behalf to himself: The duty then of the Hearer, is no other, but
that both before the Sermon, during the time of the Sermon, and after the
Sermon, he consider, learn, and practice those things, that are unto God
glorious, and unto the Church of God, and himself, wholesome and profitable:
And it consists in these two things: first, That he have an eye to the scope
and end of his calling: secondly, That he use the means appointed to come to
that scope and end.

First, of the first part of the Hearers duty, that is, of the scope in
hearing Sermons.

Forasmuch, as there is one common scope, as of all other things, so of the
Preachers and Hearers, namely, the glory of God, and happiness of the Church:
therefore it behooves the Hearer to follow the guidance and direction on of
the Preacher, and to labor to come to that chief end, by such means, as lead
thereunto: namely, by hearing the word preached, by understanding the things
heard, by loving the good thing understood, and hating the evil: by a serious
and earnest study and practice of the good thing beloved, and a slying from the
evil: by which it will come to pass, that God shall be glorified, and the
church and our selves edified.

2 Of the second part of the Hearers duty, that is, of the means appointed to
come to this end: and first, of the means before Sermons.

That the Hearer may before Sermons, as well as at Sermons, and after Sermons,
ponder, learn and practice those things which make for the glory of God, the
churches comforts, and his own, he must duly prepare hims^l^^ to the hearing
of Sermon^: and this preparation consists in the sanctifying of himself unto
the Lord: Exodus 19.
for so were the people of God commanded to do; and that it might the more
deeply penetrate into their hearts, God instituted a peculiar ceremony for the
same, and it were to be wished, that all Hearers would, with earnest endeavor
regard, for what causes this sanctification is required of them, wherein it
consists, and how it is to be instituted and ordered.

Therefore here we will deliver three necessary points touching this
sanctification and preparation of the Hearers: first, what are the moving
causes, why they ought to sanctify themselves: secondly,

1 The moving causes why they ought to sanctify themselves.

The causes chiefly moving sanctification may be gathered from the Apostles
words, Heb. 12 from the 12. verse until the 22. of the 13. chapter: where
albeit the Apostle may seem to speak generally of the sanctification of a
christian man; yet does he chiefly respect the time wherein men assemble to
hear the word, For there all things are holy.

1 Then the Church is holy: Heb. 12.18 22.19.
and the communion of Saints. 2 The Word is holy, especially that of the
Gospel, those precious pearls. Matthew. 7.6
3 The time is most holy, the Sabbath of the Lord. 4 The Angels are holy, Heb.
12.2^
who are present in the assembly. 5 Those spiritually first borne are holy.
Heb. 12.23
6 A most holy God: 23.
who is present and President. 7 The holy Saints in Heaven, 23.
whither we that are in the Militant Church, ought to strive and contend to
come. 8 A holy Mediator, 24.
even Jesus the righteous. 9 The most holy blood of sprinckling which speaks
better things then that of Abel. 24.

Therefore let us not contemn the communion with these most holy things,
neither let us defile the same with our impurity and uncleanness, but labor
for true sanctification: unto which thing let the consideration of these five
reasons following, added to the former, stir up our hearts.

1 The consideration of Gods holy commandment, of sanctifying the Sabboath, as
also of that passage, Be ye holy as I am holy: 1. Pet. 1.15 16.
for seeing he that has called us, is holy, we must be holy in all manner of
conversation.

2 Of that divine and heavenly interdiction: Matthew. 7.6
give not that which is holy unto dogs: nor cast ye your pearls before
swine, lest they tread them under feet, and turning again, all to rent you.

3 Of that assertion of S. Paul's, 2. Cor. 2.
that the preaching of the Gospel is unto the unsanctified, and such as are
never to be sanctified, the savor of death unto death.

4 Of that most grievous danger of being smitten with the hidden, or the
manifest thunderbolt of Excommunication, 1. Cor. 5.
to be delivered unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh. Where we may
remember that of the Apostle, That without holiness no man shall see God; Heb.
12.1^
neither here by says in this world, nor in the world to come face to face.
And what meant our Savior by that man which was bound hand and foot, and cast
into utter darkness, for want of a Wedding Garment, but that the want of
holiness is the just cause of our reiection from the presence of God and his
Angels? Mat. 2^ 11


5 Let every Hearer think with himself, that he is admitted to the speech
and Supper of the great God, and prepare himself as a meet guest for such a
worthy entertainment.

6 Let the change of our garments admonish us of this sanctification; namely,
the putting off of such garments as are soyled with the labors of our
vocation, and the putting on of cleaner and more precious garments. For if the
body must be hansomely and cleanely decked at such times, how much more is the
most precious soul to be sanctified and prepared? To this purpose may also
serve, the consideration of the washing of our bodies, wherein we are daily
careful: and the ringing of the Bell calling upon us for preparation.

2 The general observations which belong to the sanctification of the Hearers.

Seeing then the sanctification of the Hearers is so necessary, not unworthily
are we to search with much diligence wherein the same consists: and here it is
to be instituted and ordered as sanctification (even from the force of the
word) of the whole life of a Christian, consists in the mortification of the
old man, and vinification and quickening of the new man: which the Apostle does
thus express, that we cast off concerning the conversation in time past,
Ephesians. 4.22.23.24
the old man, which is corrupt through the deceiucable lusts, and be renewed in
the spirit of our minds, and put on the new man, which after GOD is created in
righteousness and true holiness: so this special sanctification, which ought to
go before the hearing of the word, consists in the same things: which is very
evident by that singular comparison of the Apostles admonishing the Corinthians
how they should prepare themselves to the celebration of the Lords supper: ^
Cor. 5.6 7.8
Know you not (says he) that a little leaven leaueneth the whole lump? Purge
out therefore the old leaven that ye may be a new lump, as ye are leauened;
for Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore let us keep the feast,
not with old leaven, neither in the leaven of maliciousnes and wickedness,
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. By which words, and the
rest to the end of the chapter, the Apostle does admonish in the preparation
and sanctification to the hearing of the word; that men should have respect
unto four principal things.

these, our labor must be to note them, to mourn for them, to purge them out
after admonition, and to show them in our lives. 4 To others that are without,
who are not of the Christian assembly,
For the regard of these four does not only stir up the Hearer to a serious
preparation and sanctification, before the hearing of the Word, that he may
perform an acceptable divine service unto God; but withal, works this in
him, that he does thoroughly weigh, what is required of him, in respect of
every one of these, that he may be a holy and unleavened Hearer.

And albeit the Hearers ought (through all the course of their lives) to give
themselves to holiness and purging out of the old leaven, yet it behooves
them to have great care hereof, chiefly before the hearing of the Word.

Therefore by occasion of those two notable testimonies before cited; Heb.
12.16 1. Cor. 5.
we may observe for our better instruction herein, these things following:

wicked, impure and profane; or hypocritically vaunting their holiness,
seeing it comes to pass in him, that he separates himself from the world,
and is not so affected, as the children of the world are, does not so carry
himself as they do, neither does fashion himself like unto this present
world. Hebrews 12. and 13. chapters; where after the handling of
sanctification, and his causes in general; at length he repeates a long
catalogue and roll of things impious, impure and profane, which a holy man
ought to shun and hate, and the contrary virtues, which a man must love and
embrace, but chiefly before the hearing of the Word. And hence is that
exhortation of the Apostle, of purging out the old Leaven, the leaven of
maliciousnes, 1. Cor. 5.
and wickedness; and of the new lump and unleavened bread. 1. Cor. 5.
advises us to keep the feast, not with the old Leaven, neither in the
Leaven of maliciousnes and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth: he teaches in general what are the common evils in the
sanctification of a hearer, which he must fly, shake off, and mortify;
namely, the relics of original sin, which is signified by the old Leaven.
Moreover, the little sources of evils, that flow from the fountain of
original sin, such as are either manifest impiety called by the Apostle,
the Leaven of maliciousnes, or hypocrisy noted by the name of the heaven of
wickedness: and on the other side, he shows what good things are to be
embraced and solowed, such as are sincerity and truth.
Now, that the Hearer may attain to the benefit of both these, that is to say,
to purge out the old leaven and the leaven of maliciousness and wickedness,
and to keep the feast with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth: it
behooves him to have a grievous combat and contention, which can by no means
be ended before the end of this temporal life.

^eb. 13.1
and how much the example of great men and magistrates preuailes, and what the
Spirit of God does work by them, is so well known, that it needs no further
declaration, then that of the Wise man; As the Ruler of the people is, so are
all they that dwell under him: on the contrary, what evils ensue, when the
Rulers and Leaders dedicate not their studies and cares to holiness and
religion, but to impuritie, malice and hypocrisy; are not, nor can not be
less then the havoc which a mighty tree makes, when being cut down, it
bruseth and breaks into fitters all the young trees and little shrubs that grow
under it: or as a great and massy stone, which salling from an high place,
bursts it self into many small gobbets, dissipating also all the things which
it lights on: and as a blemish in the face, does more deface the visage, then
any other deformity can do any other part of the body: so it is a greater
shame and dishonor, when men of power and government are impious, impure,
irreligious and profane, then to have many others so, that are of a lower
rank: every vice of the mind, being so much the more conspicuous and
notorious, by how much as he that sins, is of greater account and esteem.

6 But this must not be forgotten, that to the end both the gouerner and the
governed, the magistrate and the people, may have a special care of holiness;
they both stand in need of an other more potent and holy Leader, to set
forwards that work; and that is the holy spirit of God, without whose light
and might, nothing is in man to perfect so great and holy a work, as is
sanctification.

3 The parts and principal members of sanctification.

In ordering the chief parts of sanctification, we must duly consider, not
only what things a good Hearer is both outwardly and inwardly to eschew,
before the hearing of Sermons: but also on the contrary, what things he is to
embrace and follow.

For the better understanding whereof, I will divide the preparation and
sanctification of the Hearer into two kinds: the first is private: the second
is public. For albeit sundry of those things belonging to this preparation,
whereof we shall hereafter speak, are also publicly to be continued, yet
because the beginning of them is privately to be made, therefore may they more
fitly be placed, under private sanctification.

1 Of the private sanctification of the Hearer before Sermons.

That this kind of preparation may be the more clearly described to the
meanest capacity of Hearers, I will rank the consideration both of such
things as are to be avoided, and also of such as are to be embraced in this
sanctification, in a parallel and proportion of contraries, reducing them into
seven several heads.

Luke 16.14
What befell our Savior Christ in this kind, is very well discovered in the
history of the Gospel. For why did the Pharisees (who were couerous) mock at
Christ's parabolicall admonition of making friends with the riches of iniquity,
but that their hearts were set upon riches, and possessed with avarice? who may
not read a long catalogue of such impurities and vicious humors, both in the
Epistle to the Corinthians, and the Hebrews? 1. Cor. 5.10* 11 Hebr. 12. and 13.
chap.
And what is the cause that at this day (in most places) there is so little
fruit of preaching the Word, as well in faith as in life, but this, that men
do not purge out the old Leaven of their inbred corruptions, and also the
Leaven of maliciousnes and wickedness, before they presume to come to hear the
Word preached? therefore by the merit and efficacy of Christ's passion, and
earnest and zealous prayer, bathed in the tears of a truly penitent hear^,
let these be purged out, that place and entertainment may be given to the
saving word of grace.

On the other side, let every hearer labor for the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth: that by the grace of the holy Spirit he may bring with him
to the hearing of the Word, the study and care of truth and all virtues. And
here may he apply to himself those general observations spoken of before.
Such a mind as this which is desirous of grace, is very apt to receive the Word
with fruit: for there is a most excellent consent and agreement betwixt them.
Behold the same most sweetly expressed, I stand (says God) at the door,
Apoc. 3.2.
and knock, if any hear my voice and open unto me, I will go in unto him,
and suppe with him, and he with me. O what admirable fruit of heavenly Sermons
would there be, if we had such hearers? What other thing is this lump of
Evangelical doctrine, but that sacred Leaven, which being hid in the meal,
leaueneth every whit of it? Mat. 13.33
We see, that if the Leaven be hid in the meal or flower, it will leaven the
whole lump; but if it lie in the branne never so long, it never works in it:
so is the precious Word, if it meet with a soul that is boulted and sisted
with due repentance and holy preparation, until it be made pure flower, there
it leaueneth and seasoneth the whole man.

But, albeit we can not here relate all the several sorts of vices and
virtues; yet in few words we will mark out some of them, and those chiefly
that seem most necessary for our purpose.

Luke 14.16
whose oxen, farms, and wives, so forestalled them, that they never tasted of
that sovereign supper: for then the Hearers that are so prepossessed, are:
first, either hindered as they come not at all: secondly, or so fetterd, that
they come not in time to the Sermons: thirdly, or else, so busied with carnal
cogitatious, that they go out before the time that the Sermon is ended: or
fourthly, if they tarry, their thoughts do plunge them into a thousand
distractions: or fistly, sluggishnesse, heau^nesse, and sleep steals upon
them and robbes them of the very f^uits of their souls.

And what are these worldly affairs?







4. Marriages, Christning feasts, merchandising, commessations, and drinkings,

5 Roasting, baking, boiling and dressing of many sorts of meats, which
restrains,

Here then on the contrary, the soul that would be well and fitly prepared
for hearing, must only be intent and regardfull of Sacred, Spiritual, and
Divine things, remembering ever that of our Savior; Math. 6.
Seek first the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and all these
things shall be ministered unto you: From which things, every good Hearer may
receive helps unto hearing, for then none of those things whereof we spoke
last shall befall him, but the quite contrary. But above all let him consider
well the fourth Commandment, what that means, and what is the scope of the
Lords Saboth.









Martha: Luke 10.41 42.
Martha, Martha, thou c^^est, and art troubled about many things, but one thing
is needful, Mary has chosen the good part which shall not be taken from her.

Thomas, when our Savior entered into the house where the Disciples were, and
breathed on them, saying, John 20.
Receive the holy Ghost, but Thomas not being amongst them, sailed of the
blessing.

But let all men desire to frequent the holy Assemblies, after the example of
David, who wished rather to be a doore-keeper in the house of God, then to
dwell in the Palaces of Kings.

Lucian, to mock and floute at at the Word or Minister; thirdly, nor with a
mind to judge,

But, first, he must come accompanied with his family, a blessing promised, as
on the contrary, to their impiety there is denounced a grievous curse; they
also are such as God has a care over, and offers unto them the holy means of
their salvation: Secondly, Moses commanded to prepare themselves for the
sacrifice of the Passe-ouer, Ex. 12.27.
bowed themselves and worshipped: Thirdly, Come let us go up to the Mountain
of the Lord, Esaias 2.3.
to the house of the God of Jacob, he will teach us his ways, and we will
walk in his paths: Fifthly, with hunger, thirst, whose soul panted for the
Lord, Psalm. 42.1.^
as the Heart brayeth for the rivers of water; whose soul thirsted for God, for
the living God, that he might appear before the presence of God:

him not to like of his doctrine, or at least to enterprete every thing unto
the worst sense. 1. Ioh. 4.10
How can he who loves not his brother whom he has seen, love God whom he
has not seen? What shall we think of him, that giving sentence of death
upon a murderer, shall himself kill a man in the face of the open Court? And
what father will suffer the hatreds and brawlings of his children at his own
Table?

Then let him bring with him to the Church love and honor: first of the
Minister of God, for the love and honor of the Minister will bring with it the
love and honor of God and his sacted Word, and other singular fruits of
piety: Psalm. 133.3
For how good and joyful a thing is it for brethren to dwell together in
unity? Behold the unspeakable graces of love dilated and enlarged in three
whole chapters to the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 12.13.14. chap.
Then, when the hearers stand thus affected amongst themselves, with what
alacrity and comfort will the word of God be heard? and without any offense.
With what fruit will prayers be powered out to God? Let every hearer be
mindful of that sweet admonition, to be reconciled to his brother, Mat.
5.23.24.25.26.
before the offering of his gift.

also sanctified, the whole lump is corrupted, and so even every hearer: This
is a great ignominy to God, by it the wrath of God is kindled and provoked
against the whole Assembly, and we our selves are offended and hindered withal.

Therefore let us have great care to testify our brotherly affection toward
our neighbors, even as our hands do one of them help another; so let the
hearers one stir up another: 1. Cor. 5.
which are proper unto the Minister of God, for we ought to have a special
regard of the salvation of our brethren, honor of the Church, and glory of God.

or if prayer be not rightly ordered.

Therefore every hearer must have a singular regard to invoke the name of God
for a blessing: where first, David often falling into the consideration of his
sins, Psalm. 51.
even from the womb, Psalm. 25.32.
and of unknown sins of his youth: meditate on the Word, that he may have
the knowledge and utterance of such things, as belongs to the edification and
salvation of the hearers: Let him also pray for himself and all the hearers,
that they may have holy and learned ears to apply to their own souls the
instructions delivered: for there is no good thing either in the Teacher or
Hearer, without the free gift of God in Jesus Christ, from whose fountain of
mercies it is, that we must draw it with sighs and tears.

2 The public Preparation of the Hearer before Sermons.

In few words, the public preparation of the hearer in the Church, before
Sermon, may stand in these observations: first, Word, for such singing in which
there is a wonderful sweetness of things, and of concord, the holy Spirit
working by them, do stir up the motions of the mind, and drive away the
idle, wandering, and wicked cogitations, as also the perturbations and sorrows
of the heart, that the hearer may with a more settled and appeased mind be
present at the Sermon: do now talk with God himself, being gathered together
for that purpose, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that they may
bear God, and God may hear them: In which prayer it is necessary that their
chief aim be at the scope and end of all Sermons: which, because few or none
do truly understand, either how necessary it is, or wherein the end of all
Sermons consists, it shall be fit in this place that I open the point. First,
the chiefest and highest end of Preaching and Hearing Sermons is, of man's soul
and body, with which is joined this temporary life both in prosperity and
adversity, for that God may of us be glorified; and not (as it comes to
pass in this world by Satan and his members) be affected with contumely and
ignominy, by infidelity and impiety: it is necessary, that it be well with us,
and that we be assured of eternal life, and that from God the Father by the
deliverance of Jesus Christ, and the working of the holy Spirit: For who in the
grave will praise thee, says the Prophet. Secondly, Thirdly, and virtues be
soundly known: for as there is no desire of the good things which are
unknown: So of the evil things unknown there is no hatred and eschewing.
Thirdly, the lowest drist of hearing Sermons,

But now, if such as ought to hear this word, be cold and negligent in this
preparation, and either refuse to come at all, or else refuse to come
sanctified and prepared: Then 1. the Magistrate compel them to come; who
albeit he have no power to enforce the conscience, yet ought he compel his
subjects to hear the word of God. Thus have you heard the whole duty of the
hearer before the Sermon.

2 The hearers duty during the Sermon time is to be considered.

This duty of the hearer, whilst he is at the Sermon, I may comprise in three
points: 1. In the number of the things which are required of the hearer at this
time: 2. In the connection of them:

1 That the hearet may attain to the highest drift and end of hearing Sermons,
3.

2 The coherence and connection of these parts thus necessary to the hearer,
and meaning of them? what profits it to understand and conceive the things
heard, if there be not a right and holy affection of heart toward the things
heard, nor any purpose of the practice of them in our lives? 2. That the holy
Spirit of God does in sundry places of Scripture, make a most close and narrow
connection of these four things that are required at hearing of Sermons. I will
inform thee, Psalm. 32.9.
and teach thee in the way wherein thou shall go, says the Lord, and I will
guide thee with mine eye: and what says the Lord by the Prophet to the
rebellious Jews? Hear O heavens, and hearken O earth, Isay 1.2.3.
I have nourished and brought up children, but they have rebelled against me:
the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters cribbe; but Israel has
not known, my people have not understood. The same expostulation GOD uses in
the Prophet Jeremy, Not every one that says unto me, Ierem. 8.7 Math. 7.21
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that does my
Fathers will which is in heaven, faith our Savior. For it is most true which
the Apostle speaks, The hearers of the Law are not righteous before God,
Romans 2.13
but the doers of the Law are justified. And, how strongly does the same
Apostle argue this point? How shall they call on him in whom they have not
believed? and how shall they believe in him of who^ they have not heard? To.
10.14.
and how shall they hear without a Preacher? Be ye doers therefore says Saint
James, Iac. 1.22
of the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. So that we
see the Holy Ghost does knit these four several requisite in the hearing of
the Word, in one indissoluble knot, namely, to hear attentively, to understand
soundly, to be affected toward that is heard heartily, and to practice it
faithfully: without all which, no profit redounds to the Hearer, be he never
so wise and learned.

3 The manner to be observed in hearing of this duty.

1 To come then to the four principal necessaries required in hearing of the
Word,

1 The first and most necessary thing to be observed in this action, and
gestures, and is rightly called, attentive hearing, for the infinite multitude
of Hearers, who only either for fashion, or for some cause as bad, frequent
Sermous: who being present in their persons, are wandering elsewhere in their
minds: or being such as content themselves with one Sermon in a month,













and an opinion, that the handling of Gods Word only belongs to the
ministers: which conceit has taken deep root, as in* Popery, so no less
amongst many seeming Professors of the truth.



opus operatum, namely, that they will (in the time of sickness) hear the
Minister, whose voice, whether they understand or not. yet they think it shall
be of great avail unto them.



defects of the Ministers in their words.

opus operatum, and that it suffices only to hear them, albeit without all
care of the dignity of the Word, and all zeal of profiting.











2 For the impediments which hinder the hearing of Sermons attentively and
zealously, they are these.













at the Sermon time.









serve the true God, as he has revealed himself in his holy Word.













attention; and on the other side, with what profit and comfort infinite
thousands have frequented the holy Assemblies.



2 Thessalonians. 1.










they have of the great profit which comes by the Word of God and Ministry
thereof; the security of the flesh, self-love, pride, vain fear of loosing
their liberty, too much care of earthly things; the perverse opinion, that the
handling of Gods word belongs only to the Ministers, and that every man else
may at his pleasure live as he list, the hope of longer life, the vain dream
to think it sufficient to hear Sermons only, preposterous judgment, and
loathsomenesse in respect of the Ministers person: all which, as long as they
have any residence in the hearer, do hinder his affection: but much more if
all these concur in him, or the most of them.



come before it begin, tarry till it be ended.





But now forasmuch, as at the beginning of any reformation, other impediments
do arise, besides those before spoken of, it is not improper in this place to
admonish the hearer: For many, in those places where things are reformed
according to the Word, are hindered from attentive hearing by these stumbling
blocks following.

10 By an inueterate and ancient opinion and custom.

11 By a preposterous fear of the condemnation of our Elders, Fathers and
Friends dead, which fear is engendered: first, from the vain boastings of the
contrary party, touching the word of God: secondly, from the horrible raylings,
calumnies and condemnations of it: thirdly, from the authority of men:
fourthly, from the example of others: fifthly, from fear of persecutions.

12 From considence of themselves, as if they or others could not err.

13 From the opinion and conceit of zeal.

14 From the boasting of the simplicity of their faith: And these must by three
means be cared for and cured: secondly, by stirring them up: thirdly,

Whosoever will be my Disciple, must deny himself, take up the Cross and
follow me. And that of the Apostle, Whosoever will live godly in JESUS CHRIST
must suffer persecution: If any come unto me and hate not father and mother,
Luke 14.26
wife and children, brethren and sisters (if they draw him from the truth of
Christ) yea even his own soul, he cannot be my Disciple: another; secondly,
Be ye innocent as Doves, but wise as Serpents.

should try all things, and hold that which is good; of the promise of Christ,
Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of
them; and of most weighty discommodities, both external, internal and
eternal, which remains for them that have no regard of the foresaid things.

and excitation, any thing be effected by the godly Christian Magistrate, then
at length they must descend unto this means, that the Subjects be compelled
to the hearing of Sermous: not that he may justly affect any Lordship over
their consciences: but, first,

The second thing to be observed in fruitful hearing of the Word Preached,
the things heard: And here, as in the former duty, I must, first, declare the
nature of it; secondly, remove the impediments; thirdly, show the aduancements
and helps of it.



But I do for this cause call this duty a sound knowledge and understanding of
the things heard; because there is another knowledge very superficial and
imperfect, which deceiues many men. For you shall find many hearers, who do
hear and apprehend, certain phrases or speeches in the Sermon, and sometimes
not with a mind to learn, but rather to cavil, but in the mean time, are
not attentive to the whole Sermon, and therefore become very injurious Judges
and censurers of the Sermon, for seeing at one breath all cannot be delivered,
no man can rightly judge of Sermons that hears not the whole, nor does foundly
observe and confer together every member of the Sermon, antecedent and
consequent. Besides, some Hearers there are, that understand the principal
heads of the Sermons, and their members and parts, but regard not their
foundations and causes; and such do not soundly perceive the things heard. For
it suffices not to understand the things heard superficially and slightly,
but it is required that soundly and fundamentally it be understood, together
with the causes upon which it depends; unto which, even the knowledge of
circumstances does appertain.

v.g. if a holy preparation to the hearing of Sermons have not gone before, nor
an attentive hearing, then a sound knowledge and understanding cannot be at
all; for the preceding duties are the foundations of them that follow. 4. But
chiefly it hinders the fruit of hearing, much, viz. if he be ignorant of
those things which are altogether necessary to the understanding of Scriptures,
and Sermons: that is, if he have not his senses exercised. 1. In the Arts, of
words and things, Grammar, others tropicall and figurative, some to be of
manifold significations, some only of one signification: For words are the
notes and marks of things; also, if not in Logique, by the benefit of nature,
he have profited so much, that he can discern betwixt propositions,
affirmative and negative, questions simple and compound, and by what third
argument they be confirmed and illustrated, by the Holy Ghost, and the
Minister, both in Scriptures, and Sermons: Also if he have not some competent
knowledge, at the least of the method, that he can judge of the disposition
of the Sermon. But here I desire to be rightly understood, for I speak not of
Scholasticall subtleties, but of the right accommodation and applying of
principles that are borne with us, and by use and experience imprinted in us,
from whence all Arts had their beginning. doctrine of the covenant betwixt God
and man, and in the heads of Christian doctrine, in the Sum and History of
the sacred Bible. fore-conceiued opinions of pre^udicies. 14. implicit faith
and pretense of simplicity.

duty of sound understanding the things heard, wherein if we find these said
impediments, or the most of them to be abandoned, and in their places these
helps ensuing entertained, then will there be a sound knowledge and
understanding of things heard and handled in Sermons. 1. Then to promote this
duty, of the Preachers method; that he may observe the same method in
hearing that he does in Preaching. pro and con, of the Precepts of Grammar,
Rhetorique and Logic, of true and false doctrine, and of the true sense of
Scripture: but such as, at the least, is furnished with some competent
knowledge of these things. God that Magistrates, Ministers, and Parents,
Citizens and Contrymen, would in time begin to think of the necessity and
unspeakable benefit of Schools, where youth are fitted to all Offices of
Church and Country, that they would be row sed up from their sloth, to the
love, institution, reformation and promotion of Schools and houses of
learning. and give him grace to perform and fulfill it. Behold good and
faithful servant, thou have been faithful in a little, I will make thee
ruler over much. implicit and simple faith, whereby pretenses of gross
ignorance are sought. up himself to the sound knowing and understanding of
things spoken.

3 The third necessary duty to come to the right scope and drift of hearing
Sermons, is, that the hearer have a right and holy affection of heart, toward
the things understood: for many do hear and understand Sermons, who are yet
nothing affected with them; nor truly and rightly affected toward them. There
is no man living has so sound a knowledge of truth and falsehood, good and
evil, as has the devil, his knowledge herein is far more perfect and full
then any man's in the world, yet there is no man does hate truth and goodness,
nor rejoice more at falsehood and mischief then he does, which is the cause
that makes his sins and punishments the more grievous: Therefore seeing it
neither suffices to hear and understand Sermons, but withal that the
affections of the heart must be placed upon them, we will here, as in the
former duties, the nature of the duty: secondly,

well affected toward them. First, there are some men, things, and are
delighted with the false and wicked thing: nor yet have these men any right
affection. Fifthly, some, toward the things which are heard, is a most
necessary duty of hearing.

to that which is true and good, and on the other-side, to withdraw them from
things false and evil: Secondly, say he do his duty, yet if the hearer,
dissimulation: then is the affection of the heart much blurred and dis-ordered,
and so are the things they hear not rightly affected.

weighty impulsive causes, chiefly by the covenants and promises of God, by the
examples of the godly, and the singular and manifold benefit and use: And also
by stirring them up, and stinging them, to the hatred and detestation of
falsehood and vices, by the severe interdicts and comminations of God, by the
examples of wicked men, and the horrible discommodites ensuing: adding
heereunto most penetrating and moving words, Rhetorical figures, pronunciation
and gestures, the more to move the affections: Secondly, if the hearer by the
motion of the same Spirit, evil, not regarding the false appearance and shadow
of things good and evil; shaking off all hypocrisy and dissimulation, being
driven thereunto by the consideration of the most grievous interdicts,
comminations and judgments of God:

hearer, that he may come to the full scope and drift of hearing Sermons:
which is the glory of God, good of his Church, and his own eternal salvation;
is a resolved purpose of the practice of such things as he has heard,
understood, and is affected withal, and that in the course of his whole life:
And surely it is a most weighty exhortation which the holy Spirit uses to
stir up men to the hearing of the Word: Iam. 1.22.23.24.25.26.
Be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves,
etc. Where he admonishes, that it is not sufficient to hear and understand
Sermons, and to be affected toward them with a changeable and temporary
affection, except there be added withal a firm and fast purpose of the
practice of them in our whole lives: therefore as we have in the former
duties, so here, we will briefly show: first, the nature of this settled
purpose of practice: secondly, the impediments of it: thirdly, the aduancements
and helps of it.

inbred hypocrisy: secondly,

others, the difficultest part of the hearers duty, so it is the chiefest and
most proper unto a Christian, therefore the greater care is to be had about
them both, for which cause it will be very fitting to set the same before our
eyes more particularly, that every hearer may know what is the necessity of
this application, and wherein it consists.

It is a thing most undoubted that the use and application of the doctrines we
here deliver are of singular benefit to the hearer: For without due use and
application, the best Sermons that ever were, are but dead bodies: Seeing these
two, Use and Application, are the very life and motion of Sermons, for more
full declaration thereof, let us briefly observe, that Doctrines, Uses and
Application, are as the tree, the fruit, and the gathering of the fruit; as
the medicine the virtue of it, and the application, as money, the value of it,
and the use, as Christ, his benefits, and faith by which they are applied:
Now, as there is no benefit comes by the Tree without fruit, no benefit of
fruit if not gathered; as no good comes by Physic, if it have no power nor
virtue, nor help comes by the virtue of a medicine if not applied; as there is
no good comes by money, if we know not the value of it, nor does the value of
it avail us if we use it not: as Christ profits us not without his
benefits, nor his benefits without faith to apply them: So Doctrine profits
nothing except we know the use of it, and the Use is to small purpose if we
do not apply it. All that can be heard, if a man be never so wise, without
application, is but a dead letter, and the very letter of death.

That therefore this most necessary point of application of Sermons, without
which there is no practice of holiness, may the better be known unto the
hearers, these points are to be considered:



Ioh. 6.44.
and him alone: No man can come to me except the Father draw him, says our
Savior; and of himself he says, Without me you can do nothing: Ioh. 15.5.
Nay; the Apostle says concerning the holy Ghost, No man can say that Jesus is
the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost: 1. Cor. 1.2.3.
From all which places it is evident that it is impossible that ever any
doctrine with his use should be applied without the special directing hand of
God: Now God does apply the doctrine with the use at two seasons: First, the
end of the world will apply freely, the doctrines with their uses, that is to
whom, when, and in what measure it thinks fit, and that by the means
hereafter following: And these things which I have spoken of the application
which is made by God, are fitly remembered in the first place: first, opus
operatum: that is, that it suffices to go to Sermons and hear them, and that
for the works sake God will respect us:

medicine (namely the heavenly doctrine) in the name of God, bearing witness
of the singular power and profit thereof, but also does apply the same to his
hearers, and that at two several times: first, in, and at the Sermon, whilst
after the doctrine is handled and the use showed, he admonishes the Hearer,
that it is not sufficient that he know the doctrine and profit thereof, except
he apply them both also unto himself: For not the hearers, but the doers of
the Law shall be justified: And also whilst he declares to the hearer all
those things in which true application consists, of which we shall presently
speak. Secondly, are to his glory, and many ways to our own comfort and
benefit, and to the destruction of the Kingdom of Satan; and to serious
invocation, that God would be pleased more and more, to write and imprint the
doctrines with their uses in their hearts: but also by giving of thanks, and
calling upon God for a blessing, to give a holy example of them both to the
hearers: And, secondly, more privately after the Sermon, the Minister applies
the doctrine with the uses, if by private prayers he intercede with God, not
only for himself and his family, but also pray unto God for his hearers, that
his labors may not be in vain, if by application of the doctrines and uses,
he by his own example go before them, and become the type of his Flock: if
he diligently observe every an and person under his charge, and by others do
enquire of them how they carry themselves in the application and practice of
the doctrines and uses; that, if they do well, he may stir them up, by
commending their godly care, to go forwards cheerfully; if they do evil, he
may admonish blame, correct, withdraw them, and not desist herein till he
perceive the fruit of application in them. And in this holy work, the
assistance of every Magistrate is required, that he have a special care that
those things which by the benefit of the Ministry God has revealed in his
Word, may flourish in the faith and life of their people, that they may be put
in execution, and so applied that they may bring forth fruit.

Ghost uses the hearer as his instrument, to begin and perfect his own
work in him; which holy duty the hearer is to perform to himself, both at
the Sermon, and also after Sermon: At the Sermon, whilst the hearer by the
benefit and motion of the holy Spirit applies, especially to himself, all
those things which in general were delivered by the Preacher to the whole
Assembly: And after Sermon he is also to make the like application both
publicly and privately: Publicly, whilst with a joyful thanksgiving,
together with the Preacher and the Assembly, he prayseth the name of God, for
his singular and in estimable favor of the revelation of his saving truth unto
him, and by serious and ardent supplication entreat of God, that by the
working of his holy Spirit, he would be pleased to bring to pass, that the
doctrines and uses he has heard may take deep root in his heart, and may in
his whole life abundantly bring forth fruit acceptable to God: And these two
things let him privately continue and often repeat.

But besides, the hearer must privately apply unto himself the doctrines with
the use, in every condition of life, as well in adverse as prosperous times,
and that both before, amongst, and after all his actions: But chiefly when any
perplexed cases, or intricate questions are objected unto us, either by others,
or by our own flesh: But chiefly when Satan sollicities us by his Stratagemes,
sleights and grievous temptations, to errors in the says or life, that is, to
heresies and sins: whilst he endeavors to bring to pass, that either we do
not at all regard the good of virtue, or else perform it not lawfully, or at
the least not with a right end, and so endeavors to bring upon both body and
soul, not only temporary, but eternal dangers.

2 Having showed that God, the Preacher,

3 The impediments of application which are to be abandoned, being such as
hinder the success of Preaching, and cause both doctrines and uses to be
abused, are, First, that vulgar, but most pernicious opinion, that it suffices
to hear the word of God, to understand it, and with a transitory sense of the
fruit and profit thereof to be affected: albeit the practice of it be not
extended through our whole lives. This dangerous conceit is strongly shaken
and overthrown by our Savior in the parable of the Seed, Mat. 13.19 20.21.22.
which falling in three sorts of ground, namely, by the way side, in stony and
thorny ground, was caught away choakt and withered, and all because there was
no application: And no less sweetly cheecked and branded with the note of
deceiving themselves, is the same opinion by the blessed Apostle. Iam. 1.22.23
24.
But above all, that fearful commination of Christ is not to be forgotten:
Luke 12.47
That servant that knew his Masters will, and prepared not himself, nor did
according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes: Nor yet that of the
Apostle, so strongly aggrauated in five verses: Heb. 6.4.5.6.7.8.
That the earth which brings forth Thorns and Briars is reproved, and is near
unto a cursing whose end is to be burned: Therefore let this most vain
persuasion, and perverse custom be blotted out with this consideration; Math.
7.21
That Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but he which does the will of God who is in heaven: Iam. 1.
And those that be hearers of the Word, and not doers, do but deceive their
own selves. by which means application is much hindered, as we may see in
those. Guests that being bidden to the Supper, Luke 16.14
excused themselves by their several employments of seeing a Farm, marrying a
wife, and trying two yoke of Oxen. Fourthly, special care which concerns
every man in his place and calling, is neglected: And this is not the least
impediment of application, and therefore we must labor by Gods grace to take
this out of the way, that the heavenly doctrine may find place. Seventhly,
opus operatum, is not the least poison of application; to wit, a conceit
wherewith many falsely persuade themselves, that it suffices to be Baptized,
at certain times to frequent the Temple, for an hour to hear a Sermon, which
happily may strike the ear, but never wound the conscience; and happily
sometimes with others receive the holy Communion, and perform such other
outward rites and ceremonies; but yet without all understanding, or inward
motion of the heart, or amendment of their lives. that albeit for the present,
they omit and neglect the application; yet there remains a great part of their
time behind, wherein they will express the doctrine in their lives: And if
they chance to fall into any disease, or be brought near death, that then it
will be a fit time to perform these things. Ninthly, Eccl. 8.11
For, Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.
Tenthly, Luke 18.
Eleuenthly, this Diabolical stratageme of Satan in making men believe, that
they may serve two Masters, Math. 6.9 10.11.12
God and the world, God and the flesh, against the manifest truth of our
Saviors own mouth, does also prevail with many men, who would not seem to
be altogether Atheists, not to make any application to themselves of the good
things they hear. Romans 6.1.
to draw the most profitable doctrine of Gods holy Word into an occasion of
sinning. These Impediments and Lets, the Preacher must not only set forth in
his Sermons and conferences, but also the Hearers must with all care and
diligence observe and shun them, as the maine pests of application.

doctrines in the Word of God proposed. He that will be my Disciple, let him
take up his cross, deny himself and follow me: For application must begin at
the mortification of the old man, and it must end at the quickening of the new
man. Thirdly, combat of the flesh and Spirit, the regenerate part, by the
power of God, does ever overcome the vn-regenerate, through the application of
such doctrines as are in Sermons handled out of the sacred Scripture. Fourthly,
that there is some congruity with the will of God revealed in his Word, and
that he has labored something to apply unto himself the heavenly doctrine,
and to conform the actions of his life unto it. This will also stir up in him
thankfulness for the benefit of application, freely bestowed on him, by the
working and motion of the Holy Ghost; and also it will stir him up to prayer,
that there may be granted him the continuance of so great a benefit, and that
at last it may come to perfection in him. And whilst on the other side he
shall behold a discrepancy and dis-agreement of his actions from the doctrines
which are often out of the word of God repeated, and that the application of
them is lame and imperfect, there will begin to arise in him, a certain godly
and health-giuing sorrow for his neglect, and an humble deprecation unto God to
keep him from the evils ensuing such lame and in-sufficient application.
Sixthly,

3 The Hearers duty after Sermons, to the end he may come to the scope and end
of them.

Now we must understand that to the performance of this last duty of hearing,
which is of our exereise after Sermons, a threefold duty is required:

this may be done, either by repeating the Lords Prayer, or any other,
collected from the matter of the Sermon. Thirdly, to sing Psalms with the
multitude, Moses Law, is to be said and applied to every hearer: Numb.
6.22.23.24.25.26.27.
And this is his public duty after Sermons, before the dismission of the
Assembly; Only let me admonish, that it is a custom, of all others most
odious, and least becoming a Christian of all others, which is in many places
used* and whereby this duty is quite neglected: namely, that whilst the
Preacher is in his Sermon, or at least before he have done and given the
people the blessing of God, which is the closure of his Ministry, and seal of
sanctification, some are going out of the Church, and others coming in, as if
it were a Market, and many of the audience do so haste to be out, before the
exhortation be heard concerning things requisite, before giving thanks and
invocation of Gods name, before their praising of God in singing of Psalms,
and before the Ministers blessing of the people, as if they were to hear some
coniurations, execrations, incantations, or cursings and bannings. A great and
manifest argument is this, of no attentive hearing, of no sound knowledge, of
no right affection, nor yet of any serious purpose of practice, when they do
in the very threshold and entrance transgress from tho Kings high way of
Application, therefore this mischief would be opposed as well by the
Magistrate as the Minister, and by all sincere Hearers whatsoever.

Berrhaeans, do enquire, by a godly and moderate examination, of the consent,
or dissent, of Doctrines with the word of God, or from it. Thirdly, that
Masters and Mothers of Families, take an account of their children and
servants, Deuteronomy. 6.7.
touching the Sermons they have heard. Fourthly, that they use godly conference
with others of the things they have heard in Sermons, to the end mutually to
help and edifye one another. Mal. 2.7. Act. 8.30.31.
or such as are better able to satisfy them, then they can themselves, in
things obscure and doubtful. Sixthly,

enabled them. Thirdly, that they promote,

This holy exercise of censure and examination, both of the Preacher and
Hearer, being so necessary, as that without it the very force and sinews of
all Sermons are quite cut asunder, I will commend unto the Reader in as short a
discourse as I can fitly conceive it, considering therein only these three
things: First, what are the miseries which follow and fall upon men, when these
censures and visitations are neglected.

is required of every Christian, as those more proper, required of every man in
his Office and Calling.

2 Now those that are to censure and examine the actions and lives both of
Preachers and Hearers are in a double difference: censures, namely, how he
learnes, and lives according to that he learnes: But for the Hearer his
censure is directed, either to the Minister to himself, or others, for of all
these is he the censurer: to enquire and inform himself, whether the
Preacher himself or others, do Preach, hear and practice as becomes eueryone
of them in their several places and callings: and this he must do, not
only, that God blessing our endeavors, we may be by our selves amended; but
also that mutual and interchangeable admonitions may be used to the common
edification of all. And this is all I will say concerning this private censure
and examination: only this I will beg of God, that he will give such a
measure of grace to all, both Preachers and Hearers, that they may have more
and more, regard of this censure: for the omission of it, or the not diligently
regarding of it, is the only cause why many, and that most, heavenly Sermons
do pass away without fruit or comfort, as too too manifest experience in
every part of this Kingdom shows.

Now the Public Censure and Examination, both of Preachers and Hearers is
either belonging to the Church and Ecclesiastical persons, or to the Politic
and Civil Governors: the Ecclesiastical censure which is ordered by
Ecclesiastical persons, the Civil Magistrates, or persons sometimes assisting
them: is first exercised in the conuentions made by the Minister of every
several Church: Secondly, in Classicke and approved Synods and special
Visitations, where the censure is made by the Visitors and Ministers of
Churches adjoining, and other Political Officers, not only concerning the
Hearers, but also Preachers, Churchwardens, distributers of Alms, Teachers of
School and their Scholars: Thirdly, in general Visitations and Synodes by
Ecclesiastical persons alone, and this is the Ecclesiastical censure. But the
Political censure is that which is done by Political persons: as, first, in
the conuentions of several Cities, Streets and Villages, where an account is
taken of every man by certain Swornemen how they lead their lives: secondly,
betwixt the Ecclesiastical and Political censures and gouernements, none of
them hindering one another, but rather giving each one another, mutual help.

Yea, if we respect the effects of both these censures we shall find in them
an excellent proportion: For those that are found in this censure to be endued
with singular gifts, and to live agreeably to the Word of GOD, and the Laws,
whether they be Preachers or Hearers, are not only for the promotion of Gods
glory, and the public and private salvation both of body and soul to be
commended, but also to be preferred to greater Offices and Places: But seeing
of those Preachers and Hearers who live not agreeably to the Word of GOD, and
the Laws, there are certain degrees; they must be dealt withal according to
the quality of the offense: and here we must observe that both the
Ecclesiastical and Political censures have their certain degrees and
distinct orders of punishing offenders, wherein the said two censures do most
swee^ly conspire and agree. debarring and excluding them from entrance into the
Church; which answers to the exclusion and banishment Political. Fourthly,
yet if not by this means he can be bridoled, then the last remedy is to be
ministered, namely, excommunication, wherewith being cut off from the body of
the Church, he is delivered unto Satan, and this answers to the capital
punishment of death by the Magistrate. And thus do we see the effects of the
Ecclesiastical censure, as well toward Heretics and Schismatiques, as
wicked and ungodly Preachers and Hearers. Now a word of the effects of the
Civil censure against the like offenders, which answers squarely to the
former Ecclesiastical censures.

For first the Civil Magistrate blames, or lays some amercement upon them,
for some grievous offense, by which imprisonment the wicked doer is suspended
from the conversation of men, and deprived of the use of his accustomed meat
and drink, and that by mulct and amercement, something is taken from him which
belongs to the sustentation of his life, and this punishment answers to the
Ecclesiastical suspension. offenders, we should in short time see greater
fruit of the word of God and Sermons, and a most flourishing and happy
condition of Churches, Policies and Families; and not such regardlesnesse and
neglect, nor such impiety, wickedness and scandals as are every where rife.

Ezech. 34.
that he will both by benefits and judgments show in deed that he discernes
betwixt the good and bad Teachers and Hearers, and that it is not all one to
him whether any man do his duty or do it not; and therefore that he may
show that he much regards both the good and godly Teachers and Hearers, he
diueisly powers his benefits upon the^, albeit happily the flesh do often
judge otherwise; but especially he blesses them whilst by his mighty power he
turns their crosses into a wholesome medicine unto them: But that he may show
how much he is offended with ungodly and carnal, both Preachers and Hearers,
and such as make no conscience of Preaching or hearing, and for that cause
takes their works and actions into his most just balance, He does every
where in the Scripture sufficiently declare: but above all by his most severe
judgments inflicted upon men and Nations, for their coldness and remissness
in censuring of ill-hearing and practicing the will of God, which is the last
observation of this discourse. Therefore the miseries and judgments that
befall particular men, and whole Kingdoms, for the neglect of these censures
come now to be considered: Let us behold them in a threefold most grievous
kind of singular punishments: 1. Internal. 2. External. Romans 1. from the 18.
verse to the 17. of the second chapter, what shall we think will he lay upon
them who have had that excellent light of the sacred Scripture, and yet have
neither rightly in their Sermons handled that Treasure, nor yet attentively
heard it, much less soundly understood it, and carried a right and holy
affection toward it? Is not this most heavy censure and judgment of the
Apostle verified of them, 2. Tim. 3.
They have a show of godliness, but have denied the power thereof: Ever
learning but never coming to the knowledge of the truth? Surely this fearful
punishment seems to be at this day powered out upon the greatest part of
those who have taken possession of the word of God, and boast thereof, but have
utterly denied the power thereof: either wickedly corrupting it, or else not
exercising themselves in it with that care, reverence and zeal that becomes;
or still hearing of it, but without profit, understanding or fruit: and
whosoever shall vn-partially view either the state of the Popish, or yet the
reformed Church, shall not be able to deny this truth. O that he who is the
Author of all true light, and enlightening truth, even God himself, would be
pleased to take this pest and infectious evil, both from the Preachers and
Hearers who are infected with it; least at length themselves be taken away, and
cast into eternal darkness and extreme torments both of soul and body.
Secondly, the fearful external plague and punishment of God does often
follow the internal: Leu. 26. Deuteronomy. 32. Ezech. 5.16.17. Ezech. 14.21.
Cities and Towns, of which sort there are four remembered in the Scriptures,
as plague, war, famine and beasts.

There is no question but it is a fearful thing to be afflicted with any of
these plagues; but yet more fearful if two at once be sent upon a people;
and yet more fearful if three concur together, as we read there did at
the siege of Jerusalem, which would not know the time of her visitation: but of
all most horrible is it, if all four at once be inflicted upon men, which
happened to the Jews who contemned the word of the Lord, in the time of Jeremy
and Ezekiel: And surely the censure of God is most grievous; we have had our
parts of it in a high measure, the plague taking away in one year in one Town
37000, besides the infinite numbers that died thereof in every quarter of the
Land; waters breaking into the maine and drowning men, women, goods, and much
riches: Fires breaking forth and devouring whole Towns, with infinite
treasures; to speak nothing of famine; that has much infested us for many
years together: yet are we all secure, carnal, blind, slothful, petulant
and most peevish and perverse, both Teachers and Hearers, either not
ministering due censures and visitations, or not enduring them to be
administered: but except we be rowsed up, their rests yet more grievous things
to fall upon us, as these are; Thirdly, eternal punishments of body and soul:
Mat. 13.34
from the Harvest where the wheat shall be purged from the cockle and tares
which was sown whilst men slept; secondly, from the separation of the good
fish from the bad; thirdly, Mat. 13.43
from the rewarding of the faithful servant, Mat. 24.44
and punishing of the unfaithful: fourthly, from the coming of the
Bridegroom, Mat. 25.1.
where the five wise Virgins (by which vigilant Preachers and Hearers are
noted) do enter into the Marriage Chamber of heaven with the Bride and
Bridegroom; but the five foolish Virgins (by whom slothful, carnal and
wicked Preachers and Hearers are meant) are thrust out from the joyful
Marriage; fifthly, from the account which the Lord requires of them to whom he
trusted his Talents; Mat. 25.14
sixthly, Mat. 25.31
from the Judge before whom an infinite multitude of men stood to be censured;
Mat. 25.32
seventhly, from the Shepeheard separating the Sheep from the Goats: and the
same concluding censure of Christ, John Baptist remembers by purging the
Floor, Math. 3.12
and separating the Chafe from the Wheat.

In this censure and trial of Christ's, touching blind guides, and lame
followers, no clamours nor answers will be of any force, such as are at this
day heard; where the worst of men do boast of the Lord, his Word, and Glory:
For Christ shall say, Math. 7.21 22.23.
Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into my Kingdom, but he
that does the will of my father which is in heaven, etc. Nor shall the vain
excuses and shifts of those that are blindly led then avail them, such as many
now a days use, as if only the Preachers must give an account, and not every
Hearer who suffered themselves to be seduced: Shall it not be said to them,
If the blind lead the blind, shall they not both fall into the ditch? Namely,
the Ditch burning with fire and brimstome, Apoc. 21.18.
which is the second death. O thou most sharp and exquisite Censor and Judge
of Mankind, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, do thou in mercy rowse and raise
both Preachers and Hearers from their sound sleep of sin: let them know and
acknowledge that this is the time of thy most gracious visitation, that they
may be more careful and patient of thy most wholesome censure, that they may
not be enforced to bear that thy most heavy censure internal, external,
eternal: but may joyfully be brought into their heavenly Country, and be
with Thee, and thy holy Angels, blessed, internally, externally; eternally:
Amen.

The second Days Labor of a Christian to the end that be may arrive at the
Port of Heaven, is to Meditate on sacred Things, for the further enabling of
him in the course of godliness.
AMongst all the exercises of a spiritual life, as there i^ none more
difficult then the prayer of the mind, and meditation of the heart, so there
is none more necessary: which thing is abundantly manifested, as well by the
infinite testimonies of most holy men, as also by reason, daily use and
experience it self, so that it is no wonder, if to get the practice thereof
there be great care, diligence and desire required of every man. To the happy
learning of this holy Art, there are two Schoole-maisters very necessary:
First,

But besides, that we may not fail in setting down a right course of
Meditation, two things are to be considered: namely, the Method and Ma^^er of
Meditation: for it is very fit that we know beforehand, as well the manner how
to meditate, as the matter and object about which our mind is to be employed;
else the want of either of these may so hinder our proceedings, that we shall
not be able either to bestow our minds in this holy exercise, or to continue
in it with that benefit which is to be expected from it. And this exercise
comes very near the nature of prayer, if we define prayer, Chrysostom.
as some of the Fathers have done, to be a colloquy and speech with God; or an
ascending of the mind toward God: Damas.
for Meditation generally signifies all the inward acts of the understanding,
will, and other powers of the soul, when they are directed to God, and things
above.

And indeed, Meditation is nothing else but a discourse of the understanding,
and studious intention of the mind, diligently insisting about the finding out
of something, I say of the understanding, either exhorting us unto that which
is good, or dissuading us from that which is evil: and so weighing and
digesting the godly things we hear or read to the work of prayer, even as
the food whereby the will is fed and made strong, and for this cause the
manner of Meditation is to be framed according to the work of our will;
namely, that Meditation may be used as an instrument whereby the will may be
affected with that, and unto that, which is holy and good; and for that cause
may neither make too much have, nor yet be too slow, but only may in such a
sort be exercised, as may best serve the heart, that when the will becomes
inflamed it may be interrupted, until that heat being well allayed, it be
fit to fall to it again; for more labor must be bestowed upon the affection
then the meditation it self, insomuch that by how much the meditation is
shorter, by so much is the prayer more happy, being made fruitful by the
affection multiplied upon it.

In a word, that we may come to speak of the matter and manner of meditation
as we have proposed, this first understand: that meditation is in two sorts
performed: first, when we meditate of things which may be perceived by the
senses, under corporal representations, as of the acts of Christ's Passion:
secondly, or of things intellectual, as of the goodness and excellent beauty
of God, which albeit they may be conceived under some corporal imaginations,
yet they do not properly require it; but the whole thing it self, without the
help of any representation, is done by the understanding. And according to
these two manners of meditation, the presence of God is distinguished: first,
an imaginary presence, according to the first kind of meditation: secondly, an
intellectual presence, according to the second kind. Now the presence of God
is a certain application of the mind and affection, to God and heavenly
things, conceived either after an imaginary or intellectual manner; which
application is most necessary in all our Meditations.

Now come we to show those two things, which I said before were principal
helps to those that would meditate aright, and those are the matter and
method or form of meditation.

body of Christian doctrine, from the one end of the Catechism to the other.

Besides, thou may often meditate to what end this noble Creature Man, and
this glorious frame of the world was made: for that is the foundation of all
our salvation and perfection: and that it shall not herein be amiss to
follow the wisdom and direction of our Church, insisting in her steps for our
help in this godly exercise: This we shall do, if on the solemn days of
prayer and holy exercises, we shall diligently weigh with our selves, such
Mysteries of Religion as are on those days proposed to be read and expounded
to the people: If on the Feasts of the Saints of God, we reuolue in our minds,
their lives, deaths, virtues, and memorable acts, together with the glory they
have now happily attained. If upon the Aduents of our Lord Jesus Christ we
shall duly consider the Mysteries of his holy Incarnation and Nativity: If in,
and during the Lent, we seriously meditate on the holy Gospels appointed to
be read daily: If upon the Lords day, we consider with our selves the
resurrection of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, or the general resurrection
of all men, and the happiness which those that die in the Lord shall attain
unto, which the Lords day does represent unto us; or the benefits of God, or
the Gospel of that day: or do so dispose of these four points, that every
month, containing four Lords days, we at once perform these, allotting unto
every Lords day these several points. If also on such days wherein we
receive the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we enter into diligent
meditation of the Mysteries of that heavenly Sacrament, or of the passion and
death of the Lord Jesus, whereof that was instituted a memorial. If at such
seasons as these, and also when we shall have been present at Sermons, we
presently after, or within a convenient time enter into meditation and
repetition of things heard and conceived: then shall we make right use of the
Churches wisdom and direction, and find most apt matter for meditation.

And let us know this withal, that every Christian ought very often to handle
and meditate on that virtue which he knows himself to stand most in need of;
and on that vice which he chiefly desires to have extinguished in himself: for
as the body does more desiringly seek after, and more profitably and readily
digest those meats which are most pleasant and agreeable to the palate and
taste; in like manner the soul should more frequently meditate, and as it were
feed it self with those things which are to it more tastefull and profitable:
for I am fully perfwaded that the rule of Physicians is as true in spiritual
things as in coporall: quod sapit, nutrit, That which is sauory to the taste is
nourishing to the stomach.

Only to end this point, let these three things be observed in the matter of
Meditation: first, that great care be used in the beginning of every week or
month, in preparing of fit and sufficient matter of meditation which may serve
for that whole time: secondly, if it so fall out any day, that just occasion of
changing our appointed matter of meditation be offered, as Sermons, or solemn
exercises of prayer, and the like, then we must defer the meditation of that
day until the next day following: thirdly, albeit there is much benefit
arising from a settled course of prefixing to our selves certain matters to be
meditated on, from week to week, and month to month, yet may every one
meditate on other matters in one and the same day; and because these few
matters of meditation following, seem to be more profitable and necessary to
every Christian then the rest, every Christian may besides other matters of
meditaon, take every week these in order into his meditation: namely, first,
to meditate on Monday upon death; secondly, on Tuesday, upon the last
judgment; thirdly, on Wednesday, upon the torments of hell; fourthly, on
Thurseday upon the glory of heaven; fifthly, on Friday upon the Passion of
Christ; sixthly, on Saturday upon his sins; and seventhly on the Lords day,
upon the benefits of God bestowed on Mankind.

good materials for building, if he want the skill to use them in building;
and little benefit or none is had by knowing the matters whereon we ought to
meditate, unless we also know the manner how to meditate on them: Ambr.
For Ignorantia ordinis and modi quibus operandum est plurimum turbat meriti
qualitatem: The ignorance of the order and manner wherewith a man must work
does very much trouble the quality of a man's desert: nor is it to be thought
that we have attained the full knowledge of any thing, albeit we know what we
ought to do, unless withal we know the order and manner of proceeding in
it, and how we ought to do it: therefore I will only set before your eyes
certain short methodes and forms of meditation upon every of the matters of
meditation before named, and such as are easy for every vulgar capacity to
learn and frequent.

1 Concerning Death these things may be chiefly considered and meditated.







Or thus.



of the body, the loss of our senses, deprivation of sound reason, departure
of the natural heat, anxieties and troublednesse of the mind, strong
temptations, and often fearful visions.



Or thus.







2 Of the last Judgment these things are principally to be meditated.

Math. 24.
the powers of heaven shall be shaken, and all the kinreds of the earth shall
then mourn.

2. Pet. 3.
There shall be a new heaven and a new earth, this present world being burnt
up with fire.

Adam at the blast of a trumpet.





Mat. 25.41
and of them that have done evil to infinite and eternal vengeance and
torment of body and soul, of which sentence every word is advisedly to be
pondered.



3 How to meditate on the torments of hell.

In this meditation thou may contemplate these three points: first, Here
then consider that whatsoever is in hell is eternal. First, the damned
himself is eternal, not only in soul but in body too, so that neither
himself nor any other can kill him, nor will God bring him to naught: They
shall seek death but shall not find it: They shall desire to die, Apoc. 9.6.
but death shall flee from them, so that God shall be so far from fulfilling
their desires, that their mad desire to be brought to nothing shall increase
their horrible torment, in seeing they cannot obtain what they so infinitely
desire: Secondly, Eccles. 1.4.
for as the earth and heaven are eternal, so is hell also: Thirdly, Esaias 30.
For the breath of the Lord as a River of brimestone does kindle it; so that it
is not extinguished not consumed, Esaias 66.
and yet does ever burn: Fourthly, and nourished, shall have no end, and the
lively apprchension of sin and the punishment of it shall never cease, Mar. 9.
neither shall the cruel biting of it whereby it wounds the conscience, ever
have any end: From hell there is no redemption: no price sufficient to ransom
them:

And here further meditate: first, or diminution for a moment; nay rather, by
how much more as their wicked lives have been occasions of others damnations,
by so much their torments increase: secondly, Psalm. 73.
fury, envy, impatience, and madness increases: thirdly, Apoc. 19.
a most filthy place, respect of goodness, nobility, kindred, consanguinity,
friendship or fidelity, all shall be capital enemies one to another, loading
one another with all kind of torments and vexations; none can endure the fight
of another, the father shall detest the son, the wife her husband, cursing
and biting one another, and most those that have been accomplices in evil shall
now be more mad one against another; and yet, that which makes it worse, they
shall in despite be enforced to be together for ever, so that if they fly
from some whom they hated, they shall fall upon another more hateful, and to
make up the full measure of misery, he shall be compeld for ever to dwell
with his enemies that hate him, curse him, and yet can neither stop their
mouths, nor his own ears; nay, he shall see none that wishes him well, or
bemones him, but all increasing his sorrow. into the cruelty of the tortures
themselves: for, first, continuing, so vn-changeable, so eternal? If it be a
pain vn-expressible to lie a few weeks waking under some little sickness,
and on a soft bed, how vn-speakeable a torment is it, to endure these torments
so vn-vtterable?

express unto us, is there in a most unspeakable manner.

of this torment, they shall be shut out from beholding the gracious face of
Jesus Christ, which the Angels desire to behold.

4 How to meditate on the glory of Heaven.





viz. Vision, Possession, and Fruition of God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.



the blessed shall enjoy in all their senses, no sense but shall have his full
delight, and that in a more perfect manner then can in this world be enjoyed,
or by man's heart conceived.



viz. the greatness, the blessedness, the riches, the glory, of that heavenly
Mansion.

altogether Spiritual, so that without any let, it can penetrate all other
solid bodies.

love of God and our neighbors, and the infinite pleasure and exultation
arising therefrom.



Magdalens, not one Martha; all outward action, and worldly negotiation, shall
cease and be quite banished.

of that eternal happiness together.



There are also other forms of meditating upon this glory of heaven: as,
first, want, comparing them together, that so they may make the stronger
impression in thy mind.

5 How to meditate on the things that belong to the knowledge of a man's self.

Ber.
present, and to come: a course of meditation much commended and practiced by
the godly; and here thou art to ponder:

to others for a rule herein: first, thy self what thou art,



Moses. Deuteronomy. 32.29. Oh that they were wise, then they would understand this;
they would consider their latter end. First, Required that thou be wise: viz.
thou have omitted to do:

whence he has his being and well being; first,



6 How to meditate on the matter of our sins.

committed in thought, word, or deed, or by omission of our duties: Or to
meditate in what manner we have sinned against God, our neighbor, or our
selves, and so provoked Gods vengeance against us.

But we must here be very careful in the calling to mind of our sins, that we
do not too much fix upon the memory of carnal sins, nor of anger and revenge;
and withal let it be observed that the frequent memory of our fore-spent life
is very profitable to a man that professes Religion, so that if he do
sometime make his whole meditation of it running over the whole course of his
life for the space of a quarter of an hour, which may easily be done, if he
divide his whole life into so many parts as are the places wherein he has
dwelt: he shall find it no fruitless labor.

of it:

on Luxury; fourthly, Wednesday, on Envy; fifthly,

7 How to meditate on the death of Christ.

Mary, until the ascension of Christ into heaven to be meditated on.



Bethlem, Egypt, seven years, or thereabouts: fourthly, Nazareth, twenty two
years and more: fifthly, Iudaea and Galile^, Preaching three years and a
half: seventhly,

4 Another manner of meditating hereon is to distribute the life of Christ into
three parts: kind of entrance he had into the world, what kind of
entertainment he had in it, what he did in it, and how he departed out of
the world: and on every one of these to frame one, or more meditations.

Dixit multa, fecit mira, Ber.
pertulit dura: He spoke many things, he did wonderful things, but he
suffered cruel things: and hereof also may several meditations be used upon
every one of these.



8 How to meditate on the Passion of Christ.

our selves one of the Mysteries to be meditated, according to the order of
the Text of the Gospel, until his death and burial.



Annas: fourthly, before Caiphas: Pilates house: sixthly, Herod's house:
seventhly, Pilate: Caluary carrying his Cross: ninthly, Caluary it self.

seven sentences which he spoke in those three hours he hanged on the
Cross, which every Christian ought to commend to memory: first, Father forgive
them for they know not what they do: Verily I say unto thee this day shall
thou be with me in Paradise: Woman behold thy Son, etc. fourthly, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me: I thirst: It is finished: seventhly, Father,
into thy hands I commend my Spirit.

viz. what he suffered in his Soul, in his Body, in his Honor, taking the
matter of his meditation from the sacred books of the Gospels, and making one
or more meditations thereof.

and how he suffered.

of his infinite goodness and love. Thus may we every week consider all these
ends, if every day we propose to our selves one of these; or if in the
consideration of every point of the Lords Passion, we stir up in our selves,
one or more, of these affections.

9 How to meditate on the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper.





Melchisedec brought forth to Abraham; by the Paschall Lamb; by the heavenly
Manna; by the stony Rock that gushed out water; by the bread of Elias.



spiritual adversary, and filles it full of joy and the marrow of devotion, if
with due preparation, and a lively faith, and assured purpose of amendment of
life it be receiured and digested.



Besides, we may also consider these things which appertain to the due
preparation of the Receiver, which we may rank in this order: 2. before the
receiving of it, purity and desire arising from the fountains of true faith
and repentance for our sins: 2. at the Communion humility and charity; and 2.
after the Communion, thanksgiving and amendment of life. Whosoever comes thus
furnished, receives the unspeakable benefits of all Christ's Sufferings and
Merits.

10 How to meditate on the benefits of God.

calling unto the knowledge and service of God; and these may be meditated on
every week, one for every day: Secondly, the other contains the special
benefits peculiar to every man, as that he is borne of good parents, that he
is of a good and healthful constitution of body, that he has been preserved
from many dangers and calamities; and such other special benefits which he
knows himself to have received from God.





11 How to meditate on the feasts of the Saints of God.

In considering these 3. things; first, their preferment,

12 How to meditate on Christian virtues.

The chief virtues of a Christian, are these; faith, hope, love of God and
man, the fear of God, prudence, justice, humility, patience, obedience,
meekness, chastity, sobriety, mercy, simplicity, modesty, magnanimity,
perseverance, commendable silence, and the like: in considering these virtues,
we may either comprise diverse of them in one Meditation, or divide one of them
into many meditations: or else we may daily consider in our minds, these
virtues, or some one of them, which may be well put in the list of the former;
as the contempt of the world, the dis^esteeming of our selves, the ^eale of
souls, devotion, diligence in the service of God, concord, truth, fidelity,
liberality, purity, gratitude thankfulness, and repentance.

1 But in my opinion the most profitable way to meditate on any virtue, is to
observe these points following: first, what is that virtue, whereon I meditate,
as for the purpose, what is humility, or charity; and wherein to be humble or
charitable consists: secondly, how excellent, profitable, and necessary that
virtue is, considering especially what benefits it brings with it: thirdly, how
much it pleases God, and how acceptable it makes him to GOD that is indewed
with it: fourthly, what examples and admonitions Christ left behind him
touching that virtue: fifthly, how detestable, hurtful, and displeasing unto
God is that vice which is contrary to that virtue: sixthly, how far I have
hitherto bin from that virtue, and yet am, and what is the cause I am so far
from it: seventhly, what hence-foorth is my task and duty to do; namely, what
means I must use, and what impediments I must shun that I may obtain that
virtue.

on the virtues, in considering any virtue in the person of Christ, and
weighing these 3. points: first, with what examples the Son of God did trace
this virtue out unto us: secondly, what he spoke or did concerning that
virtue, remembering some sentences thereof: thirdly, why he said and did so: for
my information and imitation: And thus in one wecke, one may meditate on the
seven more principal virtues of Christ: On the Lords day meditating of his
Love; Monday, his Humility; Tuesday, his Patience; Wednesday, his Obedience;
Thurseday, his Meekness; Friday, his Poverty; Saturday, his Chastity.

Math. 5.
and in every of them to ponder these three things; first, the sentence it
self, which contains two points, the virtue, and thereward of that virtue;
secondly, how excellently this virtue shined in Christ; thirdly, how far I am
from that virtue, how great profit it would bring me if I had it, and what
harm I have by wanting it.

13 How to meditate on the creatures of God.

It is a most divine Truth, that by the due consideration of the creatures of
God, man may attain to a very high pitch of the knowledge of the Creator of
them: Romans 1.
for there is not the least creature in the world, but does demonstrate
evidently, the power, the wisdom, and goodness of its Maker: Therefore
whosoever will profit in GODS School, he must wholly addict himself to the
reading of the book of the creatures of this great and most beautiful world;
which book is opened to every eye, and the Lecture is read obuious to the
meanest capacity, therefore out of this book every man is frequently to
meditate on what he reads there. The manner of his meditation must be
either: first, on all the creatures of this world together, or secondly on some
one creature; and therein to consider the power, wisdom, and goodness of God.
And he shall do well every hour (necessity not taking him away) whilst he
beholds any creature, as Horse, Flower, and the like, to lift up his heart unto
God, and consider with himself who made it, and how many footsteps of the
power, wisdom and goodness of God do appear in it.

1 Then in meditating on the creatures in general, he shall consider: first,
that the greatness of this world does demonstrate the greatness of the
Creator of it: secondly, the multitude and variety of things; the infinite
perfections that are in God: thirdly, the beautiful frame and order of this
world; the unsearchable wisdom of God: fourthly, the benefits and profits
we reap by the creatures; the goodness of God: fifthly, the beauty of this
world, sets forth the admirable beauty, comeliness and glory of God: sixthly the
roundnesse of the world, wanting beginning and end; the Eternity and
Euerlastingnesse of God: seventhly, the unity of the world, in that but one
world, demonstrates the unity of God: eighthly, the abundance of the good
things we receive from the creatures; the liberality of God: ninthly, the
s^^nenesse and constancy of the world, in that still remaining in one state;
the immutability of God.

qualities and effects of that creature: fifthly, how often and much we have
abused this creature.

14 How to meditate on the Perfections and Attributes of God.

This meditation, as it is of all other the most fit for the learned, so of all
others it is the most excellent, some therefore of his Divine Attributes are
these: his infinite Essence, his Power, Goodness, Wisdom, Love, Mercy,
Justice, Providence, Liberality, Patience, Gentleness. In all, and every of
which it behoues us to know and consider the works and effects which God has
shown concerning these: to which purpose we must call to mind the examples
and sentences of the holy Scripture, which indeed do bring no small help
hereunto. As for example, to the knowledge of the Essence of God, this sentence
of the Prophet does much further us: I fill heaven and earth: Ier. 2. Act. 3.
and that of Paul, In him we live, move, and have our being: to set forth his
Power, that in the Psalm helps much: He spoke the word, Psalm. 32.
and they were made; and so of the rest.



Ier. 23.
and is every where present: Heb. 11.
and therefore do thou ever think thou see him that is invisible by thee:
secondly, how he is present in every place, namely, by his essence, Esaias 46.
and he is within me more inti^^ously joined then the soul is within the body,
and after a more excellent manner, so that his infinite goodness within me
gives me the being and life I have: his wisdom, the light and knowledge I
have: and his omnipotency the power I have to do any thing; and so I ought
to behold God within me most present, even as if I were his house and
habitation, where he is, and does whatsoever I am, have, or do, without whose
presence, I should presently cease to be, and turn to nothing; from which I may
conceive affections of joy, admiration, trust and love, seeing my self thus
joined unto GOD. Hence must I accustom my self to search for GOD within my
self: for if within me, why should I weary my self to seek for him only
without my self?

3 If I would meditate of his infinite wisdom and knowledge: first, I
consider that by it he knows himself, his essence, all his infinite
perfections: also all his own Acts, Intentions, Decrees, Dispositions, and
all things that he can do, so that nothing can escape his knowledge.
Secondly, measure, comprehending the number of all things which were, are, or
shall be, and of all their parts, members, offices and works; the weight of
every one of them, in quantity or weight of their propensions and affections,
natural and supernatural: the measure of every one of them length, breadth,
thickness, and depth, and the very measure of their perfection, talenesse and
faculties of them. de nouo, which before he knew not; because nothing can be
new unto him: for all things past, present and to come, and which by any means
are possible, he knows distinctly and evidently, without all mixture of
doubt, opinion or perplexity. Whence I learn that as God forgets not me, but
remembers me and all mine so distinctly as if I were in the world alone, so I
should never forget my God, nor the things that belong unto him.

Luke 1.
without any limits or bounds: nothing is impossible with God. Secondly,
Thirdly, must we give diligence that the whole structure of our lives, and of
our considerations may chiefly depend upon these three fingers of Gods
Wisdom, Omni-potencie, and Goodness, to which the actions and affections of
these three Divine Virtues, of Faith, Hope and Charity may answer: For Faith
answers unto his Wisdom, Hope to his Omni-potencie, and Charity to his
Goodness: Albeit all the three virtues and their actions, respect the three
Attributes of God together.

Psalm. 76.
for in the midst of punishment he cannot forget to be merciful. Thirdly,
Hab. 3.
that the latitude of his mercy reaches to all his creatures, Sap. 11. Psalm.
35.
and all their miseries, yea even to the bruit beasts. Fourthly, Psalm. 5.
expecting ^^ely their repentance, that he night cast their sins into the
^ottome of the Sea, Mich. 3.
and put them as far from them as the East is from the West: Psalm 102 Math. 18
He forgiues seventy times seven times, Ergo, should I be merciful toward
any neighbor in imitation of his ^ercies unto me; Ergo, may I also conceive
great confidence of his mercy to me a sinner. Fifthly, Romans 9.
This mercy of his toward his Elect is Eternal, Psalm. 102
having neither beginning nor ending, but is even as God himself from
everlasting to everlasting; this mercy preuents, accompanies and follows them
even to the last gasp: Romans 8
This mercy is most high, Ier. 31.
for it aduanceth the elect to most excellent good things, Psalm. 107.
so that as the heaven is higher then the earth, Psalm. 35. Psalm. 102.
so is his mercy greater then their misery. Sixthly and lastly, he has
expressed his Mercy in the most exact manner that can be possible; For seeing
as God he could not be sorrowful for our hurt, which is an effect of mercy,
his infinite Mercy provided that his Son should take our nature on him, Heb.
2.
that he might in all things be like his brethren (sin excepted) and so
become merciful and sorrowful for us: nay, not content to have inward
compassion, he took on him all our miseries and pains: Heb. 4.
and has not so left us, but by his Word and Sacraments, he helps our
necessities and infirmities, considering we are but men and stand in need of
many remedies.

which are in the creatures infinitely more excellent then in them. 1. Reg. 1.
Psalm. 141.
I will pour out my prayer before him: Nay, I will pour out my heart before
him. O thou infinite Goodness, which chiefly desire to be communicated, if
thou did not communicate thy goodness, it were impossible there should be
any goodness besides thee, make me partaker of these excellencies wherewith
thou have communicated thy self, that I may love thee, serve thee, obey thee,
not for fear, but of love, willingly; not for my own benefit, but only for
thy service; not with a sparing mind and heart, but with a liberal and
generous Spirit. Thus may we meditate of all Gods other Attributes.

15 How to meditate on the Lords Prayer, or any words of the holy Scripture.

In meditating on either of them it is very good to pause and stay so long upon
every word of the Lords Prayer, or any sentence of Scripture, as long as our
souls should find any relish or profit by it. In every Petition I may
meditate on these points following.

1 Hallowed be thy Name; Commandments, and all the first Table chiefly
treates: This is the first work of a Christian, to wish that Gods name may be
sanctified, and his own name may be condemned and obscured; namely, that God
may be known such as he is in heaven and in earth, that he may have all
honor and glory, that there be no creature in which he be dishonored,
polluted and blasphemed, but as he is holy in himself, so he may be taken by
all his creatures: Fourthly,

2 Thy Kingdom come; In which meditate: first, by which the Church is
gathered, which God rules with his holy Spirit, and the abolishing of the
Kingdom of sin and Satan, as also all the means that conduct thereunto; as
on the one side, the word of God, the Ministry of the Gospel, the holy Ghost,
Faith, Love, Unity, etc. and on the other, errors, abuses, false doctrine,
heresies, schisms and the like. the greatest, for he comes from Gods House,
he is a King of his Kingdom: Ergo, when we put our selves into the service
of the devil, and become instruments of his wrath, how much worse are we then
the prodigal son that kept Swine? When we commit idolatry, whooredome,
covetousness, gluttony, drunkenness, envy, hatred, rancor and malice, is it
not worse then to be in Sampsons case, overcome by a harlot? Fourthly,

3 Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven: In this meditate; first, Ioh.
6. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
also our sanctification, and that all sorts of men may rightly and faithfully
do their duty and obey God, that all the contumacy of all men and creatures
being tamed, their wills may be to his so subject, that the same thing which
he wills, he will effect that we also may will and do the same. he will
frame in us new minds and new hearts, that we ask nothing of our selves, but
rather that his Spirit may govern our desires to have a full consent with God,
that we may have obedience, patience, perseverance in the cross, and all this
so perfectly as the Angels in heaven do perform his Will. Fourthly,

Give us this day our daily bread: meditate herein, first, do we the sons
of God ask necessaries of God: And the will of God cannot be done in us,
except we be nourished with the bread of God: with that which by lawful means
does come unto us, as out of the hand of God: thirdly, because, albeit that it
be the blessing of God, yet it is destinated unto us for our conservation, as
necessary for us: fourthly, because, as the corporal food, so the bread of
Life, the word of God is ours: fifthly, only to seek our own safety and
preservation, but even the safety and preservation of al men; tenthly,

And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us:
will give it: secondly, that we first beg remission of our sins presently
after the demand of daily bread; lest any should think himself unworthy of
his daily bread, which is due to the children, and not to dogs, and should
therefore pray more slowly and doubtfully: thirdly, with great desire of heart
to ask remission: we show our selves to be his sons: secondly, because GOD
would have us admonished of our duty and the care of charity, that if any
ancient enmity cleave to our minds, we should cast it off; for except we be
easy to forgive others, we can expect nothing but the inexorable rigor of
severity: thirdly, because we have no hope of salvation, except we also forgive
others: fourthly, that we might know, we must every day forgive others, as we
do daily sin.

Lead us not into temptation, etc. Meditate, first, that temptations are
nothing else but Satan's sleights and deceipts wherewith he still sets upon us,
and would circumuent us without Gods help; so that we beg, first, help us
with his power, and sustain us with his hand, that under his custody we may
be safe:

16 How to prepare our selves to meditate.

But because this labor of meditation is one of the greatest and most
difficult works of a Christian, before I shut up this Lecture, I must first
leave you certain necessary instructions without which you can never come to
the perfection of this duty, nor come to the practice and use of this method:
And I will herein observe these three points; first, the things which ought to
go before our meditaons; secondly, that accompany them; thirdly, that follow
them.

to meditate, together with the circumstances, place, time, persons, and other
appurtenances: for the knowledge of the fact, is the foundation of meditation;
Ergo, good it is to read the Text, or to bring it to fresh memory. the points
of our meditation are diligently to be looked over, and committed to memory;
and one may take a paper containing the points to be meditated, and lay before
him for memories sake. Fifthly, considering with himself what it is that he
is to do, and to what end. upon the point of putting himself to meditation,
let him cast himself down upon his knees, or use such humble and devout
reverence and gesture of body as is most agreeable, and with his heart and
mind lift up, let him consider with himself, on the one side, the greatness
of God and his presence; on the other, his own baseness and multitude of his
sins, and yet notwithstanding that his so infinite Majesty, that he
vouchsafes us free access and audience when we come, saying with the blessed
Patriarch; Shall I speak unto my Lord being but dust and ashes? Tenthly, in
the observation of all these instructions, but yet without scruple or trouble
of conscience, if at any time he forget any of them: for it often falls out, to
such as meditate much, that without so much preparation they are admitted to
many heavenly secrets: Only our part is to use diligence, that we omit not
the things which are necessary.

sufficiency is from God. Secondly, preparatiues, which are things going
before meditation and making way for it, that it may the more easily enter. Now
after the preparatory prayer, for the most part there are two preparatiues;
which that we may know how they are to be made, we must observe, that the
matter of meditation is of two natures, the one corporal, such as is the
nativity of Christ, the other spiritual, such as is sin: When we are to
meditate on corporal and visible things, the first preparatiue is to imagine
and conceive the place and persons as if they were present; as for the purpose,
if we would meditate on Christ's Nativity, Joseph her husband, these are to be
represented unto us in our imagination, but yet without any violent action of
the head or brain: The second preparatiue is to beg of God such grace as
that we may ob^aine the true end which we ^imed at in meditation, namely,
sorrow for our sins, the love of God, the knowledge of a man's self, or some
other end agreeable ^o the meditation.

But if the matter of meditation be spiritual, we must then use another
kind of representation, namely, the soul to be in the body as in a prison,
man to be in this vale of tears, exiled amongst brute beasts: or to think
himself entrenched with devils or Angels; or to imagine a voice discending
from heaven, or Christ, or some of his Apostles, pronouncing the words which
he has taken to meditate on: That is the first preparatiue, and the second is
as before, to beg of God to direct him to the right end of meditation. The
third are Colloquies and speeches with God, are nothing else but prayers unto
God: and of necessity every meditation and contemplation must have some
colloquy or speech with God joined unto it, in which thanks are given unto
him, remission of sins, increase, or confirmation of graces, and other
necessaries are to be begged of God. Now in this business we will open these
three things; first, to the rich, the guilty to the Judge, the Sick to the
Physician, and so take upon him the person of the Prodigal child, of the
blind, lame, or any other troubled with any infirmity: and secondly,

may provide for them, and deliver the matter and method of continuing
meditation, and making some progress therein, we must consider these following
points, which in every matter whatsoever must be used.

Therefore observe that the matter of all meditation being either corporal or
spiritual: If it be corporal, these circumstances are to be considered;
first, Mary, the Apostles, and their qualities, virtues, excellencies and
offices: secondly,

But if it be a spiritual matter, the^ these things come to be considered:

But yet in this most heavenly part of a Christians exercise, these things are
further to be considered: first, that if in meditating the soul find matter
of profit in the first or second point, we must not have to the rest, but
insist upon it as long as is needful, and end with a colloquy and prayer:
Secondly, Psalm. 38.
Now the affections which are to be stirred up in the will in meditating, are
love, fear, sorrow, joy, hope, desire, admiration, and confusion and shame of
ones self: Ergo, our meditation must not be dry, not stay in pure
speculation, but affectuous and full of inward taste and relish, so that from
every point considered some fruit may arise, and that he who meditates may
from the things he understands make some reflection into himself, and propose
to himself the execution of such things as in his meditation he learned:
Thirdly, Job, Job 14.
or such like, Man that is borne of a woman is of short continuance, and full
of miseries: If on Gods love toward man, then that of our Savior, God so
loved the world, John 3.
that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believed in him should
not perish, but have everlasting life: world; and if we would contemplate the
torments of hell, to compare them to the most grievous punishments and evils of
this world: Fifthly, senses: Eccles. 10.
may not deprive us of the benefit of meditation, we must against them use
these remedies. First, good of our selves, and therefore to esteem our selves
most unworthy to speak with God, or stand in his presence: seventhly, first
labor to stand in a firm hope and trust in God, Job, n="2" Job 2.
for, shall we receive good things at the hand of God and not evil? the last
thing to be done is to enter into examination touching this meditation, and
also touching our whole lives: the first is thus to be done.

Thou art first then either sitting, if any profitable point in meditation be
understood, note it in some paper, that after thou may use it to thine own
benefit, or to thy neighbors: sixthly, succeeded, what profit was had by it,
what impediment was found in it. And to this purpose must a certain time be
limited to perform it in, as Wednesday and Saturday in the morning and
evening, and so duly observed.

the soul for the sins that day committed: day with day, and week with
week, that he may see how he profits, and incessantly desire Gods
assistance to mortify and overcome that Infirmity. This re-collection of a
man's self, and often entering into the privy chamber of his soul, setting
himself (by the benefit of imagination) ever in the presence of God, having
one eye to the hour, or day past, and another to that to come, will in short
time bring a Christian to the greatest measure of perfection that in this world
he can arrive at; and briefly consists in these three: first, exercise; for
thus shall he be preserved in a continual devotion, and grow to a most
sovereign familiarity with God, which is the perfection of man in this world.

The Third Days Journey of the Soul to Heaven is Prayer.
THIS holy duty and the former of meditation are so linked and matched
together, that hardly can the one, without the other be handled and explaned:
both of them being of great necessity to the perfection of a happy life, and
both of great difficulty in the practice of life, and therefore no wonder if
all diligence and industry of man be required therein.

If therefore we desire to be put into the right way of so necessary and hard a
work as is prayer, we must addict our selves unto these three masters:
first, the Spirit of GOD: for if all good gifts come from God, Luke 11.
Lord teach us to pray: Luke 11.


Now, that we may proceed by a right line in handling this point, I will show
what Prayer is, what are the kinds of prayer; what is required, before, in,
and after prayer.

1 That we may know what Prayer is, it behooves us to understand, that there
are diverse significations thereof: of which the second seems to make most
for our purpose: for Prayer is often taken for Petition; and so it is defined
to be a Petition of things fit to be asked of GOD: Damasc. lib. 3. de fide. c.
24.
sometimes it is taken for the conference of the soul with GOD; whether asking
any thing of God, or giving him thanks, or conferring with him about any
other thing, in which signification it seems a Father took it, Chrysostom. Hom.
10. in Genesis
when he said Prayer was a speech or conference with God: But sometimes it
signifies generally all the inward acts of the understanding, will, and other
powers of the soul when they are lift up unto God and things above, in which
sense it seems that the said Damascen took it, when he calls prayer the
ascension of the mind unto God.

And if prayer be taken in this sense, then meditation; contemplation, the
praise of God, thanksgiving, petition, obsecration, offering up our selves,
promise, protestation, accusing of our selves, weeping for our sins,
examination of our consciences, admiration and such like actions, are all of
them certain kinds of prayer; and so to meditate, contemplate, give thanks,
examine the conscience, and the rest, are nothing else but to pray: yea to
read godly books to stir up our devotions, in this sense is nothing else
but to pray: For when to this end any do read godly books, then God speaks
to them, even as man speaks unto God when he prays: Bern. lib. de scala
Claustr.
And this moved that devout Father to place the reading of godly books,
amongst the parts of prayer.

That therefore in this sense we may know what those things are which seem to
be all one with prayer: first, it must be understood that to meditate is
nothing else but diligently and attentively to weigh and ponder the thing
proposed, to the end to pray unto God, or talk with him: And this I do
therefore add, because the diligent consideration of the Mysteries of faith
and other things, as they are taught in the Church, or as any other end of them
is proposed, is not to be named prayer: But this meditation, or consideration,
is an act of the understanding, from which does the act of the will immediately
arise: For man plainly knowing what is good, and what is evil, is most easily
moved to the love of the one, and the detestation of the other: Hence the
Kingly Prophet says, that in his meditation, the fire kindled: Psalm. 38.
And for this cause is prayer and meditation so coupled together that hardly
can they be handled asunder.

Secondly, contemplation is a certain excellent and full meditation of
affections flowing out without any discourse or labor, whilst the soul by
knowledge, and perfect love, is joined unto God, and delighted in him: no
otherwise then a man beholding a most elegant image with fixed eyes, without
turning his eyes this way or that, for the singular delight that he takes
therein.

Thirdly, the praise of God is to magnify him for his excellent virtues and
perfections inhaering in him.

Fourthly, Thanksgiving is to approve himself thankful to him for his
benefits received.

Fifthly, Petition is to ask something of God, without any obsecration.

Sixthly, Obsecration is to ask something of God with some interposition of a
sacred thing most acceptable unto him, by the power and sight whereof he may
be moved to give what we demand; as when we ask him for the blood and wounds
of his most dearly beloved Son to grant our requests.

Seventhly, Oblation is to offer unto him our souls, bodies, all our actions,
and whatsoever belongs to us, or is in us.

Eighthly, the examination of our consciences is to remember our sins before
God, to ask pardon for them, and promise from the heart an amendment of them.

Ninthly, Admiration is an excellent act of prayer, when the soul in
contemplation does vehemently admire and is astonished at the wisdom,
goodness, power, and other works of God, which for the most part is
accompanied with inflamed affections and exclamations, and very often with
ecstasies, and rauishments of the soul. Luther was therefore wont to say, that
prayer brings more profit then many labors of learning, and that therefore
he came to the knowledge of heavenly doctrine which he had by these three
instruments, prayer, meditation and temptation: For prayer brings those
sentences of Scripture which in reading we conceive into use.



to God inwardly without speaking of any words, or moving of the lips: This is
true prayer, and before all others most acceptable to the Majesty of God, of
which our Savior speaks thus: God is a Spirit, and those that worship him,
John 4.
must worship him in Spirit and truth. This people honor me with their
lips, Esaias 29.
but their hearts are far from me: Ergo, this kind of prayer is not
therefore called vocal because only uttered by the mouth, but that it might
be distinguished from the mental, which being only made in the mind; the
vocal also adds to the intention of the mind, words besides.
diverse things that may provoke that duty, so shall we meet with many
encumbrances and lets: and therefore our industry must be to gain the one and
shun the other with might and maine: But because I have in the former tract
of meditation spoken* both of these helps and impediments, I will only here
name them, referring the Reader to that place for a fuller satisfaction. First,
this time, to repair that loss some other hour of the day if it possible;
Math. 6.
secke first the Kingdom of heaven, etc. fifthly, it is no ill time to pray
when we find our souls disposed with much alacrity thereunto; and lastly,







quality and manner of eating, to the end, that as much as may be he may
repress and mortify sensuality, and to persuade himself (as nothing is more
true) that the man who is given to take the solaces and pleasures of the flesh,
shall never attain to learn aright the practice of prayer, seeing the flesh
and the Spirit are so aduersant one to another: But this sobriety is chiefly
required at Supper, that the mind in the morning may be the freer to the
exercises of devotion.

cogitations that then will thrust themselves upon him. This multitude of
business is one of the greatest impediments to prayer, for whilst a man is
divided thus, precious time slips away, distraction gets possession of the
mind, and so the mind becomes altogether dry to spiritual and heavenly
thingss.



Scripture must have precedence of all others, and amongst these chiefly the
four Evangelists, the Epistles of Paul, Peter, James and John, Job, the
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and other Canonical books of Scripture: if any
excellent or profitable sentence be fallen upon, there to stay a while and
ponder it, adding some short prayer; fourthly,

with the Prophet; I will hear what the Lord God will say concerning me.
Besides, as to all other actions so to this, it behooves to bring a right
intention, that they do not seek themselves, and their own taste and
consolation, but the only honor and good pleasure of God.

Math. 5.
for these have a promise to see God: Hence it is that who are of a loose
conscience and regard not slight faults, do never profit in prayer.

much use, for such conferences of devotion do inflame the mind, as we read
of the Disciples talking with Jesus as they went to Emaus, of the Mystery of
our redemption, Luke 24.
their hearts burned within them: For who (neglecting such holy conferences)
delight to spend the time in other relations, never come to the grace of
praying aright. So that to end this point two things above all other, are
necessary to him that will benefit by prayer: first, diligent preparation
before prayer, of which something shall be said anon: secondly, perseverance in
prayer, with great trust in God, and diffidence in ones self, till the last
gasp, with no difficulties to be interrupted; for we must ever pray and never
wax faint. Luke 18.


Now ensues the discovery of the points following; namely, what we are to do
before, in, and after prayer. First, every one diligently prepare themselves,
Sir. 18.
and not to be as one that tempts God; for when we pray we must enter into
our chambers, even the secret chambers of our hearts and dispose things there
before we pray: This preparation consists in these short observations
following, the larger discourse whereof is in the tract of meditation: and
inflamed desire: and as he that has no appetite to meat gets one with strong
exercise of the body; so about to pray we must stir up our devotion, either
by reading, or diligent examination of the conscience; sixthly, to inflame him
the more, Shall I speak unto my Lord being but dust and ashes? ninthly, and
lastly, let him do all these with great observation, but yet without scruple,
or too much anxiety of heart, if he forget any of them.



be made wherein thou have been defective, and a firm resolution to be
holden of more diligent observing them heere-after. Thirdly, The Lord was ever
in my sight. Sixthly, Psalm. 10.
to conclude, shall examine how thy prayer has succeeded, whether thou have
made any passage in it, whether thou have felt any impediment and the like; and
to this end thou must confer week with week, and month with month, and
appoint certain hours of the day to this purpose.

But yet it remains that we speak somewhat more of those 8 kinds of prayer,
that herein we may know;

speaks unto God; as if the soul should inwardly say: o Lord God thou have
enriched me with many blessings, give me grace to use them all to thy glory
and my own salvation; secondly, when the soul does ruminate with it self
some vocal prayer (as the Lords prayer, or any other which it has committed
to memory) and offers unto God the Petitions therein contained.

In prayer therefore wherein a man has to do with God for the most part three
things are necessary: first, to give him thanks;

long-suffering in expecting our return, and the like: the other of particular
benefits, which as they are proper unto every man, so must they specially of
every one be remembered; as namely that he is borne of good and Christian
parents, that he is of a good constitution of body, and sound, that he has
been preserved and delivered from many infirmities and dangers of body and
soul, and such like: every one of which benefits if we do but a little
ponder with our selves, we shall find a most large occasion of giving him
thanks; and that we may have rule herein to proceed by, let every one give
him thanks: first, for the blessings of nature; secondly, of Grace; thirdly,
for blessings acquired. Also, first, for the good things of the soul; secondly
of the body; thirdly, for outward good things in particular: of all which he
must take an account of himself, how God has stored him with them, that he
may be thankful for them.

And indeed it is meet that continually we give thanks unto God, seeing
every moment we receive benefits from him; for no moment is there, wherein
we receive not from God, life, sense, understanding, and all other good gifts
both natural and super-naturall, that are in us, or belong unto us: Therefore
if when thou receiuest any benefit from any man, thou art presently thankful
for it, how can thou but be ingrate unto God, when receiving innumerable
benefits from him, thou do not answer them with a thankful heart? Thou
shall therefore give thanks for things prosperous, because they are given thee
for thy comfort: for things adverse, because they are ordained for thy
correction, and the augmentation of thy eternal Crown: thou shall give
thanks for spiritual gifts, because they enrich the soul, and for corporal
gifts because they preserve the body which is the palace and habitation of the
soul: Thou shall give thanks for the things given unto thee, because they
belong unto thee; for the things bestowed on thy neighbors, because they
belong to such as thou art bound in charity: Ever shall thy heart meditate that
good word of Thanksgiving; ever shall thy mouth, in what estate soever, sound
out thankfulness unto God, that whilst thou give thanks for continual
benefits, thou may thereby be disposed to receive better benefits.

in the Lords prayer: but besides these general petitions which daily are in
the first place to be made, every one ought to ask certain special things
most necessary unto him, which either he must retain in his memory, or else
keep a catalogue of them with him, which he may at pleasure in his mental
prayer use. First, Lord teach us to pray; Luke 11. Luke 17.
and, Lord increase our faith.

but yet it shall much help his conceit and memory to distinguish them thus:
in such a kind of sin, with such a power of the soul, or external sense of
the body.

sixthly, for our enemies and persecutors: seventhly, for all that are in any
necessity, or suffer any adversity, in body or mind. This prayer for others,
Chrysostom.
as a Father says, of all others is most acceptable unto God: unto it we are
many ways obliged, and therefore it is no day to be omitted: And as we must
pray for others, so must we not be unmindful to give thanks for others,
for the benefits conferred upon all men, for benefits bestowed upon all
Christians, private or public persons, and advisedly considering both the
persons and the benefits severally, to give God thanks for them no less then
if we give thanks for our selves.

that hears the prayer, and therefore unto him alone must all flesh come, this
is taught us out of the blessed mouth of our Savior; When you pray, say, Lnk.
11.
Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

and indignity, as the most unworthy wretches in the world.

I beseech you brethren, Romans 12.1.
by the mercies of God, offer up your selves, a holy, living and acceptable
sacrifice unto God: So that nothing less is this sacrifice, but our whole
lives, our bodies, souls, our goods, within us, without us, our thoughts,
words and works, all must be sacrificed unto him, and dedicated to his
honor, never any more to be used after the conceit of our own perverse
will, but according to the most exact rule of Gods most holy will. And these
things which I have spoken concerning Thanksgiving, Petition and Oblation,
are to be done mentally: for these contain a most elegant manner of
continuing in prayer a long time.

Glory be the Father, etc. he renew his attention, that if his mind be
distracted he may gather it up again, and beg pardon of God for this neglect:
Thirdly, the prayer being ended, thanks are to be rendered unto God, and pardon
of sins and defects therein committed humbly begged.

There is another excellent way of vocal prayer, both easy and full of
devotion, and not subject to distraction, which we may often use, but
especially in iourneying, and at such times as we cannot fitly have
opportunity to pray in another sort: And that is to recite the Lords prayer, or
any other which we have by heart, and that all by leisure, inter-posing so
much time betwixt every sentence as that one may well pawse and take breath, in
which distance of time inward consideration is to be had:

consisting both of mental and vocal prayer, is more easy then that of the
mind, and may be used so often as a man shall find himself, in respect of
some indisposition of body or mind, unfit for meditation.

And this method of praying may be used, first, seil. Pride, Avarice, Luxury,
Envy, Gluttony, Anger and Sloth, he may proceed in the same sort, and
beginning first with the sin of pride, he may first observe and call to
mind the sins he has committed in that kind; and Degree: secondly,

Now before I put a period to this discourse of prayer, it will not be
impertinent to stir up the heart of every Christian to the practice of this
so necessary a duty: And the rather for that in this declining age of the
world, most sort of people are very remiss therein, for the most part making
it a custom rather then a duty of Religion.

Religion, which indeed is nothing else but the worship of God, is of all
moral virtues the most noble, producing many, both inward and outward most
excellent actions: but of the inward none so worthy as that of prayer and
devotion. This Religion is a virtue resting in the will of man, by which all
due worship and reverence is done unto God, and prayer being the act of that
virtue is the lifting up of the mind unto God; for the will moves the
understanding to do all due worship and service unto God.

But how great the dignity of prayer is, may not obscurely be derived from
Religion whose offspring prayer is: for if Religion be a virtue obtaining
highest room amongst all moral virtues, then must prayer which is the act of
Religion be most excellent of all other acts of virtues: for albeit this be
no Theological act, yet more loftily then others, it respects and looks at
God as at the end and complement of all.

Yea even from the lifting up of the mind, which by all the Saints of God is
attributed unto it, the worthiness of prayer shows it self; as if the mind
given to prayer scorned the remembrance of the creatures, lifting up it self
to the most excellent Divinity it self: And surely the thing it self, if we
consider it according to the conditions of men, seems to have extraordinary
worth in it: for if so great honor be achieved from the acquaintance and
neerenesse of Kings and Emperors, that men value it before riches, or any
other thing besides, as the often and much affected ambition of that honor
does testify; what honor shall we account that which the often conference
and familiarity of God begets.

Upon this hinge does hang the commendations of all the holy Fathers and Saints
of God in all ages, all of them have most greedily embraced this care; for this
cause have they hid themselves in Defarts and Dens, for this alone forsook
all preferments; this was the most fat pasture of great and worthy minds, and
not only those whom Christ by his example taught, continuing all night in
prayer, departing into the Desert by the space of forty days, and for thirty
years together without many words, attended his Fathers pleasure; but even
those forerunners of his blessed coming did most religiously and duly in all
ages reverence this Divine exercise of prayer; of which, what more vn-excepted
witnesses can be, then Abraham walking the Deserts, Moses feeding his Sheep,
Elias and Elisha inhabiting Mount Carmell? Who setting aside all other
respects, and taking upon them the worship of the only true God, seemed so
much to forget themselves, that they seemed to carry minds in the body void
of the body, as it were by prayer transformed into God. With such power is
prayer endued, that the same thing which befell the Master of all Wisdom,
the Son of God* whilst he prayed in Mount Tabor, that his countenance was
changed, the same seems often to befall those skillful and zealous in prayer,
that whilst drawing the Divine Beams from the society of God, they show some
excellent thing to other men, as from a higher degree to be looked on, which
may strike reverence into the beholders.

Surely, it must needs be matter of great sublimity, which as soon as it gets
place in man's heart, begets in it an immense hope of felicity: For seeing it is
evident, that those good things which make man happy can be derived from no
other fountain then from God, which though albeit the most bountiful God do
freely give, yet will he have them demanded of him; it comes to pass that
he who conceiues to himself a firm purpose of this care and endeavor, has
already found out the right way of happiness, and has happily entered into the
same.

Hence is it that our capital enemy uses a thousand machinations, either to
deter us from our enterprise, or to make us go on with the less animosity
and courage, for he knows, that such as march on valiantly under this
Ensign, put all his Troops to the sword, themselves being such as illustrate
many with the light of God, and stir them up to emulation: it cannot be but
such as are devoted to this most fruitful exercise, must needs prosperously
succeed.

And not without cause, for there the minds besieged with all kind of evils,
do gather new forces, and are made more puissant, both to tame the unruly
passions, and also to acquire more virtues: For albeit they enter vn-armed, yet
they go out armed and more valiant to fight; of which, that our Saviors most
courageous confronting of his adversaries after his prayer in the Garden, was a
sure argument: For Prayer establishes the heart with magnanimity, it is
conceived as if it were with the fortitude and strength of God instilled into
it: And what can so encourage the heart of man as the hand of the Creator
stretched out to help? And how can he want the Hand, that has the Heart of
his Creator? Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in
the midst of them.

What shall I speak of those hidden comforts, the knowledge of God, the
contempt of the world, the peace of conscience, and many other true tokens of
the sons of God which are imprinted in the minds of such as use this holy
exercise? Believe it, whatsoever by the most wise and eloquent men and Orators
of the world can in this kind be spoken, is less, then these Orators of God
by thus exercising themselves do obtain. What then ought we to do, seeing
God requires this incessant duty of ours, but that so much of our short time
here as may be taken from the necessary employment about things of this
present life, and our ordinary Callings, should be consecrated unto prayer?
For this is, as it were, the very spirit of life, which lifts up man from the
dregs of this world, into the fellowship and vnspeakeble fruition of the most
hidden things of God.

There are but three sorts of good things in this life, wherewith man's heart is
ravished, and all these are most richly attained unto in this heavenly
exercise. are less vexed with hunger, thirst, heat, cold, and such like, and
therefore they use both meat and clothing most sparingly. That which is
honest they obtain,

That I may therefore give a right farewell to this point; the drift of all men
prayers is to be so grounded on the immovable rock of faith, that there be
no haesitation in him that prays, but that he assuredly trusts by Christ to
obtain the good things he demands; which assurance must be derived from these
3. reasons which are so strong against all the incursions of sins, passions and
all temptations, and so able to affect the heart, as that they can move even
the stones.

Reason. God, albeit he had not provided for man's help, neither the
Incarnation, Passion and Death, of his only begotten Son, nor the holy use
of the Word and Sacraments, nor any other thing; yet of his own goodness and
natural propensity unto mercy, he is most merciful, nor can he manifest his
goodness and mercy in so high a degree to his other works, as in sparing: for
it is the highest degree of goodness and mercy to do good to such of whom he
is iniuried. Seeing therefore God has made all his works to manifest his
goodness, and nothing makes so much to the end of his glory and manifestation,
as to have mercy on men most miserable sinners, certain hope may be conceived
that he will grant pardon to them that faithfully ask it, and give them both
grace and glory.

God is more propense to do good, then the fire is to burn, if therefore the
fire, as often as nothing hinders it, burns and consumes all that is put upon
it: Surely, nor will God so long as nothing with-stands him, but have mercy;
but nothing hinders God, nor can, as long as man does seriously will and desire
God to have mercy on him: therefore even the most wicked may hope, if they
seriously desire it, that God will forgive their sins, and give them all
necessaries.

Theee was never any man living from the worlds beginning, so wickedly given to
wine, or intemperancy, that was so much delighted with the pleasures thereof,
as God is delighted in having mercy: If therefore the Drunkard and intemperate
man do not only willingly take his pleasures, but is violently carried away
with the stream of them: Surely God, without any disgrace of so great Majesty,
nay, with much honor and dignity, does as it were hastily run to take those
pleasures of showing mercy: The event proves it true, he therefore sent his
Word into the world, his Son, because he is delighted in quickenesse of
mercy, for his Word runs very swiftly.

Seeing then that God, when he shows mercy, does a thing to himself
honorable, first, to the glory of his great Name, agreeable to his Palate and
Disposition and therefore pleasant to him: yea, let me say also profitable;
for so many servants he gains, as there be men on whom he shows mercy. Who
can be so mad and barbarous, as not to conceive most vn-controuleable hope, and
assure himself that the most munificent Lord will give him whatsoever he
penitently, and seriously asks.

Reason. The most merciful God from everlasting (when there was none to
entreat him, nor as yet the world was created) being most propense unto
goodness foreseeing Adams fall, decreed that Jesus Christ our Redeemer should
be incarnate, and when the fullness of time came, he was incarnate of the
blessed Virgin, was borne, and for the space of thirty three years suffered
all kinds of discommodities, and at last dying the most shameful death of the
Cross, purchased my salvation with his precious blood, and by this price of
his blood so offered himself to the Father for me being but one, as if he had
thought of redeeming none but me, so that his blood all of it, was no less
shed for me, then if Christ had shed it for none else, which the Apostle
seems to have thought, saying, I live in the faith of the Son of God who
loved me, and gave himself for me; where he speaks more particularly then
when he says, Who gave himself for us, and loved us.

If then Christ shed every drop of his blood for me, being but one; If all his
labors, and bloody sweat in the Garden were for me, being but one; If he
cried unto the Father with strong cries and tears for me, being but one, as
if the matter had only concerned the forgiveness of the sins of one man and
no more; who can be so ignorant, meditating this, but easily will arise from
the dungeon of despair, and in the midst of his heart conceive vn-repellable
hope? This reason is able not only to give health to the sick, but life to
the dead.

Reason. Besides the most unspeakable love of God exhibited to us in Christ,
who is the foundation of our hope, Christ himself has spoken in the Gospel
many things to stir up our hope; Ask and you shall receive, etc. But above
all, that; I say unto you, whatsoever you shall ask, believe that you shall
receive it, and it shall be done unto you: These words to stir up our minds
and beget hope, are most forcible: I say unto you; As if Christ had given his
Obligation for the truth of it, to bind himself to unworthy man, requiring
only this condition of us, that we hold a good opinion and faith of his
goodness, that he will give us what we ask.

And how consonant to reason is this? Is there any Prince that promising
faithfully he will give to some that ask him, a piece of silver, so they ask
faithfully, that performs no this promise? Or do any doubt of it that are
wise? If then that most high Potentate of heaven and earth, that cannot loofe
any of his riches; nay, who the more he gives tho richer he is, do promise to
give to them that ask faithfully, being able to do what he list with a beck;
Who is so mad, that does not undoubtedly hope and ask; nay, which does ask,
and does not obtain?

Now then if God, who is most propense to do good, as the first reason
proves, and of his own accord sent his Son, his only begotten Son,
delivering him to most bitter death, that I might by him obtain what I ask,
as appears in the second reason; And to conclude, the Son of God himself,
both God and Man, my Redeemer, have bound himself by promise, most ample and
most worthy of himself, to give unto me what I faithfully ask, as in the
third reason: it must needs follow, that I must not only swerue from all
Christianity, but even from the right use of reason, or else most constantly
hope for the eternal good things of salvation, which I pray for.

The Fourth Days Journey of the Soul to Heaven, is Holiness of Life.
THIS indeed is the full complement of all the rest; to hear the word with
judgment, to meditate upon Divine Mysteries with diligence, and to pray unto
God with devotion, are to small purpose, except there follow practice and
application of all these, in the life. Our labor then must be in this
discourse, first, to give some general precepts how to acquire those virtues
that help to the sanctification of life; and to root up the vices which
hinder the increase of godliness in our hearts: Secondly, to propose a daily
method of practicing such holy duties as being performed will make our whole
lives a sweet smelling Sacrifice to God.

1 The ignorance of a sure method and means to beget the seeds of virtues in
man's heart, is the cause that so few do arrive at the Haven of Perfection in
any measure: Insomuch that hardly shall one find one man in all his life that
has attained to any competent habit of any one virtue.

All virtues, as the learned do well observe, are either infused into the
soul by the only grace of God, which gives all good things, or else are
acquired by the industry and labor of man, being helped thereunto by the grace
of Gods holy Spirit, for the obtaining of which, let him consider these points
following.

1 He that will attain to any virtue, as humility, or the like, must know
these five things to be very necessary.





fourthly,







seem to be chiefest, and most necessary for all men, Humility and Charity.







The one is Saint Bernard, who gives two rules very profitable for the
attaining unto perfection: Ber. libel. de formula Hon. vitae.
If (says he) thou will fully obtain what thou entendest, two things are
necessary:





good intent, albeit it may seem to the contrary: for humane suspicion is no
true guide, but easily deceived.























but let your affirmatiues and negatiues be powdered with the salt of
doubtfulnesse.







shall be, because a banquet of worms.







that which thou would have.







want them: in like manner when God sends thee any comforts, think that those
in hell do want them.



that thou can find in this whole world.

Sure I am, that if thou do well observe and do the things that are here
written, the holy Spirit shall dwell in thee, and shall perfectly teach thee to
do all things, therefore thou shall well perform these things, and not
neglect them, read them twice every week, on Wednesday and Saturday, and as
thou shall find thou have performed what is written, praise thy God who is
good and merciful world without end.

Now follows the exhortation of Thomas Aquinas, Aqui. Opuscu. 68.
which he made unto a friend, wherein he proposes a fit way of attaining
both Divine and Humane wisdom.

Because thou have desired to know of me, beloved brother in Christ, how thou
ought to behave thy self in acquiring the treasure of knowledge, take this
counsel from me in this business, that thou may by and by pass by the
little Rivers into the maine Sea, because by things of more facility it
behooves us to pass to things more difficult: This then is my admonition and
thy instruction.

not of whom thou hear, but what good thing soever it be, commit to memory:
Eleuenthly,

Now having laid these short grounds of procuring the virtues tending to
sanctification and holy perfection, as an entrance to the sequent Treatise, you
may remember that in the front of this last part, having said that the
ignorance of a certain method and Art whereby to direct us to the attaining
of Christian perfection, and the knowledge of a right serving of God, was the
only cause why so many Christians came so far short of their duty and drift
herein, as that scarce one was to be found who had made any competent passage
into the habit of any one virtue, I must now, as my first ground of this
Discourse, according to my promise, set forth this method and Art of serving
God aright to every man's view.

Wherein for our better proceeding I will, Law, and of all our good works.

Ambrose writes, that the ignorance of order and manner whereby things are to
be done, does much trouble and deface the quality of ones desert and work: and
that he is not to be thought to have the full knowledge of any thing, who
knows what is to be done, but yet knows not the order whereby he is to
proceed therein: Then it is manifest that it profits very little that a man do
know all that is written concerning the service of God, if withal he be
ignorant how, and by what means the same is to be put in practice.

And albeit all Arts, and knowledge of good things do slow from the supreme
Artificer God, and many are enlighted with his goodness, and prevented with
the blessings of sweetness, yet are we not for that cause, to omit our duty,
nor is the obligation of doing what is in our power dissolved, in searching
into his Precepts and Will, and such things as are necessary for us, to the end
that we may do what is pleasant in his sight: to which purpose this present
method is necessary, whereby we may know and be able to put in practice all
those excellent things which the holy Scripture teaches us.

Nor let any man think it superfluous, that we shall have instructions given
us, helping to the service of God, seeing the whole Scripture witnesses it,
and the Apostle expressly, that we are Gods Fellow Laborers: 1. Cor. 3.
But we cannot say, that he does truly or sufficiently help, that does not
help so much as he can, and ought to help: Nor is it any thing else for us
to be helpers unto God, then to move the soul in all our works, as much as
we can, to repair the grievous losses which sin has brought into the
soul, and purely to love God above all.

Besides, there is no cause why any should excuse themselves in that the
anointing of the Holy Ghost does teach all things, and so there should be no
use nor need of any Art, or method, whereby to learn the serving of God. For
that is true, but yet so as that we be not wanting unto the Spirit and to our
selves, in searching and laboring by all holy means to come to that
knowledge: For the holy Ghost teaches not those that are altogether
vn-willing, much less such as reluct and strive against it.

Nor let any think this sweet yoke of the Lord to be heavy, in spending so
much time to attain so high and heavenly wisdom, whereby to use this method
of serving God aright: For if usually men spend three, four, or more years in
Grammar, Logic, and other inferior Arts, nay sometimes all their lives, if
they study to be perfect in it: how much better shall he bestow his whole
life, to learn perfectly this most heavenly Art, to teach us which, our most
dear and heavenly Master Jesus Christ came down from heaven unto us, and
with so much labor and pain performed it? therefore let not any be
discouraged in following this course, if he find in himself many
disabilities: for herein it chances to him as to an infant, for he having a
soul, has not yet the use of reason, and having a body, feet and legs, yet
cannot go, but when he begins to grow and to move the members of the body,
he can go, yet for all that with much difficulty, and often falling, until
increasing in years and by continual exercise, he goes so freely, that when
he lists he can run: The same thing falls out in holy exercises, whilst
one begins purely to serve God; for albeit the soul be found, yet it is so
bound and burdened, and so without power whereby to move it self in this
journey to God, as the whole Scripture declares, that we cannot walk at all,
and if we be moved something toward it, yet it is with such difficulty,
faintness and fallings, as that our walk is but a very standing still, if not
rather a very going backewards; but when we shall have practiced this method
and means of serving God, for some short time, we shall grow to such strength
therein, that we shall do things which before we durst not hope for, and
shall so run through these high and heavenly iournies, as that our motions
may rather be called the motions of Angels flying, then of men walking on the
earth.

And it is much to be forewarned, that no man make any pretext or excuse of
serving God in this ensuing manner, as contenting himself with the ordinary
manner of serving God to be sufficient to bring him to salvation; for it is
the will of God, even our sanctification: 1 Thessalonians. 4.
and not our sanctification for some short time, or in some one part of body or
soul, but during the whole life, and throughout the whole Spirit soul and
body. Seeing then that the lovers of the world are never satisfied with riches,
honors and pleasures, but still wish and seek for more, yea God commanding
the contrary; neither let us be content with present graces and virtues, but
labor for an increase of all graces, and of that Crown of glory which we
daily expect, seeing God so earnestly desires that we should obtain it: and
if so be our minds and appetites be not therefore set upon this course of
godliness, because it is profitable for us to salvation; yet let them for this
cause enlarge themselves to the highest extent of serving God, because they
know it is the will of God; that in all things we might be magnified, as the
sons of such an eternal Father, who is in heaven, and admonishes us saying,
Leu. 19.
Be^ ye holy, because I the Lord your God, and Father, am holy.

Having promised thus much concerning the harms which ensue the ignorance of a
certain method in serving of God, I will now descend to the first part, which
is the general instructions directing us in all our actions, wherein we must
observe these seven several instructions and helps.

1. Instruction, That knowing our selves to be naked, miserable, and of all
good things indigent, we should labor ever by all means to procure the grace
and help of God, that there may be such a change made in our souls, whereby
we may seele that our will insists upon this, not to seek the things that are
our own, as our own, but to seek God, and whatsoever good thing is in him;
and our selves as the thing that is of God, and whorewith of his infinite
goodness and mercy he wishes himself to be served: so that we hold
evermore his most excellent graces, and infinite glory, as our own goods, nay
far more excellent then our own: and that we praise him and rejoice in him
more then in any good thing which either we have, or hope for, or can happen
unto us, accounting it a perfect happiness, that the Majesty of God may
possess infinite good things, and now it does possess, and as not having any
care or regard of our own selves; yet laboring by all means that we may be
received into heaven, where we may behold him, and more perfectly enjoy him,
not for our own joy and comfort alone, but for that, the Divine Majesty being
of infinite glory, of his infinite goodness would have us to be so magnified,
with the sublime inheritance and riches which himself possesses, and with
him, all those which for their last rest and good, do desire, that the Divine
Majesty may have so great glory as it has: and this is to be one Spirit with
God, and is the sum of all Christian perfection.

For it is a doctrine clear by the sacred Scriptures, and holy Fathers, that
we were all brought forth into this world, not to rest and settle upon the
brittle good things of this life, and in them to solace our selves, seeing they
are the least, lowest and vilest of the good things of God; but that using them
so far forth as they serve for our necessity, according to Gods ordinance,
we spend our whole lives in the sublime and high works of our great God; who
to this end created us, that he might make us blessed, and the enioyers of his
own self, who is an infinite good, in whom we shall far more eminently,
and abundantly possess all good things, then we are able to magine.

Again, we may observe, that albeit God have not tied us under the
commination of eternal death, that we should perpetually intend nothing else
but his observance, but only then, when any of his commandments are to be
observed: yet by the law of equity, whereby we ought to observe our selves, as
the sons of so great a Father; not only men of a Religious Profession, but
even all Christians, are bound to procure unto themselves a more sublime, and
heavenly degree of sanctity, and evermore to serve that so mighty a Lord and
Father. For it was not of some few, but of all in general, that the Lord
pronounced those words; Let us make man according to our own Image and
Smilitude: And then is man wholly found according to the image of God, when he
exercises himself herein, to know and love the wonderful things of God,
taking exceeding great joy thereat.

And in the Gospel he says, Be ye perfect, Math. 5.
as your heavenly Father is also perfect: Surely it is most meet, that he be
holy, who is the son of him, whom Seraphines incessantly call Holy, Holy,
Holy: that never forgetting whose sons we are, we should not think it
sufficient to be holy in a low degree; but, as our frailty will suffer us, to
strive for the goal of all perfection; abstracting our hearts from the love of
all earthly things, and reflecting them upon our Father who is of infinite
goodness, and with great affection illuminateth and sanctified all that come
to his Majesty, as to the Father of infinite dignities and excellencies.

Knowing then our Obligation whereby we are all bound to this duty of
holiness, and chiefly such as have taken upon them the office of Guides and
Shepherds. Let us withal remarke, that as in this world, the greatest
neerenesse and friendship which a mortal man can obtain with a King is, that
he be of one will, desire, and affection with him; so true sanctity herein
consists, that a man be of one spirit and will with God. But to come to this
sublimity and height of honor, it behooves him to travail through the
passages of all virtues, which the holy Scripture every where describes, and
the Son of God with so much labor has taught us. Thus having seen, as
through a casement, wherein consists our change from men naked, miserable, and
destitute of graces, to divine and heavenly seruers of God, scil. by seeking
nothing but the good will of our good God in all our actions; we proceed to
the instructions following.

Instruction, That we ever have an eye to the end and scope, by which we
ought to be admonished to do those things that serve for the reparation and
remedy of our wounded souls: yea, whatsoever we determine to do, before all
other things, the eye of our observation must be upon the end that moves us to
the action: This is most necessary to be known, and every moment to be
looked on: for there is no work that has in it more goodness, then it
receives from the end for which the work is done; which end if it be evil,
the work also must needs be so, although of it self otherwise it were good.

Seeing then God is an infinite Good, that must needs be the greater good
work which is more purely performed in his sight: For declaration whereof it
is to be noted, that it behooves the servant of God, who would please his
Lord, to plant in his soul a very puissant will or habit of willing engendered
of strong and frequent acts of willing it: which will or habit, so ingraffed
in him may move him and make him think, that whatsoever he does in body or
soul, whatsoever he shall think or speak, nay, all the virtues he shall
acquire, together with this same remedy of his soul, and all his devotion; I
say, that all these things are done, because God would have it so, does ever
require them of us, and is for his infinite goodness most worthy of them; or
else because, that by these duties he should perform something acceptable
unto him.

Once the Divine Majesty said to his Disciples, Ioh. 15.
That for this cause he spoke unto them, that his joy might be in them* But
this is the joy of God which is in us, as one says, whereby he vouchsafes to
rejoice concerning us, Aug.
namely, when we are obedient to his will. But no manner of service is so
acceptable to him, as that the servant of God should so will that which he
wills, so desire what he desires, that whatsoever himself is or can be,
may with all his force be powered out to the obedience of God, as he that in
every work conceived no other end which might move him to work, then to be
willing to please God, and to do a work acceptable to him. This I say is the
thing I mean, that he should in some sort forger the good and glory which may
befall himself from the practice of virtue, being only mindful of God which
requires it; and for this cause only would do it, because God wills it, and
commands it, and not without great cause, of his goodness, requires it. To
make this plain by example; Conceive a sick man who for the recovery of his
health desires some meat, or medicine, and not only desires it, but procures
it; in the mean time it falls out, that some dear friend of his false sick of
a more dangerous disease, and stands much more need of that meat or Physic:
here he that was first sick being unmindful of his sickness how great
soever, and of that desire he had to it for his own sake, begins now to
desire the same, and to procure it, not to himself, but to his friend; so that
the love to his friend makes him desire and procure that which is needful for
himself, not to satisfy his own necessity, but the necessity of his friend:
so that after he has by sundry ways busying himself found it, he perceiues
in his mind a certain boiling desire to get it for his friend, as forgetting
that he needs it himself, and having gotten it, rejoices greatly that the
will and necessity of his friend is satisfied.

The like ought it to be to him that should move the servant of God to every
desire and work, even the like by all means: namely, that in his soul he
feel an instinct whereby to desire and do that is good: but that desire must
be because God wills that the thing be done, and by that leads a man to
perform obedience to him, as if it were very necessary to him; and ever
forgetting that by these virtues which he sought, desired, or wrought, he
should attain glory and salvation. For it is a far more necessary end, that
we therefore work because God would have us to do it, and for his goodness
which moves us to love and serve him; then that we our selves should possess
glory: For we ought to desire that we may enjoy glory and good things chiefly
for that cause because God would have us to desire and have them, and that in
having them we might love him, and after an excellent manner serve him, and
not for our own profit, joy, or glory.

And so great is the magnificence and goodness of GOD, that by how much as we
do in this manner the more desire or do any good thing, so much more shall be
our glory in heaven. This instruction, I confess, may seem unto many, to be
full of difficulty; but surely, the beginnings of all things do appear to be
such to all beginners: for they judge they shall never attain to that they
have begun: but yet so long do they exercise themselves in those things,
that by continual exercise, they become Masters, where at first they durst
not call themselves Scholars.

And observe it for truth, that if any man have a will inflamed with devotion,
he shall do all these things with such facility, that in a sinall space of
time he may seem to have done wonderful things. But unto him, who is not
enkindled with so great a flame of devotion, this must be a rule which we now
lay down, wherein shall distinctly be touched the manner and reason which he
must observe in attaining unto it. Let a man on the one side propose God as his
chiefest friend, and himself on the other side: when the will is moved to
desire any virtue, or profitable thing, let a man consider with what end he it
moved, and he shall perceive for the most part, that he is moved either with
fear of punishment, or love of glory and virtue: Now this motive ought not to
satisfy us, although it be not evil, but seeing man's will prevented and
assisted by the grace of God, has so much freedom and power, in some measure,
as to forsake the one, and choose the other; and seeing we know the will of God
to be much more excellent, and more worthy to move us, then our own will,
we must now forbear to be moved after that manner as we have been, and
turn all our will to desire the same thing after the best manner, namely,
because he would have it so, who is worthy of all obedience.

Surely, he should of right account himself vile and wretched who desires or
does any thing, moved thereunto with a natural desire, albeit the thing be
good and holy, seeing he has ever the will of GOD present before him which
should move him ever to will and desire; but chiefly, seeing GOD gives ever
such strength as that one may forsake his own will, as it is stirred up with a
natural desire, albeit a good desire, and be moved with a heavenly desire.

And so much difference there is betwixt these two scopes and motives, that
nothing in this world differs more from another, then these two do the one
from the other; so that the one of these is incomparably more excellent then
another: as the Sun exceeds the brightness of a candle; the Sea, a drop of
water; infinite talents of Gold, a piece of Lead. Therefore let us ever
endeavor to desire, and work, being moved with so happy an end and motive,
seeing the Divine Goodness most desirous of our advancement and glory does
bind un to do all our works, corporal and spiritual, great and small,
proceeding from the body or the soul, even such as are done according to our
natural disposition, to do them, I say, only because it is the will of God
we should do them. For all our actions from the least to the greatest, serve
for the conservation of this natural life; and as we cannot forsake them, so
in using them for the love of God they much further to the increase of a holy
and happy life: and so the least and meanest work we do is, in the sight of
God, of more worth then the best and highest action performed of him that has
not the same scope. And indeed it is a thing wonderful and worthy of memory,
that in the sight of God it should be a thing of more dignity to eat meat
with this scope and motive, then with any other motive, as namely, that we
enjoy the glory of heaven, to fast, or power out our blood for the truth.

Not that it is not an excellent thing to desire the possession of heavens
glory, but for that this motive is so much more excellent then the other, as
the whole world ouer-values a nut shell. That therefore we may be induced,
through this happy motive, to do all that we do, all the motions of body and
soul bending unto this end, we must be very intent that we never pass from
one work to another, nor never begin any work until we feel our selves
to be moved unto it for this, that we think, or know, that God would have us
to do it: For which purpose we must know, that God with an infinite iubile
and desire, wishes to be beloved or possessed of all men, and with the same
will, wishes that with every motion of love, which in every moment of our
lives we work, we should love him: and how often soever we shall love, or do any
other thing, we should do it, being attracted thereunto with this his
infinite will: so that this is the rule we must follow in all things, that
whenever we will do any thing, we must never begin it, until having
first cast our eyes upon God, we shall perceive that we desire this for the
infinite joy which he has of this our good work. Which being sensibly
known, that God is most worthy to be obeyed and served in this so sublime a
nature, then obeying this will, we bring into execution whatsoeucr we
determined, as altogether forgetful of our own good. For just it is, that his
blessed Will who created all wills, should have that pre-eminence and dominion
over all wills, that not only they should obey him in all he commands, but
also that whatsoever we do, we should do it, as forgetting to perform our
own proper wills, and obtain our own glory, but that both in the one and the
other Gods holy will may be fulfilled, without any other respect.

But because as many men think themselves rich, when indeed they are but
poor, reckoning their chickens in the shell; so many thinking they feel the
said motive and esteeming themselves to have done great things, do at length
find they are but small: for it easily falls out, that one considering the
sublimitie that consists in loving of GOD, and desirous of those excellent and
true good things, and also being in the favor of God and state of salvation,
has an enkindled desire to enjoy that love, and yet that desire is no perfect
work.

For albeit that desire be of a thing that is perfect, yet is that desire no
perfect work, if the perfect motive of the mind be wanting, namely, that
such desire proceed from a strong will we have, to desire such love, because God
would have us to enjoy it to our advancement, which he greatly desires. The
same that we say of this desire, may also be spoken of many, who are carried
with a great zeal of salvation of Souls, or good of the republike; and such
as are hungry and thirsty for Righteousness, and weep for the euilles which
they see and know to be in the world: all which things are good, but yet may
be most abject and defective, if they want the said true motive and scope:
therefore we must be very regardfull, that whatsoever we do, we be moved
unto it with this motive.

And that we have spoken of these words, ought to be understood and practiced
in all those infinite motions which do offer themselves to the Soul of what
kind soever, yea in the resisting of every temptation: for we must so labor,
that Gods will may reign in ours; as that nothing must arise from our will
alone.

It is true, that such as enter into this course, shall find much difficulty,
and spend much time in acquiring this excellent motive: but let none be
discouraged, for do not many worldly men labor all their lives for vile
things of no worth, and yet do not obtain them? But we shall surely obtain
this gift, if with intimous humility we labor for it with perseverance: but
he ought greatly to reprove himself: who shall think it is of any estimation,
dignity, or price, to observe these things, and yet shall not for the
greatness of the reward promised, which is to obtain the said motive, be
stirred up to seek it.

And surely, it is not amiss to prae-admonish all men, that at the beginning,
great coldness will happen unto him that directs his works after so high a
pitch, doing all things to God alone: and he may wonder, that having taken the
more sublime way, yet he should find less devotion, as he may wonder, that
approaching to the fire, yet feels it grow more cold: but we must know, that
whosoever does well consider the cause hereof, shall find, that of necessity
such coldenesse will seize upon him, and yet his work is of no less worth:
for the cause hereof is, for that we neither do nor love any thing more for
our own proper good, as we were wont, and is natural unto us: but for the
only love of God: we remove from us the root, from whence commonly and
naturally all joy and pleasure was wont to spring, that is, our own good and
quiet; and we assume another good, namely, the glory of God, for the rest
and end of our labors: which being a supernatural thing, and unaccustomed to
us, no wonder if it bring much pain to make such a change. From this arises
that luke-warmenesse; until we be accustomed to feel, esteem, price, love,
and much more to value GODS glory then our own, as the thing which we love
much more. And having gotten this, then we shall approach the fire that will
not suffer any cold fit to tarry on us.

Now the end being known, for* which we must do all things, some may admire,
that seeing the sacred Scripture, chiefly the Gospel being so perfect, and
requiring such exact obedience: yet it seems not ever to propose this end and
motive, when it admonishes, commends and prohibiteth, but for the most part
either threatens punishments or inuites by promising glory.

To this I say, that our blessed redeemer the Son of God, the author of all
Evangelical docttine being in himself most perfect, did often in his own
person take upon him the things which belonged to our frailty and infirmity,
that he might descend to our frailty, as fleeing, hiding himself, serving
death, etc. so his pleasure was to write his doctrine in such words as our
frail and miserable conditions required, who for the most part are moved to do
all things either for hope of glory, or fear of punishments.

But yet observe withal that as our Savior took upon him these our
infirmities with great perfection and love, so the Saints of God do hear the
Gospel and accordingly do live, moved with threatenings and promises therein
contained, yet without the loss of the excellent motive of which we have
spoken. Whereof if any man doubt, and think these not to be compatible or can
stand together, namely the threats of hell and glory of heaven, with the motive
of Gods will: let him consider, that when our Savior says, except ye also
repent ye shall all likewise perish; in this threatening are two things to be
noted. First the punishment threatened. Secondly, the will of God, wherewith God
threatens: and this is his will, that we should serve him arid not perish. The
true servant of God, ought to obey this precept, not that he may avoid the
punishment, but because God who threatens would have us to repent, and not to
fall into that punishment. So being mindful that Gods desire is we should
serve him, and not fall into so great an evil, as once forgetting the
punishment, we repent and turn to God. With this perfection therefore do we
work, yet moved by the co^minations of the Scripture. And so the Scripture
containing that most high and perfect serving of God, albeit withal, it has
that which seems to be of frailty and infirmity, whereby to stoop to our
frailty, and to move us to do as our frailty requires.

And that promises and threatenings in Scripture are thus to be understood, may
appear by that first and great covenant of serving God with all the heart,
etc. which he does not sufficiently perform, Mat. 21.
who toward God does not bestow all his powers to serve him, and both to
desire celestial glory, and abhor the pains of hell, as well desiring that,
as detesting this in the same manner as we have spoken: namely that the last
and chief end of both be, the fulfilling of Gods will and his obedience and
glory.

3 Instruction. That it be comes all men, but chiefly those who are sacred
persons, to serve God according to this more sublime and heavenly manner.

There is no doubt, but that God being in the highest heavens is also justly
esteemed for the most high God; but the service and obedience due unto him,
must be performed in a most sublime and exact manner. That which our Savior
said to one he meant of al, Math. 19.
if thou will enter into life, keep the commandments: it was not the young
man's raske alone, if thou will be perfect, sell all thou have and give unto the
poor; but every man's part is in that service.

This was well patternd out unto us by the son of Majesty it self, the Son
of God, who forsook all things on earth, whose sacred life was exercised with
many grievous labors, not that that most holy and princely person stood need
of them, but because it much concerned us to imitate those sacred steps; he
would become a servant that he might teach us to serve. In all things he served,
that we might understand what a laboursome and exact soul in all virtue that
must be, that rightly desires to serve and love him: No man is exempt from that
great commandment of loving God with all the heart, with all the soul, with
all the mind, with all the strength, with all the heart, with all the
affections, all the soul, with all the life, all the mind, with all the
understanding: all the strength, with all the external things of the body. It
is the part of the heart to know, of the soul to will, of the mind to be
able: of the strength, from the heart, soul and will, to know will and be
able; nor only with the good health of the body, with strength, beauty,
agility, and other gifts, but also with our riches, dignity, and authority, to
glorify God, and do him due and meet obedience.

So that whatsoever good thing we can do in heart, soul, mind, and strength,
God requires of every one under the necessity of a commandment. Yea when all
is done that was commanded us, we may say we are unprofitable servants.

If he be worthy of reprehension, who going about to do some necessary and
profitable thing, shall slightly cast it off, and put himself into some base
and abject business; How much more is he to be blamed, who being borne to
this end, that with all his heart, soul, mind, and strength he should serve
the Lord, who is most worthy thereof, and from whom there is most benefit to be
expected: yet omits this and betakes himself to the service of the creatures
and vanities of the world, which do suddenly vanish and bring much harm with
them?

As if all be to be blamed who serve not God in this exact manner, how much
more are they suable to a severe penalty, who have dedicated themselves by a
special function to his service, as are in some sort his familiars in house
and table. How exactly ought they to follow the steps of him that has called
them, Math. 19.
saying follow me?

Which being spoken to all sorts of men, we cannot but gather thus much of
every man's duty out of it, that it is not enough, that we do the thing we do
with love, but of love and for love. For these are the footsteps which he
commands us to follow. So we must not fulfill something of that is written,
but the whole. Nor is it sufficient in his service that we do our duty with
love, or love accompanying it; but it behooves us to do it of love and for
love. We see the servant serves his Master with love, who loves his Lord and
Master, but yet does it not for love, seeing he would not serve him except he
expected a reward from him. But he should indeed serve him with love and for
love, if he served him only for this, that his Lord desired it, and held his
service grateful: and because he loves the goodness and society of his Lord,
without any other respect. And such obedience it is that we learn of our
master Christ; saying, follow me. Which signifies that we must do whatsoever
we are commanded to do with love and for love.

For to follow Christ, is to do that which he did for our instruction, and in
the same manner that he did it. But undoubtedly he did all things with love,
and for love, seeing that is the most sublime manner of working, therefore so
must we do, albeit we cannot do it with such perfection as he did, therefore
we must not think that God commands us to follow him in doing only, and not
in the manner of doing too: seeing it is to no purpose to do, if the manner of
doing aright be absent; namely to do with love, and for love. For we cannot
suspect that so excellent, magnificent and liberal a Lord as this, would teach
us a doctrine of small use and profit; but of singular moment, so that we
observe therein, as well the manner as matter.

Instruction, That the cruel slaughter which sin has made in man's soul, is
the cause of such great difficulty in serving God after this sublime and
heavenly manner. For this purpose, those that will serve God aright, must
consider their own dispositions that they may be able aright to meet with
their own defects, therefore they must know that the evil whereby they are
drawn from serving God after this most divine manner, proceeds from sin, which
has weakened the soul, and subdued it to it self. For if sin had not
interposed it self, we should have done every good thing with much facility;
but sin once arryuing in the Soul, all our desires, wills and appetites are
become so dissolute, disordered and rebellious, by that grievous special
disease arising from sin, that now loathing that which is good, we scarce
love, affect, or desire any thing, save the most abject, worth less and
vicious things, forgetting that infinite good unto which we were created, as
the thing wherein we have neither relish nor savor.

And hence proceeds the confusion and perturbation of the soul which we feel
in our selves so much distracted from the true God, whereunto we were created,
that the thing which is absolutely and only good being cast off, we incline
ever, and greedily follow that which is evil. Yet must we know, that howsoever
this sin has made such a slaughter of graces in the soul, that there is not
one friend left to take arms against it; yet does not our obligation cease
from binding us to do what is our duty, and for which we came into this world.
For albeit this great infirmity does so infeeble us that we do all good things
with great difficulty; yet does it not make us altogether so impotent, but that
we are capable of grace and divine favor, whereby to repair this our former
overthrow and destruction.

Besides we must observe, that by so much more do we grow to an admirable
disposition of serving God aright, which disposition had ever remained in the
soul unto all good things, if sin had not diseased it, by how much more we
shall have our appetites and desires repaired and disposed, which by sin were
formerly indisposed. And he shall have them repaired, who with an attentive
care and profound consideration of the things we speak of, shall direct them
all to the Lord, with a repugnancy to all things that are without the will of
this Lord: and a following of all such remedies as are here described. And in
that degree wherein any shall obtain this, in the same shall he be advanced
here in sanctity, and afterward in glory. And there is no doubt, but herein
one may so profit by assiduity and diligence as that he may do all things with
great faclity and delight: to which he shall be the more easily advanced, if
he often and attentively read these instructions.

5 Instruction. That we have in our bodies and souls sufficient means for
the reparation of this decay and ruin, if they be stirred up by the grace of
Gods spirit. As we have both body and soul, so we have in both of them
instruments wherewith to work. For as the body has feet to walk, hands to
work, mouth to speak, and the like, so the soul has the understanding
wherewith to know, the will wherewith to desire, and diverse other faculties
of the appetite. But it must be observed, that the more excellent the worker
is together with the instrument, so much more worthy is the work, so that all
things concurring to the act be suitable. Corporal actions have so much more
excellency in them, by how much the instrument of the soul concurring to the
act is more excellent.

Now that is called a singular instrument, which to the production of the act
is moved by a good end: Therefore the most excellent instruments are the
understanding and the will, which can be moved of God alone: as we have said
in the second instruction. Therefore of small worth are corporal things which
do not so proceed. And this is it that Saint Paul said, 1. Tim. 4.
bodily labor profits little. But the actions of the soul are of another
kind: namely, because of themselves they may be of great profit.

As if one exercising his understanding should consider, how base and abject
the honors of this world were, and of what value those things which God
commands are; and how unspeakable that glory is to which we aspire; also to
know how one may moderate his passions and the like. Again, if one exercise
himself in his will, loving that which he knows is good, and refusing that is
evil. Such refusals of the soul should be very profitable, albeit the body
were very idle; for by such exercises would be produced excellent habits, and
the evil habits destroyed; which thing of it self is very laudable, albeit
done for the only love of virtue as Philosophers did: yet much more being in a
Christian who has faith, but most of all, if in every work we join faith
with our intention actually directed unto God.

Hence may it be observed, how much every one ought to be exercised in the
actions of the soul; which thing he may do, whether he be employed in body
or no in every time and place, so that speaking with another in any temporal
affair, yet may he in soul work, by loving God, recaling to mind some of his
works.

This may seem difficult to him that has not attained the habit thereof, yet
custom will make it easy, as we must remember that virtue is practiced about
difficult things. Therefore violence is to be used to the will, that thou may
become an industrious workman, to do singular things with facility. Which if
thou do not attempt, no marvel is it, that thou can not be more devout
toward God, seeing he is ever ready to assist thy desires unto that which is
good, and to withstand thy pronenesse to evil, so that thou do rightly use
the means.

And be sure that if thou desire on earth to be a great and excellent friend
and servant of God thou shall the sooner attain unto it, by how much thou do
daily more and more use these instrumente of the soul, thy understanding and
will, at all times and places.

And this is it which aduanceth the Saints of GOD to so much glory in heaven,
the neglect whereof is so blameable on earth. Seeing then our highest glory
consists herein for the most part, that we work by these instruments of the
soul, and our ruin in the neglect of this exercise. Let us see what course
we must take who have as yet been even liuelesse, to use these instruments of
the foul. And that we may begin with the understanding, leaving the will to
the next instruction, we will premise this theological and Philosophical
fundamental rule: that our natural appetite does naturally desire that to
which it is inclined, and seems pleasant to it, not standing need of any thing
to help or inuit unto it, but rather necessarily and as it were coactedly
desiring it.

But so does not the will work, bur first consults with reason, and finding
that the thing is convenient for it, it is then freely moved to will and
desire it. Therefore the Philosopher said, that nothing was desired that was
not foreknowne. Whence we collect that the knowledge of the soul which we
have in our understanding, is like a light whereby the will may see what it
ought to desire. This therefore being presupposed, we must chiefly regard,
that to do well and perfectly, the understanding do not err in knowledge,
which bceing had, presently the will is moved to desire that which is so
known; but if the understanding do err, which often comes to pass by the
malice which blinds us, or happily it erreth not, but the will through the
liberty it has to evil, will not follow that it knows to be good; then man
falls into all kind of mischief; therefore omitting many things which may
serve for this purpose; this is chiefly to be observed, that we be most
attentive ever when we will use the understanding, that when we would desire to
do any good work, or to get a disposition thereunto, namely, to be despised of
men, to flee all delights of the world, which godly men ever abandoned, in
these and the like which seem to be grievous unto us to do, or desire, by and
by we must use the help of the understanding, whereby we consider and
apprehend these things as most precious and acceptable to God, and such as do
accompany the godly men to heaven, without which he is ever out of his way to
that happiness.

Which as soon as it knows to be such, then the will takes courage to will
and embrace that thing and also to practice it. For albeit the will, as it is
assisted by Gods Spirt, works sweetly, yet often the difficulty and
sharpness of the thing, so deters it, that it fails to work, omitting the
duty it is bound unto; but as we endeavor to make way unto it by the
understanding as I have said, it will assume such courage and strength, that
(the excellency of the work being known, albeit most painful) it will desire
to do it, and almost with as great facility will do it, as that thing which it
naturally desires. He that works after this manner, shall easily become a
man of singular virtue, and shall make a wonderful repair in his soul of the
slaughter and ruin which sin has there made, and shall also with great
facility do that which makes men happy, both in earth and heaven, namely know
in a great measure the wonderful things of God and knowing to love them, and
loving to rejoice in them, contemning all earthly joys and pleasures for them.

Instruction, That God is pleased to give to all his Saints and such as from
the heart seek to serve him, such a strength of will, whereby they may both
desire and love, refuse and detest every thing (in a great measure) which
either helps forwards or hinders their salvation. This is surely to be known
of all, as the chief foundation of all this discourse, and of all holiness of
life: containing a memorable Cannon of the freedom and strength of will, which
God by his Holy Spirit has renewed and repaired in the souls of his faithful
servants, and so rowsing up the soul from a dead sleep and spiritual
lethargy, and benummednesse.

But here let no man deceive himself, as though this freedom of will were
natural and in his own power; for without the goodness of God, 2. Cor. 3.
we cannot think a good thought as of our selves; How much less can we will
or work it? But presupposing this, we say it is in man's power to desire, or
not to desire any thing which he judges to be desired or refused, and that,
to this or that end as often as he lists: as for the purpose. There is no
man but he may desire to be dis-reputed and dis-esteemest of men: albeit thing
to some men be difficult to incline unto: he may also to diverse ends desire
it, and make choice of these ends as he lists. For a man may desire it,
thereby to obtain the modesty of the mind which is a good end: he may also
affect it, to the end that in something he may be like the Son of God, which
is yet a better end: and he may wish it, that by abiection and contept, he may
be so disposed to God-wards, that God may find in him an acceptable obedience,
by perfect love and charity, and this is the best end of all the rest.

Now to give an example of refusing to will and desire a thing: a man may omit
and refuse, and not desire to be esteemed, or to be he loved before other men,
and that to the same ends which we have spoken; albeit by corruption of nature
he be inclined hereunto, greatly to desire to be esteemed and reputed in like
manner, as it is in every man's power (in some degree) whom Gods spirit has
sanctified, to desire or not to desire any thing, so is it to do the same as
often as he will bend his will and use the holy means thereunto. Yea every
hour as by how much oftener he inclines and inforces his will to desire or not
to desire, so much sooner shall he extinguish in the soul all vicious habits,
and engender those virtuous.

For better declaration whereof, let it be remarkable that to produce the act
of willing the thing which we abhor, we must consider that God is hereby
served, in that we do desire this thing, and incline ourwils unto it, and as
it were use violence to the will to effect it: even as the sick desires the
bitter potion, because it brings health with it, which yet he naturally hates
because it is bitter.

But the act of not desiring, that which naturally we wish and effect, is,
whilst considering that the thing is not acceptable^ to God nor profitable for
us, we incline and in some sort enforce the will, that it should not effect and
desire it. And this shall be truly not to desire, when we enforce the will,
albeit there remain a certain repugnancy of sensuality, as we see it fall out
in the sick man, who will not eat the meat, albeit he have an appetite to it,
because it is hurtful to him; and it is something profitable for him, to be
unwilling to eat it, albeit the inordinate appetite he has to that meat be
not taken away.

So we see that we may produce the acts of virtue as often as we will, being
assisted by the mighty working of Gods holy spirit.

But we must consider, that besides the continual care we ought to have of
exercising the will to desire the good things that are to be desired and to
omit and refuse the evil, whereby the evil habits being rooted up, we may
plant those that are good: it concerns us much, most often to use this present
instruction, whereby to restrain those first motions, which do much confront
and impugn even men much given to virtue: or those motions in which we are
longer captiued, to which we do sometimes consent, though in smaller sins; as
to be delighted that our words or actions should be had in some estimation, or
other men's to whom in some carnal and worldly respect we stood affected: or to
be sorry and lament for the contrary, namely for their injuries, or for the
auersnes of others from us.

In all which, albeit sin may seem but to have a little share, and that to
consent and belong, holden in these, seems not to be deadly, yet so great
damage is hereby brought unto the soul, as he well knows it, who seckes God
from the heart. For from hence it is, that the soul is blinded and dulled, and
made heavy and lumpish to all good things. Therefore he that would be evermore
the Lord and Master of his acts and a potent man in Gods favor, so that he
may easily do the will of God, must by and by resist the first motions of his
will, desiring and affecting injuries, labors, sorrows, contempt and every
kind of contradiction which offers it self, resisting such appetite of sorrow
and grief which in the first motion offers it self for such injuries and the
like.

And on the other side, considering honors, men's favors, and all such things
as are sweet and delightful to the flesh, which move in us any complacency,
or liking, we must be ready, that in our will we may bring fourth the act of
not desiring such things as we naturally covet: for so doing we shall first shu^
the sin and vanity, and by often doing, obtain most excellent habit, all
wicked habits being expulsed. And albeit that often our evil habits and
customs makes it difficult to desire that which is good; or not to affect the
evil; yet being in our power, as I have said, albeit at the beginning weak
acts are produced, yet must we not be slack to bring fourth such acts, for
by little and little they will gather strength, and bring no small benefit to
the soul.

For ever as he that gives himself to the study of grammar, if he at first
learn but to decline a nowne, he thinks he has done no great thing, but as
he goes on and learn to decline diverse, at the end of the year he will both
understand, and speak almost all things, and so much the better, the second
and third years, and so at length will become a perfect grammarian, especially
if every day with all diligence and care of memory and understanding he apply
himself to the study, all which care and endeavor is very needful to become
perfect: so in this most sovereign art of serving God, how much more necessary
is it to employ all our wits and time, unto which knowledge, not one only
habit but many are required, as the habit of the love of God and man, chiefly
our enemies, the habit of humility, Patience and abstinence, every one of which
requires more time to learn then grammar, seeing in our souls are rooted
sundry other habits contrary to these; which never falls out in him that
learneth grammar or any other science.

Yet observe, that by how much as the acts which the will produces are more
vehement and frequent, by so much sooner are habits acquired, as it falls out
betwixt two of unequal wit, that the one profits more in a year, then the
other in two, applies his study with all his power, the other labors but little
therein. And we call that a vehement act, as when one is iniuried, or despised
without any precogitation, or pre-conceiued imagination thereof. If then we
incline the will strongly, so much to desire this, as that we should rejoice
at it, whereby through such joy the soul might he tamed against that which it
first loved, against the will of God: this we call a vehement act.

On the other side, honor and favor of men being offered us, if then we
puissantly incline the will to turn away from these things because such favor
and honor might be impediments to contempt and direction which is the way to
humility; which God so much loves. Such acts are of so great efficacy that a
few such would produce an excellent habit of humility and patience: and so may
we say of other virtues.

But above all, our frailty requires that we labor with great sorrow, we root
up vices out of the soul. And we do not only kill the root of vices, that
great one of sin brought forth and practiced, but every small inclination
which we feel in our selves to sin, is the root of sin, moving us to do
so against that which the Gospel commands us. Therefore we must strive to
strangle these inclinations, as the children of the most high God with all our
power. For albeit such roots are deeply planted in the soul, yet by frequent
acts at length we shall so extirpate them from the land of out flesh, even as
we are wont daily to root up out of the earth, the roots of corporal plants.

For such roots are not eradicated and vnrooted at one two or three blows,
but by many and frequent strong atchieuements and labors: but by many more
labors, is one vicious habit to be displanted, for it has laid his roots
much lower and more fixedly both in the body and mind.

This instruction may seem to contain nothing but dry and barren words, but
such do the grounds of all acts and sciences seem to be: yet of such great
benefit is this instruction, that this alone suffices to teach us the manner
and reason of doing well, albeit all other means were unknown. And it is so
necessary withal, to be known, and fully understood, as it is necessary for
him that would make a strong and stable building to know and have a sure
foundation. And it should be in vain to hope for virtue in an eminent degree
by the ordinary way, this way being neglected.

For want whereof many have labored but without fruit, as it falls out in
many affairs of the world, whilst a due and direct order is not observed,
which is the life of every action.

7 Instruction. That there is a way of planting good habites in the soul and
rooting out the evil: and that by the foresaid instruments: and withal, that
it is the office of humility to be ignorant whether we have obtained these
good habites, and withal the grace and favor of God.

He that would rightly serve so great a Lord as GOD is, presupposing that the
slaughter and ruin of the soul consists in evil habits, and the reparation
in good, which regularly are produced by many acts, or a few but those vehement
and strong; must consider that seeing all habits are placed in the soul, the
acts also by which they are therein produced are principally done by the
instruments of the soul, albeit sometimes they receive help from that which
is corporal.

As for the point: a man desires to build a house that might give him
contentment, money he has yea and also materials ready prepared: but yet how
long soever he shall think on this business, or desire it, he shall never
obtain it, until he begin to work, and join one material to another, as is
required in building of houses. So if a man be impatient and desirous to
correct it in himself and obtain the habit of patience; although he be
iniuried both by word and deed, although he desire the habit of patience, yea
although he bridle his mouth from words, and restrain his hands from revenge,
yet shall he never get the habit of patience, except he help himself, chiefly
by the inwards of the soul; often moving his understanding to consider, the
great benefit of patience, and inclining his will as the instrument necessary
for the producing thereof, to affect and desire injuries and persecutions for
the love of God, and our redeemer, who exhorts unto such things, and suffered
such things for our sakes. And such a habit is thus to be produced, as in the
sixth instruction we heard.

Thou offerst to the thought of thy understanding this objection; what will thou do, if such or such an injury (namely such as thou abhorrest) were done
unto thee. Suddenly from the evil habit that is in thee, there arises in thy
mind a certain horror of this injury. Therefore presently call to mind, the
great good which accrues unto thee by the sufferance of this injury and the
like, and thou shall bind thy will to desire such things, nor shall thou leave
thus to bind thy self unto it, albeit that it seem wholly to be constrained:
for there is ever some voluntarinesse in it, and so often shall thou produce
such acts, that, that may increase which seemed scarce to be voluntary, that
thou may voluntarily suffer injuries, and that this habit may be planted in
thee. And this example may serve also to plant the habits of other virtues:
namely by considering the great good of these virtues, and compelling the will
unto them. And if thou consider that it is the will of GOD, that thou should
be auerse from all filthy pleasures of the flesh, and compel thy will never to
desire them, not so much as in thought to dwell upon them, albeit it be but for
some small time, thou may in few days attain to an excellent habit of
chastity.

And thus may one be enriched with all holy habits. But we may observe, that
(as before) if by the only praecogitation of an injury, one may gain the
habit of patience, much sooner and better may it be held, if indeed injury
be done one, or any other thing, wherewith we seemed before men to be
confounded and debased, so that we compel the will to desire the same. For
the acts of the will receiving this injury are more vehement, and so do more
tame the Soul, then are those of the will only desiring, or receiving an
injury only in cogitation offered, namely by thinking that it shall, or may
chance.

A few vehement acts do work more strongly and effectually to produce a
habit, then many remiss, which he must very well observe, that desires to
be one of Almighty GODS most chiefest Servants.

For he must neither say, or think that he will do what in him is to
obtain the grace of GOD and other benefits of his, who does not also wish and
withal rejoice in himself whilst those things are offered to him by which he
may be the better disposed unto them, seeing these are so necessary for the
discerning of vices and increase of virtues, to the obtaining of perfect
charity, in which consists all the good and perfect obedience of God. Therefore
to this end it is very expedient to keep the will very firm and steadfast, in
the desire and love of God, and hatred of evil: to which purpose it will not
be a little available to ponder the considerations and reasons, whereof books
exhorting to devotion are full, namely, why God is to be loved and evil
detested.

But yet let not this be forgotten, to the end that we may ever be restrained
with the bridle of fear, from falling into presumptuous sins; that albeit
one may have gained most excellent habits of virtues, yet is he not thereby
secured, that he has gotten the true good, namely the grace of God: which
albeit he assuredly has, whilst he has these things which we here speak of
and shall speak, yet can we never naturally know when we have these things,
in the manner that the will of God is we should have them, and so we cannot be
certain that we have obtained the grace and favor of God. But it is very
apparent, and a principal sign we have gained it, is, when we so in our minds
handle the virtues whereof we have gotten the habit, as we think of other men's
virtues: namely that thence our heart should not be more extolled, but bless
God and give him thanks, who is the author of every good gift, and equally to
rejoice for these as well as the other, for the praise and glory of God, which
is equally manifested in the one and the other. To conclude, that we may not
cast the salt of our sloth upon the things that are here written; it must be
considered, that if any seem to endeavor to gain some of the things which
are here said that ought to be done, and cannot attain them: he may know,
that this befalls him because he i^deuoured not to obtain another thing,
which is here written, that he ought to procure. As for the point, if any do
much labor, not to feel the injuries that are done him, and yet does not
strongly endeavor to come to a detestation and hatred of himself (of which
we have here written in his place) he shall profitte very little at all. For
GOD suffers not nor regards a man's endeavor and labor for one virtue, with
slothfulness and neglect toward another.

The 2. thing I proposed in the first part of thus last days journey of the
Soul, to be discoursed, was a particular view or such furniture as was
requisite for the repayring of man's Soul slaughtered and ruined by sin.

This discourse might be without bounds if we should measure it according to
man's lymitlesse corruption, but the true servant of GOD, who by the former
general instruction is come unto the knowledge of those many murders sin
has committed in the soul, and how much he is enabled to help himself by
such instruments as he has received from GOD, calling first upon GOD for
help, by which means he may use this power and those instruments, with such
others as are necessary to this purpose: it follows, now that he exercise
himself in such things as are very necessary to that reparation.

First, therefore he must be exercised in rooting up sin in the Soul,
that being about to perform any duty to GOD, there may be nothing so much
to offend the eyes of so great a Majesty. So this being don he must deck
himself with such habits and virtues, as may make him appear beautiful and
graceful in his sight. Which is to be performed by these exercises following.



He that has offended so great a Lord as is our God, by such grievous
treacheries as we have done, and would now again come into his service: it is
meet that first he labor to get his offense pardoned, and that to do this he
use those means whereby he may more easily be restored to grace: and that we
may not as desperate persons, or conceited idiots think that no remedy is to
be found for so great a malady as that of our malice, the divine goodness
ever desirous of our good has provided for us an easy remedy, namely that we
should be sorry for our heinous proditions and offenses which we have committed
against his goodness, and no sooner shall we intimously from the heart
conceive this sorrow, but by and by all our wiekednesse shall be blotted out of
his memory.

So great is the malice and poison of sin, that to the extinguishing and
putting out of the same, not all the sorrow and tears of all men in the world
is sufficient of it self; how much less the sorrow and tears of one man
alone? but yet so great is the clemeney and mercy of our Lord, and of such,
value is the invaluable price of the precious blood of the son of God, that
he is pleased, so that we repent our sins with a sincere heart, and with a
lively faith apply that precious merits of that spotless Lamb of God to our
wounded souls, to supply in mercy what is defective in our weakness, and to
accept that all sufficient sacrifice of his blessed Son upon the Cross for a
complete and full ransom and satisfaction for all.

And surely it is but just and right, that we grieve for our sins committed,
for there is no man living who is not naturally grieved, and does not repene
that he has done any act, whereby either harm may ensue unto him, or he may
be deprived of any good thing that he affected. Now sin is the cause that
we loose that infinite good, euren GOD himself: it is the cause that grace is
taken from us, wherein consists all our riches, it is the cause that we become
Satan's servants, and GODS sworn enemies, it is the cause that he that dies
in it, shall for ever be deprived of, the inheritance of heaven, and buried in
infernal dens, and justly ought he to suffer so great evil, who commits
Treason against the most supreme GOD, who was content to die, that he might
give unto us life. To recount the evils wherewith sin affects us, were to
number the drops of heaven in a storm of rain.

Therefore our sorrow for sins ought to be longer the^ any words can reach,
seeing our GOD offended, is so good and so worthy of our service, and never to
be offended: whose anger and offense ought most to urge us, and: whose will
and goodness, above all things to move us to blot out our sins with the
sobs of our hearts, and tears of our souls, that being put out of his sight,
that divine goodness may be pleased with our lame obedience.

But the manner of acquiring this sorrow, if the heart be found to be hard,
is, that we represent to the Soul, the evil that proceeds from sin and
compel our will to desire that it were not committed, and that God had not
been offended by it. And this act of the will we must labor often to produce,
sometimes generally for all sin, sometimes discoursing from one sin to
another, and with the greatest endeavor we can, albeit sometimes we may seem
to have no sensible grief; for such is not in our power, nor is absolutely
necessary at all times: God in whose hands it is will give it us, if we often
assume that which we can obtain: and in this sorrow he that will rightly begin
to serve God, must continue a month or more.

Exercise. Must be in the hatred of a man's self, a thing before all other
requisite in expelling the evil customs of the soul. For as from the love of
our Savior spring innumerable evils, from which ill customs and habits do
arise, to when the love of our Savior cease, and the hatred of our Savior
enters, to which the Gospel in many places exhorts, every sin and evil
custom is banished. But because such kind of hatred seems at the first sight
to defer us from this exercise, for the inbred love which every one has
toward themselves above all things in the world, unto which also every man is
bound,

I Presupposing the rule and Canon of the sixth instruction, the manner,
wherewith every one ought to hate himself, must be this, that he neither
will, desire nor assume to himself any thing that may delight him besides that
which without the offense of God he cannot omit, but if he must desire it and
take it to him, then it must be so done, that as much as in him is, he be sorry
for it, conconsidering how unworthy he is of all delectation and pleasure in
respect of his sins, and thereupon is sorry that he is compelled to admit it,
yet in as much as it is the pleasure of God, he willingly and joyfully admits
it. As for the purpose, eating, drinking, and the like, which bring some
delectation with them, thou must never assume, will or desire them for thy own
comforts and delights, or to satisfy thy own appetite, nay thou must with a
firm will determine with thy self, that thou would not admit it, if the
will of God were not such as would have thee to do it, To hold this firm
resolution, it is needful that thou call to mind the sixth instruction.

And herein shall thou know that thou hall gained such a will, when thou take
only so much of these, and in that manner as thou think God would have
thee to take and desire. God would that thou should take of meat and drink
what is necessary both in quantity and quality. In quantity, so much as is
truly and not fainedlie necessary unto thee whereby thou may be disposed
and made strong to the service of GOD: in quality, that with all thy power
thou reject all sweet taste therein, except when it is necessary for the
remedy of thy infirmities.

In these and the like it will be ever expedient, that we take something
less, yea whilst yet it may seem necessary unto us to take so much. For
often the too much love of our selves will impose upon us, but seldom the
hatred of our selves.

Besides it is necessary together with this hatred of thy self, that thou
do now desire all the toils, vexations, contempts etc injuries to be done
thee, which be wished, desired etc assumed, so that it be not against the will
of God, or be the occasion of the loss of some spiritual or temporal good.
So this is necessary the caution, discretion, and counsel of some wise and
holy man, and a continual fear that under the color of good, we be not
deceived. For we must not believe every spirit, 1 Ioh. 4.
but above all, the light of the holy Ghost brings much light unto this
business, which without doubt shall be given to them that with humility of
heart seek it.

It is also besides necessary, if we will worthily hate our selves, not only
to leave all delectable things, and withal desire all greeuances and
vexations, but withal we must herein rejoice, when any such adversities and
priuations of pleasant things, nay of necessary things befall us from any, which
is more grievous unto us then whilst we ^ake them up our selves, but chiesly
when in our judgment he who does such things to us, does it with an
indiscreete and malicious intent.

And albeit we cannot without manifest signs judge hereof, nor yet then with
any firm resolution. And albeit we ought much to lament the offense of the
persecuter and wrong doer, loving him in the bowels of compassion as one from
whom we have received a singular benefit: yet when we shall manifestly see it,
we must be very careful that so great a gift and precious pearl perish not;
but considering the reasons wherefore every one must hate himself, as we shall
show anon, then must our will come on producing most frequent acts of desiring
and accepting such persecution and contempt which is done unto us: which things
when we have done we shall be enriched with the holy hatred which we look for.

All these things Christ Jesus our Master has both by word and example taught
us, whose most holy soul, albeit never wounded with the sting of any sin,
and so there being no necessity of handling that precious body with any
asperity of hatred, yet would he for our example, despise all delectable
things and suffer persecution and to be so evil entreated as never was any
other man. All which he did, that we might learn what we ought to do, to
obtain this hatred of our selves which is so necessary. Seeing then his
Majesty would suffer such things, by his example to induce us to the like,
Christ suffering for us, 1. Pet. 2.
and learning us an example to follow his steps: Let us for the love of God
open our eyes and behold if it be just, that our GOD and Lord should suffer so
much for our sins, and to our instruction, so many injuries, indignities, and
persections, whilst we casting off all shame, forsake him, and not only not
in act bear any kind of punishment or injury for his sake, but not so much as
to have will to suffer it, nor yet ever meditate or desire it, and much less
that any man should speak to us of it. Surely as it would be ridiculous, if
any did desire to be called a student in Divinity, or to be accounted a Divine,
which is neither exercised in that study, nor yet is desirous to know any
principle of it: so is it ridiculous that any should esteem himself the
servant of God, or be in any religious congregation, which is the school of
all virtues, who labors not to procure and have this holy hatred, chiefly
having so excellent a Master to teach it us.

Let them consider this, who are so negligent in religion that they think all
Christian duties to be but matter of conformity, and let them know that the
name of Christians agrees not to them, unless they study the doctrine of so
sublime a searcher, delivered unto us both by word and example. And surely, if
nothing else would drive us to this care, but only that we might imitate so
great a Master as the Son of God, and be made like him, even that might
suffice, without any other reason, to make us walk the journey, which so
worthy a Master has trodden out for us, seeing we are sure that he cannot
there err in the way, nor has lost the crown of glory.

But that we may more fully obtain this thing, one thing is to be noted,
which at the first blush may seem to be of small moment, but more advisedly
considered, will be thought of much worth, Namely, that the chief exercise
most expedient for us to use, for the gayning of this holy hatred, is, that
incessantly we pursue and assault those our innumerable small desires, which
every moment occur. And the manner of pursuing them is after the fashion of
those who indeauor to set upon a potent adversary by deceits. For with great
circumspection we must provide, whether happily we desire any thing which is
not of GOD, nor leads us unto GOD, and as soon as we perceive that anything
falls out that may delight us besides and without GOD, suddenly the will is to
be inclined to contradict it, and not to accept it, But as soon as we shall
see any thing befall us contrari^at, or displeasant to us, by and by, to
incline the will to desire that. Which if any shall frequently exercise, he
shall far sooner obtain this holy hatred, and withal so great dominion over
himsclfe, as cannot be in words expressed. For it is most certain, that this
is the key of all those treasures belonging to perfection.

2 For what cause we must hate our selves: is now to be discussed. Which
albeit, may sufficiently be grounded out of these assertions of our Saviors,
He that hates not his own soul cannot be my Disciple, Luke 11. Matthew. 11.
and he that will follow me, let him deny himself etc. Yet to give the
greater satisfaction to this point which is holden of most men for paradoxall
and untrue, we must observe, that for many causes it is very profitable for us,
and that GOD requites no less service at our hands then to hate our selves.

He that loves his soul, Ioh. 12.
loses his soul, said the eternal truth, it is the root and fountain of
all evil in man's heart. Therefore one said well, if thou shall love evil,
August.
then thou have hated, if thou shall hate evil then thou have loved; learn
therefore to love thy self in not being thy self, for whosoever loves
himself, is deceived, and blind in that he loves it. As great madness, to
nourish that servant that will betray thee, and to cherish that thief that
brings thee to the gallows. The love of our selves will afford us no more
favor, and therefore it is wisdom to hate our selves, seeing it is no better
then the worm, that destroies the wood it is bred in, and the Moth that frets
the cloth that feeds it. Plato.
Heathen men found this to be the most grievous evil that could be in man, to
love himself; because he could not be a just judge of himself. 1 Love built
two cities, the love of GOD, Aug.
the City of God, even to the contempt of a man's self, but the love of a man's
self built the city of the devil even to the contempt of God.



And if you ask me what treason the sinner has committed, I answer, the
greatest of all other treasons; it is no other but to kill his Lord and take
his life from him. And that the sinner does this is plain, Heb. 6.
for he crucifieth to himself the son of God. The understanding whereof if
thou desire, the same Saint Paul gives in saying, Gal. 4.
Christ lives in me; namely by a spitituall kind of life, quickening of souls
and working in them the works of life, as it is written, thou have wrought al
our works for us. Isa. 26.
In this manner does God live in every righteous and godly man. Therefore
seeing God does not live so in the sinner, it is plain that by sin he has
killed him. But what a wickedness this is, and what a treason, and how many
evils it includes in it, let him well consider that will judge rightly of
things. 3. Let the third reason for which we must hate our selves be this, as
the most eminent, namely that our souls being emptied of the love of our
selves, so far is it acceptable unto God, as that it may he filled, with the
love of God, whose goodness will not suffer us to be emptied of the love of
our selves, but that he will fill us with the love of himself: and even in
that measure and no further shall we be replenished with the love of God, then
we shall be emptied of the love of our selves. For nothing can so rightly be
done as to hate all our sensual delires, that so the moll sublime will of God,
which is God himself, may reign in our will. Which is the highest pitch of
holiness that here we can have. Therefore I beseech you by the mercies of
God, and that infinite desire wherewith of his goodness he desires our
advancement, and again for that natural desire that all men have, to wish and
desire the chief good, even God himself: that you will not be negligent in
this, but search out the innumerable cranies, holds, and subtle manners of
having our selves in this hatred, whereby we may obtain such and so perpetual
riches and glory.

But seeing the coldness of our minds does not suffer us to handle our selves
any thing sharply as we ought; at the least, let us desire, and with great
desire consent, that we may be provoked, and may sustain persecutions,
disgraces, and contempt from others. For persecution, contempt and the like,
are no other but as a shop and hammer, wherewith to take from us the rust and
dross of our souls, or as the searing iron of the soul whereby to take from
it the poison of self-love, wherewith we are exulcerated and abstracted from
all good, that this exulceration being taken away, we may perform that
admirable work of God, which is the love of him. Therefore we should much
rejoice, When we are ill entreated of others, when we are affected with
calumniations and injuries, and with great love to God, and him that persecutes
us, cry out: whence have I this happiness in this world, to have the
exulceration and infection of my soul taken from me, and that it should be the
occasion to ^nrich me with my God, with most excellent riches and graces.

We may consider, that it is holden for a great happiness to light upon a
Chirurgian who can cure the wounds and ulcers of the body, albeit that he do
it not without sharp prickings and lancings, which mightily crucify even the
marrow of the soul. But sure it is much more happiness to fall into his
society, who beyond all reason seems to use us ill, and withal to take from
us even those things we stand in need of, for so he cures otherwise the most
incurable wounds and stinking ulcers of the soul. For if we willingly embrace
this, we shall be made sound from that deadly poison of self-love.

Happy is that man who shall feel and desire this, and shall with continual
and effectual care procure it: but more happy he, who seeing himself in the
midst of the conflicts of persecution and worldly disasters and misfortunes,
shall yet swallow those bitter draughts, that he may possess this love of
God, and that hatred of himself: but most happy is he, who through long
exercise is so directed toward the greatness of this most sweet hatred, that
albeit, for his natural inclination, it brings great pain with it, yet the
ardent desire of increasing in the love of God, does change it into so great
sweetness, as that was wont to do, which with a most earnest longing, he
before desired.

Of the manner, in respect of our duty, whereby to obtain this, shall be spoken
in the sixth exercise of humility which is the primary foundation hereof: Yet
this place requires, that we should deliver the most effectual manner of
obtaining this hatred of our selves because the thing is so out of all practice
and use. Therefore we must observe, that it is very expedient we be attentive,
that at what time the will is inclined to desire or accept persecution, it is
not fit to bring into sight the persecution it self, compelling our selves to
accept it: for it is something difficult, voluntarily to accept persecution,
being present or but lately laid on us, except we have a great measure of the
anointing of the holy Spirit: therefore we must do thus, using a holy
caution. It falls out often, that we are iniuried and that without all
reason, much grief accompanying it. Behold now we are at the point of death*
For at that time, sensuality has no life but is wholly subjected: the miserable
reason ^is not then mistress as it ought, but compassionats sensuality as her
sister, albeit aduersant: the devil who is never a sleep, endeavors by all
his michinations, to inflame us, that we might the more feel the persecucion:
yet God who is faithful, 1 Cor. 10.
will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength. Now it behooves us to
see what on our behalse we can and ought to do, with, Gods assistance, in such
a danger.

Namely, that the injury being so present and nere unto us, as much as is in
us, for some short time, we forget the same, and for this time, to lift up the
eyes of our consideration, to think on those innumerable riches contained in
the love of God toward us, and with this consideration we incline the will to
love and desire the infinite good of this love: so as now loving and desiring so
great riches, we turn our selves and incline our wills to the present
persecution, before as it were forgotten, and reputing it to be so necessary,
(as we have said) to obtain the riches of Gods love; we desire the same with
all our might, enforcing the will with all our power to desire it.

Thus, no doubt, the will being mollified, and strenghthned with the reward of
the love of God and future glory, will be most ready to be inclined and drawn
to accept such persecution, which before was so terrible in our eyes, and if
we exercise this often, we shall be so accustomed to that which is good, that
what before seemed above nature, we shall now with great delight perform. And
this would be again and again considered: because it is of great moment
as well to the whole Chapter, as that of Humility, Patience, Affections of the
soul, as also that of the love of our selves, and again to any difficulty or
labor inward or outward, and to conclude, to the whole method of serving God.

If I should add more reasons, why we should hate our selves, I might tell
you. should we fall in love with our selves.

as one does hate himself, as we have said, and not before, he then has all
the love which he ought to have toward himself, and which is most profitable
for him, as also which God would that he should have; that is to say, he then
has the love of God and of virtues and celestial glory and all things that
do conduce unto it. And this love suffers not the co-partnership of any vice,
albeit we are inclined to it, and so denying our selves and hating our selves
and taking from our selves the evil that we desire, we are filled with the
true divine love: which otherwise we could never enjoy.

one being placed in his due rank in the soul, makes it beautiful, and
directs it, as is convenient for the great dignity thereof, mitigating the
false and evil concupiscences which cleave unto it by sin, and disposing it
to serve him and without contradiction obey his will that created it.

It is not amiss then that we know what course must be taken to come to these
virtues. As much therefore as maybe gathered from the sacred word it self and
writings of the godly belonging hereunto, we will reduce all those things
wherein it is necessary that he be employed who would acquire so great beauty
of soul unto three.



2 That with many acts as with the matter,

3 That as with a bridle he may restrain, or warily lead and guide the
natural affections which are found in every man, called of divines and
Philosophers joy, sorrow hope and fear.

1 Of prayer. Our most high and omnipotent God would have us stand in need of
his supernatural help, seeing the good things unto which he has created us,
are supernatural. And he would also that we should call upon him for them, not
but that he more desires to give us them then we to ask them of him, but
that we might possess that with greater glory, which we obtain with greater
labor of desire. Besides he would have us ask, that as importunate suitors we
should more frequently present our selves before him, and so by often
presenting our selves in his presence, might the better come into the knowledge
of him. For by how much we have the thing present before us, by so much the
knowledge of it makes the greater impression: and the better we know his
greatness and super-eminent qualities, we shall the more rejoice in him; and
the more we shall rejoice in him and know him, the more we shall love him; and
by how much as we shall know him and love him more, by so much more will the
beams of truth shine in our souls: and to conclude, by how much as this light
together with his love shall shine in us, by so much more, whatsoever is not
good or tending to God, shall be nothing reputed in our eyes, and by so much
more shall we hate that is evil, embrace all virtue and come near unto God.

From whence it is clear by many reasons, that prayer is a sure journey to
obtain whatsoever is necessary for us, and that it leads us to the height of
love, to which we were borne. Therefore we must esteem this prayer or that
necessity of prayer, as a pledge which God has taken of us, whereby to
retain us with him. For he knows well, how much good comes unto us by his
presence, and how assuredly we would forget him, if we had no need of him.

Now we must know, that the excellency of prayer, that it may be imperious and
command a blessing, does not only consist herein, that we demand some
excellent thing, but with all and much more, that we have a sublimated and
high motive and scope. And the motive that should set us to pray must be, to
believe that our Lord GOD would, that we should have what we ask: and, he
would have us to ask, that we might thereby be disposed to his service. For
blessed is the bread which he eats, who eats to this end that he might
live, and living might be employed in increasing in the love of the glory of
his God. For so the asking of bread, and whatsoever else with a such motive, is
much esteemed in the sight of God. Besides, of such a mind we must be, that
if we think it not acceptable unto GOD, that we obtain that which we most
desire, forthwith, as much as is in us, we must neither desire nor ask it.

The hungry soul for the most part by the famine that oppresses him, is
moved to ask bread, but so is not he who rightly prays unto GOD, he must
ask meat and necessary grace and glory, not chiefly for that he has need of
these, but for that the Lord God would that we should have them, expecting
only our prayer that he might give them unto us; so that the will of GOD
desirous that we should have these things, must more move us to ask and
desire our own good, then the joy and glory which we hope, may accrue unto
us thereby.

Therefore the manner of praying ought to be, that our soul having attained
to a habit of asking that which God desires above any other things, and
exercised by many acts of so asking it, not chiefly for our own good, but for
that his most Holy will is most worthy to be desired above all desireables;
whatsoever we shall ask, let it be immixt and interwouen with such a habit,
and all the words of our prayers let them be joined to the acts of willing;
and desiring whatsoever we shall ask, for this cause that God desires that
we should have it, whereby we might thus become his more acceptable servants,
and have the greater love toward him. Happy are they that can thus pray, for
in few days they shall grow to be potent men in the Lord. To perform all the
foresaid things, are necessary the 2. and 6. instructions.

I will hereof give this example. For many do pray with the some motive; yet
speed not for the purpose: some man asks virtue ^^d grant to some good end,
knowing that GOD has commanded us to ask of, him* necessaries. He asks
instantly acknowledging his own unworthiness: perseuers in this man's of
asking and feels in his prayer some ^^dste of sweetness and divine love. Now
some think this prayer to proceed from a perfect motive and scope, but it is
not so; albeit the prayer be devout and good. But if you ask what it wants, I
answer there is this wanting, that he asked not of love, albeit with love.
Therefore I say it suffices not, that the motive be perfect, that he love,
and have all other things, but he must also be moved to ask of love, and not
for the love of the thing desired, albeit yet even the love of the thing may be
kept with much perfection: so that in act it be resired to this, that therefore
it may be loved, because God will that we should love that thing, which now is
not so in the former kind, and therefore exceeds the bounds of prayer.

Therefore many considering this, have come to know, that the love of
themselves was hid under the shadow of the love of God, and that it was true,
that albeit they loved GOD, yet were they not moved with this love in act
whilst they prayed, but with the love of themselves, albeit not with an ill
love, whereby they were moved to ask that which they did, because it was
good. This will be more easily understood by that which often falls out amongst
such as love one another; that one asks something of another, and that with
the love wherewith he loves him, yet not of, or for the love which he has
toward him, of whom he asks: but for the love of himself and his own
benefit. Therefore, as before is said, we must not ask so of God, but we must
ask with and for his love; that is, we must actually perceive a desire of
obtaining that we ask, whereby God by that may receive from us an acceptable
obedience; surely great and necessary is the attention, that we may know the
difference of these loves. For it is a thing necessary to be known, and many
think they have gone aright in this business, but looking nearer into the
thing they have found it to be only the imagination of the true love of GOD,
and themselves to be far from it indeed.

He therefore believes and knows himself to be in the right way, who
continually builds, as upon his guide in the way, upon an actual desire of
obteyning by prayer, these or these graces, that God may rejoice to see him so
beautified, and that he may grow in his love.

And although at the beginning of this exercise, many shall not only feel that
they do not increase in devotion, but rather to have made ship-wracke of that
which they had before, for which they shall be much grieved in their souls:
yet let them go on cheerfully in this great work. And let them not admire
that they feel this diminution of devotion, for in that he finds in himself
this coldness and indeuotion, he shall perform a far more worthy duty,
then before, whilst he seemed to taste a greater sweetness and contentment.

For this contentment was wont to arise from the love of himself, albeit not
evil, which yet is to be abandoned, that one may be wholly addicted to the
love of God which is best of all. For when it arose from the love of our selves
which was very great, we found great sweetness and pleasure in it: but that
love being discarded, the love of God above entertained, which at the beginning
is but small, little sweetness and devotion is felt; but this love increasing,
the pleasure and devotion will also increase.

For illustration whereof, our own experience will serve. We see that two
sticks do burn together, the one being drier and easily fiered, the other
not so, yet the firing of the one, makes the other being green, and not so apt
to burn, to flame and as it self does: but if you remove them asunder, you
shall find that stick which was not so dry, to loose both his flame and
heat too: and to keep it from going quite out, he must be enforced either to
use the bellows, or else re-match it with the former which first set it on
fire. In like manner, our love of God being not so hot and inflamed of it
self, if yet it be joined to the love of our selves, which is like dry wood,
it will as tinder set on fire all our works, but being divorced from this love
of our selves, the love of GOD will stand in need of the bellows of many
strong labors and actions to keep it in.

For scarcely shall we find any flame of this love, but rather seem in our
selves to be key cold: and therefore by many strong acts must we succor it,
by the consideration of those things, which according to the love of our selves
seemed sweet unto us; namely by the consideration of the great good of glory
and comforts which we hope for in time to come, and again, that so we shall
escape those great evils which we do naturally abhor and hate. And by such
breathings and blasts of the love of our selves, we may believe that some
little flame of the love of God may be inkindled, and by little and little
gather strength and increase, according to the proportion of our endeavor,
being helped thereunto by the love of God.

Yet it is very expedient, that we endeavor earnestly to have strong acts in
all the things afforesaid, whereby that so vehement a love of GOD may be
produced in us; as that was wont to be which we had before, as a love
compounded of the love of our selves which was great, vehement and contentfull,
together with the love of God, which was but small and very weak. And this we
must labor to do, till we find so great sweetness in being delivered from
our streights and miseries, only to the end that we may the better serve God,
as we were wont to feel whilst we desired the same, being induced thereunto,
only that we might be delivered from the anguish that did so tire us.

He that shall dot thus, may worthily conceive, that he has the true and
sincere love of God which we ought ever to seek and beg. This is, I
confess, a great alteration, and the change of the right hand of the highest
happy is he that tastes it in the earth, for now he begins to dwell amongst
those fresh pastures, which he shall more plentifully enjoy in eternal
glory. But it is very needful herein, that whilst we pray, we be very
attentive in this, until we be habituated and accustomed to such kind of
praying, whereby we may feel in all our postulations and demands, whether the
love of God, or the love of the thing, which we ask, have moved us to ask it
of God, nor by any means to pass from one demand, until we have inclined
the will* to accept it on that condition, because God would have us to ask,
and in the same to serve him. And if herein we be negligent, there is no hope
of growing in any good habit of praying. As for the point: we say, Our Father
which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name: in this first petition we ask, that
the name of GOD in us might be had in estimation and love, without any mixture
of earthly things to be loved with it. This is so high and sovereign a
petition that whosoever obtaines it, is blessed even on the earth. Therefore if
any do understand it and love himself undoubtedly, he will desire and seek
so great a good to himself, and with great affection he will desire it: and it
is a good postulation and desire.

Yet must not we content our selves, herewith, but going further, must incline
and induce the will to another more perfect motive, namely, that we desire this
thing because God is most worthy only to be esteemed and beloved in our
hearts, without all commixtion of our love, or of any other earthly thing, and
because he has created us to this thing. Nor let us by any means pass to
any other petition or demand, until we have obetined this motive. And with
all let us remember what the Son of God said; Luke 18.
We must pray always.



It is true, that many excellent things touching the sovereignty of virtues,
are written in many books, but happy is he that reads and learnes them in the
book of life, which is Jesus Christ, the fountain of all wisdom in Heaven
and Earth.

Learn of me, Matthew. 11.
says that wisdom, as of the most learned Book. And what shall we learn?
But a few things; as well, least they should be forgotten, as for that they are
such, that being learned, we need no more learning, we are full of true
wisdom. Learn therefore of me that I am meek and lowly in heart. Let no man
then think he can be enriched with virtues, except he learn them, from the
Son of God made man, and chieftly from his most sacred passion, for this is
the golden mine, given unto the world of our most merciful Father, that thence
we may fill our hands and hearts of all things needful.

It is great presumption, to think being severed from this plentiful mine, to
gather any virtues or graces; but he is happy that is admitted to the inwards
of this mine, by continual meditation thereof: for there shall he find most
sweet veins of all divine riches, to advance him to the seats of the Angels;
seeing in him are all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, the fullness of
the Godhead dwelling in him bodily. Of this Master therefore we are to learn
two lessons of Humility and Patience, as in his former inuitation, we so:
learn of me etc.

Of humility, A virtue that climbes so high, and dives so low, that the learned
have made sundry ladders to come unto it. Not let any think to come to this
Heaven of Humility without these ladders. But these being so plentifully
handled by others, Heave them and pass on to the business it self. In my
opinion whosoever shall ascend by these degrees, shall soon come to the
knowledge of all things, and sal clearly see that he is nothing of himself,
save nothing indeed; and that all whatsoever is any thing, is GOD himself: and
that seeing it is so, he does worthily exact of us, unless we will commit
these, or some worse crime, to bestow all our thoughts and all our powers, by
all means to magnify him, whose that all is, that is any thing.

Besides, Humility being such a virtue, as wishes nothing that is not its
own, requires that the whole world should handle and esteem it for that it
is, i. a^ nothing, and that men's hearts should not, for the least space of time
that is, be employed, in esteeming that for something which indeed is nothing,
or which is a vessel of all iniquities worse then nothing, and such is every
sinful man. That therefore this may be firm and fixed in every man's heart by
many acts of good consideration in that consists the key of humility, in
desiring, that those which injury us and such as see us so iniuried, may think
that we do not suffer this out of humility, but because we cannot avoid it.
For we cannot esteem it any great thing, when we desire to be ill entreated
with despite, if we think that those who see it, do judge that we suffer
it out of humility, not offended, nor feeling the injury. For he that would
please GOD, must endeavor to be accounted vile and abject, not of an humble
and modest mind.

This is that which I say, that we should so desire to be accounted vile of
others, and to be handled as abiects, that we should also wish that they should
altogether think we were so handled against our will, and that we take it
very hardly and are much offended that we are so esteemed and so dealt withal;
when in truth we rejoice for the holy hatred of our selves, which we find to
be in us. Yet we must observe, that if any man were of so great virtue, that
using no violence to himself, he could wish that other men esteemed him vile
and not humble, such a man for the edification of his neighbors might wish,
that they did judge that he suffered such injuries with joy and not against his
will, but for the love of God and humility: and that should be very heroical
humility and such as the son of God would have us learn of him.

But seeing this humility is to be learned of our redeemer, let us set it
before our eyes as the rude and unskillful in painting use to put the example
which in learning they desire to imitate. This humility of the son of God, is
inexplicable, yet will we according to our gross conceit, endeavor to know
it: considering that when he was God infinite, and man most perfect, he would
and with great joy did choose to be esteemed and entreated for the most abject
thing in the world, for thy sake, suffering all kind of injuries and
contumelies from the day of his birth, until he suffered most ignominious
death, and all these things, not for that they were necessary for him, but that
we, who had so great necessity might learn the manner of humbling our selves,
which consists in these said things. Whence we may see how reprehensible he
is, who does not learn this humility, which so great a Master does teach, and
which he exercised in himself, albeit not for himself, but that we might
learn of him. Therefore the humility of our Lord being known, every one ought
to frame in his heart another humility: to the imitation and likeness hereof,
not that he is commanded to come to the equality thereof, for albeit all the
creatures did desire and rejoice to be accounted vile, and to be most
unworthily entreated; out of the mean conceit they had of themselves from the
true knowledge of their own abiectnesse and baseness; and if all the humility
of all these were in one man; Yet this humility were nothing compared with our
Redeemers humility. For many ways, there is infinite difference betwixt his
Majesty and our nullity: every of which puts infinite difference betwixt the
excellency of his humility, and all the humility of all the Saints of God in
one, and therefore I said that we must frame our humility of the imitation and
likeness of his.

Some may happily admire that God exacts of us so great contempt of our selves
and humility, and which cost him so dear whilst by his example he taught it
us. Therefore we may observe that it was his will so to do, because indeed it
was good for us, and because we have no good thing of our selves, but all from
his bountiful hand, whom we ought to glorify for it, and not our selves: And
it is not only good for us, but most necessary, for such humility is a perfect
medicine for our deadly infirmity which proceeds from pride: nor shall ever any
man be perfectly cured of it, but by humility. So much as shall want of the
perfect cure of it, so much shall want of the clensing of the soul; and how
much we want of the clensing of the soul, so much shall we want of the
benefits and grace of God, and so much also shall we be less his.

And if any ask how one may rejoice to be agitated and turmoyled with
contempts and wrongs, seeing it is a thing difficult to desire it. I answer
that it may be done out of the great consideration of this humility of the
Son of God, and the benefit arising unto us by it, and chiefly, because we
are so made able, that GOD may have joy in us and an acceptable service of us.

But there is no disceete man will cast that from him, whereby the will of GOD
may be fufilled together with a man's own honor, and inestimable and perpetual
profit to himself, and that with the labor of a most short time.

But that we may in reason answer this objection: we must note, that to frame
so worthy an humility, it is necessary (as in the sixth Instruction) that we
often incline our will; and again that we often, nay daily desire with joy
this so precious an abiection and contempt. For how worthily ought he to be
despised, who so often is found a Traitor against his eternal Lord and
Savior, by sin betraying his soul to Satan, and taking it from him who of
his only goodness would die for it?

Surely if seriously we thought on these things, with much grief should we
take honors if they were offered to us; seeing we clearly know that hence it
may fall out, that it may be a hinderance to us of most excellent good things,
which by the contempt of our selves and true humility is the way to the
Kingdom of heaven, do undoubtedly remain for us. Yet notwithstanding in some
cases, a man may wish to be honored and esteemed, namely if he have the eye
of his intention to some service of God, which he believes or sees, may by such
honor be performed; but even in that case, also, he must desire with great
caution, fear, and some grief, to be honored.

Now there is a certain evil fruit and venomous hear be which grows
plentifully in the world, ouer-growing and indeed overthrowing all virtues, but
chiefly hindering the increase and growth of humility, namely vain glory the
mother of all evil, which infects all that is good in the whole man. And
little or no vain glory at all will offer it self to him that has denied
himself and hates himself in such sort as we have said. For vain glory is
nothing but a complacency and joy that one takes, from that which he ought not
to take it, or in that manner he ought not to take it. Rightly may one rejoice
of the good things he receives of the hand of God, so far fourth as he sees
or hopes that any service of God or benefit of his soul (for both are one if
rightly understood) may arise thereby. Else it is vain joy, and vain glory:
for we take unto us that glory, that is due to God alone: or else we glory in
our selves when we should glory in the Lord.

Therefore let every man suspect, that it is vain and not spiritual joy which
he takes of the benefits received from God, whilst he reioiceth not in the
same manner, considering the benefits which others have received: for albeit we
ought fistt choose good things for our selves before others, and also to rejoice
(that when it was not decreed that we together with the^ should obtain it, it
fell out that we had it) yet whilst both we and they obtain good things at
the good hand of GOD, the divine Majesty does equally rejoice at both, nor
ought our joy to be any other but in GOD, and for that his holy will is
fulfilled. Thus reioiced the spirit of the blessed Virgin in God her salvation.
Our good GOD would have us so much to rejoice of every good thing we have, as
we know the same good to come from God, and to serve for the service of GOD.
And when it exceeds this ordination of God, and goes beyond these bounds, then
presently becomes it vain joy and vain glory.

Yet far worse is the vain glory, which arises from the good thing we have
not; but worst of all is that, to rejoice at the evil he has committed. So
crafty is vain glory that often he who is of small virtue, will yet think
himself to rejoice in God for the good things he has, when as yet for the
most part it is mixed with vain glory. Therefore until one be well assured of
his virtues and graces, he should ever flee all kind of complacency and joy,
whilst he recogitates the benefits of God which he has received of God, or
hears of himself, and should rather accustom himself at those times, to
stand in fear, whereby should, with a certain grief have vain glory in
suspicion, which hiddenly is wont to rise out of these things.

Therefore omitting that worst kind of vain glory as too gross to be
entertained of any child of God, and is only in the wicked, and such as desire
not the true good: we will return to the first vain glory which arises from
that good which a man has, does, or hears of himself. The thing which may
easily disturne us from so great an evil, is, the consideration of the mighty
vanity and falsity which may be found in it: for there is no man that is given
to virtue, who does not hate the thing which is vain and false: and so often
and long may one consider this thing and that which follows, that by much use
of considering it, he may conceive so great a hatred against this evil of
vain glory, that thencefourth it will ever scarce offer it self to a man. And
this is the consideration, it were a vile and odious thing if any noble
courtier should esteem it for a great matter, and should boast of it, that he
had put himself in some small peril out of his love and duty to the King,
which King before that by reason of him, and for the great love he bare to him,
had exposed himself to many great dangers and wounds. But if the same noble
man, should not only esteem that small favor he had done for his King, to
whom he ought so much, very highly; but also boast of it abroad, his leuity
and folly were worthy every where to be laughed at. But yet this vanity of his
were much more abominable if the King himself should have borne all this
toil without all help of this noble man, and that the noble man should have
suffered that little danger with the great favor, and help of the King, and
with great promises and benefits before the danger suffered, and after that
little danger suffered, largely performed.

Into a vanity incomparably worse does he fall that follows vain glory. For
our most high God, a King of incomprehensible Majesty, infinite power and glory,
out of his only goodness, without any obligation beholding our infinite
necessity, for our relief, exposed himself to most bitter and ignominious
death; in which business we were so far from bringing him any help, that
we have not been thankful to him for it; nay all that were with him forsook
him, and we do most of all forsake him, through our defects and wants, albeit
his Divinity is now made known unto us much more then to any of them that
forsook him. Seeing then it is so, let us acknowledge how vain and wicked it
is for any man to glory at the duty he performs to God, omitting in the mean
time to glory in God alone, and how much more vain it is, for this cause to
desire to be had in account with others, when all that time, wherein there
hearts are occupied in judging us to be of much worth, they leave to be
employed in esteeming and praising God, the Author of all good. God forbid that
the heart which is not exercised in highly esteeming and praising the most high
God, to whom all praise and glory is due, should be taken up in esteeming me
to be of any worth, to whom no such thing, but shame and confusion is due.

He cannot but be held for consenting to the crime, who thinks others do
occupy their minds in praising and esteeming him being so vile, in the mean
time ceasing to magnify God for all his benefits: and yet is neither ashamed
nor grieved at such inuersion and abuse of these things.

And that which much increases our vanity, is, that whatsoever we do or
suffer, all that we perform is through Gods goodness and the bounty of his
hand, by whose singular help we do all that we do. And albeit some may
say, that it is to every man a thing glorious and of much worth, that he
accepts this goodness of God, and does not reject the gifts and benefits of
God, and so think that hence he may glory, herein to differ from the damned,
who therefore seem to be punished, because they accepted not the grace
offered: to this may be answered that there was yet never any man the world, who
vainly would boast hereof alone, that he had accepted of the benefits done him
by the King, but rather it should be accounted madness not to accept of them,
and that is the madness of the damned, that they received not benefits of God
when they might. But it is a foolish thing to rejoice, that thou would not
be mad, else a man may go presumptuously and pompompously, and being asked
the cause why he does so, he answers that he does it for this cause, that when
he might have been a fool, and fallen into the pit, yet he would not: and
that makes him advance himself, and think he is a jolly fellow. But such a
man in all men's judgments would be accounted a fool: How much more should he
of who^ we speak. For even this, that he accepted the benefits or God, or did
not reject them, he has chiefly from the help of God; what have thou, that
thou have not received: and if thou have received it, why boastest thou?
Therefore he that considering this in himself, shall boast himself, is surely
most mad and vain, and void of all good, so as much as he list, let him
boast himself, and glory in such his madness.

Patience, I said that out of Christ's school, we must learn two lessons;
Humility and Patience. Of the first we have heard; now of the second, how it
is to be had and preserved. This virtue of Patience is such a cossen german
(as I may say) to Humility, that almost they are ever found together, and by
the same means that the one is to be had, the other also is to be obtained.
For as to obtain humility, it is necessary that we set before our eyes the
humility of the Son of God, so must we do to gain Patience.

For who will complain of injuries and afflictions, having deserved them as we
all have, when he considers with what meekness and patience the Son of God
suffered so many and great acerbities, persecutions, afflions, torments and
most bitter death it self, who besides that he was true God and Lord of all,
was also of a more noble and delicate complexion above all other men, and more
sensible of afflictions? Who will not patiently suffer in remedy of his own
offenses, all occurrent afflictions and injuries, if he consider his God to
have suffered far greater for oothers, namely for a remedy to our evils. The
manner of obteyning this Patience see in the 7. Instruction.

But seeing we are entered into the field of Patience; we will set fourth the
great riches which we must dig for; to the appeasing of the mind, upon al
occasions of impatience: to which purpose we will propose some odious thing,
that may befall us. Thou conceiuest upon a small occasion of some one has
spoken evil of thee which thou never committedst. Through this suspicion, three
sorts of weapons are drawn against thy mind. First, the sword of wicked
judgment. Secondly, of painful impatience. Thirdly, of hatred against him
thou suspectest has spoken it. Now an industrious and skillful servant of the
heavenly King must so take these so dangerous weapons on his buckler, and
defend himself from them, that being wounded by none of them, he may from
every one of them receive a singular benefit and beauty to his soul, to the
great glory of the King, in whose service he fights: and that may thus be don.
First, from the first weapon and dart, he must withdraw his body by stepping
aside, inclyning his will, least he should receive the blow, consenting to
such a judgment, and considering we are prohibited by the chief Judge, to
whom only it belongs, who says, judge not. Therefore we must leave that with
great joy, and not usurp his office. Secondly, he must receive the second
Dart with all his forces, rejoicing at the injury and grief that proceeds from
it; and by how much the more as he shall seem to rejoice at it, by so much
less shall the devil assault him by im patience, least he should give him the
occasion of so great a good. And that it may thus fall out in this second point
have recourse to that which is written touching the hatred of our selves.
Thirdly, we must meet this third weapon, namely of hatred against him of whom
we have suspicion, or happily certain knowledge, that he spoke this; by
inclining the will to produce some singular act of love toward him, seeing
(God assisting us) we may incline the will to desire what it will, and to give
what end to our labors it will.

And as we ought to provide our selves against these foresaid three darts,
arising from this small occasion, so ought we to carry our selves toward all
the fiery darts of men and devils, which in all our lives do occur in any
kind of adversity, whereby we may in all things so look to our selves, that
patience may ever remain in our selves unhurt, and that we may ever remember,
that saying of Christ's, Luke 21.
By your patience possess your souls. Be sure, that when he shall have
determined, that patience shall have possession in it, if that patience fail,
the soul is left as it were destroyed and forsaken: for neither shall it
obtain from God another possessor, if it suffer this to be taken from it, nor
of it self can it have any other that is good. Therefore is it in the greatest
danger that can be, least it should be taken captive of every one, seeing that
roaring Lion never sleeps, but ever goes about seeking whom he may devour.
From whose jaws only such possessors, or those that are possessed of patience
are secure. Blessed therefore are the meek and peacemakers, as that giver of
happiness has pronounced.

3 The third thing which we noted to be necessity for the beautifying of the
soul, These we will reduce chiefly to these four, joy, sorrow, hope and
fear. Yet not omitting to discourse some thing of the rest. For these are the
natural affections which are found in every of us. For it is natural for
every man to rejoice at present good things, to be sorrowful for the evil,
to hope for good to come, and fear the evil. Therefore here our labor must
be in speaking of these affections, and some others very considerable to show
how they may warily be bridled and guided to the service of God.

For much evil arises from them, if they be suffered to go vnreined and at
liberty, because they never cease rouing and running hither and thither in the
soul, sometimes this affection, sometimes that, so that hence it is that all
the evils which befalls us, do spting in that. We suffer them without any
check or snub to take their range: yea even in men very devout, they do much
harm, albeit they are much confined. But this is to be noted, that if any one
do all his works both inword and outward for the love of God, as in the 2.
Instruction, and be led by a hated of himself, as in the 2. Exercise is
spoken, he shall with great moderation restrain and govern these affections.

Therefore here we will briesly proceed, observing that then are these
affections said to be rightly moderated, when we give our assent to none of
their motions in the mind, but such as we know do please God, and from which
he may receive an acceptable service: otherwise they ought ever to be banished
from his mind, that would safely travail unto God: as a learned man has
sweetly resolved. Bo^tius.
Tu quoque sivis lumin^ claro, cernere verum; gaudia pelle, pesse timorem;
spemque f^gato, n^c dolor adsit. If thou will see clearly the thing that is
true. Then banish joy and fear, expel hope, and let no grief seize on thee.
And it is to be understood, that then are these affections to be banished,
when they are not directed to that end, that in them may be found the service
of God.

That therefore we may the more easily banish them: we m^st know, that all
joys which the world affoords us, are to be placed in true evils; and that
for the cause following. And hence it follows, that all things which bring
sorrow and grief are to be placed and accounted amongst true good things,
seeing that by these, as by most wholesome sanatiues are cured the wounds of
our souls. And surely he that rightly understands and performs these things
may very easily do that Boethius couselleth, and which is in this Chapter
discoursed: to which that shall not a little help which is written in the 6.
Instruction.

Yet we will severally and briefly speak of these affections beginning. 1.
With joy, where we must know, that we are to joy in nothing but in God, and the
things with are of God, such are all the things that direct us unto God. The
reason is: for he that has so great matter of joy in God and the things which
are of God, is very in circumspect, if in the mean time be occupy his mind in
rejoicing in any other thing, seeing our forces are so much weaker to rejoice
and love, by how much they are more divided and distracted into sundry joys
and business. We ought also to know, that albeit we give our selves wholly to
GOD yet shall we not do that we ought to do, how much less, if we be
distracted into other affairs? Therefore one of these things of necessity we
must do, either repel every other joy as soon as it insinuats it self, to
which purpose we must refort to the sixth Instruction, or else that it be
ordered toward God, so it be not vain joy as in the 2. Instruction. And that
so our joys ought to be so ordered, we are taught; Rejoice in the Lord
always, Phil. 4.
again I say, rejoice, unto this we ought very carefully to look.

For daily inumerable things of small moment there are, which popose a matter
of joy unto us, from all which a man must presently extricate and acquit
himself, nor do I think it needful here to use any example. For this is a
general rule, concerning every joy that is not in GOD, or actually referred to
God. Yet that by more advisedly pondering whatsoever has been said, hereof we
may the more lively feel it, we may observe, that if it be accounted an abject
and base thing for a great King flourishing in all abundance to esteem a
little scrappe of silver so highly, that the gain of it would greatly rejoice
him, and the loss of it mightily afflict him and cast him down: then far
more is our baseness, who having ever present the infinite good things which
God possesses for himself and us in which we ought to rejoice, we yet rejoice
in other things of no worth, offering themselves unto us: such as are all the
things of this world: chiefly seeing we ought to love him more then our
selves, and so esteem his glory more then our own. 2.

Therefore we must never suffer any grief or heaviness to tarry in the soul,
but that which arises for our sins. Grieve for nothing, says a holy man,
but for sin only. And this is the reason: for sorrow is either for the evil
that is present, or the good that is lost: now seeing no true evil or good can
be lost, but for sin, we should not be sorrowful full for any other thing.

Besides, we may add that which we have spoken of joy, that to whom so great
an evil so falls, whereat to grieve as is sin, he deals very
inconsiderately in dividing his powers to sorrow for any other thing, seeing
all his strength and ability suffices not to sorrow so much for his sins as
he ought. Therefore that we may the better expel sorrow from us, we must
consider, and say, when all kind of tribulation lies upon us, why have I
greater care of my self, then my God would that I should have, seeing I am not
my own, but his? He will have care of that which is his own; knowing what is
expedient, what should befall it. This is that which I would say; that
whatsoever does befall us that is painful, it ought to be acceptable and
welcome to us, how long soever it last, as that thing which is convenient unto
him that is Gods, nor to grieve more for it, then God whose we are, commands
that we should grieve.

If any ask, how much GOD would have us to grieve. I answer: that he would
have us to take so much grief, as the acerbity of the thing that befalls us,
does enforce us to feel, yet so, as that we rejoice so much at the sorrow, as
it shall last, as at the thing which comes from the hand of God, and that by
this joy we may labor to drive away the grief, as the case shall require,
that we procure it after that manner, which we know that God would have us do
it, and because he would have us do it: for by one means it behoues us to
be delivered from the state of sickness, namely by procuring leuitiues, and
by another way from the strength of famine, namely by procuring meat: also
after one fashion from the violence of could, by getting fit garments: and
after another from the troubles of persecution, whilst it hinders us from the
worship of God by reason of the debility of our nature; to which is necessary,
that we give our selves wholly to virtues, thereby to gather strengh: or else
to flee the persecution, whilst our powers do no more suffice to bear it,
together with that, that God has inspired us thereunto. Yet are all these
remedies together with all others, which are also necessary, to be procured
with joyful moderation: and because GOD would that we should procure them,
whereby being delivered from such greeuances, we might with more quiet serve
God; albeit there is a necessity of suffering them, so long as we cannot shake
them off: and that we should rejoice for them, because GOD would have us to
bear them, for many causes, some manifest, but others hid from us.

And truly I know not, how it comes to pass, that even in this life, God
does not give himself wholly to that man, whom he has so wholly taken for his
own. But seeing it is certain, that he will give himself wholly to him, happy
shall that life be, for seeing God shall so be his, he shall ever rejoice in
his so great good and glory, as if they were his own proper riches. Oh how
blessed is that man, that knows this Iubile, for there are no words which can
manifest the joy he finds in his heart, whose soul, with the whole heart,
shall thus say; Oh what an infinite good do I possess, seeing God which is
more I, or more mine, then I am my own, does possess so infinite good things,
whom I now see, albeit imperfectly, yet I seek him and hold him for my own,
more then ever I held or possessed any thing for mine. Let us not think that
this can be expressed in words, but let us (to our purpose) conclude only,
that so great a good ought to move us, that we should not otherwise feel our
griefs, but as we now have spoken, seeing we ought not to desire for our
selves any other thing, then the divine goodness has ordained for us, and
after that manner he shall think fit to dispose.

But it is fit that we diligently ponder all the words we now speak, because
they are of great use, and contain great perfection. Therefore every servant
of God must be provident, that by the said considerations he presently put from
him the infinite pains and sorrows, which the miseries and disc^nte^tments of
the world thrust upon him. To which thing are necessary the acts spoken of in
the sixth Instruction presently casting away the unwillingness (as it is there
spoken) and that so often as such grief shall occur: or to speak more
rightly, every one should in will occur and meet the sorrows, that he may
desire those things from whence sorrows and afflictions arise. For when these
are desired, then the sorrow cease, which first did arise from heaven even
that we hated these things, and it is most just that we should desire those
things, from whence comes such grieuances, as well for that they come from the
hand of God, Job. 1.
as also for that our sins have deserved them, and with all many good things
do come unto us by them.

Therefore from hence it follows, as from a certain rule, that the faithful
servant of God ought either so to expel, or else to direct his joy and grief
to Godwards, that nothing else should occupy his thoughts besides God, whereby
perfectly to expel it, he may endeavor to make it a custom, to take up some
painful thing: and as often as any delightful thing or joy shall fall out,
to bring fourth the act of sorrow and grief: and again on the other side, to
rejoice as often, as any grievous thing shall fall out.

And surely it is most just, that he who offe^ding God and expelling him from
the soul, has delivered his soul to Satan, should joy at every grief and
grieve at every joy that befalls him. In this manner is that to be understood
which is wont to be spoken: Let thy joy be ever unto thee for a punishment,
and thy punishment for a loy. And he only shall perform this, perfectly, who
shall more manifestly know, that all things in themselves, and in respect of us
are nothing, but so far fourth as they are of themselves or by us directed to
Godward.

And albeit every man thinks he knows this: yet happy is that man in the
world, that sall truly know and feel this in truth. 3. Now as for the
affection of hope,

Of this hope which is no virtue, but an affection common to all, we may
observe, that albeit we are inclined to Hope for many things often, yet
nothing ought to reft in our hearts to be hoped for besides God, and those
things by which we think we may the better draw near to God, to serve him:
for whatsoever thing else we must think to be of no worth: an^ if at any time,
we see the hope of any thing to fix it self more in our hearts, then felicity
and virtues, we must presently expel it, seeing that it is evidently against
the due and right end. The Lord it my light and my salvation, Psalm 26.
whom then shall I fear? and so the Son of God: fear not them that can kill
the body, but fear him that can cast body and soul into hell fire. q. d. You
are much to feate the offending of God, or to provoke him to anger: but he
cannot be more provoked to anger, then if by your sins, you give him occasion
to send body and soul into hell fire. Hence it is that he cries, Alas I will
revenge my self of my enemies. Is. 1.
Therefore most just it is, that this great God be so feared with a filial
fear: For it is more to be desired, that we should pluck out our eyes, the^ to
do any thing to displease so great a God and so good a Father and Lord as he
is.

Nay he is not to be feared with any other kind of fear, seeing he only can
give both life and death eternal: and fearing him, there is no cause thou
should fear any thing else in the world. Qui timet Deum omnia timent eum,
qui non timet, Deu^, timet omnia: He that fears God all things fear him: but
he that fears not God, fears all things. For albeit all the calamities of the
world rush in upon us, if we fear them not, they can affect us with no evil,
which can truly be called evil. But rather if we boldly confront them, and
take them with a thankful mind, in that our God and Redeemer, would have us
to embrace them, in memory of those things which he suffered for us, they will
increase in us perpetual dignity and glory. Therefore being prepared hereunto,
that we esteem of no worth, or rather esteem as a precious ornament,
whatsoever calamity can befall us in the world, if any fear creep upon us, by
and by in will, we meet it, to repel it, that it have not that place in us.
In which the reverent fear of God, necessary for us, ought to be placed, to
this, the sixth Instruction is necessary. Surely he that shall thus rule the
passions of the soul, shall live without vicious passions in a great
perfection, and shall come to that peace, which makes the peacemakers be
called the Sons of God.

Of the passions.
SEeing it is impossible for him to get the victory that does not know his
enemies; and the more cruelly they vex us, and grievously wou^d us, the more
need there is to know their wiles: it cannot but be a matter of singular
consequence, for the true enriching of our souls, to know how to order our
passions so as by them the enemy get no advantage of us. And the rather,
because it is a resolved truth as well by assertion of the sacred Scriptures,
as holy fathers, that impugnation of our senses and passions is of all other
the most cruel, and brings the greatest dangers with it.

The cruelty thereof is sufficiently expressed by that exclamation of the
Apostle; Romans 7.
Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death:
and the grieous dangers thereof by that other of the same Apostle; 1. Cor. 9.
I beat down my body, and bring it into subjection least by any means when I
have preached unto others, I my self should be a reprobate. And the reason is
good; for the enemies are borne at home and in our own bosoms, which seeing
they cannot be expelled, those whom they cannot with cruelty prostrate, they
will by their improbity and incessant labor, tire and weary out. And this we
find by the unlooked for and manifold casualties of men very famous for
holiness of life. From whence it is evident, that this doctrine of the
passions is most necessary to those that have not tamed them: besides that it
is also wonderful profitable to the understanding of divine affections.

Passion therefore (that we may define it, for the purpose in hand) is nothing
else, but the motion of that sensitive appetite, at the imagination of good or
evil, with some kind of change of the body: to speak more clearly, it is an
impression whereby the appetite is stirred up, by the image of good or evil
conceived by the inward senses. This resides only in the sensitive appetite
which is composed of two parts, the concupiscible which is in the liver, and
the Irascible which is in the heart. And the acts of the will which are called
by the names of passions are not properly simple passions, but in act.

Therefore there are of proper passions in number. Love toward the good first
conceived: Desire or Concupiscence toward the good not present: Joy or
Delectation toward the good present: Hate first conceived from evil: Flight
or Abomination, from evil not yet present. Sadness or Grief from the present
evil.

Those other five which have their seat and being in the Irascible, Hope
toward the difficult good: Boldness against the difficult evil. Desperation,
Fear from the difficult evil: Anger against the difficult evil.

All these 11. passions are exercised about such things as are perceived by the
outward senses: and do prosecute those three most pleasant good things in the
world, Honest, Profitable, Delectable good:

And this is the nature of the Concupiscible, to weigh and ponder those three
good things and and their contraries according to their proper natures, and so
stands either well or ill affected. But because, it is often unable to enjoy
the good things by reason of the many difficulties, wherewith they are
besieged; it belongs to the work of nature, that the Irascible should be
present which might overcome the difficulties of obstacles and hindrances, and
place the concupiscible in quiet possession of the good. But these good things
seeming unworthy of our mind and by the imitation and inticement of the
present delight, do vehemently move the whole man, the passions being drawn
and made wild and fierce, do, make head against the tower of the superior
part, and do either cast it down being weakened, or disturb it, being
resistant. Therefore even from these things which we have spoken, may well be
gathered what kind of intestine and civil war hangs over their heads, and
of how many enemies they shall be beleagred, who desire to withdraw themselves
from the pleasures of the world to serve God.

To this purpose, we may aptly consider the stryuing of Jacob and Esau in
Rebeceaes womb which so tormented the mother, that she little less than
repented her of that conception. But consulting GOD, he answered: two nations
are in thy womb and two people shall issue out of thy bowels: the one people
shall overcome the other, and the elder shall serve the younger. So surely,
even as ic were in one womb, those that will religiously serve God, have two
people within them; which whilst they mind earthly things do well accord;
but man is no sooner come to the threshold of Gods house, but presently he
finds them rebelling and struggling the one against the other; because he has
begun to take part with the one and oppose the other: but let them be of
good courage; because it is the divine oracle: that the one shall serve the
other, but not as then, the elder shall serve the younger; but the inferior man
shall ferue the superior, the flesh the spirit, and sensuality, reason.

Now having generally thus spoken of the passions, as much as may seem
necessary to be known. Let us come to examine them apart. But this is here to
be premonished, that we must read again and again more seriously and
seeingly these general points, then the other, because every line almost of
these co^teines so many wholesome assertions: which except they be fully
perceived, we can never come to the knowledge of the inward man.

Therefore of Love, concupiscence or desre, delight or joy, wherein, as of the
rest, observe 1 The description of the passision. The remedy.

the passions of the Concupiscible) nor by the Irascible dare he attempt
against that is evil or fear evil, except by the Concupiscible he first
hated it: and he cannot hate any thing but that which diffents from the good
first loved.

From this it comes to pass, that not only the Concupiscible is before the
Irascible, but also that all passions take their beginning and rise from love,
the first passion of the Concupiscible, unto which all the rest are fast tied.
For no man desires, or is delighted, save with that which he loves; or
hates, flees, or is sorrowful, but for evil which is opposite to the good
which he loves: or hops or despaireth, but for that good which he loves;
or fears, or dares, or is angry, but for the evil which hinders the good he
loves.

Therefore we may thus describe love; that it is the first motion, which good
brings unto the appetite, or more plainly; the first impression whereby the
appetite out of the knowledge of some good, is affected, whilst the good thing
it knows, does please it. This similitude from nature will illustrate the
thing well: fos as every thing which does engender confers first form to the
things engendered and afterward a motion agreeable to that form; as when the
fire inflames the air, it first imprints in it the fiery form, and then a
fiery motion to tend upwards; so every good does not only imprint a certain
form in the sense, which conceiueth the image of good, but also in the
appetite, the image of the sense mediating it self; that is to say love, which
is as the form of the loved, and by love stirs up the motion of desire,
whereby the appetite returns again to the good it self, the circle being
ended.

Hence it is evident, what is concupisence (which when it accompanies reason,
is called desire) for it is a certain extension or progression of love, or
rather: that motion or step whereby the appetite affected with good, begins
to incline to that good it self. For after that good (which is the motion of
love) has pleased the appetite, the appetite enlarged it self to receive that
good (which is the motion of concupiscence or desire) by which motion it is
said to be drawn of the good it self.

It is violently carried, because drawn by pleasure: Therefore the desire is
wont to wax strong, if it be not granted to enjoy pleasure even until a
certain ardour, which is called fervor, and is the effect of love, the which
thing Lauguor (being another effect of love) is wont to accompany, which is a
most grievous sadness, of such fury, it is often wont to kill men: but if the
good desired fall out as we would have it, then follows delectation (which if
it be with the work of reason is called joy) and it is a motion of the soul
placed in the good that pleases it; or more clearly, that motion whereby the
appetite perceives the good which it desires, in whose enioyment or
possession the appetite is placed, is called delectation or fruition, which is
all one.

This passion is one of the chiefest and seems to be the most effectual of
them all; for it fulfils the motion of love: and in it love seems to exercise
all his powers: for seeing there are many effects of love; as (besides fervor
and languor before named) ecstasy, liquefaction, union, mutual inhaesion,
penetration, zeal, in embracing of the present good almost all of them do wax
strong and multiply.

Ecstasy which signifies the going out of the appetite from it self, that it
may exist in that is good which it affects; whilst good is present, acquireth
strength. Liquefaction which is a certain emollition, rarefaction or, softning
of the heart, that as it were, the poores being opened, good may easily and
quickly enter, albeit that it do keep his strength good being absent, yet is
it filled with the drinking in of that which is good. Union, which is as it
were a cotouching of lovers Mutual inhaesion, which is the binding together of
things that touch one another. Penetration, which is a certain sliding into
the inwards of the heart, do not fall out, but when good is present. Zeal,
which is nothing else but the impatience of a conceit if any would interpell,
the inioyer would fight and contend most fiercely.

Therefore it is plain that the passion of delight is compassed with many
circumstances, which do easily demonstrate his power. But even the thing it
self is so proved, by experience, that without any other witnesses, if any be
asked, what is the thing most attractiue, whosoever he be, he will answer:
Trahit sua quemque voluptas, every man's pleasure is his adamant.

For as yet those other two kinds of good, so: honest and pofitable good if
we take away pleasure, would not draw any man's heart after them; which is a
thing most worthy to be known, and is convinced by this reason: For we shall
see many borne in the country, whom if the King would draw into the City and
enrich them with honors and commodities, they would upon no other ground
refuse, then for that they would not forgo the country pleasures, to which
they arc accustomed, and which they despair to find elsewhere. Seeing then
that man's heart is sick with the love and desire of pleasure, as of a grievous
fever, let us seek for some remedy for these three passions.

shall find, that our most merciful LORD God would not take away food and
nutriment from these eleauen passions, but transfer it unto better good
things, that the sense, together with the superior part of man. First his
reason might instruct both the appetite and also, the flesh it self, according
to their capacity, to thirst after God, and to lift up themselves toward God.

For that thing which passions wrought in Adam before his fall, even unto that
do the servants of God and despisers of the world aspire: and often times, as
much as the divine grace vouchsafes to grant in this corruption of our
natures, are they made partakers of their desires: amongst whom, he was one,
who said; my heart and my flesh rejoice in the living GOd; and in another
place, my Soul thirsts after thee, yea my flesh how often? according to this
doctrine therefore of weaning our passions from the forbidden good things, we
will give these examples.

Let the examples be thus: thou happily see some thing which does greatly
please the appetite with a sudden motion: which is the motion of love,
presently thy heart extends it self to that thing which is the motion of
Concupiscence, for it coueteth that thing: if this thing be granted then
succeeds a certain delight of perceiving of joy touching the thing which
seems to agree to the appetite drawn on by the love and Concupiscence
aforesaid, which is the motion of delight: and in this manner, does that thing
bear rule in his heart, that was so taken with the love of it, and with a
certain kind of fruition, he delights in it, which is the end of
delectation, and to conclude does complete the motion of love. He therefore
that is so tempted, let him first discern the fault from the temptation: for
in such sudden motions of love and concupiscence, often their follows no
fault, because in men of riper years, they prevent the consent of reason: but
if any sin lie hid, by the negligence of reason, it is a very small one,
which I would have to be observed in all kinds of temptations: that I need not
repeat the same thing again.

goods things. But this restrayning of the appetite was in use amongst heathen
Philosephers: for it has nothing in it above reason.



kinds of repressing the appetite is human. The second is Christian: But the
third is divine.

But if the appetite do not give place: yet for all that do we not labor in
vain. For albeit the appetite do not obey reason at a beck, as the other
members do, but after a certain politic manner, and often, do most strongly
resist reason: Yet we find that by thus doing we are prepared unto a
Christian mortification, and by custom of fighting, reason at length gets the
dominion over appetite.

To end therefore this point with a short but sweet admonition: he that much
desres to kill his passions so as that they may not kill his soul, must know,
that if he shall know to moderate well his love, from whence all passions do
arise, he surely shall carry away the victory. Nor shall he only overcome,
but by a wonderful short cut, sooner then others he shall overcome, and with
greater delight and contentment.

And the manner of doing it is this: he must be very circumspect, in the
exercise of every thing, that he set not his heart upon the apparent show of
things; but as soon as he sees any thing that is pleasant, to turn away his
heart, and make have to breathe after heavenly things. For it is altogether
impossible, that the other passions should wax heavy or hurt us, if the roots
of love be cut up.

Let this be the example: a man sees some profitable good thing, and forthwith
as soon as he sees it, whilst his love is stirred up, he lifts up his heart to
heaven, saying, Oh how much more profitable things are provided for me there?
He sees something that delights him, and whilst his appetite grows in love of
it, his heart is instantly lift up to heaven, saying, how much sweeter shall my
banquet be in heaven, where my meat shall be Manna Angels food, and my drink
the fountain of life? He sees some honorable good thing, namely, other men's
estimation conceived of his witty learning, dexterity etc. And whilst the
appetite begins to be carried to the love of honor, he runs, and lifts up
his heart, saying, how much greater estimation and honor shall be conceived of
me in that most ample Court of heaven, then if I had the honor of the whole
world?

2 Of the passions of Hate, Flight or abomination and of sorrow and grief,
where also are two things as before.

evil: or more clearly; it is the motion of auersion, wherewith the appetite
is affected, when any thing dissonant or contrary and repugnant to it is
represented: for as betwixt the appetite and good there is consent; so betwixt
the appetite and evil there is dissent.

Hence comes flight and abomination of the evil which is the motion of
retraction, whereby the appetite departs from evil; as if we said; that, that
recession or declining whereby the appetite retracts it self from evil which
displeases it, were slight or abomination of the evil which is the intention
of flight: for after that evil is by the imagination represented, the appetite
does not only disagree and become dissonant (which is hatred) but also goes
back, which is slight.

Sadness or sorrow succeeds, when the evil is present; sorrow comes from
evil joined unto the body with the apprehension of sense: but sadness is for
the evils conceived by inward apprehension, which may also therefore be past
and to come which arc inwardly conceived, seeing sorrow only for the present
time continues, whilst the body is oppressed. Therefore sadness or sorrow is
a certain motion, whereby the appetite is vexed by the present evil; as if I
said, that it is the motion whereby the appetite is oppressed with the burden
of a present evil. These passions are of contrary motion to those we handled
in the 9. Chap. for hate is auersion from evil: love the conversion to good:
flight, is the departing from evil; desire is the progress to good; sadness
is the oppression of evil; delectation is the expansion to good.

But as love with the two other passions is carried toward the honest,
profitable and delectable good: so hate with the 2. passions arising from it,
inclines to the 3. fold evil, dishonest, unprofitable, unpleasant. Now by good
and evil, we understand either the true or the apparent good: for whatsoever
pleases the appetite is good, and whatsoever is repugnant in this kind is
evil. But amongst all other things in this place this is most attentively to
be observed; that sadness one of the principal passions (which as delight
complets the motion of love, so it of hate) is a capital enemy to true virtue:
for besides the hurt it brings to the body, this amongst all passions is the
greatest (for it has the motion of contraction, contrary to the vital motion
coming from the heart dilated) it most grievously hurts the mind, as by this
reason appears. For the mind is kept down by the weight of the evil present;
the actions are made more seeble: a certain cold vapor and sluggishnesse
runs through the whole man, and almost dissolues the ioints: whereby it is
hardly moved or else altogether slacks to the works of virtue, which being
difficult, stand need of exte^sion to undertake difficult things, which by this
reason is evident.

It is a thing well tried, that any sorrow of the body long raging, in short
time the whole man must needs be dissolved: nor can the imagination diuerte
from thence to any other work for sorrow is the bond of the mind. Now if
sadness be properly taken as differing from sorrow, it much needs worse
torment the mind then sorrow: for the anxieties of the mind are much more
grievous then those of the body; which is thus from the contrary proved: it is
the general opinion both of Divines and Philosophers, that the delectations of
the Spirit are greater then those of the body: for seeing delectation is a
motion proceeding from the conjunction of good, by how much as the good is
greater, the conjunction straighter, and the appetite more inacted to perceive
pleasure, so much the greater shall the delectation be, but the goods of the
mind are greater then of the body, as being Spiritual; more narrowly joined,
as being without any body betwixt; more lively perceived, as having the
understanding to penetrate the essence of good.

Therefore by the same reasons, the evils of the mind inwardly apprehended
arc greater: because they belong to the mind, their conjunction is greater:
for evil inwardly conceived is most nerely conjoined and repugnes the
appetite; but outwardly apprehended, does nearly repugne the body, (but if it
should only hurt the body, the appetite not resisting, it should be more
light, yea and sometimes it should delight, for many with delight of the
appetite, even for foul causes, do suffer hunger, blows and stripes.) To
conclude evil is; more intensly perceived, but the inward sense is more able.
Hence may we collect how diligently we ought to cut off the beginnings of
sadness, and of what weight it is prudently to cure these diseases. For the
learned know that these passions, but especially the third do often put the
unexperienced worshippers of Christ out of the way of salvation: that not
without cause the Apostle was instant; rejoice in the Lord, evermore, again I
say rejoice: for it behooued him to speak it again because it was of infinite
weight.

The remedies of these passions. 1. swift motion, as much as belongs to it, the
appetite flees from it (which is slight) and being commanded or constreined to
perform it, he is cast down with the burden of heaviness and grief. Then
therefore he that has care of himself, as soon as the motion of hate
arises, may thus command himself, abstain from thy auersion: for it is not
worthy of hate, if I will hear reason speak: for many more incommodious
things must we suffer, for the love of virtues and expediting of the mind
from the fetters of the body: for the liberty of man is by these motions hurt,
whilst he hates the things which are not truly evil; and will make him
languish from the study of reason. This manner of commanding the passion (as I
said of love) is common to heathen men. of faith it may abhor, and this comes
from the superior part of man: thus, abstain from hate: for here is nothing
worthy of hate, seeing sin is a wanting, which only is worthy of detestation:
for that as concerning the incommodity, if it be without fault certainly it
pleases God well.

By such exhortations is the superior part wont so to prevail, that by his
command and effectual motions, the appetite is weakened: nay sometimes by a
sudden conversion it begins to love, what before it hated. But oft-times these
kinds of repressing the passions do not profit, because the appetite cannot
receive these reasons, of the honest good; or else it will not be instructed
by reason, in respect of the violence and heat of the passion; and then it
will be to purpose, to represent to it other more grievous evils, which by the
experiment of lesser evils, it has cause to fear; to shun which evils, if
not willingly, yet patiently, he will not hate the present evil which he
began to detest, and this may thus be done; desist from hatred: nay love and
embrace this incommodity: for art not thou mercifully dealt withal, who have
deserved the torments of hell? ought not the fiery flames of hell to be changed
for this incommodity?

These and such like present remedies are to be sought out, before sadness and
grief have taken too deep roots: for if the grief do grow not from a light
cause, but proceed from some grievous causes of the soul, such as are wont to
befall to men of a scrupulous conscience, or vehemently vexed for the sins of
their life past; there are some more effectual remedies to be sought out. For
the written counsels and (as it were) dead letters have not so much power to
heal these diseases which creep into man's inwards, and do extenuate the
powers both of body and soul, putting on diverse forms, as the Oracles of a
living voice, of some sweet singer in Israel, who according to the nature of
the evil, can minister a word to the wearied in due season. Such as the
Psalmist delivers: Eduxit me de lacumiseriae and de luto faecis, and statuit
supra petram pedes meos: He brought me out of the pit of misery and from the
claie of dregs and set my feet upon a rock. How many causes of joy are
here? He fetched me out of all my miseries, and that I should not fall into
them again, set me upon the rock Christ Jesus, from whom I shall never fall.

To conclude, we may observe that these three passions may not only be
encountered with the said reasons, whereby the superior part maybe able to
keep them down, but also the true lovers of Christ both may and ought often
to stir them up (as in the next Chapter appears) that as love, desire,
delectation are stirred up tor prosecute the goods of the mind; so hate,
flight, and grief must be rowsed up to detest the evils of the soul; which
may thus be done, the superior part instructing the inferior.

The superior part does find the appetite to be deterred from labors,
contempt, and austerity of life; and does thus urge it: if thou will hate, do
not hate those things which are not foul, but rather hate the deformity of
sin: if thou will flee, then flee from sine as from the face of a serpent; if
sadness and grief creep upon thee, let it not grow upon thee for punishment,
but for sin, that it may be turned into wholesome repentance. But yet if for
all this, it do not so abborre the turpitude of sin, seeing it does not so
clearly perceive it: let it hate, flee, and grieve for the punishments of hell
and terror of that great judgment: which the imagination can more easily
represent. But let us come now to the Irascible.

Of the passions of hope and audacity and their remedies, and 1. what it is.
The Irascible part (as we have said) is the setter of the concupiscible at
liberty; for when as manifold difficulties do encompasse the good things which
are desired; then the Irascible as if armed with power, combats with this
difficulty and drives it away: and so brings the concupiscible into a francke
fruition and enioyment of them.

But amongst the five passions of the Irascible, Hope holds the first place:
which is nothing else but a motion toward the difficult good which it believes
may be obtained: or to say more clearly, it is a motion, whereby the appetite
is stirred up to acquire that good which is hardly acquired, which the
concupiscible loves, and which is thought may be obtained.

Boldness and Audacity succeeds this Hope, which Audacity we call a motion of
the appetite prosecuting an imminent difficult thing: as if I should say, it
were a motion whereby the appetite goes forewards against an evil at hand.
That as desire is a certain pregression of love, so boldness is a progression
of hope. But when I call audacity a motion toward evil; we understand by the
name of evil, the difficulty it self: which it endeavors to overcome, and
which does circumstance the good, which hope properly respects: although
audacity also do respect the difficulty of the difficult evil, to overcome
which Hope succeeds.

Touching these two passions, we must observe, that those who are given to
love, are more enabled both to Hope, and to dare then others; for seeing both
the passions are motions of progression, and heat which is the property of
love, by his dilatation; and opening conferres much to the motion of
progession: it comes to pass, that Lovers are more prompt and ready to hope
and to dare: especially such as stand well affected to Heavenly things, for the
Conscience of Righteousness, inioyning the divine assistance begets a certain
security: which does chiefly conduce both to Hope and Audacity. Happy are those
who find themselves called to such an assurance, as from the affection of
divine love, and heavenly things, and the testimony of a good conscience, may
beget in them hope and audacity: so that with much profit they may have the use
of these passions. But here we have need to know fruits from falsehood, seeing
these passions may impose upon the unwary, whilst they are ill placed; for
those things which are unworthy the followers of Christ, must not be hoped for:
nor must we dare and be bold sharply to drive away the things which are not
evil, as shall appear by this example.

The remedies of these passions. It comes to pass often that either a man is
checked or frownd on by his Prince or some great man under whose check he lives;
or the wife of the husband, or son of his father, or servant of his master is
so used, as that he conjectures he is not beloved: yet loves to be beloved:
But it seems a difficult thing unto him to obtain it: for it behoues him, to
excogitate some means to reconcile his mind unto him, and so fit himself to
avoid his checks and frowns: which would require both time, and discourse,
and some other duties, not without labor; yet it seems possible; Therefore
albeit all other duties be neglected, he determines to deal seriously in this
thing; he is raised by hope, and goes forewards with boldness: but these
passions he may check thus.

What is it that thou do, thou unbridled appetites, it is unworthy the
mind of a man to hope for things which are not true good things: but to desire
so to be beloved, as not to be checked is dissonant to reason, and therefore
cannot be any true good: therefore God forbid that I should bestow my time and
labor to win the favor of men, and not rather in gayning the favor of God.
God forbid that I should boldly go forewards to shake off the things which are
molestfull to the body, and should happily procure greater indulgence of the
body, but more grievous losses of virtue. But this first kind is such as a
natural man may use. Yet from this example it appears, that the passion of
hope shows it self through a false opinion at the apparent good of indulgent
love, but indeed true evil: but on the other side audacity, against the
circumstant difficulty, as against evil; and therefore the superior part
ought thus to instruct the appetite.

If it help any thing to Hope, amendment which is a true good is to be hoped
for by correction and check; if thou will be bold, go foreward against those
things which hinder thy amendment: dare something against the motions of
sorrow, combat with them; and carry a cheerful countenance: that those who
seemed to be offended with thee, seeing the fruit of their checks and
controules, may go on to check more: for it is written; let the righteous
rather smite me, but let not their precious balmes break my head: Oils, i.
the fair dissimulations of sinners; not break my head, i. affect my mind
with any delectation.

or the living. Therefore dare something against the difficulties which would
retarde, and withdraw thee from the sweeter embracing of Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be happy.

things are required: for passions if they be well tempered are the remedies of
other passions. Therefore in one place only we will give herein admonitions.

Of the passions of desperation, fear and anger, and of their remedies. These
three passions, Desperation and Fear which are opposed to Hope and Audacity,
and Anger which wants a contrary passion; come now to be handled: for if
difficult evil do not lie upon us, but be overcome, and the possession (...)
good succeeds it: then no difficult thing remains, against which the Irascible
part may arise: but delectation succeeds, which is aconcupiscible passion.

Therefore desperation is a motion of the appetite, from good which it
believes, cannot be acquired; as if we should say, that it is a motion
whereby the appetite is oppressed or cast down, when one thinks he cannot
obtain the good that he loves. Hence arises fear which is a motion of the
appetite departing from evil to come, which it cannot resist; as if we should
say it were a motion, whereby the appetite is contracted and depressed, when
the difficult evil is imminent, before it be present: for it is not a simple
departure, as Flight, or Abomination of evil, but a depression of the
appetite for the difficulty of the evil at hand. But when the difficult evil
has the nature of injury, then it is anger.

Now anger is a motion of the appetite, to revenge; or more clearly a motion
whereby the appetite being hurt, waxes hot to repay the injury: which does
respect the revenge, as that which is good for it, and him from whence the
injury comes, as evil, whence it has a mixed oblation.

These passions arc wont to make work to those who are written up amongst the
soldiers of Christ; so that worthily they ought to provide remedies, and
seriously to think of most weighty matters. For desperation is not only for
the evil of the opposing difficulty, but also, for the sole excess of good,
which albeit it may seem to fall upon the same point and head of difficulty,
yet it shows the manifold motions of desperation arising in the hearts of
sloathfull Christians, sometimes the difficulty and sometimes the sublimity of
the thing being represented: from whence it is, that they think of no joys;
without proposing whereof unto them, they scarce meanly profit.

But fear is wont so to charge Nature with floathfulnesse, and so to manacle
the whole man, yea with the very fear of excellent virtues, much more with
the fear of imminent labors, that stupour and astonishment; that, is, the
unaccustomed imagination of evil, does come in place, and blunts and duls the
very natural instruments of operations, and as it were within a palsy does
dissolve them all; Whence such suspicions and consultations do arise, upon
very signs and shadows of evils, which will never come to pass. And to
conclude, there is nothing more hurtful then fear to the study of virtues,
which are of generous hearts obtained.

But anger is a most fierce passion; which seeing it is stirred up from
despite and contempt only or those things which are reduced to contempt,
hurts so much the worse, by how much it is more consonant to a worse vice, i.
Pride. For it boiles as often as it sees it self despised: for when the sin
is of ignorance or passion, it does not so flame out, seeing it does no^
observe it self to be contemned: and so much the more it exasperats the
appetite, by how much it conceiues that it deals more justly: for it desires
evil under the name and show of good; that is, revenge, under a certain
reason or conceit of equality, which it does endeavor to settle, betwixt
contempt and revenge, through a certain imperfect work of reason mixed with
passion: for reason compares revenge with injury: But by and by fails, the
work not absolved; for reasons should have gone fore-wards, that it might have
commanded that it was not lawful, to take revenge: and so his light by the
motion of passion is so extinguished that amongst all the passions, chiefly
anger, for the commotion it makes, does disturb the judgment.

Therefore we must endeavor God reaching out his hand to tame and suddue these
wild be asts and to transfer them also to divine things, which by this
example and remedy following we may do.

2. The remedy of these passions is this: Remedy of despair a man often
finds himself admonished concerning the acquiring of the modesty of his eyes
and looks:

Whilst the appetite is thus ill affected, instantly comes reason stepping in,
and uses the second of these three means of taming the passions: saying; Why
art thou so heavy O my soul, and why art thou so troubled within me? Hope in
the Lord, because yet after so many slips of my youth, I will yet praise him,
who is the light of my countenance and my salvation: and to say all in a word,
he is my God, whose it is to lift up the broken and wounded in heart: and
seeing it is an easy thing with him, suddenly to make a poor man rich, why
should I despair? Many are the examples of conquered frailty: many are the
remedies provided for such affections; the reasons for man to hope are most
effectual.

First GODS own natural goodness: Secondly Christ's passion which is so much
mine, as if he had suffered for none else but me. Thirdly besides natural
goodness, and his love in sending Christ my Savior, he has promised many
things to raise our hopes: whatsoever you ask the Father in my name etc.

Remedy of the passion of Fear. Suppose there should some task be put upon a
man, or some affliction befall him more grievous then it seemed he was able to
bear: presently the appetite apprehending some fear, begins to be daunted
and to step back, as at some vehement tempest, or sudden and fearful ruin
of a house, for it loves the commodity of good things, from whence it is, that
this fear of suffering any thing arises. Then does reason work in this
manner, namely the second of those three ways of taming the passions.

The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear. The Lord is the
protector of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid? Surely I will not only
not fear by Gods grace, to under go this burden it has pleased him to lay
upon me, but also, albeit even Castles and Fortresses should ^tand up against
me, my heart should not be affraide.

But if for all this; the sense make any reluctation: then that third way of
taming those passions, which consists in the Imitation of Christ; is here fitly
to be used. For when the inferior part of Christ feared the acerbity of his
passion, even to the sweating of blood; he stirred up by deliberate act of
reason, the passion of audacity, that he might conflict with fear and
prevail against it: and so rising, he admonished his Disciples: Arise, let us
go hence, behold he that betraieth me is at hand. Behold, let us arise, says
our Champion Christ, and as fear possessing us, we labored to flee from an
instant danger, so let us courageously, by a stirred up audacity meet the
danger coming. Thus did Christ: and shall he be worthy of Christ, that will
never strive to accompany him in agony?

The remedy of the passion of anger. It often falls out that a man either by
words or gestures, finds himself to be little esteemed and contemned, of some
either his inferior, or not much above him: by and by, anger is inflamed, and
he desires and seeks in the same manner to render at least, a like kind of
revenge: for the appetite will begin to complain, saying; he ought not to
have made so small account of me; he might have risen unto me; he might have
put off his hat: he should not so lightly have improoued the things I spoke:
He ought not so to have contradicted me, he ought not to have controuled me
in that manner: he might have answered me more mildly, seeing I am no way
inferior to him; as many things will the love of a man's own excellency object.

But now, the superior part will herein do thus, to mitigate this passion.
Thou fierce disordered passion be quieted. For it becomes not man endued with
reason, like a beast, to wax fierce and angry, and by a certain drunkenness
of fury to become mad, for the turpitude and vileness of this passion, does
even in the countenance bewray it self; whilst the eyes do sparkle, the lips
tremble, the speech is hindered, and the whole man is alienated from that
meekness, which being a sociable creature, is natural to him. This manner
albeit but natural: yet is it very effectual to the subduing of anger.

But the second kind of subduing the passions is more worthy the true
Christian; and that is thus: blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the
Land of the living: and shall I for this beastly and brutish passion despoile
my self of the right of this inheritance, which faith shows unto me? The
third kind of taming this passion may be this, and most apt for such as will
follow Christ: For as a Lamb before the shearer, he opened not his mouth; and
as a sheep unto the slaughter he was led: when he was cursed, he cursed not
again: when he suffered, he complained not, he delivered himself into the
hands of him, that judged unjustly, and shall not I be meek and mild?

Many other reasons might be used to restrain these passions; but here I
desire may be observed (as also in other passions;) that these passions may
profitably be exercised, if they be transferred to divine things: and surely
the use of desperation, albeit, not so proper as of other passions (for it has
not any spiritiall good which for the hardness of it, is to be despaired) may
be this, according to the counsel of the Kingly Prophet: trust not in Princes,
nor in the sons of men in whom is no salvation: q. d. hope not, nay despair
of salvation from men, who altogether are void of it; for that salvation which
the world by an impudent lie does promise, is to be despaired of.

Fear has a most large field: for what is it that justly can be feared in
this life, not sudden death, nor the torments of hell; nor the severity of the
last judgment? nay nothing, albeit the most terrible evils of this life ought
to put us in fear: for Christ has said, fear not them, that can kill the
body, but fear him, who having killed the body, is able to send the soul into
hell fire.

In like manner, anger may be exercised many ways: there are sins; there
arc enemies of the soul, and amongst others most cruel, are the passions
which do continually disturb and oppugn the reason of man: but against these
enemies, our Savior Christ has taught us, that anger may wholesomely be
stirred up in us, whilst being most meek, yet did he wax hot against
desilers and abusers of the Temple. Thus have we briefly been taught to
master our passions which are the greatest enemies to the reparation of our
souls.

But yet before we conclude this point, let us take this observation with us:
to consider diligently, the original increase, and declyning of our own
proper passions; for besides the former things, we shall find many things of
much profit, if we shall diligently mark, that sometimes this passion and
sometimes that, as if they were borne of diverse parents, do produce sundry
effects: as by the example following may appear.

There is nothing, doubtless, seems less consonant to anger then
delectation: and yet it often grows up with anger, as when a man in his fury
reuengeth himself, but grief and heaviness, does more directly disagree with
delectation, then anger; and yet grief, in the very motion of sorrow conceived
of the absence of the thing is cause of delectation, whilst it begets the
memory of the thing beloved.

But the other are more plain: that namely, out of the love of good, the
hatred of evil which is repugnant to it, arises: and out of concupiscence and
desire of the good deferred, does sorrow grow, by reason of deferring it: and
this duel of the 2. passions, thus conflicting together, is very well known,
seeing toward one and the same thing, as namely fasting, the appetite, both
dares do it, because it hopes for victory, and fears also, because terrified
with the difficulty: which do serve for this purpose, that both the various
commixtions of passions may be known, and also that their sundry remedies may
succeed.

But this must every man most carefully labor to know: namely, of what passion
he is most grievously infested; for love vexes some most, some hate, others
fear, and others anger does most trouble. And as the powers of the soul being
intent unto one act the soul does more remisly work in other acts: so
whilst the inferior part does exhale the fury by the motions of one passion,
it is usually moved more faintly with other passions.

But after that a man shall once know his capital enemy, he must then bethink
himself of entering into a combat with him; and by the death of him to
extinguish all his assaults. Of those remedies for the mastering of passions,
whereof we have treated, he may take which he thinks does most forcibly
work with him; or in his own discretion choose some other: to the undergoing
of which combat, if the passion be more fierce, we must labor to get the
help of perseverance, which is a virtue, that swears perpetual fealty to
God, which can never suffer any declination, having the victory and garland
promised by our Savior ever before the eyes of it, whereby to be stirred up:
which is no less, then eternally to be saved.

Nor let the difficulties or dangers ever deter them from perseuering in this
combat with passions. For how many noble, learned and worthy of honor shall
we see, that for 20. 30. or more years do live in the Courts of Princes, and
with seeking and knocking wax old therein: rand yet either fall short of all
hope, or else are but (as the best) tormented with their small rewards? But how
many such men, who die before the Princes, in whom, they placed their hopes,
and perish eternally; who if they had contended to subdue their passions, and
put themselves into Gods service, might have shined in Sanctity, and abounded
with eternal riches? Therefore how much more easily, and profitably may we
contest with our passions, and by a compendious way come to the crown of glory?

But besides, does the shipwreck of so many sleets and the loss of so much
gold, disturne any of those from sailing to the Indies whom God has delivered
from such dangers? it is a wonder to see how boldly they contend with the waves
and storms, with what sweat and sorrow, they constantly encounter: how after
they have been twice or thrice delivered from the jaws of death, yet do they
never change their manner of life, but go on with a resolute courage. Surely
these men's iniquity and folly, is the Christians school: for if they be twice
or thrice delivered from death, after so many nauigations, when being
sufficiently enriched, they thought to return home and rest themselves, and
yet are swallowed up of the revenging storm: How much more honorable and safe
is it, albeit never so many temptations assault us, and auxieties vex us, to
hold that course, which can never bring any shipwreck?

But generally this is to be observed, from the external acts (for we have
chiefly handled the manners of the internal acts, which are the originals of
the external) for the remedy of every passion, that the external act of the
contrary passion may be exercised, if the passion it self and the
circumstances do suffer it. For I do not think, that such external acts are
necessary to all passions, for that desperation and hope, are reformed by
internal acts. But my meaning is, that when opportunity suffers, that then it
is expedient to exercise the externalls acts, which may either engender the
contrary affect, or else extinguish the passion; for we do not properly
speak of the contrary, because anger has no contrary passion, but yet may be
extinguished.

Examples of this instruction, there are both many and usual: for if any be
possessed with a childish fear of dead folks, if they often handle dead
carcasses and bones, it will drive away that fear. If an angry man be often
set upon with opprobries and reproaches; he will by little and little grow less
angry: for as it is commonly spoken, there is no passion arises from things
accustomed. If any man labor of sloth which is a kind of grief, throw cold
water on him violently, or use some sharper remedy, and he will shake off that
drowsinesse in short time. If any be delighted with neat and fine clothes,
cloathe him with course and ragged garments, and within few days, he will put
of that affection. These and such like external remedies for the subduing of
passions may be used, as every man shall think fittest for himself.

But now, if we will join to these external and internal remedies, the
practice and care of prayer, the thing will succeed as we would have it. For
this exercise is the most effectual of all other to the mastering of our
passions; the reason is most strong: the very endeavor it self of lifting up
the heart vino divine things by a certain natural consequence, does weaken
the inferior part of man, and disturnes it from its own prouocations; which
is made evident thus: for the passions are not stirred up but by a fore-running
knowledge of the senses: therefore he that has his inward senses intent and
settled upon the imagination of divine things, shall cut off the roots of
passions, as it were with the sword of that knowledge. Therefore let us often
implore the divine help, for amongst all remedies that is chiefest.

Besides, this must obseruingly be noted, that these eleven passions if they be
suffered licentiously to range at liberty, are so many fountains of vices: but
if they be imperiously governed by the divine help, to the prescripts of
right reason, are almost so many seminaries of virtues. Seeing that from the
motions of the passions, if reason give place, the habits of vices are
produced, and from the same tempered with reason, the habits of virtues are
engendered. For the vice of anger arises from the untamed passion of anger, and
the virtue of meekness from the same subdued: from which it appears, why
many virtues and vices are called by the same names of passions for they borrow
the names of the passions, by whose acts or victory they are begotten. But a
word

Of Temptations.
AMongst all those great benefits, which the knowledge and subduing of passions
begets, the knowledge and victory of temptations deserves not the last place.
For, as it does appear by those kinds of taming the passion stirred up; the
chief and most effectual course of them, which the fathers have delivered, of
dryuing away temptations, is that which we have in the former treatise often
named. For if as soon as any passion, (upon whatsoever cause) is stirred up,
we will hold the course there described, no temptations can ever hurt us, but
rather make much for our good. For being at the first insurrection repelled,
they offer unto any valiant champion an occasion of subiugating the passion, of
acquiring of virtue, and of extirpating the contrary vice.

But that they may the better know the insinuations of temptation, let them
observe this division of the powers of the soul, delivered by Divines.

There are 3. powers in man, which serve and belong to knowledge; and a
threefold appetite does proportionably answer them. maturall men. 1. Cor. 2.
This power is besides called by mystical divines the lowest heaven.

next, does compose the superior part of man: and it is the understanding it
self; as it deduceth knowledge from knowledge: so that if we reason after the
manner of men touching temporal things, it is named the inferior portion of
reason; if concerning eternal things, or temporal by the eternal Law, then
it is called the superior portion of reason. To this does answer the
reasonable appetite, or that which they call free will, which is the very will
it self, through which reason, it is moved of the inferior or superior
portion of reason. This power is called the middle Heaven, from whose superior
part, and the third power, now to be described, the Spirit of man is framed.

synderesis: that is the natural practique habit, whose act is conscince) is
the understanding it self, so far as it immediately from God receives light,
to know the first principles, only by conceived terms, through a natural, or
hidden supernatural force of divine wisdom; and is called intelligence,
albeit of others not the understanding it self so conceived, but his act, is
called intelligence. Unto this does the will answer, as it immediately from
God, receives a certain natural propensity unto good, represented unto it,
by the simple conceit of the understanding. This power being compounded of the
understanding and the will is called the Spirit or the third Heaven.

The Spirit therefore which compriseth the superior reason and intelligence,
and the answerable degrees of the will, (proportion ever observed) does serve
to direct the infe^iour reason, and to moderate as well the external as the
internal senses, and rule the appetite; but yet with great difference, seeing
it commands the external senses and all the members (except the generatiue
parts) in such sort as a lord commands his servants, but the appetite it
commands politically, as a governor does his Citizens: for members and
external senses cannot be restrained, and the appetite does obstinatly reluct
and rebel.

But this is seriously to be observed, that the enemy of our salvation, does
more maliciously set upon the true servants of Jesus Christ, the^ other
Christians, which are no such enemies to him. Therefore he must have his cunning
shifts well known unto him. For he insinuats himself into the inward sinews,
and besides the fircenesse which the passions have naturally in themselves, he
does vehemently stir up the appetite: therefore it is needful, that he
vigila^tly, courageously and quickly shake off the temptations lately stirred
up, least the evil grow and wax heavy.

Therefore, whether (as for example) any man be tempted with any filthy and vile
thing received by the outward senses and brought to the imagination, or without
the use of the outward senses composed, or of the devil himself framed (which
three often fall out) he ought chiefly to reflect most carefully upon the
office* of the superior reason, and from thence as from the Kings throne to
moderate all the powers. For then the violence of the temptation moving the
inferior part of man, if reason by any means neglect lect the passions
arising in the sensitive appetite, to be carried unto vile things, which
although it come not to a full deliberation, yet it is a sin.

But if the inferior reason i. which judges of things after the manner of men
be not corrected of the superior which judges of things after a divine
manner, according to the Law of God; or (which is more plain) if the superior
reason do but tacitly assent, it is a sin, as this example will declare.
Some man is tempted unto lust, after he has begun to imagine some
beautiful creature: forthwith his concupiscence boiles within him: then the
inferior reason, i. the understanding discoursing after a humane manner; does
presently conceive that it is a wholesome thing to disburthen nature, and this
conceit of health is proposed as a certain profitable and delectable good:
now if the superior reason, i. the understanding, so far as it is ordered to
the eternal Law of God, (the will permitting) do neglect to consider that this
thing is contrary to the Law of God: or albeit, that it do observe it to be,
yet it does so coldly observe it, the will permitting it, that it suffer it to
please the will, that tacit consent is a great sin: and that tacit consent,
the learned call morosam delectationem, a tarying delight, not from the time,
but from the stay of reason so tacitly assenting; which may be in a moment of
time.

But if the superior reason expressly assent, (which comes to pass when the
understanding does deliberately think on any filthiness, and the will
cleaves to it) then it is a grievous sin, and so much more grievous as the
thing is great, whereunto the superior reason yields. By this is evident,
that it is generally true, that from one express or tacit consent of reason
and will all sins, but chiefly great sins do arise.

But let every man do his diligence, to know a temptation from consent, and
accustom themselves to resist the first assaults valiantly: as long as the
knowledge of temptations and the will to resist is of force with us, we can
never (such is the goodness of God) fall unwittingly into any grievous sins.

If any grievous temptations befall us, let us assuredly hope, that God will
give, not only suggest equal, but of his bounty greater forces, and also give
an issue with the temptation. Let us acquit our selves well; and love to be
tried, that when we are tried we may receive the crown of life.

It is a happy event of temptations which the Son of God who in all things
was tempted yet without sin, has left unto us, most sweetly comforting his
troops, and saying, You are they, that have tarried with me in my temptations:
and I give unto you a Kingdom as my Father gave unto me a Kingdom, that you
should cate and drink at my table. And what is a wanting to them that shall
feast at that table, that they may not valiantly go together to it? Therefore
let us go through sire and water, that we may at last come to this most
pleasant refreshing.

3 The third thing which I proposed to be considered in this first part of the
true ruele and art of serving God, after the instructions and exercises for the
reparation of the slaughter which sin has made in the soul, is the love of
God, which being the fire which God would have ever burning upon the Altar of
our hearts; all that we have yet spoken of the reparation of the soul, is
only directed unto it. And if any will know of what dignity this love of God
is, he shall see that whatsoever has been spoken of the reparation and
clensing of the soul, is but little to the acting of so worthy and sublime an
enterprise. For of so great excellency is the love of God, that none of those
blessed Spirits, nor any other created thing or which can be created, is able
to do a more sovereign work. For which cause the Son of God calls this the
great and first commandment: Nay, say that all the labors and powers of
Angels and Men together, were in any one Angel or Man, yet were they not all
able to do a work more excellent then to love God. Nor can any creature
sufficiently so love this our GOD as his goodness and worthiness requires.

Now as this tract of the love of God, follows that of the reparatio^ of the
soul, because those things are very fit to the obtaining of this love: so this
of the love of God is placed before that of the love of our neighbors and the
love of our selves, because from this love of God only proceeds the love of
our neighbors and the love of our selves.

1. Therefore of the love of God. 2. Of our Neighbors; And 3. of our selves.
1 This love of God being so glorious and joy ous a thing when it is expressed
in words, what joy I and glory shall it be to seele it and how much more to
do it? This is the holy work of God: I say the holy and whole work and
labor of God: for whatsoever God works withal his infinite powers, is only
to love himself so much as his Majesty deserves and is worthy, that is;
infinitely. For out of his own infinite goodness and excellency he is infinitely
to be beloved: nor is there any excellency in heaven or earth, which is not
much more his, then it is his that possesses it: and from them all he has
infinite glory, and loves it and rejoices and glories in it, and would also,
that we should love, it, think upon it, and rejoice in it; seeing nothing is
so consonant to equity, as that with all our powers we should love him, from
the loving of whom we must never cease, albeit we had infinite powers so to do.

Therefore are we to give God thanks, that in loving himself infinitely, he
supplies by his own powers, what is defective in every one of us. Let us ever
rejoice in loving him who is so great dignity, that never ceasing to glory at
his excellencies, yet that which we do is nothing if it be compared to that
he deserves. For of so great glory and Majesty is God, that he stands in no
need of our service: but only requires it, because it is profitable of us.
This only he desires that we love him and reloyce at his good things, for
this is his own holy work. Therefore he would have all men with all their
strength to do that, which he does with all his strength. And for that which
remains, he stands no need it, no nor of this neither, but that it is good
and just and unto? us glorious: and therefore he so much desires it, that he
laid down his life for it, that so by dying he might provoke us to love him:
Besides, that there are other things found in the Scriptures, which are by him
commanded to be desired, that is for this end, because they are helps to this
love, and to omit them would be a great hinderance to it. For neither are the
vices which are prohibited any other thing, then the inordinate love of vain
things, which do occupy that place which is diputed only to the love of GOD.
Not do vertuaes serve to any other purpose, but to despose the soul to this
love; yet are they so necessary thereunto, that it were great presumption to
think to obtain it, without the mighty exercise of such virtues.

That therefore we may fitly speak of this precious love, we will first
declare the various manner of lovers, but withal judging that best which is
most sublime and high. To which purpose we may use this example. Therefore
touching the variety of lovers, we must observe that which by the experience of
many, was a testimony unto them, when they had attained a greater knowledge of
truth, namely, that they had a long time loved God as a most sweet Lord, who
had communicated himself to them as a liberal benefactor, in whose service,
they were delighted, and often had asked of him many benefits, with great
delectation in the contemptation of his bounty, and of the knowledge of his
excellent graces which they asked of him: and that often they came unto him as
to the fountain in which they found so great sweetness, as that they thought
there was nothing a wanting to their love of God. For they thought that the
greatness of that sweetness which they felt in the sensitive appetite, was
nothing else but the greatness of that love. And would to GOD that all men who
do not love God, did so love him.

Yet God forbid, that those who love God should be content with this love,
although it be very good, and so good as that it suffices thus far, that for
certain days, beginners do exercise themselves therein; for they may so,
easily come to that more excellent manner of loving God, which follows. It an
argument, that this love I have spoken of is frail, seeing that he who so
loves, as soon as that sweetness is a wanting or gone, goes on with an abject
mind in the things of God, and is so overcome of the frailties of his mind as
if he never had had any such love. For he does so much procure unto himself
corporal delights, as to feed on delicate viands, to drink the most pleasant
licours, to wear most gorgeous clothes, and such other vanities, pleasing to
his appetite, sensual friendships, honors, favors, even as he does that has
never begun to taste the things that are of God.

Nay often times, at such time, as he is visited with such an apprehension of
sweetness, he is taken up with many vain affections, and very sensual,
being drawn thereunto by the beauty and pleasures of some persons. Again he
desires to be seen, and to be accounted devout, and grieves if he be not
reputed for such; nor does he rejoice when he understands that others are
accounted more fervent in devotion, and such other blemishes he casts upon
himself: all which are so abject, that they suffer not the society of that
excellent love of God (of which anon) although it have not that sweetness.
Therefore we may conclude that such love is but frail, seeing it is the love
of him that loves for his own benefit and comfort. Yet let us express the
excellences of this sensitive love.

For albeit such love is frail, yet is it profitable for 2. things. First, he
that has it may easily cast from him the said blemishes, and love of vain
things. Secondly, such a one shall be in a very near disposition to bring
fourth many acts of that more sublime and excellen^ love, when he shall come
to the knowledge of it.

There is therefore a more high and heavenly love then that former, unto which
many had undoubtedly attained, if they had known it: and the more of this love
that the soul acquires, of the greater perfection shall it be. This love we
will describe with words rather declaring what we ought to do to obtain it,
and being had to keep it, then such as for a small time may work some liking
of it. Not for that I would express this love in gross terms, but for that
he who can attain that love which is expressed in plain words is to be
lifted up of that sweet lover, to the height of that love, which man's power
cannot express. Therefore now we will deliver some parcels of this love.

1 What it is: we say it is a certain work or act which the will produces,
strongly and sometimes with sweetness, in loving, or desiring that God may be
that which he is, may possess so great glory, so great dominion and power, as
in truth he possesses over us and over all things, and so much as he has
himself. And again, that whatsoever thing is or can be, may love him, serve
and glorify him, for his only infinite goodness and worth: and so far as
the excellency of his Majesty requires, that withal our powers we should do
it. These are profound words, and such as daily he must meditate which truly
loves: that he may recogitate what God is, and may rejoice in it; again that
he may recogitate and bethink himself how great glory he has, having an
universal dominion over al us, all other things, and to joy hereat more then
we are wont to do at the preferment and honor of our best friends.

Besides we must desire, that whatsoever is in the world may obey him, love
him, desiring it a thousand ways, and ten thousand ways procuring it. And
further in the discourse of the mind, meditating a thousand ways of glory,
greatness and service which are due unto God; that we may wish them all for
him, and that because he is God and for his only goodness. For all equity
requires, that we love so great a LORD, by all the means that can be thought
on. Seeing then there is no higher end then GOD himself, who is the beginning
and end of all, it follows that he ought to be loved, not for that chiefly
we receive from him or for that we expect, but for himself who is infinitely
amiable.

This is that which I say and would have observed, that we should so accustom
our wills, which our selves also may feel that they may be moved to love,
and that they may be delighted in the glory and riches of our God, not for the
sweetness they perceive to be in his love, not for the gifts, which either
they have received, or hope to receive, but that these being forgotten, they
may love him, as the most worthy to have all the wills of Angels and men herein
exercised, that they may desire and be delighted, that his Majesty has all
that good which it has, albeit it nothing* should thence redound to them,
although indeed so much more will return unto us by how much we love him
without any reflection to our selves.

is, when as the lover loves God as well when he shows himself fierce
against him, as when he is more mild, as well when he chastises in justice,
as when he cherishes in mercy. He that is such, loves not, for that God is
sweet and good, yet loves that sweetness and goodness, because God gives it,
and gives him a mind, more diligently to serve him. He is not affraide at his
chastisements, but takes it with that love, which the pious and princely hand
of him that lays in on him, requires. He does not supplicate and petition,
drawn on with desire or sweetness of the benefit desired, but that his soul
enriched with virtues, may be increased in strength, that he may more
diligently and fervently serve the Lord, who bestowed those benefits. He is
not in any indignation, that sometimes he sees himself void of consolations,
yet grieves, if any thing be in him that may offend the eyes of so great a
Majesty, and so separate him from it. He desires not therefore to be pardoned
that he may escape the punishment, or may recover the lost grace and virtues,
or right unto the Kingdom of glory, but that his soul having received pardon
may be to GOD more acceptable, may love him, and purely serve his most high
God and Creator.

He that is such, has no affection that draws his heart any other way. He
remembers not, nor marks whether men think of him. He grieves not, when he
perceiues himself be held of no worth. He flees and is sad at the honors done
him, fearing least they may be a hinderance to his humility. He rejoices at
the good and honors of others, supposing that even honors may be to them as
being more strong, a furtherance mote fervently to serve GOD, desiring without
all fiction of vanity, that other men may take an example of good works at
him. He that is such, has all things, and yet has no thing, he submits
himself to all men and all do serve him: He flees all sweetness and
contentme^t, and yet feels nothing but that which is pleasing unto him. In
that great God which he loves, he knows whatsoever he ought to do, say
or think, and that he both says, does and thinks for him alone. Happy is
the man which so loves, it is not he that lives, but Christ lives in him;
Gal. 2.
giving unto him grace to live a divine life. This man in loving himself,
loves not himself but the most high, for whose love, he desires every good
thing. Let us give one example, whereby as much as may be, we may behold when
we do thus love God.

Say there were a son whose father were a very honest man, but very poor,
from whom the son expected nothing, nor needed it, and yet should so serve
this father, as that he placed all his joy and delight in him rather then in
himself, and rejoiced more to be delighted in his father then in himself,
and all things which bring any honor or joy, which he does or are offered unto
him, he so much rejoices that they are offered, as he thinks his father
will rejoice for them: and on the other side is more afflicted by any occurring
calamity, for the grief that his father will thence conceive, then for his
own punishment. So that when this son is sick, he suffers more pain, for
the affliction and sorrow which he sees his father suffer, seeing his son
sick, then for his own grief: and when he grows sound, is more ioyed of
the joy his father does thence conceive then of his own health.

In like manner, in things which in the world bring honor, as egregrious
stratagems and policies of war, or exercises of learning; he desires to do
them with commendations, because his father looks upon them, and rejoices at
them more then for his own honor: and one the other side, if he do not
these things aright, would thence take more grief, then for his own
dispraise. All this love and will has this son toward his father, providing
for him all things which are necessary for him, by no other reflexe, then for
the great love which from his infancy he bears toward his father.

This example must he that will serve God, from day to day often reuolue in his
mind, at the least for two or three months. For herein is declared, so much
as may serve for our purpose to set fourth the manner of the true love of God,
not hunting after our own profit, which course we ought to observe. Our
eternal Father is God, and we his sons out of his magnificent gift and
grace. He stands no need of our goods, but we cannot want his good; in a far
different manner from this father that I have spoken of, with his son. For
there the father was rich, and the son his Protector, and therefore so much
the more is the love of the son toward his father to be esteemed.

Let us therefore rejoice that the Majesty of our eternal Father is so great,
that he stands no need of us, knowing that our obligation is greater unto him
then of that son to his father: Let therefore our love at the least be like
that of this son, and our souls so far subjected, until they find and
feel no joy of all the good they do and expect, but so far as we shall know
that by this we do God service. And whatsoever we shall do, must be done with
great joy, because we believe, (and so it is indeed) that the divine Majesty is
well pleased with it, and all the grief which we feel by the infirmity of sin
must be, for that it is against the will of God. And the Prophet does witness
that God reioiceth at our service: God is well pleased with his people, Psalm.
149.
the praises of God are in their mouths. And that by our sins he seems as if
he were grieved, God himself testifies: it repents me, that I have made man.
Genesis 6.
Now it is to be observed, that if the adversary of mankind do much impugn
the servants of God in every virtue wherein he sees they desire to profit, he
will much more set upon them, when he sees the^ hunt after this most high kind
of love. Amongst al his diverse impugnations and assaults, there is one, as
very secret, so no less hurtful wherewith he oppugneth and opposes many, and
that is tepidity and coldness of mind, which many do feel whilst they
think on, read or hear, the chief point wherein consists this heavenly love,
namely, that the being, glory, and all the good things of God should be desired
for God himself. Concerning which we must consider two things. 1. what it is
that causes so excellent a thing, to wax cold, and to come to such an aguish
fit: seeing it is that divine heat it self. 2. What remedy is to be applied
to this disease? For the 1. we will express it by this comparison. If being
induced to behold something which is of great value, it come to pass by the
defect of our knowledge, that the same thing do seem unto us to be of small
estimation and worth, undoubtedly we find that our appetite grows cold
whereby we desired to see it, albeit in truth the thing be of as much worth
as it was first commended for.

The same thing befalls many in this same love of God, whilst they both
slenderly behold the thing they love, and the adversary besides sets upon them,
which thing chiefly chances unto them who are prevented with that sweetness
and contentment which this love usually brings with it: who hearing that this
love consists herein, that we do desire and inwardly feel in our selves a
complacency and pleasure from all the good and glory which is in God, wax very
cold, thinking that this work is not so high and excellent, and judging that
there are other things as well corporal as spiriturall which may be had, more
sublime and worthy, imagining many things which they judge to be of more price,
and that it becomes the servants of so great a Lord to do them, as works of
great corporal fortitude, as for the point; with one shock to cast down some
mighty tower, with one blow of a sword to cut in sunder ten squadrons of
soldiers. Again to show some great sign of knowledge as to the purpose; if
one should make all the Heathens using all the Science and knowledge they have,
to be speechless: or some other great wonders, which are of great admiration
in the world, as continual contemplation, the working of miracles,
prophesying, and such things which are thought by those that are thus tempted,
to be of much more excellency, then to lift up the soul to God, that it may
rejoice that in God is all good and glory which he has, and therefore they
wax cold in directing all that they are to do in this life to this only end,
to attain to that love, which in their eyes seems not so excellent a thing,
albeit they believe it to be such because the sacred Scripture affirms it,
and they do almost admire that God will prefer this love before all other
things that can be done.

But it is to be considered, that as the appetite and desire of hurfull and
loathsome things, for the most part proceeds unto the sick from one and the
same root, namely from the infection and corruption of the palate: so it
comes to pass in him who does value these signs of great corporal
fortitude to be of much worth: and this love of GOD not to be of any such
esteem: for this proceeds from the infected palate of the soul, as has
been said in the fourth instruction, and from the assaults and temptation of
Satan. Yet is not good meat more vile, then evil meat, nor the love of God
less excellent then other works, but much more glorious and precious.

Yet does such coldness bring no small benefit to such as are frail: for
neither does the greatness of the work inuit them, seeing they perceive it
not, nor yet the taste of the thing add any strength unto them, and from the
one and the other of these it comes to pass that in their labors their
strength is defective. Therefore: it is. 2. fit that we endeavor to apply some
remedies to this soar, having already seen the causes of this coldness. The
first remedy and most common to cure this malady, is to provide that the
corrupt appetite (as in the 4. Instruction) may be healed: and by and by those
who before felt that coldness shall perceive their former works which they
judged to be admirable, to be indeed very abject if they be compared to the
love of God.

This does the Apostle, whose palate was most sound, teach us, saving, If I
speak, with the tongue of men and Angels, 1. Cor 13.
it I give all my goods to the poor, if I give my body to be burned and have
not love it profits me nothing; and yet must not these be judged to be of
small moment. But besides after all these, speaking of* sublime works, he
affirms them all to be of less value then love. The same has the Son of
GOD himself taught, as we have already said. Therefore it is manifest that
love is the chiefest of all works and duties, seeing without it all other
things are nothing. And without any further proof, this ought to suffice us
that the eternal wisdom of God which cannot lie, has willed, chosen and
commanded us to do this before all other things that can be done in heaven or
earth.

Nothwithstanding. 2. There is another remedy more singular which will make us
something feel the inexplicable greatness of this work of the love of God:
and the means hereof is, that we unite and most strongly glue our wills to
that will which is of infinite excellency, and that we join them in that manner
that it be carried to nothing else, but unto that which that infinite will would
have it; for then shall our wills be of much value, when our own will being
abandoned, they have the wills of that infinite will which is God himself: for
he evermore willleth, loves, and reioiceth for the infinite good which he
himself has. Besides for many causes, God would have us to desire that which
he so greatly desires.



has, it is very just, that we as the obsequious and dutiful servants of so
great a Lord, all our lives long be herein employed, to rejoice at the good and
glory of God himself: and indeed every one may easily see, that it is most
just and of great weight, that all things as well in heaven as earth, (omitting
all other things) should evermore be herein exercised, to rejoice at the good
and glory wherewith God is infinitely filled.

gloria nihil aliud est quam gratia consummata: glory is nothing die but grace
consummate: to possess charity here in a measure, is to be glorified there
in abundance: and so it is begun here, but perfected hereafter.

But it is to our purpose to show how this glory which is heavenly, may be
perfected by this love, wherein the excellency of this love will appear.
Therefore we must consider, which is also again and again to be read and
pondered, that all our joy proceeds from the fulfilling of our own wiss, and
by how much more our will desires any thing, and by how much more perfectly it
fulfils that which it desires, by so much does it obtain a greater joy. To
these things, let us consider that the blessedness, or perfect joy in heaven
proceeds from the vision and beholding of God, who in the same moment, wherein
he is seen, infuseth into all that see him, a most perfect knowledge, that he
is most worthy to have all the good and infinite glory which he has.

For as soon as they see him, they become all prudent and wise, so that every
one may see what is convenient for him: to which knowledge of God is joined the
love of God above all created things, together with an ineffable desire that
he may possess all the good and glory which he is worthy of: which desire and
most intense and enlarged will of every man, this clear vision of God does
succeed, whereby they know and see apparently that the same their desire is
far more perfectly fulfilled, then they are able to comprehend. For they see
and understand God himself whom they so much love, beautified with so great
good and glory, that for the infinities of it they are not able perfectly to
understand, nor yet are able to come to die defects or increase of the glory.
And again, that so much is every ones joy the greater, by how much his desire
is greater and more perfectly fulfilled.

And here is opened the largeness of the glory of the blessed, seeing their
desire in such a sublime manner is fulfilled, as that nothing can be more
excellent: besides, that desire is of, the infinite good of GOD himself, whom
they do more love and desire, then they do the glory which properly belongs
to themselves. Blessed is the man, who on earth shall with an intimous will
love and contemplate the being and glory of God, seeing he shall thereby
obtain, that he may see his own desire in as high a manner to be fulfilled
in heaven. Who is he that can imagine how much of his glory the Lord, (without
any diminution of glory in himself) shall give unto him, who dwelling on
earth, wishes nothing else, but the glory and greatness which that Majesty
possesses? all these things doc those words of Paul well declare, Eye has not
seen, 1. Cor. 2.
nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man, which God has
prepared for them that love him. And this he says, because no man can
conceive, how intimously those that love GOD here, do wish and will in heaven
that good which God possesses, and in what a high manner, this their desire it
fulfilled, and how much joy they have of the one and the other. Therefore it is
manifest of what great excellency this work of the love of GOD is, seeing
neither tongue nor pen is able to express it.

possible, exercise our selves in this love: yet that we may be able the more
lively to feel, how we ought continually thus to love, we must observe, that
if the exchange be commendable whereby one takes upon him the labor of one
hour, or gives some small money for the redemption of a thousand men captined
by the Moors; without all companion, he shall and ought to think his time
better bestowed, that himself or any other man, should sustain death yea
many deaths, that some other man for a most small time may love God, if that
love cannot be had without suffering of the same death or deaths, even for that
small space of time, and that is so true, that it not only has place, when he
who for that small space of time loves God, by that love obtaining heavens
glory: but also if we were certain that he might by diverse other services
toward God in that small space of time obtain the said glory: which hence is
manifest. For that short love has in it greater good, then the evil of of him
that is suffered with much grief who does also wish death a thousand times.

Besides, it shall yet incomparably be a greater good, if we shall consider,
that for this short time of love shall be rendered an increase of grace, and
further also an augmentation of perpetual love together with Celestial glory.
And how great a good that is, he shall know, who understands what is the
greatness of divine love. And this being known, it will yet more clearly
appeace, that we ought evermore, or by inumerable vicissitudes, to perform
this so sublime a duty of love, that doing here that which is our duty we may
increase in strength to do the same in heaven: where those that ^aue obtained
glory, do so much more excellently love, by how much more they have loved
when they were on earth.

But if we ought by these inumerable turns we ought to love this our most
glorious God, because the act of this love is of inestimable goodness: then
let us turn our selves to consider our own negligence and mallice^, and
behold how bitterly we ought to lament every moment of our lives which has
passed without this love. Again how much more grievously we ought to bewail
al those things which have disioyned us from this love, and such are all our
sins: by which we become capital enemies and most contrarious to this love,
and at the best, brings a shiuering coldness and sluggishnesse over our hearts
to so great a good: and withal let us consider of what great reprehension he
is worthy, that does not intimously from the heart rejoice at every thing which
may promote us to so great a good; such as injuries, contempts, persecutions
and the like, are. And on the other side if we do not mightily lament as
often as we find any impediment to so great a good, such as human favors,
and all other complacency and temporal delectations are. Surely so
reprooueable is it, that we do not joy or grieve at the things we have spoken,
by how much it is more better to suffer death a thousand times, then the
injuries and persecutions which man's malice was wont to infer: or the
sorrows which we can feel whilst we flee the favors of men, and other
things which were wont to be delight-some to us.

Again that in so excellent a iouruey, nothing may hinder us, we must
observe, that if sometimes for the debility of body, or because we have not
attained so great virtue in the soul as is necessary to the suffering of
adversities, it is necessary then that we flee persecutions, and the societies
of such as affect us with injuries, or to procure I some delicate and sauory
things, that we may do that with an actual intention of greater evils, and
often lamenting, for that in fleeing from adversities we should depart from
that which is good, which may promote us to so great a good as is the love of
God: and that taking up these pleasant things, we should omit those bitter
things, unto which by the malice of our negligence, we are obliged.

And we must do this, with an humble Prayer unto GOD, supplicating his
goodness to strengthen verthe both in body and soul, whereby, having received
power to. resist our frailty, for which, by the defect of our power it was
necessary for us to flee persecutions, or to take up things pleasant unto us:
we may be without any impediment disposed, to that same heavenly love of him
and his glory.

And that we may the more clearly know how worthy these our negligences are
of reprehension, whereby we fall from this precious love; it will be to good
purpose to observe that which we have written before of the hatred of our
selves which is the foundation and primary disposition to this love of God. And
because we have no balances on earth wherewith continually to weigh the same,
we must ask of God that he would provide us from heaven; and God grant that
our lives may never be weary of the consideration hereof.

From all these is to be observed, what great madness it is not to procure
that great glory in heaven, seeing the sublimity of that glory does necessarily
follow, low, the seriousness of that love, and although the greatness of that
glory were not much to be regarded, which is ordained for us, yet are we much
obliged to regard, that we may obtain the greatness of the love, that being
made glorious, we may ever love him, who is most worthy of all to be most
highly loved. But that we may see how we may be able often to love, chiefly
when the taste in sweetness forsakes us, which of it self was wont to stir us
up; we must take a help from the sixth Instruction; seeing God gives grace to
the will to incline to this or that as often as the servant of God shall
prepare himself thereunto, from al which the servant of Christ may observe, what
an infinite and irrecouerable loss we receive when we omit to love God in
every moment of time wherein we may love him. And if it be to be lamented,
whilst by neglecting of great dignities or earthly riches, one receives a
great loss: How much more lamentable is it (seeing the loss is far greater)
to omit even for a moment, to love God, albeit no sin concur with it.

We may consider that the most skillful workman makes no gain, but whilst
he labors in his faculty: so neither is the servant of GOD enriched in love,
but whilst he produces special acts of this love. Now having this
considered this most Heavenly love; it follows the greatness of it, it seemed
unto them a garden of such pleasure, that, not considering nor entering the
journey which the holy Gospel prescibes unto such love, whereof we speak,
they would not enter in at the door, but break in another way, and whilst
they provided not for themselves they found themselves wandering quite out of
the way.

Surely God is so potent, that he can at one leap place a man in the highest
room of the world: yet he that leapes is to fear, because sometimes he shall
think himself to be lead of God, when indeed he is lead by his own
presumption. And so may we think of him, who, leaving the way of the Gospel,
will by and by leap up to the highest bounds of this love. Nor yet would we
have such as prepare themselves to this excellent love, in the beginning quite
to forsake it, but least in the beginning they should cast themselves wholly
upon it, they should forget the preparation, and way of the Gospel, which the
Son of God has delivered unto us. For so much more certain shall the
preparation be, by how much one does more highly place himself in the love of
God, by such exercises as the Gospel delivers unto us, and (as is said) are
necessary to that love. Therefore the humble servant of God who endeavors to
receive into his soul so precious a liquor, that through the sweetness of
glory, he may glorify his most high God, must 4. For many days exercise
himself in the things before spoken: and above all things: that he extricate
and acquit himself from himself. But when he shall see himself rightly or
sufficiently at least exercised herein, if the Lord be pleased to help him
with the blessings of sweetness, they shall be a great help unto him, to
love with facility. But if this sweetness be a wanting, or else whilst this
sweetness offers it self, he must of purpose* work on this manner.

Let him briefly call to mind, how great that good and glory is which God
has, considering him, as the best and most worthy, that all men should joy at
his good: and presently let him incline his will, to desire the same thing, and
to rejoice at that so great good of God, and let him persist in that will as
long as he can. And if he be a little distracted or cooled herein, let him
turn himself by and by in the same manner of doing; and so as much as is
possible, let him not omit to produce the acts, whereby he may desire or love
that good which God has, and in mind let him often leap for joy, considering
God to be most infinitely replenished with infinite good. From the long
continuance of this exercise, he must needs be lifted up to that most high
love. Nor is it any other thing to bring fourth the frequent acts of love, then
if one hear, and that in an hours space related many stratagems of some
singular friends, or some great honors done unto him and rejoice at every one
of them: every one of these joys proceeding from affection toward him, is
called the act of love. Seeing then the glory and honor of God are infinite, and
of infinite excellency, and in like manner whatsoever he does or creates; and
every one of these show his singular dignity and honor: nor do all the
moments of our lives suffice to hear or consider them; it is our part, at the
least to cast them up under the name of infinite good and glory, and to produce
the acts of our will, inclining it to desire it and rejoice at it all the days
of our lives, seeing we owe this unto him more then we do to any other
friend, in that of his great bounty so great a part of his glory does result
and rebound upon us.

And one may so exercise himselues in these acts (albeit that sweetness which
they call devotion be a wanting) that in every business and in every place,
he may love God not needing hereunto any secret place, or any other
sequestration of himself: as it daily falls out, that a friend rejoices,
whilst he hears, that of late some good thing has befallen his friend, and so
suddenly ioyeth at it without seeking any other time, place or sequestration.
Unto the producing of these acts, it helps much to consider the second and
sixth Instructions, and also that in the Chapter of the hating of ones self.

Whence we collect how these acts ought to be produced, and that it all must
be done, for that GOD is most worthy, that we should do it for him. Nor
ought it to seem a labor or staying of us, for these things to have recourse
to the foresaid instructions, for when as for a few days, this thing shall be
done, one may then easily work, yea without returning to them any more.
Happily it may seem to some to be a more easy way to come to this love, if
they do fervently ask it of GOD by prayer, as we have spoken in the tract of
Prayer, together with the exercises of virtues, whereof we have spoken; and if
they be rightly examined, they are almost the same; but yet he shall more
briefly and more divinely attain unto it, who together with prayer shall know
now to help himself with the acts of the sixth Instruction, and that in that
tract of the affections of the mind. For in every of the acts of them, is
found a new service and increase.

And seeing sometimes it falls out, that those who endeavor to produce these
acts of loving and desiring the good and glory of God; do yet find the will
very dull hereunto: Therefore to give remedy to this disease; we believe that
this comes so to pass, because there wants the holy hatred of our selves
which our Redeemer taught us, as in the sixth Instruction: or else some of our
affections cleave to some earthly thing; as the love of some delight not
necessary, or an affection to some person, not rightly ordered. He therefore
that shall find himself so dull, ought diligently to search out in himself
such defect or affection, and to take it away with contrary acts. Nor is it any
other thing to be willing to incline the will, to bring fourth the acts of the
love of God above all things, not having first obtained that holy and precious
hatred of our selves, or die affection to some earthly thing remaining, or some
other thing that may bring delight, not ordered actually or at the least
virtually toward GOD; ^hen with a beetle or mall to be willing to clean
those things, which do require a rasour, or a most sharp knife.

Surely, it behooves the will that would bring fourth the acts of true and
sincere love, to be so sharp, that it may penetrate whatsoever opposes it,
until it do come unto God. And such a will even in peace and without my
labor, will produce a thousand acts of love and many more in one day; whereof
the least, suffices to advance a man to a great degree of heavenly glory. And
on the other side he that endeavors to lift up himself, to produce the acts
of love by a ^ill dulled and blunted, with a ^mall inordinate love; it is so
difficult for this man to love, as it is to ^deuide the heavens with a mall.

For the sublimity of perfect love suffers not together with it a thing so vile
and abject. Nor ought any to admire, that to the obtaining of this love, such
circu^spection is here advised, saying, that many have obtained it, without
using so many cautions, and without this method and course. To which I
answer, that albeit, many have obtained this love long before the writing
hereof, yet who will rightly weigh what our Redeemer meant, when he said that
all the law hanged upon love, shall plainly perceive, that no man obtained it
the common way, without these courses here prescribed, which are no other, but
such as are drawn from the Sacred Scripture, according the declaration of the
fathers: which method and means our LORD GOD of his infinite bounty and
goodness does manifest to all his elect, both small and great, whose goodness
is also pleased to grant, that now at the last these things gathered together
for the common instruction, might be published unto all: that our frailty and
misery every day increasing, there might ever abound the facility of knowing
that which is so necessary for us.

And if they urge further, affirming that they have attained unto this love
without these courses and means: I dare presume to entreat them to take heed
least happily this their love be that cold and weak love whereof I spoke in
the beginning of this treatise; which seeing it suffers many blemishes and
blurs to be in it, there is no wonder if without either method or labor it
be obtained.

which are to be spoken of this love of our neighbors; there is (...) rule to
be observed, which may be applied to every work namely, that whosoever desires
ever to please God, must observe two things.

The most excellent work which God would have us do, is to love him, and
think upon him: yet if we do not this in such manner as he would have us,
as in the former tract is delivered it would not be acceptable to him, nor
worth the doing.

There is another work like unto this, which God would have us to do, that
is, to love our neghbours: but yet albeit God would have us to do it, except
we love him in that manner as GOD would have it done, we shall not attain
those sublime and heavenly rewards which GOD has prepared for those that love
him aright. Greg.
For albeit the sacred Scriptures do not contradict this manner, of loving, as
if they judged it a sin, yet is it not so done as GOD by them would have it
done. This is my commandments says that great Majesty, that ye love one
another, as I have loved you.

Therefore it is fit that we discourse a little hereof, how he has loved us,
that we may understand in what manner he would have us love our neighbors.
This our great God, loved us, reducing us to the sublime love of himself: he
loved us inducing to suffer the adversities and afflictions of the world, never
letting loose the raines of our affections to the vain pleasures of this
world, beyond that which should be necessary to the sustentation of the body:
he loved us dying for us that he might give unto us grace and glory.

And in this manner of loving was he most of all given to love and the
greatest enemy that could be, of all vain love, wherewith lovers do love one
another, and whereof they make outward show; which kind of love is very
slippery and deceitful. And therefore God is earnestly to be prayed unto, that
this love may not infect the will which was created to be the temple of God.
Sure it is, if this love had not infected the will, the Son of God would never
have said, he that hates not his father and mother, brethren and sisters,
cannot be my disciple. Therefore we ought to love one another, and in that
manner which our Master Jesus Christ has taught us, casting away all other
vanities which are wont to mix themselves with love: whereof, this that
follows is one.

It comes to pass that thou see one in respect of the soul much given to
virtue, and in respect of his corporal presence and conversation very
acceptable and pleasant: with this person many are so cordiatly affected, that
they become captiued with the love of him, and it is grievous unto them not to
see him, not to speak with him, not to acknowledge in him a reciprocal love
toward them: this is a vain love. Whence with many it falls out, that they
take great pains, but profit very little, and do unto God very small service.
But let us make the vanity of it appear by a familiar example. Thou have a
friend happily who has a servant, the love of this servant of thy friends does
so captiuate thy heart, that it pleases thee much more to converse and talk
with him then with thy friend. If thou shall say, that the love wherewith thou
love this servant is for thy friend, who will not laugh at it? For although
it may be, that this love was begun, in that he was thy friends servant, yet
that from whence this love so increased, that thou delightedst more in his
conversation then thy friends, does show that now thou love him not for thy
friends sake, but because his conversation it pleasant and acceptable unto
thee: in like manner, we may say, that it is worthy of laughter, that thou
should say, the love whereof we spoke before was for Gods sake, although
happily it might have some part of spiritual love in it: but it suffices not
him that is truly addicted unto God, to give part unto God, but the whole, so
that the whole affection must be employed in God, or in that which is wholly
directed to him.

Therefore whatsoever is vain in this love must be cast away, seeing it is
certain, that nothing can be ordered and directed toward God, which is more
loved in the creature then in God the Creator. Our love toward al persons
ought to be carried with so great affection, as can proceed from that
affection which we have toward God, all other affections being cast off,
that, that affection may have place, which we owe unto God. And to the casting
away of these things, it shall not profit a little to remember what we have
spoken before of vain joy together with the sixth Instruction.

Now therefore, seeing in part, we have spoken what kind of love ours ought to
be, and that we must cast away the love that is not such; we will add an
example, to open this manner of loving: to which purpose we need but call to
mind, the example of that good Son, of whose love toward his Father, we
spoke in the former Chapter: by whose imitation we collected it is fit to love
our Heavenly Father. So now let us see in the imitation of him, how we ought
to love the servants of our Father, namely all that are in the world, friends,
and enemies.

Therefore we must add in that example, that the father so beloved of his
son, who yet expected no benefit from his father, had a servant whom he only
loved, but yet wanted all kind of necessaries as well for himself as for his*
servant, saving what his son did give unto him. Now this servant is odious
and hateful to this son, and in nothing profitable* to him, or to his mind;
and if the son should only seek himself and his own benefit and pleasure,
he would cast off this servant: yet unwilling to do any thing that may
displease his father, but rather seeking by all means, to do the things that
may please his father, induced thereunto by no other respect, he maintains
this ser^ant in his house as one of his ^onnes; or most dearly beloved
servants, and so speaks unto him and intreates him, that if at any time he
would seem to leave the house, the son would be grie^^ed, and would entreat
him to tarry, fearing least his father should be grieved for his absence.

Such love must that be, which we ought to carry toward our neighbors,
namely, that considering they are so much beloved of God, that he gave
himself to death for them, when as yet all of them were his enemies; we also
should love them al so much, helping them in all that is good, and necessary
for them as well in body as in soul, even so much I say, as we are wont to
love them who do much please and delight us; and that also, albeit their
conversation were odious and g^ieuous unto us: and so to speak unto them; and
provide for them in all necessaries, even as for those who are much beloved of
that our Father and Lord, who both would it should be so and has also so
commanded it to be done.

And all these things we must do, with as great and fervent a will as we are
able, because this is most acceptable unto God, and he would have us do it,
and this he his infinite will that it should be so done of us. Let them who
desire to serve God, chiefly observe, that whosoever do affect us with any
injury, gives us great occasion, to increase in the service of God: for after
this occasion of so great good which comes unto us, joined with the
commandment of God who would have it so; what excuse can we have, if we do
not with intimous and ardent bowels love then that load us with evils, chiefly
whilst we consider that God himself will happily afterward take from such
our perse cut ours all excellent and high duties, as it often befalls many
other sinners?

Therefore the good servant of God he must never be accounted, who reioiceth
not at the afflictions and injuries, which are cast upon him for his Lord. If
therefore he shall esteem himself happy, when he is set upon with injuries
and adversities, the only will of serving God, makes him no less stable in
loving him, whom his inordinate affection made odious, then him, whom the
abundance of benefits compelled to love. Yet it must be observed that although
love must be equally borne unto all: yet first it must be showed both in
affection and good works toward them that are given to virtue and holiness
of life.

himself. To love our selves is a thing so natural, that whosoever would
hereof write, may well do it without fear of provoking any to anger, seeing our
appetite does increase in our love toward our selves, that albeit, we be
enriched with great riches, yet do we judge them but small, because we love
our selves and labor advancement to greater matters. For this cause our
excellent Master the Son of God desiring that we should love our neighbors
very much, as those for whom he laid down his life; that he might show in few
words how much he would have us to love them; he gave this rule: Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self. Math. 22.
But seeing the blindness of sin has so invaded us, that it has taken from
us, the judgment and knowledge how we ought to love our selves; it is fit by
the direction of the Gospel, we provide for this evil.

Therefore we will say that he truly loves himself who observes these three
rules.

obtain two points may be considered. 1 Is the good which from this thing
comes unto us or may come unto us.

Let us observe, that every one whilst he loves himself, does greatly desire
to better either his ornaments, or else all his household furniture and all
things else that he has if it be not such as he would have it: and so must he
do who spiritually loves himself. For our Lord God has given us a precious
ornament or pearl, wherewith at all times to enrich our selves. This pearl
we have, but covered with brass or copper, whilst we desire any thing to our
own good or profit: nor must we ever rest, until by the right hand of the
highest, there be such a change made, that our appetite, which is ever
agitated and tossed up and down in us, wishing our own profit, may now only
regard those things, wherewith GOD is delighted, chiefly that thing being
such as that not only GOD would that we should have it, but also that we our
selves should be more enriched with it. For the more we do forget our own
proper benefit, that we may record it call to mind the glory of God: the more
care has he of enriching us with all good things, this forgetfulness is
worthy of eternal memory: this remembrance worthy of eternal glory. What a
most precious love is this which makes men Gods? For of this love is that to
be understood which a good father spoke: Si Deum amas, Deus es: if thou love
GOD, August.
thou art God: for I have said ye are Gods: Psalm. 81.
that therefore we might obtain this so excellent love of our selves, our GOD
would have us to hate our selves in that thing wherein wordly men do love
themselves: and this he wills, whilst in the Gospel he commands, Luke 14.
That we should hate our selves; as before is spoken.

Besides all these things, I forewarne him, that will truly love himself:
that the sweetness he finds in the service of GOD do not suffice him, for
the glory expected. For albeit, this sweetness be good, yet GOD gives it not
to this end, that we should rest in it alone but that by it, we might come to
take a taste in the consideration of the good, glory and dominion which God
himself possesses, and that with a great mind we should praise him. For the
beautiful praise of God is nothing else, then that should re^oyce to declare
the wonderful things of God to the whole world as in the psalms and every
where in Scripture is to be seen, and in all created things.

Of which and or every other thing which we shall relate, speak or hear, we
must feel a new motion of joy; such as worldly men do feel, whilst they see
themselves or those whom they most love to be commended. Seeing then that they
do vainly rejoice at the commendations which are not due unto them, it is
very just, that the servant of God should mightily rejoice at his praise, whom
heaven and earth suffice not sufficiently to praise.

Besides, he who truly loves himself, when he shall have understood, that
he has received any benefit from God, ought from his most intimous bowels to
give him thanks, not for that he finds himself more iuriched, but that he
finds himself the more enabled to serve God. Even as, if some of the Kings
chief servants should reioyed, that they had received some great benefit from
the King that from those greater riches, they might do him greater and more
acceptable services, without respect of other benefits or gifts. Nor is it any
other thing to give God thanks, (which thing many know not) then an inward act
of the soul, whereby he who has received the gift or benefit from him,
acknowledging that God is an infinite Lord, from whom comes cuery good thing,
rejoices at all the glory of God, and that by such gift, he sees himself
more apt, the more to love and serve him.

and by how much that which is said, is enlarged, seeing it is a thing of great
moment, we may observe that besides this recognition and joy spoken of, at the
receipt of every benefit from God, we ought to offer unto God, all that we
are: in our own wills annihilating our selves, whereby we may give our selves
wholly in body and soul to his service, producing then mos^ great acts,
wherewith, for the great power and goodness of God, we may rejoice: from whence
that benefit comes, for which we now give him thanks. And that we may more
clearly understand that which I now speak of annihilating our selves: I would
hereby signify, that seeing we may ever increase in the diminution and
despising of our selves, we ought as often as we give thanks unto God, after a
singular manner, to dis-esteeme of our selves in respect of his benefits,
whereby we may the better give our selves to his Majesty. Therefore the servant
of God must be very present to himself that as often as he gives thanks to God
for any benefit, that motion of the mind, and that will, whereby he reioiceth at
the benefit received, do actually proceed (as before is said) that he may love
God the more and serve him; rejecting all confideration from this, that hence
it comes unto him whereby he may of good from him that he knows may come
unto him, thence so be made more strong in the love of GOD alone, and more
acceptable thanks may be rendered unto him: and he must also have the eyes of
his soul open, for sometimes these things will fall out not without some
defects, and we will think that al things are rightly done.

But the groundwork of that which hitherto is spoken, is taken from that
which Divines and Prophets are wont to say, that he who would be thankful, must
return to the benefactour a work of as great a value or greater then that
which be has received. Seeing thou that all our good things are received from
God, whatsoever we can perform in his service, is of little worth in respect
of the least of his benefits. Therefore at the least we ought to give him
thanks for them in this manner, as we have spoken, and that with as much
affection and endeavor as we are able. By this very motion of our
understanding and will, and by all the foresaid preparation of our
annihilation, we must every day give thanks, for so great a benefit bestowed
on us: namely that he that great Majesty has received to himself so great good
as he has.

In the same manner must we give like daily thanks unto him for the benefit
of his Incarnation, our Redemption and the Redemption of the whole world. For
the benefits conferred upon all the company of that blessed Court of heaven:
and for all the benefits bestowed upon his Saints in earth, but chiefly on
those that do affect us with injuries, and reioyeing at all these things to
give GOD singular thanks, from whom all good things do proceed. Oh how truly
does he love himself, who is ever employed in this giving of thanks. For
assuming as his own, every good thing which is done to all others after an
inestimable manner, it causes his own proper good to increase, yea it makes
the good of all others to be his own proper good; and by so much more does
his own good increase, by how much he does more rejoice in the only love of
God; and gives him thanks for all, without all respect of such increase. In
these last words consists the sum of that which is required to make thanks
acceptable to God, and that we assured^ so do, it is expedient that we be much
accustomed to do all that we do because God would have us so do as is
expressed in the second Instruction.



the four graund passions of the mind and all other passions as is formerly
discoursed. Yet besides those things which are there handled, it is not
unnecessary in this place to join in manner of an example, a thing which is
somewhat grievous; which although it often offer it self, yet is it very
necessary for the obtaining of this true love.

It falls out daily that we do or say somewhat, whence we may seem to be
confounded and ashamed, and that those who hear or see us; do contemn us for
it, whether it fall out by any natural defect, as suppose, that we have not
well composed our Sermons, or that we have not so aptly spoken, or so cunningly
sung or some such other thing: or whether it fall out upon some of our
unbridled motions, as intemperancy in the gesture of the countenance, or in
angry words or the like. He that loves himself must in every one of such
contingents and chances consider two points.



But those who soundly love themselves do quite contrary, namely embracing
that confusion with great love, considering that others will despise them,
according to the common custom of the world, and will think them to be men
of small virtue and worth, and profitable for nothing: all which do make up a
vehement act of patience and humility: whereof, (as is before said) few men
suffice to produce excellent habits, albeit, we (which yet is true) will not
say, that in every of such acts which are referred unto God, there were great
service done unto him.

And if we be attentive; there is daily an occasion offered unto us, either of
operation or cogitation, whereby we may do these things, all which things
they do loose that without method and negligently lead their lives, albeit,
they think themselves devout. But how much he who truly loves himself ought
to esteem every of these acts, the servant of God will very well observe;
turning himself as well to this place, as to the things before discoursed, in
which there is mention made of these acts of the will.

but for the Lord alone: whose we more are then our own, and to whom we are
more debtours then to our selves, and also who has more care for the things
that are fit for us, then we have for our selves, and who has more labored
and sweat that he might give us life, then we have don, that we might have it.

Thus concluding this first part of the third general requisition in serving
of God, I will shut it up thu: namely that happy is the man who does all that
ever he does only for GOD: and happy again is he who has strongly
determined in his soul to produce the multiplicity of the acts described in
this book, which he must exactly know that will serve God aright, and most
frequently bring them into action.

Therefore let all men read this book: let them who know how to serve God read
it, that they may more easily remember, in what manner the most high will be
served: Let them that know not, read it, that they may attain that excellent
knowledge without which there is no coming near unto GOD neither here nor
here after. Surely, I dare affirm, that it shall most clearly appear, if men
will judge aright, that he who shall use this way of serving God shall in one
year do more and more perfect and excellent services unto God of those things
which are much to be esteemed for the singular help which he shall by their
instruction receive, then he shall do in ten years, who is not helped by
this method or the like, if the Lord God will give in unto him.

This is proved from the great necessity which all men confess there is of
godly books teaching this excellent and compendious course: seeing that to
this purpose the holy Gospel is written, and whatsoever is good in the world.
But in this method is most singularly proposed, by what means one may come to
the sublime and perfect practice of all that is written in all the books of
God and godly men.

Besides, this is showed by the confession of many, who thought themselves
before to have had a sufficient love of God, according to the frailty of man;
and that they served him according to his will: but yet having read some such
direction and method as this is they affirmed, that almost they had not served
him at all; and that now they served him more in one day, then in ten before.

And the same shall be also fully manifested by experience of the^, who reading
these things again and again, will ever do according to this form or such
like and ever doing all they do to the praise and glory of our most potent
LORD God; shall grow mighty and powerful servants of his for ever.



arise quickly. Act. 12.
This timely rising is of great moment, for upon it depends the whole
sensible devotion of the whole day, and the divine visitation. As Soon
therefore as thou art up, turn thy heart and mind unto God, and labor in
that first moment of day to bind him unto thee with the affections of thy love.
For it is just thou should consecrate unto GOD the first fruits of the day,
and first receive him into the closet of thy heart, as that guest who to this
end turns in unto thee, and brings with him a troop of unspeakable graces
to season thy heart, and sanctify all the actions of that day. To this end
therefore thou must cast from thy heart al thy cogitations, wherewith Satan
labors to exercise thee, and offer unto God the first fruits of thy
cogitations, either in thought, or some holy meditation, upon thy knees, until
thou have conceived some affect and feeling of devotion, laboring to cast from
thee al vain cogitations which then do chifely infest thy mind: for hereby
thou shall be more devout to every good work, and more expedite all that day.

This is of great moment, because if thou openest the gate of thy heart to any
vain cogitation or care, it will make thee unquiet, and less apt to pray. It
is in the power of thy will, (Gods grace assisting it) to admit this
cogitation, but not to reject it after it is admitted, because after it has
gotten the possession and dominion of the heart, it will be very difficult to
cast it out.

Whilst thou art it clothing thy self, invoke the blessed Trinity, and pray
with heart and devotion, for the obtaining of zeal to pray, of holiness and
diligence in performing the duties of thy calling. For this purpose, thou must
have in memory, some such short prayers as may stir up thy affection.

This done, and thy self being fully made ready: cast down thy self before
God, and with as great affection of mind as thou can, give him thanks, that
he has given thee as quiet night and wholesome sleep, that he has granted
thee a new day and longer, time, to acquire thy eternal salvation, and that
he has delivered thee from many dangers both of body and mind, from all the
iullusions of Satan: and thou shall instantly beg of him grace to shun all
kind of sins, to perform worthily the duties of thy calling, and in all
things so to seek his most holy will, that thou may be acceptable unto him,
offer up unto him thy body and soul, thy cogitations, desires, words and
works, in the union and merit of Jesus Christ, that from it and it only, they
may become acceptable to him. Lastly, put on a full resolution of shunning some
particular defect and sin, and of exercising some particular virtue, and ask
of GOD a special faour and help to the performance of this holy work.

Abrham, beginning his prayer to God: Genesis 18.
I have begun to speak unto my Lord, and I am but dust and as^es. In which
words are three things which this excellent preparation consists. Chrysostom.
that I am ignorant of my self, and do exceed my bounds, and use too much
confidence. For I know that I am but dust and ashes: but as I know this, and
know it clearly, so neither am I ignorant of this, that the greatness of thy
mercy is plentiful, that thou art rich in goodness, and would have all men to
be saved. Think therefore, whom thou art, to wit, a most vile man, a most
ingrate sinner, for thou art indeed dust and ashes, dunge and stinch it self,
and with this cogitation humble thy self. Think also to whom thou do pray,
namely to the most wise, merciful and potent God, the lover of Angels nature,
the repairer of man's nature, the framer and maker of all things. Admire his
dinine Majesty in^^mously present, which susteines thee, love his infinite
goodness, which is ready to hear thee, and graciously to favor thee, be
rooted in hope, in that thou can never depart out of the presence of so great
a King either empty, or forsaken.

Lastly think what good affect thou will drawn from thy meditation, that thou
may direct thy considerations unto it, and what thou will pray for, that so
thou may observe that of Salomons: Be not rash with thy mouth, nor let thine
heart be hasty to utter a thing before God; Eccles. 5.
for God is in heavens and thou art on the earth, therefore let thy words be
few. If he do so much exceed all men, it is fit, that with great fear thou
speak unto him, and be well advised what thou art to speak. By these and
such like cogitations thou shall abandon al vain fantasies, collect thy mind,
and find thy self attentive, humble, fervent, and with other holy affections
drawn to pray.



But first of all that thou may make thy life fit for prayer and for speech
with God, thou must labor as much as may be, to have it sequestrated from
worldly affairs, freed from sins, and separated from earthly affection. When
Joseph was to be brought into the presence of Pharao, Genesis 41.
he was first shaven, and his garments changed. Those Hebrew children which
were to be taken into the King of Babilons Palace to be instructed in wisdom
and knowledge, Dan. 1.
were not only to be richly apparelled, but also, for a long time fed with
most delicate meats, only to the end they might stand before a barbarous
king, and might carry a coutenance worthy of the kings Court. If these things
were required of such as were to be admitted into the presence of an earthly
king, what ought thou to do, who art daily attendant on the King of Heaven,
to lay open to him thy desires, and receive from him his gracious answers?
Surely it is not enough, that thou depart out of the prison of thy slagitious
life, but thou must also shin in all virtues, as in most precious gaments; and
change the food of the country, for the portion of the kings meat, that is, thy
earthly affections and worldly cares for heavenly affections and spiritual
cares. Besides, thou must know, that prayer is the chiefest work of the whole
day, and to be preferred before al humain affairs: this susteins and fattens
the soul; this ministers the helps of grace to over come temptations and bear
all greeuances: this directs and perfect the actions of the whole day: this
brings us, the divine mercies. Praised be God which has no kept back my
prayer, Psalm. 66.
nor his mercy from me. For as long as our prayer cease not to go up to God,
so long will not his mercy cease to descend to us. For a father worthily
speaks, As long as we are here, August.
we pray unto God. For this; that he would not reinoue our prayer nor his mercy
from us: that is, that we might ever pray, and he might ever have mercy. This
our Lord Jesus commanded; Luke 18.
Ever to pray and not to wax faint; showing by the example of the wicked judge
who was moved by importunity of the poor widow to do her ruistice; that
much more will our heavenly Father revenge his elect which cry day and night
unto him. If we faint not in prayer, we are sure, that he will not fail in
his promise, albeit for a time he may seem to differ it. Therefore he
says, praised be God which has not removed my prayer nor his mercy from
me. When thou see^^ thy prayer not removed from thee the^ thou may be sure,
his mercy is not removed from thee. If therefore it be plain by the judgment
of Saint Augustine that the mercy of God toward thee, do, in some sort, depend
upon thy prayer to him, thou must not for any cause cause to pray. If thou
failest at thy fittest time, to eat or sleep, thou do afterward as soon as
conveniently thou can, eat, rest and sleep, because they are so necessary,
as that without them, thy life cannot long last. Prayer is the food of the
soul, the sleep of the mind, whereby, the diminished heat of the spirit is
renewed and gets strength. Therefore if our set times of prayer be upon any
occasion interrupted, let us, as in the omission of our meat and sleep, take
all sit times to repair that loss.

In the time of prayer, of one thing I will advise thee: that thou have
together with God two guests very diverse one from another, to which thou must
minister fit nourishments. These guests are thy understanding and thy
affection. The understanding feeds upon meditations, colloquies, and the simple
aspect of God: the affection is salted with holy desires and purposes, and the
internal acts and love of all virtues. And few things suffice the
understanding, but the affection after it has desired much, loved much and
refreshed it self, with many purposes and acts of virtue, will scarce be
found satisfied. Therefore so moderate this banquet of prayer, that thou put
but a few things before the understanding, which often times needs not duine
co^sideratio^s, but is content with the simple beholding of the Lord; but thou
must prepare many dishes for the affection as being more greedy of the souls
salvation.

Or if thou will, think that God himself is thy guest, whom thou must feed
with such meat, that his soul may bless thee. And what are these dainties,
but the considerations of the understanding, and the affections of the will.
Therefore he says, My son, give me thy heart, and let thy eyes keep my
ways. Why does he first demand the heart, and afterward the function of the
eyes, seeing the eyes of the mind, do in nature go before the steps of the
heart? it is, for that the affection of the heart, is in this business more
excellent: and because every consideration is directed to the motions and
affections of the heart? thou art then out of the way, if thou bestowest the
hour or time appointed from parier, in considerations of the understanding,
and leauest the will empty and fasting. Give unto the Lord, at that time, thy
understanding whilst thou do exercise it moderatly, and to stir up thy
affection in godly meditations. But guie thy heart more largely to the Lord,
whilst thou do satiate it with godly affections. Banish from thee all
distraction, tepedity, and somnolency. Let the mind ascend to heavenly things,
let the understanding call the bridegroom, but the affection, draw allure and
embrace him, that the mind by that most chaft imbracement of him, being made
fruitful, may in due time bring forth the Son of sanctification, and may
make thee in the midst of Gods people, being delivered from the curse of
barrenness, blessed for ever and ever.

4 Having thus prayed, thou must then read some portion of Scripture: wherein,
without distraction, thou must be so attentive, that thy mind may be fixed. 1
Either on the words themselves. 2 Or upon the sense of the words, if thou do
understand them; or, if it may be, upon both. And as that blessed father
speaks concerning the manner of reading the Psalms, so do thou in all other
parts of Scripture. If the psalm do pray, pray thou also; August. Psalm 30.
if it mourn, do thou mourn also: if it rejoice, rejoice thou, if it hope,
hope thou, if it fear, fear thou. For all things which are here written, are
our glass. And thus shall thou take great profit by thy reading.

5 How to prepare our selves to the receiving of the Lords Supper.

OMitting many things which others have written heareof I will draw all that
which is to observed herein; unto these four heads. imbecility of the
stomach is hurtful to the taking of sound and wholesome meat. And this is
the cause, why most sorts of men, albeit they daily receive it, yet do not
receive from it those heavenly benefits which it offers; because they live
not in a holy conversation, but come unto it with vnpurified hearts and
unsanctified hands and lips. That which the Prophet uses upon another
occasion, may well be applied to this present purpose: Ye have sown much and
bring in little, Agg. 1.
ye eat but yea have not enough, ye drink but are not filled, ye cloathe
you, but are not warm, and he that earneth wages, puts it into a broken
bag, and he gives the reason of it; because my house lies wast, and ye
run every man to his own house. And have not we sowed much seeing we have
sown that good seed, that grain of eternal life, in the earth of our hearts?
have not we eaten much, who have fed our selves with the bread of Angels, the
food of the elect and Saints of God? have not we drink even to satiety, who
have drunk the blood of Christ that celestial drink, that cup of the Saints
of God? Have not we put on that most glorious garment of which the Apostle
speaks, Romans 13.
put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ? Have not we, not only heaped up the wages,
but also the treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of God in the bags of our
hearts? Or at least made the world believe we did these things, when we
resorted to his blessed feast? Why then have we gathered so little fruit
thereof? Why do we perish with hunger and thirst of virtue? Why do we seem
to shake with cold? But only, because we daily build up the house of our old
Adam, with new sins and vices, but we neglect to build up the house of God,
the precious soul, with holy conversation? Why do we hide the treasure of
treasures in our hearts, and yet are poor, but because we put it into the
broken bag of the heart, which is rent and torn with vain and wicked
cogitations and desires. If therefore thou will come to this heavenly banquet
worthily, and receive the comfortable fruit of the Lords passion, labor to
bring with the holy life, fit for such a place and purpose. One says, there
are three kinds of sacrifice: one of the Lords body another of a contrite
heart, and the third of the mortified flesh: Therefore the sacrifice of
humility in the mind, and of mortification of the flesh must go before, that
in the celebration of the Lords supper, thou may not only come with great
devotion, but also with much comfort and profit. Therefore labor to come with
great purity of the flesh, and with no less cleanness of the mind, that
there may be nothing in thy whole inward or outward man unmeet for so great a
feast. By this care of well living and coming with a clean heart and body,
thou shall gather by often communicating, plentiful fruit, and a great
increase of virtue.

whole sacrament it is, to be purged from all thy sins. praise of God, seeing
we have nothing whereby sufficiently to praise God according to his dignity,
but Christ Jesus whom we Spiritually receive. Father, I will, Io. 17.
that they which thou have given me be with me even where I am, that they be
one as we are one, I in them and thou in me, even that they may be one in us.
These are some of the ends which we must set before us, when we come to
celebrate this most holy communion.

There are others, who providing for the more unlearned sort, and the frailty
of memory, do draw from these seven petitions of the Lords prayer, seven ends
and considerations sit to be observed of such as come to the holy communion:
which they distingush according to seven days of the week, assigning one to
every day. of a spouse, entreating, that as in heaven, so in thee and in all
earthly things Gods will may be fulfilled. thee, thou shall come to this sacred
conduite of graces, that thou may be requited from all true evils, namely
Satan, sin, and all the miseries of this life.

Some there are who not unprofitably do order their intention from the
consideration of the 7 words of our Savior on the cross. Father forgive them,
Luke 23.
for they know not what they do. And they imitating our Savior must adorn
themselves with charity, and pray as well for their enemies. Very I say unto
thee, Luke 23.
this day shall thou be with me in paradise. And they allured by the largess
of so great a promise, come to the communion that they may conceive hope, and
draw nere to the reward of glory. Io. 19.
behold thy Son, and to his disciple; behold thy mother, and they compelled by
their beggary and misery, come to his holy Sacrament, that they by his
providence, may be provided of all necessaries. 4 He said, I thirst, Io. 19.
an ardent desire of perfection and thirst of righteousness. 5 He cried,
Matthew. 27.
complained that he was forsaken: therefore they approach this Sacrament, that
in all pressures and temptations they may know, that the help of God is at
hand. Io. 19.
it is finished: Therefore they celebrat the communion, that by a constant
obedience of co^mandeme^ts; they may happily finish their course. Luke 23.
and they desire the union of the soul unto God, that he would be pleased to
join the^ by love to their Father and most loving Lord and Husband. But
whether thou will imitate any of these, or some other of thy own invention, I
leave it at thy choice; only labor, that thou come to this holy sacrament
with a most pure actual intention of pleasing God and of coupling thy self
unto him by love.

the number of seven, that by the week they may serve by distinct reason to
dispose the soul. Who comes in this Sacrament? Christ with all his graces to
be joined unto me. To whom comes he? to me a despicable man, who am not
worthy to be present at his holy Sacrament, or present my self before him.
For what cause comes he? Not to seek any good to himself, but that he might
give unto me and his whole Church, yea the whole world, innumerable good things.

1 Who is it that comes? Christ a King received with this acclamation;
Blessed is the King of Israel that comes in the name of Lord. Io. 12.
To whom it is a small thing to be king of men, seeing he is a King of the
whole world. A King gentle and meek, who comes to reign, not that he might
fleece and poll his subjects, but that he might teach righteousness, and with
most abundant salvation save his people. Hence it is written, Behold thy King
will come unto the righteous and a Savior. Zach. 9.


2 Who is it that comes? Christ the Lord, Ye call me Master and Lord, Io. 23.
and ye say well, for so I am. But such a Lord as lays on his servants the
sweet yoke and easy burden of his Law: and for the obedience of one moment,
thereof in and through Christ will give an eternal weight of glory. 2 To whom
comes he? off the yoke of all due service, and more then so, has sworn
homage and subjection to the adversary of his Lord, sin and Satan. 3 Why comes
he? Adam, Hosea. 11.
and bands of Charity this his slave, and might reduce him from under the yoke
of inordinate passions, unto his service, more happy then to be Lord of all
Dominions.

Math. 32.
who said to ^is Disciples; Be not you called Rabbi; for there is one that is
your Master. But not such a Master as binds heavy burdens and insupportable
upon the shoulders of men, but will not move then with their finger: but he who
first did the things which he taught, and in the Doctrine of perfection
instructed all, both Men and Angels, and ever helps his to do their duties.
and Disciple who never or seldom comes to hear the doctrine of virtues, and
besides, by the leuity of his mind, does soon depart from the things heard.
Can. 8.
That I by imitation may follow the bridegroom, and apprehend him by faith, and
may lead me through hope into the house of my mind: there shall he teach me his
ways, the ways of righteousness, and I in like manner will give to him
spiced wine of love and wine wrung out of the holy affections of the
pomgranates.

Sir. 6.
the weight of gold and silver is not to be compared to the goodness of his
faith: who being forsaken of us, does yet never forsake us; and provoked by our
iniquities, yet does not contemn us. Sir. 6.
a strong protection, that whilst I find him I may find a treasure: that he
might increase in me his love, and more intimously unite me to him by love.

Hebr. 2. Psalm. 21.
I will declare thy name unto my brethren. The first begotten brother, who
having right to the whole inheritance, yet most willingly admitted others
adopted by his Father, into the possession of it. comes he? To me his brother,
but the killer of him my brother, who as an other Caine have with my sins
slain just Abel in the field of this world; and him as one drunk with love,
and not with wine, with most bitter death have I slain and punished.

Is. 9. Is 22.
and house of Judah: because he begat all the sons of his Church with the
word of truth, and does by grace give them a divine essence. A Father who loved
us most tenderly, and calls us his little children, of whom he does again and
again travail, till himself be formed in us. 2 To whom comes he? Luke 15.
and cloathe me with the roabe of grace: that he might give me the ring of
celestial gifts, a sign of dignity in my hand: that he might protect my
feet, i. my affections with the shoes of his help: that he might feed me
with his fatted calfe, his precious body and blood: that he might defend me
from my elder brother and from pride, and ever make me a possessor of his
eternal inheritance in the house of his glory.

I will marry thee unto me for ever: I will marry thee unto me in
righteousness, Hosea. 2.
and in judgment, and in mercy, and in compassion, and I will marry thee unto
me in faithfulness, and thou shall know I am the Lord. He marries the soul
for ever unto him, because he would never depart from the wedlock of it: he
marries it in righteousness whilst he iustifies it by grace: in judgment
whilst he delivers it from the adversaries; in mercy and compassion, whilst he
inricheth it with celestial gifts; and in faithfulness, because not by its
works, but by faith in Christ and by grace, is it admitted unto so great
dignity. In every high hill, Ier. 2.
and under every green tree, thou have played the Harlot: The hill, is the
occasion of waxing proud, and the green tree is the incitement to adhere to
things created: in these have I ever fallen, and have prostrated my self to
pride and impure love. 3 To what purpose comes he? That the sorrowful soul
might return unto him, and be admitted again, most lovingly into the bed and
bosom of his most sweet familiarity. For thus he wooes it: thou have committed
fornication with many lovers, yet return unto me says the Lord, and I will
receive thee. By these or such like meditations, which are every where to be
seen, thou may easily shake off all sloathfulnesse, and stir up thy self
to devotion. Nor do I think any long time required hereunto; because the
mind, being warned by the morning prayer, and by the care of the divine
presence (of which after) does easily collect it self, and dispose a man to
celebrate the holy Communion with all due and possible devotion.

1. Tim. 2.
but more particularly for our selves, for the obtaining of all things
necessary and profitable: but albeit this prayer is to be left to every man's
devotion and affection, and depends not upon any composition of words, but
unction of the holy Spirit; yet I think it not unfit to set down a form of
prayer which may fitly be used in the morning before the receiving of the
communion; that every one may thereby learn the manner of praying, and lifting
up the mind to God. Thus therefore, not with lips but heart, not with words
but affections being placed in the sight of God, let him set forth his desires,
and pray both for himself and others.

O blessed Trinity, O my Lord God, O most omnipotent Father most wise Son, most
holy Spirit: O three Persons truly distinct, and one most pure and simple
Deity, O thou that art the Author of nature, giver of grace, the first and
universal cause of all things, and the most in deficient fountain of all
goodness: here O Lord I know thou art present after a most heavenly,
spiritual, true, comfortable and most effectual and powerful manner to the
soul of the worthy receiver. I worship thee as my God with my whole heart and
with all my strength; humbly praying thee in the merits of my Savior Christ,
that all my thoughts, my desires, words and works may be now and ever
acceptable unto thee, and that thou will hear my prayers, and for thy mercies
sake not without comfort dispatch them from thee.

I thank thee, O fou^tain of goodness, for the innumerable great benefits
which from the very moment of my conception until this instant hour, I have
received of thy bou^ty: for the infinite benefits which eue^ now at this very
time I receive from thee: for those infinite benefits which even unto the end
of my life and for all eternity I shall receive, out of the treasures of thy
immense goodness and bounty. For I am O Lord without all comparison less then
least of thy mercies: unworthy altogether, whom thou should remember,
sustain, or comfort with the least of thy benefits.

But now especially, most dear Father and merciful God: I give thee thanks
from the bottom of my heart. First, for the most infinite riches which thou
have placed in the humanity of thy only begotten Son, my Lord Jesus Christ,
and because thou have given him unto me for a Father, a Teacher, a Guide and a
Redeemer. Secondly, for that great plenty of benefits, wherewith thou have not
only enriched me, but also all those whom by thy effectual grace, through the
whole Church, thou call to sanctification and newness of life, and
admittest to thy most sweet familiarity. Thirdly, also I thank the most dear
Father, even with all the strength of my mind, for this thy great merey, in
taking me from the miseries of this world, wherein many of thy servants far
more worthy then I, are plunged, in calling me to the knowledge of thy great
name, and granting me so many helps to serve thee as I have. Fourthly, for
all the talents and gifts both Natural, Spiritual and Temporal bestowed on
me, that by them I might profitably spend my time, help others according to
my calling and power, and dispose my self, by thy mercy, to attain eternal
felicity. Fifthly, for this vicissitude and change of consolations and
desolations, of prosperities and adversities, wherewith thou have wonderfully
wouen and seasoned my life, that neither through continual adversity I should
be cast down, nor yet by assiduity of prosperity I should be made drunk.
Sixthly, for this inestimable benefit of calling and admitting me this day to
the most heavenly participation of all the rich treasures that are hidden in
the life, death, resurrection, ascension and glorification of thy only
begotten Son and most sweet Savior.

And now, O my Lord God, being animated with these and other thy innumerable
benefits, I presume humbly to sue for more. Give me Lord and all that now are
prepared for this heavenly feast, Matthew. 15
this day, our daily bread. It is not good, O my God, to take the childrens
bread and give it unto dogs, but though this be so, yet sometimes the whelps
do eat of the crummes which fall from their Masters table. Therefore albeit I
am in thy house like a despicable whelpe, yet this day by thy mercy, let me
feed on the bread of thy children, and furnish my soul with all graces which
may make me worthily to taste of thy supper. Give me thy most abundant grace,
that I may come to this my Redeemers ba^quet, with such assured faith, profound
humility, due reverence, humble fear, fervent charity, constant hope, and
thirsting affections, that I may there appear to be welcome unto thee, and
may receive into my soul, all the fruits of this thy most heavenly Sacrament.

And because, O my sweet Father, Savior and Sanctifier, this is a service
wherewith thou art well pleased, and by which thou conueiest unto us the
bottomless Ocean of all thy mercies and graces; I will now power out my heart
further in thy sight: and because thy Son my Savior is omnipotent, I will
for his infinite merits sake pray unto thee for all men.

Be merciful therefore, O Father of al mercies, to the whole world and
replenish it with thy faith and knowledge, turning the Nations which are void
of faith to the knowledge of the truth in thy Son Christ Jesus. Turks,
Barbarians, Heretics, Schismatiques, Idolaters, and the perfidious Jews,
compel them now at length to enter into the house of the Church. Let not so
many millions created in thy image, perish: Let not that most precious blood of
thy Son be shed for them in vain, I lament, O Lord, before thee, these my
brethren thus estranged from thee, and the miserable condition wherein they lie
entangled; and if I could, I would believe in thee with all the understandings
of these people, I would love thee with all their wills, and I would
perpetually serve thee, with all their strengths. But, alas, I can do nothing
but desire and lament, and power out my laments and desires before thy great
Majesty.

Have mercy, O Lord, upon thy whole Church, increase in it the purity of faith,
and cleanness of sanctification, and extend it by the labor of thy good and
painful servants to the ends of the whole world. Behold with the eye of thy
mercy, thy righteous ones, those that labor more and more for a further
measure of sanctification, preserve and increase in them true righteousness:
Behold all miserable sinners lying and stinking in the puddle of their sins,
draw them unto thee, and take them by a mighty hand out of that so miserable an
estate. Help, Lord, all those pastors of thy flock, and give them grace that
both by word and example they may shine unto all men, and their light may guide
and direct others to salvation. O Lord, make them the salt of the earth, the
light of this cloudy world, the cities placed upon a high hill, and give them
grace not only to aspire unto, but to attain that purity of life, that zeal
of thy glory, which their place and dignity requires. O Lord, pour out thy
mercies upon our King and all other Kings and gouerours, nobles, plebeians, and
all the whole rank of secular men that call upon thy name: deliver them from
their adversaries, ioyn them together in the peace of thy Gospel, enrich them
with a zeal and care of observing thy commandments, that they may live as it
becomes Christians and may obtain that eternal salvation to which they were
created. Forget not the kingdoms and principalities of thy Church, but make
the^ more pote^t then their enemies, give victory to their armies against the
enemies of thy faith, and in mercy bestow upon them all necessaries for the
quiet and comfortable passage or this mortal life.

I bring before thee, O Lord, my Parents, my Brethren, my kindred, my friends,
humbly praying thee to give unto them all things which thou shall know to be
agreeable to thy will, and profitable to their salvation. I bring also into thy
presence, all captives, imprisonned, sick, tempted, troubled, agonizing and
wounded souls, and all such as are in any extreme and grievous necessity,
that out of thy goodness they may receive liberty, health victory,
consolation, a happy death, and a full remedy and recovery of all their
necessities and wants. Yea I humbly entreat thee O most merciful Father, for
all my enemies, that in all things thou would be good unto them: and that
for the infamy which they have east upon me thou would give unto them
honor: for detraction, a good fame; for hatred, love, and for all the evils
practiced against me, all temporal things profitable for this life, and in
fine eternal salvation.

And now, O my God and only refuge, I come unto thee for my self, and will
declare, before thee, my own necessities and miseries, not that thou may
know them, for all things are open and manifest unto thy eyes; but that whilst
with mourning and grief I pronounce them, I may kindle in my self the desires
of thy mercy, and may draw from thee, the remedies of my griese. I have sinned,
O Lord, beyond the number of the sand of the sea, my iniquities are multiplied
against me, and I am not worthy so much as to behold the heavens, because of
the multitude of my sins against thee. Yet in confidence of thy sons
merits, whose blood was a sufficient ransom for the sins of the whole world,
I beg for his sake, remission of all my sins, and to be cleansed from all
mine iniquities. Grant unto me a saving faith to hold fast on thy promises; a
true repentance, that for the love of thee, I may detest all sin; and a safe
protection that I be never entangled in the snares of Satan. Give me true
mortification of my judgment, will, affections, and senses, least being
deceived by these which are ever prone unto evil, I be drawn from those
things which are pleasing unto thee. Give me a true contempt of earthly things,
that I may neither seek for honors, nor hunt after dignities, nor desire
riches or pleasures; but that I may place all my honor, all my treasures, all
my delights in thee, who art the fountain of all good things. Deliver me from
all temptations and guiles of my invisible enemies, but chiefly from them,
that come under the vizard of good, least seeking after that which is good, I
should be pulled away from the true good.

Grant, O my Lord God, that that faith which thou have given me, may evermore
be preserved and increased in me. Lighten my mind with a supernatural
light, that it may know the divine mysteries, and that it may more perfectly
understand those things which I believe concerning thee and thy Son. Grant me
a firm hope, whereby I may altogether forget my self and may place all my
cares in the bosom of thy providence, and that I may conside, that I shall
only out of thy mercy obtain eternal life, and all things necessary to the
attayning thereof: give me perfect charity, whereby I may most ardently love
thee and my neighbors: give me a true resignation of my self and agreeable to
thy will. Cheer up my mind with the presence of thy goodness; pacify my
soul and conscience with thy peace: inkindle me with the zeal of thy glory,
and salvation of my brethren: power into me the affection of compassion whereby
I may compassionate and condole the miseries of others, and according to my
weakness help them.

Perfect in me, O my Creator my understanding with prudence and discretion,
that in all things I may hold a mean: give me a docible heart, that I may not
frowardly persist in my own sense and opinion: Stir up in me a true fervor
and heat, that I may not slackly and coldly, but most diligently serve thee:
and adorn me with the virtue of attentio^ and circumspection, that I may take
heed of the evils of my soul, which every where daily lie in wait for me, and
that I may do nothing by my negligence which may be less acceptable and
pleasing unto thee.

Perfect in me, O Lord, my will, by the power of thy righteousness, whereby I
may willingly submit unto thy will, and may give unto every one that which is
his due. Subject me to thy self by the power of Religion, and give me the
virtue and gift of prater that in all things I may seek thy praise, and give
thee that worship which is due to thy great name. Give me a heart penitent for
my sins, pious toward my parents, devout toward my betters, subject to my
governors, thankful to my benefactors; affable to my friends, simple in
deeds, and true in words. Such a heart, I say, as may imitate the heart of thy
dear Son, and may ever offer up unto thee an acceptable sacrifice.

Perfect, O my good Father the irascible part of my soul, with the virtue of
fortitude, so that in all adversities I may carry my self as becomes me,
and pressed with the burden of afflictions, I may never be exorbitant from that
which is right in thy eyes. Give me a mind in magnanimity conspicuous, in
things of my duty and thy service, through security, joyful, contemning the
goods of this world for thy sake, susteyning all acerbities and sorrows,
albeit many and long enduring, and perseuering constantly in that which I have
well begun. For it is the voice of thy Son, that not he who has begun, and
left off from his enterprise, but he that continues to the end shall be saved.

Perfect in me, O my God, my concupiscible faculty, with the beauty of
temperance, whereby I may both flee all filthy things, and follow after honest
and holy things, and in the care for my body, may only have respect to my
necessity. Cloathe me, O Lord, with abstinence and sobriety, that I may hold
all due measure in eating and drinking; with chastity and shame fastnes, that I
may keep my body which is thy Temple, immaculate and clean in his duty before
thee. With meekness, and clemency, that by thy help I may restrain all
indignation and anger. Cast not this my petition, O my God, out of thy sight,
but give me that most excellent grace of humility, that I may be made the true
disciple of Christ thy Son and my Lord, and may account my self (as indeed I
am) the most vile of all others, and may truly contemn all the spend our and
glory of this world: give me in my actions modesty, in my tongue silence and
prudence, in the use of all things moderation, and victory and conquest over
all kind of curiosities, that there may be nothing in me, that may displease
thy Majesty.

Let all the gifts of thy holy Spirit rest upon me, O Lord, the spirit of
Wisdom and Understanding, the spirit of Counsel and Strength, the spirit of
Knowledge and Piety, and let the spirit of thy Fear fill my heart, that by
these gifts I may be made immovable from thee, and may grow up to be a
perfect creature in Jesus Christ. Of other gifts and graces which do not
belong unto sanctification, give me so much only as may serve to the
salvation of my soul, and performance of thy will. And grant that I may be
employed all my life in such business as may be to the glory of thy name and
my own salvation. Give me, O my God, this grace, that in all the talents and
gifts which thou have given me, I may never seek my self but thy praise and
glory: give me of thy goodness the gift of perseverance, that by no sin I
may ever be separated from thee, but until death and for ever may persevere in
thy grace. Give me by thy immortality and the most blessed death of my Redeemer
a happy end of my days in him, and that after a good life in thee, I may die
the death of the Righteous: take from me, the too much love of this life and
the immoderate fear of death: grant that I may so live, that I may say with
the Apostle, Phil. 1.
I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ: Give me an inward light of
the hour of death, that I may flee the flattering in^icements of the world:
give me an inward savor of blessed eternity, that I may joyfully forsake all
transitory things: Give me a true resignation in thy most holy will, that I may
willingly depart hence, when and how thou shall dispose: receive my spirit
clothed with thy grace and love, that for ever it may cleave unto thee: To
conclude, take from me whatsoever may keep me from thee, and give me O Lord my
Redeemer, most potent helps to live holily and die happily. These are my
petitions, O my God, these are the desires of my heart, which I pray and beg by
all thy mercies and the infinite merits of thy Son, may be fulfilled, not only
in me, but in all my brethren unto the worlds end, that we may ever please thee
in this life, and enjoy thy blessed presence in the life to come. Amen.

Being thus prepared; for some good time, before the communion; it follows,
that coming into the Temple; thou should cast down thy self upon thy
knees; and prepare thy self further; inuocating the name of God thus: O
blessed Trinity, my God and my Lord, I do now come to be partaker of all those
heavenly riches of my Saviors life, death and resurrection. 1. In confession
of that supreme dominion which thou have over all creatures, and of all manner
of subjection which we have toward thee. 2 In commemoration of the most
bitter passion and death of Jesus Christ thy Son and my Savior, according to
his commandment: saying, As often as you do this, do it in remembrance of
me. 3 In thankfulness, for all those infinite riches conferred upon us by his
most precious death. 4 In thankfulness for all his benefits, wherewith he has
in this world magnified his Saints, and me his most unworthy servant. O most
omnipotent Father I come to this thy true refreshment of souls, confirm in
me by thy grace, all things which may make me worthily receive the same: I
come unto thee, that thou who art life it self, may by thy grace quicken me;
thou which art the light, may illighten me, thou which art the fire, may
inflame me; thou which art the rest, may quiet me; thou which art the purity
may purify me, and thou which art joy it self may rejoice me. I humbly pray,
by thy wisdom illuminate me that I may worthily use these holy mysteries:
adorn my soul with those seven fold graces of the blessed spirit, that by
thy infinite charity, I may be inflamed, to receive it worthily.

O my God: I come unto thee, as smalnesse unto greatness, as darkness unto
light, as uncleanness to holiness, as infirmity to power, as the creature to
God his Creator: O make me great in thy eyes, turn my darkness into light, my
uncleanness to holiness, my infirmity to power: and show thy self in me as a
most wise and potent Creator, so a most wise and loving Recreator and Redeemer:
I am most unworthy to receive so great favors, I confess, altogether
unworthy, because I have ever offended thee and past by all thy commandments
unworthy, because I have ever coldly and neglige^tly served thee: unworthy,
because I never fully and with all my heart loved thee: unworthy, because I am
but dust and ashes, nay very filth (and if any thing be worse) worse then that.

I come unto thee whom the heaven of heavens is not capable of, how much less
this house? I come unto thee who art the common Father of Men and Angels, and
who will not reverence his Father? I come unto thee, who art the Lord of all
creatures: and who will not do homage to such a Lord? I come unto thee as to
the Father and Lord, whose honor I have contemned, whose sons and brethren,
I have not once, but often both by word and example smitten, and who will not
tremble to stand before him so offended? I come unto thee my Lord, whose
servant I have smitten: unto thee my Father, whose Son I have slain: I smit
him by word, I slew him by example, and shall I not fear such a Lord, and
reverence such a Father? Yes surely: but yet as I come with fear, so will I
come with hope, as I come with reverence, so will I come with confidence. For
thou have appointed thy Sons blood whom I have slain, to be the only
soueragin antidote, and heavenly remedy to heal my wounds, and this thy
blessed Sacrament to be the Cabinet out of which I must take that sacred
plaster. for it is the blood of Jesus Christ thy Son, 1. Io. 1.
that cleanses us from all sin. He is the bread of life, Io 6.
he that cateth of it shall never die. These words indeed, are Spirit and
Life: they give Spirit unto my wounded spirit, and life, unto my dead soul. O
look upon thy servant, that I may live, O bless me with the gift of such a
faith as that out of my belly may flow rivers of water of life. Amen.

6 How to give thank after the Lord Supper is received.
IT were very absurd to receive so unspeakable a gift, and not to return
thanks: if after dinner, rest from business and employment be necessary for
the health of man, that the natural heat may concoct the meat, and turn it
into the nourishment of the body, much more necessary is rest (this feast being
ended) from distractions and business, that the benefit of this Sacrament may
come unto us, and that it may diffuse his virtue and strength into our souls.
But who will be so ingrate, as to pass by such and so great a benefit
without thanks? who is so cold, as that having tasted meat, so reeking hoate
with love, does not also himself wax hoate? surely that were a sign either
of spiritual death, or of stupidity disposing unto death. After the holy
communion if thou do not feel some spiritual refection, it is a sign of
spiritual infirmity or death. Do thou put fire in thy bosom, and feel
no heat? or honey into thy mouth and feel no sweetness? how then can thou
eat and drink at this heavenly Table, and not be drunk with the plesures of
Gods house? therefore let us learn of others who have received small favors
with thankful hearts, to take this great benefit with no less thankfulness.

When Boos persuaded Ruth to gleane the cares after his servants, he said unto
her, hear thou, my daughter, go to none other field to gather, neither go
from hence, but abide with my maidens: let thine eyes be upon the field that
they do reap; and go thou after the maidens: have not I charged the servants
that they touch thee not! besides, when thou art a thirst, go unto the vessels
and drink of that which the servants have drawn. This benefit with what
thankfulness does she repay it? she fell on her face, and bowed her self to
the ground, and said, how have I found favor in thy sight, that thou should
know me, seeing I am a stranger? but thou art called not by a rich man, but by
God, not to gather cares, but to eat the bread of life, not to drink water of
no value, but to drink the precious blood of the Lord: art thou invited? with
what great humility, what great zeal, what great affections of love ought
thou to give thanks for this benefit? Ester inuiting her Lord Ahashuerosh to a
banquet, he so esteemed it, that he said unto her, What is thy petition Ester
that it may be given thee? Est. 7.
And what would thou have to be done? Albeit thou ask the one half of
my Kingdom it shall be given thee. Out of doubt, here is greater cause
(without all comparison) of thankfulness: for there the handmaide inuites the
King, but here the King inuites his vnprositable servant: there are earthly
cates, here are heavenly viands: from the banquet proceeded the death of an
enemy, and temporal safety, but from this arises the destruction of sins
and spiritual salvation. Who the^ is it, that admitted to so magnifice^t a
feast, does not offer unto God, so inuiting him not only a part of his heart,
but the whole heart and whatsoever he is or has? Who is it, that does him not
all duties of love and praise? 2. Sam. 9.
What did David with Mephibosheth that he might show toward Jonathan his
father? did not he promise him all favor? Did he not restore unto him the
things that were Saules, and commanded him to eat meat at the Kings table:
And what answered Mephibosheth? Who am I thy servant that thou should look
upon such a dead dog as I am? Behold, what God has done for thee, even
wonderful things: he has given thee many benefits, he has left thee a
dispensatory and most rich reconditory of all graces, the blessed Sacrament;
he has given that his flesh to eat and his blood to drink. And what will thou do unto him? Will thou be unmindful of so many and great benefits
contained in one Sacrament? Will thou forget the Sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving? Will thou go from this table by and by to thy worldly
imploiments? the Lord complains of those ten leapers whereof but one returned
to give thanks: Luke 17.
where are the nine? and that worthily, for nothing is more damnable then
unthankfulness. And what complaint will he take up of thee, if thou
receiving, not a corporal but a spiritual health, shall either return no
thanks, or very cold ones? and so great a guest being left alone and unsaluted,
shall betake thy self presently to the cares of the world?

It is the duty of all holy men, as soon as they have tasted this heavenly
feast, to recognize the great benefit of it, and to give God immense thanks for
it. Holy David may seem to have prophesied the same: all such as are fat have
eaten and worshipped: all they that go down into the dust shall kneel before
him. And who are these fat ones of the earth? are they not the righteous and
holy men, which in this world possess the true riches, and are fatted with
celestial cogitations, and enjoy the most pure pleasures of the spirit? Who
are those that go down into the dust? Is it not the humble in heart, who in
contempt of themselves fall down upon the earth, and make themselves inferior
unto all? These do first eat, that is, take the mysteries of the body and
blood of Christ, and presently praise the Lord and adore him with thankful
hearts. I do no wrong unto this place of the Psalms, in expounding it thus:
for two worthy and learned men long since have so used it. Bas. Theod.
Thou therefore that couetest to imitate these fat ones of the earth, and wilt
be partaker of their good things, do not thou separate the things which the
Spirit of GOD has joined together; eat and adore: receive the benefit and at
the least return, though not sufficient yet such slender thanks as thou art
able. Say with the same Prophet, Psalm. 56.
unto thee will I pay my vows, unto thee will I give thanks. Where we read,
thy vows are upon me, O God, I render praises unto thee. Thy vows, my God,
and thy desires, or those which thou desire from this thy creature, are not
far off, I can easily have them, they are ready without me, I have them
within my self, which are praises and thankfulness which for so great a
benefit, I will answer thee.

Being with such cogitations as this, stirred up; thou must for some half
hour, or as thou shall think fit, get thee into some private place, and
bestow thy self in giving of thanks. And if thou have not better of thine own,
or be one of them who being acted and lead by the Spiof God, need no prevention
of meditations; thou may use these seven meditations, which may be assigned
to every day of the week.

1 Meditation. 1. Behold Christ Jesus thy Savior in thy heart by faith, as a
most potent King and thy self, as one guilty of many sins, standing before
him, and desiring mercy.

2 Give him infinite thanks. 1. That he has been pleased to leave thee so
great a pledge of his love as to be present at this holy Sacrament, not as a
Judge punishing thy sins: but as a most loving Father and King, pardoning thy
offenses. 2. That with so great favor he has heard thy prayers put up with
such a polluted heart and lips. 3. That he* would condescend to dwell in that
foul and unprepared house of thy heart.

3 Detest all thy sins before him: conceive a hearty sorrow for them, and
humbly beg pardon of him.

4 Love him with thy whole heart: namely so; as that thou have a firm desire
and purpose, that thou will do nothing that is contrary to him; that thou will
do nothing that is contrary to him; that thou will love nothing but what in
act or virtue tends to him, and that thou will prefer him before thy self
and all other things.

5 At the last ask of God, seven gifts, which some do conceive the blessed
Virgin did daily beg of God. 1. An effectual help, that thou may in some
measure perform the commandment of the love of God. 2. That thou may
constantly love thy neighbor, and every holy thing which he loves. 3. That
whatsoever evil he hates, thou also may hate the same. 4. That thou may
be adorned with humility, chastity, contempt of the world, and al other
necessary graces. 5. That he would make thy mind and thy body a worthy temple
and habitation for himself. 6. That at length after this mortality being don
away thou may for ever enjoy his most blessed presence, and may with the
eyes of thy flesh clearly see his most holy humanity and with the eyes of thy
mind behold and possess his divinity. 7. That in this temple, and in all
other temples and places throughout the whole world, he may receive all due and
worthy reverence, acknowledgement, honor and praise.

2 Meditation. 1. Behold Christ thy Savior in the midst of thine heart as thy
Lord, who redeemed thee with the price of his blood: and thy self as his
servant, who by a new conceived fervor would return unto him; desirous in
all things to please him.

2 Give him immense thanks. 1. That he would be present at the Sacrament, and as
a Master would govern the habitatio^ of thy heart, and compose with the gift of
mortification, the multitude of thy affections. 2. That with such meekenes,
received the petitions of his runnagate servant. 3. That being King of kings,
whom the heavens cannot receive, yet vouchsafes in admirable manner, to dwell
in the base cottage of his unworthy servant.

3 Desire that at the presence of thy Lord, the house of thy heart may be quiet
and in peace. And resolve with thy self that thou will mortify thy judgment,
will, affections and fences, and cast away whatsoever shall displease him.

4 Love him with all thy soul, which thou shall do, if thou do submit thy
life unto him, if only thou would have life and would keep it, that it
might obey him; if thou do direct all thy cogitations, desires, words and
works to his good pleasure.

5 Thou shall ask of him those seven things in the first Meditation.

3 Meditation. 1 Behold Christ thy Savior in the midst of thy heart as thy
Master, which teaches thee the way of salvation, and gives grace to perform
what he teaches: and thy self as his disciple, who for thy great negligence
have learned little or nothing of him.

2 Give him infinite thanks. 1 Because he would be present at the Sacrament,
that as a most wise Doctor he might teach thee the way of perfection, and
instruct thee in things to be done and omitted. 2 Because with so great mercy
he has heard the petitions of his Disciple, craving heavenly knowledge. 3
Because the Master of Angels and Men has deigned to remain in the lowest
rank of thy polluted heart to teach thee.

3 Blush before him, because thou art so estranged from his Doctrine, and art
so filly a scholar in the imitation of him. Resolve also with thy self that
thou will forsake all created things both in thy understanding and affection,
and wilt wholly cut off all inordinate love of the creatures from thee.

4 Love him with thy whole mind. Which thou shall do, if thou resolve to
cleanse thy spirit from every thing that may displease him, if thou purpose to
adorn it with virtues, if thou do continually adhere unto him, in thy memory,
understanding and will; if thou do labor for ttanquillity of the mind that
Christ himself may dwell in thy heart.

5 Ask of God, those seven things before remembered.

4 Meditation. 1. Behold Christ thy Savior in thy heart, as thy most faithful
friend, who has advanced thee his own workmanship, and his own vassal to
his familiarity and friendship: and thy self as a friend at the table, or
rather an hireling, who when thou receiuest comfort, then love, him, but
being beaten for thy amendment, waxest cold in love.

2 Give him imnense thanks. 1. Because he would be present at the Sacrament,
that he might visit thee being made his friend by grace, and that he might
talk with thee words sweeter then honey. 2. Because with so loving ears he
heard the petitions of his friend, begging perseverance in friendship. 3.
Because as a most rich friend has determined to dwell by grace in the conclaue
of his most poor friends heart.

3 Conceive shame and grief; of thy own nakedness, who art spoiled of
virtues, and covered with sordid rags of vices: kindle the desires of virtue,
especially such as thou most need: ask them instantly, and exercise some of
them with internal acts as time and place will suffer.

4 Love the Lord thy God with all thy strength. And that thou shall do, if
thou do offer unto God the powers of thy soul and also the senses and
instruments of thy body in the union of his powers and senses, and determinest
to use them ever to his service.

5 Beg of God the seven graces aforesaid.

5 Meditation. 1. Behold Christ thy Savior in thy heart, as thy elder brother,
and the first borne of many brethren, who has reconciled the enemies of his
eternal Father unto him, and made them his brethren: and thy self as a little
brother, worthily the least, or rather unworthy of such a name, because thou
art both in life and manners most unlike unto him.

2 Give thanks. 1. Because he would please to be present at the Sacrament,
that he might not call thee an enemy, but might acknowledge thee for a
brother, and might divide with thee his fathers inheritance. 2. Because he
would hear with so great love, the petitions of his brother so unlike him in
manners, and by the coldness of conversation, affecting him with tediousness.
3. Because the first borne Son of our heavenly Father reigning now in heaven,
did not abhor the base and obscure dwelling of his brother remaining in
exile; but was pleased to dwell in it.

3 Observe thy self to be distanced from so loving a brother, and complain
of thy misery, wish ardently by prayer his intimous familiarity, and propose to
thy self that all things necessary to obtain this gift are to be performed
of thee.

4 Love him, with all thy power, which thou shall do, if thou do
effectually propose and faithfully perform it that with all thy endeavor,
thou will be aduersant to all evil and perform all that is good.

5 Thou must ask those seven things before named.

6 Meditation. 1. Behold thy Savior Christ in the midst of thy heart; as a
most pious Father, who begat thee on the cross not with pleasures but
sorrows: and thy self as the prodigal son returning from a far country,
after thou have wasted all thy Lords goods with vicious living, and know thy
self, to stand in need of his goods and mercy.

2 Give him infinite thanks. 1. Because he vouchsafed his presence at the
Sacrament, that he might claspe thee in the arms of his love, being his
forlorn and cast away son returning unto him from a most barren land, namely
from thy self. 2. That with so much pity he would receive the petitions of his
most unthrifty and disobedient child, begging pardon of him. 3. Because a
father most worthy of infinite love, would not only receive into his house a
most ungracious child, but also would dwell even in the dunghill of his
filthy-breast.

3 Being placed before him, instantly desire and beg of him true
sanctification: that being cleansed from sins and adorned with all virtues,
thou may cleave unto him continually both in understanding and affection, and
by perfect faith and charity may live of him, through him, and for him.

4 Love him with all thy might; so that for him thou despise thy life (if need
be) the health of thy body, riches, pleasures, and honors, and accustom thy
self to llue without the creatures.

5 Beg the seven abouesaid.

7 Meditation. 1. Behold thy Savior in the midst of thy heart, as thy most
sweet bridegroom, who loved thy soul, not because worthy, but because he
would, and so pleased his own goodness: and thy own sold as his spouse
joined unto him by the bond of marriage, and allured and enticed to him, by
infinite benefits bestowed.

2 Give him infinite thanks. 1. Because he was pleased to be present at the
Sacrament, that he might join thee spiritually but inseparably unto him, and
might cherish the with the sweet imbracements of most chaste love. 2. Because
he heard the entreaties of a most faithless spouse, begging his favorable
aspect and embracing. 3. Because he has decreed for ever to dwell with thee
in thy bosom, as in a bed of all other most desired of him.

3 Raise up thy affection toward eternal glory, and compel thy self
fervently to desire it, and to be transported from this miserable world: and
say to him as to thy husband, tell me, Can. 1.
thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou lie at noone.

4 Here gather together all the affections of love: and love the Lord thy God,
with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, with all thy
powers, with all thy strength, and with all thy might.

5 Ask of God those seven former petitions.

This form of thanksgiving if thou likest not, use thy own judgment in some
other. But be sure thou omit not this duty. For the sin of
unthankefulnesse is of all other sins the most dangerous, albeit thou
should receive, but very small benefits: but receiving so many and so
unspeakable benefits (especially this whereof no man can account the
worthiness) it were most intolerable not to give thanks.

And for this cause, is it, that thou receiuest not the mercies thou often
desire, because thou have been so unthankful for this so great a benefit
so often received. For as that devout father writes, We see many at this day
ask with great importunity the things they know that they want, Ber.
but we know very few that have given worthy thanks for benefits received. It
is not reprehensible that we instantly do ask, but surely it denies the
effect of the petition, when we are found unthankful. And happily this may
seem to be clemency to deny to the unthankful that which they ask: least it
might fall out unto us, that we should be judged so much more grievously, by
how much we have been found more unthankful for benefits heaped upon us.
Therefore in this case, it is a point of mercy to withdraw mercy; even as it is
a point of anger and wrath to show mercy, namely that mercy, of which the
father of mercies speaks in the Prophets: Isa. 26.
Let mercy be showed to the wicked, and he will not learn righteousness:
therefore let us be ever thankful for this so great a benefit, and never
suffer it to pass away with out some notable thankfulness of heart for it.

7 Of the study of Christians and how they should profit in learning.
THere is no man but knows Idleness to be the maine enemy of all virtues:
therefore must the Christians labor be to keep him off, and shut him out of
doors. It is not by Idleness or sleep, that the reward is obtained, as one
says. As there is no work proceeds from him that sleeps, Ambr.
so there is no fruit, but loss comes of Idleness. Idle Esau (lost the
blessing of birthright, because he had rather have meat gotten to his hand,
then seek it. But painful Jacob found favor with both his parents.

Therefore, in all thy studies and readings which thou do undertake for
increase of thy knowledge, labor to bring with thee a right intention, and a
true scope, unto which all thy knowledge is to be directed. Thou must not
learn or read, that thou may become renowned amongst men, not that thou
may be instiled a learned man, not that thou may be holden for a great
man, not that thou may step up into the chiefest Pulpits, and Chaires of
Doctors, not that thou may gain preferments in the Church or policy: because
to learn to this end is great vanity. Thou must not learn, that thou may
satisfy the appetite of knowing if thou may know new and subtle things,
that thou may only fill thy understanding with the knowledge of excellent
things for this is vain curiosity. But learn thou, that thou may please
God, that thou may accommodate thy self to his good pleasure and the
prescript of his obedience: that in knowing God better, thou may more
ardently love him and more fervently serve him, and more diligently perform
the duties of the calling wherein God has placed thee. A blemish in any
garment is uncomely, but in a most precious garment of silk, or costly stuff,
much more uncomely: so a preposterous intention in every labor of man is
discommendable, but in the gayning of knowledge is much more intolerable.

The great danger of such as direct their studies to such vain ends, the wise
man well describes: Job. 20.
His meat in his bowels was turned; the gall of Aspes is in the midst of him:
he has devoured substance and shall vomit it: for God shall draw it out of
his belly. For knowledge is as bread, whereby we refresh the mind, which
shall be turned into gall when we direct it to vanity and ambition. And the
learned does but vomit it up, when from his dry and barren heart he powers it
out, without all profit either to himself or his hearers. And it shall be drawn
out of his belly, when the labor of such a foolish man is left without reward:
because it is not approved of his maker. This sense I must not be said to
seigne, for a great learned father avouches it, saying, Greg.
Bread not unfitly is taken for the understanding of the Sacred Scripture,
which refreshes the mind and gives strength to do good works, and of-times
even Hipocrites labor to be instructed in the mysteries of GODS Holy word:
yet not that they might live by them, but that they might appear to other men
how learned they be. His bread in his belly shall inwardly be turned into the
gall of Aspes; because, whilst he gloried of the knowledge of the Law, he
turns unto himself, the drink of life into the cup of poison, and dies a
reprobate, whereas he seemed to be instructed unto life. Nor does this unfitly
fall out, that often the Hipocrite, whilst he labors to seem to know the
Word well, by the just Judgment of Almighty GOD being blinded, does naughtily
understand that same word, which he wickedly sought after.

So that whosoever of vanity and curiosity labor to learn, do not only
fail to be illuminated in the knowledge of the Truth, but are thorowlie
blinded that they can never come to the knowledge of the truth: Seeing hereby
the heart of man is so carried away, and drawn out of it self, in considering
of the impertinent things, that it cannot return unto the circumspection of it
self; and so make the most excellent instrument of Virtue, Knowledge, to be
the ruin and destruction of Virtue.

Would thou vainly have thy knowledge set a broach with men? But yet
herein thou shall not become glorious: because God casts down such as exalt
themselves, and brings them into great contempt. Will thou satisfy thy
curiosity and too much desire of knowledge? But whilst thou desire to know,
only for knowledge sake, thou both hurts thy conscience, and resists the true
knowledge which affects and mooues thy will. Therefore in knowledge, seek
nothing but God, and in the acquisition and use of it, labor not to please the
foolish world but the wise God.

The studies which proceed from such a holy intention will easily be joined
with virtue: which are two sisters that must at once be labored for. Because
knowledge without virtue is little or nothing worth, and virtue without
knowledge lame. Therefore let thy knowledge be full of virtue, and thy virtue
seasoned with knowledge that thou wander not in the way of virtue. But yet
there is more care to be had of virtue then knowledge, which being the end of
knowledge, must have the first and chiefest place in thy heart and care.
Therefore we must never for the attayning of knowledge omit the actions of
virtue. The works of virtue make us holy, but the study of knowledge only
make us learned. Therefore Sanctity is to be preferred before science. If
after many years study, thou have profited so much as to become most learned,
and have not profited in virtue and humility. Oh how foolish art thou, how
little worth, how reproueable, who have not only wasted thy age but all thy
substance with harlots, and have cast off thy spouse, most worthy of all love?
For what is knowledge without virtue but a ^harlot? What does it, but eat up
the strength of thy mind, and with the infirmity of vanity, consume all the
actions of thy life? how unhappy art thou that would not understand to do
well? Psalm. 36.
thou have imagined mischief upon thy bed, thou have set thy self in no good
way, nor do abhor any thing that is evil. Is not this to meditate iniquity
to learn the works of God, not to verity but vanity? is not this, not to put a
man's self in any good way, to direct the way of knowledge otherwise, then to
the service of God? Is not this to embrace malice, to wax proud of knowledge,
and from that which was given to humble us, Ber.
to be daily more and more puffed up? it is therefore evident, that dignity
without knowledge is unprofitable, but knowledge without virtue, damnable.

That therefore thy knowledge may not damn thee, nor make thee poor and
miserable, join it with virtue, and to this end only labor to get knowledge;
that every day thou may be made better, and as thou growest more learned, so
thou may also grow unto a greater measure of sanctification.

Only forget not this: that evermore, thou begin thy study or reading with
prayer unto God who is the God of knowledge, 1. Sam. 2.
of whom the cogitations of the heart are prepared; this thou may learn of
that godly father who most often did so search out the truth, August Conf. c.
11.
as if speaking with God, and demanding of him, and as it were wringing from
him by prayers the solution of doubts. For searching out the Nature of time,
he is thus instant with GOD: my mind burned within me, to know that most
implicate and inexplicable aenigma and secret; O my Lord God, my good Father,
do not shut it from me, I beseech thee for Christ's sake, do not shut out from
my desire these usual yet hidden things, O Lord, but through the assurance of
thy mercy, let them appear unto me.

Whom shall I ask concerning these things, and to whom may I more profitably
confess my unskillfulness then to thee, unto whom my inflamed studies of thy
Scriptures are not grievous nor displeasing? Give that which I love, for I
love, and even that thou have given me. Give good Father, who truly know
to give good gifts to thy sons. Give, because I have undertaken to know
thee, and it is a great labor unto me, until thou openest.

For Christ's sake I beseech thee, in his name who is the Holiest of holies, let
no man reprove me. I have believed and therefore have I spoken. This is my
hope, unto this do I make have, that I may contemplate the delights of the
Lord. Behold, thou have made my days old, and they pass away, and how I know
not, and we say, a time and a time; and times and times. How long has he
spoken this, how long has he done this, and in how long time, that I have not
seen. And this fillable has a double time, that simple brief syllable. We
say these things, we hear these things, and we are understood, and do
understand: most manifest and most usual are these things, and yet again the
same things, are too much hid, and there is a new invention of them. If
therefore thou do thus come to learn, and do thus importune God, thou
shall much profit in all thy labors of learning.

8 Of the examination of the conscience before dinner.
HEre I purpose not to be long, because hereafter a sitter place will offer it
self to declare the necessity and profits of this exercise. Yet thus much let
me say, that it helps very much to the acquiring of the purity of the heart
and conscience; for as the cloth which is often washed, is so much the
cleaner, so the conscience by such examination becomes so much the purer, by
how much it is examined oftener. Therefore if the commodity of time will serve
thee, a little before thy dinner, discuss thy self thus; Consider the state
of thy mind and body, what is awanting, what it has profited, what hinders
thee to profit. And how thou may mere with it, either by declyning or
resisting, or governing, or tolerating some thing.

Search into thy self how thou have spent that morning, how thou have walked
with God, that thou may repent thee of that wherein thou find thou have
offended. Take an account of thy self, and (...) a just Judge wring from any
(...) a reason of e^^ry fact, sayin^ Way have I wounded my b^^^ers fame? Why
have I rashly judged my brother? Why have I contemned GOD? Why have I been
angry without a cause? Why have I marmured, that every thing has not fallen
out to my fancy? Thus must we discuss our selves for our morning sleeps,
inquiring, also how we past over the last night, and how we failed in any
good duty. Thus if a man do order his ways, he shall grow from strength to
strength, and shall see the GOD of gods in Sion.

This thing that good father saw well, Ber.
who upon those words of the Prophet, Let us search our ways, speaks thus: In
this thing let every one judge himself to have profited, not when he shall
find in himself what he may worthily reprehende, but when he may justly
reprehende that which he shall not find in himself. Then have thou not in
vain searched thy self, and if thou have observed that thou have need again
to search thy self, and so often has not thy inquisition deceived thee, as
often as thou shall think, that it is to be iterated and renewed.

9 Of our behavior at dinner.
THere is do doubt the hour of our refection is compassed with no few
dangers: for often the delicacy of the fare, makes us ouercharge the stomach
with too much, and so blunt the edge of the soul and the mind, and fall into
many and grievous sins. Therefore it behooves us herein, to be most
circumspect, least, whilst we refresh the body for the health of the soul, we
loose the beauty and glory of the soul.

First therefore, think with thy self, how un worthy thou art of these
blessings, how many gross sins even since the last night thou had committed,
how coldly and negligently thou have served God, wandering so many ways out of
the rule of righteousness, and lift up thy mind unto God assuring thy self,
that GOD would not have thee to eat for thy pleasure, but for necessity, and
that thou might be the better enabled to serve him and do the works of
thy calling.

This done, power out thy prayer unto God to give thee grace that unto this
end, 1. Cor. 10.
thou may eat, and that all may be done to the glory of God.

After thou have blessed the meat provided for thee, think with thy self
that these things are given thee, as out of Gods alms and bounty unto thee;
have Christ ever before thee, and eat as if thou eatest before him: when thou
eatest, let not thy whole man eat, but be attentive either to that which is
read, if there be any thing read, if not, think of God, and something fit for
edification. That both thy inward and outward man may be refreshed.

Despise not any thing that is set before thee, nor yet complain if any thing
be a wanting: for it is the custom of children and men of ill condition to
complain, and strive about the provisions, ill preparations of them: think
thy self unworthy of Gods benefits and so shall thou never be greened at
small defects. Think also that many more worthy in Gods sight then thou art,
would be well pleased with worser cates, and would think the things which
thou reiectest, to be great delicacies. And ever be mindful to leave
something for the poor members of Christ: for Kings have evermore enough to
eat, and to leave to their servants. And if thou seruest GOD, thou art a King,
for to serve GOD is truly to reign: Therefore thou must ever have this honor
to leave something for Christ, and that not of the worst, but of the best,
least Christ should reject it.

Lastly seek not after delicate meats for thy taste, but leave them for
gluttons and Belly-gods: and conclude all with thanksgiving unto GOD who has
so liberally and lovingly fed thee being so unworthy. For it is necessary that
every man know whose bread he has eaten, that he may give him thanks for it.
Tell me if thou should give unto any man, the thing he needed, would
thou not expect, that he should give thee thanks? And if he should not,
would thou not note him, for an unthankful person? So GOD who feeds us,
expects we should thank and praise him for his gifts. For this is the
retribution of divine benefit, that when we are refreshed, we should confess
we took if well.

But if receiving the gifts of God, we silently and vnmind^fully pass them
over, we shall be defrauded of the use of them, as ingrate and unworthy, that
so by calamities coming upon us, we might be provoked to seek God whom by
his benefits we have not known, and by adversity might be provoked to ask,
who in prosperity have not given thanks for the things we enjoy.

2 The exercises of the Evening or later part of the day, which we cast into
these three following.
1. THat we bestow some certain time, as our necessary occasions will give
leave, after dinner, to read some part of Scripture, or other godly book, in
which we are not too much to seek knowledge of spiritual and heavenly things,
as the taste, relish, and affection of them. Thus every day something is to be
swallowed down into the belly of our memory, which may more faithfully be
disgested, and again being called unto memory, may oftener be ruminated,
chewed, and meditated, which may agree with our purpose, profit our intention,
and may so hold and exereise the mind, that it may not, be carried away with
by matters.

Nor are we to think, that this kind of exercise is prescribed only to the
unskillful and weak, but even to the wisest and most perfect. The learned
stand in need of it, if not, that they may know things new, yet that they may
move and stir up themselves, to perform the things they know. We know many
things with a barren kind of knowledge, which being read, do affect the will,
and from affection do not only move them to knowledge, but also unto action.

And even the most perfect and regenerate man stands in need of this exercise,
because no man can be perfect, but that he may be further promoted. And
reading puts into a man, greater desires of a larger measure of holiness, and
shows him higher degrees of it. This lesson is taught by the wise man, as well
to the learned, as unto other: A wise man shall hear and increase in learning,
Pro. 1.
and a man of understanding shall attain unto wise counsels.

And who are wise men but the Learned? Or of understanding but the perfect, and
Sanctified? And yet even these by hearing shall grow to a greater measure of
knowledge, and a larger taste of Heavenly wisdom.

This daily practice of reading for an hour, or so much, as the duties of thy
calling will admit, does as a mistress reveal unto thee, the sense of sacred
Scriptures, this as a candle, or most resplendant star does illuminate the
understanding, this as a nurse teaches the Infants to speak in the Spirit,
alluring and enticing them to Prayer and Meditation, this as fit^ kindles the
chaste affections of Divine love, and in a word, this as a Schole-master does
collect our heart, and disturne it from vain and foolish distractions and
cogitations. Ier. ep. 1. ad Demot.
Let the advice of that good Godly father ever be had in memory; which is
this: That thou so do read the Scriptures, as that thou ever remember they
are the words of GOD, who does not only command that his Law should be
known, but also fulfilled. For it profits nothing, to learn things to be
done and not to do them.

Thou shall then most excellently vso the reading of Scriptures, if thou do
set it before thee in stead of a Glass, that there the Soul may look even
as it were upon its own image and face, and may both correct the foul
blemishes, and also may better adorn and deck the things that are beautiful.
Let prayer often break the course of reading, and the grateful vicissitude of
some holy exercise and work, evermore inkindle the soul cleaning unto God.
Let thy reading be temperate, unto which let not lassitude and wearisomnesse,
but counsel put an end. For as immoderate fasts, and watchings are truly
argued of intemperancy, and do by their excessiveness bring to pass, that
afterward, we shall not be able to do these things in any measure, so the
intemperate labor of reading is reprehensible, and so, that which is laudable
in its due times, becomes culpable by excessiuenes. Generally and briefly we
may say, and it is true, that even in good things, whatsoever exceeds measure,
is a fault.

But that which I should first have admonished is this, that prayer must ever
usher and attend our reading, whereby we desire grace to understand, and take
profit by it. Before reading we may in few words, pray thus. O Lord Jesus
Christ open the cares and eyes of my heart, to hear and understand thy word,
and to do thy holy will; because I am a stranger upon earth: hide not from me
thy commandments, open my eyes, that I may know the merueilous things of thy
Law. For in thee O Lord is my hope, that thou should illuminate my mind.
And as prayer must go before, so let it both accompany and conclude thy
reading; accompany it, in praying that the good or evil which thou art to do
or shun, thou may have grace to perform: and conclude it in giving thanks
for that grace of affording thee the knowledge of his will, and desiring that
thou may have power to perform it. Read not for curiosity, but for vtility,
not to tickle thy cares, but to prick and move thy affection: not to get
knowledge, but to increase thy zeal. Read not many things, but let more
things be thought on, more things deliberated, and let every one meditate with
himself, how those things ought to be performed. And if the good things thou
read shall not, by the illness of thy memory, tarry with thee: be not hereat
much troubled, for only reading does refresh, and (I know not how) without any
fixing the memory, does promote the spirit, Even as the vessel oftentimes
washed, becomes clean, albeit no water tarry in it; so the Heavenly Doctrine
if it often pass through a Godly mind, albeit, that it do not rest in it, yet
it makes the mind clean and neat, and keeps it very pleasing unto GOD.

The special benefit consists herein, not that thou commend the words of
Doctrine unto thy memory, but that the effect of the Doctrine and words remain
with thee, that is, that thou obtain from the Doctrine an inward purity and a
ready will to live a Holy and Godly life: if thus thou shall spend every day
some time in reading, thy mind will be refreshed with most wholesome and
delicate ^oode, and will become very strong both for to do that which is
good, and also to shun that is evil, and not once but often, will supply the
defects of Prayers which are often distracted, and not so fervent as they
should be.

2 Things to be done in the Evening, is the examination of the Conscience.
THis exercise, is to be entered into, a little before we compose our selves to
sleep, and because it is of singular moment to Holiness of life, I think it
very necessary to handle it something more largely, considering therein these
three points. First, the necessity of this discussion and examination of the
conscience. Secondly, the manifold benefits of it. Thirdly, how, and in what
sort it is to be performed.

1 This examination of conscience, is a subtle and exquisite discussion,
whereby we do weigh all our cogitations, words and actions, and do retract
both the good and evil we have don. This discussion is very necessary, that
we may not become hateful unto God, whom we desire to please; for he
considers all the thoughts and works of all men, approouing the good deeds,
and condemning the evil: yet does he mercifully pardon the evils if we by
examination acknowledge them, and with tears and true repentance wash them,
What is man, says Job, Job. 7.
that thou magnifiest him, and that thou set thy heart upon him? and do
visit him every morning and triest him every moment? I ask what it is, to be
magnified and visited of God, but to be replenished with his gifts and
graces? But what is it for GOD to set his heart upon man, but to observe
whether he do well use his gifts, and do discuss his own works and
manners? Is not this the same, that the holy man comments upon this place.
Greg. 8. Mor.
GOD magnifieth man, because he inricheth him with largeness of reason, visits
him with infusion of grace, exalts him with the honor of virtue bestowed on
him. And when he is of himself nothings, yet out of the bounty of his
goodness, graunts him to be partaker of his knowledge.

But the Lord sets his heart upon man so magnified when after those guiftes,
he stirs up his judgment, and examens vehemently all the moments of life,
and after takes of him more district punishments, by how much he has more
liberally prevented him with his guifs bestowed.

Now these evils which God observes in us, provoke him to wrath, unless by
repentance and desire of amendment they depart from us, and then do we
repent for our sins, when we desire and purpose to shun them, when in the
discussion of the conscience, we shall understand, that they are evil and
displeasing unto God. For the evils which either out of ignorance, or
infirmity, or yet or malice we have committed, this discussion and this
examination does detect, and sets them before the eyes of the mind, that they
may be lamented and blotted out.

Therefore the things which we have committed with more precipitancy then
prudence, and fear to be evil, we must diligently discuss, and by a wise
retractation inquire whether they be just or unjust, profitable or
unprofitable. Hence we may collect, that who do not often examine themselves,
can seldom or never have a right and sanctified life. For even as a line is
not thought to be exorbitant and swaruing from straightness, when it is
looked on without the help of the rule: but as soon as the rule is laid to
it, the obliquity and crookedness of the line is discovered; so the defects of
our lives, do pass by and out of our knowledge, whilst that the Rule of
Examination does not ponder all our works: For this discussion of the
Conscience, is the rule, which directs our actions, and shows, what is
crooked, and what is straight, what is acceptable, and what is odious to God in
them.

If therefore the rule be necessary to Artificers, to the doing of their
works according to art, surely then is the examination of our thoughts and
works necessary to us, to the end that we may live well, and frame our lives
according to the rule of virtue. When we do purpose to cleanse a house, we
first gather and sweep all the filth in one place, that we may afterward
cast it our. So is the house of our conscience to be cleansed; examination
gathers our sins together, and repentance after that casts them out. But if
by this exercise, we do not see our sins and defects, and gather them into
some corner of our memory, even to our confusion and tears for them, how shall
we ever cast them out?

One does very aptly compare the examination of the conscience, to the moving
of the humors in the body by physic: for as the art of physic does first
by the benefit of some medecin, move and collect the humors, and afterward
by some potion drives them out; so the art of holy living, does first by
examination move our sins, and as it were, pull them out of their residence,
and after by true repentance castes them out.

This to be the true fruit of examination the Prophet shows; Let us search
and try our ways, Lam 3.
and turn again to the Lord. For what other thing is it to search our ways,
but to discuss, our manners, affections, words, works, and thoughts? What is
this inquisition; but to try by examination whether these same things be good
or evil, acceptable or odious unto God? And what will hence follow? Surely,
that we may return unto the Lord, and by true repentance put away his
indignation and obtain his mercy and favor. Therefore the discussion of
Conscience is auailcable hereunto, that we may detest and lament our sins.
Thus holy David stirred up himself to the destruction of his sins: Psalm. 6.
I am weary of my groaning every night wash I my bed, and water my couch with
my tears. He had said before, Turn me, O LORD and deliver my soul, O save
me for thy mercies sake. In which words he prays that the Lord would pardon
his former sins: But that I may obtain pardon, says he, I will weary my
self with mounrning, I will in the place of my rest, call to mind my sins
and will sill my bowels with sorrow and grief. For this is the way O Lord, to
bend and incline thy mercy, and allure thee to spare and forgive my sins But
now let us briefly lay down the necessities of this discussion.

1 It detects our sins, and gives light and wisdom to know them. For whilst
we accustom our selves to look into our selves and to separate the evil
from the good, we are instructed of the Lord, who is faithful, how to do that
is good and shun that is evil. When Gedeon was threshing wheat by the
winepresse to hide it from the Midianits, Iud. 6.
the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him; who taught him the will of God, and
made him captain to overcome the Midianits. And what is this to thresh wheat
and hide it from the Midianits, but to examine thy life by a wise
consideration, to avoid the snares of the devil? Does not GOD looking upon
this thy labor, send his messenger to make thee captain against thy enemies,
whilst thou feel a light sent from heaven, to make thee know thy sins, and
stir thee up by tears and repentance to cast them out? What is it to thresh
wheat, says a holy father, but by straightness of judgment to separate the
grains of virtues, Greg. 3. Mor.
from the chafe of vices? Therefore those that by judgment and examination
separato their good deeds either from wicked works or affections, do prepare
themselves to receive the beams of divine light. At the last day when God shall
judge the world, he will first examine the consciences, 1. Cor. 4.
and by the examination manifest them, that after he may give unto the Godly
most ample rewards, and to the wicked most bitter torments: because even nature
does teach, that no man is to be judged good or evil, till his cause be
known of the Judge. God will set before man his sins, Psalm. 49.
he will write them in his sight with the pencill of his wisdom, that he may
know himself guilty, and GOD justly punishing him: and the same order, if we
will do aright, must we observe, namely first, by a prudent examination,
ponder all our thoughts and works, before either we arraigne our selves as
guilty, or acquit our selves as innocents. For never whilst we here live,
will there be awanting in our hearts, sufficient matter to humble us and to
provoke us to a holy repentance, except our lives lie hid under the veil of
self love.

2 Another reason of the necessity hereof is, for that no man can without it,
sufficiently conceive a detestation of his sins. For who ever was moved to
detest the misery he knows not? Who ever grieves for the stripes he feels
not? Or the infamy he knows not? such is he who is utterly ignorant of his
defects and miseries, who doubtless will never grieve for them, nor by any
censure of amendment, will cast them out. And how shall he not be ignorant of
his defects, who never looks into himself? Who does not examine and discuss
himself? And who never observes what he caries, either in his hands or in his
heart? Therefore discussion of the conscience is the beginning of all
sovereign sorrow and repentance, whereby when we behold our own cases and
estates, we are stirred up to sorrow and detestation for our sins. After that
I converted, I repented and after I was instructed, Ier. 31.
I smote upon my thigh. For albeit GOD alone it is that turns us unto him,
unto whom the work of our conversion is to be ascribed, as the author of all
good, yet seeing he will have us in this work not to be stocks and stones,
he beginning this work, does not exclude our works, but in what manner we
are converted he shows, saying, After I was instructed I smote upon my thigh;
First we must by attentive discussion, know our sins and after by due
repentance chastise them.

To conclude, I was ashamed yea even confounded, because I did bear the
reproach of my youth, q. d. thou have showed me my sins, whilst I searched
them, and touched with the knowledge of them, I am ashamed to have committed
them, and to have followed, and served the wicked lusts and affections of my
youth. Behold how the knowledge of sins, which comes by discussion,
enforces the heart to grief: patient Job saw not himself. And therefore he
was not ashamed, but boasted of his own innocence, complaining of the miseries
which God brought upon him: but after that by a more intimous consideration he
looked into himself seeing his own vility, he lays down his complaints,
and takes up the countenance of a true penitent. I have heard of thee by the
hearing of the ear, Job. 42.
but now mine eye sees thee; Therefore I abhor my self and repent in dust
and ashes. q. d. I now see thy wisdom and the just causes of my smiting and
plagues. And therefore I reprove my self, that so boldly durst pronounce my
self innocent, and to have suffered without cause, I repent for it in dust and
ashes. So when we do not see our own consciences, we think our selves
righteous, and much better then others, but when by examination we discuss
them, then we judge our selves miserable sinners. And by how much a man does
see himself less, (says a father) by so much does he displease himself
less, Greg. 35. Mor.
and the more light of grace he has received, the more will he know himself
to be reprooueable. Because he shall more clearly see how much he swarnes
from the rule that is above him.

And the Prophet tells us, Psalm. 59.
that this is the custom of God, that he might by the knowledge of our
sins, draw us to sorrow and repentance for them. Thou have moved the Land
and shaken it, heal the soars of the land, for it shakes. in this place it
is demanded; how the Land is troubled and divided? And he answers himself,
August.
by the conscience of sins, a wise and true answer, for when a man finds in
his heart the sins he knew not before, then is he pricked in his
conscience, moved with sorrow, troubled with fear, that he may be healed of
the Lord by grace. For it is he that pricks, that he might cherish; mooues
that he might quiet; troubles, that he might by compunction deliver the
troubled mind from the evils for which it is troubled. But if we do not
discuss our selves, we should neither know our sins, nor be moved by
contrition, without which we can never obtain the pardon of our sins.

The Spirit, says the Prophet, Ezech. 3.
lift me up and took me away, and I went into the bitterness and indignation
of my Spirit, Into what place, shall we think the Spirit of GOD lifts up the
just man? shall we not think, that into the place of rest and peace, where
he may acknowledge the goodness of GOD, his own imbecility and manifold
defects? And from whence took he him? But from earthly cares, and troubles of
the world, that his own only care and business might be to know himself, and
cleanse himself from sins? There is he filled with bitterness whilst he
finds himself less cleansed, and less seruent then he should be. There is he
offended at himself, and from the knowledge of himself takes just occasion of
indignation against himself, and so arises from sorrow and indignation to the
hope of divine mercy, to the tranquillity of the mind, and to the feeling of
celestial consolation. For presently the Prophet adds; the hand of the Lord
was upon me comforting me. For those does the hand of God recreate and
refresh, whom it finds pricked in conscience and forsaken, out of the
knowledge of their daily slips.

Therefore this is a s^re conclusion, that the discussion of the conscience, is
the original of co^punction, the mother of all godly sorrow, whereby we are
prepared to receive consolation and pardon of our sins. This necessity of
examination a father does thus acknowledge, exhorting all the faithful unto it:
behold, says he, thou have a book, Chrysostom.
where thou writest thy daily expense. Have also the book of thy conscience,
and write thy daily sins, when thou art on thy bed, and have none to troble
thee, before sleep fall on thee, bring thy conscience fourth, remember thy sins
in thought, word and deed, for thus says the Prophet, be angry but sin not,
what you say in your hearts, Psalm. 4.
be pricked for in your beds. On the day time, thou have had no leisure, thou
have observed thy Judge; thy enjoined duty, confabulatio^ of friends,
domestical necessity, care of children, solicitude of wife, fear of
soldiers, and a thousand other causes do incompasse thee.

But when thou shall come unto thy bed to give thy members rest and a quiet
haven, no man then troubles thee, no man knocks. Say in thy soul and in thy
heart: we spent a day, O my soul, what good have we done, or what evil have
we wrought? if any evil, do so no more, if any good, give thanks unto God.
And remembering thy sins power out thy tears, and labor to blot them out.
Pray to God, and so suffer thy soul to rest. Confessing thy sins, make an
account to thy self, beg the mercy of GOD and thou shall find rest. What
heavy or grievous thing is it, in thy bed to bewail thy daily sins? When
thou sh^^^ begin to think well of thy self, hang thy cogitations, as upon a
rack or torture, and shave them away with the rasor of the fear of God. Set
before thee, the fear of hell, which brings upon thee a cutting blow that has
no sorrow. Make unto thy self the judgment to be terrible, prepare an easier
confession of thy thoughts, that in the last daiy thou may not be more
sloathfull to search out thy sins. Therefore behold how the examination of
the conscience stirs up compunction, and a mind pricked being first troubled
with the stings of sin, finds out ioyfulnesse and comfort.

3 Hence arises a third necessity of discussion: that without it, commonly we
cannot obtain remission of our sins: I say commonly, because sometimes a man
gets the pardon of of his sins, albeit he forget many of them, whilst he
truly grieves and repents for his sins ingenerall. But if we look upon the
Law of GOD, that sin be it great or small which we prosecute with a true
detestation and hatred, that sin I say only is remitted us; but we detest
that sin which we know, we have committed, which in the inwards of our
mind with an attentive discussion of the conscience, we deprehend.

Mary Magdalene first beheld the foulness of her heart, and then washed our
Lords feet with her tears, lamented her iniquities, Greg. Hom. 33.
and obtained pardon of her sins. Because she beheld the spots of her
turpitude, she ran to the fountain of mercy to be washed. But if she had not
beheld her blemishes, out of doubt, she had not come to the bath of mercies
to^ be cleansed. Therefore if thou will be cleansed from thy daily sins,
detest them by compunction, if thou will detest them first know them by
examination; for as no man loves the good he knows not, so no man hates the
evil whereof he is ignorant.

Moses put his hand into his bosom and it came fourth leprous; Exodus 4.
so whilst we put our hands into our bosoms, and discuss our own
consciences, we bring into knowledge the leprosy of our sins: he put it
again into his bosom and brought it fourth, and it was clean without any
leprosy: So whilst we are in a daily examination of our defects, we are at
length cleansed from the filth of our sins. Therefore the discussion of the
conscience is like to a bath, wherewith, whilst we know and lament our sins,
we are through the mercy of God cleansed. Now then there is none but sees that
the examen of the conscience is necessary to the purity of the mind, because
it both lays open our sins, and being known, bewailes them, and whilst by
tears we labor to purge them, the Lord who mightily desires our amendment,
does of his goodness through Christ give us full remission of them.

2 We are now come to consider the benefits of this examen which is the third
tiling I promised to open. Those things which are very necessary unto life, are
went ever to be full of great profit, that the benefit of them might enforce
the daily use of them. Whence it is, that seeing this discussion of conscience
is so necessary to advance a godly life, it cannot but abound with most
pleasant fruity, which the Saints of God as from a tree may daily receive from
it. Now we have seen the great necessity of it* as being a most present
remedy of the emendation of life, and the original act which God uses to the
remission of sins. The benefit of it is most manifest, seeing not only
Christians, but even Heathen Philosophers instructed by the conduct and light
of nature, have observed it. To omit both Seneca and Plutarch, Pithagoras has
in most elegant verses described this discussion of the conscience: of which
the sense is; that every one, before he compose himself to sleep, ought to
discuss his daily actions, and observe in them these 3 things. 1 Wherein he
transgressed. 2. What he had done. 3. What he had left less perfect. Who
will deny the profit of this discussion to be most manifest which the blind
did see, and even those indewed but with a glimmering of the light of nature
have so wifely disci^hered? Therefore besides those we have named, there are
many other worthy fruits of it.

1 The daily discussion of the conscience, is profitable to the destruction of
vices, because whilst the mind beholding it self, knows it self to be
vicious and foul, whilst it laments, and detests the sins that defiled it,
it inflames it self unto the fight, and in fighting puts to flight the sins
to which it was subject. Josh. 3.
Even as when the Priests entered into Jorden, the waters stood like unto a
mountain, so when we enter into a serious discussion of our conscience, all
our ill customs renounce their former stream, step back, depart from us
and loose the strength wherewith they were wont to molest us.

2 It is profitable, to the planting of virtues in us. For as the diligent in
any faculty do by frequent beholding of their work, learn to amend it, and
from small beginnings comes at length to great perfection in his art; so he
that is studious of virtues, whilst he daily examines his actions, and
despises this as naught, but adorns and decks the other as less perfect, and
casts another off unto some fitter time, with in few months will grow to a
great measure of Sanctification. The knowledge of living well is to be
acquired by many means: partly by reason, partly by example, partly by
doctrine, partly by meditation of the Holy Scriptures, partly by a daily
looking into our own works and manners. But this last, of all others is the
most necessary, as making us to grow in graces, and cut off all superfluities,
that the mind may come to her ancient beauty.

3 It is profitable to the acquiring of the minds quiet because, whilst he
laments the evils committed, and leaves nothing in the conscience to trouble or
check it, it must of necessity bring with it peace and quiet. This peace Job
found, when he said, Job. 27.
His heart did not reprehende him in all his life. The Saints of GOD cease not
to search the very secret corners of the heart, and subtly sifting
themselves do cast away the cares of earthly things, and all their thoughts
being dug up, when they find themselves not bitten with any guiltiness of
sins, do ^est secure, as in the bed of their own hearts. They desire to be
hid from the actions of this world, they ever consider their own things. Those
that are thus buried in themselves do sleep secure, for whilst they
vigilantly ^enetrate into their own inwards, they hide themselves from the
laborious burdens for this world, under the sweet shadow of rest. For they
suffer nothing that can hinder their quiet, to ^est within the circle of their
^earts. For even as those that do diligently search their house before they
sleep, that they may not leave any thief or enemy lurking in any corner to
surprise them, may after take their rest in great security; so those that
before they lie down to sleep, do search out the secret corners of their
hearts, and do labor to cast out with tears all that they find therein
vicious and naught, do procure unto themselves a quiet and secure life.

On the other side, we know that no man is suffered to sleep, when the war
waxes hot, because as long as we do not overcome and repel them, we must
of necessity be troubled with their assaults.

4 Besides, it is profitable to acquire wisdom. For he that searches out
himself and examines the beginnings, ends, and circumstances of his works,
does so learn, how he may thenceforth live, what things are to be done and
what not. The my of a fool, says Solomon, is right in his own eyes, Pro. 12.
but he that hears counsel is wise. Why the fool? Because he takes no
counsel; because he takes not the warnings of his own conscience, contenting
himself only with the external face of virtue. But the wise man gives not
only ear to the counsel of his friends, but also takes counsel of himself,
whilst he requires from his own conscience, an approbation of his own actions.

Therefore if thou desire wisdom, return to thy own heart. Daily discuss
thy self, consider whence thou came, whither thou comest^, how thou live,
how much thou do daily profit, how much thou failest, with what cogitations
thou art most assaulted, with what affections most troubled, with what
temptations most beleagred: for by so much shall thou sooner and surelier come
to the top of wisdom as thou shall come more fully to know the state of the
inner man. For wisdom in doing things is engendered by the disquisition and
consideration of things to be done, whence it is that in spiritual things
wisdom is retained by the inspection and discussion of our spirit and
spiritual things. But this is performed by the examen of the conscience, which
looks daily into the mind what augmentations or detriments and loss of grace
we sustain; by these, the wisdom of the spirit does increase and every man
learnes to direct both himself and others; so that we see the discussion of
the conscience to be the enemy and bane of all sins, the origin of al
virtues and spiritual graces, the quiet of the mind, the wisdom of every
Christian, therefore whosoever will attain any measure of sanctity, must daily
practice this holy duty.

3 The last thing in this discussion to be considered is how this duty is to be
performed, and what is the matter whereabout it is exercised: To understand
this the better, we are to know, that this discussion is to be compared to
the draw-net gathering of all kinds of fish. Our life and conversation is the
sea, a sea bitter with sorrows, anguishes and sins: a sea deep and
unsearchable through the obscurity of intentions and affections, so that the
Prophet said truly, Ier. 17.
The heart of man is wicked and unsearchable. To conclude a sea very turbulent
and unquiet through the multitude of thoughts and cares. The great and huge
fishes of this great sea, are our actions as well inwardly thinking and
desiring, as outwardly speaking or doing any thing. The good fishes are good
actions, the bad fishes which we cast out are our wicked works. But the net
is the examen and discussion of the conscience, whereby we gather our actions,
and cast them out or preserve them as they are good or bad. Therefore to this
examen are all both good and evil works to be subject, the good that they
may be approved, the wicked that they may be corrected and amended.

For this examen is like to a ^Iudge of Assize who calls all men within his
circuit to an account, and brings every action to the bar and trial of
Justice without favor or affection: so our soul or reason calls all our
actions inward and outward, good or bad before it, that it may cherish those
good and holy, and correct and amend the wicked and ungodly actions: casting
out our incorrigible actions, checking the unquiet, amending the negligent,
instructing the simple, mitigating the angry, restrayning the voluptuous,
stirring up the sloathfull, comforting the weak, and teaching the indiscreete
actions.

In this Assize, which every man must keep in himself, reason is the Judge,
conscience the Kings Attorney accusing the sinner, peruersity the party
excusing himself, pride the advocate defending the guilty, but innocence the
just man confessing his fault. After the manner of wicked and perverse men,
vices do contradict all commandments, but after the manner of good simple
persons, virtues obey them, yet do virtues sometimes accuse one another. For
Mercy accuses Justice, and Justice Mercy, Honesty accuses Humility, and
Humility Honesty, Mercy accuses Justice, that it has stretched its hands even
unto cruelty, that it has used words of anger, that it has changed the
countenance of Meekness. Justice accuses mercy, that it has not put on the
countenance of Severity, that it has suffered sin to go unpunished, that it
has not blamed the offender at least so much as in words. Humility accuses
Honesty, that it exceeds mediocrity, that it follows superfluity, that not
only it uses honest, but even voluptuous things. Honesty accuses Humility,
that it loves too much poverty, that it bestows not what is necessary upon the
body, that it loves nakedness, beggerlinesse, and all contempt. For sometimes
Mercy deals too remissely, Justice too cruelly, Humility too sparingly, and
Honesty too abundantly. Yet do they not leave to be virtues, albeit they be
weak and imperfect. For whilst they accuse, they lay themselves open to
receive discipline and censure. But how are they made naked and open? When by
confession of sins, the hidden things are declared.

But there are many things which require the examen of our good actions, for
often our self-love deceiues us, so that we think that to be good which is not
so. Therefore let every man use the judgment of examination, that he may
acquit himself from such deceit, and declare whether his works be good or
bad. He that is negligent in discussing his good thoughts and deeds, exposes
himself to a manifest danger of falling and of sin, whilst he admits an
unprofitable thought for a profitable, and a wicked work for a good. As
Ishbosheth was slain on his bed because he had not a wise and valiant Porter
to examine and keep out his enemies, 2. Sam. 4.
so he that has not a strong keeper of the mind, and great care to behold all
that enters into his conscience, is in danger of his life, because he thinks
he enters virtues, whilst vices entering in the habit of virtues kill him on his
bed unawares. Therefore let not only a frequent, but also a diligent and
careful discussion keep our mind, which may examine all our works, and
wisely judge whether those that enter under the color and garments of virtue,
be such as they appear to be. Even our good actions will the Lord examine
and judge, therefore it is fit that first we examine and correct them, least
the presents which we take to be good, the just Judge shall think unfit and
unworthy to come in his sight.

A scholar that is learning to paint, does again and again behold and amend
the work he has in hand, and as much as possibly he can, shows it to his
Master polished and well limned: and shall we presume to offer unto God our
good works which are by him to be examined, without diligent viewing and
lymning of them? Shall it not be said unto us, Is. 1.
Your silver is turned into dross and your wine mixed with water? Your words
and works seem to be holy, but your intentions and other circumstances
accompanying them, do take from them all their worth. Job. 7.
Therefore holy Job was afraid of all his works, knowing that God would not
spare him that offends. Greg. 9. Mor.
And what is it that this holy man who did such admirable works feared in
them? was it not least fraud and deceit should mix themselves in his actions,
and earthly concupiscence should like a thief secretly lurk to steal away
the goodness of them? Exodus 30.
Therefore as the sacred perfumes composed of many sorts of spices, were to be
beaten to powder and set before the Arc of testimony: so must our good works
not be few but many, not proceeding from one, but mixed with all virtues, and by
the pestle of the heart, through inward discussion of the Conscience, broken
and bruised all to pieces and powder, that they may give a grateful savor in
the nostrels of GOD. For as these spices if they be not powned, cast fourth no
fragrant smell, so if our good works pass not under the hand of discussion
but be presented in gross unto God, they loose the sweet smell which they
should have.

Now if our good works must come under this examination, much more must our
evil and wicked actions be subject to it. For seeing thereby not only our
sins and defects but also the quality and greatness of the evil committed,
it cannot but move it to sorrow and repentance, which being true and unfeigned,
bends the mercy of GOD toward us and obteines remission in Jesus Christ. Is.
38.
What does the good King that he might get GOD to be propitious unto him? I
will walk weakly all my years, in the bitterness of my soul: where the
common translation goes thus, I will recall all my years in the bitterness
of my soul. All the years, says he, of my life, I will remember my sins
committed against thee: and I will season this remembrance with grievous sorrow
and repentance, and because I have offended thy divine Majesty I will even
consume my self with grief and affliction. I will surely say, O Lord, if thus
I live, if thus I must spend and wast my days, if in such, so filthy and
odious things, so unworthy of man, I shall loose the life of my soul, why
should I live? And whilst I thus say, and with grief consume my self, feeling
thy reprehension in my heart, I am by thy mercy brought to life again. I now
see, that in the false, feigned and hurtful peace which I had with my sins,
there was hidden most bitter bitterness. But whilst I see this, and grieve for
it, thou, O Lord, who would not the death of a sinner, but that he might
be turned and live, have taken away and delivered my soul from that miserable
condition of sin, that it should not perish, and have cast behind thy back
all my sins. These fruits did Ezechias gather from the recogitation of his
sins. And the same shall we also do, as often as with sorrow and grief we
discuss and recogitate our sins. Ber.
Learn therefore, says that devout father to command thy self, to order thy
life, to compote thy manners, to judge thy self, to accuse thy self with thy
self, and often to condemn thy self, and suffer not thy self to escape
unpunished. Let thy conscience judging and condemning thee sit quiet, let
Justice stand as guilty, no man loves thee better, no man will judge more
faithfully. In the morning take an account of thy self for the night past, and
give a Law unto thy self for the day come. At night take an account of the
past, and lay a commandment on thy self for the night to come, so shall thou
be kept from all wicked and dangerous transcursions and wanderings out of the
way. Seeing then all that we do must be thus discussed, many of them being by
the mercy of God, good, and not a few by our own frailty, evil, it follower,
that all both good and bad must appear before the conscience, that what is
good in them, may by the mercy of God be accepted, and what is evil out of our
frailty, may through his mercy and our due repentance, be put out and pardoned.

Now having thus seen the matter of our discussion, it follows that we
speak how it is to be done. We say; that Kingdom is happy, where the Judges
love no gifts, nor seek for rewards, but judge justly: but more truly is
that soul happy, in which reason illuminated by God, examines all the actions
and dissembles nothing; nor leaves any thing that is unjust, without just
punishment. If then this examen of the conscience be a certain kind of
spiritual judgment, the form of judgment most be observed in it that it be
rightly and profitably performed of us.

Now in that judgment, wherein a man is not only accused of some crime, but
also of ingratitude toward him whom by his offense, he has hurt. 1. There
must be a commemoration of the benefit. 2. An inquisition and probation of the
crime. 3. Lastly a sentence of the Judge condemning the guilty, and with due
punishment censuring him.

Of this kind, it seems, the examen of Conscience is^^, in which we must
not only accuse our selves of some faults and defects, but of ingratitude
toward GOD: which being proved against us, we cannot but pronounce sentence
against our selves and punish our selves by repentance for it. For as black
does appear better if placed near unto that which is white, so our sins being
set near to the benefits of God, will more evidently show themselves. To this
discussion, the Prophet exhorts, what have I don, Mich. 6.
O my people, and wherein have I grieved thee? That so remembering his benefits,
he might draw them to the knowledge of their sins and ingratitude, and so
bring them to a desire of their conversion.

The next thing is, to take a time accommodate and fit for this examen, which
may be some short time before we prepare our selves for sleep. There is one
time of searching out the things that are above us, and another time of
discussing the things that are with in us. For their is a time for every thing
under the Sun: Therefore there is a time of contemplating the wonderful
works of God, and there is a time of considering our own infirmities. This is
a time of weeping, but that is a time of laughing. For sorrow may be for a
night but joy comes in the morning. Psalm. 29.
Why should there not be a time of laughing in the morning of divine
contemplation, in the contemplation of eternal light? And why should there not
be a time of weeping in the evening of horrible sights, in considering the
darkness of man's conscience? Therefore in this time of weeping and
considering our own darkness, five things are to be done, which concur to
the form and manner of this examen. 1. Is a commemoration of the benefits of
GOD and an humble and fervent thanksgiving. 2. A desire of grace, that we may
be able, to search out and know our sins and defects. 3. An inquisition and
discussion of the conscience, whereby we may acknowledge the sins of omission
and commission. 4. Sorrow and detestation for our sins and a purpose of
amendment. 5. A due censuring and castigation of our selves for them.

1. Our examination must begin with thanksgiving for all his innumerable
benefits. This grateful commemoration of benefits and humble confession of
sins accusing our selves vehemently before God, does strongly impell and
enforce our repentance for them, Bas.
and obtain remission from God. He that affirms all our prayers should begin
with thanksgiving, gives us this counsel: whenever thou determinest to pray,
leave thy wife, thy children, yea even leave thy self, and depart far from
the earth, and overcome even the heavens and leave also all created natures, as
well which may as those which cannot be seen, and begin from the
glorification of him, who made all things.

Say unto him; I thank thee O Lord, for thy incredible clemency, and thy
wonderful facility in bearing the sins of men; who do daily sustain me
with singular patience every moment sinning against thee, and gives us all
space and time, and means to repent. Even for this cause, O Lord, thou hold
thy peace and bear with us, that we might give thee thanks, who gouernest
and moderatest the salvation of mankind, sometimes by threatening, and sometimes
by gently exhorting, and who first by thy Prophets and after by the coming of
thy Christ, have visited us. For thou have made us, and not we our selves: thou
art our God alone.

But if all prayer must begin with thanksgiving, much more this, in which we
would beg such light as might bring us to the knowledge of ^our selves and
obtain the remission of all our sins. A general thanksgiving under one
name, comprising all the benefits of GOD, is not very profitable, a special,
repeating all his benefits, is impossible: for who can recount all his
benefits? Therefore a middle course is to be holden, and both certain
general benefits and some particular of that day are to be called to mind,
and thanks to be given unto God for them: the remembrance whereof will
something dispose us to sorrow and repentance. Thus then thou shall say. 1. O
Lord my God, I give thee infinite thanks, because thou have from all eternity
seen and loved me, and (as by thy infinite mercy I hope) have effectually
elected me to glory, and by convenient means have predestined me thereunto.
2. Because thou have created me of nothing, and made me in thine own image;
and have enriched and endowed me with infinite gifts both in soul and body.
3. Because thou preseruest both my self and all other things, with so long a
continuance for my sake, without whose actual assistance, we had presently
been brought to nothing, nor could we have lasted for one moment of time. 4.
Because thou gouernest and rulest me and all things for my sake, and disposest
all things which belong unto me, with a most effectual and sweet providence.
5. Because thou have redeemed me with thy most precious blood, and by thy
merits and passion have delivered me from the slavery of Satan. 6. Because
thou have given thy self unto me, for a teacher, a physician, a father, and an
example of holy life. 7. Because amongst those little numbers of thy poor
flock thou have called me to the profession of the Gospel, and to the
knowledge and obedience of thy Majesty. 8. Because by thy holy Word, thy
Sacraments, thy Inspirations, examples of holy men, godly books, and many
other holy means, thou have helped me to live well, and yet do help me. 9.
Because thou have advanced me from the miserable estate of an enemy, (and as I
hope in thy mercy) to the dignity of a friend, and with thy saving grace have
justified me and remitted all my sins. 10. Because thou have delivered me
from innumerable dangers of loosing thy grace and favor; and do not cease
to deliver me. 11. Because thou have enriched me with many both inward and
outward graces and gifts, as well of nature as of grace. 12. Because thou have
(as I assuredly hope) effectually prepared for me, from before the foundations
of the world, according to the good pleasure of thy will, a sure degree of
glory and happiness. 13. Because thou have this day admitted me to pray, and
speak unto thee, fed me with the precious delicates of thy flesh and blood,
and have continued me in thy obedience. 14. Because thou do follow me, with
other infinite benefits, and ceasest not still to follow me through my whole
life, and for ever. 15. Because thou have ministered unto me health; and all
such things as may serve to further me in the obedience of thy Law.

2 Thus having given thanks, thou must then ask of GOD, grace to know,
discuss and look into thy self: for the heart of man is wicked above measure
and insearchable; and who does know it? And seeing in the same place the
demand is thus answered; I the Lord search the heart and prove the reins;
Ier. 17.
we must ask of him, who can do it, that he would place our hearts near
unto us, display the frauds and dissimulations of it, and open the vein of the
knowledge of our selves: This prayer must be short, that there may be time
also for the other points of the examen.

Therefore thus thou may say in thy affection and mind: Thou Oh most
bountiful! I beseech thee unto all these thy benefits add this one more, to
send me light from thy glorious Throne and give me of thy abundant grace,
that I may know my manifold sins, and so repent truly for the sins I have
committed against thee.

3 We then come to the inquisition of our sins; which for better understanding
we may distribute, into thoughts, affections, words and works: namely what we
are to discuss in these. 3. Hugo. lib. Med.
The affections, cogitations and works. One says, that in our affections we
must consider, that they be right, i. that they be directed unto that which
they ought to be. And secondly that they be sincere, i. directed as they ought
to be. For to love that thing which a man ought not to love is evil; and so to
love as a man ought not, is also evil. Therefore it is a good affection when it
is unto that which it ought to be unto, and also as it ought to be. Amnon loved
his sister, and it was in affection unto that which it should be, 2. Sam. 13.
but because he loved her wickedly, therefore it was not as it ought to be.
Therefore the affection may be to that which it ought to be, and yet not as it
ought to be. But it can never be as it ought to be, except it be unto that
which it ought to be, in that to which it ought to be, it is a right affection:
and how and as it ought to be, it is a sincere affection. 2. In the cogitations
we must consider, that they be 1. Clean, and 2. ordered: they are clean,
when they are neither engendered of ill affections, nor do engender ill
affections. They are ordered, when they come reasonably, that is, in their own
time. For not in their own time, even to think good things is not without
sin as in prayer to think of reading, and in reading to think of prayer. 3.
In works, we must consider. 1. That they be done out of a good intention, a
good intention is that which is simple and right. Simple without malice, right
without ignorance. For that which is without malice, has zeal, but that which
is with ignorance has not zeal according to knowledge. Therefore the intention
must be right by discretion, and simple by devotion. 2. That out of a right
intention begun, they be with a perseuerant fervor, brought out to the end;
that neither perseverance may be sloathfull, nor love may wax cold. 3. That
they be commanded in the word of God. Else God may say, who required these
things at your hands? 4. That they proceed from faith, else they will prove to
be no better then birds without feathers that cannot fly, and images without
life that cannot stir. 5. That they be done to the glory of God, and the
good of our selves and others; which is the true and only end of all our
works. Now for our words; we must consider in them that they be. 1. True. 2.
Hurtful to none. 3. Necessary for some cause. 4. That in fit time and place.
5. In due manner spoken, if in any of these we offend; concerning our thoughts,
that they be less clean, or less ordered: concerning the affections, that
they be less right or less sincere: concerning our works, that they be
less qualified then we have spoken; concerning our words; that they be less
true or less necessary; we must note it in our memory that we may the
better conceive a grief for it, and procure a purpose of amendment.

In thy examen of thy works and words, let this be thy form for the avoiding
of that detestable negligence which in this behalf is used: at some convenient
time, be thou a Judge of thy self and take a strict account of thy
Stewardship: saying, Oh evil servant and slow, tell me how thou have spent
this day? Thou have been slow to do thy duty unto God: Thou have been
indeuout in doing it: Thou have spoken many words, with little fruit: thou
came late and labourest loiteringly. Thou have spoken unprofitably, demanded
curiously, judged suspiciously, reported dissolutely, detracted wilfully, thou
have been moved, thou have wandered both with thy heart and eyes. Thou have
been attentive after worldly things, negligent toward the things of God. Thou
have been to greedy of meat and drink, desired more, and murmured at little.
Thou wast not patient at a little, nor continent at more, nor pleased in any
thing. Thou have sought thy self in small things, and have left Charity and
Fidelity undone. Behold where thou have fallen and leave to be proud, give God
the glory for all thou have received. Ever deplore the state of the inner man,
with many passions entangled. Search the secrets of thy heart, if anger, if
envy, if concupiscence, if malice, if impatience or grief has moved or
overcome thee. Nor must thou search for evils committed only, but also for the
good neg^ected. If thou received the benefits of God thankfully, if thou have
prayed as well for the enemies as friends, if thou have been ^^ithfull and
obedient to those ^et over thee; if thou have been compassionate to such as
are weak and in any temptation, if thou have helped such as asked, and
comforted such as have sorrowed; if thou have simply and purely sought the
glory of God: if thou have strongly shunned the praise of men, if thou have
frankly denied thy own proper will; if thou have preferred thy self before no
man; if thou have patiently taken correction, if thou have been grievous to no
man, if being hurt, thou did lo^^ingly forgive, if thou have asked pardon
of him iniuried; if thou have done thy duty to God devoutly; if thou have not
been perverse, if thou have made have to humble thy self, if being contemned
thou have not contradicted, if thou have not thought to render evil for evil,
but have labored to overcome evil with good, if thou have seriously repented
thee: thus we see many whole counsels painted out before the eyes of the
mind, to make us ashamed, who having so many occasions of growing daily more
holy, do yet so defile our selves, that we have just cause rather of sorrow
then solace, from the tenor of our lives.

From these thou may gather a daily fardle of thy sins, and a heap of
sorrows for them. For placing these thy sins near the benefits of God
before remembered, thou shall see how little thou answerest unto God for so many
benefits, how little thou do recompense his gifts; how vile and ingrate thou
art, who returnest him for benefits offenses, for gifts sins, for love
oblivion and negligence.

Therefore thou may well lament, and power out tears, seeing thou have so
much matter of lamentation. For thou can never come to this examination, but
thou shelt find sins, ingratitudes and obliuions of thy Lord and creator;
these offenses albeit they seem small to the eyes of thy body, yet with all
the seruor thou can, for the love of God detest and hate them: because a
faithful soul beholding Gods goodness unto it, and its ingratitude toward
God, will count nothing small, (if he have any celestial knowledge) that may
offend so great and good a Majesty.

4 From this collation and comparison of Gods benefits and thy ingratitudes and
sins; thou will derive such sorrow and detestation of thy sins, that thou
shall leave no place to the smalnesse of faith. Nay even from this same, that
thou see the soul soiled with so many sins and blemishes, and thy most
merciful Lord to bear with thee so many years, and to have pardoned thee, not
70 times, seven times, but even millions of times, thou may be lift up to
hope, that God will never cast thee out so sorrowing and greeuing for thy
sins, but so often as thou shall thus come unto him and beg pardon, he will
redeem thee as a most loving father.

5 At the last, set some pain upon thy own head for these thy many escapes
and sins, let it be an amercement proportionable to the quality of thy
sins, and ability of thy body, that so thy repentance and sorrow for thy sins
past, may be a bar against the propensitie of sinning after: check and
reprove thy self again and again, and deal as a senere and just judge with
thy soul and body, imprisoning all thy senses, and fettering thy affections
that henceforth they may not stealt away thy precious soul from thee.

But to end this point of discussion. Whereas I have often in this treatise
made mention of this examination, thou may refer them all unto two times;
namely before the Communion, and before thou go to bed. For after thou have
taken a view of thy thoughts, affections, words and actions; turn the eyes of
thy mind unto that vice which thou impugnest, or that virtue which
particularly thou exercisest, and look diligently, in which thou have failed
or profited; and so shall thou easily twice every day, fall upon this
profitable exercise of discussing thy self. From which thou shall gather these
two principal benefits: first thou shall purge thy self from thy sins by
true repentance, and provoke thy self to a purpose of amendment: secondly,
thou shall know thy self within and without even to a hair; which is the
mother of all other graces. For if thou shall search not only into the boughs
but also into the roots; not into the imperfections, but the originalls of
them, thou shall see thy self plainly to be full of filthiness, and empty of
all goodness, neither shall thou any thing esteem thy self, but rather even
from the bottom of the heart, despise the best things thou can see in thy
self.

3. Things to be done, is how to compose thy self to sleep.

After thou art laid down in thy bed, recite some Psalm or Prayer, or
meditate some holy thing. And consider with thy self of what moment the grace
and love of God is, until that sleep came upon thee. So shall thou be made
apt and strong to repel all temptations, and even in thy sleeps shall be able
to resist Satan tempting thee; and from the custom of well doing, thou shall
feel thy self stirred up to prayer and all holy desires. Herein take the
devout man's counsel: when thou go to bed, evermore carry something with
thee in thy memory or thought, in which thou may quietly sleep, which will
also sometimes help thee to sleep, and which following thee waking, may
restore thee into the state of yesterdayes intention. So shall the night as the
day be alike light unto thee, thou shall quietly sleep, and when thou risest,
thou shall be the more nimble and ready to return unto that which thou
did not wholly forsake and leave.

If any temptation or passion take thee, return to prayer, and take unto thee
all the complete armor of the Apostle: and add unto it, the consideration of
eternal fire; the torments of the Saints, the constancy of Martyrs; the
trophies and glories of such as witnessed a good confession. Consider
diligently the stones where with Stephen was stoned* the broyle iron of
Laurence, the clubs, the hooues, the thorns, the flames, the wheels, the
sharp flints, the scalding waters and leads, the tears, contrition and
repentance, the teeth of beasts, the horrid prisons, the straight gives of the
Saints: and so God assisting thee, thou resisting it thou shall overcome fire
with fire, thou shall confound the devil, and shall sleep and rest in the
peace of Christ.

3. The things which are to be done every weeks.

1 Albeit I know the custom of our Church has otherwise ordered the matter;
yet if fitly it might be done, every week I should think it very full of
comforts and profit, if thou did receive the holy Communion. For the
frequent use of receiving this Sacrament, is of so great moment if it be taken
not out of custom, but of love and devotion, that it would minister great
help to the advancement of true piety. For what shall the Sun of
righteousness do received in the heart, but enlighten the receiver? what shall
the fountain of love do received in the mind, but comfort the receiver? what
shall the true life do admitted into the bosom of the heart but increase the
life of the soul, and bring it unto all perfection? a man by much traffic
and merchandise often gains much, but if he chance to light of some pearl
of great value, out of doubt he shall be much richer. For this may suddenly
make him a rich man. So a man may grow rich by the practice of many virtues;
but if he often fall upon such inestimable Pearls as that of the Lords supper,
where is the true mine of all rich and heavenly Diamonds, how quickly may he
become a Christian of infinite worth? For all other virtues give us but to sippe
upon the little rivers, whereas this gives us to drink our fill out of the
fountain it self.

Yet great care is to be taken that we come well prepared hereunto, least we
should eat and drink our own damnation. He that comes coldly and of custom
gets no benefit by it, but rather much hurt, because he discerns not the
Lords body. But if he come with such devotion and disposition of heart as
becomes a man to do, to so heavenly a feast, he shall find in himself the
wonderful effects and power of it, and a marvelous change in his whole life.

Herein are two extremes to be avoided. First of them that would not come so
often to the Communion; but yet do come, to avoid the penalty of the Law, or
suspicion that they are not so found as they should be: Secondly, of them that
would receive far oftener, (if they might) then other men do. The first of
these are sick either of sloth or ignorance, because either they neglect duly
to prepare themselves to the Lords Supper, or out of some servile fear and
tenderness of conscience, they think themselves not worthy of it. If sloth
and coldness of devotion be cause hereof, then is he to be cured of this
coldness, with such things as may inflame him (as before in this Treatise) and
with considerations of the greatness of this mystery and the fruits of it.
What good Son will neglect to come to his most loving Father? what brother
will refuse to come to his elder brother on whom he wholly depends? what wise
does not willingly entertain her loving husband? and why should any fly from
the entertainment of the author of his justification, sanctification, and
remission of his sins, and the giver of all graces? In this banquet, is the
sweetness of the soul, and the fruit of all virtues; Here shall he eat the
bread that comforts man's heart, here shall he taste the honey that is sweet
unto his throat, here shall he drink his wine and milk. For he that eats
shall eat to satiety, and he that drinks, shall have rivers of the water of
life slow out of his belly.

What and how great profit is in this feast, where sins are cleansed, vices
extinguished, passions do acquire a measure, virtues an increase, and heavenly
gifts their perfections? how great is the sweetness of this table, where is
water cooling, wine inebriating, milk refreshing him, honey sweetning, and the
bread of life eternizing? Desire evermore to be partaker of the grace of it:
and if thou do feel no hunger of it, know thou art sick, and labor to be
cured.

Those other that desire to communicate oftener then others, let them take heed
it proceed not from emulation, because others do often receive it, and they
would gladly be accounted devout, let them cheek themselves of too much pride
and hypocrisy: and if it proceed of some sensible devotion which they think
is to be received by using it, let them mortify themselves and know that not
sensible devotion but the purity of the soul, is to be sought as the chief
end in this Sacrament: but if it proceed from an impatient desire, and violent
love, that contents not it self in any but in the Lord; if there be purity of
life, the gift of prayer, an evident profit by the Communion, the edification
of others, and no scandal given to others; which do persuade us that these
desires proceed from God, he may then very well use it more often, so that he
live in such sort as he may be an example to others. But howsoever either of
these sorts receive it, let them ever have that of Chrysostom in mind: whom
shall we make most account of? those who once, or those who often, or those who
seldom receive it? neither those who once, nor those who often, nor those who
seldom, but those that take it with a clean heart, a clean conscience, and a
life unreprovable.

Now there are two sorts of disposition and preparation to be used in
receiving the Sacrament. The first is, as it were a far off, and that is no
other but a holy life, free from vices, distractions and foul crimes which do
defile a man and make him odious in GODS sight. For the more humble in heart,
pure in mind, fervent in love, and holy in life thou art, the more worthily
shall thou receive this Sacrament. 2. Tim. 2.
Therefore are we advised to cleanse our selves from all sins that we may be
vessels sanctified unto honor and ready unto every good work: our lives must
be ever so holy, as that with comforts and profit we may receive the
Sacrament every day if need were.

The other kind of preparation is to be performed, for a week or some such
fit time before our receiving of it; in which time a full survey without
partiality, being taken of a man's life, we may so give our selves to Prayer,
Fasting, Repentance and other Holy duties, that we rid from us the burden of
our accusing sins; and be furnished with Faith, Hope, Love and all the
troop of saving graces, to the end we may in some competent measure approach
that Heavenly banquet.

And to conclude, with the same or more diligence which when thou see a woman
painte and trim her self that: she may appear to be beautiful to men,
must thou deeke, wash, purify and painte thy self and thy Soul with inward
graces, that thou may be truly beautiful in the eyes of thy loving God.

And if after thou have lived a holy life, and for some time before the
communion also prepared thy self, and that day wherein thou receiuedst the
communion exercised thy self in repentance and holy desires and shall for all
this find no sensible devotion, but rather a drynes, yet cast not down thy
self, nor withdraw thy self from the Sacrament: for the wisdom of God
works diversely in those that serve him the effects of his graces; nor must
any man search out the secrets of God, for they are unsearchable and past
finding out. Therefore the indeuoute ought not to be driven from the
Sacrament, whilst he lives holily, acknowledges himself humbly, and comes
reverently: nay whilst he tells me, he is sorry for his sins, and purposes
amendment, and craves the help of that blessed Sacrament, he is not to be
kept from it. For it is the hid Manna and conteines abundance of all spiritual
delights.

Now for some good time after the receiving of the Communion thou shall do
well to recollect thy self to give thanks for so great a benefit: for not
only the defect of preparation, but even the defect of giving of thanks may
much hinder the fruit thereof. For shall we receive all those infinite benefits
of his passion, and pass by him unsaluted? He comes to hear our petitions and
help our miseries and shall we ask nothing of him? He enters most lovingly
into the Inner chamber of our hearts and shall we give him no thanks? Least
we fall into so great ingratitude, and loose such an opportunity of profiting,
sit like good Magdalene, at the feet of thy Lord and Savior. Hear diligently
his word, he will vouchsafe to teach thee something, speak to him, be
confounded at thy own vility and nakedness, and beg pardon for thy small
and remiss disposition; offer up to him thy body, and all that belongs unto
thee, a holy, living and acceptable Sacrifice, lay open thy miseries and
necessities, desire his grace and all the good means that may further thee
thereunto, and exercise thy self in all the affections of love. If thus thou
shall do, the Lord will not suffer thee to depart from his presence, without a
blessing.

2 Things to be done every week is the hearing the word preached.

THis is very necessary to be heard (at the least) once a week; for as it is
the true and only means in that kind to heal our spiritual leprosies, so
is it to conserve and keep us in sanctity of life, and spiritual health. Two
things (amongst many other benefits) we receive from the word, Ber.
says that devout father; it heales vicious souls, and it admonishes
virtuous souls. One calls it a bread, and a sword: a trumpet for it sounds in
our ears; bread for it feeds the hungry soul, a sword, for it penetrates the
very secrets of the heart.

If then thou will profit by hearing, come prepared as in the first part of
this treatise thou art taught. Come with preparation, prayer and great desire
to learn. Hear not negligently and for fashion, but let the words of wisdom
sink into thy heart. For they inquire at the mouth of the wise man in the
congregation, Sir. 21.
and they shall ponder his words in their heart. They will not hear
perfunctoriously and negligently, but think on his words in their heart, and
wisely ponder them, to the end to work out their salvation thereby.

And thou shall stir up this holy desire much, if thou shall observe well
that thou stand need of heavenly doctrine. Yea with so much more care and
attention, is it to be heard, by how much as experience has taught thee, that
by frequent hearing of it negligently, thou have received from it no benefit or
very little benefit at all. The similitude of that learned man is very fit to
express this business; as, says he, The fish which are bred in the salt
water, Clem. Alex.
do yet for all that stand need of salt to season them, so even those that
are much exercised in Religion, and are bred and brought up in hearing the
word, do stand need to hear it diligently, that they may be preserved from
the corruption and putrefaction of sins.

Hear therefore the Preacher, no otherwise then thou would hear Christ
himself speaking and teaching thee. For it is he that speaks unto thee by
his Ministers, it is he that by their mouths instills the words of life into
thy heart. That belongs unto all Preachers which the LORD spoke to the Prophet:
Thou shall go to all that I will send thee, Ier. 1.
and thou shall speak all things which I command thee, and behold I will put
my words in thy month. But if God have sent him, whom thou hear, to teach
thee, if he proprose the things which GOD commaundes, thou must not think
that thou hear a man speaking only; but even God himself. Thou must not
regard whether the Preacher be learned, or eloquent, or to thy toothe, for if
he bring the word of GOD unto thee, thou ought to hear him with like
reverence, as if he were endued with great talents and gifts. For as it falls
out in the affairs of men, Chrysostom.
when the King sends his Letters, happily by some base post, or man of no
reckoning, and such as cannot reckon up any petigree of greatness, but is a
very obscure fellow: Yet those to whom these letters are directed look not at
the person of the Kings messenger, but with great reverence and silence receive
them. So the hearer must not have any respect to the means of his condition or
condition of his gifts whom GOD will employ in his service, to bring him the
tidings of salvation: but with all reverence and attention must receive the
message brough, as if it were delivered him by the king of Heaven himself. But
because we fail herein, it causes the word to have such small increase in
our hearts. For we hear it without any reverence, not as the word of God but
as a tale told, us by a man, and so it goes in at the one care and out at the
other.

Nor yet must we regard, if the Preacher do often propose unto us common
doctrines and known to all men: for thou must not hear the doctrine of the
spirit, to learn new, things, but that thou may be stirred to practice the
old things thou have already learned, and that thou may be ashamed hereat,
that thou have not performed the good things thou know. For if the word of
GOD had not come unto thee, thou had had no sin, but now thou have no
excuse for thy sin. Therefore hear the Word of GOD, not with loathsomeness
and tediousness, but attentively and desirously, not out of curiosity, but out
of a desire to learn and practice the good things thou hear.

Hear, not to forget presently, but to meditate seriously. In the Law those
beasts only which chewed the Cuade were clean, Leuit.
in the Gospel those Souls only which meditate the Word heard, and by their
lives, and it were, do turn it into their own substance, do become clean
in the sight of God. The hearer of the word, says a Father, must be like to
those beasts, which because they chew the cudde are called clean, that it may
not be irksome unto him to think on the things which he received into the womb
of his heart: and when he hears, let him be like to one that eats; but when
he calls things hard to remembrance, let him be like one that chewes the cudde.
If so thou hear the word, thou art happy: Blessed are they that hear the
word of God and keep it. Hear humbly, not as a censor to judge, but as a
scholar to learn: Hear attentively, that thou may keep in memory what thou
hear, hear faithfully, that as good ground thou may bring forth fruit,
through the seed that has been sown in thee, and so from abundance of
doctrine, thou shall gather a most rich storehouse of al virtues and graces.
Prepare thy self to hear, with a short prayer unto God, that he would give
unto the Preacher, the grace of speech and edifying, and unto thee and all the
hearers, all helps and means of profiting.

4. The things which are to be done every month.
Concerning this point, I will only observe one thing, wherein it is fit that
every one do monthly exercise himself; being most profitable for the
increasing of our graces, and for live promoting of a happy life: and that is
that he choose unto himself one day every month, in which he sequestrate
himself from external negotiations, and bestow it on himself, in diligent
and wise examination of his life end manners. This day thou must pray more
devoutly, and give move time to reading of Scripturs. But chiefly herein, thou
must be employed, to become a censor of thy self, and a severe judge of thy
own actions. Consider therefore the things that are above thee, whether thou
have fervently served God, and longed for heavenly things. Consider the things
beneath thee, if thou have tamed thy body and restrained thy senses and
affections; consider the things about thee, if thou have cut off superfluous
things, moderatly taken necessary things, and walked holily before thy
brethren. Consider the things within thy self; if thou have had purer
thoughts, if thou have increased any grace or virtue, and if thou have lived
with more tranquillity.

Think with thy self, that it has been said unto thee, that thou art a
Sun: and of the Sun it is thus written, that it rises and sets, Eccles.
1.
and returns to the place where it rises. Therefore as a mystical and
spiritual Sun do thou never exceed thy calling, no more then the Sun does
his Zodiac, but running all thy course within that compass, labor to
enlighten all men with the example of thy life. Sometimes lift up thy self by
prayer above all corruptible things: sometimes by holy actions draw near unto
thy neighbors in helping them: and after thou have thus labored for some
time, return unto thy place, namely to the repose of viewing and amending thy
defects, and say unto thy soul; return O my soul unto thy rest because the
Lord has blessed thee. And what blessing can be greater, then to help us to
live holily, to move us to return into our selves; to find strength in holy
life, and rest and tranquillity of Conscience? But for such whose places of
service will not fitly allow so large a time as one day in a month for this
exercise, let them, if fitly they can steal some few hours from their
necessary employments, to be bestowed in this exercise of their amendment,
and gayning of a spiritual rest. If they cannot gain so much time, yet let
them not be grieved at it, for they may live with such care of conscience even
in the midst of employments, that they shall not stand need of this exercise.

5 The thing which are every year to be done.
1 IT will help much to advance piety, if every year, we set apart some
certain days for the renewing of the actions of a spiritual and holy life.
The Philosophers have determined that a natural motion is very flow at the
beginning, but swift at the end, but a violent motion is swift at the beginning
and very slow at the end. As for the purpose, if a great and weighty thing
should naturally descend downwards, it would slowly begin to fall down wards:
but the nerer it came to the center, the more swiftly it would approach the
center, that it might rest in it. But if a stone were violently thrown up into
the air, it would begin to ascend with great celerity, but after a while, it
would begin to slack his course, and grow, as it were, fainte and weary. Hence
may we evidently gather the necessity of renewing our spirits. For our nature
being by sin corrupted, has incuired this great evil that it easily
discends to the vile and abject things of this world, as if it were natural
unto it, but to ascend upwards, and to breath after heavenly things is a
violent motion. It is true that virtue is according to man's reasonable nature;
as the school teaches, and vice and sin, Aqui. 1.2. q. 71.
against nature; but because the appetite of our first parents by original
sin, did make a defection from reason, shaking of his yoke, and by
intemperancy and immoderation subiecting reason to appetite; hence it is that
man, whom appetite does rule, abhorres virtue as an Island, and inclines and
runs his course to sin and iniquity, as to his most pleasant nourishment.
Therefore being inclined and propense to evil, by how much as he is more
wicked, by so much more vehemently and vnbrideledly he bends himself to it:
and in respect of the appetite which is auerse from the true good, the longer
he is carried toward it, the slowlier and coldlier be feels himself to go
on.

What then shall he do that would gladly profit in godliness, and not go
slowly on in so happy a journey? Surel^^ even as an Archer that would shoot
his arrow through many distances of miles, does first shoot as strongly as he
can toward that place whither he intends to go; and where his arrow lights,
takes it up again and shootes forewards, and makes many shootes, sporting
himself till he come to his iourneies end; so must he that labors for
increase of graces, in the beginning of his conversion; with great fervor and
strength of mind shoot at the desired end of happiness and after many times
drawing the bow of his mind, and finding it weak and cold, to set upon it
with a new fervor, and shoot again and again till he come in time to the
(...) where he would be.

It is the nature of this life of ours, so to dispose of all things, that they
all wax old, and by little and little come to ruin: and even when no
discommodities do encounter us, only by lapse of time, we grow old, and make
have to death. Even the heavens themselves, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 102.
shall perish, they shall wax old as a garment, thou shall change them and
they shall be changed, but thou remainest for ever. If the Heavens wax old,
because they stand need of renouation and change, how much more, shall
corruptible things hasten to old age?

A renouation therefore is earnestly to be sought for, as the examples of all
godly men do show. Therefore says the Apostle, We saint not, but though our
outward man perish, 2. Cor. 4.
yet the inward man is renewed daily: and this is the daily renewing, when
prositing in sanctity, we transfer our love from temporal things to eternal,
from visible things, to intelligible, from carnal to spiritual. And this
renouation is that which the Prophet speaks of, comparing it to the renewing
of the Egle. Which some do thus expound: Ier.
that the Egle when she grows old, and her feathers and eyes decay, she
seeks out a fountain, and clapping her wings, and making herself hoate,
dives three times into the water; and so her eyes are healed, and she is
restored to her youth: Aug.
but another, says thus: that when by the immoderate growth of her beak
through age still increasing, she cannot take her meat; the upper part of it
being so crooked over the lower part, that she cannot open her mouth, and so by
that means can take no food to sustain her: she then finding her self to
languish, age and poverty growing on, by a natural instinct to renew her
youth, comes to some rock and by much whetting and beating it against the
same, brings it to such a proportion with the lower part of her beak, that she
can well^ receive her meat; and so by little and ^little all things are
repaired, and so after old age, becomes young again. The strength of all her
members returns, the beauty of all her plumes, the government of her wings,
she slies as high as ever before, and there is in her, as it were, a certain
resurrection.

And even so, our spiritual renouation is no other, but when the soul does
duck and diue it self into the waters of compunction and repentance, conceiues
a new heat of zeal, castes off the old wings and feathers of sins, and
constantly castes away the beak, that is, all things that hinder us from
taking the food of prayer. Then shall our desires* of Holiness which before
were deaded, lift up themselves, then shall thou obtain of the Lord, that
which thou soughtest, that which thou ask, that for which thou mournest and
weepest.

All things that are in this life are sometimes renewed; that they may not
perish, and the things that are not renewed, albeit they be very lasting, yet
at length they die and perish. Kingdoms are renewed: 2. Sam. 11. Esd. 3.5. 1.
Match. 1.
Cities are renewed, Temples are renewed: Friendships are renewed. Nay man
himself after hoe had sinned was cast out of Paradise least he should be
renewed and live for ever. Genesis 3.


Therefore whosoever will live happily, must be renewed; let him renew his
Kingdom that he may reign over his own heart and affections; let him renew
the city of his soul, and restore the breaches that sin has made. Let him
renew the temple of his spirit in which GOD dwells, by the access of holy
desires: Let him renew his friendship with God by the instruments of prayer,
grown cold through disuse of familiarity. Let him by the imitation of Christ
reach fourth his hand to the tree of life, that he may now live as becomes a
holy man, and after this life, happily for ever. Thus persuades the Apostle,
Lay aside, 1. Pet. 2.
all Malice, all Deceit, Dissimulation, Envy, Detraction, and as newborn
babes, desire the sincere milk of the Gospel that ye may grow thereby; Not
every milk, but milk without deceit, whereby to grow up to eternal life.

All the whole time of this pilgrimage, is nothing else but a ^^me of
renouation, granted unto us to cast of the old man and to follow the new man
Christ, walking in newness of life: but yet there is some help to be taken by
using this special time of renouation seeing we do every day so soil our
garments and defile our Consciences. And surely less then once a year, who is
it that can renew himselse? Do we not often in a year renew our suits and
garments? And shall we have less care of the soul then the carcass? Why
then should we not often, or at least, once in a year, bestow a new suite upon
the soul, or else patch up the old one? But take heed of patching; for God
loves a new creature: He will have all new, or none at all. Ambr.
In a word: he is rightly renewed, that is changed from the darkness of his
sins, into the light and grace of virtues, that being before more stinking
then a dunghill, is now become more white then snow.

2 Because continual labor even in profitable things and worthy of all our
love, is a weriso^nnesse to the spirit, and makes it less able to perform the
duties required: Therefore ease thy self for some time, and dis-burthen thy
mind of those serious things, that thou may rest and resume strength. The
mind must have some remission, that it may rise up the more sharp. As we
must not incessantly command fruitful fields, for their fertility will soon
be exhausted if they rest not, so the daily labor of the mind breaks the
strength of it. A little remission and relaxation will recover strength: But
dullness of mind arises from assiduity of labors. Of purpose men use to
unbend their bows, that in their time, they may with profit be bent again;
which if they have no relaxation, will by being continually bent loose the
strength of hitting the mark. So in the exercise of the mind, virtue is
sometime reserved, when by discretion it is pretermitted; that afterward it
may the more strongly hit vices, by how much in the mean time it wisely ceased
from smiting. A key if it be turned one way shuts the lock, but turned
another way opens it: so the mind intending outward things, disposes and
keeps them, but turned unto God and inward things, opens the door of Gods
mercy, to fetch out the treasures of heavenly gifts, except thou shall move
thy self toward this side, and except thou shall receive from GOD, that which
thou gave, thou shall not have any thing at all to give. Wisely therefore did
that good father speak: Ber.
to wait upon God is not to be idle: nay of all b^si^esse is the great^^
besi^e^se, be^a^^e from this idleness, do forces proceed to work, and he
that knows wisely for a time to rest, shall after know strongly and profitably
to labor; God himself inuiting us to rest by his example and resting the
seventh day.

6 The things which are ever more to be done.
THere is no question, but that evermore vices are to be shunned, and virtues
embraced: ever we must insist in doing good; and fighting against Satan and all
his deceits. But more particularly for our purpose we will reduce them into
these three ranks. 1. Our duty toward God. 2. To wards our selves. 3. Toward
our neighbors.

1 To wards Gods these points following must ever be observed. 1. The presence
of God, think ever thou do hear him, saying, Do not I fill hea^e a and
earth. And behold him as a witness of thy though and desires and a beholder of
^er. 23.
thy words and works. He compasses the on every hand, and if thou were in the
bottom of the sea, he conteines with his Deity, all above, thee, below thee,
on the right hand and left, before and behind, and that Great Lord and wise
Judge lies had even within thy self. This cogitation, that God is present,
that he sees all thy inwards and outward, let it never depart from thee, and
so dispose thy life, compose thy conversation that as much as man's frailty will
suffer, thou need not blush that God should behold thee. In the beginning of
every work offer it to him, in the continuance behold him, in the end resolve
to please him, for his sake to end it. If thou shall attain this gift,
whether thou be idle or in business whether alone or with others, thou know
to contemplate God standing by thee, thou shall sooner then thou think,
attain to a great increase of graces.

2. The love of God. Thou shall love thy Lord God with all thy heart, all thy
soul, all thy mind. Love him with the heart, directing all thy thoughts and
desires to him. Love him with thy work, keeping his commandments: love him
only, turning thy will from all created things: love him diligently,
performing all things that belongs to his obedience with diligence: love him
purely, in nothing seeking thy self: love him freely, constantly casting away
all things that oppose his love. Love him gratis, looking from his love nothing
but his good pleasure. Love him strongly, suffering ^all things for him
patiently. Love him perseuerantly, never pulling thy self from his desire and
obedience. These thou shall do, if thou do contemplate him, as the chief
good, as goodness it solfe, as the fountain of all good things. If also thou
shall daily with earuest prayers beg this love, if thou labor by all good
means to keep thy self clean from all leprous pollution and filthiness.

3 The fear of God. Fear the Lord thy God because he is thy Lord, and
requires it; if I be your Lord, where is my fear? Fear him, because after
he has slain the body, he can also kill the soul and send it into h^l fire.
Fear him because his judgments are incomprehensible, and his ways past
finding out, and thou know not what shall become of thee. Fear him, not as
a servant, for fear of punishment, but as a most loving and faithful child,
least thou should incur his displeasure. Fear him, least thou should be
separate from him, in whom is all good, and from whom, if thou be separate,
thou drawest to thy self all evil and misery. Fear great sins, because
they separate from God: fear small ones for they set open the gates unto
great: lastly fear the Lord, for his fear is the beginning of all good: for
nothing shall be wanting to them that fear the Lord: and those that secke him
by chaste and holy fear shall not be destitute of any good. From this fear
proceeds intimous reucrence, whereby thou learnest to adore him in spirit.

4. Zeal of Gods glory. Be inkindled wilh the zeal of the glory of thy God,
which may eat up thy heart, and consume thy soul with forrow. Consider that
the Lord is thy husband, whom heretics contemn, the Jews do mock,
Idolaters and infidels know not: all manner of sinners do with infinite
injuries affect him; most part even of the best men and his dear children do
but coldly and negligently serve him: and wilt not thou that see this, labor
to put away these injuries, and gain thy husbands honor, and for so great
iniurses wilt not thou intimoufly grieve? therefore let this be thy care, ever
to seek the glory of God and salvation of souls, and both by prayer, holy
example, and all other good means, to help to promote the glory of God.
Forget thy own profit and quiet, contemn thy own honor, and spare not to
meet with any difficulty, that thou may promote the glory of the Lord.

5. The praise of God. Praise thy Lord God ever, because not only worthy to
be praised, but above all praise. Praise him with thy tongue, praise him with
thy work and life: the prayer of lips and life is best of all. That as the
heavens by their beauty and brightness declare the glory of God, and the
firmament with as many tongues as stars show forth his handy work, so thou by
sanctity of life shall praise the Lord, and shall inuit as many as see he, to
praise and magnify his name. So let the light of thy life shine before men,
that seeing thy good works they may glorisie thy father which is in heaven.

Praise him with thy tongue, so that it continually may begin in thy heart, and
resound in thy mouth. Evermore reuolue the mysteries of Christ, the attributes
of thy God in thy mind, and all his admirable perfections extol with
thytongue. All his creatures praise him, thou being one he has done most for,
be not thou sloathfull to set forth his praise.

6. Thankfulness to God. Ever give him thanks: for it is just, that re ceiuing
every moment benefits, thou should answer him every moment if it were
possible infinite thanks. There is no moment, wherein thou receiuest not from
God, being, life, sense, understanding, and all other good things natural and
supernatural in thee or about thee: if therefore when thou receiuest a benefit
from man by and by thou thankest him; shall thou not be most ingrate to God, in
receiving so many blessings and giving so few thanks? Give him thanks therefore
for thy prosperity, because given for thy comfort: and for thy adversities and
crosses, because given for thy correction and increase of thy crown. Thank
him for spiritual gifts, because they enrich the soul, for temporal, because
they serve the body the habitation of the soul. Thank him for things given to
thy self, because they belong to thy self; and for things given to thy
neighbors, because they belong to thy brethren; to whom thou art joined in
love. Let thy heart evermore break forth a good word of thanksgiving, and thy
mouth in every success set forth his praise, that whilst thou give thanks
for continued benenfits, thou may be disposed to receive greater mercies.

7. Resignation of our selves to the will of God. Leave all thine and all thy
felfe in the hands of God: Commit thy self unto him resign thy self fully
into his hands, that he may do with thee what seems best in his eyes. Say
often, thy will be done, but with all embrace his will in thy will. For we
often say with the mouth, and resist it with our desire and purpose; we offer
it him in word, but we retain it indeed; We give it him in speech, but in
action we foolishly resist GOD when he would take his own. Do not thou so:
but know that thou art not thy own but GODS; thine are not thine, but GODS:
Therefore thou medlest with another man's gods against his will, and so in the
day of judgment shall be condemned of theft. Be thou before the Lord as a table
clean wherein nothing is written, that he may write in thee what he
pleases. Be as the clay in the hand of the potter, that he may break thee or
make thee, and being made, may set thee in a higher or lower place. Look upon
all thou have, thy Life, Health, honors, comforts. And all thou possessest,
not as on thy own, but as on things lent thee, and be ready to render them to
him, that liberally lent them. He loves thee infinitely more then thou do thy
self; therefore thou ought to put thy self into his hands, to do with
thee both now and in all eternity, what he pleases.

2 Our duty toward our brethren. Where consider 1. In thy brother thou must
regard to think and behold not so much man as God: for God is in every thing
by his essence, presence and power, but chiefly and in an excellent manner in
man. Therefore it is fit that in every thing, but especially in man, we behold
God. Therefore when thou see or speak with thy brother thou should not
so much behold his aspect with the eyes ^^^che flesh, as God dwelling in hi^^^
with the eyes of thy ^unde. To obtain this; is a great gift of God. For so
shall thou not be affected either to his youth or beauty, or abhor the aged,
lame and sick, and shall obtain a wonderful purity of mind and a singular
familiarity with God.

2 The love of our brethren. Love thy neighbor as thy self, is the precept:
and is like that great commandment of the love of God: for it commands love;
and commands it for Gods sake, and in his amplitude includes all the
commandments for he that loves his neighbor has fulfilled the Law. Therefore
love thy neighbor with true and pure love, Romans 13.8
not for gain, nor for any created thing, but only for thy God. This thou
shall do, if thou shall not conteinue thy brethren in thy heart, if thou shall
not judge them rashly, if thou shall not brawle with them, if neither in word
or deed thou shall harm them, if according to thy ability thou help them. To
conclud, if thou perform that is written; not to do unto another what thou
would not have done to thy felfe. Nor is this love difficult, if thou do
contemplate God in thy brother, if thou remembrest that he is holden in high
esteem with God; if thou shall think that he is the son of God, ordained
unto glory, and unto thee profitable.

3. Affability to all men, and good example. Acco^modate thy self to all men:
speak gently to all: let no in-urbanity or in-ciuility or rusticity appear in
thee to offend any. A sweet talk multiplieth friends, and pacifieth them that
be at variance; a sweet tongue increases much good talk. Sir. 6.
Therefore so converse amongst all men, that all may love thee, and every one
desire thy company.

To all men give good example, and spread abroad the savor of sanctity, and
being made the good savor of Christ in every place, thou may not only praise
him with thy own mouth, but with all men's mouths. For thou do praise him
even with the mouth and heart of others, whom by the purity of thy life thou
inuitest to praise him. This thou shall do, if in the good works thou
show, and circumspection thou keep, thou seek not thy own, but the
praise and glory of GOD. Therefore do nothing whereby others may take any
scandal or offense, or occasion of living at more liberty.

4. Honor of our brethren. Go one before another in giving honor. It is pride
to expect from others the signs of honor, and not rather to preuene them in
giving honor. Show thy humility in honoring others, not in hunting after honor:
Let none pass by thee without honor, let none come to thee without honor. Yea
even thou shall honor God dwelling in men, when thou give due honor to every
man according to his place.

5. One to bear another burden. Our defects are great burdens, by which we
sometimes become intolerable to others. Therefore the defects and churlish
manners of our brethren must be born withal, that so we may fulfill the Law of
charity. Measure others by thy self: I know thou seeft in thy own
conversation many defects, which thou would have other men to bear. So must
thou do with others, except thou will with diverse weights and diverse
measures, measures other men's and thy own, which is abominable. Therefore
bear, that thou may be born with all, dissemble others light defects, that
thy great ones may be dissembled, be thou silent, that thy miscries may be
silenced.

6 Help one another. Be profitable to all and by thy industry help them for
the love of God. Help by thy Prayers, imploring Gods mercy for them? Help
with holy desires, coveting the fruit of their labors with the Lord, be they
corporal or spiritual: help with thy speech when thy wisdom finds
opportunity exhorting to all things fitting and honest: help by thy example of
life; and help by all the means which GOD has given thee. For to this end
have thou received them to be Gods Steward.

7 Live circumspectly. Love all, but be familiar only with the godly. For he
that touches pitch shall be defiled with it, Sir. 13.
and he that is familiar with the proud will be like unto him. Nor be too
familiar with any, for out of doubt it spends and consumes the time, distracts
the heart, and makes two men offend at once.

3 Our duty toward our selves, where consider. 1. The care of modesty. In all
thy actions be mindful of modesty, and so behave thy self that thou no less
respect thy self, then others beholding thee. Modesty is not only a virtue,
but the ornament of all virtues. It it that which with men gains estimation:
because by the aspect of the face, and those things which they see outwardly,
they are wont to measure our inward parts. And as it is a Judge of inward
serenity and fairness, so is it wont to keep the same amongst all occasions
of trouble. Therefore thou shall show thy self modest, as well in the
cleerenesse of thy countenance, as gracefulness of thy gate, and in the
moderation of all outward actions; so that these outward things may show the
inward tranquillity, to edify all; and may show some image as it were of
Christ whose modesty was so admirable, that Paul besought the Corinthians by
the meekness and gentleness of Christ. 2. Cor. 10.


2 The contempt of ones self. Learn to discuss thy self, to Judge, blame,
and contemn thy self. It is a knowledge more profitable to know to despise
ones self, then to know the amplitude of heaven and earth. This Science of the
knowledge of our selves does ever cast in wholesome and profitable counsels,
tending to the humble despising of our selves. Therefore turn thy eyes from
those things which thou think are good and excellent in thy self, for they
are not thine but Gods, who gave them gratis without thy desert; and behold in
thy self the things that are abject and despicable, for these are thy own
proceeding from thy corrupt nature; and for these argue and despise thy self:
Let thy words savor of the contempt of thy self: and desire to hear the same
from others, concerning thee, and let not the baulme of flattery break thy
head. Flee applauses, flee the world; and hearken to such willingly, who
sincerely speak truth and do reprehend in thee what is worthy of reproof. If
thou shall thus contemn thy self and love thy contemners, God shall love thee
as the apple of his eye, and shall adorn thee with great blessings of the
spirit: for this holy hatred wherewith one hates himself, God does abundantly
recompense with his love.

3 A general abnegation of our selves. This is Christ's rule: If any will be
my Disciple, Math. 16.24.
let him deny himself take up the Cross and follow me. This word (himself)
does not design one part of the man, but the whole man to be denied.
Therefore if any will insist in Christ's steps, he must take up this general
denying of himself mortify thy senses inward and outward, command thy
appetites, restrain thy judgment and will. Chiefly bridle the two tongues of
body and soul; the tongue of the body, that it speak not hurtful and
unprofitable things. The tongue of the soul, that is thy thought, that it do
not harbor and utter vain impure, unfruitful things: if thou shall tame these
two beasts, the tongue of thy self and thy cogitation, thou shall wonderfully
dispose thy self to the familiarity of God. For God vouchsafes to speak to
them, whom he sees abstain from vain words, and as much as they can, do
recall their thoughts to one, that is to God himself.

4 To beat down the body. This rebel flesh is ever in arms against the
spirit: Therefore that it may not overcome, let the spirit take arms against
the flesh and by watching, fasting, prayer, and such holy helps, labor to
bring it in subjection. Beasts are not persuaded with reasons or arguments to
obey men. The flesh is a beast, which thou shall never tame by consideration
alone, without some castigation, or subtraction of food, as men use to do,
that tame beasts.

5 Tranquillity of heart. Think thou have done nothing, until thou have
obtained this. Let not thy own defects disquiet thee; but presently as soon as
thou fallest into any sin, out of the love of God, detest it, return to
peace, and commit thy self and all thine to Christ. Let not adversities
trouble thee, think they will not tarry, nor that they came without the good
will and providence of God. The tranquillity of the heart depends upon the
purity of it. For small sins tear the heart, but for inordinate affections
excruciate and torment it. Profane business do gripe the heart, and such as
belong not to our calling infect it. If therefore thou will have a quiet heart,
shun even the least sins, those thou shunnest not, presently repent thee of
them, moderate thy affections, flee profane business and withdraw thy self
from all that belongs not to thy calling.

6 Is discretion. In these things hitherto treated of, and in all others, there
is great need of discretion, whereby thou should consider, the times,
places, the persons, thy self, and such with whom thou dealest, thy state and
manner of conversation, and according as reason, circumstances and the
qualities of things and persons, shall dictate and direct thee, so thou
should carry thy self in things that do occur and offer themselves. Many
things there are which do displease God, trouble thy neighbor, and hurt thy
self, because not seasoned with the salt of discretion: the same things if they
were discreetely don, would be of great acceptance both with God and man: but
the discretion which thou have not, let it be supplied with prayer and recourse
unto God and with the counsels of prudent and wise men. For he that in
doubtful thing resorts to GOD and the counsels of the wise shall never err.
If therefore thou shall observe these duties unto God, thy neighbor, and thy
self, thou shall wonderfully profit in sanctification of life.

7 Prayer. O Lord God, whose all that is, that is best of all, who co^mandest
thy servants to shine with virtues the true ensigns of thy house, and sendest
into their hearts the desire of such excellent beauty; kindle I beseech thee in
our hearts, the flaming desires of all virtues, teach us with prayers and
groans to seek and obtain them at thy hands, that our unworthiness for the
worthiness of thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ may obtain of thee who art a
most bountiful giver, these true and ever enduring treasures. Teach us the
nature of virtues, that we take not vices for virtues: stir up in us the
love of them, that we may love them and thee the author of them: strengthen our
arms by the help of thy grace, that we by holy lives setting upon the City
of glory, may through the merits of Christ be possessors of it: let our life be
the life of the righteous, that we may die in Christ, and live in thee for
ever. Amen.

The conclusion of the Book.
IF shall be objected, that this manner of serving of God is most troublesome
and withal most impossible in repect of our many frailties, miseries, and also
our necessary and alloweable employments in our vocations: I answer that
having fully acquainted our selves with the several rules and instructions
contained in this book, the greatest part of bodily labor in the service of
God will easily be cut off, and we shall lay for a foundation that of the
Apostles, that bodily exercise profiting but little, 1. Tim. 4.
our chief care must be to reverence and love God in our minds, holy
cogitations, and good desires, albeit yet those duties of our bodies may not as
time and place will give leave, be utterly neglected. For it is godliness
only that is profitable unto all things.

But besides, seeing we are to give an account unto God for the expense of our
times, as the most precious gift of God; it is very necessary, that every man
have a knowledge of some profitable form of serving GOD, that he may thereby
labor so to spend the four and twenty hours of the day, and so consequently
all the days of his life: that he may assure his own conscience, this his
life has been life indeed and not death, and so may obtain the glory of
eternal life, and avoid eternal death in which all they do ever die that
live in these insinit streights of the world, and do not make use of their
most dear and precious time, to that end for which it was leut them, namely to
know, love, fear and reverence God, and to delight only in him and the things
directed unto him.

Therefore experience teaches us that there are three considerations which do
not only inuit, but ought also to enforce every man but especially great
persons, (who think themselves most exe^pted from this kind of serving God)
duly and in such a straight and exact manner as this is, to serve God. The 1.
is the nobility, of him which serves. The 2. is his greatness and goodness
who^ we serve. The 3. is hope of reward. These 3. if we do rightly consider
the^, with many other motives very effectual hereunto, will casily so command
our affections that we shall never omit to serve the high God in this sort.

1 The nobility of him that serves ought to move him to serve well. For a
generous mind in some sort compels a generous man to perform the task he has
vndertake^, after the most sublime and excellent manner that possibly he can,
and that especially when he has to do with great noble and generous persons.
Therefore every man (as much as is belonging to this business) must consider
what himself is and of how great nobility and worth: And thus doing, we shall
find our selves to be of much more excellency then the heavens, nay the whole
frame of the world; seeing we are created after the image and similitude of
God, and are his Sons, if we serve him a right, and shall be heirs of his
eternal Kingdom. This nobility of ours ought much to incite us rightly and
duly to serve God.

For albeit we may omit, that it is just, that the generous should use his
generosity, through his fidelity to serve duly; nothing else does so much
effect, that generous and noble persons may come nere to that most high and
true nobility which they wish, as to serve the most high God. For thus, Psalm.
82.1.
of men, they become Gods, and so become far more noble, then if they were
borne of the kings line. For that is true liberty and nobility and that only
in which the service of Christ is found to be. If the Son do make us free
then are we free indeed: Io. 8.36.
if he inoble us then are we truly inobled.

And surely this is not without great reason: Matthew. 24.47.
for only those shall be kings of heaven and rulers over all their Masters
goods. As the holy Gospel tells us; Yea and in earth shall be more eminent
and high then the kings of the earth. For in commanding themselves, they do
also command whatsoever things else. But al those that serve not Christ, are
not only the sons of Satan, but even at length are made his most vile slaves
in eternal darkness. Therefore if there be any whom the former cause,
namely, that he may obtain most excellent liberty dominion and nobility does
not inuit to serve God, surely that man ought to be terrified with the great
evil which in the second place is noted, namely that so he becomes the son
and slave of the devil, and for this cause should strive with all his powers to
serve God.

2 We must also ponder the greatness and dominion and the bounty and
goodness of him, for whose service we were created. And we shall find that
the dominion which God has over every one of us, and also over all the Kings
and great Potentates and States both in heaven and earth, is without al
comparison greater, then the dominion that all the Kings and great ones of the
world has above one base basket of earth: nor are they indeed the true Lords
of so much: but God is so the Lord of all them, that with one only blast he can
turn them unto nothing, and plunge them all into the deep dungeon of hell;
except they shall serve him: but if they will serve him, he shall so exalt them
in another life, that they shall truly acknowledge that whatsoever they
possessed here, was nothing else, but a base basket of earth, compared unto
those worthy things which there they shall enjoy.

There is no cause that we should in many words extol the greatness of this
Lord: for albeit we should never cease, yet should it be nothing that we had
said in respect of that which the thing is. And I am resolved to dispatch these
things in few words that they may make the better impression in our memories:
Therefore it is most just that we should serve so Great a LORD, in respect of
whom all creatures in heaven and earth are of so small esteem as a drop of
water to the Ocean.

Nor shall his goodness (methinkes) less inuit us, which we ought in every
moment of our lives a thousand times to recount. Surely, amongst the abject men
of the world, it would be accounted for a great favor, if some King, or great
Lord should for their love, inuit them unto him, by rewards, when for some
foul Treason committed against their said King or Lord, he might justly take
a severe revenge, of them. Yet should his bounty and goodness appear to be
greater, if for such Traitors, such a Lord should expose himself to many
afflictions and death it self.

But yet above all these, beyond all comparison, does the goodness of GOD
shine toward us. For being of so great Majesty and standing need of nothing,
yet he choose to lead a life of so great labors and sorrows, until by most
cruel torments he laid it down, that he might give life unto them that
were worthy of death: and that he might enrich them with more sublime life and
eternal riches which were such ingrate Traitors unto him.

This Great GOD of his infinite goodness, besides the benefits we have spoken
of, has also commanded his Angels continually to serve and guarde us: He has
commanded that heaven and earth should not for a moment of time cease from our
service. And besides all these, that he might show his exceeding goodness the
more abundantly, he has promised to be with us to the end of the world.
He procures by innumerable means, that we should increase in all true good:
nor does he at any time consent that those which serve him, shall be
afflicted, but under condition, that by the same, there may much good come unto
them: for he more desires our good, then we out selves. But indeed I ask,
what will he not do for our good, who was contented for us, with so great
afflictions to deliver himself unto death? Surely whatsoever can herein be
spoken, is nothing to him that shall attentively consider these things.

3 I also said, that, to the end we might be the more animated to serve this so
Great and good a LORD, we ought to consider the greatness of rewards, we
expect, if we do serve him: and seeing they are so great that the whole world
suffices not to express or conceive them; 1. Cor. 2.9.
let it suffice for this present consideration; that it were a far more
sorrowful message, if it were showed but to the least of them that live in
Heaven; that GOD had determined to take him thence and to make him King of the
whole World; then if it were showed to some King of the Earth, that GOD would
the next day deprive him of his Kingdom, and suffer him for to be thrust
through with his own Subjects spears. This is so true, and need so little
proof, that no man doubteh of it, but he that Judges ill of all Truth.

And surely, if he who serves GOD should not expect these great and excellent
rewards in Heaven, but only peace, full of the joy of the heart, which they
do possess in this life that give themselves to holiness, and the contempt
and reiection of the vanities of this world: and that they might be freed from
the miserable and never contented or quieted life which they live that live in
sin; even that only ought to suffice hereunto that our whole life should be
dedicated to the service of this Great GOD, how much more, whilst we expect
so great and excellent rewards, even such as no man can express.

Therefore he that considers these things, and is not stirred up and animated
to serve God, let him certainly know, that he is benumbed with the sleep of
death: yet let him not omit to labor that he may be stirred up, for God is
ready to give remedy to our diseases, if with humility we do as much as in
us lies.

But if any be not stirred up with these things; it is good for him to search
in himself, and to get some remedy, if happily he be obnoxious to some
secret sin, of which he has had no remorse of conscience: which if he find,
let him minister a remedy by true amendment and repentance, and he shall by
and by feel health and strength to do all that is good: and this sweet sin
may be called inordinate love, which begets some inflation and swelling in
the soul. And hence it is that God often forsakes us, and gives no remedy to
our dulnes, till we find out and amend that secret fault; for we must not
only serve GOD in some things which he commands, but in all: nor must we
desire to understand in his service, that only which is pleasant, or not very
grievous, but even that which for our pride and malice shall be very laborious:
therefore let all men be moved by these three considerations, to acknowledge
that they ought to serve this God even in the highest and strictest course that
is here proposed.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, and are to be sold by Thomas Adams, at the
sign of the Bell in Paul's Churchyard. 1617.


