THE JUSTIFICATION OF MAN BY FAITH ONLY: MADE AND WRITTEN by Phylyp
Melanchton. and Translated out of the Latin in to this our mother tongue by
Nicholas Less of London

AN APOLOGY OR Defense of the word of God, declaringe what a necess^ry thing
it is, to be in all men's hands, the want whereof is the only cause of al
ungodliness committed through the whole earth, made by the said Nicholas Less.

Augustinus in Psalm. 31. Si vis esse alienus a gratia iacta merita tua.

TO THE MYGHTIE AND VICTORIOVS PRINCE Edward by the grace of God duke of
Somerset, Lord gouernoure most fortunate of the King his highness own
proper person, and Lord Protector of the Realms of England and Irelande,
with the rest of the King his dominions on both side the Seas. Nicholas Less
of London desyrethe good health both of body and mind with long continuance
therein to the pleasure of the Lord.
COnsidering and pondering with my self (most noble Lord and very friend
of God) the great diversity of opinions not only in this Realm but in all
other realms and dominions, risen and spronge for lack of the true knowledge
of the word of God, concerning the iustificacion of man, beside the great
variaunce and mortal hatred, not only between man and man but also between
Realm and Realm that almost no country, no region, or place, is void of
this and such like kind of controversies, to no small dystructyon of
Christians: the matter being in the time of Lent last past (which was in the
year of our lord. 1547. by the King his grace his own subjects before his
highness in his Chapel most clarkely and connyngly declared and made open
that nothing could be desired more: it seemed to me a thing very necessary
and expediente: among many, which have written on this article: according to
good and sincere doctrine, to select and chose on (...) doing: whose labor
and payns should seem to me so fruytfull: whose reasons so pl^^ne, so mete for
the capacity of al men to be perceived and understood: that for the common
profit and lerninge of all men (which are willing to know and learn the
truth): it should seem to me no labor, no pain, but great pleasure and
comfort, to translate it into this our mother tongue. That like wise as they
have been instructed and taught by the lively voice of godly and learned
preachers: so they may being at home in their houses, certify and confyrme
their own conscience, every man as God will give him grace to receive it.

OF the which article of Justification: for as much as there be three sundry
opinions and minds of men, so diverse so contrary and different one from that
other that almost no blak^i^s more contrary to white, being no likeness of
similitude and agreement in them every man for his persuasion with to the and
nail striuinnge and contendynge: that almost the whole some of our belefe is
now come to that case that it is nothing else but a bare contention, it is
nedeful (I say) therefore that there be set abroad to all the king his most
loving subjects in writing some perfect instruction (all other fantasies
and opinions said aside (wherein being learned they may know certainly whereto
they may-stycke and confyrme their minds.

There is one kind of men which contend that by their own works and
merits, they are justified, to whom their sauyoure and redemer is of none
effect and serves for no purpose except it be to their condempnation, because
they do refuse so gentle and loving a sauyoure, making and deuysynge to them
selves, every man after his own phantasye a sundry sauyoure and redemer,
some one thyngesome an other. Papists, Jews.
The which sort of men are the foul and stynkynge Papystes, and also the
Jews. Of the which twain the Jews are least to be blamed: for as much as
the Papystes professynge the name of Christ do utterly deny Christ in byenge
and selling the salvation of man: none otherwise than Judas did bye and sell
his master. I fear me, that like mischefe will happen to them, as did to
Judas, which for sorrow most desperate, went a (...) ^^^^ed him self. The
Lord give them g^^^^ to repent while they be in the way. And as for works
they do drown men's conscience in them so much, that without they do them
as they be prescribed there shall remain no hope of salvation: more ready to
drive men headlynge into desperation, than to any trust of the blood of
Christ. The Jews are no Jews in comparation to these. They have the
Scriptures to serve for their purpose at the least they do make them to do
them service as the Devil, what time he tempted the Lord. If it would please
God to open the eyes of the Jews, that they might behold and se the light of
the right Messiah, which is come all ready to us: whom they yet look after,
they would deteste and abhor these foul Cankres they would not know them to
be any of the flock of Christ: but of Satan: to whom they do service of whom
they shall be rewarded.

An other sort there is, to whom Christ is somewhat more beholdynge not so
openly malicious as they be: but no less dangerous, for as much as they do
come more under color of virtue. At whose hands Christ lesyth not all his
labor, being allowed as yet for half a savior. Our salvation being cut
of in the mids: that one half to Christ: and that other to their own
works ascrybed. Hipocrites
These be the holy Hipocrites which perceiving and seeing the light of the
Gospel so shynynge abroad all the world, that their abominable traytery to
God can no longer be hid, do now at the last mitigate and swage some thing
that great and foul error, wherein they made Christ to lose all his labor,
all his pains, all his bloodshed as much as lay in them. They do sause it (I
say) with Sewgar: they do myxe Honey with Poison to begyle the poor souls the
more craftily and subtyllye, saying that with works and faith together they
must or justified, so that from our justification in no case they will exclude
works: for none other purpose, but to maynteyne and hold up the filthy
dignity of those works which they have invented by their own brayns for
lucre sake The word of God, The word of God is Triacle to the soul.
which is the most fyneste Triacle that may be: can not chose but expel this
deadelye Poison from the heart of man.

T^ third sort knowledgyng and confessing Christ in his own kind: that he
is the only savior, the only redemer, True prechers.
our only mediator and advocate, which shewethe to his father in our cause
his bloody payns, which he has suffered and passed for us these men do teach
that only by faith every Chrystyan man is justified in the blood of the
Lamb, which is Christ. Not there by excludynge repentance and good works
from our life: Good works.
as the Papystes, and Hypocrytes do continuallye bark and blaspheme: but
excludynge them from the cause of our justification, The cause of our
justification.
which cause is only Christ and his merits These be those men which would
feign that Christ had his right and his honor not mynyshed: these men will
and teach him to be a whole savior: not scanteled, mangeled, peced and
botched Of these sort of new learned men was John Baptyste: John Ba^tyst.
which for all that he taught the people repentance and knowleginge of their
sin, yet for all that he declared, that all that would not serve them, did
they never so much, showing to the people with his finger him which should be
their savior, which came down for none other cause but to take away the
sin of man. If there had been any other thing beside him, wherein our
salvation should consist: he would not have said, behold the Lamb of God
which take the away the sin of the world, he would have been well ware of it:
he would not have spoken these words so plain to be any manner of occasion of
heresye or division, he would have said: look, yender is he, which may do
much in this cause: he shall be a great part of your salvation: but yet take
good head and trust not to much to him: John fyrs^ preached ^^pentaunce^
afterwar^ the Gospe^
trust to your works also or else ye may be deceived. This or such like
oration would he have made to his hearers. But he was well assured of the
contrary. And therefore he showed to them their sin, that they might se and
abhor their abomination of life: their fylthynes of manners: to the intent
they might be the more apt to receive comfort of the Gospel: which is the
glad tidinges. And so after he had rebuked them of their sin: with like
counsel to repent and to forsake their unhappy lewdness: then he taught them
the Gospel: that ^hriste should take away the sin, not of one or twain: or
of a few in nombre: but of all the whole world. To this brazen wall he
commanded them to lean hard: which is unable to be broken. If he had
spoken these words within these few years in London, Smithfeld ^ger san^uinis.
I think not the contrary but Smythfelde would have been to whote for him: he
should have learned, what it is to roste a faggot, he should have been taught
to know: how Iudicare came to Creed for his true preaching.

Thus the people being taught.iii. manner of sundry ways: every teacher
having his patron: his head: his bearer: having and making the Scriptures
for their purpose: how is it possible (most noble and Godly disposed Lord)
that the poor and simple people should be in an unity, Diversity ^f
prea^hynge cau^ethe dys^orde.
concord, and love. How is it possible the carte should go forward when the
horse drawers do pluck and draw sundry ways. What time shall a ship be
brought to her viage end, if every maryner styrrethe a contrary course: what
time would it be or these four persons should mete, if the one goes East,
another West, the third North, the fourth Southe: we must all go one way:
we must keep the king his high way, not turnynge into by paths and lanes for
lesyng and going forth of the right way, which is Christ We must keep all one
course to the port of salvation.

I do offer therefore: and exhibit to your grace the mind, judgment and
sentence of that noble clarke: and Godly deuyne Phylyp Melanchton: Phylypp
Melanchton.
a man for his intolerable payns and sweat, in setting forth the word of
God sustained by him: worthy to be had in most high estymatyon: touching
the article of our iustyfycatyon: by me translated forth of the Latyne into
English: by him so plainly: so openly set forth, his arguments, reasons,
examples, and auctorities being so many and so manifest: that every plowman,
which can find in his heart to learn to know to whom he shall cleave for
his salvation: may with no great payns ye in passing of his time come to the
knowledge: whereto he shall stand and stycke to for his salvation. Whose
doctryn in all matters: and specially in this, i^ so conformable and
correspondent to the Scriptures both old and new: not writhen nor wrasted
(as shall appear to the readers) that I think there be no man, which can be
so perverse and malicious that can find any fault therewith. Except he will
deny utterly Christ to be Christ and the Gospel to be true. If there be
any such (as there has been in deed: and I fear me there be many: which
loving the Devil as well as the Gospel will put away their servants: if
they may know that they do but ons smatter thereof) such I would wyssh to be
banyshed foor from al men's company: such would I desire to be in low
authority and rule: that they might do little harm or none, I would wisshe (I
say) that God of his infinite mercy would open their eyes that they might se
the light of their salvation that their eyes should be no more bleared with
the fantasies and auctorities of men.

This work because the learned as well as the unlearned might be full
instructed and led as it were by a line to the perfect knowledge and
understanding of this proposition. Only faith iustyfyethe. Therefore it is
divided into four parts.

The first conteynethe the declaratyon of this vocable and word Justice how
it is taken in the Philosophers and how with the Gospel, and what they be
both in effect, showing what the law of God does require of us: and what we
can perform of our own selfs. And at the last what remedy by what means
is to be had for our infyrmytye.

The second part doethe teach the right understanding of these vocables
and words. The law, the Gospel, Sin, Justification, Grace, and faith,
how and in what manner after the sincere doctryn of the Gospel every one of
these vocables must be taken. The blyndnes and ignorance whereof: has brought
so great darkness into the world: that the clear bryghtnesse of the Gospel
could not be perceived: but made dark, clowdye, and so mysty that men had
no list to have the word of God in their hands, as a thing most asperous and
bitter and fore from all comfort. The which thing did cause the ungracious
and perverse manner of interpretacion of the said vocables and words contrary
to the right sense and meaning of them. The right understanding and meaning
thereof perceived and known: that which semyd before dark and cloudye, shall
appear now bryghte, shynynge, like the son as clear as any Crystal: that
which was hard and rogged: shall be found soft and tender: and finally,
which semyd to be as bitter as Gall, shall be more sweet then any Honye. So great
an all teratyon shall the word of God bring with it.

And because that the Papystes do beat into the heads of the simple plain and
unlearned people to stir them to the hatred of the word of God, saying and
beatynge their hands that these new fellows they do teach no good works:
they bydde you do no more but believe, and you shall be saved, live you never so
licensiously, so lewdly. To convince them therefore of their most deuelyshe
malice and open sclaunder in the third part he speaks and teachethe good
works, what works, and how they must be done, how they shall be pleasant
and acceptable to God. The which works he callethe a Christian man's
obedience, A christian man's obedience.
which comes necessary after faith. In the which part he shewethe how
venyall sin is to be taken, and what sins they be which makethe us
destytute of grace and the holy Ghooste.

In the fourth and last part, like a most diligent Scholemayster, be
settethe forth one after an other all their Sophistical cauillations and
crooked arguments, where with they might deceive and begyle a right good
clerk that both you may know what they be, and how they are to be
dissolved and put away, which thing shall be very necessary to be marked,
that when men do hear them in their reasonynge wryenge and wrastynge the
word of god, they may stop their mouths with the right understanding of
it, that at the last they shall be ashamed to bring any more such durte
before men. At this point this Godly clerk finisheth his work very profitable
and necessary for all men. The which work I would exhort all men to read
earnestly and to mark the auctorities of the scriptures, by his Godly labor
gethered together for the use of other men. that they may have them at all
times in a redynes, to ferche them forth of their breasts as it were shaftes
out of a quyuer to serve their purpose to the mayntenaunce of the true word
and glory of God against the whole rabble of the Papystrie.

In consideration therefore of the most propensed and redye good will and
favor, which your grace always has borne, and does bear still to the
most heavenly word of God, and to the furderars thereof. I could deuysing
with my self find no man more fytte, to whom this treatise should be
dedicate and given better than to your grace. Whose natural inclynatyon to al
goodness to be very Godly, the most lucky and prosperous successes of all
your affairs (the Lord declarynge his especyall favor and love to your
grace ward, that again in his defense you should have a strong stretched
out arm against his enemies) do give so true and manyfeste euydence and
testyfycatyon, that all Chrystendome speakethe most honorable thereof.

To the which work of Iustyfycatyon I have annexed and set to, a little
matter: not vnfruytefull, I trust, called an Apologye or Defense of the word
of God, declaryng and proving how nedeful it is that the word of God be in
the hands of all men and common for all persons, showing also what great
inconuenyence comes by the lack thereof, being the only cause of all the
detestable enormities and vices which are wroughte and committed through all
the world. Wherewith as with an apple of mine own tree most lowly with all
reverence I submitting my self unto your grace do present and give,
trusting in the Lord that according to your old accustomable gentylnesse,
you will with no less good will receive and accept this mine enterprise, than
it was with a most pure and loving heart offered up. Whereby I am surely
certayned of.ii. commodytyes thereby received. First that the pureness and
sincerity of my heart to your grace ward is hereby declared and also accepted.
Secondelye that all they which shall receive any profyt of this translation,
shall most thankefully next to God ascrybe the occasyon thereof to your grace,
whom I beseech the Lord long to preserve to the safe tuition and good
governance of our soueraygne Lord and vyrgyn King, and to the comfort of
all the realm, and dyscomforte of al those which are Gods and his grace his
enemies, and specially to the furderaunce of the word of God. Whose excellent
Majesty I pray God many years to contynewe with increase of all his Godly
gifts, that his grace may spring and grow of a lyltell sweet tender plant
to be a strong old tree with many goodly and comfortable branches.

AMEN.
THE IVDGEMENTE OF PHILIP MELANCHTON concerning the article of the
iustyfycatyon of man which is by faith only.
IN MY BOOK ENtytuled the common places of the scripture, my mind and entente
was to declare and make open with all simplicity and plainness, as nighe as
God would give me leave, all that the Prophettes, and Apostles have written and
taught, concerning the article of justification, entendynge now the self
same thing because that that kind of matter is most peculyer and proper
unto the Epistle of Paull unto the Romans purposynge in some places thereof to
speak more plainly.

THE Philosophers do call, Justice, a certain Obedyence universal, as touching
to al virtues, (that is to say) an outward honest dyscyplyne, the which a
man by his own strength may and can perform. The which Justice, Justice of
works.
Paull does call the Justice of the law, and the Justice of works. We have
often times declared to you that God wyllethe and commaundethe that all men
shall be bound and as it were tied fast with an outewarde honest dyscyplyne, as
Paull witness the saying. The law is made for the unjust, and the Lord
doethe punyshe those which be offenders and brekers of this dyscipline, as be
those, which are swearers, periurous persons, blasphemers of the Lord,
seditious, manquellers, horemongers, thefes, and liars. It is true that
Arystotle sayethe. Neither Hesperus, nor yet Lucifer, the night and the day
star are not more beautiful and goodly, tha^ Justice, that is to say honest
discipline. It is forsooth a good orname^t of man being no thing in the world
that this weak nature of man can or may perform more excellent than this.
But yet for all that, we must be certainly assured, that this dyscyplyne can
not by any means satysfy, and perform all that the law doethe require, Our
outewarde works are not perfect.
as the very law, but that this discipline, is nothing else but as it were a
small shadow of the law bearing thereto witness excellently Paull, the 2.
what is to behold moses under a veil.
Corinth. 3. Cap. saying these words. The Jews do behold and look upon
Moses with a covered face, vnde^vayl, that is to say, not having the very law
shynynge in them, I do mean the knowledge of God, and a perfect obedyence,
such I say as can be no more required, but only a few outewarde works. The
law of God doethe ask at our hands, No man for hi^ works is just before God.
not only externe and outward works, but also a perfect obedyence, whereby
it is easy to be perceived that no man can be just before God, that is to say
accepted for the outward dyscyplyne, as the said Paull witnesses plainly, by
the works (says he) of the law, no flesh shall be justified. The which
saying doethe mynyshe, nay pluck away clean, the commendatyon and praise of
iustyfycatyon not only from ceremonyall works, but also from moral works,
speaking of the whole outward disciplyne. And where as the Philosophers and
laws humayne, do dyspute and reason of this outward discipline, which is the
covered face of Moses, they do not search how, or which way a man may be just,
that is to say accepted be for God. Furthermore we may not compare, and set
together, as of like estimation, the sentences and minds of the Philosodhers
with the holy learning and teachinges of Paull. Let this carnal Justice have
his place. What rule bears this outewarde Justice of the Philosophers.
That is to say, let the lewd wicked and carnal people be brideled and
plucked in with this outward discipline. let the teachynges of the Philosophers
be in the mids of the great multitude of the people, let them behold the
face of Moses covered not ascendynge up into the mount unto God Let Origenes
and such as be of his sect continewe still among the blind people, Origin.
not beholdynge the clear and open face of Moses, teaching and prechyng none
other but a carnal outward and fleshely Justice. For as much then as the
natural reason of man can not se by what means, nor how, we should be reputed
just before God, the Gospel prechethe an other kind of Justice, The Justice of
the Gospel.
not known to man's reason, but reveled and made open to the fathers, first
by God him self, and afterward by his Prophets more and more declared, and
last of all by Christ him self and his Apostles manifested to the whole
world Therefore John said: God no man did ever se but only the son of God
which is in the bosom of the father, he has declared him to us. As though he
would say, this will of God that God would forgive freely, and give life
everlasting for his sons sake, no creature, no reason humayne could attain
to understand and perceive, but only by his son manifested and declared.
Of the which most merueylous and excellent benefyte, Paul preaches, whose
saying brefelye in the declaration of the Epistle I entende to expound and
declare, ye and Christ his self, as it becomes him, which is a cunning
crafts master, in few words comprehendynge the whole sum and discipline
of the Gospel, commanded his disciples to preach repentance and forgyuenesse
of sin in his name. The total sum of the preach is of the Go^pell is
repentance and fo^gyuenes of sin for Christ sake only.
By the which words you may perceive that the ministry and office of the
Gospel is first to reprehend and rebuke sin as witnesses our master
Christ saying. The holy Ghost shall reprove you and rebuke the world for
sin. etc. And so the mind and conscience of man, recognisyng and knowlegynge
of old his sin, and for that, the dredefull anger and wrath of God,
Repentance
then is moved and styrred with no counterfete and feigned fear, but with
most heuye tears and sorrows (that he quakethe again) which with heavy and
deep syghes, being ones perceived and felt, the Gospel does lay and set
before him that thing which is full of all comfort vtterynge and pronouncynge
that voice which is proper only to the Gospel, which is the promise of
Christ his benefyte, declarynge the son of God to be the mediator, after that
manner that John did set him forth and descrybed him, saying. Behold and se
the Lamb of God, him I say which takes away the sin of the world. He
commands you to be certaynlye assured and persuaded that for this medyator
his sake, which is the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ we do obtain
remission of our sins: being imputed just not for any of our works or
merits but freely by faith, that is to say, when we do believe without any
wauerynge that we do obtain those great benefits for Christ his sake, when
do we obtain remission of our sin by whom and how.
when we do lift up our selfs standing vpryghte, being underset with this
faith, lokyng on no thing else but on Christ, then do we obtain remission
of our sins, and are reputed just, that is to say. God for his mercy sake
does accept us, and sendethe into us the holy Ghost making us the sons of
God, and heirs of life everlasting. Bearing thereto witness John. 1. cap. He
gave to them the pour to be made the sons of God, to them I say which do
believe in his name. These thing are plain and easy to be thoroughly perceived,
and most fytteste for the use of our consciences, Dauyd.
as by diverse examples may appear. Dauyd being a king for his abhomynable
Adultery committed and murder, being accused of the Prophet: did feel in him
self so great torment and fear, that he was not able to stand under it, but
was borne down to the ground, the torments of his conscience were so heavy,
whom afterward the Prophet comfortynge, with this voice of absolution, did
lift him up as it were taking and lyftynge him from the ground by the hand,
said. The ryght^ manner of absolution.
The Lord has taken away thy sin. Thou shalt not dye. At the which voice
Dauyd did believe his sin to be forgiven not for his own dignity, The faith
of Dauyd.
deseruynge or merits, but freelye for the mercy of God his sake. And so he
was thorowlye taught and learned, that the delyuerance from sin and death is
promised for the savior sake, that was to come, beleuynge stedfastlye, that
Christ should be the only oblation and sacrifice for the sin of man. As the
psalm bearing witness says. Thou art the preeste everlasting. etc. with
this faith Dauyd steyinge and bearing him self up was made just: that is
accepted before God to everlasting life. what / and how is this word just,
taken with the Scripture.
Luke also. 7. cap. The woman came weeping to Christ knowledgynge her sins,
and herd of Christ: go thy way in peace, thy faith has saved the.

SO these two motions fear and faith are set forth and described in our
conversion. Fear and faith are together in our conversion.
The which fear, men use to call contrition: which, (believe thou verelye).
can never merit remission of sin. Nay except thou be propte up with
faith, thy mind being oppressed and overwhelmed with tears, heuines, and
fear: tha^ must needs run headlynge to everlasting death. Even so did
Saull and Judas peryshe for ever: Saul. Judas.
not co^fortyng them selfs in the mids of their anguishe and sorrow: with
faith and knowledge of the mercy of God. And this is the sense of Paull his
saying. The law causes anger and wrath that is to say the law drives into
thy stomach and heart, horrible terrors and fear: such as the psalmyst
descrybeth. And Ezechias also: saying. Like as a Lion has crusshed together
and broken all to powder my bones. These torments except that faith does
comfort, and gentylly lift up the minds of men, lokinge and beholdynge only
the promises of Christ: and so (as it were) holdethe Christ fast should bring
them into utter dystruction and everlasting death. These battayles. Co^trition
or sorowfulnes without faith dryueth into desperatyo^
how huge and great they be: we may learn in the psalms: beholdynge how
great a battle Dauyd stroke with him self when he cried. Lord do thou not
correct me: nor rebuke thou me in thy furye. Have mercy and compassion on me.
There is no man among the dead creatures that can remember the, nor yet in
Hell any that can praise thy name. Cast me not among the dampened creatures,
which do burn in horrible and everlasting hatred of the: and curse yt. Let
me not be thrown into the company of thine enemies. And also psalm. 41. O my
soul why art thou sad and heavy: why do thou thus trouble me. Trust and
put thy confidence in the Lord: for yet I will laud and praise him.

OF such kind of fight and battle Paull does speak, The law does fear
the conscience.
not of swines flesh only and such other like rytes and observations. He
cries out aloude saying. All men are under sin In the which words he
preaches fear unto us. But afterward he does show Christ saying that we are
justified freelye by faith. And that we may perceive and understand, that he
speakethe not of an idle thought or cogitation of the mind but of a strong
faith, Faith.
which does fight with the fearful torments of our conscience, he does say
furthermore. Being justified by faith we have peace, and atto^ment: and fre
passage unto god.

For as much then as this sentence of Paull doethe agree so well with the
teachynges and preachynges of the Prophets. What frowardnes is it, to give to
Paull an other clean contrary understanding or sense?

Furthermore I do say that for as much as this sentence by me rehearsed
concerning the conversion or renewynge of man: and of our justification is so
plain and manifest (the use whereof is here in this world, while we be in
this life) being the fyrme, steadfast, and immutable sentence and mind of the
Gospel declared and made open to our fathers: I can not tell well whether the
great bli^dnes of Christ his adversaries is more to be bewailed and lamented:
than the froward, crooked, and way ward stobbornesse of them is to be most
beynyouslye of all men detested and abhorred in that they do reprehende: nay
utterly condemn this good: true, and right interpretation.

AND here I do most hertely desire and pray all virtuous and charytable men
diligently to expende and mark, what on both parts may be said and
alleged. Our adversaries do confess, that there must needs be terrors and
torments of the mind: but as concerning faith they be of a contrary
opinion. They be content also, and confess the hystorycall knowledge of
Christ: but as touching the remyssyon of sin, An obiectyon of the
adversaries.
they do bydde and command: that men should not have to much confidence: but
rather to doubt. And if perchance a man does obteyn the remission of sin
(say they) it is not for faith sake, but for thy merits. By the which
words they do utterly extyncte and abolysshe the light and comfort of the
Gospel, which teaches us that for Christ the benefyte of remyssion of
sin, is obtained. Being thereto (to make us the more certain and sure) added
a promise, where God commaundethe us both to give trust, and also to clean
stedfastlye thereto: as men thoroughly persuaded, that that same promise does
perteine to us. That this is the true, and sincere meaning through out all the
Gospel: will we, or nyll we, we must needs grant. For Paull his self does
refute and reprove that foul and erronyouse opinion of dubytatyon or doubting
whether thy sin be forgiven the ye or nay, The promise must be received by
faith.
saying: that the promise is none other way to be received but by faith: Rom^.
iiii. cap. And therefore by faith freely (says he) that the promise may be
made fyrme and out of all doubt. He commands also that we should give and
ascrybe to God only the praise and commendation of all ^eritie and truth.
Likewise as Abraham did not doubt with any mystrust, and John 1. the.5. cap.
Who that doethe believe in the son of God, bearethe witness in him self: who
that does not believe God, he makes God a liar. etc Ergo, when we do say,
that by faith the benefytes of Christ are obtained, we must needs understand
that we have them for Christ his sake. To the which promise of God there is
no remedy but we must give our whole assent and consent and full belefe, that
god for his sons sake will perform all that he has promised. Wherefore
faith does not signify only the knowledge of Christ hystorycally: that is
to say, that Christ was borne of a vyrgyn immaculate, that he lived here in
earth most poorly: that he preached: that he fasted and prayed: that he was
betrayed to the priests of the Jews: that he suffered most sharp and bitter
passion and death: that he did rise again the third day from death to life:
and such other like things as are contained in the history. But faith does
signify also a strong and steadfast confydence and trust in the mercy of God
promised to us for Christ his own sake, to us (I sa^) consentinge and
agreinge to the promise of God. Such a faith Paull does require of us as
believes with heart and mind all the articles of the Creed which is our
belefe that they be true, that is to say: that for the son of God his own
sake, which did suffer and rise again for our sakes: we have the remission
of our sin given to us frelye. For unto this article all other artycles
which by order are set before in the Creed, The fynall cause of our belefe.
are to be referred, as unto the fynall cause of our belefe.

Wherefore the contrary part rehersynge in their daily deuotyon and prayers
this article of our belefe (I do believe the remission of sin) does show
and declare: how their own selfs does not consent and allow that thing
which they do pronounce and speak with their own tongues in their prayers. In
that they command to doubt of the remission of sin, their own lyppes
declaringe the contrary: that we should not doubt but that we have remission of
our sin. I do know diverse men, which by the comfort only, which they have
received of this article contained in our Creed, have clean cast away the
most dampnable doctrine of the Monkyshe and Popyshe sort, concerning
dubytation, and merits, committynge them self all together to the comfortable
promise of Christ our most merciful Lord.

But for what cause I pray you, is these word freely which is called in latin
gratis, Frelye.
only added by Paul, and not these words also (by our works) but for Christ
his sake. About the which words, not only the consciences of men, but also
the Prophettes and Apostles have spoken largely. It does comprehend in it
self.ii. things most hyghly to be noted. It does exclude all merytynge of
our selfs and our own deservings, setting as it were before our eyes the
deservings and merytes of Christ. In the which place specially above all
other is to be observed and marked the dradfull anger and wrath of God against
sin, The great wrath of God.
in so much that no kind of oblatyon or sacrifice could pease and swage his
wrath, but the death only of his own son. The unspeakable love of God.
On that other side the greatness of his love toward us is declared in
gyuynge his only begotten son for our sake, which was an exceeding love
far passinge al other loves. The which both as well the wrath of God as the
love of him (together) we must comprehend and hold fast: what time our
consciences being in the conflycte and battle against sin, are most
sorowfully payned and grieved. To God must we lay for us the merits of Christ,
what law must we wage with God.
for whose sake we must both ask and surely trust, and look for pardon: not
for our merits sake In this point consysteth the whole end of this conflyct
and battle. The mind being in great fear of the wrath of God doethe not
seek to know whether God will be merciful to them which have sufficiently
meryted, and can show many godly deeds and other gaye virtues. For that thing
the mind knows well enough without any question that is to say, that God is
good and merciful to them, that are worthy and without sin for the
knowledge of the law, which we do bring into the world to us (as soon as we
are borne) doethe teach us that God is good and merciful to them which are
good, it is not that thing which the mind and conscience seeks after, but an
other manner of tryng, that is: whether God will be merciful to the unworthy,
and to the sinner, ye or nay: wherein this word freely, does declare what
difference is between the Gospel and the law. For the law does teach that
God is good and merciful: The law requy^^^^e our own worthynesse.
but beside that it doethe set forth a condition of our own worthynesse and
merytes: saying, that god is mercyful to them which are without sin, or
which be least defiled therewith. As for the Gospel it does remove and put
away the condition of our worthynesse and merytes, bearing witness that God is
reconciled again to us freely for the merytes of Christ his own sake: and not
for our merytynge: considering that this faith: that is to say the sure
confidence of the mercy of God does lean and depend only on Christ and his
merytes. We use otherwise in the Scripture in the stead and place of this
exclusyue (freely we are justified by faith) to speak after this manner,
Freelye by faith, only by faith / and by faith we are justified is all one.
saying. Only by faith we are iustyfyed. The which word, only, does not
exclude all other kind of virtues and good deeds, that we should not do them.
But it does remove from our minds that dampnable opinion of hope and trust
in our merytes and the condition also of our own worthynesse, excludynge it
clean and shutting it forth from the cause of our justification or
acceptance to God, as here after I will speak more largely. And verily it is
al one thing to say: By faith we are made just, and by faith we are made just
freely: And by only faith we are made just. For it could not be called
faith, if our confydence were set in our own worthynes and merytes as the
Papystes do dream. Faith is clean banyshed away: if I should think that God
will be then merciful to me, On what thing depends our faith.
when I have done works enough, and meryted sufficient lie, it follows
therefore that faith can depend on no thing, but only on the promise of God,
which promise does show to us Christ, for whose sake the father has
promised that he will with our any fail be merciful unto us.

ALSO when Paull (in reasonyng this matter) doethe demand whether by faith
or by works we should be justified: The mercy of God and our wo^thynesse are
contrary.
he doethe mean by that word faith: the perfect trust in the mercy promised
for Christ sake: the which trust of mercy he does lay against and as,
clean contrary unto our worthynesse. As though he would say to the these
words following. How doeste thou think that thy sins are forgiven the, and
that thou art made the child of God, for the dignity and worthynesse of
thine own works virtues and other good qualities, or else by the most tender
mercy of God only for Christ sake. Therefore truly he doethe exclude the
dignity of our works, saying, that by faith we are justified.

WHEREFORE without doubt this sentence is exclusive and barryng of all our
worthynes, when Paul says By faith we are justified: that is to say not for
our dignity and deserte: so that who that will truly judge and deem on this
thing, may easily perceive, that it is all one thing to say. By faith we are
justified: by faith we are justified frelye: and by only faith we are
justified. Thus much have I spoken that the phrase and manner of speaking of
these words might be perceived and weyed diligently. But how so ever we do
use our speakinge and words: let us take heed and beware, that the thing
and matter it self be not confounded, and made dark: but that this sentence
exclusyue of all worthynes: may be kept in his right sense far from our free
acceptance, whereby we please God the father for Christ his sake. For that
makethe the difference between the law and the Gospel as I have said.
Therefore I have spoken of this word, freely, that the virtuous and Godly may
consider, Our merytes must be repelled from our free acceptacion.
all merits to be taken and cast away. Not to make us to be the more idle in
well doing absteynynge from good works. But to make the promise certain,
which promise should be uncertain if it should depend on the condition of
our merits, and to render to Christ the honor due only to him, beside that
it makethe us se and understand, that all our deeds, be they never so
glorious, are never able to atteyne to the perfectnes of the law. For faith
does spryng forth of the word of God: that is from the Gospel: From whe^^
commethe faith.
which Gospel is the promise: wherein the benefyte of Christ is both
promised to us and also exhibited. For the wit, and reason of man, by it self
could never come to the knowledge of the remission of sin: if God had not
opened his will in a certain word, or a certain promise to us.

WE must also be certaynlye assured that this promised of the Gospel is
universal: The promise of the Gospel to vniuersal^.
wherefore it is most necessary of all thing that good and Godly men be
infourmed thereof and taught that it is so: because, that feeble and fearful
minds, and weak consciences, be always with these.ii. questyons combered, of
worthynesse, and of election, as by example.

worthynesse
FIRST they doubt whether that God will receive to his mercy those which be
unworthy, Electyon.
or nay. On that other side in case that they be worthy, they do mystruste and
think, that God has chosen certain special friends whom he favors
above other wyllyng to bestow his benefytes on them. They do fear also: lest
that those benefytes do not perteyne to them, doubting that they be not of the
number of the elected. And thus the reason of man hangethe as it were in a
pair of balaunce, wauerynge hither and thither in doubt fullness and mystrust
of the will of God. For the philosophers be of that opinion that God does favor
and love a few in no^bre, The blind opinion of the Philosophers ^onceruynge
election.
of those which be noble men, gouernyng and prosperyng their affairs in
especyallye at ou^ all other, all other kind of men neglected and not
regarded. And this is the mind of some men concerning predestination (as they
call it) which folysshe and weak opinion of man the heavenly voice of God
reprehendeth, In this point dyfferethe the Gospel from the opinions of the
Philosophers, and from the law, wherein does the Gospel dyffer from the law.
declaring to us after an other manner of fasshyon: the will of God, than the
law does set forth to us, shewinge and teaching that God wyllyngly doethe
receive to him, ye those which be unworthy, offering to all men his spirit
with this condycion, that they do believe stedfastlye in the promise.

WHEREFORE let al chryste^ me^ learn to know that the promise is universal
perteynynge to all men, as witnesses many sayenges in the Gospel, as. Come
you to me all that labor and are burdened. And to the Romans the iii. cap.
The justice of God through the faith of Jesus Christ in and on al men which
do believe. And to the Romans the.x cap. The self same Lord of all men, and
rich for all men. Let us therefore under this general and universal word
comprehend al and every one of us together jointly and severally: beleuynge
that no man is excluded from the promise which perteynethe to all men
indyfferently. Predestinatyon.


WHEREFORE in our communication of justification we have naught to do with
predestination. We must begin at the Gospel: which first rebukynge sin
does afterward extend and hold forth to us, the grace and pardon promised
for Christ his sake: and that freely: so it be received with faith. Look we up
therefore al and every one of us, on this general word, taking good head that
we be not with the speculations and reasonynge of predestination separated and
plucked away from the promise. By what way is the will of God searched.
For the will of God may not by any man's blind reason, but by his own
word only be searched, judged, and demed. And likewise as the promyses be
general, so do I understand this saying. God wylled al men to be saved: the
which salvation in his promyses he does offer to al men. But man's folyshe
will in those things, which they will not believe does repoung, and goth
against the promyses. And contraryewyse those which do hold up and
vndersette them selfs with the promyses, they do not doubt, but that the
benefytes of Christ doethe perteyne to them, and be theyrs, because they will
not make God a liar. So that when in receyuynge of the Gospel, they do erecte
and coragyously lift up them selfs, co^fortynge them therewith. Then works
the holy ghost effectuously in them through the voice of the Gospel,
according to that saying. Faith is by hearing. And to the Galathyans.iii.
cap, that we may receive the promise of Christ by faith. And thus when the
sick, feeble and fearful minds be comforted, helped, and made strong by faith
then do they receive the holy Ghost. The which is the true conversion,
being called in the Gospel the regeneration or new birth, containing in it
iii. things most notable, and for us expedyente. Remission of ^ane ou^
justification and the gi^^ of the holy Ghost a^^ together (...) our conuersyon.
Remission or forgyuenes of sin. Our justification, that is, that we be
accepted of God and imputed just. Thyrdly the gift of the holy Ghost with life
everlasting. I have now spoken of the sharp motions, torments and terrors of
the conscience, and also of the comfort which we do receive by faith. Where
fore this sentence of Paull is to be received of al men, being not entangled
with foolysshe and idle questions, but plain, open, and agreeable to all the
preachynges and techinges of the prophets and Gospels, gyuynge us knowledge of
great and weyghtye matters, which good and Godly men in this life by
experience do find true. The knowledge whereof is so necessary to the
church, that nothing is more.

NOW therefore I entende, with as few words as the matter will give me leave,
to make plain and declare unto you, what these vocables and terms following
do signify. The law, Gospel. Sin, Justification, Grace, and Faith.

Law.
THE Law from the Gospel does dyffer no small thing. For the law is a
doctrine by the which we are taught and commanded of God what manner of men we
ought to be, what things we are bound to do and observe, and what the
contrary. And albeit that the common weal of Moses is utterly extyncte and
now nothing at all, yet the moral law abides and remains still, being at
all times one thing that it was at the beginning. The knowledge whereof we are
not so sone borne, but we are endued with it. The law of nature.
For God would that some knowledge should remain in man natu^ to know and
perceive what is sin: beside that, at all times the voice of the law doethe
rebuke sin what time it preaches repentance. Which thing Paull well
perceiving was induced to say, by the law is the knowledge of sin Not
meaning and speaking only of the ceremonies, but also of the moral laws, and
of the commandementes accusynge always at all times al manner of men. We may
not reason of the divine law of God as we do when we do talk of a moral law,
and of the manners of a cyuyl life.

FOR the civil life does require but an externe and an outewarde dyscyplyne
only that we might outwardlye appear honest and just. Ciuyll life
what does the law o^ god requir^
But the law of God does require a perfect obedyence, both an inward and an
outward as well a spiritual obedience to appear just before God: as a
corporal in the outward obedience of the laws, where to bears witness the
commandment. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart. And so
Christ his self in Mathewe.v. cap. doethe expound the law.

FOR as much therefore as the nature of man being infected and corrupted by
the natural corruption and disease of sin, which did spring from Adam, can
not possible perform a perfect obedience, the law declarethe the wrath of
God against sin accusinge and condempnynge al men (Christ only except)
which has delivered us from the malediction and curse of the law. He has
delivered not only the Jews and al other which lived after the law was
given forth, but also the fathers, which were before Moses. Wherefore it
does follow that these fathers, The fathers before Moses were saved by their
trust to the promise.
which were before Moses were under a law And so being accused and brought
into great fear, had utterly peryshed, if they had not styckt and cloven
fast to the promyses of Christ. For whose sake they knew well they should be
delivered from sin and death. These wordly, politic, and cyuyl wise men,
peradventure will deride and make a mock at that we do say, that the law of God
does require a perfect and an absolute obedience: and that we do say that no
man can satisfy and perform all that the law does require of us because
that naturally the great blyndenesse, ignorance, and contempt of God is so
roted in us, which does seem and appear to the Philosophers and to them
which do use their judgments after the wordlye fashyon nothing else but folly
and madness. But how so ever they do take it, I do assure you yt the Prophettes
and Apostles mente none otherwise than I have declared to you, Therefore the
Prophettes will, that men do know the greatness of sin: because they do not
know God in deed as they ought to do, no nor glorify him as witnesses Paul.
This ignorance and contempt of God is the sin which the Prophettes and
Apostles do show and teach to be the cause of al our calamities and miseries,
The ignorance of God is the root of all mischief.
wherewith this weak and feeble nature is opressed they do teach (I say) that
we should seek the true justice and delyuerance from sin and death freely
given by Christ. As touching al other things of the law that I might now
speak of: I do refer and send al them which are studious and desirous to
know them, unto the book of common places of the scripture which I did
write and gather together. Wherefore now I will speak of this vocable Gospel.

Gospel.
THE GOSPEL DOES preach repentance, The promise of the Gospel is not to be
joined with the promise of the law.
promisynge forgyuenesse of sin and life everlasting. The which promise we
must be ware that we do not joint with the law. For though the law has
certain promises annexed to it, yet they do differ and varye much from the
promyses which are peculyer and proper only to the Gospel, for the promises of
the law are promised condicionallye, requiring a perfect obedience, as
witnesses the first precepte, (The Lord saying I will be good to the^ that
love me with all their heart. Where as the promise contained in the Gospel
doethe declare to us the remission of sin, our justification, and life
everlasting freely without any condition of our merits and worthynes, but
for Christ sake only. No man's voice or tongue can declare this great benefyte,
which the Lord through his son Jesus Christ does bestow on us, that is to
say: that the great blotte of sin by h^s blood scraped and rasshed forth,
and death utterly vanquisshed we may have the fruition of the sight of the
Godhed in everlasting life justice and glad ioyfulnes. The promise of this
benefyte by no man but from heaven is declared to us, as John says. The son
which is in the bosom of the father he has declared and made manifest to us.
An other dyfference of the Gospel and of the law.
And although that there is a certain knowledge of the law in us even from our
birth, it is not so with the knowledge of the Gospel, for the knowledge
thereof we have not naturally. Man's reason of it self being not able to
perceive and know the will of God: that God will send his son down to be
oblatyon and sacrifice for the church, and forgive sin frelye without the
deseruynge of our merits. This is far from man's understanding. Therefore
the words of the law, and the promise of the Gospel must be diverse and sundry
ways taken and perceived. In the writings of Phocillides and Hesidus: o with
such other like writers a man shall find many sayings of the laws: but as
touching the promise of the free forgiveness of sin and of the son of god,
it is never to be found among them. Which in their writings did imitate and
follow the judgment and natural reason of man only. Moreover for as much
as a certain knowledge of the law is natural to us, ye from our first birth
and nativity, our own minds and conscience accuses sin in us, what does
our own conscience judge our sin.
thinking and be leuyng no thing else, but that God will punyshe, and also cast
forth of his sight those men which be unjust and sinners. This is the judgment
which the law doethe give, being both a just and a right judgment
according to the mind of the law. Against the which heuye sentence of the
law: in the time of knowledgynge thy sin and repentance thou must object
again and lay for the, the most lyberal and fre promise of mercy, which ought
to be preferred before the law. As by example: when Adam after his offense,
Adam.
was accused, he could think none other thing in him self but that which was
the law. that he should peryshe, because he obeyed not the Lord. But straight
way the Lord: (natwithstandynge that he had made him subject for his
disobedience unto the death of the body) which was before immortal: and to
other miserable calamities, The promise given to Adam.
yet God gave to him a comfortable voice promising deliverance from sin and
death, and the restoring again of mankind, saying that the sede of a woman
should break the head of the Serpent. The which voice spoken and declared by
God: straight way the son of God mouynge and styrrynge the heart of Adam: did
pour into him a new life and light. At that time the son of God was
constituted and ordained to be a keeper, a governor, and a savior of the
church. Then began the son of God to give battle to the Devil: That
likewise as the Devil most cruelly does rage over al mankind in the dispyte
and hatred of God, to deface and put out of al remembrance his most holy and
blessed church, fastening his most venemouse tethe in our hels and flesh.
So on that other side, the son of God is strong and mighty in them which
believes, treading down under his fete the furye of the Devil, restorynge
and delyuerynge the faithful from the tyranny of his enmy. The world has not
the grace to consider and se this battle, but the great falls of many with
the most heuye and tragycall calamities and miseries and again afterward, the
most glorious and tryumphant delyueraunce (example of Dauyd and of many other)
do manyfestlye declare and show what manner a kind of fight and battle this
is.

THESE words also which are written in the Genesis. The sede of a woman shall
tread down the head of the Serpent, has none other meaning than those
words which John did pronounce, saying. For this purpose the son of God is
exhibited unto us to distroye and break the works of the Devil. Thus did
Adam take and understand the promise. So did all the fathers after him believe,
that for this sede sake which was promised, they should obteyn remission of
their sins, with deliverance from sin and death. By this faith they were
made just, not by fulfyllynge of the law. This being that same faith whereby
in all their perilles and terrors they were comforted and hold up. For they
knew well that this Lord was always at their hand to help them as Jacob most
lively did express the.xlviii. of Genesis, saying. The Angel which delivered
me from all evil: bless these children. In the which words he declared that
same Lord by who^ he was delivered from al evils desiring and prayenge to
bless and keep his posterity. Al those words can be of none other than of
the son of God meaned. As witnesses Paull. The son of God was in the tents
of the people of Israel where soever they went. And John also. By this son of
God al thing was made, by whom light did shine in darkness. All tryumphe and
victories got and won against, and over the devil, was by none other than
by this son. Noe was reserved, Abraham was defended, Joseph was wakened up.
The people was delivered forth of Egypt, and Daniel also did speak with him.
After this fasshion the preachynges of the Apostles do teach of Christ:
wytnessing that he is the sacrifice: the deliverer and savior, counsellynge
and commanding us to set our whole trust and confidence in this captain. The
which thing many places in the prophets does testyfy: as the second psalm,
kiss you ye son. Blessed be al they that trust in him, with out the which
faith otherwise called the certain confydence of the trust and mercy of God
promised for Christ sake all the prayers in the world seem they never so holy,
never so long, all the worshypfull worshyppynge that ye can do, are in effect
as much as nothing. For this is the same Bishop by whose means we must
come to the father, as it is written in many places. The blyndnes therefore, of
them which do imagine and dream that the Gospel is a law conteinynge certain
precepts of amity or mutual love which require the faith, that is to say,
a bare and naked knowledge of the life of Christ hystorycally, and that men
should take God as a teacher of good precepts, as they did use to take
Socrates and Phocillides: I say again the deep and profounde blyndenesse of
them is to be detested, execrated and of all creatures abhorred. Such like is
their blyndnesse in phantasyeng that men are made just for their own good
deservings being for all that in doubt, whether God does forgive us our
sins, whether he does hear us or whether he will have any thing to do with
us, ye or nay, as one, which nothing regards what does or shall become of
us. Thus the great gorbelyd Monks, and now, our great supercyliouse and
proud popish Philosophers do transform, The doctrine of the Popish clerks.
translate, and make, the Gospel, which is the most pure and sincere word of
God, to be a Philosophy Academical, dysputynge and reasonynge of good works,
commaundynge men to doubt in the promyses of God. But of faith which leanneth
on Christ and the promises made for his sake, not ones for a thousand pound
they will neither think nor speak: herein they be as domme as stones, and as
dry as a stock fyshe. Therefore I pray and desire with all my heart, al gentyl
readers that they would weye and consider the difference of the law and the
Gospel, of Moses: and of Christ. And to mark diligently what is the glory of
God: what was the right honor, service, and worship done to him by our old
fathers Adam: Jacob, the Prophets and the Apostles. Of these men let us
learn, that Christ is always the valyant Captain, the only governor:
delyuerer: savior: protector: an dedfe^der of his church against the Devil
with all his members. Let ^s learn I say, that by faith we must perceive and
receive the benefits of Christ Let us have in remembrance and not for get
that the gospel is a sweet voice, which promyseth and shows to us, as it
were putting into our bosoms these great benefits: Paul bearing thereta
witness, saying. The gospel is the power of god to saluatyon to him that
does believe. That is as much to say, as the gospel doethe offer unto us
pardon of our sins and life everlasting freely for Christ his sake, and not
for the law. By this gospel god works in us effectuously, gyuyng to us his
holy spirit: he begins in us a new life, and gives us life everlasting.

Sin.
THIS VOCABLE AND word Syn does not signify noughty corrupt and viciouse manners
only, Under this word sin is comprehended our Original sin.
as the Philosophers do take it: but it co^prehendeth under the same vocable
also the great feebleness and weakness which is brought into this world with us
and in us being called original sin, The which sin though carkles men do
not much pass for regardyng and setting it light as though it were a very
small tryfle, or rather no sin at all, as the Philosophers do judge it, yet
we may not so mystake it, but must make an other manner of reckoning thereof.
For the dark blyndnes with ^ubitation and ignorance of God, being uncertain
whether God doethe pass and regard mortal men, ye or nay: whether he does
punish offenders or not: whether he norisheth, fedeth, and helps, or
herkeneth to men and their inuocations and cries ye or nay: to be without the
fear and dread, and love of God, to set much by our selfs and our painted
shethes to make much of our own wits, not regardyng the Lord mocking and
dalyenge with this opinion, and that opinion of God, as the supersticyous holy
hipocrites, and the deintly fed epicures uses to do daily, to have diverse
and sodein motions and styrringes in us clean contrary to God and his law.
These I tell you plainly be no small euyls and vices. Nay that they be great and
sore vices: the bitter and sharp pains ordained by God, and prepared, for the
co^mytters and offenders, does sufficiently declare to us. For these
abominable vices, God did make man subject and thrawl to death, punishynge
and chastenynge him straytly, with many and marvelous kinds of calamities and
miseries. Considering therefore that the wrath of God for these offenses might
by no manner of sacrifice be peased and pleased, but by the death of his own
son only, it does follow of necessity that that vice is a great vice, which
requires so great a ransom to be redeemed with. It is a marvelous thing to
se that the dullness of man is so great, that he can not perceive and se this
his own disease being so great. Wherefore sith that man is so blind that he
can not nor will not se and knowledge it: God his self with his own voice
and doctrine has made it open to the eyes of al men. Let us hear him and
believe his word, setting at light al Sophistical cauillations, which with
their mockyng and mowyng do make of original sin but a trifle, and a thing
small to be regarded and taken head of: not much setting by, nay utterly
refusing and dispisinge our sacrifice, which is Chyst. From the which most
pernycyous doctrine: let us both with the inward and outward ears, with heart
and mind abhor and fly from, as the most dangerous pestilence of ma^s soul.

Justification.
NOW TO COME TO justification, and to declare that this word, to justify
after the Hebrew Phrase is used commonly for to pronounce or to repute just.
As if a man would say after the manner of speaking of the Hebrews. The
Romans did justify Scipio, which was accused of the tribuns, which is as
much to say, as: the Romans did quite Scipio pronouncynge him just, and
wrongfullye accused. After the self same manner in Paul his reasonynge must we
understand justification, to signify remission of sins, and free receyuyng
or acceptacion unto life everlasting, as it is manifest the.iiii. cap. to the
Romans. In the which place he does defyne justification to be the remission
and forgyuenes of sin. So that this sentence by faith we are justified: is
as much to say as we are reputed of God just, for Christ sake: when we do
believe. And this word justice does not mean in this place the justice of the
law, or the obedience universal and our own qualities Justice.
when we do say (by faith justice is given). But it does signify the
imputacion of justice, and acceptacion of God, that is to say, though we be not
of our own worthynes clean and just: yet, it does please God for Christ
sake to take i^ good worth our unworthiness calling and making us just if we
do believe, and so accepts our good will, A just man
making his justice our justice, his worthynes our worthynes. So that by this
understanding a just man is taken respectively for him that is accepted of God
to life everlasting. We must note also that as soon as we do obtain remission
of sin, we have also given to us the holy Ghost, when with faith we do
comfort us after our fall. So that to our justification is annexed and joined
the gift of the holy Ghost, which doethe not begin to work in us one virtue
only, but also al other virtues, as the fear and love of God: the love to the
truth, pureness of life, pacyence, right dealing with our neighbor, as
here after I will declare more when I do speak of works. wherefore (...) we
not just for our ve^tues.
The which virtues do not merit remission of sin, nor yet are our justice:
or justification, for the which a man is accepted, and pleases God: because
those virtues be not thoroughly perfect and good.

FVRTHERMORE when our conscience is full of anguysshe and tormente for sin,
and does seek wherefore we are justified, it does not inquire what virtues we
have, and what good deeds, but it does seek how we may attain to remission
of sin, and reconcilyatyon with God. Our conscience is vexed and troubled
about the will of God, not beholdinge what we our self have done that is good
or what virtues we have in us. But in case we have any virtues which be of any
estymatyon, yet our conscience doethe not lay and compare them with the
judgment of God.

THEREFORE they which do interpretate this word Iustyfycatyon to be an
infusion of virtues they do not attend and mark that in this case we reason
of the remission of sin, only, of the peace of conscience, and
reconciliation with God. For we do seek how we may be justified, which is
how we may have remission of sin, making one necessary conclusion, that
God is merciful to us. Justification
It folowethe therefore necessaryly that iustifcation is to be taken for the
remission and forgiveness of sin, for the fre acceptance of god, and for
imputation of justice.

Grace.
GRACE DOES Signify the fre acceptance and mercy of God, promised to us for
Christ sake, wherewith is joined the gift of the holy Ghost, as witnesses Paul
Rom^. v. cap, how much more the grace of God and the gift in grace, by the
which grace is understood the free reconciliation and by the gift in grace
is mente the gift of the holy Ghost, with the renewynge and beginning of a new
and eternal life. For in the forgiveness of sin as I have said is contained
the gift of the holy Ghost. It is the profane and ungodly Philosophy of
Pelagian to be detested, which holds opinion, Pelagians doctrine.
that without the operation of the holy ghost men are made the sons of God
and heirs of life eternal. Oftentimes therefore under the vocable of grace, is
signified the help and work of the holy Ghost. Grace.
But the pryncypal signification of grace is free acceptacion, as is said.
Paul by Grace obtained remission of sin, being as much to say as Paull for
Christ sake obtained forgyuenes of sin. Wherefore the Monkishe and Popyshe
exposition is clean to be refused, Grace after the papists doctrine does
signify virtues and good qualyties which are in a man as when we say he is a
gracious man which is full of good deeds
which inuentynge and deuisinge a declaration clean contrary to the mind of
Paul saying that by grace we do purchase remission of sin, which is as they
say, for our own virtues.

AND that grace does signify the reconciliation and fre acceptacion promised
for Christ sake, many sayings of the Scriptures do bear witness. As, ye are
not under the law, but under grace, perceiving that the just man, though he
be not clean and pure from all sin, yet is not accused, because he is under
grace, that is to say, accepted and pleasant to God for Christ sake. For he
will not that man shall think him self accepted and pleasant to God for his
own virtues and good qualyties: but only for Christ his sake. As Paull Rom^.
iiii. cap Therefore by faith and through grace that the promise might be made
fyrme, certain, and stable. Our own qualities and virtues can not make our
conscience certain of remission of sin, but only for the fre mercy promised
for Christ. Wherefore: for this place, the gloss of the Popyshe sect,
teaching that grace doethe signify our own virtues, is far unmeet and
nothing agreeable. The.v. cap. to the Romans, witnessethe the self same
saying. Where as sin was most abundant: there was grace most plenteous,
that is the fre mercy of God did then shine most clear, when the greatness
of our sin is most perceived and seen. We also then do feel that for none of
our own merits, we do obtain pardon and remission of sin but for Christ.
And to the Ephesians. i. cap. Predestenynge us through Jesus Christ: after the
pleasure of his will, to the praysynge of the glory of his grace: meaning none
other thing by these words, than that the free mercy of God, not our virtues
out to be commended and praised. And to the Galathians.ii. cap. I do not
contemn and dysprayse the grace of God, for if so be that our justice is of
the law, then Christ has suffered in vain. He says not, I do commend and
bost my self of my virtues and perfectnes: but I am proud (says he) of the
mercy of God: Whereby I do believe through the death of Jesus Christ that God is
merciful to me. And the second Epistle to the Thessalonians.ii. cap He gave
us good hope in grace. He bids us not hope and trust in our virtues, but in
the fre mercy of God, promised for Christ sake. And to the Hebrews the.iiii.
cap. Let us draw nere with a sure trust and confidence unto the thron of
grace, that is of the mercy which is promised. It is euidente by this to se
that by grace is not meant our own virtues. To be short what this word grace
after the Hebrewe phrase does signify al learned men does know. Which manner
of speaking observed it is easy to know the signification of the vocable.
There is no man also so ignorant and blind, but that knows that Paul for
none other cause did incolcate and beat into our heads this vocable Grace,
than that we should be surely persuaded that we are acceptable to God for
Christ sake, and not for our own virtues. Which sense and meaning, by their
durty gloses and wrastynges, is clean inuerted, teaching that we are
justified by grace, that is to say, by our own virtues. It is also to be noted
that in this word Grace doethe lie hid a partycull exclusyue, which as I
have said must be diligently observed. For these words gratis propter
Chriust, that is freely for Christ, does make the difference between the law
and the Gospel. And albeit that I do speak thus much of this word
exclusive, I do not mean that repentance for our sins with other virtues
should be excluded, but only the condition of the dignity and worthynesse of
our merits, that the fearful conscience may have a firm and strong comfort
in Christ. For all our promises of remission of sin etc. without we do
add and include this word frelye, they be unsavory and nothing pleasant. All
men which do make their invocation and call on the name of God shall be saved.
To the which words, if I should join these words (if they be worthy) their
minds should be thereat astonned and made affrayed. Wherefore the Gospel does
cry out aloude this word, freely, The unworthy must call on Christ.
that thou may call on him, ye though thou art unworthy. For through Christ
all they which call on the Lord shall be saved. More over the psalmyst says.
With the lord is mercy. If I should say toward them which be worthy: in what
case would the pore conscience stand: it would run away for fear if it could
tell whither. Finally the Gospel wylleth that by these word Grace, should be
understand the fre mercy of God promised for Christ. As though he would say,
fly not away, but draw nere unto the Lord, and receive with faith the gift
offered unto the. For God will freely for Christ forgive us, which decree is
certain and immutable: if there be any which do doubt in that, what soever
they be: they do great injury and despyte to the son of God, which is the
only pledge of this promise, which promise by faith must be received.

THESE words have I rehearsed the oftener: because it makes much for the
purpose, that this exclusyue be known of all men, whereby they learn to know
well what difference is between the Law and the Gospel. And that virtuous
minds and faithful hertes may think berelye that they have a sure and
substancyal comfort offered unto them that they may rise up their selfs unto
faith and invocation in the time of all their hard business and dangers.

FOR in our daily troubles this faith must be practysed and put in use.
Neither the Gospel without these exercyses can not be understand, no nor yet
true prayer can not be made without this faith. As Christ him self witnesses
saying. What soever you shall ask the father in my name, that is with a sure
trust and confydence of my name I will perform it. Here may you se how far
the chrystian invocation and prayer does dyffer and pass the prayer of the
Ethnyckes. Our prayer must be with out mistrust


FOR they prayenge be in doubt, whether God regardethe the prayer of man,
whether God be moved and has compassion on man's calamities, yea or nay. On
this manner to pray and to make thine invocation: thou doeste nothing else but
dishonor and displease God. And yet for all that thus contumelious and
spytefull are the inuocations of the wicked, being taught and learned of the
Monkyshe and Romyshe hipocrites to make their prayers, with dubytacion and
mystruste, which is a thing most desperate. Against the which most wicked
opinion we must ponder and lay the sentences of Paul Rom^. v. cap. By him
(meaning Christ) we have free passage and way in faith. And to the Ephesia^s
v. cap. Through whom we may boldlye by faith in him to come nigh. And to the
Rom^. viii. which sitting on the right hand of God doethe continually pray
for us. Therefore no man can come to God but through this mediator and Bishop
which bears our prayers to him without any stop or let of any other. As to
the Rom^. x. cap. How can they call on him on whom they believe not. James
also teaches, let the man ask in faith not doubting. And Matthew.xxi. what
soever you ask in your prayer beleuynge you shall have it. Therefore the way to
make thy service to god and worshyppyng of him true, perfect and pleasant,
and also acceptable, is of necessity to learn to know this doctrine of
faith, and mercy which is given freely.

Faith.
ABOVTE THIS VOcable and word of faith: many do make much a do agynst us,
which makes us to marvel that there has been and is so great darkness
in the church, that the very natural signification of this word, which is in
every man's mouth, that all men's ears are full of it, is so lost,
forgotten, and unknown, that few do understand it aright. The which loss
of the right meaning of faith being much to be lamented: has associated
to it another greater and more evil: that it is hard and almost impossible,
to pluck the enueterate and old erronyous opinion out of men's heads. The
which certain raylers, as Cocleus and certain other (which do show them
self to be of a more sad and demure sort) do most styfly and stronglye
defend and maintain, with whom because they seek not for the knowledge of the
truth, but how they may serve their own apetyte and foolyshe blind disease:
we entende not for to brawle and scolde: referrynge us to the judgment of
virtuous and learned men. For the Prophettes and the Apostle do declare and
show so plainly the very true signification of faith, that of no man which
has his right wits it can be denied. Faith therefore is not only a
knowledge of the hystorye of Christ: but it is a steadfast trust also in the
mercy of God promised to us for Christ sake. Grace.
And to believe that likewise grace which is the free mercy of God: the gift of
the holy Ghost, and life ever lastyng is promised to us and that even so it
shall be performed. Thus to believe and to be agreeable to the promise coveting
and desiring this heavenly comfort, and there in for to have our repose and
rest: when we do hear that god will be mercyful to us for Jesus Christ sake,
it perteyneth to the inward part of man the heart and mind. Wherefore when we
do hear say that by faith we are justified, we may not imagine and think
that we are justified because that faith is a Godly and a worthy virtue. But
when we say that by faith we are justified, we must understand this saying
relatyuely, having respect to that thing which I do receive by faith, being
the fre mercy promised to us for Christ sake, by the which we are made just,
pleasant, and acceptable to God. By this faith we apprehende, receive, and
knowledge the mercy of God making it fytte and mete for our necessary use.
Faith is a vocable relatyue.
For faith, and confidence, although I grant them to be qualities: yet they be
as all other vocables and words of affections to be taken relatiuely, that is
to say, to be referred having respect to an other thing beside it self. As
by this example. This word love, is respectyuely taken to that thing which
is loved. Fear has his abiecte that thing which is feared. So the abiecte
of faith or confidence is that thing which is trusted and hoped after. This
manner of dialecticall reasonynge and proof, not so much as children but do
know it to be true. The which that unshame fast and foul mouthed person
Mensenger as bold as Gawyn within tempest audacitie and out of all season did
reprehende. But I do appeal to the whole judgment of them that be learned
men which know that vocables. relatyue, are to be understand respectively,
as it is said in latyne. Secundum dici, perceiving how necessary is the use
of these small and tryfelynge (to seem to) precepts in matters which be of
great import and weight.

LYKEVVISE as these words folowinge are to be taken respectively. The
confidence of his treasure, makes the rich man in time of death and scarsty
to be of a quiet mind, and stomach, that is to say. Through his treasure the
rich man is quiet. So when we say that by faith we are justified, streyghte
way thou doeste remember the correllatyue, being through mercy for Christ
sake promised we are made just. I remember that I have been sometime demanded
and asked this question: Wherefore we must say. By faith we are made just, if
we will that man shall be just by the mercy promised for Christ. Whereto I answer
saying, that these words ar correllatiue that one having respect to that
other. By faith we are just, and by mercy we are just. There must needs be
mention made of faith, for as much as by some motion and mean we must
receive this gift of mercy applienge it to our commodities. And when we do
speak of faith, our mind doethe look straight way on Christ, beholdynge the
mercy which is freely promised for him, being thoroughly persuaded that we are
made just, not for our own virtues and deeds: but for some thing else which
is without us and nothing of our self: that is for Christ, the mediator, which
sytteth on the right hand of the father calling and intreatynge for us. This
faith being in our minds is not a phantasy or an idel cogitacio^, but it is a
thing which stryueth and wrasteleth with the terrors and torments of our
conscience, with sin, with death, and with the Devil, which by huge and
wondrous crafts does besege our sick minds: to drive them if he might
into the contempt of God, which contempt, utter and most to be wailed,
desperation does follow. As Cayn, Saull, Judas, with a great many mo, which
rekenyng them selfs abject from God: did incontinent lie with all furyous and
outragyous madness begin to hate and despise God. There be an other sort which
passinge not for God do think that there is no God at al, living like epicures
as Pharao, which when they be in the stormysh and troublous brontes and
dangers, do not regard, nay they do despise the word of God, and the
heavenly comfort, not aydinge them self with faith, but being as men broken
and clean overcome, do give place to the Devil, which says to them, there is
no God which has any power, and that the world with all the contents
thereof is not governed by God, but that al things does live and dye again,
come and go again naturally. Contrary wise they which do give ear to the
Gospel, that, to be cast down into the extreme calamities and miseries, as it
were into the bottom of Hell, and to be thence brought out and restored again,
are the very works and ordynance of God. Those men do stay and comfort them
selfs with faith, they have their refuge unto their captain Christ. Him
they know to be the conqueror: which breaks the head of the Serpent, which
(as is before said) does distroye the works of the Devil, being and
continuing always from the beginning with his faithful lovers. For they which
be helped of the son of God, are they which do vanquisshe and overcome the
Devil, not forsakynge the Lord. And this is the thing, for the which the
Devil doethe make all this styrrynge and great romble, striving with us to
make us to deny the Lord, our faith steadfastly withstanding, and commaundyng
us to stycke and to cleue fast to him, which is our captain, teaching us also
that there is a Lord, which though he does punyshe sometime, yet be gyuethe
also a fre promise of mercy for his son sake whom he has given to us to be
our helper, and promisinge to his beloved everlasting life and felicity. God
therefore is both seen and known in and by his words: whereon man's mind
steadfastly with a perfect faith fyred, doethe not forsake God but knowledgyng
his mercy, does call on him lokyng for deliverance, submyttyng him self all
together to the will of God. Who has the praise of the victory but only
Christ, which says without me you can do nothing. Those men which have
proved this by experience in their own living and invocation may understand
this doctrine of faith, and also judge that we are just, that is to say
accepted for Christ sake only. Faith must be kyndel^d with the knowledge of God.
The which faith must be kyndled in us with ye true knowledge of God, which
faith I say can not be kept and defended without great battle and fight.

NOW will I declare to you bringing forth the testimony of the Scriptures,
testifieng and teaching us that faith does not signify only the knowledge
of Christ hystorycally, but also a sure and steadfast confidence of mercy,
which does strive continually against desperation and contempt of God. Romans
iiii.i.
Paull to the Romans the.iiii. cap. does confer together the promise and
faith as correllatiues, that one respondynge to that other, teaching that the
promise of necessity must be receyuyd by faith. Ergo, Faith does signify a
confidence which depends only on the mercy of God. The which testimony is so
clear and plain, that the Devil of Hell can not withstand it. Therefore
(says he) by faith and through grace and favor that the promise may be
certain, that is: I do require faith where by the promise of our
reconciliation may dereceyued. Ephesians. iii.ii.
To the Ephesians.iii cap. By whom we have boldness and courage with fre
entrance by the confydence, which is by faith in him. What testimony can a
man have more excellent I have not now to do with iesters and raylers, but
with virtuous and gentle redars, whom I do exhort and desire for the very
glory of Christ, that they would weye diligently the testimonies and
witnessynges of the Scripture. Paul in this place does excellently declare the
nature of faith with.iii. goodly vocables. By faith (he sayethe) that we have
boldness, we have entrance, we have confydence. The which vocables do not
pertayne to the historycal knowledge, which should discomfort us if we should
think, that then we shall come to Christ, when we shall be found worthy. It
follows that faith is to be understood, the trust of mercy, though Cocleus
would burst for anger, with all his cauilations. If faith (says he) and
confidence, or trust in mercy be al one, wherefore should Melanchton join unto
faith, confidence or trust of mercy, as effects of foythe. Wisely forsothe
and full of lively wit. As though that one motyon of the heart can not be
expressed and declared with sundry and diverse vocables. And for as much as
faith is a motion of the heart, whereby we have entrance to the Lord, it can
not be taken only for the hystorycall knowledge of Christ, which as I have
said would rather discomfort the minds and consciences of men which are
weak, then to comfort them and make them strong, as to the Romans.v.
Through whom we have entrance by faith. Rom v.ii.
The third testimony, to the Romans.v. cap. We being justified by faith,
have peace. etc Now the hystorycall knowledge of Christ does not set the
conscience of man at rest and quietness, nor at peace with Christ, but rather
does augmente and increase terrors and fear in us, so long as we do hold
and keep the opinion of the law. For what sign or token more terrible of the
wrath of God can we have, than to consider that he neither could nor would be
pleased with no kind of sacrifice, but only with the blood and death of his
son.

THVS for to think that the merits of Christ pertains to none but to them,
which of them self have sufficiently merited, does not minishe the terrors
of our conscience, but increasethe them. Ergo, Faith does comfort the sick
consc^ences.
then it follows that if faith does work this Godly feat and deed of comfort
in lyftynge up and comfortynge of the diseased and sick conscience, why should
not we then call this faith to be, and to signify the confidence and trust of
mercy. And for as much as Paull his self does show and declare that he does
speak of that faith which does fight and strive with the fear and torments
of the mind: how can our adversaries say that by this faith is understand
the knowledge hystorycall of Christ. The fourth testimonye. To the Colosenses.
In whom you are also risen again through faith, which is wrought by the
operation of God. He does say that we are sanctified through faith, that is
as much to say, that God through a sure and steadfast confidence in his mercy is
effectuously in us. John. v.v.
John also the v. cap. Who that believe the not in the Lord his promise makethe
him a liar because he beleuethe not the testimonye and witness of God, that
God has given us everlasting life, and eternal felicity. Wherein he does
remytte and refer faith to the promise, requyrynge us to give faith and
trust to the promise which who that believes not makethe God a liar. As though
the lord would not perform that which he has promised. what is to believe
the promise. Romans iiii.vi.
To agree to the promise is nothing else but to have confidence and trust of
mercy for Christ sake. The syxt testimonye. And to the Romans.iiii. Which
against al hope, where nothing was to hope, believed upon hope. I pray the most
gentle reder, can in this place this word faith and belefe be otherwise
expounded, than of the confidence and trust of mercy by the promise. We need
not go far about to seek the signification of the word. Abraham is commended
because he believed that God would perform his promise, Abraham hi^ faith
although to him naturallye it seemed impossible. On this manner must the good
and Godly christians be instructed and taught in their faith, that when we be
most destitute of man's help, we may look most surest after the help and aid
of God, and so to keep and hold God fast. It does follow afterward in the
self same chapyter, Faith and mystrust are ii. con^aries
where Paull does confer faith and dubytacyon together: as layinge.ii.
contraries one against an other saying. He doubted not on mistrust, or else, he
was not feeble in faith: where he speaks of faith, which wrasteleth with
dubitation or mystrust in ceceyuynge of the promise. The seuenthe testimonye.
Mark the.ix. chap. I do believe Lord: Mark. ix.vii.
help thou mine unbelief. In the which place the Euangelyste speakethe not of
the hystorycall knowledge, but of the perfect and sure confidence and trust,
which does ask, call, look, and hoope steadfastly after the benefits of
Christ. As the hystory of the woman of Canany Mathewe.xv. The faith of the
woman of Canany.
cap. which being put twyse from Christ: ye and with rebuke: did not for all
that cease to call and make her petition with a marvelous discrete wisdom and
sobrenes, refutynge the saying of Christ, confessing her self to be in deed
unworthy of the benefits of Christ: yet for the goodness of the lord she
trusted steadfastly after his benefyte. The faith of the which Ethnycke woman:
Christ with his own mouth did extol, praise, and commend hyghly, an swerynge
to her O woman thy faith is great, so be it to the as thou doeste desire
Wherefore should we not only in these place: but in many other such like
histories of the Gospel not doubt, but be certainly persuaded that faith does
signify a confidence which both does ask and also trustethe after the
benefits of Christ. Which feyth, sith that it ought to shine and be as most
principal in all our inuocations and prayers: it is necessary that al me^ be
instructed the right way of it. But contrary wise the enmies of gods word
bids us to look on the life of Christ: they counsel us to doubt and to be
in mistrust, whether god will be merciful unto us, and here out peticio^s ye
or nay. The which doctrine is clean contrary and repugnant unto this most
godly exaumple of the woman of Canany, and such other like, utterly abolishynge
the true worshippinge and right invocation of god. H. br^.xi. viii.
The description of Faith to the Hebrews.xi. capi. does teach us that Faith
does signify a confidence and trust, with these words. Feythe is a certain
expectation of things looked and trusted after. This is an exposition of this
word faith after the bare grammar rule, as al learned men doethe know. If it
be an expectacion: then it is a true confydence, or trust of a promise to be
performed. Also, Ac^. xv, ix.
the Acts.xv. By faith purifieng the hertes of them. By this it is evident and
plain that the hertes are not purified and made clean by the hystorical
knowledge. For it follows afterward as it were an exposition of that same,
with these words Neither our fathers, nor yet any man had ever their hertes
clean through the justice of the law. But clean contrary he sayethe, that
their hertes are cleansed and made pure: if they be made clean through the
favor of our Lord Jesus Christ: wytnessynge, that by faith is signified a
certain confydence dependynge on the mercy of God promised for Christ sake.

Romans.x. cap. Rom x.x.
All they which do believe in him shall not be confounded or made frustrate and
boyde of their belefe. Here Paul does separate the benefyte of the Gospel
from the law, speaking not of the knowledge hystoricall only, but of such a
confydence which makes us certain that God is merciful to us for Christ his
sake, and not for the law. Which sentence is often time repeted in the
Prophettes, as psalm^.ii. kiss you the son. Blessed be all they which trust
in the son. By these words, the confydence and trust in the son must needs
be understand. We are commanded to knowledge and take him to be the son of
God. On the which lord we are commanded to put and set all our confidence.

FOR as much as the condition of the law may not be added thereto (for Faith
can not be part on Christ, and part on the Law) we must of necessity take
Faith to be a confydence, whereby we ac^ persuaded that through the son of God
we are delivered from sin and tyranny of the Devil. ii. Para. xx.xi.


THE second of the Paralip. and xx. cap. Trust you to your Lord God, and you
shall not fail but be safe. The army was commanded to call and to trust
certainly for help from the Lord In the which place there is no speking of
the historical knowledge: but we are commanded to have confidence, which does
both call and also look for help of God. These testimonies I think do
sufficiently declare that Faith doethe signify confidence or trust in the
mercy of God. And many mo exaumples, they which will read may find. There is no
testimon^ of the scriptur so plai^ but it may be p^ru^te^
I know very well that the Devil with all his babes can devise cautels and
crafts enough with cauillatione, whereby they would go about to ^elude,
peru^rce, and inuert, and corrupt the right sense of these testimonies.

SVCHE is the wanton ydlenes now a days of wits, that some ambiciouslye in
hope of praise and honor, and gapynge for promotion, some maliciously for
evil will, and some for mere hatred against the truth will after their corrupt,
malieiouse, and enuiouse iugementes, ^eprehende and falsefye these and all
other testimonies of the Scripture, be they never so manyfeste. But ones
again, for Christ sake: I desire and pray al gentyl and good reders that they
would ponder and wey with all diligence this interpretacion: and to consider
what great inconuenyence and danger would ensue and follow to our souls if we
should admytte the contrary, and wrong sense thereof: that thereby al hope and
comfort is clean taken from our consciences: al true invocation clean
abolyshed: and Christ his most profitable benefit, not darkened only: but also
plucked away. Wherefore we must wipe and with most sharp pikes put of from
al our life, and in specially from the church all Sophistical delusions and
cauylations, and not to suffer every man: nay no man to phantasye otherwise of
this vocable Faith than we have declared, as they do now at their own liberty
and pleasure, like to paynters with their colors, some this way, some that
way. Let the simple and plain verity most necessary for the church be
maynteyned and delivered interly, whole, and pure, to our posterity. This
duty does God require and demand of al men: but in specyallye of them which
be the wells and heads of learning and governors of the commonwealth: most
due of right to the church of God. Being certainly assured that there is no
service or worshyppynge more pleasant and acceptable to God: than is this.
For after this manner are the sentences of Paull to be understand. Abraham did
give confydence to the Lord his promise, and therefore he was reputed just. As
who should say, Abraham knowledged that he was not just for the law sake, or
his own virtues, considering his own natural infirmities, which is the
mother of many vices, that is to say, of mistrust of Gods promise, of many
wandering and wauerynge desires and lusts. He remembered the offenses
committed by him, when he was among the Calde is defylynge him self with most
ungodly worshyppinges. But after that he herd of the sede that was promised
(the lord saying to him) I will be thy protector and defender: then he believed
that through the favor and mercy promised of God he should obtain remission of
sins and to have God a merciful defender and savior. By that means was
Abraham pronounced just by Faith, that is by the confydence and trust in the
mercy of God, although he perceived his nature, to be corrupt, weak,
noughtye, and vicious. Faith also does not only pertayne to remission of
sin, and free acceptance of God: but also sometime it has his outward
obiectes, being about externe things. Faith some time is about outewa^de
things.
As was the Faith of Dauyd about the fight and battle with Golyathe. The
which examples do serve also for this our purpose. For this Faith which
lokethe after corporal aid, must needs be after that other Faith, which goes
before, which receives remission of sin. For the mind of man: can not be
persuaded in him self that he shall obteyn help and succor of God, before he
be surely certayned that God is and will be merciful to him. The which rule
does show and declare that Paul does allege the testimonies and scriptures
of Faith aryght, giving us instruction, how we shall behave our selfs in our
invocation and prayer.

Augustine.
UNTO the testimonies of the scriptures I will add and join the minds and
judgments of the old writers. Augustyne, does say. The Law make the us to
fear God, but Faith causes us to fly to his mercy: wherein Augustyne
declares very well that Faith is not the historycal knowledge only.

Chrysostom
CHRISOSTOM also in his co^mentarye which he did write on the Epistle to the
Romans the third chapyter. By Faith (says he) we do not only love God,
but also we do believe that we are beloved of him, be we never so gyltie, and
that our sins be forgiven by him for his son sake. There is no kind of
worshyppynge more excellent than this. No though thou should absteyne from
theft and murdre: that same deed can not be more pleasant and acceptable to
God. Hitherto the words of Chrysostom, which though he do some time err and
go out of the way, yet for this point he deserves no small praise and
commendation. For he has set forth and painted this word and vocable
Faith in his own colors so lively and so manifest (in that he says that we
must believe that we are beloved of God, ye though we be fawty and full of
fylthynes, and that we through our belefe do receive remission of sin) that
no man can more. The faithful man reioyseth and is proud, not only because he
louethe God, but also because he fyndeth at his hand again great love and
profit. For likewise as he loved God gyuynge and putting great confidence in
him, being a token of a great love, so likewise God loved him being a great
sinner not only not punyshyng as the sin deserves: but for his steadfast
confidence and trust in his mercy making him just and ryghtwyse.

Bernarde also is no less worthy of commendation: Bernarde.
for that he writes concerning feythe, whose words are these following,
written in his sarmon of the Annunciatio^. It is necessari (says he) first of
all to believe that thou may and shall obtain remission of thy syn: none
other way than by the pardon and most ientill favor of god. Thou must also
add this unto thy belefe and trust of remission of sin: that for Christ sake
thi^ sins ar forgiven the. This is the testimony and witness that the holy
ghost bears in thy barte, saying to the: thy sins are forgiven the. After
this manner did the apostle deem and judge, that a man freely by feith is made
just. This far gothe the words of Barnard, which has many such like
sentences: being but of late, and not very many years past a writer, not
ignorant nor void of these spiritual exercises and motions, whereby he did
perceive that the conscience could not be satisfied and set at rest without the
trust of the mercy of god by feyth, which feyth he called as we do, the
confidence or trust of mercy. I have said before, that we do comprehend under
this vocable of feith, the historical knowledge also of ye life of Christ,
with all the circumstances thereof: and all the articles of our feith: so that
when feith does conceive and comprehend this article of remission of sin,
then do we straight way give trust and confydence without doubt that we shall
receive this benefit. Where as other, which going no further than ye bare
hystorycal knowledge of Christ: at this point making their stay, do not believe
of the remission of sin, (according as they do teach and preach) that is:
that men shall doubt whether their sins be forgyuen them ye or nay.

I HAVE spoken sufficiently (I think) of this word Faith, which to them that
be lovers of the truth were sufficient, Therefore now I entende some thing
to touch the Sophistical clusion of Origin, and many other, which do think
that this saying and proposition (by Faith we are justified) is spoken
figuratively by a figure which is called Synechdoche, meaning that we be by
the knowledge of the hystorye of Christ justified Thus they do understand
Faith, thynking that Paul does only commend our profession (that we be called
Christians) because that the name of our profession (which is common to the
evil persons as well as good) causes (as they think) our virtues to be
plesaunt and acceptable to God, which virtues in the Turks and Infidels
should not be pleasant nor acceptable. Thus this figure does transform and
transpose the Gospel into the Law, turnynge the glory and praise of Christ
into our virtues and that thing which is the comfort of our conscience: to our
great discomforte and sorowfulnesse, lere abolyshynge the doctrine of Faith
which is the trust or confydence of mercy. And wherefore do they doubt in this
article of remission of sin? because they do perceive and feel that our
nature is weke, feeble, and full of all doubtfulnesse and mistrust of the will of
God. Therefore they do confyrme this doctrine of dubytation, because they do
persuade them selfs, that the blindness and darkness which we do bring
naturally from Adam with us into the world: to be no vice nor sin. As the
Academical questioners: Philosophers which other have done. The which figure
being all together contrary to that doctrine of Paull in the exposition of
this Epistle to the Romans. I will refute and take away: with so manifest
arguments and and profes: that they their own self shall se and also say that
all together is a wrye and amysse. We will bide by the words of Paull, which
says that we be justified by Faith freely, that is that we do obtain
remission of our sin, being reputed just before God not for any of our
merits, but by Faith, which is the trust of mercy promised to us for Christ
sake only. We will not make Paul speaking here in figures: we do not change
his words, but we do learn of him to take the true meaning, as the nature of
the word, and the matter which the Apostle takethe in hand to dyspute, does
require. It is very profitable and necessary to al good men to have certain
sure testimonies of the Scripture wi^h the confirmations of this proposition,
always ready and at hand: both to instruct other and also to stir up true
Faith and perfect prayer The which vocables by us declared and perceived of
you. I trust in the Lord that this proposition. (By Faith we are justified) is
easy and light for every man to understand. For the which cause at other times
we have gathered together forth of Paull many places for this purpose.
Wherefore at this present it shall be sufficient to have touched the principal.
In the end of the third chapter to the Romans. Paull most like a
cunninge clerk, propoundynge this proposition: By Faith we are justified
freely: uses weyghtye and clerkly confyrmations, which most of all are to be
printed in men's minds to kyndle up our Faith that in all our perils and
dangers they may be always before our eyes.

THVS much have I spoken of Justification and of Faith. works.
Now will I declare some thing concerning the doctrine of good works, which
are called the new obedience: Dure new obedience.
which necessaryly follows Faith. There be.iiii. things that we will speak
of. The first what works are to be done, the second: how they may be done.
Thyrdly, how they may please God. In the which third part we will dyscusse
whether we be justified, that is to say accepted of God to eternal felicity
for that new obedience sake, which be borne again in a new kind of life,
and whether we be without sin and worthy everlasting life for our own
pureness. Fourthlye we will treat of deadlye sin which makes us void of
Grace, of Faith, and of the holy Ghost: consequently declaryng what are called
venyall sins, and which they be.

that wor^es are to ^e done.
TO THE FIRST QVEstion, what works are to be done, wherein it is right that we
do led the minds of me^ to the word of God, that they may know that al their
life as well concerning the conflicte of conscience as their outward deeds
must be governed and ruled by the word of God, as witnesses the Prophet,
saienge. The candle or lantern to my fete is ye word of God. I do answer
therefore to this question, word of God.
that those works which are commanded to us of God are to be kept and done:
and that by the manifest word of God. As the ten commandments in manner and
form as they be declared and also expounded in the new testament: yea and
also if there be any other precepts or commandments perteynynge to the
outward life: in the teachynges and lessons of Christ and his Apostles. This
I do say because I would not that men should make and feign no new
worshippinges and works with out the word and commandment of God. As did
the Monks, Chano^s and Friars, Nonnes, Monks.
with other Popysshe prelates, and now of late the Anabaptists, which not
taking the word of God to council, did inuente and pike out for them selfs,
works after their own judgment and fantasies, making men believe
afterward. that they were styrred thereto by the holy spirit. The which may in
no case be resisted or co^traryed, but obeyed by allawes, right and reason. This
was the cause of the dissolute and unlawful living of the Anabaptists.
Anabaptystes
Wherefore here after it shall be declared to you: what is to be understand and
meant by this words (to be delivered from the Law) purposyng now in few
words to show, that they which be regenerated and newborn by Faith as I
have said, do receive the holy Ghost, that there may be begone in them a new
obedience or better manner of living, a new light, and life eternal, which
is a beginning and an entrance into the law of God.

THEREFORE the Prophet says. I will give and put my law into their hertes.
Faith of necessity must needs go before this new life, the which life must
also follow as necessarily. Many sentences in the Scriptures bearing thereto
witness. Example. If thou wylt enter into heaven keep the commandeme^tes Also.
Except the justice of you do abound above. etc. Fornicators and adulterers
shall not possess the kingdom of God. And. The holy Ghost does move and
styre the hertes of men by the word of God: to the which word we must give
all our obedience. As Paull witnesses, we are detters, that we do not live
after the flesh. For Faith can not stand in us without repentance. For by
Faith we must receive the remission of sin. And that man does not in deed
ask and call for remission of sin, which against his own conscience
deliteth in mischief. It is not the outward discipline only which is
required of us. But the beginning of the inward obedience, that is to say,
the godly motions of our heart agreeable to the law of God. A man may se that
the adversaries of the truth, when they do cry and bark good works: they
do play as though they should teach children how they should behave them
selfs in modest and honest wearinge of their garments, in their eating and
drinking. Now and then peradventure they do speak of alms deed. But touching
the works commanded in the first table: they do play mum: not one word for
a good pound: being as dum as a fish. Wherefore is ye: but because they know
not the doctrine of Faith: therefore they can give no good instruction. But God
commaundethe and requires of us the works of both the tables.

HE wyllethe that we do fear and dread the anger and wrath of God against
our infyrmities and innumerable offenses. He wylleth also that we being
reconciled by the son of God do believe that he has received us to his
favor, that he will save us, that he will help us. With this Faith will he
be called on. He wyllethe that with this Faith we do both call and surely to
look and trust after help, as the psalm. Call on me. etc. He wyllethe with
this Faith, that we do depend and hang on him, and not to seek other aides and
helps contrary to his word and will. These are the secret and most propre
works of a christian man which we must needs understand. The examples whereof
are seen in those Godly men which God has set before us as masters and
teachers. In Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Samu^l. David, Jeremy, Danyel, and
such like. He commands us also that we have a whote and an ardent desire:
both to know and also to set forth abroad to all men the Gospel. This is the
worshyppynge which he teaches: for the which we are al chefely ordained,
created, regenerated and called. As Peter writes. Being called from darkness,
to show and set forth to all men the benefits of God, and the psalm.34 I
will confess to the etc. and psalm.95 I will render and perform to the lord
before all the people my vows: in the porches of the house of our god. He
wills, that in the profession of the gospel we be constant, and in
afflictions obedient, calling and trusting for help and succor from him. He
wills us to take heed, that with our ill examples of life we do give none
occasion of sclaunder. He commands us to refute, hate and abhor al wicked
doctrines: and not to corry fauell with the instruments and members of the
Devil: which do go about to obscure and darken the most clear, pure, and
wholesome doctrine of the Gospel. I go not about now to make none exposition of
the commandments: but yet I would council all men always, to look earnestly
on them, and to considre how many, great, and hard matters they do
comprehend.

How works may be done.
TO the second question: by what reason and how may so great works: both
the inward and the outward works be performed and done, our weakness being
so great as it is. Although that the outward works by man's power and
diligence may be somewha^ likely, and skant so so performed, yet the inward
discipline and work being in the spiritual motions agreing to the word of
God: without the working of ye holy Ghost can by no means be done as they
ought to be. Therefore when that with Faith the hertes of me^ are erected and
lift up with comfort, then is given the holy Ghost to kindle in the minds
of men godly motions respondent to the law of God, according to the saying of
Paul, that we may receive the promise of the spirit by faith Zachary the.iiii.
cap. I will pour out upon the dwellers of Jerusalem the spirit of my grace,
favor, and pardone. Very godly forsothe did this Prophet set forth and
declare, the office and works of the holy Ghost in the hertes of the
virtuous, and also the right worshippinges that we ought to do. He doethe
name the spirit of Grace because that when by Faith we are lift up: then we
are helped of the holy Ghost, whereby we are persuaded that God is merciful
to us, and again that we are acceptable to him.

FIRST therefore he does declare and signify to us that Faith is styrred up in
us by the holy Ghost, in the which motion and styrrynge the holy ghost does
give us testimony and witness. As Paul says. For as much (says he) as by
faith we do knowledge the mercy and presence of god, we do th^n also call on
him, we do submit our selfs to him beginning al other true worshippinges which
under the name of pra^e^ the prophet does comprehend. For this is the chief
honor that can be done and exhibited to god. It is therefore easy enough to be
perceived, that Faith of the which we do speak, is the beginning of the
inward obedience, good purpose or intentes, (as men use to call it). Neither
can the first precept which techeth of the wrath of God against sin, and also
of his free pardon, have any root or beginning in us, except through the
hearing of the word of God, which is the Gospel with a strong Faith we do
certain our selfs that for Christ sake. we do obtain remission of our sin.
For Faith does behold the son of god in his kingdom, knowinge perfectly that
he is not idle: but always giving bat tail to the Devil, which continually
ragynge over mankind: never ceasseth with his cautels and giles to illure and
provoke him to sin, and other misfortunes, for none other cause but to draw
him into desperatio^, with diverse kinds of errors and other epicuris opinions,
which do flatter and deceive gentle and soft wits. On that other side he
styrreth up tyrants for to put down and to suppress withal cruelty the
name of Christ. For as much therefore that it is manifest that the nature of
man is so weak and feeble, that without the heavenly help it is not able to
vanquish and overcome so cruel and fierce an enmy, which never slepeth.
Therefore Faith calls to remembrance the kingdom of Christ, beleuyng
steadfastly that he has been contynually with his faithful even from the time
of his first promise, which was, The first promise.
the sede of the woman shall trede to powder and dust the head of the Serpent.
The which promise by John is made plain, saying. Christ appeared to distroy
the works of the devil. The Lord was at hand with Jacob and blessed him with
the holy Ghost: he was by Danyel, and talked with him: he does reygne so, that
he is always present with his members confyrmynge them with the holy Ghost,
gydynge them against the crafty gyles and deceytes of the Devil with all his
assaults. What manner and how glorious these victories be: The examples of
Dauyd, Ezechias and Danyel do declare, ye and Christ at the resurrection of ye
dead shall show those gorgious triumphs, which the world does make light at:
nay they do openly deride and laugh to skorne.

BUT to good men these battles are well inoughe known: which in the times of
perils and dangers must practyse this Faith: knowledging and calling on
Christ their captain: and so having confidence in him to fight with the Devil,
remembringe the words of John. Christ came down among us to distroy the
works of the Deuyli. By this, men may se that Faith is not an idle
speculation or phantasy, but that it is a light which gouernethe all our
acts, ye and al our perils and dangers. We may therefore by the help of the
son of God, which reygneth, begin this new obedience, which like a valiant
captain never forsakes his beloved, putting into them his holy spirit. We
may not think that Christ lives and reygneth in Heaven ydelly, as the Poets
feigned Jupiter to banquet and to make merry in Heaven, nothing regardinge what
is done in earth. Such darkness is in the mind of men, contemnynge and setting
light by God. The which errors by the light of the Gospel and by Faith must be
redressed. Of this practice and exercise of Faith with true invocation of God:
what can the adversaries of god say, and speak, which in the stead of the
Gospel and of Faith does inculcate and teach us the Pirrhonious Phylosophye
of dubitation and mystrust.

Now follows the third question which the old writers have not spoken of,
so largely and plainly as they have of that other twain, being no less, nay
more necessary

How our works may please God.
FOR as much as in them which he regenerated remains yet great imbecillitie
and weakness, not having the fear (which they ought to have) of God: not
brennynge in Faith and love, seeks the help of man, more than the word of
God permits, being seducted with errors, and neglygent in doing their
duetye and office, being proud and puffed up with immoderat affections of
love and hatred, courtynge dishonest and unlawful pleasures: and in their
afflictions and troubles bendyng their brows against the lord, doubting, or
rather dispayryng of his mercy, are inflamed with unjust desire of vengeance,
does not with heart declare them self to God gentle and loving: not thankyng
him hertely for his great benefytes, passing not much whether the Gospel does
go backewarde or forward, not bewaylyng the calamities and miserable state of
the church, and of the commonwealth, not prayenge for the church, and for
princes: but being set a fire with unjust desire of gatheri^g together of
richesse, honors, and of power, hatynge them which do shine in godly virtues
and godly gifts, or rather caysyng up sclaunders on them: as the contention
of superiority between the sister of Moses and Aaron did cause stubburnesse.

FOR as much I say as these great ^yces do yet reygne in them: ye which are
borne again in a new birth, vices I say much contrary and repugnante to the
law of God, worthy death everlasting, spryngynge from the most pesty^ent
well and fountain of al mischefe. I say Original sin, that is the ignorance
and want of the knowledge of god, and froward turnynge thy self away from the
will of God, (of the which vices Paul speakinge discribeth no small deformite:
but a great and monstruouse evil, saying, the sense, felyng, and pricking of
the flesh is mortal enemy to God), it is manifest therefore that no man can
perform and satisfy the Law but only Christ, and that in the new borne by
Faith, there does remain sin contrary to the Law of god, and worthy
everlasting death without they be forgyuen. Sith that this is true: not only
in the schools, but also in men's minds these question being resoned causes no
sma^ perils and contention within man, resonyng with other, yea, and with
their own selfs, whether they please God ye or nay: secondly how this
impure, and imperfect new life can please God being so full of uncleanness.

IT is necessary therefore that men be taught to understand and perceive both
of these doubts. For the hypocrites (so feeble and weak is their nature) d^
stand much in their own conceyt regarding and setting much by they^ own
virtues, thynkyng that they b^ strong enough of them self, making the
natural vicious inclination of the flesh no sin or very small: do think
them selfs without sin, that they be able of their own strength to perform
the law of God, and worthy to obtain the life everlasting for their own
deserts and merits. This is the mind not only of Hipocrites, but also of
those which in their judgments do follow their own blind reasons and
fantasies. Such was the reasonyng of Plato and of Tullye of the immortality
of souls, saying that those souls which departed forth of the bodies most
purist having least part of the dregs and filthynesse of the bodies did fly
up to the air. Contrary wise: those souls, which departing, were full of
all filthy lusts and foul desires of the fleshly bodies, did continue still
on the earth being about the sepulchers and graves where their bodies were
laid and buried. Is not al one matter that our religious fathers, bosting and
setting un of their merits seems for to do Do they any thing else than Plato
or Tully. Although that the reason of man by his own light and knowledge of
him self can none otherwise judge, yet the word of God does testify, that no
man can satisfy the law, accusyng al men, and setting before us our mediatur,
the only son of God. It is necessary therefore that those proud, arrogant, and
carkles stomakes of Hipocrites be rebuked, as much as it is requisite, that the
fearful consciences and weak minds are to be comforted with the true comfort
not to mystrust the mercy of God (for that he hates) but to have a steadfast
Faith: and to learn how the life, manners, and works may please God. Peter:
when he was in the boat, being affrayde, said: go from me Lord, for I am a
sinner. Though that Peter being in great fear did not mark what he said his
self, yet as it does happen often times unawares to a man being suddenly moved,
he did simpelly declare with his mouth what his heart thought. For he fled
from God, beholding and considering his own unworthiness. Likewise all men
beholdinge their own unworthiness, do fly from God, thynkyng that in so doing
they do well to go from him, because they do seem to their selfs unworthy. The
which error being fyxed in men's minds, the gospel does reprehend,
commaundinge all men though they be unworthy, to come boldlye unto him,
trustyng steadfastly on the mediator, which is the son of God.

AND although as I have declared a new obedience, (which is the justice, in
declaration of a good conscience) is very necessary, yet for all that they
which be regenerated and new borne again in Christ in a new life by Faith
and inspiration of the holy Ghost, neither do nor can fulfill all that the law
does require. For in them (for all their new birth) remains our first and
original disease: not to be set light by, bredinge and causyng innumerable ill
affections in us. Considering then that these vices are worthy and deserve
everlasting death, ye those which be new borne again are not just, that is
to say accepted or pleasant to god for their own propre virtues, but through
mercy, and that freely: by a full trust in the mediator Christ. Also they do not
merit eternal felicity by their own works and virtues: but they must be
of this opinion that they be heirs of everlasting life by Christ, freely by
Faith: although they have the new obedience, or the good works which
consequently must follow this Faith.

TO prove that none of all the godly and most virtuous men that ever were, can
not perform the request of ye law and that there does remain in them
sin: ye after their regeneratyon this sentence folowinge does prove.

Psalm. 143. Thou shall not enter in to judgment with thy servants, for no
living creature shall be justified in

ALSO Romans. 7. cap. I do se it strives in us always against the Law of
God, Sin.
deserving eternal death: except by Faith, our pardon be obtained, meaning by
that word sin, not only the small motions, styrringes and prickinges of the
flesh, but also the sharp motions of the mind, that is to say, the
mistruste of the will of God, abhorring the cross not being lift up and erected
with trust and gladness in the Lord, as we be when we do find ease and help of
our bodily diseases and sickness. From the which diffidence and mistrust,
rises many evil and noughty minds. Therefore the Apostle uses.ii. vocables in
the same text to the Romans, very propre and mete for this purpose. The first
is this word striving or fighting against: signifieng thereby that like a most
cruel enemy in an open feelde: it does fight against us and seeks al means
and crafts to wound our mind with mistrust in the mercy of God, with terrors
and great fear, with pride, with trust unto our own wit, and rightwisnes of
our self, putting us out of al care of God, and kindelingin us the flame of all
noughty lusts and fylthy desires. The second vocable is this, (going about to
make me captive) the which is so said because thou should take the better
head of him, whose study is to have us in bondage, oppressyng the weak minds,
and at the last taking us prisoners, though we be again delivered by Christ.
As when Moses was snared and taken at the rock, he douted and mistrusted.
Dauyd also was taken when he commanded to nombre his people, either deceived
by error, or else by vainglory that he had augmented and increased his kingdom
so mightily or for some such like cause. We shall not need to bring forth many
examples: every virtuous man has enough of such examples within his own
doors, by their own experience, feling and seeing how diligent and busy our
enmy is to seduce and oppress our mind with our own opinions and
fantasies. For the devil does never cease to besege the virtuous and faithful
men in specially.

PAVL to the Corinthes the first Epistle. 4. i. Corin. i
cap. I know nothing in my

CHRIST also bids his holy ones to call for remission of sin with these
words, and forgive us our dettes etc. commanding them also to say: We holy
Ghost, replenished with excellent gifts continuyng in exercise of Faith,
having governance and rule over great matters (As Abraham, Joseph, Moses
Samuel, David, Esaias) al together with one voice they do cry (I say) these
words. What man does know all our offenses: from our secret and privy vices
make us pure and clean, good lord. Wherefore the arrogant and proud boldness
of the hipocrites, is much to be detested, which do boste and crack that they
do deserve eternal felicity by their own merits and works, and as they do
say, both worthyly and of duty.

Psalm. 31. I have said. I will confess and knowledge against my self
accuse him.

TO the Lord be al rightwisnes: to should know them self nedy of mercy. Also
Paul says He that is proud and reioyseth: let him be proud in the lord.
These and such other like sentences set good men set before them, that they may
learn to know their infyrmyties to be sin without doubt, and that they may
fear the wrath of God, which is against sin, and so let repentance grow in
us. It is said in the Genesis concerning the latter judgment. Sin shall be at
rest till it be reveled and made open. Wherein the carklesnes of mankind is
described, which does neither fear nor regard the judgment of god. He says
sin shall be at rest, that because the lord which does prolong and differ his
punishments: all men will be slogardes without care: dispising the
threteninges of god, but at the last their sin shall be laid forth and set
abroad that it can not be hyd. There it shall not rest, but it shall bring to
man's mind everlasting terror and fear with horrible and soore pains.

TO make our new obedience and good life acceptable to God, what is required
to make our works acceptable to God.
three things are required. First we must believe that man freely for Christ
sake is acceptable. Second to knowledge our own infyrmities and weakness to
be very sin, being sorry and repenta^t for those great vices. Thyrdly to
comfort our selfs, believing that those sins be for given us for Christ
sake, after that by Faith we are made the sons of God, being certain that
our new obedience and work pleases the Lord, not for their own dignity or
worthiness, but for the mediator Christ. Who being our Bishop does offer up
and carries to his father our prayers and worshippinges as Peter writes. Offer
you spiritual sacrifice acceptable and pleasant to god by Jesus Christ.

THIS Apostle sets forth good works goodly calling them sacrifices that is
to say, Spiritual sacrifice.
the mouinges and affections styrred in our hertes by the holy Ghost. And yet
for all that, this kind of worshippinge being so holy: is none otherwise
accepted nor pleasant to the Lord, but only for Jesus Christ sake our redemer
and Bishop, which daily does sue to the father for us.

THVS must Christian hertes be instructed and styrred up to good works God
made and created man to be as a felowshyppe and company together, to the
entente that he would be known among men, and to teach one an other the
doctrine and knowledge of god and of the son of God, as witnesses Stigellius
in his verse as follows.

Vtque alios alii, de religione docerent
Contiguas pietas, iussit habere domos.
GOD also for man has ordained diverse kinds of degrees and orders as some to
be the heads and rulers of the churches, some of universities and schools, and
so forth in all other kind of rulers and offices. He ordained Matrimony for the
bringing up of children. The guvernaunce of the common welthes, and the kings
to be the heads and chief rulers: he has ordained wares and bying and selling
between man and man. He has ordained the church to be subject to great
afflictions and troubles. For what intent was so great a diversity of things
ordained, but that our Faith might shine bright in all our dangers and
perilles, ye and then to increase most, and that we should believe that we are
not made to be distroied, but to be received of him and saved by Christ. To call
on him: to believe that Christ is our captain, which puts away ye brontes
and assaults of the Devil, helping us, both in our private and public business
He that is a Bishop, Bishop.
parson, or parish^ preeste must cry: Lord open thou my lyppes,
Scholemayster.
and my mouth shall pronounce thy praise. The scholemaister shall cons^der how
sore that Christ threateneth them which gives sclaunderous occasion of life
to children, Houscholders.
prayinge that Christ would vouchsafe to be in their studies and to govern
their manners. Householders: let them consider their charges likewise. Good
Princes also must set their churches in a good and conform unity, Princes.
and concord, punishing the epicurious persons, living in all voluptuousnes of
life, passing neither for God: nor for the Devil, and to se good order and
rule among the people: chastenynge thieves, unchaste livers, and liars: to se^
that the right be ministered, every man to have his own. The Devil styrreth
about labourynge to disquiete and disturb the quietness and tranquillity of
the church, the commonwealth: arming tyrants against the word of god
Wherefore let Princes be burning in Faith: beleuynge that Christ is their
helper and distroyer of the work of the Devil.

TO be short likewise as invocation and prayer: so must Faith glister and
shine in all our works and deeds. Although that the virtues and works of good
me^ do not deserve and merit eternal felicity, and remission of sin, being
not able to bye and to purchase everlasting life (for no man can fulfill the
Law, being contrary to al reason, that the merytes of Christ should be
referred to our works and merits, making the promise uncertain if it should
depend on the condition of our worthiness) nevertheless a new obedience
otherwise called good works must necessaryly follow Faith, Faith does go
before and good works does follow.
which obedience then, and not before has the beginning: when by Faith we do
receive the holy Ghost, which faith and holy ghost we do cast away from us as
often as we do lose this new obedyence, Faith and mind to d^yl are neue^
together.
transgressing the commandementes of god against our conscience. For these
twain, Faith, and a will to do or to work against conscience, can in no case
dwell together. To this effect perteyneth many sayings of works, with heart we
believe to our justification, with mouth we give knowledge to our salvation. All
our whole obedience must be a knowledginge and a confession, that is must be
referred to the glory of Christ, and furderance of the gospel. For albeit by
Christ we are made just, and heirs of life everlasting: yet must we have still
this obedience, which is pleasant and acceptable as I have said, being not
possible that Faith can be without this obedience. Paul bearing thereto
witness saying Let us be cledde with an other garment: lest we be found
naked. For Christ his sake, life everlasting is given to none but to them which
do believe, in the which Faith begins everlasting life, which beginning is
the new obedience and works. wherefore ar^oure works excluded from
justification.
Our works be excluded that Christ may have his own honor and praise, that
ye promise might be certain, and that we may have a sure comfort and
consolation against desperation. The thief hanging on the cross being
converted had this new obedience repentyng and lamenting his sin. The Thief
on the cross
A great light of Faith did shine to us in this abject person, the Lord
declaringe by this example to us, that he does preserve and restore the church
when it seems most destitute of help, and like to be overthrown. he
compares and co^fer^ethe the steadfast Faith of the thief with the d^uot^umes
of the Apostles.
The Apostles saying and perceyuyng the great troubles and pains that their
master was in, doubted of him: thinking that he was forsaken of God. But this
pore thief was not discomforted, for all that he saw Christ on the cross,
but called on him for help, hearing him before say. Father forgive them: he
hard of ye works of Christ: and what he professed. He marked the natures of
things, hearing witness to that same, the darkness of the son and the
erthquake. Therefore with a strong heart he called on him, saying. Remember me
Lord when thou doeste come into thy kingdom. What a great matter of Faith was
this, that he would knowledge him which suffered like punishment with him:
which should dye with him, to be the Messiah the forgiuer of sin: the giver
of life everlasting: and that should (death being overcome) reygne a kingdom
after this life. The Apostles before ye time did think that the Romans being
expulsed, he should be an erthly king: but this thief declared, that he which
there suffered death with him: after death should reygne. Whereto Christ giving
evidence said that he his self should reygne, that he was the gyuer of life
eternal, giving to him absolution, and the Gospel of everlasting life, to
kindle and confyrme his Faith, saying. This day thou shalt be with me in
Paradise. Wherewith this poor thief being made strong and confyrmed did
knowledge and confess that he had life everlasting given to him, not for his
own merit and deserving, but for this Lord sake declaring as soon as he
had this Faith and comfort the new obedience toward God. Mark therefore I
pray you and se how that this Apostle hanginge on the tree did teach not
only those which were there present, but also the church which was to come.
What a good spectacle is set before us, whereby we may learn that by Faith
freely we are saved by Christ, not excludinge for all that repentance and other
good works.

what are to be noted i^ the thief.
In the which thief is to be noted, repentance, faith, invocation, confession,
and the office of a preacher. Which forsooth are the chief and principal good
works and kind of worshippinge that we ca^ do to God. There is also an other
marvelous godly lesson to be observed and i^ especial necessary, in that these
good thief rebuked with sharp words, that other thief his fellow, which there
was hanged with him: defending the glory of God: what is to be onderstand by
that this these rebuked his fellow
because he spoke blasphemously of God, giving us example how to rebuke and
reprehend the teachers of wicked lerning contrary to the word of god with
tyrants and al such other which are full of blasphemy persecutinge and
speakinge ill of Christ in his members. The which preacher may well be likened
to them in these our latter days. Wherefore let us hear him diligently both
considering the example and also following of that same.

FOR as much therefore as our new obedience is pleasante and acceptable to God
as I have showed you: although that the life everlasting is given freely for
Christ his sake, yet he does recompense our labors, deeds, Our good deeds
are rewarded
and troubles sustained for his sake, as he does testify, pour reward is
great in heaven. And natwithstanding that of just merit they deserve not life
everlasting, yet they deserve other rewards both corporal and spiritual. For
the Lord entendinge to maintain and preserve his church does liberally give
and distribute many corporal benefits, as mainteininge life with living
competent, giuinge also a ciuyl peace and tra^quillitie, with other things
necessary and profitable for these life. We have also need of spiritual
benefits, as wisdom, learning, strength, good success to every man in his
calling Therefore Christ said, first seek the ki^gdome of god, and then al
thing shall be thrown to you. Paull says also, that pitifulness and charity
has her promyses both in this present life and in that other to come. Mark
the.10. chap. He shall receive an hundredfold more in this life, but not without
persecution. The fourth precept says that thou may live long on the yerth.
And Christ says, give you and you shall receive again. Math x. He that gives
but a cup of water to one of these for the doctrine, he shall not lose his
reward. Every where in the Prophettes promyses of corporal and spiritual
benefytes are contained, These are goodly rewards.
as Esaias 33. speakinge of the good and virtuous sort. Bread shall be given to
them, and they shall se their king florishe: they shall lack no food, their
comonwelth shall prosper and be quiet: Faith. work. Reward.
The widow Sarepton received into her house the prophet Ely, when there was
great scarsite of vitayles. In the which deed, first the faith of the woman,
secondly her work and third her great reward are to be noted and marked.
The Prophet commanded her to give to him some meat, if she had any left,
addinge thereto a promise as the historye declares. The woman gave to him for
to eat, when she had no more in her house for her self. This woman would not
have extended to so great liberality, if she had not ben of a strong Faith,
thinking first that God must be obeyed, and the Prophet succored, and so did
look after the reward and benefit promised of God. Therefore she received a
reward of faith and charity. For her house was maynteyned, and fed from heaven
by ye power of the Lord till that vittayles were better chepe, and waxed more
plenty. Her child which was dead, was restored to life again: by the which
great miracle her Faith was made strong and steadfast and the young man called
unto virtue. Whom Epiphomius does write to be Jonas the Prophet, Jonas.
which afterward preached to the king of Assirians in Niniue, promoting and
setting forth the word of God. Likewise at all times godly and virtuous men
have received not only spiritual benefits, but also many corporal, to the
preservation of the church, some this gift, some that, Paul.
as it pleases the Lord to give, The lord preserved Paul from al dangers,
providing for him both house and meat, and al to her things necessary, so
long as it pleased him that he should serve him in his ministry and office.
So Paull to the Corinthians writethe concerning the plage of pestelence,
saying, that god punished the^ with that plage for their offenses, and if they
would repent be said, that then the plage would cease, Such like are the
words of Zachary. Be you converted to me, and I will turn my face to you,
that is as much to say, as I will swage and mitigate your calamities and
plages, if you will repent, not meaning of one work only to be done, (as
though it were satisfaction) but of the true conversion and fruit, and
declaring that same. By these examples rehrrsed, you may perceive after what
fashion this new obedience is acceptable to God, and what kind of rewards it
has. There be many things that may kindle a man's heart to well doing.
There is no greater ^lage then ^lyndnesse and sin.
First the commandment of God. Secondly, Faith is clean extinguished if
you do neglect this new obedience, that is to say, if new works follow not
this Faith. The third is, considering that the lack of this Faith, and al
other vices are punished with plages in this life, and with pains to come.
Blyndnes, and sin are great plages to us: although there were none other.
Furthermore it is not only the promise which moves us to believe and to be in a
steadfast Faith, but also the commandment of God, which does command us to
give credit and belefe to the son: it does courage us to practice our faith in
good works, because that without such exercise and practice our Faith does
not grow and increace, as it is declared, by the talent. Augustine says. Love
deseruethe again to be increased with Love, speaking not of our acceptacion
but of gifts. Gifts do grow by use of giving, and deserves to be incresed.
The greatness of the mercy of God also does encorage us, because it pleseth
him to allow this our miserable beggarly, and s^lender obedience, and not only
allowing it, but also reputing and taking it to be high honor unto him. Many
other things do courage us thereto as the rewards necessary and expedient for
this life, for the mayntenaunce of the church, with rewards offered to us of
the Lord at times convenient for our Faith, and the practice thereof, as
certayntie of meat and drink: peace good success in all our callinges, in our
studies, in the governing of the church and of the common welthe, honest and
virtuous children. etc. These be great rewards: but the blindness of the
world is so great, that the commandment of god, and mention of eternal payns
does not much move and stir their minds. They know not how necessary these
corporal benefits are for us and how much it skylleth to use them well.

LET us pray therefore unto God for our lord Jesus Christ sake, which does
pray for us, to stir up virtue in us, to teach and govern us in his holy
spirit, even as he promised to give the holy Ghost to them that would ask
and call for it.

The fourth question.
AS concerning the diversity of sin: when we say yt the dregs of the old
sin remains in us after our new birth, and Faith also, it is necessary
that we make a distinction of sin, because that no man shall think that
aduoutry and such other deuelyshe abominations can be in place where Faith is.
In my book of common places I have written large, as touching deadly and
denial sin. Wherefore now brefely I will show and teach the reder thereof.
When we be ones justified by Faith: then must the justice of our good
conscience in good works follow and appear of necessity. This thing does
the teachinge and doctrine of Christ teach and command often times openly,
and Paul the first epistle and first chapter to Timothy. The whole sum of
the commandment is a perfect love from a pure heart, and from a good
conscience, and from a faith not feigned. It follows in the said chapter, se
that thou do fight a good fight, having Faith and a good conscience. Also
the second epistle to the Corinthians and the first chapter. This is our
glory and rejoice the witness and testimonye of our conscience. And the first
epistle of John the.iii. chapter. If our heart does not co^dempne us, we have a
good trust and confidence to god ward Whereby we are taught that they can not
call and make their invocation on God, which have their intent to break his
commandment against their conscience. Also the first Epistle of Peter
and.iii. chapter. With all sobernes and fear, having a good conscience. And to
the Galathians the.v. chapter. The works of the flesh are manifest,
aduoutry, whore huntinge, worshippinge of forbid things, which is Idolatry.
They which so do shall not enherite the kingdom of heaven. Therefore he calls
the^ manifest, because he condempnethe al ye weting and with their knowledge do
commit any thing of these against their conscience. Wherefore Paul to the
Romans viii. chapter doethe make a distinction of sin saying. If you do
live after the flesh you shall perish and dye. If you mortify the deeds of
the flesh with the spirit you shall live. There be in godly men operations and
deeds of the flesh which are corrupt affections against the which when we do
fight in spirit that is to say, not faynyng and in Hypocrisy, but
refreyninge them with the true fear of God, and a perfect Faith we do abide
still in Grace, having still in us the holy Ghost and Faith, which thing can
not be without great Faith in the mind, so manifold are the enticementes and
troubles of the world and soden motions of the flesh.

THE Devil is always seking occasions, wherewith he may entice our minds and
draw them to him. Wherefore we had need be always watchynge contynuynge in
Faith and invocation For the victory of these battle is Christ which does
overcome the Devil in us.

BUT for all that our discipline and obedience must be present and ready
calling for help by Faith. As Peter says. Be you wakinge for the Devil
goes still about like a raueninge Lion sekinge whom he may devour. And as
touching our discipline it is said. I do chasten my body bringinge it into
bondage. Let the fear of God continuallye resyst our desires and temptations.
Let Faith call for help and pardon of our infyrmitie. Let us mark the
examples which do declare the greatness of sin. and the pains both perpetual
and also present in this life therefore. As Joseph being tempted and moved by
the tentation of his Lady and maistres: not with out great battle and fight
of mind did resist the fury of the woman and the crafty assaults of the
Devil, he perceived that the Devil went about first to pollute him with sin,
and so to pluck him from God: to spyl and rob him of the gift of prophecy,
to make him naked of al heavenly ornaments and gifts to raise up a sclander
whereby the doctrine of Joseph should be had in less estimation and regard,
that God should be evil spoken by, and finally that the true religion, which
was but new spronge up should be utterly extinguished and put out of memory.

SO great a ruin and decay should so little, so small, and so folysshe a
pleasure have brought with it. For the Devil doethe se a far of, workinge
snares to our destruction, which be inextrycable and impossible that thou
should ever come forth of them, if thou do ones fall into them. As Dauyd
and many other virtuous men have had the experience thereof. Joseph considering
all this matter what would follow, did stand up strongly with Faith against
these entycementes and perilles vsinge this outward discipline, and calling
for the help of God. So our captain the son of God by Joseph did overcome and
break the purpose of the Devil.

Venyall sin.
ON this fashion when good and virtuous men do strive against this infyrmitie,
the infirmity is commonly called venyal sin.

OTHER sins there be committed against our conscience, which we do commit for
the nones wyllyngly. And Paull says. The works of the flesh are manifest,
that is when a man against his conscience willingly does break the
commandments of God: not resistinge temptation, but flatteringe with his
own vices and noughty desires. Pryuely, as Saull hatinge David, or else
openly and outwardly in outward acts and deds. As David in taking away the
wife of an other man. They which offend on this manner do lose Grace, they
shake of the holy Ghost from the^. They do cast away their Faith from them, in
so much that without they do repent, turninge again to Faith, departinge
forth of this life being in that miserable case, they shall perish for ever.

WE need not in this place reason and dispute of predestination, We will judge
and pronounce of our deeds, and of the will and judgment of God, as the word
of God expressly does teach. If Dauyd had not repented he had been cast into
everlasting tormente, as Saull. Man's mind is so idle and negligent that it
regards and passes for nothing. Wherefore we must take good head that we do
not flatter with that evil, which may be covered with many colors and clokes,
to make it appear to be good, honest and virtuous. Let us set before our eyes
the word of God, as he says. The lantern to my fete is the word of God. The
which word bears wytnes, that for such sin committed: grace is gone away,
and the holy Ghost cast of, as to the Romans viii. If ye live after the
flesh ye shall dye. Example we have in Mathewe.xii. The Devil returning
back again to them from whom he was cast out. does bring.vii. spirits
with him of a more mischeuous nature then himself, and so entering in, causes
the later part of their life to be much worse than that which was past.
Mathewe also in the.xiii. chap. speaking of the sede which was suffocated and
strangled with the enticementes of ye world and Paul the first Epistle and.vi.
chap. to the Corinthians. Go not out of the way, for whormongers, Idolaters,
Thieves. etc. shall not possess the kingdom of God. Where he witnesses that he
precheth to them, which before had received the benefits of Christ. Than he
warns not to lose those benefytes. Also the first Epistle to the Corinthia^s.
x. chapter. Be you not ydolaters, let not us be whormongers, as some of them
were, and perysshed in one day.xxiii. thousand men. And the.v. cap. to the
Galathians. They which so do shall not attain to the kingdom of God. It
follows. He that sows in flesh, shall repe destruction, he that sows in
spirit shall repe everlasting life. And the first Epistle to Timothe.v. cap.
He that takes no care and charge for his own family, does deny his faith and
is worse than an infydel. To the Hebrews.xiii Aduouterous persons, and
whoremongers the lord shall judge, and the second Epistle of Peter and second
chapter. If, when they have received the knowledge of God, and of their
savior Jesus Christ, they have ones escaped and fled from the fylthynes of
this world, and afterward again do suffer them self with the same vices to
be entangled and overcome, their latter time is made much worse than the first.
Mathewe.x. He that denies me before men. I will deny him before my father in
Heaven, Mathewe.xxiiii. He that continues til the end shall be saved.
Matthew.xxv. Go you from me ye cursed into fire everlasting. I hungered and you
gave me no meat. etc. and.i. Corinth. xiii. And I had al Faith and not Love, I
were nothing Although that for our own virtues and works we are not just, that
is to say accepted before God, yet must we have a new obedience in us (though
it be not perfect) as men which be ruled and led with the spirit of God, as
the sons and children of God. As the first epistle of John.iii. cap. In this
are known the sons of God, and the sons of the Devil. He that does not
just is not of God. He that loves not his brother abides in death. My little
babes, let no man deceive you: He that does justly, is just: be that works
sin is of the Devil. The nature of man is so weak and ready to evil, that it
does always extenuate and make small the greatness of their offenses, making them
either to be none (as they do flatter with them selfs) or else if they be
offenses, to be very small. But mark what bitter threateninges these be. What
might be said more sore more terrible than these words. He that works
sin, is of the Devil, that is to say, he is bond to the Devil: he is led
and governed by the Devil: being forsaken of the holy Ghost, and out cast from
God: as the end of him does testyfy.

WHAT a great heap of sins, calamities and miseries did the on fall of
Dauyd cause. After that the noughty desire and fylthy lust had ones got the
upper hand in him, the^ he took an other man's wife. He commanded her
husband to by killed, and with him many Citezins good, godly, and virtuous
me^ were also destroyed. The name of God susteynynge and sufferynge great
blasphemy. Then not long after the son moves sedition against his father. He
takes and uses his fathers wife in whordome: so consequently following a most
lamentable and pyteous destruction of many thousands of the Citezins. To be
short, sedition is the mother of many euyls. The ydolatry of Solomon.
By the ydolatry of Solomon what mischefe did ensue and rise.

THE kingdom of Israel was torn a sonder, The fall of Adam.
they continued in perpetual ydolatry and deadly wars. The fall of Adam, did
it not bring great and many euyls into this world.

THIS is the mind of the Devil to work such crafts for us when he
perceives that we make light of sin, flattering our own affections, giuinge
to them the bridle and reyne at large, whereby Faith is extinguished. For Faith
which asks remission of sin can not be in them which have their delight in
sin, not being sorry, nor repenting the^ selfs as witnesses this saying.
Where shall God dwell. In a contrite heart which fearethe my words. They will not
be delivered from sin, which wyllyngly delyteth therein. The teachinge of John
warns us from whens sin comes how great an enmy we have, declaring what
is the entente and purpose of our adversary: that we may learn to practice
Faith, and that Christ, in us may overcome this great and cruel enmy.

Hitherto have I declared to you the whole sum of the teachinges of ye
prophets, and the doctrine of the Gospel, concerning justification or Grace,
concerning our reconciliation, concerning Faith and good Works. Wherefore for
as much as this is plain and open, having no darkness or perplexity, without
Sophistical cauilations, when it speaks of ye motions and stirringes which be
known to virtuous minds in the church of God, conteynyng no manner of folyshe
questions, but setting forth the glory of Christ, and making open the great
infyrmitie and weakness of man, being in all points agreeable to the scripture,
both of the old and new Testament, and for as much (I say) as in all ages in
the church, all godly disposed people do find by experience this consolation
and comfort to be true, most necessary and expedient. I marvel greatly that
our adversaries be so blind, that they can not find in their heart to allow it,
and much more that they be full of furye and madness, that with toothe and
nail they do openly resist it. But the Devil is in the cause, which diverse
ways does pour in errors into man's mind, to the intent that the glory of
Christ might be obscured and made dark LET godly men therefore pray that it
would please the Lord to preserve his own word and Gospel, that he do not
suffer it to be forsaken, and put out of the way, that it would please him to
govern us with his light, and that in setting and showing forth his truth
and verity unto al men, the foul dark clouds which the Devil has brought
in, may by the bryghte clearenes of his word be utterly expulsed. Finally
that the contagious and stinkynge myste of his traditions full of rotte and all
infection, with this brennynge heat may be dried up from the face of the
earth.

LET our industry and diligence provoke and stir up Christ toward us. Let
learned men endeavor them selfs to set forth this great cause and matter,
plainly, openly, and diligently, that our posterity may have at our hands
without knottes or knorres, without Sophistical and deuelysshe elusions, let
them not refuse neither pain nor labor in lerning thereof, nor yet no kind of
punishment in professing and confessing thereof. For without lerninge this
matter can not be made plain. And to bear the hatred and displesure of great
heads, and wordly wise men, which do resist the word, some for one cause, some
for an other cause, improuing and condempning this matter. it is requisite to
have a manly heart and a good stomach. Good and godly men must contend and
fight spiritually under the banner and standerd of the Gospel, as Christ
witnesses. In this my father heavenly is glorified, if ye be my disciples
bringing forth fruit bounteously. Wherefore let us set forth this doctrine
faythfullye and truly, with all simplicity and plainness making our invocation
to the Lord that it would please him to give to us his holy spirit and grant
us increase thereof TO this matter we will add and join certain arguments
and objections wherewith the adversaries of God does impunge this our judgment
and mind.

THE first and principal of their objections, is borrowed forth of the epistle
of James, not taking him as he mente: but to make him for their dogged and
stubborn proud stomakes, purposes and intentes.

NOT by Faith only but by works etc. Whereto it is very easy and light to make
answer being no great difficulty to him which does understand James aright.
The first objection of the papists whero^ they d^ ^on^de their iustifica^^^n
by works.
James in these place does call faith the hystorycal knowledge of Christ: for he
says. The Devil does believe. But Paul speaks of faith in his other
signification, which is the certain confydence and trust of mercy promised to
us for Christ sake. Wherefore James does reprehend and rebuke the error of
those which do suppose them selfs to be just in that they do profess the
knowledge of the hystory and life of Christ (which is a thing very necessary in
deed as all other good works be, but that is not the trust and confidence
which we have whereby we do receive remission of sin as it is manifest. And
where he says, yt Abraham was justified by his works you must mark and
observe the manner of speaking.

HE means not that Abraham for his works is reconciled, but that the works
of Abraham being by Faith reconciled to God, ar after his reconciliation
pleasant and acceptable to God. For the works are a certain outward justice
of the Law, and are acceptable in them which be reconcyled, but they deserve
not remission of sin, or acceptance to eternal life. Therefore he said that
Abraham by his works is justified, that is as much to say, as the works of
Abraham are pronounced just, the which is true in Abraham being just and
reconcyled and believing. And truly it is necessary that works do follow, in
the which our Faith may be lively and put in practyce. Let us go upright in
this matter and handle it in his own kind with out Sophistical bablinge. James
does not treat and meddle with that argument that Paul speaks of, but of that
faith which is the belefe of the hystory of Christ, which the Devil as well
as the faithful had. Wherefore the words of James are not contrary to the
words of Paul, nor yet to be alleged against him, or against any other
part of the Scripture.

An other objection. ^he second ^biection.

IF thou wylt enter into life, keep the commandments. Ergo, then for our
works is given life everlasting, and not freely to him which believes, you
must mark distinction between the words of the Law and the words of the
Gospel.

THESE be words of the Law which must needs be expounded by the Gospel, for
no man should be saved if he should be judged by the Law, as by this reason
following appears. The keeper of the commandment shall enter into life: but
no man keeps the commandment and Law: being therefore not with out sin (and
so no man which is without sin shall be saved) because he ca^ not keep the
commandment as he ought to do.

Solutyon.
Therefore you must add to those words (if you will enter into life. etc.
that is to say after the Gospel, which promises forgiveness of sin, and
justification or imputation of Justice for Christ sake, and so begins in us
a new obedience which the Lord does approve and allow, ye though it be
imperfect, not that it should be the price of life everlasting. And so it is
necessary that the commandment be kept, and the Law taught, that repentance
and faith may grow in us. But the Law alone is not to be taught without the
promise, which promise being taken away the Law is nothing else but a minister
of wrath, bringinge death everlasting without end. It is plain that Christ
is the end of the Law. Wherefore we may not consyst and bide still in the law
But when we do hear the Law preached to us trymblyng and quakyng thereat, we
may not think that we be accused because we should perish, but because we
should thereby have occasion to seek our mediator the son of God, whom let
us take to be given to us, that by him we may be delivered from sin, from
the tyranny of the Devil, and extreme death. Therefore when that life
euerlastinst is begone in us, then we do obaye the Law, and keep the
commandments, as it is written. I will pour forth on the house of. David
the spirit of Grace and of prayer.

IF I had in me all Faith, The thy: t^ obiectyon*
and not love, I am nothing. Which is thus to be answered, as before is said.
I confess that love is necessary, but the love of God can not be, nor be
acceptable, except first by Faith we do receive remissyon of sin, and
imputation of justice. Every man may inuente and deuyse of their own brain a
love of God, but the very love of god, which is a perfect love must be referred
to the wrasteling of ye mind and to the true motions in our inuocations and
perils. Some men there be which do doubt whether God doethe pass or
regard man's necessity and causes, whether that either prosperity or
adversity does chance and happen by fortune, without any provision and
governance of God, or nay. Some men feling and perceyuyng in them self the
anger and wrath of God, does in their afflictions and trobles fall down
dispairi^ge and railing against the judgment of God. Of these great storms and
bitter shures of the mind, preaches the heavenly voice, comforting the minds
of me^ in the mids of the great waves and sourges of their troubles with the
promise of the Gospel. When the mind of man does comfort and lift up him self
with this Faith kowledginge the mercy of god, then foldweth love. It is
necessary therefore that Faith doethe go before which askethe remyssyon of
sin. The which feyth does not lean and depend of our worthynesse or
deseruinges. Therefore though that love does follow, it is not consequente:
that for that love we be justified, but for Christ sake only. Men commonly do
expound this word love of the love of god and of our neighbor, therefore I
have answered as touching the love of god. But Paul in this place speaks
not of the love of god but of the love of our neighbor, which much less can
merit remission of sin: Forgive and thou shall be forgiven. Ergo. The fourt
objection.
By our forgiveness and remission to other, we merit to us our justification.
These words be exhorting to repentance, as be many such like in the
prophettes, as Esai the.i. Cap. Cease and leave you of from doing evil and
learn to do good. Then shall your sins be wyped from you. The first part of
this is a precepte of repentance. The second part conteyneth a promise. Precept.
Christ does not say you shall obtein pardon for your pardon, but he commands
only that we do pardon and forgive our neighbor. Promise.
Afterward he does give us knowledge of a promise, which promise is dependinge
of an other thing, than of the worthynesse of our works, what a trouble and
vexacion would it be to our consciences: if we should thyncke that the pardon of
god should depend on the pureness and worthy dignitee of our forgiveness and
pardon to other which have offended us: For be they never so well made
friends, those which were at variaunce, yet remains some scarre and grudge of
ye old displeasure. Therefore it is necessary some other cause and way of
remission of our sin to be sought, and so to keep the true sense and mind of
ye Gospel concerning the free forgiveness of sin. There is also such an other
saienge in Daniel. The first part whereof perteynethe to penance or
repentance, as this. Love and enbrace justice, help the miserable wrongfully
oppressed, and defend the church against tyrants and persecutours. The second
part conteyneth the promise, as this. And thy sins shall be forgiven, thou
shall be heled and made whole of thy infyrmities. Repentance must needs be,
and yet our forgiveness and pardon must be freely given and received by Faith.
For if the promise should be none otherwise a promise than we are worthy
depending on our worthynes, then it should be made void and no promise, as
Romans viii.

Love is the pryncipall and chifest of all vertuse. Ergo. The fyft obiectyon.
for love we are reputed just. I do deny plainly the consequent, the reason
is manifest for it would follow much better if you would say, Love is the
chefest and godliest of al vertuse. Ergo. Because we can not perform that
love as we ought to do, we are nothing justified for that virtue. If we had the
virtues which the law of god does require, and were without syn then we might
be said well, to be just for love and other virtues: but because of our
wekenesse and great infirmite is far from that parfection of the law, not
beginning in love as we ought to do, therefore the gospel sets forth an other
justice teaching us not for our own vertuse but for some other thing that is
not in us: that is for our mediators sake, the son of god: to be reputed
just, but under a condition: that by feithe we do assure our self, that god is
merciful to us for his son sake. It follows that we be by imputation, that
is to say, because it pleases him to impute it to us, of his only goodness and
favor, being made just, not for our own virtues, though we seem to have
some beginni^g of them in us. But if a man will demand and know the
difference, of virtues, mark well. Faith. Hope.
Faith receyuethe in this life remission of sin. Hope is a lokinge and a
trusting in deed after that thing which is promised, that is our clean
deliverance, which is to come. Faith is a consent, wherewith the will of man
wylleth and receives the promise, so being made quiet and at rest, well
setteled in his mind, for the mediator the son of God his sake. And when the
will is so contented, then the heart is at rest and well pleased, receyuyng
comfort and gladness, which is the beginni^g of a new life. These motions
follows Hope and Love.

Because that Faith does make us certain that God is merciful to us we do
call and look for the other benefytes promised to us. Love.
And so love does rise because we do knowledge that God is not idle, as the
folyshe reason of man does feyne, and that he is our friend, and no enmye to
us, as the Law does declare, And that he is a merciful father, taking pity
of our great affliction and calamity coveting to deliver us. Bearing thereto
his self witness by an other saying. I do live and will not the death of a
sinner By this way we knowledginge that we are received into Grace, and our
inuocations hard, and granted to us of god. We do submit our selfs unto him,
and so is kyndeled in us a certain reverent love and desire to him ward,
preferring God before all other things. Which love in this life is not
brenninge as it ought to be, but very weak and cold.

They do lay for them this word and vocable (Reward), saying. The life
everlasting is called a reward. Ergo, The syxte objection.
good works do deserve life everlasting. I will not seek any crafty
interpretation of this vocable reward, but the thing and matter it self must
be substicially mayed and pondered.

The psalmist says: Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy
sight, no living creature shall be justified Also what man does know and under
stand our offenses, which declares that by our virtues we can not merit
life everlasting, making them to be the price and reward of the same life.
Before I gathered together many testimonies which do teach us that in those
men which be regenerated a new by the spirit of God there does remain
sin. which testimonies in this place we must lay before our eyes. And let
every man examine his own conscience, whether he had rather that life eternal
should be given to him for Christ sake, or to be paid to him as a reward for
his merits. Thou would peradventure say to me.

If so be that life eternal should be given to him for Christ sake, the^ men
would not care much how little good deeds they did. Whereto I answer. That
contrariwise desperation does cause great negligence in doing well. And
verily they must needs despair, which do ymagin that life everlasting is
given after our deseruynge.

The which dangerous peril our fathers were well ware of. Therefore Augustine
and Bernarde agreinge to the Apostle his writing, said that freely for Christ
sake is given life everlasting to him that believes, and as Paul forther more
does testyfy with these words. The gift of God, is life everlasting through
Christ Jesus our Lord. This is no uncertain gift, the Lord commaundinge that
we do believe, and that we shall receive life everlasting for Christ sake
alone, as John the.vi. chap. This is the will of the father: that all men which
believes in the son shall have life everlasting. This Faith does not consist
without repentance, but it does consider and behold both parts of the saying
of Christ, which is. I live, I will not the death of a sinner, but I will that
he repents and have life. But by which way? by the son, as he sayethe: this
is the will of the father, that al men that believes in the son shall be saved,
and have life everlasting.

Wherefore natwithstanding that repentance is required at our hand, we may
not think that the condition of our worthynes is to be admitted.

But clean contrary, repentance and trust of our own merits, are repugnant
and of contrary effects, and end, as it is written. He that reioyseth, let
him rejoice in the Lord. Thou wylt say to me again. Wherefore is it called a
reward I say that although that life everlasting is given freely for Christ
sake: yea after that it is given, it does recompense our labors and troubles.
I will make the to understand it more plainly. This is the manner of speaking of
the Law. He shall give to every man after his works. Also their reward
shall be plentiful in Heaven. The scripture speaks after the manner of the Law,
concerning justice, as though it should be of our worthynes, and likewise of
Faith as though it were our virtues, saying the reward is given to our
virtues. But for all that, the Gospel teaches us, that we are not just for our
worthynes: but by free acceptance, and that by faith the benefytes of Christ
are to be received, not for the worthynes of faith, because it is a virtue: but
because it does depend of an other which is Christ. This is the most right and
plain answer, that can be made, without any Sophistical cauilation.

I will to these objections of our adversaries, add and join certain of
their crooked and sophistical arguments which being opened and made plain
shall give much light to this disputation and matter that we have in hand.

The first argument of ye Sophisters. Justice is an obedience to the hole law
Our good works be obedience to the whole law. Ergo.

By good works we be justified.

Our good works are no perfect obedience.
The second part of this argument called the minor, is to be denied, for our
good works are not a perfect obedience unto the law, for as much as the nature
of man is repugnant to the law of god. As to the first part called the Mayor.
I say that is true, if we speak of justice of the law. For the justice of the
law is obedience to the hole law. But because we can not perform this
perfect obedience and justice to the whole law, therefore the Gospel does offer
to us free justice, ascribinge to us freely of his goodness that, which we can
not perform of our self. As Paul does declare by this word and vocable
imputation. The which objection is very profitable, showing the difference of
the justice, which is of the law, and of that justice which is of the Gospel.
It does teach us also that this word justice is taken sometime one way,
sometime an other.

Wherein the masters of the sentence have been so foul begiled, which lerni^ge
in Aristotle that justice does signify an universal obedience, The justice of
Aristotle
do dream that it is always to be taken in that signification in the writings
of the Prophettes and Apostles, which is false, as it is written in the Psalm.
In thy justice they shall reioise and be glad, not meaning the virtues which
Aristotle did write of: but respectively saying. Thy justice, that is to say.
The justice which thou do impute to them, not of their deserving, but for
thy mercy, making them just and accepted. The justice of the law does signify
obedience, as thus. I have done judgment and rightwisnes. But the justice
whereof the Gospel speaks properly does signify respectively, The justice of
the gospel.
the imputation or giving of justice to us which we have not of our self, a
free acceptance and receiving to life everlasting whereto is joined the free
gift of the holy Ghost. So when thou do hear these saying (to be
justified), remember the manner of speakinge of the Hebrews, whereby is
signified that thou art reputed and pronounced just, or else made quite of thine
accusation and vnrightwisnes A just man does signify that man which is
accepted of god to life eternal. A just man.
As the second Epistle to the Corinthians.v. chap. He made him, which knew no
sin to be sin, that by him we might be made the justice of God, which is as
much to say, that Christ was made gyltie for our sakes, that we might be
acceptable and pleasant for his sake. This is grammatycally after the meaning
of the bare words, For this word justice is sometime taken for the obedience
of the law, sometime it is taken for imputatio^ of justice being very expedient
and necessary that every man should mark well the difference thereof.

An other argument Sophistical.
Works which be against the law of God, are sin. Ergo. Good works are
justice.
This consequent must be true (say they) for they be contraries: bad works
and good works. And the knowledge of the one contrary, Contrari o^ eadem est
disciplina.
is the knowledge and declaration of that other. Wherefore it follows that by
good works men are justified, for as much as good works be justice.

This is very light and easy to be answered. It is true as they say, if that
good works were a perfect obedience. But because they be far from a perfect
obedience, you may soon perceive that the argument is not good, because they
be not right contrary For noughty works are right naught in deed: but our good
works, are not perfectly good works, for as much as they have much fylthynes
and corrupcion in them, where with they be corrupted. As by example. Pomponius
Artycus: was both modeste and just to the Citezins. But he douteth of the
governance and provision of god: he is without the fear of God, which marreth
the rest of his virtues.

The which argument may sone begyle and deceive them which are not warned
and taught the subtyltie thereof. Therefore the consequent of this argument is
false because they be not clean and directly contrary. Like answer shall you
make to this argument that follows.

An other.
Ill works do condemn us. Ergo. Good works do save us.
I do deny your co^sequent, affyrminge that it is no right contrariety. For
ill works are thoroughly evil: our good works are not thoroughly good, being
both corrupt and imperfect. Example. Dauyd has many good works, and yet he
has many vicious affections, as somt^me in doubting of the goodness of God. The
which darkness a great heap of vices does accompany: as to be without care of
God: to have confidence in thine own wisdom and justice, to be without the
fear and love of God: not to be in Faith so ardent as he ought to be. I do
know men which have made their bost, that with this argument they have broken
down the walls of these opinion of justification. But how folish and childish a
thing it is, there is none which has either eyes to se, or ears to hear, but
can perceive, and judge this matter.

An other.
Sin is the hatred of God. Ergo. Love is the justice of God.
With this argument Eccius thought to bind Bears, and to prove that by faith
only we are not justified, The paruis ^f Oxforde.
and I think no boy of the paruis schools, is so folyshe and ignorant, but
that can put this blow aside without any danger. I do grant that perfect
love is the justice which the law does require. But as I have said we are
not just by the law. For it is impossible that love should be before we are by
faith reconciled. After the which reconciliation, follows a beginning of a
new obedience and life, remaynyng still in us great infyrmitie and wekenes
repugnant to the law of God, which does disdain and rage against the
judgment of God, as the Psalm. Be you angry, but sin not Therefore we must
have an other manner of justice, which is the free acceptatyon of God.

An other.
Justice is in our will. But faith is in understanding. Ergo Faith is not
justice.
The first part which is called the Mayor is true, concerning the justice of
the law, which justice does signify our own qualities and virtues which
are in our will. But when that Paull does speak of the justice of faith, he
dotth not mean our virtues or qualities, but our free acceptance and
imputatio^ of justice, that is to say, that we be made right wise by faith,
which are in deed unright wise. For he teaches that men are reputed just, yt
is accepted to God, not for our own qualities, but for an other thing without
us, and that is our mediator the son of God, only by mercy. The which mercy
must be received by faith The which faith is not only a knowledge of the
mind, but it is also a consentment and agreement to the promise, believing the
promise to be true: whereto is required the motion and styrryng of the will, as
learned men does know, which motion is both to will and also to receive the
promise and so to rest in it.

This faith to conceived when we do assent to the promise of the Gospel
wherewith when the trobled conscience does comfort it self, in the self same
moment the holy Ghost by the word moves the heart to believe.

Another.
By Faith we are just. Faith is a work. Ergo. By works we are just.
By faith we are justified: not because faith is a work, quality, inuert in
us, but because it does take hold of mercy: cleauinge fast to Christ: but to
make it plain, you must turn this saying, by faith we are justified to his
correllatiue, that is to say. By the mercy of God for Christ we are just, but
yet by faith we must certyfy our selfs that the same mercy perteyneth unto
us. And to the second part of this argument, called in latin the minor, I
grant it true. For faith is a work, as other virtues be works as love,
patience, chastity, and likewise as al other virtues be imperfect: so faith
also sometime is weke and feeble. Wherefore we are not just for the worthynes of
the virtue faith, as for a work, but because it does apprehend and receive the
mercy of God. It is necessary that there be some instrument and mean, whereby
the mercy of God must be trusted after whereby Christ must be looked on with the
inward eyes, whereby also we must certain our selfs, that Christ will forgive
us. Therefore we must answer to the minor, that faith is a work, for the
which work sake, being taken as a work, we are not just, but because it does
take hold on the mercy of God. Therefore it does not follow that for our works
we are justified. It may also be answered that this argument is not good,
because there is more concluded in the conseque^t or conclusion than is
contained in the premises. For it makes conclusion of justification, whereof is
no mention made neither in the first nor second part of the argument, that is
neither in the mayor nor in the minor.

An other argument.
By Grace we are just. Grace is a love poured into our minds Ergo. By love we
are just.
To the second part I answer, that the right and chiefest signification of
Grace, is to be taken respectively, signifieng the favor or mercy, or free
acceptance for Christ, with the which free acceptance is joined the gift of
the holy Ghost, which is the most propre and right interpretation of this
vocable Grace. And therefore they which expou^de by Grace we are just, that is,
for the virtues which be in us we are just, they make an exposition clean
contrary to Paul, taking away from our sight the true comfort and consolation
of our sick mynde^ ^^d consciences. If when we do make our invocation and
prayer: we do behold our own self, thinking that the ^^we shall come to God:
when we are f^ll of godly virtues, we must not look for the kingdom of Heaven
before we do se these great virtues and perfectnes in us. Truly our minds
would abhor our impurytie and fylthynesse, and despair of the help of God.
And the more that our minds are vexed and troubled, Though thou be unworthy
let not to com^ boldlye to Christ,
the more they do ponder and consider their own uncleanness and wekenes of
nature. Paul therefore because he does perceive that we can not bring me rites
worthy salvation unto God: therefore he does set forth Grace, that is free
pardon and acceptance for Christ sake. Therefore, although thou can not bring
worthiness, and come worthily to Christ let not for all that to come boldly in
with a sure confidence in our mediator Christ having him therefore as Paull
says our Bisshoppe: let us draw nere to the throne and mercyful seat of his
Grace.

These refutations I have now joined to the matter of justification, that they
which do reason and dispute of the propre signification and meaning of this
proposition (by faith we are justified) may hereby be sufficiently instructed.
For I entende always (God is my record) nothing more than to speak and
declare that thing which is both true and right, voydynge al manner of subtyl
reasonynge, to instruct them which be learners how they may the better put
away these crafty cauilations, which they do use in the schools.

Therefore I wysshe and desire, that these examples may be profitable to many,
both that the matter which we have handeled and spoken of, may be the playner,
and that they which be studious of knowledge, may with the better will give
them self, and their whole minds thereto. For these refutacions do declare
that those men which should open these controversies, being so intrycate and
doubtful, had need both to be learned, and also well exercised in such matters.

Let not those men which do take on them the office of true opening and
settinge forth of the doctrine of Christ, think that they have taken a small
matter in hand. Therefore I pray God that it would please him to govern the
studyes of the vertuosly dysposed, and not to suffer in his church the true
knowledge of Christ and the light of his Gospel to be obscured and made dark,
to the glory and praise of him for ever.

AMEN.
AN APOLOGY OR DEFENSE OF THE WORD of God: declarynge how necessary a
thing it is to be had in the hands of all persons, which do bear the name
of Christ, and being called Christians, are willing to know his verity. To
the myghtie and victoryous prince Edward by the grace of God, Dukes grace of
Somersette, Lord gouernoure of the king his highness own propre person, and
Lord protector of the Realms of England and Irelande, with the rest of the
kings dominions on both side the Seas.
FOR AS MVCHE as there is nothing in this world more necessary and expediente
for man (most godly disposed Prince) The fear and love of god
than the fear and also the love of God, bearing thereto witness the wise
man, saying. The beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord, not a
seruyll and a bondmans fear, which engenders hatred and malice rather then
love: but such a fear as the child bearyng to his natural father, for love
fears to do that thing which might displease his father, the which love and
fear of God, being not only for any commodity or displeasure wordlye, no nor
yet for any thing which might be commodious or contrary after this present
life: but to declare and show our selfs not to be ingrate, and unthankful for
so great and manifold benefytes: which we have and do daily receive at his
most plentiful and liberal hand: at the hand I say not of a nygard, but of
such ^on, which not only things cadewke and mortal (al things being of hes
goodness) but also that thing which for our right health was most necessary, and
to him most paynfull (not against his will) vouched safe to give: ye to the
blood of his heart, that we should no more but love and fear him.

The perfect knowledge whereof, what thing can or may better teach and instruct
us, The reding ^f the word ^f god is the ^eachinge of (...) to fear ^^d and
to ^ue him al^o without ^he which ^ou canste ^o neither.
which would be feign Christyan men in deed, than the contynuall reading of his
most blessed will, declared and left unto us of him self, by ye mouths of the
holy and virtuous men the Patriarchs and Prophettes being inspired with the
spirit of his most heavenly god head, and after by the mouth of the right
Messiah promised to us and exhibited according to the promise, to the
confyrmacion and stablishing of al his behestes and loving promises, which at
no time has promised any thing which he has not ye with advantage performed
with much more than we could of our frayl weakness, desire, or wyshe. The want
of the which love and fear, how great ruin and decay it does cause and bring
in to the city of the Lord, The c^tye of the lord
which is the church or congregation universal of all them which professes his
name: taking on them to do his will: it is so manifest and open (the more is the
pity) that almost in a great nombre, a man shall scant find one, that lives
in the true love and fear of the Lord, in so much that he may well say. If I
do find but one just man in the city, I will cease my wrath from it, and
contrary wise innumerable almost al ye world which passes not and good haw.
which end of the staff does go forward, whether God or the Devil be better
man, which neither for the love of god, for his merytes sake, nor yet for the
sharp thonderboltes and threateninges of his wrath, ones begins to redress
and reform to better, their lewd and ungracious kind of life, not squayring
and playning it after the right line and rule of his most blessed word: but
clean contrary every man (as the Devil puts into his head) does hacke
maungle and choppe this most blessed and pure word al to pieces, to serve their
own purposes and most dampnable affections, going about not to make the stone
fyt to the line, as the proverb makes mention, but the line and rular to the
stone.

O what a goodly piece of work, and well framed buylding would this be? how even
and well proporcioned a matter, how excellent a frame. A frame? worthy forsooth
to be put in pattern, for an example to al them which are most expert and
cunning workemaysters. How long time would it be if a man would thus begin
to build an house to dwell in, or a ship to sail with, or that he should make
an end and finishe his work? All men truly might most justly laughe him to
skorne. Likewise how long time should that man live or that any kind of
virtues should take any rote in him, which endeuoreth all that he may, to make
the Scriptures for his own purpose of life and not rather framinge his life to
the Scriptures? How great blasphemye is it to Gods word when we go about to
flatter our own selfs in our most detestable vices: by the example of the
falls of godly men, which by fraylnes of this flesh, after they have fallen,
did not long lie still but with sorrowful repentance and perfect confidence
in the only mercy of God by the help of the holy spirit did rise up ma^fully
again. This is the lack both of the fear and of the love of god. This lack
of fear and love is through out all the earth: beginning at them which have the
keys delivered to them of the opening of the Scripturs unto the very lowest,
and most (to seem to) vile and abject person that lives: Bysshoppes
What a great nombre of souls are committed to the cure and charge of the
Bisshoppes, to be fed and made fat with the pregnant word of God. What
great liuinges have they given to them for none other cause, but that they
should be diligent therein. What rentes, what fees have they, more like Earls
and Dukes than pore spiritual pastors of Christ hes sheep. And not unworthy
forsooth, but right well bestowed, if they would declare them self no less
desirous, of the health of their flock, than they be gredy in gatheringe of
their revenues and rentes. God forbid al should be of that mind. Some Bishops,
without doubt, I know of the contrary mind and study (whom I pray the Lord
preserve and continue in their good purpose) I think verily, and you may say
and affirm also that their be but some, not many, the less the nombre, the
more to be lamented The thing it self every where declares. and openly
testifies, how slack and loose they be in doing of their duty. As though to
be a Bishop were nothing else but to be mytred, to be promoted with great rentes
and knights fees and finally to be called my lord Bishop. These glorious
tytles many, nay the most part do gape on both sides for, they will not lose
one ^ote of their dignity, they will not part with one lock of wolle, to the
comfort and succoure of their sheep, ye though any of them (of whom they had
the wolle of) should perysh for cold. They will live of the profits and
commodities of the altar, but they will do no service to the alter, they will
eat corn with the Ox, but they will not tread it forth of the straw with the
Ox. They will (finally) have al thing but they will do nothing.

Yet: me thinks to be a thing reasonable, that they should do some thing for
their great liuinges: otherwise they appear to be consumers and deuourers of
those liuinges, which by most godly and noble princes were provided and
ordained for good me^, which would be glad to do their duties. They do think
(but they are deceived) that they have done their duty sufficiently, if ones or
twyse in the year they do go about on visitatio^, when the pore creatures, were
better to have them away than among them. For the Euangel or Gospel of god, is
not a whit the more preferred nor set forth, the repentance for sin, the
trust and confydence of mercy for Christ sake only, not so often as ones
mentioned. The commandementes are nothing taught how they should be kept. They
do no more but seek and search if a few of man's traditions be thoroughly
observed and kept, that the infringers and breakers thereof might be with most
rygor and al extremytie punished. They do rebuke no vices, as whordom,
aduoutry, fornication, blasphemy against the name of god, extorcion, neglect
of the holy and blessed word of god, as things perteyning nothing to their
office. And at their departing, they do leave over the pore flock (being never
the better for their coming) such pastors and shepeherd, as to whom for their
knowledge and lerning and much less wit, and much worse conversation of
life: a wise man would be loathe to commytte the kepinge of his Swine, more mete
to be scourers of foul masers, than to have the cure of souls. These be no
curates, but gaylers and tormenters, keeping the consciences and souls of men
laden down with yrons of their own traditions, keeping them in great famyn
and hungre, as lean as rakes, perishing for lack of the heavenly fode, and
cryeng out to your good lordship, meat meat for pore prisoners, not of
Newgate, but of the Pope his foul stinking and dark dungel: being by most
gracyous pardon quite, and our fees paid and yet for all that kept in most
cruel dura^ce, lieng and rotting in cold yrons, that no man is able to abide
the savor. O that your good lordshippe might with your merciful eyes se and
behold, how pitifully, how bare and lean they look, how they be eaten with
vermin for lack of kepinge: there is no doubt but your good lordship would
take pity and compassion on them, would se them set at large. And the lord
which doethe se your compassion on them for his sake, will a thousand fold
reward you again, that you should not think your labor ill bestowed. What
is the cause of al these miserable calamities which the pore souls do abide
and sustain? what is the cause, the Bisshops, Persons and Curates do not their
duties. Forsooth the lack and want both of the fear and of the love of the
lord: whosmost high majesty if they had in fear, either for his threateninges
and curses, considering all the woes, contained in the old and new Testament
for their negligent administration: or else if they had him in love, for his
great and unspeakable goodness declared unto us al, they would be sore ashamed
ones to be espied with so great a fault. But they fear neither God nor the
Devil. They love him not for his great goodness, nor yet they do fear him for
his threateninges. I fear me, that there be many: I pray god that there be
none, which do think the speaking of God and of the Devil to be, as it were,
but an old wives tale or fable invented by the policy of man and natural
reason, to keep men in an order while they be in this life, as did think many
of the blind Philosophers the Epicurs thinking none other life after this
present: Epycures.
did de live in all kind of delites and plesures. I trust in the lord that he
has sent an angel among us with a two handed sword to cut away clean these
discordes and abuses to his glory eternal. What need I speak of men of power,
which by their power and strength, by no equity nor justice, Men of ^ower.
against conscience and right, care not a bean what wrong and injury they do
to the mean sort, if that either house or land, pastures or woddes does lie
commodiously for their purpose: and specially when it joins to any part of
theyrs. Such as does thus have not red the blessing in the old Testament
contained with the reward prepared for them, which do join house to house,
field to field, farm upon farm, some one man.xx. some.xxx. some.xl. scant xx,
good me^ which should be able to serve their prince at need maynteyned, where in
times past has not ben so few as.v. hundred as by experience in places not
long days paste was almost found to true. As for fynes, and incoms, with
reysinge of their rentes they be so importable, so tedious and so heavy, that
the pore tenantes or their years be half expyred shall be glad to lay the keye
under the door and run their ways.

Such is the pity we have of our christian brethren, so little is the fear
and love of God among us, ye which professes the Gospel (which thing makethe
well for the Papists to the sclaunder of the word of God). As for the office
of a judge, Judges.
what man can say but it is most justly executed, upright without
parcialitie, not fauouringe of one man more than an other, not prolonging of
suits, in the favor of the rich, to the utter undoing of the pore, not taking
of gifts, worthy to be compared to the court of the Ariopagittes. which to
avoid percialitie, judged al causes by night darkling. If it be any otherwise
tha^ I have declared, it is to be ascribed and imputed to none other thing
more, nay to nothing so much as to that, they be not in fear of the judgment
of the lord, which does command with these words. Judge and ministre right
judgment you sons of men. There is no man that can find fault with those kind
of men, which are occupiers, Occupyer^
living by their laborius venture and travail, so vpeight is their dealinge, so
just, so indifferent, that almost no faith, no truth, no trust, no confidence
is to be given to their oath, much less to their word and bare promise,
Thieves.
What Thief would steal and rob to be hanged on a gallow, if he were toched
with the fear and love of the lord. Murther^
Who would be so stony hearted to quel and sley his brother, for whom Christ did
suffer and shed his blood? Aduouter persons
What man would be an aduouterer, a fornicatour, a committer of rapt: if he had
but one sperkil of the fear and love of God, knowinge that they which do so
shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven, judged by sentence diffinitiue,
without help of appellation to everlasting sorrows, except there be in this
life or they depart, a true and perfect repentance, with trust in the mercy
promised for Christ sake. Traitors.
What causes so many rank traitors and rebelions against their most
lawful kings and gouerners, constituted immediately under God, and by God over
them, to keep them in a good rule, quietness, peace, and tranquillity, but,
that they do want and lack the fear and love of the lord, the high king and
governor.

The want whereof the more and greater it is, the more rank and poisonous are
the treasons which are wrought.

Adam.
How great an evil this is, how huge and foul, a monster of how
innumerable calamities and sorrows which we have and do sustain, this is a
most wicked mother: what thing can better set forth or paynt, as it were in a
table or in a glass before your eyes more evidently, more lively than the
great fall of Adam, being for lack of the fear, and of the love of the
lord, which brought us into thraldom, bondage, and captivity of the Devil.
For if he had loved him for his benefits, because he was created, by him a
heavenly creature like unto his own image, or if he had feared him, for fear
to displease him, whom he found so good a lord, or for fear of breaking of his
commandment, as of his head and master (for he that is commanded, is under
him that does command) he would not have transgressed, whose transgression is
our transgression, whose fall is our fall. Our sinful life and corrupt
manners, being the relyques, dregs, and remenaunte of his old sore. Cayn.


What caused cursed Cayn to slay so cruelly, Pharao.
and unnaturally his own brother? What caused Pharao to persecute the children
of Israel. Dauyd.
What made king Dauyd to commyt abominable aduoutry, not contented with one
mischeuous deed, but also to join and add bloody murdre, to stynkynge
aduoutry, in sleying the husband of the woman, with the most lamentable
destruction of many mo. Judas.
What caused Judas to be a traitor to his most loving master. To be truly
certayned and assured, there was nothing else in the cause, but the want of
the fear and of the love of the lord, O cruel and dampnable mischief
coming from the bottomless pytte of Hell. What remedy and salve is to be
found for this foul sore? what is the cause yt it reygneth so much among us
christians every where, yt almost no fear nor love of ye lord, is found in any
place nay rather open contempt and blasphemy and dishonor to his most blessed
and holy name? what man can express the cause thereof: that this plage more to
be feared than any pestelence, has so infected the air through all the world,
that no man high nor low: what state, degree or dignity so ever he be, has
escaped it. Job.
The foul botches and sores of Job did never stink so sore to the nose of
man, as these makes us to be abhorred of god. stopping his heavenly nose, and
turninge his merciful visage from us. Among our earthly phisicions which do
take cure of bodyly deseases only (which bodies being never so well healed,
shall at the last go to corruption) the cause of the disease and sickness
known (being the chief point of their science) the parth which is sick is
half cured and helped already. For likewise as in ministration of medecines,
the cause of the bodily infyrmitie not known perfectly, they do kyl, sley, and
murdre, not with knife, but with poison, the party which seeks after help and
remedy. So the cause and rote of the sickness perceived, the medycation is made
thereafter, to the help and comfort of him that complained and lamented his
grefe and infyrmitie. Even so again, of our spiritual infyrmities and sickness
(which kylleth not the body, ye oftentimes does send both body and soul to
the whorlpole of hell (paste remedy and help if he comes ones into that
place,) speaking our Heavenly master and doctor, and spiritual physician
Christ (which knows all our waters a little better than we do our selfs): to
whom al our diseases and maladies are thoroughly known, which sercheth with ye
instrument of his spirit, ye very reins of our backs, ye the depest
thoughts and cogitations of our hertes declared the cause, the very principal
cause, and cause efficient of all our malydes: with these words. Quia non
cognouerunt me neque patrem meum: because they knew neither me nor yet my
father It follows therefore that if we know him and his father, we would both
love and fear both him and his father. And contrary wise because we know
neither we love and fear neither: nay we hate and persecute both. The
ignorance then of God, being the cause that we be void of all fear and love
of the lord: what maruayle is it, if we do run headling into all kind of
mischefe, if we set naught neither by God nor by ye world if we regard not
his precept? his fruit full teachinges and most beneficial promises? Nay truly
Satan the father of ignorance, is not so contented to le^ his disciples rest,
at that point of little regardinge of the lord his goodness, but he does stir
them to high treason against his majesty, to open contempt and manifest
blasphemy, to the defiance of his godhed, proclayming war against his
infinite power, with trompettes and heraldes of arms, of his own begettinge
and sendinge, dishonouring him, minishing of his godly and imperial tytles,
those I say which do belong of right, by his own purchase and great conquest,
to the heavenly crown, I do mean the titles of our creation, of our
redemption, of our justification, and free acceptatio^ (they giving honor unto
the creatures, in the stead of the creator) with like detestable, most
dampnable, and heretical persuasion and opinion, in ascribinge part of our
salvation, ye sometime altogyther to our own (worthy) deseruinges and merits,
the praise whereof he his own self like a most valiant captain with no
feyned sweat of his own body with no counterfeyted blood, with no mocking
death (for he was a right natural man) and no man did ever offer so much as
he) did obtain and wyn.

What marvel is it, though such as they be, are traitors against their
princes here in earth, if they do work in huggar muggar their most pitiful and
lamentable destruction, to the overthrow of whole realms, to the utter
castinge away and decay of common welthes, to the impouerishinge of all the
world, to the mayntenans of thieves, murderers of the^ that are void of al
pytye, against their fathers and mothers, of whormongers, aduouterous persons,
rauishers of vyrgins, breakers and dispysers of the most holy state and
sacrament of wedlock and finally the very roted sede of al kind of mischief.

If therefore the knowledge of god causes, the love of god: so that without we
know him, we can not have, neither him nor none of his benefits in estimation
and valor of a good straw: it follows consequently of necessity, that the
lack of the knowledge of him, causethe the hatred and little good affection
toward him, or any of his works. So that it follows, that the cause that we
love him not, is the cause we know him not. Not as Judas knew him, which
always was present in company with him familier with hi^, at board and table
with him, which kissing his blessed mouth and knowinge him corporally,
betrayed him. Not as the Jews knew him, which scourging and beating of his
blessed body committed al kind of vilany, nailed his body to the cross, and
so forth as the hystory makes most godly and ghostly mention. For that
corporal knowledge how little it profits, nay how much it hurts (if you do
rest there and go no further) the master of al heavenly knowledge Christ
declares with very plain words speakinge of his own flesh and blood,
saying: the flesh profits nothing at al: it is the spirit that gives life
and quickens. The lord did speak plainly, not meaning any other thing then
he did with his mouth speak and declare. To man's judgment what thing
could be more heavenly, more blessed (as it is in deed) than to have ye body of
our savior, forty wekes within our own bodies, as the vyrgin Mary had? But if
yt she had not known him in her spirit a little more perfectly than her
corporal knowledge might have given informatio^, forsooth it should have profited
her very little or nothing: she had been no mete vessel, habitacle or mansion
place for that sacred body. But gyuinge credyte at the last, forsakinge her
own reason and judgment, whereby she could not attain to the knowledge of God
his will and pleasure, being of her self counseled to ye contrary by natural
reason, as by these words appeared. (Quoniam virum non cognosco) I never had
flesshely knowledge and company with man: I know not what it means: I can
not tell, which way it should be so, most like a plain, simple, and virtuous
maiden, felinge her spirits moved and new altered in her self (for the holy
Ghost wrought merueylously in her and strongly) nature gave place, reason
quaked, faith relyued, so that to the words pronounced by the Angel. Thou
shall conceive. etc. she made no more a do but yeldinge herself up clean, as
one having no power of her self, answered these words, here I am the
handmayde of the lord, let the lord do with me as it shall please him. This
word whereto Mary gave credit and belefe did get her with child, this word
was made flessh this word came into the world naturally (sin excepted). To
this word before any thing was, nothing did give place, to be made some
thing, and of nothing al thing. To this word if Adam had given credit and
belefe: by the which word he was made and created, he had not fallen, nor
many more after him This word the holy fathers from Adam to Moises had not
written, but declated and pronounced by the mouth of God whereby they knew God,
and believed God to be God, and the Messiah to come To this word Moses gave
credyte, which was given to him in the mount in the tables of stone, written
with the finger of God, that he should give them to the people, that they might
be his people, a people that should fear and love the lord. This word Moses
did write in the book called the Deuteronomium. This word the lord commanded
to be in the hands of his people, and never to be left out of their hands, to
be always with them in all places, at al times, at their eatinge and drinkinge:
ye and at their slepinge, having it for a pyllow to lay their hedes on, and in
their iurneys to be their companion to comfort them to be their staff to stay
them and hold the^ up. And finally in all their pastimes, to be their rejoice
and delight. This word was hard of the people in the mount, whereby they knew
God, by the which he would be known, and not by any out ward vision, because
partly our flesh and corrupt carnal nature can not arise up into the mount
to behold the clear glistering bryghtnes of his Godheade, and partly because
they should not delude deceive, and blind the^ selfs with none outward
appearance and similitude of things: to avoid the great incouenyence of
Idolatry, to be committed under any spiritual or godly color.

With this word were all the Prophettes and godly kings illumined and set a
fire with the love and knowledge of God unto the time of the son of God be
coming man, which declared these word by mouth and miracle, that thereby he
might be known perfectly what he was and is in deed. This word had the
disciples and Apostles committed unto the^, with a special commandment, to
declare this word: not their own fantasies or imaginations: the word I say
of preching the Gospel to al creatures, that is to say: Repentance and
remission of sin for Christ sake, the hope of our saluatiu^, by Christ only
and his merits.

This word the holy and most virtuously disposed Apostles most faithfully
putting in writing did leave behind them to our discipline and salvation, as
witnesses Paull, saying: the Gospel is the power of God to salvation of all
them that believes, commanding also under the pain of bitter curses, neither
to minisshe or pluck away, neither to add nor join one word or title to
this word: as John in the last of his revelation says. If thou wylt be so
bold to enlarge his word, adding any thing to this book of life: whereto
nothing can or may be joined, more than it is, or else to pluck any thing from
it, I do bear witness says he, the lord shall increase on the, the plages
contained and written in this book, and for his boldness: to take away any thing
from this book: the lord shall take away from him his part and portion out of
the book of life, out of the holy eytye, never to be partaker of any thing
contained in this book. Against this word our mortal enmy has continual
war and battle, this is the castle which he goes about to undermine
coveting to overthrow it if he might. At few word the everlasting being of
God without beginning: al his power as much as may be perceived by man, that
he created the world, with all thing there in contained: that he sent down his
only begotten son (moved with compassion of our imprisonment and captivity) to
set us at liberty with full salvation, and what is there else, that is not known
by this word. Considering then that likewise as in our corporal bodies
corruption and putrefaction comes of corrupt matter, as sometime the cause of
corruption being without us, by the corrupt infection of the air and
poisonous savors does cause the inward parts to be infected and corrupted,
sometime the cause being within the body, as raw and indigested humors coming
of ill diet, of surfetinge, with other kinds of dishonest and inordinate order
of life, so proceeding from corruption to putrefaction, from putrefaction to
mortification and sleynge of the matter which is first corrupted. Even so the
cause why we lack the love and fear of the lord, is the want of the knowledge
of God spiritually, whereby we should glorify God, as Paul witnesses to the
Romans. Yet must there follow an other cause why we know not the lord, and
that truly is because we embrace not him with our arms in his word, because we
do not make much of him in his word: because we kiss him not with the mouth
of our heart earnestly and heartily in his most blessed word, and so to follow
him in life with all pureness and godliness of living. What is the occasion
of all these our spiritual infyrmities, that we may learn and know the original
cause and fountain, that hereafter we may be preserved from this most poison
and pestiferus infectio^ the better: being (as the proverb says) ons warned
and so half warned.

He that was sometime an Angel the father of pride, the old enmy of god and
man Satan, the child of everlasting wrath and dampnation: he (I say) which
made to our savior many great promises and gay, if the lord would have fallen
down and worshipped him, of whom Satan knew well his head should be broken: he
works all this mischief, al our sorrows, he enuieth us to be the children of
God, he would fayn have us to be as he is in extreme misery: he plucketh from
us the lively and most holso^ fode of the soul: he knows that as our bodies
being destitude of bodily sustenance can not chose but dye, so the body of
the soul, being without the heavenly and most comfortable fode of the word of
God of pure necessity must perysshe. As Christ ye right scholemaister of health
answered. Bread is not only. etc. This is our adversary well ware of: he
knows hes power very weke and feeble where the word of God is in place.

Some Antechrist therefore, like to him self must he stir up and ordeyne (as
he knowethe what makethe for his purpose) making and constituting him as god in
earth, lord over all the world fellow and chekmate with God, forgyuer and
holder of sins, having ye keys of Heaven and of Hell, not being under any*
but holding the heads of al princes under his gyrdle, crowned with the crowns
not of glory (as he would have them betaken) but with the crown of the world of
the flesh, and of the Devil, above all potentates in power, having his power
in every king his dominion, more strong than the most natural and lawful
kings them self, and for none other cause but to remove from the hertes of
men this stomblinge block the word of God by his power, threatening and
cursyng the row his most wicked ministers, which should be the vpholders and
defenders of this most holy and blessed word, putting into princes heads
that it is not lawful: for the lay and common people, to meddle with the
Gospels, with the secrets of God, to know the will of god, to know by whom
they are created: by whom they do obtain salvation and remission of sins,
declaring many more great inconuenyences and hurtes that will follow thereof if
they be suffered to have it at lybertye, ascribing and imputing to the knowledge
and redinge of the word of God, those things and vices which are clean
contrary to the nature of the word of God, making the magystrates and rulers
believe that it will cause sedition, tumultes and insurrections in the commonwealth, O most cruel sect of vipers, which does shut up the kingdom of Heaven
from men, neither willing to enter in your selfs, nor content that any else
shall, most like unto ba^dogges, which lie tied at the maunger not feding of the
hay that therein is, nor yet sufferinge the pore Ox or Horse to eat and fed?
of it to their sustenaunce. What thing does teach peace? but the word of God.
What preaches tranquillity in feldes, towns, cytyes: and realms, ye through
all the world? but the word of God. What meanethe these words. Discite quia
mitis et humilis sum. Learn of me, for I am mek, lowly and gentyl. Also peace
be with you, love you one another, as I loved you, in this men shall know that
you be my disciples What thing shows forth true obedience of subjects unto
their louinge kings but the word of God, which declarethe to us, how
obedient, how subject our master Christ showed him self unto Caesar, saying
to Peter: let me se the coin and stamp of Caesar, knowledgynge and alowynge
therein, and also comfyrmyng the authority of princes, commanding also to
give, pay, and render unto Caesar all that does belong to the emperyall crown
and dignity of the Emperor. What does Paul teach in commanding us to be
obediente to kings and magystrates, addinge thereto a cause of our necessary
obedience, declaringe that he is not ordained of man but of God, as the high
minister and officer of god, and that he bears not the swerd in vain. Paul
also which commands ye laws to be kept, teaches not disobedience.

What place of the Gospels and Pystles is not every where full of al manner of
obedience. Of the son to the father: the servant to the master, with like
exhortations unto the masters and fathers toward their servants and
children. This gear is far from rebelling, from seditions, from risinges and
insurrections. Yet these hell hounds be not a shamed, to report, belie, and
sclaunder most shamefully the holy word of God, bearing most false witness
against it, for to banyshe it, to burn it, to hang it out of the way, that
their master Satan may have full swey and rule in the heart of man which is
the seat, house and temple of God. Such as these be, are first traitors to
God, and after to their princes and kings. For it stands not with reason nay
it is impossible, that ye or they should love their king heartily, which loves
not God, which takes part with Antechrist. They their own selfs be those
persons which would have seditions with risinges and insurrections of the co^mo^s
and other heads, to the maynteyning of the kingdom of Satan. For I doubt not
to abide by it, that where the word of God is, there can be no such
disobedience, no nor mistrust of subjects. But where the word of god is not,
there look for no manner of goodness, no kind of virtue, none obedience or love,
but for fear not from the heart, but from the teache forward, laughing as the
Hare, which ha^geth on the saddle bow, among them is the Devil with all his
whole band and rabble. Example we had not many years past when Satan his
minister Antechrist, with his retinue of Monks Friars, and other of his
chapleyns had thought to have stroke a great stroke in this realm to ye utter
undoing of all the whole comiualtye of the said realm, if the most mighty hand
of the lord had not turned all their cogitations upon their own necks. I
would they should answer me whether the word af God was the cause of the
insurreetion in the north ye or nay. If they be choked with this demand, I
will go a little more nere unto them, to se if they ca^ escape any way, by any
honest answer and excuse but that they shall be found loud and shameful
liars against god, Which part was the first mouers and styrers of these most
lamentable insurrectio^ (if the lord had not set his foot in) the laytie or
the spirituality of the north parts. If they will put it from them, and lay it
on the lay men's shulders, I will answer the^ and say that the cause of the
sedition was not the lay cause but the spiritual cause (as they call it) for to
maynteyne and uphold their ungracious power, kingdom and dominion, and that the
lay men were but ministers of their fury and madness, provoked by them with most
false persuasions. Wherefore they most justly suffered not like traitors, but
traitors in deed. If it was not the popyshe cause or cause of religion (as they
do call it) in the defense of their sodomiticall monasteries, and mayntenance of
the most stinking and proud Babylon with the great crowned whore and al her
harlottes, for what cause did their chalyses, crosses, pyckes of silver and
gold (which no lay or profane seculer man might touch for the holiness
thereof, but not to holy and good to commyt treason with them fly so fast
about to the mayntenance of this great evil: with all their cattle, as oxen,
sheep, and grain also, that no thing should lack to the furtherance and
setting forward of so evil and deuelysh a purpose The badge and token that
their souldy ours did were on their backs and breasts for a knowledge, and in
their standerde was it not the sign of the five wou^des of Christ, in token
and signification that their rysynge was in the right of the church. Then
must you confess that ye spirituality there being, was the whole cause of that
tumulte and sedition, how soever the pore laytie did bear ye bront (not
unworthily) for consenting and ayding of their treason. But such has been always
the practice of Antechrist and his true sworn servants, to set kings with
kings together by the ears, and to stir the commons against their kings
plucking their own necks forth of the halters, they have ways inoughe to
shyfte for them self. Yet they will and affirm that among them only does and
must remain the word of god, which has nothing to do with any such matter,
no nor yet can not, nor will not be, where any such feats be used and
practiced. For commonly where the word of God is abse^t, there wa^teth no kind
of mischief, there is styrring and moving of hatred, between the subjects and
rulers. This is the practice of the Devil in his ministers. This was the
practice of Augustine, the legate of Satan his minister Antechrist, with whom
al kind of Abomination was brought from Rome the seat of all iniquity into
England, taking at ye time this noble realm so great infection that it could
never sense be thoroughly purged

Was it not with god his word, that this Augustine caused a thousand five
hundred godly and true preachers to be slain in one day? was not this the
practice of the holy shrined traitor Thomas Becket for the church right? what
shamfull contumelise and opprobrious despite has diverse right noble and godly
kings of this realm, at the hands of these wicked fyndes perforce sustained,
and glad yt they might so escape with no worse turn? What should I remember
that godly king John: which for the love he did bear to the lord: and
ardent desire in setting forth of his gospel: was he not after most shamful
ha^dlyng at the last with poison deprived of his life? what cloak? what color
had they to bleare the commons eyes: but only that thing which they thought
should please the commons for their poor bellies sake: saying nay, beliyng and
most falsely sclaunderyng the king: that he went about to bring in and to make
such a derth of corn, as was never seen nor hard, with extreme famyne and
hunger into the realm. How long should a man stand in rehersyng all the
practice of antichrist prelates? How many kings.lx. or.lxxx. years paste
durst ones open their lyppes against these holy servants of god: but they
would have watched one time or other to have displeased them, that it had been
less pain and displeasure for the kings and head rulers to have had open
war with any other foren prince: and less harm also for the commons: than
to have angered but one of the least of this most vile generation of Antechrist.
These are good and sufficient warnynges for the kings and head rulars, to try
them well, whether they be of Antechrist stock ye or nay: before they suffer
them to be to bold or to nere about them, for they cannot chose but practice
their malice, their poisonous nature in so who^ and rank Did not within this
few years a sort of pyld friars obtain a commandment from the bishop of
Rome, with a curse against their own natural and right king, which now
does reign in Portingale, for not fulfyllynge his fathers will in building
of their monastery, for a sort of sodomites (which is made all together of the
feyrest and finest marble that may be) compellyng their ointed king and head
to perform it? where did they ever read this in Paull or any other of the
apostles writings. And yet for all that they have the word of God with them,
they be also of the spirituality. Wherein they do make no leasinge. For there
is.ii. kinds of spiritualtyes: that one is of God, that other is of the Devil.
The Devil is a most dampnable spirit, working spiritually, by his spiritual
members. The Devil also has his church. the Devil has his spiritual ministers
as well as God, the Devil has his commandments as well as God and this is
the principal and first of his commandments, not to suffer ye word of God to
reygne in the hertes of men.

What token can you have more euydent, more plain to spy and know a bishop,
an Archdeacon, a Deane, a Person a curate of his church, than when you do here
him preach and teach the commandment of his master ye Devil, ye the word of
God is not to be had in the mother tongue, is not to be common among al me^ as
though the benefits of Christ perteyned but to a few in nombre, and not in
generally to al men. Such persons when you do hear on this manner teaching,
straight way mark him up to be of Satan's church, and one of his chapleyns be
he Archbishop, or Bishop, Suffriga^ or Archdeacon, Deane, Person, or pore
Cucate. We have a saying in our mother tongue. Thou shall never make me believe
that thou love me, when thou do take my meat from me. It is in deed a
token of very small love. How little the^ are they our friends, nay how much
de they the enemies both of God and man, which do rob our souls, bought with
so dear a price, taking the word of God from the people, which is the right to
de of the soul, and the only preserve from al corruption,

This great enormitie and abuse, or rather the great sclaunder of souls, the
king his excellent majesty, which late reigned of most godly and happy
memory perceyuyng (being taught from god above): What a sort of rebellious
conspiratours, of god his enemies Antechristes disciples and ministers, with
the name and most falsely usurped power of Antechrist him self: did his
grace, (nay god in him, for it passed man's power) as it were in a moment of
time to be compared to so great an act, swepe away and shake clean forth of
his realm and dominion. How many of the^ did rather chose to be hanged,
drawn and quartered quick, then (forsakinge the common tyrant of all the wide
world) to eleue unto their most natural and louinge king. What thing was
thought among them to dear, for that bloudsucker and soul killer? and with
their own king would scant find in their heart to part with a good will with
ye paryng of their nails: if they thought it might have done him any good in
preuaylynge against his enemies. Their abomination and deceytfulnes perceived:
his grace commanded the blessed word of god to be set at large for all men,
not without great struggelinge and resistance of the sede of Antechrist: how
has this word sense that time ben tossed from post to pillar, from the west end
of the church, to the east, from the north to the fouth, from the body of the
church, to the quere, and at the last was glad to skyp forth of the church
^ore, or to be hid in the vestry for fear of tearing al to pieces or burni^g
What grievous complayntes has been made against it, how the word of god has
let god his service to be song, in a tongue, that neither the singers nor the
hearers understood or were the better for. I know a certain cathedral church in
England, of no small rentes and possessions, replenished and adourned with all
kind of goodly ornaments, lacking neither popynge nor syngyng, a temple
worthy to be (as it is) the seat of a Bishop, called saint Augustins of
Bristow in the which for the space of.ix. mo^thes after they had express
commandment by the kings majesty, which is in glory a man might have seen
Poules steple stand upon the high altar, as soon as the bible in the church,
or any part there of. So great is the favor that they do bear to the word
of god, so good is the example that they do give to the pore paryshe churches,
which are in deed, much better disposed than those which should be the chief
lanternes of light. These men do set forth the word of god gaily. These men
did set so much by their kings commandment, that neither for fear and
love of God, nor for fear of breaking the godly commandment of the king,
could find in their heart to suffer it to be in tht sight of his people If
there should be a commandment that the people (for satisfaction and
penance, because they have committed ydolatry) should set up on every of
their seats an image of this or that, with certain candels before it, to
knele down before it at certain times, to kiss and lycke it, to say
certain prayers to it. What loking and totinge: what prieng and spyeng should
there be: what dilligent observation, who did observe: who did neglect this
penance. Every one of Antechrist his birds would have had here in as many
eyes as ever had Argus, they would never have slept, some should always have been
waking. But against this most sacred and blessed word of God, how malicious
they be, how spiteful and with what tyranny they do persecute those whom
they know to embrace this word, it makes christian men's hertrs blede to se
it. They have shut up this word from the pore, and handye crafts men, as
though they had no souls permitting it to rich and great landed men, wherein is
a great point and piece of their legerdemain and craftye iuggeling to be
noted. They do shut and lock it up from the pore, because they be always most
ready to receive it, they do give and grant it to the rych, not that it should be
set forth the more fruitfully by them, but for.ii. other causes which they do
keep close within their own bosoms to them self, that one is, knowing that
the most part of the rich sort ar so choked up with this world, and the
care thereof, that they pass not for it (which makes well for their purpose)
that other cause is, if any of the rich do receive the word thankfully,
knowleging the benefits of God, yet they will be afraid to profess it openly,
for danger they should be entrapped with the loss both of their bodies and
goods.

These be the practices of the prelates of Antechrist hes church to suppress
and put down the word of God, that Satan his kingdom might florishe. God
therefore declaringe his manifold benefytes and unspeakable love toward this
realm, in the stead and place of that noble king deceased, now resting in
the bosom of Abraham, has sent down to us a little Dauyd to break great
Golyath his head with the stone of the word of God, to overthrow on the
heads of the inhabyters high and proud Babylon, not leaving one stone or
stycke standing but to burn it al to powder, with brymstone and wyld fire. And
in the stead thereof to build up a new the temple of God, to set forth the
right honor and glory of God, that we appear not unthankful to him for the
preservation of this our young vyrgyn king from the hands of his mortal
enemies: which, lokinge and gaping for a day, which should have been to us
blacker then any pytche, more bitter then any gall: were most luckely (we may
say) deceived and made frustrate of their hope.

We need make none other reckoning but that his grace was delivered and plucked
out (by the mighty and strong hand of God) forth from between the jaws and
sharp tethe of the Lion, at ye hour when his cruel enemies were taken and
dystroyed, being as great a miracle wrought by God in his grace, as was ye
deliverance of the children of Israel in the read Sea from the tyranny of
Pharao. The lord requires again for his manifold kyndnes, no gold nor
silver nor any other kind of wordly treasure but a thankful heart, a knowledge
of his godly will: open confessinge of his benefytes before all the world.

The lord rebuked the children of Israel for their vnki^dnes in forgetting and
not having in mind their deliverance from the captivity in Egypt, and from
the tyranny of Pharao.

Your good lordship can do no better service to the lord, than to se his most
blessed word, Trust not ^^togyther ^o the Bishops.
most purely with all sincerity set forth in his own nature and kind. It
is your grace his office and duty to se that it be done in deed: for as much
as it has pleased God to call you to so high administration and governance.
This is one of the tytles perteyninge to the crown of England: the defense of
our faith: which consysteth in seeing the word of God ryghtly ministered, and
truly broken unto all the king his grace his highness most loving subjects: as
your grace always has declared your self most earnestly affectioned
thereunto, and so to proceed to the honor and glory of God. Then shall Satan be
banyshed with his adherentes and commisioners forth of this realm.

Then shall the word of God florishe and bring forth goodly fruit, that is to
say the right knowledge of god and of his benefytes, a perfect love and fear
to offend his heavenly majesty with godly living according to his will and
pleasure. Then will he let his word be among us: to the comfort of our
souls, and honest conversation of our life. This word is the way: the
truth: and the life: who that does not go this way goes forth of the way and
is deceived. Who that teaches any other doctrine teaches not the truth, but
false doctrine and lies, who yt seeks any other life can not mysse but find
most terryble death. Let us therefore keep this truth, and we shall not err in
opinions: let us keep this way and we shall not be deceived of our iurney.
Let us seek after this life: and we shall not fail but find it, to the only
honor and glory of the lord, who be praised for ever world without end AMEN.

Domine saluum fac Regem.
Imprinted at London in Fleet street at the Sign of the George next to Saint
Dunstones church by William Powell. In the year of of our Lord God.M.CCCCC.
XLVIII. the.XI. day of October.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimen dum solum.


