A Sermon exhorting to pity the poor. Preached the.xv. of November. Anno.
1571. at Christ's Church in London. By Henry Bedel Vicar there, which treatise
may well be called THE MOUTH of the poor.

Imprinted at London by John Awdely.

To the Christian Reader.
Where as some for the trial of their wits, and proof of knowledge, are
moved to pen their studies and travels, which they do most exquisitely, and
others for the benefit of their country, some time of their own labors set
forth books, and some of other men's works in our mother tongue do open the
meaning, and all I trust to Gods glory, and the furtherance of knowledge: Even
so I, not of my self moved, by any worthynes I know in my self, neither to
purchase praise of men (for this my deed is nothing praise worthy to me, for if
ought be fauty, that is to me due, and if any thing be to purpose, that was and
is Gods work in me) have labored as far as memory might teach, neither
addyng nor deminishing to or from the words I spoke in the pulpet, to write
and pen somewhat for the help of the poor. Which the rather I have done, for
that then I was required by my friend so to do. Which purpose or sum of
matter, though of an other it might be more excellently done, then of me it is
in this treatise done: yet thinking that all men will consider my god heart and
well meaning to the poor, it made me the more bold to enterprise this matter,
to further their poor estate that want, and so to put in print those rude
words that then by preaching I spoke.

And thus hopyng that al men will accept my sylly good will in this my labor,
unto which I may speak as Ovid did, Vade sed in cultus, I leave the succes
unto God of this pains I have taken, as well touching my self, as also for the
poor for whom I have spoken.

H. B.

A Sermon preached in Christ's Hospital at London.
PSALM.XLI. Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy, the Lord shall
deliver him in the time of trouble.
FOr as much as God has placed his Children here in this world for the trial
of their patience, and proof of faith: and for this cause has mixed the poor
with the rich, placing some in poverty, not that he could not make them
ritche, but giving them poverty to try their patience, and enritching other
some, not that they should trust in their riches, as by his Prophet he says:
If riches rise, set not thy heart thereon, Psa. lxiij
but geuyng them riches to try their faith whether they will serus God
through and by faith that woorketh by love, or else serve Mammon, by keeping of
him in secret, knowing Mat. vi.
also the iustifiyng faith as S. Paul says, Gala. v
is that that works by love. Which love is especially expressed in
ministering to the necessity of the Saints, and our poor brethren Romans xij
as the same Paul affirms. Therefore also does David, for his part by these
words as much as he can, travel to bring us to that purpose of faith, to shaw
our love to the poor when in these words he says: Blessed is he that
considers the poor and the needy.

As the tree is known to be good or bad by Mat. vij
none other ways then by his fruits: so the faithful, not by his words, but
by his exercises is known, in believing and woorkyng the things that belong to
faith. Therefore our Savior says: Not all that say Lord, but they that do the
will of my Father, who wills Mat. vij
amongst many things that this should be one, namely to consider the poor and
the needy. For us the unsavory salt that loses his saltnes, is not fyt to
season, but to be cast Mark. ix
as reprobate and naught in the hye ways, to be trod under foot: so is that
faith dead, that has no exercises in the way of love, to remember the poor,
as James says: Faith if it have not her exercises in her self, the is dead.
Jacob. ij


I speak not this, as if a man should suppose, that he that wanting faith that
teaches to work cannot be justified, having the same faith now given, that
hereafter would work, as we see in children that have not wrought, yet justified
by faith that is lively in them, and would have wrought if they had lived. As
also in the thief that never wrought, be cause he wanted that faith by which
now he is justified, whereby he would have wrought if he had lived. Therefore
does faith only justify in them that are prevented, that they cannot work
according to the same, and therefore Grace makes them free. But to others that
have time, and therein also the iustifiyng faith, they have the fruits of the
same.

Neither do I speak thus, as if God needs our works or gifts, who gives
unto us first, and that with plenty, and casts no man in the teeth, nor I
speak not to the end that we should so work, as to think our selves
justified therein, being as our Master says, unprofitable servants, when we
have done Luke vij
all we can do, giving out nothing, but what we have received, as S. Paul
says. But this exercise of faith to give to the poor, is required of us to
satisfy our bounden deutye, not for merit, but in duty, because the poor
are left amongst us for this cause as Christ says: Ye shall have the poor
always with you. John. xij
Which poor for us, as the rich for them are left, whereof S. Augustine faith:
Propter diuites De verbis domini ser. 26.
sunt pauperes, that is, the poor are for the rich man's sake, which are to be
considered as poor and needye, even as David death teach us well.

But to ariue to my purpose, these words of the Prophet contain two profitable
notes The first to teach us to respect the poor and needy, as becomes the
faithful. Secondly to consider the promise that is annexed thereto. And of
these I will speak by Gods grace severally.

First, concerning the respect and care of the poor, al be it that David does
note it well in this Psalm, yet to the better satisfying of so necessary a
deutye, that by the mouth of many witnesses we may the more speedely be
brought to the credit of the same, let us hear the course of the scriptures,
and learn our duty forth of them.

How earnestlye does God call upon us to remember the poor by his servant
Salomen, as we read in the Proverbs where he says He that despyseth his
neighbor, synneth against Pro. xiiij
his Maker, but he that has pyty on the poor, he shall be blessed. He would
not have us hard hearted against the poor and our fellow servants, to say
to them: Go thy way thou stranger, God send thee thou stranger meat, drink
and clothing as Syra^^e says. Nor ^e would not have us to be disquieted with
the cry of the poor, to stop our ears against them, and therefore says: He
that stops his ear at the cry of the Prou. xij,
poor, shall cry him self and not be heard. Nor he suffers us not to be
careless of their Luke vi,
state, being at ease our selves, as that Glutton was mentioned in the Gospel,
but as David his father wills the poor to be considered, so he concludes
saying: the bread of the Eccle, 34
poor is in the ways of the rich, he that keeps it from them, is a man of
blood.

Toby being a good instrument of God, and in this matter worthy to be believed
in his counsel, who as he well considered the poor in feeding of the living,
and burying the dead with his own labor and cost, so he teaches others the
same practice of duty when he says Tobi. iiij
Be merciful after thy power, if thou have much, give plenteouslye, if thou
have little, do thy diligence gladly to give of that little. For as God needs
not the gift, but requires the duty: so Toby, not for the quality of the
gift to be wayed, but in the quality of the mind of him that gives, teaches
us to give somewhat, be it little or much, even as S Ambrose also teaches: Non
solum queritur Ambro. in. 1. Cor
quantum datur, sed de quanto and quanto animo. That is: It is not only
required how much is given, but out of how much and with what mind, not to be
praised for the greatness, in that we give not so much as we received, for what
geuest thou that thou have not received? Nor for the abundance, because i,
Cor, iiij
we have more then needs, but for duty requiring the same, we must of
necessity give. And therefore as in substance God has blessed us with the
most, so we must study to give the more, not that God is pleased with sums,
as though thereby we should think our selves justified, but to discharge our
stuardships of that we have received, according to the saying of s. Paul
writing to Timothe, Charge them that are rich in this world, that i, Tim, vi
they be ready to give, and glad to distribute, laying up in store a good
foundation for them selves against y^ time to come, that they may attain
eternal life. Unto whose words we may fitly for our comfort and erudition
ioyn Sirackes saying: Reach forth thy hand unto the poor, that thy mercy and
blessing may Eccle, vij
be made perfect.

Also the Prophet Esaias speaking unto us in the word of the Lord, amongst many
wholesome and necessary lessons forgets not to put us in mind of our duty
to the poor, because it is a pleasant thing to the Lord, and a fruit of our
faith, and a token of Christianty. Therefore first he says: When thou see
Esai. lviij
a naked man, cover him, and see thou despise not thine own flesh. And after in
the same place he says: Break thy bread unto the hu^gry, and never turn thy
face from any poor man, and so the face of the Lord shall not be turned from
thee. And again a little after in the same chapter he says: See the nedy and
the stranger brought into thy house. Surely in deed howsoever wilful
affection and vain pleasure leads us, we ought not to be unmindful of our
brethren the poor members of Christ, seeing that besides our duty, even our
excess would content their need, and our wast serve their lack. So that if at
any time God has given unto us abou^dantly, which we waste in superfluity,
that should be the portion of the poor. And for this cause we do not so, Basil
charge us with wast that we shall surely answer. He says: Nonne spoliatores
qui dispensanda suscepisti tanqua^ propria reputa^do? Est enim panis famelici
quem tu tenes, nudi tunica quem in co^claui reseras, discalsiati calcei que
penes te ma rcescunt, in digentis aurum quod tu possides in humatu^. That is to
say: Art not thou a spoyler in taking to dispense an other man's substance, and
then to reckon it as thine own? For it is the bread of the hu^gry which thou
retainest, the coat of the naked that thou lockest in thy wardrope, the shoes
of the barefoote that lie m^wloyng and drying by thee, the needyes g^ld that
lies cankred and buried by thee. Which sentencs of Basil, as it teaches the
liberality that is due for the poor, so it blames the careless that account
al to be their own, keeping to them selves more then sufficient. That at the
last day the Mite in the croms, the Mothes in the garments, and the rust in the
gold may freate them like cankers, as James does protest. Jacob. v.


Therefore the hard hearted rich that respect not the poor, and yet will be
accounted the lovers of God, ar reproved by the Apostle s. John, who says: He
that has this worlds i. John. iij
riches, and sees his brother to have need, and yet shuts up the bowels
of mercy from him, how does the love of God dwell in him? And therefore they that
brag of the love of God, who they never saw with bodily eyes, let them show
some compassion to the needy members of Christ, whom daily they see. Other wise
such careless may boast of Christian^^ie, but the fruits thereof he has not. He
may brag of ^aith, but he wa^teth that which works by love. For the
amendeme^t where of let all that have and may well spare, not respecting their
fancies, but co^st dering their duty, harken to the words of Syrache: Let
Eccl. vij.
every man dele according to compassion and mercy with his brother. For be it
known to all, that as to steal from them that rightly posses their goods, is
criminal, and a matter gilty before God, reputed to be sin: so it is no less
but equal sin, to keep from them that lack, being poor and nedy, as Ambrose
says well: Non minoris est criminis habenti tollere, quam cum possis
indigentibus denegare. It is no less sin (says he) to take from him that
rightly possesses, then not to give to him that lacks, when thou art able
For the right rich man that dulye deserves that name, is not known by his
possession, his gorgeous fare and costly house, his great palace, his Jewels
and gold, but by confidering the poor and needy, whereof S Au^^ine August.
homelia. 15.
says thus: Diuites aliorum paupertate probantur. That is to say: the rich
are proved by the poverty of others. So that still and always the scriptures
and Fathers prescribe not an indifferancie, but a necessity, not at pleasure,
but upon duty, that the poor and needy should be considered.

Where is that large liberality that in our Fathers was seen much, though to
an evil purpose then applied, as thereby seeking their salvation, may now be
bestowed to a better use, that is, to foster and feed the poor members of
christ. The world is as great as ever it was, the people as rich, but not so
liberal, our knowledge more, but in this point we be wylful ignorant. For look
what wastfully our fathers as fools did lay forth and bestow upon shameless
friars that never were full, and fat bellyed Moonkes whose bellyes were their
gods, that now our Nigards can not lay forth, distrustyng their states, least
they should beg (say they) before we dye, distrusting the providence of God,
that blesses their store. Whereas in deed as Seneca says Nemo tam pauper
viuit, qua^ nascitur and mo Seneca de Iuditijs.
ritur. That is: No man lives so poor, as he his borne, and shall dye. The
extorcioner can spare naught to the poor, for ioynyng house to house, with a
cursi^ to the same, as Esaias says, doing no good to the poor, except Easy. v,
it be to cast them forth a doors. The pride of apparel makes us forget the
patched poor, and our dainty soft lodgyng, their hard couc^es and straw.

Where is the plentye of gold that garnished y^ erroneous church, the silver
and jewels that so largely was given forth to stocks and stones, the cloth
that clothed the Pylgrime god that felt no cold, the stock that bought the
candels to set before them, that had eyes and yet saw naught? Were ye so
plentiful about such pel^e, and will ye give nothing to poor Jesus Christ?
Well, ye make a scorn of the poor and needy, the poor now perishes by the
rich, and no man considers it. Is this the life of Christians? Is this the
fruit of our Gospel? Is this the mercy that we learn by the word?

Well then awake from your sleepy security, consider your duties toward the
poor, stretch forth your niggard hands that presses down your mucke, and
harken to Syrache, who like a good Father teaches thee as his son saying: My
son, suffer not Eccle, x^.
the poor to want the things necessary for to sustain his life, and be not
thou hard against the poor. Contemn not the hungry, and grieve not the pore in
his poverty. Add not affliction to the afflicted in heart, and deferrs not to
confer thy benefit on the poor. Refuse not the voice of the selly and simple,
and turn not thy face from the poor. Cast not thine eye^ from the miserable,
least he have cause to accuse thee.

Thus at length does Syraehe counsel, but we are negligent to hear the same.
Hear we may, but credit thereto is small.

Then consider, as the benefit is great where with God recompenceth the
merciful, so is the justice very sharp in condempnyng the hard hearted, as in
that conclusion the same Syrache says: For if thou be careless of the Eccle,
iiij,
poor, saint and needy poor that calls on thee, he that made him shall hear
his prayer when with a troubled heart he sha^ accuse thee.

Then give, and give gladly, give and give largelye, for the bread that is
given with a grudgiug heart, is called stony bread, as Seneca says, reporting
the words of Fabius Verecosus, Seneca lid. 2. de beneficijs.
which are these: Beneficium ab homine duro aspere datum, panis lapidosus est
Esurienti accipere cum sit necessariu^ est tamen acerbus panis. That is to say:
the benefit hardly given of a hard man, is stony bread, being then necessary
for the poor to take it, because of his hunger, yet notwithstanding it is but
sower bread. Such a geuer in my counsel is next cousin to Satan, for be gave
Christ stones in stood of bread, but this man gives the Christian stony bread,

Therefore ye that have it, be not vnmyndful of the poor I pray you, and again
give ear to Syrach, for thus he does teach: Lay Eccle, 29
up thy alms in the hands of the poor, and know that what thou keep, in
the end thou Eccl, xvij
shall only leese, but that that thou geuest, shall be as a purs about thy
neck, as the same wise man says: For as this life waxes old Prou. xj,
and our days pass away, so shall this vain pelf pass away from us, neither
shall riches help in the day of vengeance, but the corruption abides which
freateth like a canker. Then what shall it profit to get all the world? and when
the world forsakes us, that shall be most against us, that best we loved being
in the world. Then in satisfiyng our duty to give to the poor, is better then
to keep to our selves the flitting mucke, even as Lactansius Lactans. lib. 7.
cap 27.
does teach us: Vnusquisque potiorem animam suam inducet, quam bona ista
fallacia quorum incerta and caduca est possessio migrant enim multo velocius
quam intrauerant and licet vsque ad vltimum hijs frui liceat alijs tamen
relinquende sunt. That is to say: Let every man persuade him self, that his
soul is better then these subtle riches, the pessession whereof is variable
and uncertain, for they pass from us much more swiftl y, then they came to
us, and albeit we have the use of them even til the last day, yet at the length
we must leave them to others. Then I pray thee ay them forth for the profit of
your brethren. Learn to forsake them, before they forsake you. Learn the wise
counsel of our Savior Christ: Make thee friends of the wicked Mammon. Luke
xvi,


It is maruail to hear how plentifully the Scriptures command us to be
mindful of the poor, besides that that already has been alleged. As in the
Proverbs the wise man says: He that has pity on the poors, leandeth Prou,
xix Psa. xviij
to the Lord. And David in the Psalm desires to deliver the needy from the
hand of the sinner. And Christ says: I was hungry, Mat. xxv
and ye gave me meat. etc. But how slack all states are in satisfiyng this
duty, with grief I speak it, and with dread for their negligence they shall
hear and seele it, when it shall be to late for men to dissemble their state.

Yet ye give not, and why so? Not because ye have not whereof ye may give, but
because ye will not let go from you that you may well spare. Power wants good
will that should be adjoined unto him. The purs is able, but the heart is not
frank. Needy niggardy causes many to profes such a needeles necessity, that
that is kept from the poor, that profuse prodigality wilfully does waste. Many
are good to the poor, as we commonly say, but they will give them naught,
then I say great boast, and small roast makes unsavory mouths. Yet if words
will do any good, they shall not want. For it costeth us nothing to say: alas
good soul God help thee, God comfort thee, I would we were able to help
thee. So that they wish well to them selves in wishing them able, but of such
wishing, and for such wishers I say as the Beggar to the Bishop is reported to
say, that if their wyshings were worth a halfpeny, I doubt they would not be
so liberal. Therefore let them leave wyshyng, and fall to some doing. Ye lock
up and will not loose, ye gather together even the devil and all, and why?
because ye will hatch the Cockatrice egg. Ye nurse up a canker for your
selves, ye keep the pack that shall trouble your vyage to God as Christ
says: O how hard shall it be for a rich man to come Mat. xix,
to heaven, it shall be easier for a Camel to go through a needels eye. He
says not so because no ritche man shall be saved, but because the mercyles
rich man shall be damned.

And will ye know the cause and what lets that some give not: He gives not
to the poor because he is not reputed in the parish: he withdraws his hand
because he is not set up in the church higher, proud hearts and Beggars
pursses, but where is that rule and condition prescribed? He pleads poverty,
and yet sticks not to bet, prick, and play at this mark, and that game in
wylful expense, with loss of time, twice so much as might well serve the need
of the poor, and so at length falls to need him self, and therefore robs
the poor in deed of the portion to them due, which by Gods providence are
made poor. Another swylleth excessiuelye his body with drink, abusing nature,
but forgets the thristy and faint hearted soul, making his own body a den of
dronken Diueis, but others want his excess. He turns away in rollyng of
timber both his thrift and pity that is commanded, thereby making both wife
and children beggars. Some in chambering and wantonness (ye know what I mean)
wastes his body plaged with diseases, and his goods, but no penny for the
poor. He casts to Dogs, that which by nature is created for man, so that al
order and honesty, virtue and piety clean set aside, every man follows his
pleasure and fil^hynes gredely, satisfiyng the Proverb, every man for him
self. But in the mean while the stock of the poor is clean forgotten.
Which thing unless it be mended, I let you to wit the poor shall cry, and their
voice shall be heard: their distress considered, and our vengeance shall be
wrought. I tell you truth in Jesus Christ even as David says in the.xiii.
Psalm: The Psa, xxxiij
poor cries unto the Lord, and he has heard them. Wax ashamed therefore of
this vnthryftynes, of this waste and excessive riot. Open your ears, if not to
man, yet to Christ in his Gospel speaking, who very plentifully calls upon us
to give and bestow upon the Luke.vi.
poor and needy. Give, and it shall be given you, says he, by s. Luke, and
that none should think them selves so low that they owe no part to the poor,
he brings not only the rich, that of their great abundance did cast Mark.
xij,
into the treasure of the poor, but he sets forth before us the poor
widows mite, to teach us as Paul says to give gladly. Even so he reasons
with the craftye rich man, that would know what to do to attain eternal life.
He said: Go sell all that thou have, Math. xix
and give to the poor, not that it is necessary for every man so to do, or
that a man cannot be saved except he so do, but thereby teaching him
particularly to loathe the world, so thereby universally shows unto all men
the care they owe to the poor. And for this cause the holy Apostle prescribes
thye collecting for the poor as a necessary business, and the Sabothes labor.
Not on the Saboth to spend and consume all that the week has before gotten,
nor by unlawful games to prophanat the Sabbath, by hunting of tavern and
alehouse to dishonor the Lord of the Sabbath, but as becomes good Christians
to make collection for the poor S. Paul wills saying: Of the gathering for
the saints as I have i, Cor, xvi,
ordained in the congregatio^s of Galatia, eue^ so do ye upon some Sunday, let
every one of you put a side at home, and lay up whatsoever he thinks meet.
He says not, let every man waste and spend what he list, but lay up for the
poor that that is meet. For if the rich would once become liberal, there is
superflueus enough to help the poor and needy, for nature is soon pleased. I
would therefore wysh, and with my heart I pray, that the hearts of the
prosperous might be opened toward the miserable, it is an easy matter, for
there wants but good will, and good use. Then let the proud leave his cuts,
his pownces, his gardes, and embrothery, and give nature even enough to
suffice, and he shall give the pore a good portion. Let the Glutton serve
nature to suffice, and leave his surfeit, then shall the poor be fed with
that, that he often times either vomiteth forth, or works as a means to
destroy his life. Let the whooremonger leave his daliance, it shall be good for
his body, and better for his soul, and his pur^ shall be the heavier to help
the poor. Let the Artificer sit fast by his calling, then shall he profit the
common wealth by his travel, and he shall have some what to spare to help the
poor, even as to this purpose S. Paul exhorts Ephe, iiij.
the Ephesians, that each of them labor with their hands, to obtain thereby
that they may give to him that has need, because we are not borne to our
selves, but to our Country, to our Parents, our brethren and friends, to do
good to all, but specially to the Galat, vi.
household of faith. For amongst all the sacrifices which now the Church uses,
as praise and thanks giving to God is the chiefest, so the next is to
distribute to the needy Saints, as the same Paul teaches the Hebrews saying:
To do good and distribute forget not, Hebr, xiij,
for with such sacrifices God is pleased. Surely of that goods that we keep in
store, we are answerable, but of that we give to the poor, we are discharged.
That that we keep, the rust will freate like a Canker, as James says, Jacob.v.
but that that is laid up in the bosom of the poor, that is discharged, as
our Master has commanded. That that we leave behind us, the wicked may
consume in prodigality, but that we give in the way of Christian liberality,
shall be rewarded as it is written. Opera eorum sequentur eos, that is, their
Apo, xiiij*
works follow them.

Then travel not after riches to get estimation, for thou broughtest nothing
into this world, nor set not thine heart upon unrighteous Mammon, least thou
fall into the temptations ^, Tim, vi
and snares of the Devil, but be merciful to the poor indifferentlye without
respect of persons. For God as Augustine says, shall crown his gifts in thee.
Let the Beggar be wicked, thou shallt have the praise. Though some make an
occupation of it, and account of their vales, yet as Paul does bid thee
especially remember the household of faith, so be does not deny thee to do good
to all.

Feed not your equales, nor the like his like, frank not your selves to fat
to feed the woormes, for as Esaias says: Your pride shall Esaias. xxvi Amos, iij,
be plucked to hell, your fat carkases shall fall in the end, the Moth shall
freate thee, and the worm and the duste shall cover thee. But when ye may
spare to spend and banquet your selves, to make your hearts glad, as Christ
says in the Gospel by S. Luke. Then call the Luk, xiiij
poor and impotent, the halt and the blind. etc Let Herod in his daliaunce
remember his prisoner John: Nay rather as good and wise men follow those wise
men that presented poor Christ that was laid in the maunger in pouertye and
need, with their gold. When Dives has diued, let Lazarus have the crooms.

Surely it is a shame to see and know the contempt of the poor, especially
now in the time of the Gospel, when faith should so spr^d her self in our
hearts: faith I say that is exercised in love, that bragging much of faith in
words, do not correspondantly answer the same in deed. Wle can look upon
the quauering carkas that lies full cold, and we say, God help thee, and send
thee warmth, but where is our help? Yet they are our flesh, so that in
contemning them we leave our duty Jacob, ij,
undone, and verify James in his saying: If a brother or sister be naked and in
need, wanting their daily foods, and some of you shall say to them, go thy way
in peace, God send you warmth and clothing, meat and drink, and shall not
give them the things that are necessary for their bodies, what shall it profit
them? Surely a good faith that only is found in the good Christian, it always
is exercised, but every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is cut down
and cast into the fire. It is not enough only to bear leaves, but we must
also bring forth our fygs, or else the lord Jesus shall cursie us.

Then this is to be learned, that none contemn or despise the poor, but that
every man according to his ability help them, and consider of them as David
says. So that neither the rich in defiyng the poor say, away with this
Beggar, go whip me this slave, this stinking rascal, this lousy wretch, being
his own image: neither on the other side none say I am so poor I cannot help,
I need help my self, for God loves glad hearts and chereful i, Cor, ix,
geuers. For except it be the poor in deed to whom we must give, there is no
such want but that they may give somewhat as Fulgentius Eulgentius Sermon de
confesso ribus.
says: Dare elimosinam omnibus est possibile, si adsit bona voluntas: Omnibus
facile, si non adsit dira cupid^tas, omnibus salubre si ferueat charitas
cunctis debet esse commune vt omnibus detur eterna felicitas. He says: It is
possible for all men to give alms, if all men have good will thereunto. He says
it is an easy thing for all men to do, if cruel conetousnes be not present. He
says it is wholesome for all men, if charity be fervent, and he says it
should be common to al men, that al might obtain eternal felicity, not in
respect of the gift, as I have said before, but for the promis sake, as Christ
says by S. Mathe w: He that Math.x. Mark, ix
shall give to one of these little ones a cup of cold water in my name, he
shall not loose his reward.

Give we must to satisfy Gods ordinance, whereto he has ordained us, as the
same Fulgence Fulgentius de confesso ribus.
says: for God has ordained Quod de mus, cur demus, and quibus demus, that
is: He has ordained the thing that we must give, a cause why we should give,
and his creatures to whom we should give. Therefore in respect of the first
that he has ordained things to give, that must needs be applied to the
ordinance wherefore it was made, or else we commit sin in abusing Gods
ordinance. Then secondly in that there is cause to give, even the will of God
prescribing the same, Gods ordaining will must be satisfied, or else we commit
sin. Last of al for that he has ordained to whom we should give besides
favor, that rises by love, in duty we are bound to give them ye portion that
God has appointed for them, ordayning things for them, and ordaining them
also to enjoy those things, as ordaining riches and rich men, to help the
poor in their poverty.

Which were an easy matter, if there were a forward good will and readynes: For
the number of the poor he nothing comperable to the number of the rich and
wealthy. So that in this concourse of people, if every one would do but a
little, it might be an easy matter to help the poor. An easy matter I say, if
we follow Chrisostomes counsel, who says thus: Gratia Dei centum millia hominum
Chryso. homeli. 87. in ca. Mat. 26.
huc co^uenere opinor, quorum singuli si vnu^ panem quotidie paupertate
offerrent, omnes certe pauperes abbundarent: si vnum quisque obulum solummodo,
nemo penitus indigeret. Whose words in English are these: I suppose, that by
the grace of God, there is resorted to this place one hundred thousand men, of
which number if every one would daily give but one piece of bread, all the
poor might abound: if euerys man would give but one halfepeny, no man should
want.

And may not I say so to you my country men, as Chrysostom did to his? Is
there not as great multitudes and concourse of people now, as ever was then? The
matter being so small that is required, me thineke it is great impiety if it
be denied. If ye be moved to give more, God bless that motion, and move ye so
still: if not, yet give this small request. Rule thy penny I pray thee, let it
not rule thee for one of these two offices must it needs have, either
subjection or government, as the Poet. Horace says: Inperat aut seruit collecta
Horace.
pecunia cuique, That is to say.

The money that greedely is gathered together. Either rules or is ruled I know
not well whither Then I say once again, give, that it may be known that ye
govern, and do not obey, for in keeping ye seem most manifestly to be
governed. Again, least thou go from thy riches before thou have done good
with them, so heap together I pray thee, that thou may well scatter, and so
posses I beseech thee, that thou know to give forth. For the time must come,
that thou must leave al, when thou have caught and scraped together what thou
can as Martial in his verse does truly say: Rape, Martial.
congere, aufer, posside, relinquendum est, 1.

Catch and heap up, filch and posses:
yet must thou forsake Mammon remediles.
But what should I speak of Chrisostomes counsel, or use mine own persuasion,
or infer the verses of Peets, when as there are good and godly laws appointed
for the same in this Realm of England? as ceasments in parishes, and Colectors
for the same, forfaits for absence from the parish church, and Side men for the
same, and such others ordained by authority for the comfort of the poor. But
how loosely this is looked unto, it appears in the tresure of the poor, for
every man plucketh his neck out of the yoke, and no man asked why so: the
forfaites is never asked, be absent who will. Thus conscience is careless and
lies a sleep, regarding neither duty toward the poor, nor vow toward
God, neither wordly shame and improofe for their negligence, nor the answer
they have to make for the poor: neither the cry of them that live for a time,
nor the judgment of him that lives for ever. And this is the cause of the
want of the poor.

Yea and more then that (such is their remediles ear) the rich as Amos says,
make hauock of the poor, in bying them for old shoes Amos, ij,
Nay they will buy them and sell them out of doors. They are good to the poor
as they say, but they will give them nothing, and thus the poor are robbed, God
amend the evil.

I might apply histories, the reports of good and godly men yt were merueilous
beneficial to the poor, but what should Christians in the time of the
exhorting and commau^ding Gospel use the council of stories to teach them
that which God in his word commands them, which might be easly satisfied if
Dives would leave his daintye dishes, and leave to be Epicurus fellow. If
pride would look upon poverty, if Venus would not so couple her self with
Seres and Baccus, if godly piety and pitye might once enter into our stonye
minds, if liberality might once kill covetous if rich men could command the
penny that commands them, which God once grant.

Surely amongst all the exercises of Christianity, there is none more fit for a
Chrstian nor more seemelye, then large liberalitye toward al, and pure pity
toward the poor. And therefore the stories report of Helena Flores histor.
lib. 1
Queen of the Albanes, a most memorable report, that is this, that she being
called to ye faith of Christ, and so baptized in the raygne of Cladius Caesar,
the.x. year, great famine oppressing ye people in Syria, she of her own cost
prepared great store of corn, and sent to them. A notable example to move
Christians in necessity to pity the poor. But Helena is dead and Ioses, who
was called Barsabas, be is also gone.

Consider their need ye wealthye worldlinges, that would be content with
hungrye chaps to chaw, and with sanke bellies to devour that that ye wastefully
neglect, being ordained for the poor, and not to be cast either to the Dog or
dungbil. Regard their travel, their slavish service and drudgery, think on
their toil, and comfort them. Let Christians learn a lesson of the Heathen
Orator Tully who says thus: Multa vilia and scruilia negotia liberos homines
ac ingenuos paupertas agere Ciceroex appellation^ co^tra Eubulide^
cogit, ob que potius misericordiam qua^ interitum demerentur. Poverty (says
he) compels many a good and honest man to sake in hand vile and slauishe
businesses, for which cause they deserve mercy and succor, rather then
destruction. O think if ye were in their poor state, how glad ye would be of
a small refreshing, which now to them full slackly ye do show.

Therefore let me entreat you with David the prophet, O ye rich men, consider
your duty, remember the poor, and of your satiety all their emptines: Ye that
eat til ye blow, and feed ^il your eyes swel with fatnes, that taste first
your course meats, and then fall to your fine, that drink the cold drinks
for your stomachs that are hot, a cup of claret wine, some ale or beer to
lay a foundation, then eat till to much make us blow, and then a good carowse
to make good disgestion, a cup of sack for the stomach that is cold, it is
good at midlemeale say some, this and that ye have, and I know not what the
prodigal waster licensiously does spend, which with thankesgeuing unto satiety
God has created for you. Ye I say that live in this excess with superfluity,
have some remorse to the poor in their misery, that God may bless ye as
David says, which he shall surely do, as the text does show, for such shall be
delivered in the time of trouble, that so shall do. And thus much of the first
part.

Now must I speak a little of the second, which I shall not need to stand
long about, because the scriptures plentifully teach the same, and experience
does prove it. But what shall we have for helping the poor? Surely blessing in
this world, honor and diliuerance from trouble, as David says, and retributio^
Apo, xiiij
in the life to come, and their works shall follow them. Yea and David in this
Psalm, enlarging the benefits by ennumeration declares them saying: The Lord
shall preserve him and keep him a live, that he may Psalm. x^j,
be blessed, and deliver not thou him into the hands of his enemies.

Again, our Prophet expresses well the promis granted to the man that
considers the poor and needy, saying: He has dispersed abroad, and given to
the poor, his righteousness Psalm. cxij.
remains for ever, his horn shall be exalted with glory. Which words
Snoigodane interpreting says thus: Dispersit Snoigodan. in Psalm. 112.
amore Dei non thesaurisauit sibi: Dedit pauperibus non histrionibus aut
adulatoribus: Iustitia eius and merces misericordie manet in seculum seculi,
quia praemium erit eternum. Which words englished are thus: He has given to
the poor, not unto wicked rakehels and flatterers, his righteousness, and the
reward of his mercy remains for ever, because the reward is eternal in
heaven. By which words Snoig^dane teaches well upon whom we shall bestow that
we may spare, and who ought not to have. Then it remains that we spend not
upon Dogs and Bears as some do, to satisfy their mercylesse pleasure, to see
two cruel creatures tear one the other: not upon cards and dice as some
others do: not upon excess of apparel and fare as some do: not upon fensing
and dancing to please the flesh: not upon varlets and parasites, those fawning
dogs, the Catterpillers of the poor, but upon the godly and the virtuous
poor, for that is the gift that has the promise of reward annexed unto it.

The words of Tobias whom I have proposed to be a master of mercy and pity,
may also be applied in this matter, to testify unto you the reward that
follows the same, as he writes in these words saying: Those Tobi. xij.
that exercise alms and righteousness, shall be filled with life. So that if
they have not a long raze here on the earth, yet shall they surely live with God
for ever in a far better life.

Then O dear Christians count it not lost that is given to the poor, as some
do, suppossing it is cast away that is given to those stinking rascals, but
rather think and know that it is the portion that of all thy goods is best
bestowed. For look what thou keep, thou shall loose, but that the poor
has, thou keep for thy self. Remember the good captain Cornelius, whose
memory is registered in the Acts, to whom the Angel appearing in a vision said
thus: Cornelius, thy prayer Acts.x.
and thine alms is come up before God. Lo here the reward, and also of whom
thou shall be rewarded.

Believe therefore and know ye that be rich, God wills ye to lay forth nothing
for him which he will not recompense: and as ye beleus so practice to give to
the poor, for ye shall have never the less, your basket never the emptier, nor
your store the poorer. Look upon the widow of Sarepta, little was her
provision God knows, and small was her store when the poor Prophet came to
her to ask her bread. To whom she said, I have nothing 1. Reg. 17
but a little flower in a barel, and a little oil in a cruise, which
notwithstanding she bestowed upon him. And what followed then? forsooth her
barrel was filled with flower, and her pot with oil. Surely, the plentye that
comes by the poor is much, as Augustine says: Fecundus est ager pauperum
cito redit August. in Psalm.
donantibus fructum, that is: The field of the poor is fruitful, it
surrendreth again the fruit with speed to them that give ought, yea if it be
but a cup of cold water, says our Savior Mark. x,
Jesus Christ.

The blessed Apostle s. Paul specifieth the promise annexed to the exercise of
alms, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, saying thus: God Hebr, vi,
is not unrighteous that he will forget your works of love, which ye have
showed to the Saints for his names sake, which have ministered to the saints,
and yet do minister. The confirmation whereof Christ in these words expresses
saying: Blessed are the merciful, Math. v,
for they shall obtain mercy.

To conclude, how many blessings in sundry sort promised (which he can and
will perform that has promised them) are set down for them that are pitiful
to the poor, the scriptures do testify, which should be to long to recite.
Yea and nature in flesh and blood is not able to reach to the knowledge of
them, for that they be celestial in the kingdom, according to the promise
infallible, which by express words are declared in s. Mathews Gospel in these
words: I was hungry, and ye gave Mat. xxv*
me meat, thirsty, and ye gave me drink* etc. Therefore enter into the
kingdom prepared for ye from the beginning of the world. So then that not
only many sorrestriall benefits to enritch us here are promised in
recompense, but those, that as I cannot repeat them, so unworthily we have
them promised for any thing we do, but because our gracious God has promised,
we shall surely enjoy them. The multitude whereof, the height and depth whereof,
the price and beuty whereof, the same and dignity whereof no tongue has spoken,
no more can mine: no pen has written, therefore must I stay mine: no heart has
conceived, yet may we believe, such glory has our gracious Master prepared for
his faithful Stuardes in that his kingdom that our Christ speaks of. Unto
which kingdom God the Father, by the mediation of Jesus Christ bring us al, to
whom with the holy Ghost be all glory and honor now and ever.

AMEN
A prayer which the same Henrye Bedell uses every Sunday and Holy day after
his Sermons, in the said Christ's Church.
O Dear GOD our heavenly Father, hear our prayers for Christ's sake, and say
not our syns to our charge to punish them, and to take vengannce on them, but
rather in the blood of Jesus Christ vlot them forth. We have deserved thine
anger, we co^fes, but yet in Christ's blood we know thou art well pleased, in
whose name we cry unto thee, O save us from our enemies, that seek us and our
blood for thy Gospels sake. O let not the wicked say, where is now their God?
but let us rather say, the Lords right hand has brought mighty things to
pass, our God shall laugh our enemies to scorn. Therefore hear us dear GOD,
and for thy mercies sake save thy worthy servant Elizabeth our most gracious
Queen. Grant her we pray thee peace and safety from all her enemies, give
her the blessings of peace, and a royal courage, whereby through thine
assistance she may confound all her foes, and not to fear what man can do unto
her. Let her be comforted with thy sweet mercies, lay not our sins unto her
charge, nor suffer not her life to be plaged for our sins and wickedness, but
keep her (O Lord) to be thine own, and bless her with long life and happy
days. Make her an old mother of this common wealth, and grant her a long and
prosperous reign over us in thy godly peace. Remember (O Lord) her gracious
Councellers, and behold them with thy fatherly eye. Give them thy fear, to set
forth thy will, and grant them the spirit of wisdom, and the counsels of
peace. The Bishops and Pastors O Lord, direct and make them faithful in
gathering thy harvest, to break the bread of life in time convenient, that thy
Church may be builded of lively stones. And bless thy people O Father of
might, open their hearts to receive the dew of grace, that the seed of thy
word may stnck into them. Give them O Lord, the spirit of obedience and true
humility toward thy word, and their Prince. Cast down thine eye from thy
thorn above, behold our Realm and country, and preserve it by thy might, from
civil foes, and from forayne might, from Turk and Pope, and al popish power,
that all the world may see and know that thou art our GOD. Finally we pray
thee, at thy good will, in thy appointed time, open the eyes of the blind, and
convert the hard hearted, that they may come to thy truth and be saved. Teach
them to know thy word, that once we may be one flock, in one pure faith, unto
one Christ. Confound Satan and his members, Antichrist and his religion, give
thy Gospel a joyful and free passage, give all thy people the freedom of
conscience and peace in Christ: through the same Jesus Christ our. Lord.

Amen.
Imprinted at London by John Awdely, dwelling in little Britain street,
without Aldersgate. 1573


