THE CARD AND COMPASS OF LIFE.

CONTAINING MANY PASSAGES, FIT FOR These times.

And directing all men in a True, Christian, Godly and Civil course, to arrive
at the blessed and glorious harbor of Heaven.

2. TIM. 2.7. Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all
things. Cato. Quicquid feceris honestum cum labor, labor abit, honestum manet;
quicquid feceris turpe cum voluptate, voluptas abit, turpitudo manet.
Heraclitus: Intrate, nam and his dij sunt. LONDON Printed by W. S. for Walter
Burre, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's Churchyard. 1613.

To the most Heroical and worthy Prince, CHARLES, heir apparent to the
Crown of Great BRITAIN.
Most Religious Prince.
THE devout Bernard spoke it; and it is a profitable precept for all
Posterities, Si vis securus esse, time securitatem: intimating, that man is
never less safe, then when he seems furthest from danger; fear of security
being the guard of safety; great fortunes and high places, the rocks of ruin.
Pythagoras was wont to say* That no horse, without a bridle, could well be
governed; nor any felicity, without great wisdom, well swayed. More difficult
it is to bear prosperous then adverse fortune, because it chances but to few
to be both happy and wise. For (as one says well) Fortuna, quem nimium
fouet, stultum fecit; which the wisest King expresses thus; Prosperity
destroieth fools: Pro. 10.22.
herein not much unlike to Merchants, who, having had good success at Sea,
adventure for more and loose all. So that it is too true, That as much light
offends the eyes, so much felicity clouds the understanding, and abuses the
judgment, (...) 1.^1, ^
making the conceit of our safety, to be the cause of our sorrow* Hence the
golden rule of Solomon: Pro. 28.14.
Beatus est homo qui semper est pauidus; Blessed is the man that fears ever;
viz. who ever carefully avoides the deceits of the Devil, the World, and the
flesh; who ever lives in the fear of God, least he attempt any thing against
his will: whoeuer perse^ers in true repentance, and takes heed of offending God.

Now seeing the safety of your sacred person (being the most glorious Star
in our firmament, the hope of future times, and safety of our safety) is the
thing that most do wish; many labor for; and is the duty of all Subjects to
aim at; it must be valued of us at no less rate, then our dearest lives, and
of you at no less then your hardest and godliest labors. Else should we be
all ingrate to the Divine goodness, whose blessed showers of mercies are well
approved to us in the faire-springing blossoms of your grace-promising and
religious Youth. Therefore knowing ingratitude to be odious with God and all
good men; Isay 5
insomuch that God by the Prophet has sentenced a fearefu^l destruction upon
the ingrate Nation; and at Athens an Action would lie against the ingrate, as
in other causes; 2. Ia^. 18.3.
we must all strive to stop this just plea of God and men against us. For
which cause, my self to cast from me the just aspersion of so foul a vice,
do ever pay my vows unto our good God for your safety; and at this time (to
beginue a payment of my neuer-dying duty) have adventured to present your
Highness with a few chosen flowers, much conducing to your present safety in
this life, and eternal salvation in a better.

And seeing there is no greater pest to a King or Prince, then the hatred of
his Subjects; and that (as Seneca says) simul ista mundi Conditor posuit Deus,
God has ever placed hatred and government in one rank.
Odium and Regnum; this little book being well observed, shall defraught and
unload the Ship of this Kingdom, of Odium, which is the pest and danger, and
shall leave you Regnum, which is the Diamond and Treasure. Which divorce
betwixt Hatred and Kingdom (if firmly made) shall make an happy conjunction
of King and people, by no violence to be sundered.

I must confess, that in Me there is plus ruboris quam roboris, seeing my
presumption oner-ballanceth my performance: but in the Work it self is plus
roboris quam ruboris, being in part wellicke over, as the Bear does her
welphs, by the industry of those prudent Counsailors, who knew well how to
fashion an excellent proportion: and the rest by me not misse-shapen: for my
own part I may well with Apelles lie hid under the covert of my picture, to
epsy and hear the diverse judgments, which to know shall not be vnsavourie
unto me. Pro. 27.
For I account the wounds of a friend, more happy to me, then the kisses of
an Enemy. socrates admonition to De^onicus. ^lin. Junior to Traian Emperor.
Unto my self I am conscious of some pains and diligence in the translation
of one piece out of Greek; and another out of Latin; together with some
meditations, and matters of moment, the Collections of some Aphorisms and
Rules out of my own various reading, and the disposition of the whole.
Something I have done, if (but as Ruth) in the field of Booz I have gathered
the scattered ears: Ruth 2.
and albeit I could not bring great hand fuls from the harvest into the Barn;
yet some few ears (and not to be despised) have I cast into the Garner,
knowing that worthy sentence of the wise Orator and Statesman; Omnis nostra
curain hoc versari debet semper, Cicero 2. de Oratore.
si possumus, vt boni aliquid efficiamus, sin minus, at certe nihil mali: The
chief care of every good man ought to be, ever to do what good he can, but if
he cannot, to take heed that he do no evil. Sure I am, that as the Noble
Historian says, Nusquam nee opera est sine emolumento, Liuie lib. 5.
nec emolumentum ferme sine impensa opera est. No labor is without his
profitte; not almost any profitte to a man's labor, without charge and expense:
Besides, if little profitte should hence be conceived to arise, by some, Lamb.
Dan to the 17. Prouince^ Lael. Zaech. to Henry the 4 K. of France. Jacob.
Simancha. to Philip King of Spain.
more conceitedly judicious then truly wise; yet it does much protect my
design, and add wings to my drooping hopes, in that some things of like
nature have been tendered by diverse very learned to the greatest States and
Personages of our Western World.

Wherein the ancient custom of some Nations confirmed me, which was, That none
might come to the King or Prince without gifts; the Law ordayning that none
should pass by them, either in their progress, or any part of their Kingdom,
not giving them something: as the example of the great Artaxerxes Mnem^n King
of Persia shows, whom Syneed the poor Husbandman meeting in the field;
presented with an handful of water out of the next River; and was rewarded by
the King with a Persian garment, Aelianus.
a cup of gold, and a thousand Da^ices of Silver.

But gifts are not all of one sort; many serve for pleasure, lust, and pomp;
many are vain, or rather plainly insidious and crafty, more hurtful then
profitable, and costing those persons dear, to whom they are given; and are,
as Ajax says in Sophocles, (...), gifts and no gifts, or rather gifts of an
enemy. But there are other gifts more rare, and very fruitful, such as belong
to the culture and ornament of the mind, and study of virtue, which do
outballance all the price of silver and gold; such as that holy and heavenly
institute, directed to your late most honorable brother, and now a glorious
Saint, by the cunning pencill of that divinely royal, and royally divine
Bezaleel; Exodus 31. The kings Majesty's (...).
such as Isocrates gave to Nicocles King of Cyprus, touching the government of
the Commonwealth; such as the same Isocrates gave to that noble young man
Demonicus; and Plime the younger to that famous Emperor Traian: which two last
are now become my handful of water, by turning their streams into my grounds,
wherewith amongst other things of no vulgar worth to present your Greatness.
And these gifts of all others are most precious. For to what end should we
give Princes; gemmes, gold, or silver, which they st^nd in need of that give,
and wherewith they abound that have it given? Is not this rather to play the
merchants, then the giuers? Is not this craftily to sell their wares dearer,
then those that keep shop? But those who present to Princes wholesome
counsels of life, whose reading may instruct, or more fitly inform, what to
shun, and what to follow, that they may live honorably and die happily;
their gifts are most profitable and rich, and most worthy a Prince to receive,
and a good subject to give, being the gifts that immortalize both the giver and
receiver; such as Augustine approues, which neither hurt the giver nor the
taker; most worthy (I say) are those gifts.

For if it be true, that Appion the Grammarian was wont to say, That he
immortalized them, to whom he wrote any thing touching Grammar; how much more
are they immortalized, who have any thing dedicated to them, The religious
Lady Carew, and the worthy Knight Sir Robert Carew her husband, the learned
Master Thomas Murrey, Sir James Fullerton knight, and Master Quyn.
touching the eternizing of their souls? And what other end have these gifts,
then to demonstrate unto you, that as the river Tanais goes under Mocotis, and
Alphaeus under the sea; yet is not the one bitter, nor the other salt: so you,
passing by the puddle of pleasures, and through the sea of honors, neither
that sink nor this sea, may ever so attaint your heroic heart, but that you
may ever retain the sweetness of those divine and moral virtues, wherewith
you have bin by your Deborah, Nathan, Hushai, and other worthies about you,
wisely and godly seasond: Nor shall they which read this little labor return
untaught: as Aesops Fox and Crane sent the one the other away, with a ridiculous
furniture of a banquet, Plin. lib. 35
vn-supt; but as the story speaks of that famous Painter Timantes, that his
pictures were herein admited in that more was to be understood then was
painted, so this slender labor at the first blush, promising no great thing;
if more seriously viewed; considering therein, that many of these most divine
rules proceeded from heathen men, and destitute of the knowledge of the true
God; it is a wonder how they aff^ct, recreate, delight and profit, those that
read them.

Neither shall this discourse (I trust) offend against that golden sentence of
Isocrates: Plutar. in vita Isoc.
who at a banquet being desired to show some feats of his art, answered: Quae
ego noxi, temporis huius non sunt, quae vero exigit tempus hoc, ego nescio: The
things that I know, are not for this time; and the things which this time
requires, I know not. Not much unlike to that of Seneca, Seneca E. pist. 29. ad
Lucillum.
Nun quam volui popalo placere nam quae ego scio, non probat populus quae
probat populus, ego nescio. I never regarded to please the vulgar: for the
things which I know, the people do not approve, and the things which the people
approve, I know not. But of this I am sure, that there is no wit so strong of
weak, which may not from every doctrine and book: draw something, to nourish
and confirm his understanding, or refresh his appetite. Sen. ep. 109
In the same meadow (as Seneca writes) the Ox may find grass, the dog an
hare, the Stork a Lizzard and the Virgin may gather a flower: nor need any
depart hence hungry, except by the wantonness of his own appetite; seeing here
are golden slips and twigs, gathered from every wholesome tree, to furnish the
garden of the mind with variable, valuable, and delightful fruits. So that I
may truly say as the wise Siracides; Behold, I have not labored for my self
only, Sir. 24.29.
but for all them that seek wisdom.

Two examples then (most noble Prince) have stirred me up to this adventure;
the one of Syneta, presenting an handful of water to that great King
Artaxerxes, as before; the other of Diogenes, to the Athenians. Diogenes, a man
not inferior to Plato, in age and sect, seeing all the Athenians busily
employed in rampiring and defencing their walls for fear of their enemies, and
himself not called to the same work, because a Philosopher and stranger;
least in the common business of all, he alone should be counted an idle
spectator, began to ^umble and toss his tun up and down, that he might
thereby testify (being all he could do) his readiness to help the
Athenians, if they pleased to use his labor. This thing the Athennians
observed, praised, and committed to perpetual memory. Wherein two duties were
exceedingly well performed. For it was the part of a good man, albeit a
stranger (as Diogenes was) to join his care to the common care of the
inhabitants, and plainly to show himself as ready, as others of that place,
to defend the common good; and this did Diogenes: it was also the part of
noble, wise, and thankful Citizens, to approve and not despise the good mind
of that man, whose labor they used not in defense of their country rights;
and this did the Athenians. My self, by both these examples being warned of my
duty, and trusting to the most high equity of your noble disposition, and
like comitie and noble acceptance, as the Persian King showed to the poor
Syneta (not estimating the mind by the gift, but the gift by the mind; for (as
Bernard) the true value of a benefit is the good will of the mind) have not
doubted dutifully to offer and promise my labor and service (such as it is) in
the common labor and care of your creatures, and most obliged servants, for
the defense of your honor and increase of your future happiness. Wherein I
truly put on the person of both these Preside^ts, though (happily) I shall be
distinguished from them in the success, as I differ from them in deportment:
for my tun, and all that is within me shall never leave tumbling and
toyling, to tender my service in the care of your preservation; and therein I am
like Diogenes: but have nothing left me by the malice of the time, but an
handful of water; and therein, like Syneta.

Now seeing one way only of accommodating my self to your service, is left
me, namely, to represent to you the things that have beeue prudently written
by others, of well governing as well the private life, as public affairs; I
could not be wanting in that duty. I tender not therefore long and perplexed
disputes of well managing the life and Republique; but most sweet Meditations,
brief Aphorisms, and Rules, concerning the government of both: and discovery
of such rocks, and dangers as usually dash the consciences of men, and states
of greatest Kingdoms in pieces: and those, not dubious and naked, but clothed
and confirmed with the judgment of most grave writers, whence they were
collected, and approved by the practice and example of great persons, having
the witness of all prudent men, and times, whereby to add more power and
faith to their excellencies.

Nor may this slender present (happily) be intempestiue or unpleasant: for as
sudden storms and unexpected alterations of weather, do often drive the most
skilful Pilots to great perturbations in their Art, in so much that they know
not into what haven to fly, or what shore to fetch: so, albeit these Halcio^
and blessed times of peace, seem to promise no storms; yet if the great
persons be not soundly instructed with divine and wise precepts, to entertain
a gust when it falls, or to decline it, that it hurt not when it comes; such
storms may so suddenly arise (even when we say, peace, peace) as will put the
wisest Politicians, and best Leaders, to their wits end. Therefore, that your
Highness may bring to a safe haven, as well this noble ba^ke of your body and
soul, as the great ship of this Kingdom, and these glorious countries and
people (whereof as God has made you the most hopeful heir apparent, so the
same God make you and yours long and happy governors) cast, (I besetch you)
your gracious eye sometimes on these short parcels of instruction, and
entertain them into your Princely heart: so shall your government be most
happy and peaceable, your end glorious, and for ever blessed, your memory
honorable, and never dying, which shall ever be the vote and vowed labor of

Your Highness most humble obseruer, RICH. MIDDLETON.

The Contents of this Book.
1 A Divine Meditation upon the four last things Death, Judgment, Hell, and
Glory, as the strongest motives to make an impression in the soul, of
detesting all sin, but chiefly intemperance and uncleanness, and adding wings to
our faint desires of heavens glory. 2 Of truewisdome, what it is, and wherein
it consils, 3 Of the pleasures of the body. 4 Of things concerning the
endowment of the mind. 5 Of Religion. 6 Of Charity. 7 Of Conversation. 8 How
to use all sorts of men. 9 How to carry a man's self toward himself. 10 Of a
Prince and his whole deportment, in fifty seven Aphorisms. 11 Of the things
that preserve Kingdoms. 12 Of the things that ruin Kingdoms. 13 Prognostics
of the anger and scourge of God to be at hand: or of the final periods of
Kingdoms and States. 14 That the conuersions, euersions, and ruins of
Kingdoms and States, may be foreknowne, as well as the death and dissolution of
a dying man may be foreknowne by a skillful Physician. 15 Why men are so blind
that they cannot see their own ruin and Gods anger hanging over them. 16
Eight Aphorisms or Rules, containing the sum of a happy life and blessed
death. 17 How to obtain eternal life, and avoid eternal death. 18 Two Rules
never to be forgotten, restraining man from the pursuit of his carnal and
bestiall desires. 19 The twelve weapons for the spiritual battle: ever to be
had in memory when the desire of sinning tempts us. 20 The twelve conditions
of a lover, whereby to know, in what degree of the love of God we stand. 21 The
twelve abuses of the world. 22 The true Anatomy of Contemplation: showing what
it is, wherein it consists, and how worthy a work it is for a Prince, and also
for every good Christian. 23 The fruitful admonition of Isocrates to Demonicus
containing eighty five most excellent moral precepts never before translated
out of the Greek. 24 The institution and description of a good Prince by C.
Plinius directed to the Emperor Traian, never before turned out of Latin.
THE CARD AND COMPASS OF LIFE.
MEDITATION. I. A Meditation on the four last things; Death, Judgment, Hell,
and Glory. To restrain sin, and increase piety.
WE must not make this Meditation a naked discourse or bare reading only, but
a vehement application of the mind to the things themselves, with an inward
sense of heart; all the distractions of our thoughts being abandoned.

thee in all thy actions; and beg of him thus present, that al thy thoughts,
words, works, and all thy strength may wholly be directed to his glory and
thy salvation. And here first conceive thy self to be lying upon thy bed,
near unto death, the Physicions despairing of thy health, and thy friends
sorrowing for thy departure, the soul being now ready to give the last gasp.
Secondly, entreat God with hearty affections, to give thee grace that thou
may take profit by the consideration of death.





This consideration will not a little astonish thee, that thou shall have at
that time, more then ever in all thy life, more doubts and scares suggested
thee of the certainty of thy salvation, ^^st, in respect of the multitude of
thy sins; secondly, in that thou shall then have the memory of thy sins
represented to thee, which oblivion and custom of sinning had stolen from
thee; thirdly in that the sins; which then thou thoughtest to be little and
light, do now appear great and grievous; fourthly, in that thy repentance
(dying) is not so secure, as when thou art in health. Hence it will fall out,
that thou shall be so amazed, that thou will not know which way to turn thee.
To return back, the grieuousnes of thy sickness will not suffer thee: To go
forwards, is of all fearful things the most fearful. To stand still in
that estate God will not suffer, who has numbered all thy days from eternity,
and will have this to be the last hour of thy life. If thou beholdest God,
he will appear to thee, angry, with the sword of his most just vengeance,
drawn against thee for thy impenitent life: If thou cast down thy eyes, thou
shall see nothing but a stinking grave for thy body, which thou so much
louedst and pamperedst; and the gates of Hell standing open, to entertain thy
soul which in thy life thou so little regardedst. If thou enter into thy
self; what shall thou find, but a confused infinite mass of thy sins? the
conscience whereof does worthily adiudge thee to eternal torments. If thou
look about thee; what shall thou see (miserable wretch) but an infinite
troop of Devils, striking horror into thy conceit, and reading the books and
bills of all the sins of thy life, and like Lions, whom long famine has
enraged, expecting for thee their prey? How suddenly then will Honors, Riches
and Pleasures of thy whole life, seem to have fled from thee? How evidently,
but late, (if not too late) shall thou then know, that all the things of this
life under the Sun, are nothing else but Fopperies, Dreams, Frauds,
shadows, which like a vain apparition, have nothing in them certain, solid,
and sure? How would thou desire a little, even the least, stay and
breathing to collect thy self, and correct thy ways? But al too late.

with Worms, Toades, and Serpents: only thy works will accompany thee into
the entrance of another life, most happy or most miserable, such as thy works
have been good or evil.



The last point is, to ponder with thy self what then thou would that thou
had done, Seneca persuades, Mors vbique nos expectat, tu, si sapiens eris,
vbique illam expectabis. Death every where expects us, therefore if thou be
wise, do thou every where expect death. So shall it never take thee at any
advantage. To this end remember Augustines admonition, Be afraid to live in
such an estate as thou art afraid to die in.

Conclude this Meditation with a friendly conference with God: in which,
demand of him, that by his grace these things may penetrate into the bottom of
thy heart, and there be so fixed, that they never may be quenched; and that
from this time forwards thou may make such use of the preaching and hearing
of his holy word of the co^sortable Sacraments of his Church, and all other the
good means of thy salvation that thou may begin now to walk with a better
conscience before him, and in the peace of a quiet conscience thou may arrive
at the Haven of glory.

MEDITATION II. The second Meditation is of the last Judgment.
HEre must a preparatorie Prayer be made, as before in the Meditation of death.
And first conceive thou see a most ample, goodly, spacious place, where all
the Nations of the Earth shall be gathered together, to receive their doom of
eternal bliss or eternal torments. Secondly, ask of God from thy heart,
that so great and vnvsual a spectacle may bring some profit to thy sinful
soul.

end of Heaven to another, summoning the whole World with that fearful
Trumpet, Arise ye dead, and come to Judgment. Secondly, in the Devils: whose
bands shall then be loosed, so that he shall rage more then ever before. Thirdly,
in the Waters; which (happily) may rise above the tops of the Mountains: whose
noise, and horrible roaring of the Sea shall confound the hearers. Fourthly, in
the Earth: whose most inward parts shall then by horrible motions be shaken;
with cracking of stones, traiection of mountains, and complanation of valleys,
insomuch as all Creatures shall be struck into sorrow. Fifthly in the Heaven:
the Sun and Moon shall fall from Heaven, and threaten eternal ruin to the
Earth.

Sixthly, in men: Then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in Heaven;
and then shall all the kindreds of the Earth mourn, and the wicked shall be with
horror so confounded, that they shall run by the way like mad men; and cry
unto the mountaints, Cadite, Cadite, fall, fall, and hide us from the Lamb and
the fury of his wrath. Seventhly, in the fire; whose power shall be so great,
that it shall suppe up (as it were) with one deluge, all the other Elements:
and all men, and Creatures shall it suddenly turn to dust and ashes, so that
there may be a new Heaven and a new Earth.

The Son of God shall appear with power and great Majesty, accompanied with
an Army of Angels, his aspect, to the wicked terrible, to the godly most
comfortable: For their redemption draws near. Then shall he take the good
to his right hand, and place the wicked at his left; where such griese shall
invade them, as never in all their lives before, seeing themselves in that
miserable estate which they never dreamt on: even there, where with a most just
balance, all the things that ever they have done, spoken, or thought; all the
good they have omited, shall be weighed; and no man, not so much as in one word,
can patronize them. It will much increase their torment, when they shall see
the sign of the Son of Man: the nails as most sharp arrows, shall wound
their hearts, when they shall understand, that they have all their life long
trampled underfoot, by the turpitude of their lives, that precious blood shed
for the redemption of the World, and made a mock of it. And, the more to shame
them, the Judge shall open his wounds, from which his most precious fountains
the water and blood issued most plentifully, to wash them from their sins, if
they would have taken hold of it in time. Now conceive what misery the wicked
shall think themselves in, to be placed at the left hand, a most infallible
sign of damnation; and what joy and security to the godly at his right hand,
a sure token of eternal salvation.

no care had of any natural or supernatural gifts of body or mind. In a
point of time shall be set before thee all thy most secret thoughts and
words, of Lust, Pride, Hatred, Envy, and all the rest: yea even all the good
thou have omitted to do, shall be put on thy score, to increase thy damnation. O
miserable and thrice miserable wretch! thou art in thy own conscience damned;
thou art destitute of all patrocinie and defense, not only of men, but of
Angels, who were once inployed, whilst thou liuedst, for thy good, but are now
by so much the more become thy adversaries, by how much once they loved thee
more: Nay, to conclude, forsaken of Christ, who only therefore sits in
Majesty, to judge and condemn thee; for if the just be scarcely saved, 1.
Pet. 4.
where shall the wicked and ungodly appear?

cry to the rocks Fall upon us, fall upon us, and cover us. Fifthly, fierce
and inexorable, and cannot be mollified; Apoc. 6. 1. Sam. 15.
For the strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent.

Depart from me ye cursed, into eternal fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. O most unhappy sinners! then will they cry, but none will hear;
weep, but none will have mercy on them: then shall they seek God, but shall
not find him, because they hated knowledge, Pro. 1.
and did not seek the fear of the Lord: the shall they damn all wicked
ways, and curse the society of sinners; and madding, shall grow frantic
with the fury of their sins, which for most vile pleasures they committed.
On the other side, the just shall be surprised with unspeakable joy, when that
blessed sentence shall be read, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the
Kingdom ordained to you from the beginning of the world. Then shall their
mouths run over with praises, and their hearts beefilled with vnutturable
joy: Then shall the ignominy of the Cross be counted an exceeding glory;
austeritie of life, wonderful sweetnsse; and the despising of all the
pleasures of the World and the flesh most unspeakable pleasure.



Now direct thy speech to God who shall be thy Judge, and pray that in this
life he will lay his judgments upon thee; as Saint Augustine, Domine hic ure,
hic seca me, ne in eternum peream. Lord, burn me here, cut me here, that I
perish not for ever. And also pray that these Meditations may take such root
in thy heart, that thou may judge thy self, that thou may be chastened of
the Lord, least thou be Condemned with the World. I. Cor. 11.


MEDITATION. III. Of Hell.
THis Meditation must take his rise from a preparatiue Prayer as in the former;
in which we must first propose to our selves a most vast, and bottomless
gulf, hideous to behold; in darkness, most dungeon-like; in pains and
torments most horrible; in smell most odious; as it were a Sea breathing out
flames and smoke; whereof we may represent to our imagination a model, by
calling to mind that horrible mountain of Aetna in Sicilia, and Vesuvius in
Naples; both which belch out the inward bowels of the Earth with stones,
flames, fumes, and ashes; and that in such surie, as if it imitated the Giants
war, and meant to overthrow the God of Heaven, and all his Saints, to draw
the Sun down to the Earth, and turn the night into day. The burning ashes
of this hellish Vesuvius (as Dion Cassius notes) in the time of Titus his
Empire, were not only carried to Rome, but to Africa and Egypt, when in the
boiling Seas fishes were boiled to death; in the Aier, birds choked with smoke;
and the most famous and ancient neighboring Cities, Stabea, Herculeanum, and
Pompeij, were overwhelmed with stones and ashes, whilst the people sat in the
Theater. Now conceive the horror and hideousness of Hell far to exceed all
models and descriptions that can be made thereof: but if any thing can in part
express the form of it; then may this mirour of Natures horror do it.
Secondly Beg on the knees of thy heart, that God would so bless thy
meditation, that the horror of the place, and the interminable and endless
punishments and torments for sin to be inflicted upon the damned, may make
such an impression in thy inward man, that hence thou may be strengthened by
his grace, to shun and hate all manner of sin, and disobedience against
Gods Law; but specially, that it may quench in thee, and utterly extinguish the
heat of lust, that most dangerous inbred enemy.

such acerbitie and variety of torments, as cannot beconceiued, much less
uttered, in a place horrible, full of filth, squalour, horror and
hideousness, where there is no order, but eternal horror ever dwells.



A third point considerable, is; to behold how this infinite Army of damned
and reprobates, buried in madness and hatred, obstinate in frenzy, lie
amongst Serpents, Dragons, Basiliskes, and other monsters; ever compassed about
with the horrible forms of devils, who with a perpetual hatred against the
damned, that are delivered over to their power, do heap punishment upon
punishment, and sorrow upon sorrow.

Besides, consider that albeit there are innumerable kinds of torments
inflicted upon the damned; yet two (above the rest) are chiefly to be weighed.
The first is poena sensus, the punishment of their senses. For the Soul, being
in her nature most noble, shall for ever be tortured with most exquisite and
grievous torments: the Imagination can conceive nothing but flames, wherewith
for ever it is burned: the Memory retain nothing but the thought of those
sins for which it is so tormented; seeing they shall not carry that visage
which now they represent unto us, but as they are in themselves; a shape, more
horrible then Hell it self. The conceit of which horror of sins was such,
as moved good Anselmus to say, That he had rather (if it were possible) go
into Hell eternally without sin, then to dwell in Heaven for ever with sin.
The understanding shall be obscured, that it shall be able to comprehend
nothing, but that which shall increase the sorrow. Now, what grief shall that
be (O wretched man) which thou shall feel, when thou thy self being the most
unhappy betrayer of thy self, shall be forced to fry in the furnace of such
flames? O miserable eyes and ears, which for the most filthy things in which
thou tookest pleasures, shall inherit nothing but howlings, roarings, and
blasphemies! O miserable Carcass, which for the delectation of thy senses,
shall for ever be tormented with intolerable pains. Behold now, if every
little sorrow and pain, that is but short, seem to thee intolerable, what
will thou then do in such an Ocean of calamities and torments as no mortal
man is able to conceive. Secondly, the other punishment is poena Damni, the
punishment of loss; much more grievous then the other: seeing this is the
deprivation of the blessed aspect and face of God, from which the damned are
utterly hatred; being comforts so inexplicable, that the blessed Apostle cannot
utter it but thus; 1. Cor. 2.9.
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man,
what God has prepared for them that love him. Nor is there any power of the
mind, which, if it should think from the beginning of the world to the end
thereof, could conceive any thing of the joy or fruition of God, but that the
thing it self would infinitely exceed the cogitation and conceit of it: and
this for ever the damned do want. On the other side to be secluded from the
presence of God, is of all miseries the greatest misery; insomuch that
Chrysostom on Matthew says, Many do abhor Hell: but I esteem the fall from
that glory, to be a greater punishment then Hell it self; yea though any man
should propose unto me a thousand hels, yet shall he say no such thing unto me,
as to fall from that glory, to be hated of Christ, and to hear that
soule-killing word, Non nouivos, I know you not. For it is better to sustain
ten thousand thunderclaps, then to see that blessed face turned from us, and
that life-giuing eye not enduring to see us.

not only from external torments, but even from the inward worm of
conscience, which ever gnawing is never consumed, but ever vpbraids them for
their sins committed. O what vexation, what sighs will then break out, when
they shall perceive the good instinctes so often of them repelled, by which
they were either invited to better things, or recalled from this or that sin;
or counsel which was suggested them, that this occasion should be taken and
that forsaken, that they would return to a better way, and abandon pernicious
and damnable courses! what shall they feel, when they shall perceive themselves
for ever delivered up to most exquisite torments, for such like holy
instinctes, and motions of Gods Spirit, exhortations of his holy word, and
admonitions of the messengers of God neglected?

Eccl. 9.10.
whither thou go. Their worm shall not die, nor their fire be extinguished.
Isai. 66.24.
Go ye cursed of my Father into everlasting fire. Mat. 25.14.


Lastly consider, what is this eternal damnation and eternal fire. It is in
the wicked the sense of the horrible anger of God against their sins, the
most sorrowful fear, confusion, flight, roaring, indignation, biting and
gnawing of conscience, arising from the recordation of their sins now laid
open to the whole world, and with the most direful thunder of Gods anger
inflicted upon them. The wicked perceiving themselves for ever with the Devils
cast off from God; and his horrible wrath powered out upon them; all their
turpitude and malice to all the Angels and men demonstrated; and all occasions
of flying these punishments and mending of their manners in this life
intercepted; acknowledging godly men enjoying with God eternal joy and glory,
to be for ever blessed; so all houle and lament for their carnal security and
final impenitency, and amongst these infinite torments of body, and soul,
with horrible lamentations, eiulations, sobbes, and sighs, and in perpetual
mourning, anguish^, trembling, shame, ignominy, gnashing of teeth, and
desperation; ration; shall every moment in vain wish, that these sorrows and
torments might by death be cut off, and they themselves to be redacted into
nothing: but all this (I say) in vain. Apoc. 9.6.
For Cupient mori, and mors fugiet ab eis; they shall desire to die, but death
will not be acquainted with them. This is eternal damnation, this is eternal
fire.

O horrible eternity! whom the consideration of thee may not move to forsake
all evil, and follow all that is good, (I will speak it in a word, but I will
speak it truly) he has no faith: or if any sure he has no heart, or if any,
sure he he has no hope of salvation. Close up this Meditation with a sweet
colloquie and speech with God; desiring him so to inflame thy heart, with a
true zeal of serving him in holiness and righteousness of life, that all thy
life long thou may be out of the fear of this eternal death; and in the
death of thy body, thou may enjoy the fruit and Crown of righteousness,
eternal life.

MEDITATION. IIII. Of Celestial glory.
CAst down thy self before God, and beg of him that he will direct all thy
thoughts, words, and works, to his glory and thy salvation. First, cast thy
conceit earnestly upon that description of the holy City, Apoc. 21.
New Jerusalem: where is represented to thee, a place full of all glory,
pleasures and excellencies, that heart can imagine: and all those perdurable,
and for ever. Secondly, ask of God to give thee grace intimously, and from the
heart, to understand the glory of this heavenly country, and so to be affected
and ravished with the desire thereof, that ever and every where thou may be
stirred up to serve him in pureness of life, and also labor to bring as many
to this glory as thou can.

and the whole City of most pure gold; the gates of Smaragds and Sapphires; and
the streets of no less price, and beauty. There is no night, nor darkness:
for the Sun of righteousness which knows not to be hid, does ever send his
beams into it. Now if the fabric of this world, which is but a stable for
beasts, an exile and valley of tears to men, has so much beauty and
excellency, that it strikes him that contemplates it, into admiration and
astonishment: and such plenty of good things, that no sense can desire more,
such variety of beasts, fishes, fountains, towns, cities, provinces,
disagreeing in institutes, manners, and laws, such choice of all stones of
value, gold, silver, and exquisite silks, natural and artificial: if (I say)
this building of so small a frame, of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, shine with
such brightness; what shall then our heavenly country do, not now the
habitation of servants, but sons, not of beasts, but blessed souls? where is
the Hall of the great King of Kings, the omnipotent God, who can and will
perform to his beloved children much more then they can conceive: what things
will not he frame in his eternal Palace for his sons? Psalm. 84.1.2
How amiable are thy dwellings thou Lord of Hosts! My soul has a desire and
longing to enter into the Courts of the Lord. What joy shall that be, when
they shall come from the East, and from the West, from the North, and from the
South, Luc. 13.29.
and sit at table in the kingdom of God?

Angustine) there is a life prepared of God for his friends, a secure life, a
quiet life, a beautiful life, a clean life, a chaste life, a holy life, a life
that knows not death, a life without straitness, without necessity, without
sorrow, without auxietie, without corruption, without perturbation, without
variety, without mutation, a life full of beauty and honor. Where (as
Bernard says) there is nothing present that offends, nothing absent that
delights. How lovely a house is this! where is perfect love and no fear,
eternal day, and all one Spirit, where God is seen face to face! Blessed are
all those who so live in this world, that departing hence, they may be assured
to remove to so blessed a home.

Daniel says, Dan. 7.
Thousand thousands serve him, ten hundred thousands assist him. Behold with
these, so many most holy souls of men and women, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, Virgins, Innocents: so many, that John said, Apoc. 15.
They could not be numbered. Behold the beauty of every one, and so great
charity, that they no less rejoice of another glory then their own.

Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath. Isa. 6.
In the divine Essence they know themselves and all things else, and do not
only see God, but also love him, with a vehement love, a full love, a perfect
love, with all the heart, and all the strength, and in loving they enjoy him,
and in enjoying with an inexplicable joy are ravished. No cessation of praises,
admiration, thanksgiving, and joy, which they receive by the presence of God,
whom with all reverence and rest they assist, and by that society of so many
Saints, with whom they see themselves in glory, in a place so sublime, secure,
and pleasant, do eternally rejoice.



1. Pet. 1.
insomuch that the Angels themselves desire to behold it. And the more shall
men receive comfort and joy hereby, in that they understand, that by this blood
they were redeemed, which they shall see to sparkle in his most holy flesh,
more flammously, and burning-bright, then any Jasper, chefely in his heart,
feet, hands, and side, and so much the more, in that their humane nature is by
that humanity of Christ, advanced to the right hand of God: which nature in
Christ, as the head of all things, and Governor of all creatures, they adore.
Nor shall the joy be a little, which they shall take in the view of the blessed
Virgin, when they shall see in her so great sublimitie with so great
submission, such majesty, with such misery. The aspect also of one another
shall much increase their joy, when they see themselves placed in a state so
secure, in glory so glorious and unspeakable, every one rejoicing as much of
another glory as of his own.

Paul were in that estate, that he could say, Gal. 2.
I live no more, but Christ lives in me; why should not rather every blessed
soul say, I live, not I now, but God lives in me. The powers of the soul
shall be illustrated with a most full knowledge of God, and fullness of joy:
the Memory shall be exercised in commending the benefits of God; the
Understanding, in the aspect of the divine beauty; the Will, in the love of the
infinite goodness. The body shall be immortal, not obnoxious to any hurt or
danger, sorrow or sickness, whose glory is excelling the Sun in brightness,
so that now it may truly say, 1. Cor. 15.54.55.
Death is swallowed up into victory: O death, where is thy sting? O Grave,
where is thy victory? Now is that verified which the Prophet foresaw; Eye has
not seen, nor care heart, nor has it entered into man's heart, Isa. 4.
which God has prepared for them that love him.



weight of glory. 2. Cor. 4.17.
Who will then for the short space of time which is granted us to live, nay for
many ages of Worlds, refuse to suffer adversities, to repent in sackcloth and
ashes, to beat down this rebellious body, that we may at length arrive at
the haven of this glorious eternity? The more to inflame us hereunto let us
know for certain, That, as Gregory says, Momentaneum est quod delectat,
aeternum quod cruciat: It is but momentanie whatsoever it be, in this life,
that can delight us; but it is for ever, and ever, that wiltorme^t us. Our
delights live and die in a moment, but our punishment is interminable and
endless.

no man shall see God. Here cast thy eyes upon those things which the Saints of
God have done, Heb. 1214.
whom now thou see triumph in glory: and descend into all the offices of a
spiritual life, and see what means they used to attain so wished an end;
what they suffered either for the love of God, or desire of this glory. And
(that done) set down and determine with thy self from the heart, to follow
their footsteps, whose end thou desire, that thy end may be like: and know,
that this is spoken, to direct thee in the way; Be ye followers of me, as I
am of Christ: and also that: 1. Cor. 11.1.
Be ye followers of me, and look on them which walk so, as you have us for
an example.

To conclude, shut up all with a sweet conference with God, begging of him
pardon for thy sins past, by the merits of his Son Jesus Christ; and that he
would give thee grace by the working of his spirit, not any longer to spend thy
time wickedly, and neglitently, but that from hence forth thou may go on to
run the ways of his Commandments unto the end of thy life.

Of true Wisdom, what it is and wherein it consists,
as it is indeed, vile things to be vile and precious things to be precious.

First then only virtue, that is piety toward God, and Men, to wit the worship
of God and love of men, is the only precious thing, and all other things are
only good and precious as they stand in relation thereunto, otherwise they are
merely evil.

First, Riches, are not Gemmes, Metals, Magnificent Buildings and Treasures,
but not to want those things which are necessary for the defense of life that
is riches: Secondly, glory is to hear well of our excellent Virtues. Thirdly,
Honor is veneration and reverence for that Virtue which is of great worth in
us. Fourthly, Grace, is the favor we have for our lovely Virtues. Fifthly,
Dignity, is the right opinion of men, concerning our well deserving Virtues.
Sixthly, Power and Kingdom, is to have many men with whom honestly and rightly
to consult. Seventhly, Nobility, is to show himself like his worthiest
Progenitors, in the excellency of his actions. Eighthly, Generositie, is to
be well composed by nature to Virtue and virtuous deeds. Ninthly, Health, is
such an habitude of the body, that the mind may be also in health. Tenthly,
Beauty and lineaments of the body, are those things that make the mind
beautiful. Eleuenthly, Strength of body, is to be sufficient for the exercises
of the mind. Twelfthly, True pleasure, is that which is taken from those
things which belong to the mind. If any man consider these things otherwise
and conceive them as the Vulgar does, he shall find them all to be but
foolish, vain and hurtful, and himself to be void of true wisdom.

For first, the body it self which we pamper so much, is but the covering
and slave of the mind, and prison of the soul. Secondly, Life it self is but
a pilgrimage, beset with infinite dangers, and upon most light occasions lost,
Thirdly, Riches, are but the long expenses and provisions for a short journey:
they help not, but rather oppress the bearer, as heavy burdens do sink a
ship. Fourthly, Nobility, is but an opinion, or lot of birth, arysing from the
folly of the people, being such as is often acquired by theft and cruelty.
Fifthly, Power and Kingdom, is but a spacious molestation, a gilded poison, a
crown adorned with counterfeit gemmes, a Sea of evils; and such a thing, as a
wiseman would not stoop to take up. Sixthly, Honor, if it arise not from
virtue, is but a wicked and perverse conceit. Seventhly, Dignity, Who can tell
what it is? seeing it is given to the most indigne men, and acquired by craft,
fraud, ambition, suit, and wicked arts. Eighthly, Glory, what is it; but the
vain inflation of the Earth? seeing it is uncertain, momentanie, and wicked,
like his Father the Multitude; who this day commend a man highly, and in the
same dispraise him extremely. Ninthly, Beauty is but a well-colored skin:
if we could look within, we should see a most filthy dunghill. Tenthly,
Strength, what is it? seeing the greatest things, and those most worthy of a
man, are not done by the strength of sinnewes, but by the sinnewes of wit;
Beauty, and Strength being but the flowers of the body, which one blast of a
fever will deface, and shake all to fitters. Eleuenthly, Pleasures of the body
are but as the body it self is, pecudine and vile: Diseases are the usury of
pleasures, and perpetual sorrow, the bond. Hence it is said, That when Jupiter
could not accord Pleasure and Sorrow in a difference that they brought before
him; that he bound them together with an Adamantine chain, and indissoluble
knot.

Let al men therefore in true wisdom esteem every thing as it is; so shall
nothing ever hurt them: and with the same wisdom ponder these Aphorisms or
Rules following.

3 Of the pleasures of the body.
1 PLeasures of the body, the beasts do more often* more vehemently, and
longer enjoy, the^ me^. Besides, hence do arise, First, many diseases of the
body, Secondly, much loss of substance, Thirdly, much repentance to the
mind; Fourthly, much dullness of wit, and decaie of all the faculties of the
soul, Fifthly impatience of a man's self, Sixthly, hatred of all Virtues.
Besides, no man is so impudent that dare use them publicly for shame, but
seeks darkness to take his pleasures in. They are also most flitting, and
uncertain, and ever mixed with bitterness. Therefore the greatest evil is not
(as the Vulgar think) Poverty, Ignobilitie, Imprisonment, Ignominy,
Deformity, Sickness Imbecilitie: but Vices, and those things that are next
to Vices, Ignorance, Stupiditie, Madness.

2 God did not create us to play, and trifle out the time, but to serious
things, to Moderation, Modesty, Temperance, Religion, and all Virtues.
Therefore let us not cure the diseases of the body, with the sicknesses of the
soul.

3 Consider how great an evil it is to rule wicked men; but how much greater,
if thou be wicked thy self.

4 Man must keep his mind (the insused preciousnesse that makes him man) as
Cleanliness keeps white; or rather as Virginity keeps Virginity. For a
stained mind blemisheth the whole body.

5 No man can be just to himself without wertue: for Affection, being a gross
and partial chooser, will starve the mind to feed the senses: and oftentimes
starues some of the senses themselves, to glut others. Therefore, to the end
that bodily pleasures do not infatuare us, we must by virtue curb affection,
the breeder of pleasures. So that to be just, we must be virtuous; to be wise,
we must be virtuous; to be good, we must be virtuous; to be honest, we must be
virtuous; nay to be, we must be virtuous. For to be vicious and sensual, is
but base corruption, which killes and deformes, and cannot be seen after her
conquest.

6 Pleasure and profit, are the two bodies which man labors to adorn; and
what is Pleasure but the adulterate Brat of the Senses? Are not our Senses the
Counselors and perswaders to receive them? and yet how base a Counsailour is
the whole earth to direct him, for whom Heaven and Earth were made? For
pleasures are no sooner borne, but they die; no sooner seen, but they shrink
away for shame. And who ever saw it otherwise, but that either the body or the
conscience vomited out the surfets of pleasure? the licorish entertainers of
them being plagued with more thirst and unsavory tastes, to be rid of them,
then they were before with famine, to enjoy them.

7 Two things inform us, that there is no true excellency in any of the
pleasures of the body, but that Opinion has seduced Imagination so to
believe. The one is, that he who gives us both them and our selves, has barred
himself of them; which he would not do if they were such excellent blessings.
The other, that they are so fading, they would not last while their pictures
are a drawing, if memory did not preserve them.

8 There is nothing in Pleasure that can make it valuable: if anything, then is
it either profit or pleasure: Profit there is none, if profit be that which is
lasting and excellent. What lasting is that, which is at the longest but an
Ephemerides, or of one days age? and what excellency is that, which the most
excellent do abhor and discard? If we look for Pleasure in pleasure, she
deceiues us with colors and shadows. For the countenance, and showing of her
teeth in her contentments, is the best she affords us, whilst the heart is
laden and pierced through with the stains of sin, and sting of guilt.

9 To please the body, and put the mind to drudgerie for his sake, is as full
of peril as folly; and no other good comes thereof, but a dis-ranking of all
good orders, of Holiness, putting the Cart before the Horse, Earth before
Heaven. Pleasures of the body are the diseases of the body, and no more to be
followed or believed, then the conceits of a man in a burning fever.

10 You will believe that a vessel full of chinkes and holes, holds nothing to
the good of the owner: why will ye not then judge, that a body and mind,
replenished with chinkes and holes of pleasure, powers out it self
unprofitably, and spends faster then it gets? all their actions being monsters,
some wanting heads, some feet, one blind, another deaf, and none with right
shape or Christendom. With this, cast up your gains and losses, the
shortness of them, vnsafetie, and torments of them; and tell me if any, but
fools and mad men, will make choice of such companions.

4 Of things concerning the endowments of the mind.
1 SHame not to ask the things thou know not, of any man, which thing the
most excellent men have not blushed at. But be ashamed to be ignorant, and
unwilling to learn.

2 By three instruments we attain learning: Wit, Memory, and Study.

3 If thou would seem learned or good, labor to be so indeed. For that is
the most compendious way to be esteemed learned and good.

4 There must be no end of learning, till the end of our lives: therefore three
things, whilst we live, must be meditated: How we may well be wise: how we may
speak well: and how we may live well.

5 All things in this world do pass from man to man, being all vile saving
the Mind: to the end, that no man should say, That anything is his own, save
his Mind.

6 He is a free man who only couets the things that are in his power: He is a
servant and slave, that does the contrary. For to be filled with the gifts of
fortune, what other thing is it, but to ouerload a footman in his journey?

7 Nothing is so pleasant as the knowledge of many things: nothing so fruitful
as the understanding of Virtue. These season joyful things, and mitigate
sorrowful things, restrain the temerities of youth, lighten the burdens of
old age. In all times, places, and occasions, these accompany us, nay guide
and help us.

8 Much care is had in curing the diseases of the body, but much more should
be had in saluing the sicknesses of the Mind: seeing the maladies of the Mind
are more grievous the^ those of the body.

9 Thou shall easily cure the greatest disease of thy Mind, that is, Anger, if
thou do fixedly hold, that no injury can be done thee, unless thy Mind be
hurt: which cannot be done, but by bringing vice into it.

5. Of Religion.
1 THe true worship of God, is to purge the mind of the diseases and wicked
affections, and (as much as in us is) to labor to be transformed into his
Image, which is, to be holy and pure as he is.

2 Be assured that God is not more liberal to any then such as he teaches
what is his true worship.

3 So ignorant and childish is our nature, that we lament, when most hurtful
things are not given us, as if they were most profitable, and we abhor most
profitable things, as if they were most hurtful. So that for the most part,
there is nothing more pestilent to us, then to enjoy our desires.

4 Know that the life of Christ does testify the probitie and goodness of his
humanity; his miracles, the omnipotency of his Divinity; his Law, his
heavenly wisdom: that thou might from his probitie have an example to
follow; from his authority, power to obey; from his wisdom, faith to
believe: his probitie engenders love; his Majesty, reverence; his wisdom,
faith.

5 Be present at the sacred Rites, attentively and piously: not ignorant, that
whatsoever thou hear or see there, is most pure and sacred: and that it is
facile to look up and adore that immense Majesty, but impossible to
comprehend it.

6 When thou hear any attribute of God, or his Son Christ, lift up thy
self in contemplation, and pray that he may be such to thee; as namely, if
thou hear that he is full of mercy, that thou may find him such to thee;
if Omnipotent, that he will show it toward thee, in making thee who art the
worst, to be the best, of an enemy a son, of nothing something; if terrible,
that he may strike fear into them, of whom thou art afraid; if Father, see
thou love him, and live like his son; if Lord, see thou serve him, and that,
in singleness of heart.

7 Begin nothing without invocation of his sacred name: for, all things being
in his power, he will give wished successes to such things as we enterprise
from him.

8 But inuoke him with a pure heart, bruised and broken with true repentance
for thy sins, and accompanied with a lively faith. For if thou regardest
wickedness in thy heart, God will regard neither thee nor thy service. Psalm.
66.


6 Of Charity.
1 MAn, commended to thee of God, if he be worthy, love him, because he is
worthy whom thou should love: but, if he be unworthy, yet love him,
because God is worthy, whom thou should obey.

2 Think it no disparagement to have him for thy brother, whom God disdains
not for a son, except thou will contemn the judgment of God.

3 War is the greatest of all hatreds, whereby Man exceeds the fierceness of
all beasts: think it is not any thing belonging to man, but as the name of it
imports, belonging to beasts: Bellum quasi Bellumum.

4 Let no man think himself a Christian, or dear unto God, if he hate any
man: for Christ commends all men to us to be loved as our selves.

5 To mock or scorn good things, is a thing detestable and wicked; evil
things, cruelty; indifferent things, folly; good men, impious; wicked men,
beastly; known men, immanitie. And to conclude, to mock or scorn any man, is
brutish inhumanitie.

7 Of Conversation.
1 HIs salvation is to be despaired of, who is not ashamed to do evil.

2 Contempt is an intolerable thing, for none seems to himself so vile, as
that he deserves to be contemned: nor is any so great, but stands in need of
him that is least, and Time, and Chance, may bring him lower then the least.

3 Think nothing of such moment, that for it thou should suffer thy self to
swerve from right and truth. Let not riches nor nearenesse of blood, nor
prayers, nor threats, nor fear of death, nor certain danger, wrest this from
thee: so shall thou gain to thy self authority and credit, that whatsoever
thou speak, shall be thought to be Oracles, otherwise thou shall be
despised, and judged most unworthy to be heard.

4 No pleasure is so sweet, as that it can be compared to the speech of a wise
and discreet man.

5 Boast not thy self in words to know any thing, but show thy self in deeds
to know it.

6 Abhor lying as a most corrupt thing; for nothing is more abject to humane
condition, being that which separates from God; makes one the slave of sin
and Satan; and himself not to be believed when he speaks truth. Miserable
is that man who shall do that deed, from whence he cannot be delivered but by a
lie.

8 How to use all sorts of men.
1 Love all men, that they may know thou art a friend to mankind, and wishest
well to all men.

2 Yet show not thy self alike to all, as a white line a white stone; some
admit to Council; others obey; others reverence; and to others be thankful,
if thou have received any benefit from them: But chiefly be thankful to them,
whose labor and service thou have used, either profitable to thy self, or
diligent and faithful.

3 In which thou must reckon the mind for the deed; so that he may not seem to
be in much less account with thee, who has labored and desired to profit
thee, then he who has profited thee indeed. For the best Physician does not
ever cure the disease, nor the best Orator ever persuade his purpose; yet their
skill and pains are not the less, nor less to be regarded.

4 If thou have taken any man's labor and service, be no less careful of
compensation and recompense, then if thou had borrowed money.

5 Nor think honest labor, and proceeding from a sincere heart, to be less
worth then money: but to be so much the more valuable then money, by how much as
the body and mind of every man is more dear to him, then all outward
things.

6 Expect not till thy friend reveal his necessities to the: Do thou of thine
own accord help him: meet his honest requests, and entreat him before he
entreat thee.

7 Love thy Parents dearly, and next unto God reverence them, and their
Commandments perform, as the Divine precepts, persuading thy self (which is
true) that on Earth they are to thee in Gods stead; nor art thou more dear to
any then to them.

8 Next to these are thy Masters and Tutors, and such to whom the care of thy
manners and breeding is committed: because there is nothing in man more
precious and excellent. These, as thy parents, love and reverence: obey these
modestly with all alacrity, accounting whatsoever they command or advise is
not for their commodity, but thine. Therefore evil should thou recompense
them, if being careful for thy good, thou should render them hatred and
contumacie for it.

9 Believe it for truth, That thou art most dear to him, of whom thou art
friendly reproved.

10 Not the reprehension of an enemy is hurtful to thee: For if he object
truth, he shows thee what is to be amended, if false things, then he shows
thee what is to be eschewed. So does he ever either make thee better, or at
least more wary.

11 If thou take it ill to be rebuked, do nothing that is to be reprehended.

12 Miserable is that man, who has not a reprehender, when he stands in need
of one.

13 If thou accustom thy self to Flatterers, thou shall never hear the truth.

14 Of beasts, the most deadly amongst wild Beasts is Envy; amongst tame
beasts, Flattery.

15 Shun the conversation of wicked men, even as of men infected with the pest:
for both ways contagion is to be feared.

16 Search thy self who thou art, in what place, of what condition, least any
thing should add so great a spirit to thee, that thou should think there
is more lawful for thee, then for others.

17 By how much as it shall be lawful for thee, out of custom and power, to do
more after thine own will; by so much let it be thy pleasure, out of
moderation, to do less.

18 Show thy self to thy inferiors courteous, to thy superiors reverent, to
thine equals facile; yet ever to Vice inexorable.

19 If any thing proceed from thy inferior, not pleasing to thee, do not by
and by judge it to be contumely, but liberty of speech.

If thou be wiser and better then others: herein give place from thy own right
to others, as more ignorant and infirm: but pardon thy self less, seeing
wisdom and virtue have given thee so much strength more then others.

21 If thou excellest not in virtue; why desire thou to seem better then
other men? If thou do excel; why do thou not perform more in moderating
thy affections, then the vulgar do.

22 The VVisest and best Men have judged it more safe, to receive, then to do
injury; to be deceived, then to deceive.

23 To forgive, is the part of a Generous and noble disposition; but to keep
anger, of a fierce, cruel, degenerate, and abject mind; which thing even
Nature shows us in bruit beasts.

24 Thou must labor to be such toward others, as thou desire Christ to be
toward thee.

Seeing injury is in the mind and not in the fact, and it is only God that
knows how the mind is affected, and what punishment is due to it: take heed
thou take not any revenge, for that is Gods office only.

9 How to behave a man's self toward himself.
1 THou must not only be dear to thy self, but also venerable; so that thou
shall be ashamed of thy self, if thou shall do any thing foolishly,
impudently, flagitiously, wickedly, nefariously, and impiously; even as if done
upon the Theater of the World.

2 Make more account of the testimony of thy conscience, then of the voice of
an infinite multitude; which is foolish and ignorant, and as it rashly approues
unknown things, so it condemns them as soon.

3 A troubled conscience bringes the greatest torment to the soul, that can be
in the World; a quiet conscience, the greatest bliss: no riches, no kingdom,
to be compared to it.

4 Fame shall never profit a wicked man, nor hurt a good man.

5 When one is dead; what shall he have more from fame, then Apelles his
picture when it is praised, or the horse that overcame in Olympus games? nor
yet will it profit him being alive, if he know it not; and if he know it, it
brings him no more benefit but this; That, as a wiseman, he may contemn it;
and, as a fool, he may please himself for it.

6 But the conscience is a solid and perdurable testimony, of much force in
that terrible day of judgment: and the Mystresse of this present life, if not
altogether corrupted by the affections: It is the braze^ wall of confidence in
God alone, which cannot be moved or demolished.

7 It is a disgraceful thing to be known to others, and unknown to thy
self; does it not suffice thee to be known to thy self, and chiefly to God?
would thou have a more replenished Theater? or a name more lasting.

8 To love thy self, is to labor by most earnest prayer with God, that thy
most excellent part, the Mind, may be decked with true ornaments of virtue,
but chiefly with Religion.

9 For he loves not himself that loves riches, honors, pleasures, or any
thing without himself, or in the body; seeing the principal part is the
Mind: nor does he love himself, that by ignorance of himself deceiues
himself, or suffers himself of others to be deceived: persuading himself
there are worthy things in him, when there are none.

10 The blind and inconsiderate love of the body is the source of all evils:
for it takes away Charity; whence all evil arises in the World. He that too
much loves himself thus, neither loves himself, nor is truly beloved of
others.

11 Remember, that if thou think those things which serve thee by nature, to
be at thy liberty and unrestrained, and shall take other men's for thine own,
it shall come to pass that thou shall be hindered, troubled, lament, and
accuse both God and man: but if thou think that to be thine, which indeed
is thine, and other men's (as they are) to be other men's; no man shall ever
hinder or trouble thee; thou shall accuse none; thou shall do nothing
unwillingly; none shall hurt thee; thou shall have no enemy, nor receive any
calamity.

12 Those things are ours which are in our power; as Opinion, Appetite,
Desire, Dislike, and all our actions: those are not ours; as the Body, Money,
Glory, Empire, nor things which we our selves do not.

13 In every thing that either delights thee, or serves for thy use, or is
beloved, consider what kind of things they are: beginning at the least; as if
thou love a pot: that it is a pot, thou love, for that being broken, thou will not be troubled: if thy son or thy wife; know thou louedst a mortal
Creature: for they being dead, thou shall not be grieved.

14 No perturbation arises to man from the things themselves, but from the
opinions of them. Death is not evil; but the opinion is ill. Therefore when we
are hindered or distracted, let us not blame others but our selves, that is, our
opinions. To accuse others in our calamities, is the part of an unwise man; to
accuse our selves, the part of him that begins to be wise: but to accuse nor
others, nor our selves, the part of him that is wise indeed.

15 As in sailing, if thou go on land to refresh thy self, and gather Cockles
on the shore, thou must have thy eye on the ship, and thy ear ready to the
Call of the Governor; that having called, he weigh not anchor and leave thee
behind: so in this life, if instead of Cockles, a wise, child, riches or
honor, be given thee; these must not hinder thee, but that the Master calling,
thou must run to the ship and leave them all, not looking back, but having
thy mind bent upon God.

16 Think never that thou have lost ^^y thing, but rendered it. Is thy Land
ta^^n away? it is rendered. But thou will say, he is a wicked man that took it
away: what is that to thee, by whom He took it from thee, that gave it to thee?
Therefore whilst thou have it, use it, as the Trauelier does his Inue.

17 We must so behave our selves in this life, as in a banquet. If any thing
be brought thee, with modesty put forth thy hand and take it. Is it gone? care
not for it. Is it not come? reach not out thy appetit too far for it, til it be
brought thee. If thus thou carry thy self toward wife, children, riches,
Magistracy, thou shall be worthy the banquet of God: but if, when they are
brought thee, thou despise them, thou shall be a consort of Gods Kingdom.

18 Remember thou art the Actor of such a fable as thy Master approues; if
short, of a short one; if long, of a long one. If he will have thee play the
part of a beggar, or Prince, or Plebeian, see thou represent that person
ingenuously. For this is thy part, to put on that person well that is given
thee: but to choose what part, is not thine, but another; even Gods.

19 If thou will be truly free, and not bond, contemn the things which are
not in thy own power.

20 Death, Banishment, and all that is accounted evil, have daily before thy
eyes; but above all, death: so shall thou never think any base thing, no nor
yet greatly desire any thing.

21 Seek not that honor or place in the World, which thou can not attain or
keep without wrack of integrity and godnesse,

22 If thou be not bidden to the same banquet, nor holden in the same Honor
that others are, grieve not thy self: for as he which paies the price of the
horse, must have him, and yet is not he in worse Condition that has the price,
then he which has the horse: so if thou want Honor and dignity, thou
do want the charge, and also the grieuances that go with it.

23 Things that serve the body; as meat, drink, clothing, houses, and
service, let them be so far ministered, as they are of use to the mind: But
refuse whatsoever belongs to Ostentation or Delight.

24 If any say, that some have spoken ill of thee; answer that he knew not
thy other vices: for otherwise he would not only have blazoned these, but
them also.

10 Of a Prince, and his whole deportment. in 57. Aphorisms.
THE Prince must have the same care for subjects, that his he has for the
members of his own body,

2 The Prince ought well to know what belongs to war: but yet let him love
peace.

3 Access to the Prince must not be difficult.

4 That the Prince may have his Nobles, and Subjects, good, continent, and
strenuous, the only way is to be so himself. For such as is the Prince, such
will the people be.

It is the part of a good Prince to ordain and establish the true worship of
God, and then to take care that it be sincerely practiced.

6 Covetous and ambitious Courtiers in favor with the Prince, do ever wrap
the Prince and Kingdom in great difficulties.

7 That Prince makes way for Tyranny, that suffers few or none of his Subjects
to come to his presence without a Mediator.

8 The cruel and rash anger of the Prince, begets the irreconciliable hatred
of his Subjects.

9 It is the part of a prudent and good Prince, if but in words he have
offended any of his Subjects, to mitigate them by acknowledging his error. So
did Xerxes to Artabanus.

10 The universal rule of institution of Princes is comprehended in the sacred
Scriptures: therefore is that book daily to be learned and scanned of him,
Josh. 1.8. Pro. 5.21.
that would be a good Prince.

11 The true reason of good and happy commanding, Psalm. 72. Pro.
2.34.8.16.9.10.
is in the whole Sacred volume.

12 Albeit it much concern the Prince in tender years to be bred in true
Religion and Piety toward God; yet except he have some Worthies about him, to
retain him in the fear of God, and (as it were) by their power to move him,
he will easily fall from true Religion to Idolatry; either induced by the
prayers or manners of the people, so prone is the untoward nature of man to
Idolatry: specially the minds of Princes, 2. Chro^. 24.26. and 5.
which are wont to be fearful, servile, and assentatorious, when they fear
their Subjects, or have been vexed of them.

13 There is nothing more dangerous, then the wicked family of the Prince.
Therefore it should consist of pious and good men: and for that cause Himself
should often examine the conditions of his family; that the wicked (if any have
crept in, Psalm. 104.
or are so become) may be abandoned, and the good retained and cherished.

14 In the Princes family, no Idolatry, or any footsteps thereof, ought to be
suffered. Genesis 31.22.


15 It is most convenient, that those that be Princes be well instructed in
true Religion: for the Re-publique so long stands in the true Worship and
fear of God, Josh. 24.31.
as they themselves love and serve God

16 How many evils by the just judgment of God fall on Princes for whoredom?
namely to be enfeebled in their bodies; their Counsels to be discovered; in
conclusion, themselves to perish. One example of Sampson may serve all Princes.
Judge. 16.


17 Venereous lusts do horribly corrupt Princes: for at length they bring them
to all iniquities, 1. Cor. 5. Pro. 1.6.24 7.7.31.
that their Harlots commands effeminates them, and makes them mad. Therefore
chiefly to flee from this vice.

18 Families that have been chosen of GOD to govern; for their impiety and
sins have often bin removed from the regiment, or else utterly extinguished. 1.
Sam. 2.3.


19 Princes must not only with diligence search and know the public
affairs, but also private, and such as are done with him at home: and every
where to punish, purge and take away sin, Psalm. 102.
and wicked livers.

20 It turns ever to the great benefit of the Prince, to have the attendance
and counsels of righteous and good men, Pro. 10.30.31
and to prefer them before all others.

21 It is Tyrannical to say, That all is just, that is profitable for the
Prince.

It is Tyrannical to say, Plato.
That the Prince is freed from the Law.

The Prince is to govern and defend the Commonwealth, according to the
prescript of the Laws: therefore is infinite power not to be ascribed to him.

The ignorance of the Magistrates duty, and of the true God, is the fountain
of innumerable both private and public calamities.

25 It is a most odious thing, that the Prince should lie with that mouth,
where with he invocates God.

26 The Prince must love them he commands, and labor to be beloved of them.
For the love of the people is the foundation of a lasting government.

27 The Prince must shun all superfluous private expenses.

28 What measure the Prince shall use to others, the same shall God re-measure
to him,

29 A little aberration in the Prince, is a great hurt to the whole
Commonwealth.

30 The Prince himself must obey the Laws, that by his example he may teach
his Subjects to do the same.

Wicked and perverse men are neither to be suffered, nor promoted by the
Prince, least he participate with their sins. For that Prince that punishes
not sin when he may, does before God partake with the sinner.

32 If thou would have GOD to bless thy affairs, choose such men to be
Magistrates, Rulers, and Officers, as are Religious, Godly, Prudent, Faithful,
and of great integrity: For so shall God do with thee and thy affairs, as
he did with Potiphar by the godly industry of Joseph; Genesis 39.
for whose sake all that Potiphar had was blessed.

33 When Princes and Magistrates will not suffer themselves to be admonished,
taught, and reprehended, Eccl. 4.13.
it is a certain prognostique and sign of the sudden change of things.

34 It is a rule for a Prince, Do thou that which appertains to God, and be
sure that God will do that which appertains to thee. Gregorius.


35 As Religion is the mother of virtues: so the departure from Religion is the
leader to all vices. Hiero.


36 As in bodies, so in the Re-publique the most grievous disease is that which
comes from the head. Plin.


37 No reason suffers that he should be accounted amongst Princes, who does
rather destroy then govern the Empire. Greg.


38 If thou will well govern the Commonwealth, Zonaras.
thou must be guarded with gold and munition. Use thy sword against thy
enemies, but reward thy faithful friends with gold.

39 The most expedite way to increase thy treasures, Cicero.
is to abate thy expense.

40 Plato reproved in some the too too much study of riding, for that it could
not be, that he who gave himself so diligently to things of no value, could
have leisure to handle great and serious business, Aclian.
and so must negligently carry things, which indeed are worthy of admiration.

41 Let the innocent Prince live of his own, and accommodate himself to live
of his rents: Tho. Morus
Let him restrain evil, and by a right institution of his own, rather
prevent, then suffer to increase, those things which afterward he may punish.

42 A Prince must not learn all Arts, but such chiefly as do set forth the
manner of governing the Kingdom. All letters are not fit for a Prince, but
such as deliver the Politiques, and Ethics, and as do demonstrate examples of
things well or ill done. Such is History. Tho. Morus.


43 He that gouernes the Commonwealth well, must avoid all superfluities, Amm.
Marcell.
as most steep and dangerous rocks.

44 Antoninus Pius was wont to say, That there is nothing more fordide and
cruel, then to suffer such men to gnaw and devour the commonwealth, who by
their labor confer nothing to it: Capitolin.
and that the train even of a most sparing Prince was grievous to the
Prouincials.

45 Alexander Seuerus was wont to say, That that Emperor was an ill Pupil,
who of the bowels of the Commonwealth fed men not necessary nor profitable for
the Re-publique. Lamprid.


46 That Kingdom cannot long stand, whose charges are greater then the
revenues.

47 Let Princes take heed how they dissipate or alienate the public treasure:
for that is the destruction of Kingdoms and Commonwealthes; Therefore all
immoderate profusions exhausting the Princes treasure must be forborne.

Three things are required to the facility of well governing: Tho. Aqui^as.
First, wisdom, that he err not in governing: Secondly, Nobility of stock,
that he be not contemned in commanding, Thirdly, Power of virtue in executing
justice.

49 The Prince must not be auaritious, for there is in that heart no footsteps
of righteousness, Leo Magn.
where Avarice has taken up his dwelling.

50 Three affections thrust men headlong into all facinorous courses, Anger,
Avarice, Lactant.
and Lust; therefore are called Furies, agitating men's minds. Anger desires
revenge, Avarice riches, Lust, pleasures. These three are ill counsailers every
where, but in a Prince, most dangerous.

51 That Kingdom and City stands eternally, where the desire of Venerie and
Money has least force. Val. Max.
For where these most certain pestes of mankind do enter, there injury
dominiers, and infamy flames out.

52 No King or Prince is in so much danger by his armed enemies, Scip. Afrie.
as he is by his pleasures, every where breaking in upon him.

53 Prudent, sage, and ingenuous men, and such as can see further then others,
the Prince is to make much of and reverence. For this is an infallible truth,
Isocr. ad Nicocl.
That a good Counsailor to a Prince, is the most profitable and worthy
possession of all others.

54 Let Princes take heed of ambitious Courtiers, for Ambition is the worst of
all the devils. Nazianz.


55 The Prince must not favor such as speak the truth faintly: for he is a
betrayer of the truth, that does not freely, Chrysostom.
nay, which does coldly pronounce the truth, or does not freely defend it.

56 That Commonwealth which has an unjust Prince, Aug. de Ceuit. Dei. 2.21.
is not only an unjust Commonwealth, but just no Commonwealth at all.

57 Three things are required in the chief Magistrate: First, That he love the
present state of the Re-publique, not as Nero, Me mortuo misceatur terra
cu^igne. Secondly, to have so great power, Arist. Pol. 5
that he may do what his place requires: Thirdly, That he be just, not
wounding the fundamental Laws: not taking from any, or giving to any what he
pleases.

11 Of the things that preserve Kingdoms.
THe things that preserve Weal publiques, are of two sorts: First, Divine, and
that is, first the Providence and Decree of God: Psalm. 125. Psalm. 147. Psalm. 91.
and secondly, the true worship of God. For that is infallibly true, 1. Sam. 2.
I love those that love me. secondly, Human means, which are of two sorts:
First, from our selves, as first the site of the Kingdom: Secondly the
grounds: Thirdly the tribute; Fourthly, moderate liberty: Fifthly, Counsel
and Prudence at home: sixthly, concord of subjects. Secondly from without, as
first friends, secondly, public faith sincerely kept: thirdly, firm leagues
with the enemy: fourthly, auxiliarie helps: fifthly, when by God one Nation is
opposed against another. Two virtues ^o chiefly preserve Kingdoms;
Beneficience toward all, and truth and fidelity in performing promises. Prou.
20.


It is a discourse of very facile demonstration, That true religion by her
acts serving the divine wisdom, is truly the end, and in some sort the
efficient, and form of all humane felicity, as well of that which consists in
the goods of the body, and external things, as of that which consists in the
goods of the mind. And if any man presume to say to contrary, the same shall
be found to speak against every part of Philosophy and Divinity, against the
decrees of all wise men, against the consent of all Nature: And he shall not
only do so, but also contradict all moral, Political, Natural, and
Metaphysicall learning: he shall be repugnant to the writing of the most
learned, to the sayings of the greatest Emperors, to the wisest Sages of all
famous Nations, Lawyers, Physicians, Antiquaries, the most renowned men of all
times; and even to the events of all Nations and Kingdoms. And it will behoue
him, if he will speak truth, to have this whole world to perish, and another
order of natural things, unlike and contrary to this world that is, to be
instituted. For it will never appear that true felicity had ever any other
rise, then from true Religion. Therefore, when Religion shall be so oppressed,
that the Son of Men when he comes, shall not find faith on the Earth, then
shall this whole world perish: Luc.
which does then also decay, and in part fall, when true Religion is in any
part decayed or shaken. And this is that which the Lawyers say, That Ius
status, The Law of state, consists (before all things) in sacris and
sacerdotibus, L. 1.. Huius. D. just. and Iur.
in sacred things, and sacred persons, and Priests: the same Lawyers also
determining, that the first precept of the Law of Nations, was Religion, which
they preferred to parents, country, or life it self. And that this is so, yea
further, that all temporal felicity depends upon virtue, and religion,
(albeit outward felicity be no infallible note of the true Religion) the
unanimous consent of Egyptians, Assyrians, Chaldaeans, Persians, Greeks, and
Romans, will clear it. But let first Divinity lead the way. Does not our God
promise long life to those that honor Father and Mother? Exodus 20.
which the learned do interpret to be meant of this temporal life. And if it
sometimes chance that he be of longer life, who has been injurious to his
parents, and those set over him, we must not respect that which sometimes, but
that which for the most part falls out. Besides, the godly if they die sooner,
they lead a more pleasant life, which does well recompense the shortness of
it. And I say further, that never any that was injurious to their patents, came
to that age, which many godly attained unto, as Enoch and Elias.

We may also observe what Jobs opinion was herein. The just shall be claed with
the impious man's garments, Job. 27.13.14.15.16.
and the innocent shall divide his silver. Their inheritance and succession is
very momentanie and short. The same says David in sundry Psalms. God shall
destroy thee for ever, pluck thee out of thy dwelling, and root thee out of
the Land of the living. Psalm. 52.
Again, Let them fall away as water that runs apace. In another place.
Psalm. 58.6.7.8.9.10.
O how suddenly do they consume, perish, and come to a fearful end? The same
holy David does also foretell, that unto the good, good things shall be more
lasting. For the righteous shall flourish as a Palm tree, and shall multiply
as the Cedar of Libanus. His seed shall be mighty in the land, Psalm. 91.
glory and honor shall be in his house: whereas the bloody and deceitful
man shall not live half his days. Psalm. 112. Psall. 55.
And Basil and Chryfostome interpret the 34. Psalm of the temporal felicity
of David. He that would live, and see many good days, let him keep his tongue
from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile, etc. And this is the
tenor of the whole Scripture.

Consonant hereto is the judgment of the wisest Heathens: the chiefest amongst
the Egyptians affirming, in the person of God: I am present to them that are
good, Mercur. Tris. in Poemandro.
godly, pure, religious, and holy, and my prefence does so help them, that
they know all things, and have God the father pleased and propitious to them.
On the other side. I dwell far from the slothful, the ignorant, impious,
the envious, the unjust, and homicides, giving them over to the will of the
Devil, who takes vengeance of them. What can be spoken more divinely, then
this of that great Egyptian Sage Trismegistus? Of the same judgment, as
concerning religion, and divine things, that they are the only grounds and
causes of prosperity and felicity, were the Assyrians, Chaldaeans,
Babyionians. Else, why should the King of Niniue, that most ancient and potent
King, Ion. 3.7.8.9.
so divinely order his repentance, and humiliation to God upon that only short
Sermon of Jonas? Yet forty days, and Niniue shall be destoyed; that man and
beast were commanded a solemn fast, putting on sackcloth, and crying to the
Lord, and that every man should return from the wickedness that was in his
heart, for who can tell if God will turn from his fierce wrath, that we perish
not? Had not this been in vain, but that they judged, that Religion and
Piety was the cause of felicity? In like sort when Samaria was taken by
Salmanassar, 2. Reg. 17.
and the Jews carried away into Media and Assyria, the land being given to be
inhabited unto a people ignorant of the true worship of God, who were devoured
of Lions, because they feared not the Lord, did not they attribute this to the
ignorance of serving the true God, by which only thing they conceived they
might be delivered from that judgment? But if they had not believed that
temporal evils befall the wicked from God, and temporal good things are given
to the godly, they would neither have done thus, nor would the event have
answered their actions. The same things are recorded of the Chaldaeans and
Babylonians concerning their opinion of religion in that kind. For thus an
ancient Historian writes. The Caldaeans being the most ancient of the
Babylonians, Diod. Sicul.
did obtain that place in the Commonwealth, which the Priests did in Egypt:
for they were deputed to the worship of their Gods, philosophyzed all their
life time; and were accounted most skillful in Astrology. Many by a certain
divination foretold things to come, and as well by auguries and sacred things,
as by ceraine other signs, were wont to interpret both evil auguries,
diuinations, and conjectures, to be disturned from men, and good ones to befall
other men: which thing we see more plainly delivered by the divine Oracle. For
when Nabuzaradon, the chief Steward to Nabuchadnezzar, Ier. 40.2.
had set the Prophet Jeremy at liberty, he spoke thus unto him, The Lord thy
God has pronounced this plague upon this place: now the Lord has brought it,
and done according as he has said: because ye have sinned againse the Lord,
and have not obeyed his voice, therefore this thing is come upon you. So we see,
he judged that temporal punishments were inflicted upon men and Nations for
their sins. Besides, the Kings of the Assyrians, Chaldaeans, and Persians, were
also Priests, nor could they obtain the Kingdom, except they had been of
the company of their Magi, who were Priests, and instructed in their learning:
for Nemo regnare potest, nisi inter Magos sit iudicatus: Philo.
No man could reign there, unless he were judged to be amongst their Magi or
Priest. Whereby they gave to understand, that in Religion and Piety consisted
the felicity of Kings and Kingdoms. And Clemens Alexandrinus reports, Cl.
Alex. l. 7
that it was the custom amongst all the learned Nations, that he who should
be King, must also be a Priest: so much they judged religion to import the
felicity of Kingdoms. Hence it is that Xenophon writes, Xenop. 8. Paed.
that the Persians accounted them most happy, that were most godly, but the
society of the impious to be most unhappy. If we descend to the Grecians we
shall find them all of one judgment in this point, namely, that all felicity
depends upon piety. Plato, whom they call the God of Philosophers, in many
places shows, That by Prudence and Goodness men are brought to beatitude and
happiness: without which prudence and piety no good thing can befall men, but
all good blessings are turned unto evil. And therefore in the end of that most
sweet and ingenuous Dialogue, which he frames betwixt Socrates and
Alcibiades, he concludes, Nemo foelixesse potest, nisi sapiens bonusque sit.
No man can be happy that is not wise and good. Plato in Gorg.
To which purpose in another place he says, That no man, who is vicious, can
be happy: and that the world was contained and preserved of God, for good men;
and therefore of the Grecians was called (...), fair, because it abhorres all
sin committed by any; nor could it admit of any sin within it, seeing it is
fair and beautiful: but sin is a thing incomposed, deformed, and brings
ruin and reproach with it. And the wise (says he) do deliver, that Heaven and
Earth, the Gods and Men, are knit together in a certain society and
friendship, and with a modest or nature, temperance, and justice. To spend no
more time amongst the Grecians, whose sayings are to this end infinite, let us
conclude with the Romans, the wisest, happiest, and most flourishing Empire of
all others. Cicero, the Prince of Orators, determines it thus: Cic. Orat. de
Arusp.
How desirous are we to be in a nored of our selves (Fathers conscript) and yet
neither have we overcome the Spaniards with numbers, nor the french with
strength, nor the Carthaginians with craft, nor the Greeks with Arts, nor (to
conclude) with the domestique or nariue sense of this air and earth, the
Italians and Latins, but with piety and religion, and by this only wisdom,
that we have acknowledged that all things are ruled and governed by the power
of the immortal Gods: by this only have we vanquished all Nations and
Countries. So then I will close this discourse with the authority of a grave
writer, Dion. Halicar. l. 2. de Romans
concerning Romulus his institution of the Roman Re-publique. When Romulus
(says he) had observed, that there were certain causes of the felicity of
Weale-publiques, upon which it was vulgarly agreed, but yet granted but to a
few to attain unto them; First, the favor of the divine powers, which being
present all things do prosperously succeed. Secondly, temperance, hand in hand
with justice, by which two it comes to pass, that men hurt themselves less,
mutually consent together the better, and do not measure felicity by their
filthy pleasure, but by honestly, and goodness: and lastly military valor, by
whose help other virtues subsist, he did not suppose that any of these good
things came of their own accord, but understood, that a City was made godly,
temperate, just and strong in battle, by right laws, and emulation of honest
studies, Therefore he gave great diligence chiefly to these things,
enterprising and commencing all his actions, before all things, from the
worship of the Gods, not suffering his Citizens to think or speak any thing
but well and excellently of that divine and blessed nature. The same Author
says, that all men, to whom the piety of the Romans was unknown, may cease to
admire of their happy success in watres, seeing they never took arms but
upon most just causes, which thing did chiefly procure to them the favor of
the Gods. So that it is most evident, that all Nations with full consent have
deereed this truth, that all felicity and happiness, temporal and eternal,
has his dependa^ce and root from Virtue, Religion, and Piety. Therefore the
Ciuilians teach, that the first precept of the Law of Nations, Pompon.
was Religion toward God, the second obedience to parents and country, the
third defense of our self and ours, the fourth, not to insidiate or lie in
wait, and beguile another. From whence we collect, that all deceits, injuries,
and death it self, is to be suffered for religions sake, our Parents, and
Country: but together with life, Country, and Parents, all things are to be
esteemed of no worth, in respect of our Religion and Duty to GOD; and that is
the first precept of the Law of Nations. Besides, the same Ciuilians testify,
Vlpian.
That public Law consists in Sacred things Sacred persons, and Magistrates;
so that Ius status, the Law of state or standing, as the Politicians call it,
has his life from Sacred things and persons: And therefore the Commonwealth
ruins, and cannot stand, (for hence is it called Status) without Sacred
things and persons. And this is it that Cicero speaks: Piety is the
foundation of all virtues; which piety toward God being taken away, faith,
and society of Mankind, and that one most excellent Virtue, Justice, must
needs also fail. Hence the same Author persuades, Cicero de leg. 2.
Let this from the beginning of all men be believed, that the Gods are the
Lords and Moderatours of all things; and that the things which they do, are
by their power and providence done; and that they highly deserve of Mankind;
and that they behold what kind of man every one is, what he does, with what
mind and what piety he reuerenceth Religion; and that they take an account
of the godly and impious. So says another historian, writing of Zaleucus a
lawgiver. It behoues them that will inhabit a City, Diod. Sic. 1. 11. Biblio^h.
to believe that there are Gods, and that they are chiefly to be worshipped,
as the first and most excellent benefactours of mortal men, from whom only
are given to Mankind, Posterity, Riches, Virtues, and all good things: And
also it behoues them to perform and offer up to them a mind expiated, and
pure from all improbitie and blem^sh; for the Gods will not with a cheerful
eye behold the polluted Sacraments, and gifts, of the flagitious and sinful
person, but the just and innocent institutes, and the holy manners of mortal
men, are by the whole Diuinities embraced. Hence I conceive, it is impregnably
concluded by consent of all Nations, and wise men, and from the Oracle of God
himself, that Kingdoms and Commonwealths, and all felicity even of
temporal prosperity, depends upon Religion and Piety, as the infallible
ground of all Gods blessings.

12 Of things that ruin Republiques.
THE things that ruin Kingdoms are of two sorts: First Diume; for this World
is transitory, mortal, and the place of mortal things, so that no part of
it, but is subject to mutation. Yet of these changes and mutabilities there are
certain apparent causes, as we see in plants, beasts, and men, who are the
chiefest part of this World. So is it in Kingdoms: for we see the most potent
Kingdoms that ever were, as that of the Chaldeans, Persians, Grecians, and
Romans, overthrown; but the chiefest of these causes is God himself, who has
decreed to every Kingdom his beginning, progress, increase, maturitie, and
death. Of which just will of God the cause to us is unknown: but yet it is
never unjust; Dan. 4.
for God gives and takes Kingdoms as he list. Secondly, the worship of God
contemned and neglected, and so by little and little sliding into Idolatry; a
most sure token of the ruin of Kingdoms. For that sentence is immovable, The
Kingdom and People that will not serve thee shall perish. To which, that of
the 73. Psalm 27. agrees well: It is good for me to hold fast by God, to
put my trust etc. but besides, the violation of the Divine Law, which
prescribes our duty to our neighbor, is the cause of Kingdoms ruins. Pro.
28.2.
For that part of the law contains justice; which if neglected, and in stead
thereof force, violence, oppression, briberie, injury, and slaughter do
reign, those Kingdoms leave to be Kingdoms, and are of God overthrown. For
as Augustine says, Quid aliud sunt magna Regna absque iustitia, nisi magna
latrocinia? Kingdoms without justice, are but great roberies: which God
suffers not long vnrevenged: Psalm. 94.15.20.
Secondly, humane Causes of the periods of Kingdoms are of two sorts: First
arise from home, as First, Coniuration; Secondly, Sedition; Thirdly, Faction;
Fourthly, Civil War; Fifthly, Distraction and Discord of minds; Sixthly,
Perpetual Suspicion of Subjects against other Subjects, that being more
unworthy grow more wealthy, and honorable. These are the domestique causes
of Countries ruins. Secondly, from without; as First, the sudden rushing in of
our Eenemies; Secondly, rebellion of Subjects that have been vanquished in
war; Thirdly, the ^^efection of Colleagues and Confede^^ces; Fourthly,
continual external wars; ^^^tly, a too warlike people; that is, such ^^^iue by
wars, and are wholly bent to ^^^^res: as the Spartans that overthrew
^^^^selues.

^here are three causes of the misery ^^d destruction of Kingdoms: first too
^^ch leuitie and facility of sinning: Secondly, too much pertinacie,
Thucydides.
and lust of enjoying idleness and pleasures: Thirdly, too much license and
authority of vain Orators, and prating young fellows, and Counsailers, that
emunge and fleece the Common wealth of her treasure, making the public ruin
their proper Rise.

Experience, the Mistress of things, Tho. Caiet.
has taught us, that there is the ruin of the Republique, where Offices are
vendible.

It is wisely observed by Aristotle, and from him by Diodorus Siculus, and
Phil. Comen: That the whole Family of those Tyrants, who in their government
used cruel Counsailours, seldom or never remained in that Kingdom one
hundred and twenty years; but were either utterly abolished of God or of their
Subjects basely dethroned.

And that we may not seek far f^^ matter, to set the fairest Kingdoms i^^
ruinous and irreparable combustion; (...) your eyes upon S. Paul's Prophecy, 2.
Tim. 3.
(...) you shall easily epsy in eight V^^^^ four degrees of ruin; like so
many ^^^ners, digging at the roots of Kingdo^^^ to ouerturne them. The first,
is a full co^fluence and deluge of vices: The seco^^^^ is simulate, fained, and
counterfeit pi^tie: The third, is Schism: and The fourth is Heresy, and
gross impiety. And behold how they march in order, and succeed one another.
From all kind of sin, men grow to counterfeit and face-holinesse; from this
show of sanctity, they fall to Schism and D^uision; and from that, to flat
Heresy or ir-religion. These are the Antecedents of the Last times: and by how
much as any Kingdom or people do depart from true and sincere piety, and fall
into these devouring gulfes of iniquity and impiety, by so much are they in
danger to be swallowed up, and loose the fruition of Heavens and Earths
felicity. For if the root of the principal good thing be shaken, or suffer
any detriment, ruin, or hurt; much more must all those things that depend
thereon. Hence is it, that the Philosopher concludes, That chiefly Kingdoms
and Governments are dissolved and changed, Arist. Pol. 5.7.
for that there is not due care of justice had, as becomes: Concluding his
Ethickes, and Moral learning; his Oeconomickes and Houshould-gouernment; and
his Politickes and State-gouernment, after one and the same sort; namely, that
the Man, the Family, and the Kingdom, is most happy, which depends upon
Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance: and that so much felicity
chances to every man, how much as he has of Virtue and Prudence, and how
much he lives according thereunto: seeing God himself, is not blessed and
happy, by any external thing, but of himself, because he is such by nature.
By which he concludes, That only that Kingdom is happy, whose end is Virtue,
and the contemplation of God. For God is happy by contemplation of himself,
and that according to nature; of himself, not by any external accessorie. And
seeing God, contemplating himself, works all things in the World; therefore
he ordaines, that by this contemplation all things should be ruled in that
Kingdom, that would have future felicity. Therefore herein must all men,
people, Nations, and Kingdoms, propose God to be imitated, if they will have
durable and permanent happiness. For when they fail in this imitation, they
fall into the burning fevers of all impieties, to their utter consumption and
ruin. Which thing the most potent, opulent, and flourishing States that ever
were, have left witnessed to us, by their woeful ruins through excess, and
impiety. So that if we take a survey of the manners of Nations, when they
gained to themselves most high Empires, and Commands; and of their Conditions
afterward, when they were changed, ruined, and overthrown; we shall find,
that in the beginning they were frugall, continent, shamefast, virtuous, and
glorious for moral excellencies; and on the other side, toward their
declining and end, intemperate, with all manner of excess: and destroyed
through lust and pleasure. And therefore no marvel, if the King of Niniue
enjoined a fast to man and beast, Jon. 3.
at Jonas his Sermon and prediction of their ensuing calamity: as if too much
ingurgitation, excess, pride, and lust, had been the cause of Niniuehs
euersion, and the Assyrian Empires ruin. And that it was so, Writers of good
credit do report. Justin. l. 2. Diod. Sicul.
The same also is recorded of the Babylonian Empire, which was then taken of
the Persians, Herodot.
when the Citizens, together with their King, Labynitus, indulged, and gave
themselves to dancing, banquets, wine, and pleasures. Sembable hereunto is that
we read in Daniel, Dan. 5.
how the Kingdom was taken from Bel-shazzar, King of Babylon, when he and his
thousand Princes, his wives and Concubines, were carowsing. What frugalitie,
Diod. lib. 1.3. and l. 3.1
how great continency and temperance, the Egyptians and Ethiopians used, we
may know from the Historians: who report, that from the beginning they were
subject to the government of Priests, and were frugall, continent and
temperate, but afterward they so changed their manners, and grew to such
extreme lust and excess, Herod l. 2.
that they counted it very religious and godly, to have familiarity with
beasts. The Persians also, before they came to the height of Honor, used to
eat nothing but bread and water, Herod. l. 1.
with salt, and the herb Cresses, Xenoph in Paed.
or nose-smart; wearing most rought garments, namely, of Hides, and had nothing
that was dainty, spruse, or quaint: but afterward it is wonder to see,
Herod. l. 1.
into what excess the whol^ Empire fell; insomuch that Persicus apparatus, the
Persian attirements, and costly dressings were the most famous in the World for
excess. All the learned know what instruments of excess and lust Alexander
found, Justin. Curt. Plutarch.
when he rifled the Tents of Darius. All writers record them.

And who knows not the drunkenness of Alexander, corrupted with the Persian
customs, and so casting himself into extreme hatred, even of his own
friends? With these things were also all the Greeks infected; from whence it
was that all their Kingdoms were ruined. For the things that are written of
Cleopatra, and her excess, are so vulgar, as they need no relation.

The Romans remain, of whom Pliny does much complain; in that they were
fallen from their Ancient parsimonie, modesty, gravity, and chastity. Horat.
And what says the Poet of the corruptions of his time?

Foecunda culpae secula nuptias
Primum inquinauere, and genus and domos:
Hoc font deriuata clades
In Patriam, Populumque fluxit etc.
Ages, fruitful of sin, first defiled marriages, and stocks, and houses:
from this fountain was the slaughter and misery derived into Country and
People. His conclusion is this.

Aetas Parentum peior auis tulit
Nos nequiores, mox datura
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
Our Fathers worser age has brought forth us, more wicked then our Ancestors,
which shortly will produce a Progeny and issue more vicious then the worst.
And surely, Rome after the sacking of Carthage did contend in nothing more,
then in alluring and effeminating the people, in things pertaining to pleasure
and delight. The Histories show, Pub. Victor.
that in the City were twelve most ample and goodly bathes, besides
innumerable private bathes, in which all did accustomably wash before they
eat, and were also daily anointed with unguents and oils. Besides, there
were forty five public Stews; so that nothing could be found comparable to
the Romans in lust and delicacies. Therefore, no wonder, if the Empire after
Neros death was taken from the Romans, and translated to the Italians; and from
those after Neruas death, to the Spanyardes; and thence, from one Nation to
another; and consequently to the good Emperor Constantine; and so by little
and little swallowed up, by the power of the incroching Bishops of Rome; till
at last nothing was left, but the bare and naked name of an Empire.

And what does so much promise and threaten the ruin of that barbarous,
hellish, Ottomanicall, Turkish Empire, as that we find by Historians they are
effeminated, drunk with pleasures, idleness, and excess, and have lost their
Ancient severity of discipline and manners? It is wittily fabled by the
Ancients, That Mars was then taken by Vulcans intrapping nets, when he gave
himself to pleasures with Venus. So was Hannibal entangled with the beauty of
women, and he and his Soldiers enfeobled with the pleasures of Capua: So was
M. Antonius with Cleopatra: both most valiant Captains; but by reason of their
lust, they iost the best occasions of most admirable atchieuements, which if
they had taken, shaking off Lust, the baine of Men and Kingdoms, they had
given place to no Emperor that ever was, for virtue and glory. For this cause
it is written, That Castra, Castles and Fortresses, were so called in the
Latin, because there Libido castraretur, Lust should there be gelded. For in
times past, if any in them abused the flower of his youth, he was branded with
ignominy, and dismissed of the Romans; Polyb. lib. 6.
so much did they conceive that Purity imported to victory and glory. I may
conclude with our own Nation: touching whom, if we will believe our own
Stories, it is written, That it never received any great change and mortal
wound, but when the manners and customs thereof were so dissolute and vicious,
that the Land seemed to stagger under the burden of them. So that I may take
upon me (without presumption) to prophecy thus far, That the greatest
Kingdom that Europe has, the most mighty people that ever was, and the most
famous Commonwealth, that ever flourished, shall all of them by contemning
Religion and Piety, and wallowing in the puddle of sin and sensuality,
become desolate. What religious Prince, confidently in a good cause relying
upon Gods assistance, has not notably triumphed over all his enemies. Look
into the books of Genesis, Exodus, Joshua, Judges, Kings, and Machabees, and
what shall you find, but that Abraham, Moses, Joshua, Gedeon, Samuel, David,
Ezechias, Josias, and the Machabees ever triumphed victoriously over multitudes
of enemies, because Religion and Piety were the Generals of their Armies? How
did Constantine discomfite the bloody Maxentius? Aug. l. 5. de Ciu. Dei. cap.
25. Theod. l. 5. hist. c. 24.
even as Moses did Pharaoh: How did The idosius the elder, for his piety,
obtained many noble privileges? In like sort, Theodosius the younger, when the
Sarazens came to the aid of the Persians, O nimium delecte Deo, cui militat
ether, and coniurati veniunt ad classica, venti. Claudian. Socrat. l. 7. c. 18.
against whom he fought, the Angels from heaven (like the stars against
Sisera) so troubled the Saracens, that in the river Euphrates were drowned an
hundred thousand. And did not Julian, whilst he was religious, make Italy and
Afric stoop to the Roman Empire, when suddenly after his revolt, he
perished? An heritique holding that there was but one will in Christ.
Thus did Heraclius conquer the Persians, till he became a Monothelite. So that
we see contempt of religion to be the pest and ruin of States and Kingdoms:
and the zeal of religion to be the firmament, prop and buttresse, to
perpetuate and preserve Kingdoms and Cities.

Tot mala quid Mundo congerit? Impietas:
Anne salut^s adhuc spes vlla est? vnica: quisnam
Porriget banc? Pietas: Haec vbi? Nullus habet.
Quid sias Munde? rue, vt pietas est nulla: ruentem
Sic video, auxilium Numina laesa negant.
13. Prognostiques of the anger and scourge of God, or of the final Periods of
Kingdoms and States, to be at hand.
1 THe first is the magnitude and horror of sins, reigning in the Kingdom.
Such nefandious and grievous sins, are Symonie, profanation of the holy
Sabbath, and holy places, Irreuerence of the divine worship, Sacriledges.
Adulteries, Incests, Sodomitries, Blasphemies, Periuries, Cruelties, Viole^ces
Rapines, Discords, Vsuries, Enuies, Frauds, Ephesians.. 5.6.
Deceits, Trecheries. For these and such like comes the wrath of God upon
Kingdoms and Countries.

2 The second, is the multitude of sins, Grievous sins, if but committed of
some few, may happily escape the revenging hand of God to light upon the whole
Nation: but if grievous sins be the sins of the multitude, these heap up
wrath against the day of wrath, and God will shortly visit their sins upon
them. Romans 2.
Of this multiplicitie of sins David complains. They are all gone out of the
way: Psalm. 14.
they are altogether become abominable: there is none that does good, no not
one. Of this Hierom aduersus Vigil. Rara virtus est, nec a pluribus appetitur.
Of this Ovid.

Nec facile inuenies inmultis millibus vuum Virtutem pretii qui putet esse sui.
3 The third is the unshamefastness or shamelesnes of sinning. Sins may be
horrible in nature, many in number, and God may wink at them a long time: but
when men sin with a whorish forehead, and blush-lesse cheek, God cannot have
longer patience. Sine vere cundia nihil rectum esse potest, Cic. l. 1. offic
nihil honestum: and Valerius l. 14. That shamefastness is the parent of every
honest counsel, and the guardian of solemn offices: the Mistress of
innocence, beloved of her neighbors, accepted of strangers, in every place and
time, carrying a favorable countenance: and Bernard, That spiritual
shamfastnes is the glory of the conscience, the keeper of fame, the ornament of
life, the seat of virtues, the ensign of nature and all goodness. Now cast
back your eye upon those grievous sins, and behold if all of them of all men
be not as familiarly and boldly committed, as men use to eat and drink,
without blushing or shame.

4 The fourth is the impunitie of sins. Many manifest and shameless sins
might receive favorable indulgence from God, if they were duly punished: but
the sufferance of these gross sins, and in the greatest persons, vntaxed,
unpunished, draws on Gods heavy judgments. For if we defer the punishing
of those sins that offend God, we provoke his indignation, God being much
delighted in the punishment of wickedness, which being unpunished, does so
much deface, and obscure his glory. How seldom great sins, and in great
persons, are punished, I need not light you a candle to see: Dat veniam coruis,
vexat censura columbas: and what shall we see, if animaduersion be used against
some offenders, but a most unjust course? transgressors of humane Laws to be
grievously punished: but violators of the divine to be greatly honored? Crimen
laesae Maiestatis humanae, viz. traitors against the Kings Majesty to be
punished with the sword: but Crimen laesae Maiestatis diuinae, viz. Treason
against God to be uncensured, so much as with a word.

5 The fifth is the affection, study, and promptness of sinning: when all
diligence and care is taken, to commit horrible sins, as if it much imported
our good. Sins, committed without shame and punishment, God passes by often:
but if with all our hearts and affections, our labor and diligence, we strive
to commit them, if we set up our rest to avoid no sin that is, for our profit
or pleasure, that increases the sharpness and hastens the shortness of our
punishment. What pains and diligence is generally used of al, to become more
proud, more wanton, more rich, to be more the servants of the flesh and the
devil, then of God, the Theater of our world will spare me pains to speak.
But I will say it, and from the heart weep it too, as that godly man did,
Anselmus.
seeing a woman curious about her person, to please her Lovers, and himself
not so diligent to please his God: O miserable men, whom so infinite love,
blessings, and riches, cannot provoke to such care and diligence of pleasing
God, as the vilest things do incite our industry to please the devil.

6 The sixth is, the pleasure and glory in sinning, which is a degree higher
then all the rest. To take pleasure, and boast of our iniquities, this is, to
sin against God with a high hand. Of this David, Psalm. 10. the ungodly
boasts himself in his own hearts desire: and Psalm. 52. cries out of such
wicked men: Why boastest thou thy self thou can do evil? But sin was
never so boasted as now. Women and men in their words, walks, weeds proclaim
the glory of their sins, and are proud of nothing but their sins.

7 The seventh is the perseverance of sinning: this, the highest step of
damnation and ruin. For hereby the most gross and odious sins become
insensible, and grow so little and light, we neither see them nor feel them.
How true is that of Gregory, Crimina diuturniora, sunt grauiora? Time does not
diminish sin, but increase it: if we cease not to sin, God will never cease
to punish. What is this, but the sin of the Jews, to be stiff-necked, and
of uncircumcised hearts, and ears, Act. 7.
ever resisting the holy Ghost? and therefore were rejected, and cast off from
being the people of God. Therefore I conclude, where these seven signs are,
there cannnot, either a change, or (at least) most grievous plagues be wanting.

And that I may not seem to speak without book, having no sacred warrant for
it, this I put as a divine, undeniable, positive truth; that God never brought
any general or particular extermination or ruin upon any Kingdom, etc. but
these signs were the harbingers and forerunners: Genesis 6.5.
First, see Genesis 6.5. etc. all 7. 1. Great wickedness. 2. Much wickedness:
for all flesh had committed. 3. Manifest and without shame: for in the Earth.
4. Unpunished: for one as bad as another, the earth was filled with truelty. 5.
With affection and study: for gie imaginations of their hearts were emll, etc.
6. With pleasure and glory, ithout fear: for all their imaginations, t^^. 7.
Perseverance, for continually. 2. the Genesis 19. where you shall see all these
^gnes going before their judgment. Genesis 19.
(...) A great cry for great and horrible sins. (...). A multitude of sins:
Ezekiel. 16.
for 4. as Ezekiel. 16. and all the men of the City from the young to the old. 3.
Shamelessness, for they publicly demanded the men, that they might know them.
4. Impunitie: for the sins cried, which they never do, if severely punished:
for then they loose their tongue, seeing, Quae non placent, non nocent. Aug.
Sins that please not, hurt not. Besides, they said, shall he rule over us?
5. Their affection and study of sinning, They rose up out of their heds on the
night to commit wickedness, cried to Lot to bring out the men, etc. and
pressed sore upon Lot himself. 6, Pleasure and boasting of their sins: Is
not he a stranger, and shall he rule over us? 7. Continuance in sin: for they
left not their abominable wickedness, till God rained fire and brimstone on
them, so that these seven are worse then Ber. 4. for he says, that the
dissembling of our weakness, the excusing of our wickedness, ignorance of o^^
wretchedness, and perseuering in our si^^ fullness, are four steps that lead
us to d^struction. If a man travail through a^ the Scriptures, and all
profane storie^ he shall ever find these seven signs eu^dently going before
the desolations an^ ruins of Kingdoms and States. If the^ iniquity be
increased, Mat. 24. 1. Cor. 10.
and the love of many wax cold: if the ends of the world be come upon us: if
all these signs present themselves to our view, and can no more be hid, then a
scarre in the face; let us know assuredly that the warning is gone out, and
except we meet the Lord with true and speedy repentance, we cannot be secure,
for it may more truly be verified of our age, then of any before, which that
most famous English traveler Sir John Mandeuile living in Edward the 3. time,
having traveled Scythia the greater, and less, Armenia, Egypt, both Libias,
Arabia, Syria, Media, Mesopotamia, Persia, Chaldaea, Greece, Illiricu^,
Tartary, and many other Kingdoms, and returning into England, left to
perpetuity; Virtus, Ecclesia, clerus, demon, symonia, cessat, calcatur,
premitur, regnat, dominatur: Virtue cease, the Church is despised, the
Clergy trodden on, the Devil reigns, Simonie dominiers.

Iunius l. 1. quaest. polit. 5. That these things belong to the durable
safety of Kingdoms, 1. The study and care of Piety and Religion. 2. The
wisdom of the Magistrates. 3. Observation of the Laws. 4. Justice. 5.
Concord. 6. Punishment of offenses. 7. The flight of innovation. 8. Integrity
and vigilancie of Princes. 9. Flight of factions amongst the potent and Nobles.
10. Conservation of families. 11. Taxes instituted upon good reason. 12.
Constitution of Censors. 13. Conservation of the treasure. 14. A vigilant
circumspection, that the Magistrates make not a gain of the Commonwealth.
Therefore the contrary of these procures the euersions and ruins of
Kingdoms, Arist. in Topic.
seeing of contrary causes must needs proceed contrary effects.

All causes of Kingdoms ruins may be referred to these three Originalles. 1.
Providence of God. 2. Influence of Heaven. 3. Confluence of vices. First,
Providence of God, who has put a period to all sublunarie things: So Plato,
Nihil stabile, perpetuum, sed omnia orta, certis temporum interuallis and
periodis interire: nothing is stable and perpetual, but all things that have a
beginning by certain spaces and periods of time die: which also chances to
Re-publicks. Secondly, influence of the heavens, temperature and distemperature
of air. Thirdly, confluence of vices. Scipio to Masinissa, Non tantum ab
hostibus armatis periculumest, quantum a circumfusis volupt atibus, not so much
danger from our armed enemies, as from our common volupt uousnesse is to be
feared. This flood is divided into two streams, general and special: Most of
them, Aristotle, Polit. 5.2. repeats. Unto this rank refer: First,
Injustice; for the helps of armed men do not so much confer to the safety
of the Kingdom, as Laws, Judgments, and constant care of inuiolated justice.
On the other side, it is an easy conjecture, That that Re-publique cannot long
stand, in which perverse and wicked judgments are. Sleidan.
Sleidan. in Orat. ad Princip. and Ordin. Imper. Nihil est procliuius quam vt
talis Respublica nutet, languescat, intereat, and collabaturtota, quando hoc
illi proprium, vt in ea suum quisque priuatum spectet emolumentum, that
Commonwealth must needs totter, languish, die and come to naught, where every
man respects his own private. Secondly, contempt and neglect of religion:
whence Idolatry and persecution of the Church arises. Ex mutata religione
aurei seculi, mutata quoque aurei seculi foelicitas. Lact. 5.5.
From the change of the religion of the golden world is derived the changed
felicity of the golden world.

The Heathens acknowledge this, therefore Aristotle Pol. 7. amongst the things
that are required to the felicity and integrity of Re-publiques, gives the
first place to (...); the care of religion and piety: seeing that religion,
fear, reverence and worship of God, is the only foundation of the whole
Kingdom: for it is true of every public society, Mercur. Trism.
that Mercurius Trismegistus says, (...): Godliness and religion is the
foundation of all public things. Upon this depends the subjects faith and
loyalty to their Prince; obedience to Magistrates; piety to Parents; charity
to every one, and justice to all. Polyb. 8.
Not Polybius himself, though an Atheist, could deny this, lib. 8. de mil.
disc. Romans nor without cause did the fear of God ever seem a most effectual
cause of restraining the vulgar within bounds: for all men are moved with
religion, Cicero. 5. in Verrem.
as Cicero. 5. in Verrem. Numa Pomp. feigned nightly conference with the
Goddess Aegeria, Liu. 1.1. Liuie. 1.1.
Hence also Minos King of Crete, was wont every year to go down into a deep
den, and to tarry there; as if he received his Laws from Jupiter. Valor.
2.3. On the other side, August. de Ciuit. 3.3. the Poets, Valor. Max 2.3.
Prophets, and all acknowledge that the Gods forsook to be friend to their
beloved City of Troy, for the adultery of Paris. Hor. 36.
Horat. 26. Dij multa neglecti dedere Hesperiae mala luctuosae, the neglect of
God brings many sorrowful evils to Mankind. Secondly, desire of reigning.
Camer. 2, 44. That too much desire of reigning, close hatred, private
commodity, and young Counsels, were the bane of Rome, Troy, Mogunce, and
Leiden, which from free Commonwealthes became Tributaries. Princes that gape
for others goods, often loose their own. Thirdly, It is a pest of the
Re-publique, Arist Pol. 5.2.
when unworthy men are advanced to honors. Arist. Pol. 5.2. this is the folly
proceeding from Princes. Fourthly, Pleasures and Lusts are no mean causes of
consumption of states and Kingdoms: for the City that is much given to
pleasure, loses her greatest Empire; but that, given to labor, Valor. l. 4.
retains it. Hence Pythagoras was wont to say, That first, Luxury entered the
City, then saturitie; after, contumely; Stob. Ser. 4.
and lastly destruction.

The special causes of Kingdoms ruins, are either the special sins of
Ecclesiastical persons, of Politic Statesmen or of the Vulgars, or Commons.
The first of these may be ranged under the name of Ambition, in
Ecclesiastical persons brigging for Politic government. This contains all
those deadly bickerings, raised from such disputes and questions, as may with
like piety be ignoranced as known: sometimes being for such things, and so
frivolous, as do so much good in Religion, Alciatus.
as Canis in balneo, a Dog in a Bath. Hence proceeds this misery, so much
complained on, That no war is sooner kindled, then the Theological war,
Bucholzer.
nor any slowlier quenched. Hence also do we see a great cause, why Epicurisme
and Atheism do make such an inundation into our Kingdom. For as the
Ecclesiastical Annals testify, Seculum contentiosum continuo insecutum est
Epicuraeum. A contentious Age begets an Atheistical and godless Age.
Therefore that the Divine worship might with more success be propagated, the
people of the East, Bodi^^. l. 4. de R^o^^. 7.
and of Africa, and also the Kings of Spain, did holily prohibit to dispute
concerning Religion. And in the Commonwealth of Israel, albeit there were
seventy one Colleges of Priests, as the Thalmudistes affirm, Opt. M^^^at.
l. 3. Bud.
yet it was lawful for noue of them to dispute. Which albeit I allow not in
that strictness, yet this insanabile disputandi and scribendi cacoethes, as
Iuenal Satyr. 7. calls it, this incurable ill custom of disputing and writing
of every common subject and triuial business (and sometimes of the greatest
mysteries, which our reach falls short of) in my conceit does more hurt then
good. Add to this a second cause; a worm gnawing a-sunder the cords and bonds
of Kingdoms; namely, the licentious, unbounded, shameless, and graceless
practice of Symonie, and ungodly packings and choppings of spiritual Offices,
places, and preferments, whereby the Clergy makes themselves very slaves,
packhorses, and profane Drudges; and bring all Religion and honesty, not
only into disputation, but flatly, into plain Irreligion and Atheism. If the
fire of the sacrifice, which (as Augustine) had continued seventy years under
the water of the Babylonian Captivity, was extinguished, when Antiochus sold
the Priesthood to Jason; thereby showing us, that the fiery power of the Holy
Spirit left to work in their Sacraments and Service, God abhorring all their
Sacrifices for Simonies sake: what can we expect, but that all our Prayers,
and Sermons, and Sacraments, shall be turned into sin? seeing so many
Antiochisses, and Iasons amongst us, that will buy and sell sacred things in
despite of God. For it is true that Ambrose says: Who thus acquire
Ecclesiastical Livings; his body may well receive the dignity, but his soul
has lost all honesty. Secondly, in the second rank we will range the vices
of the Magistrates: for if Republikes be rightly governed, they are either
more lasting, or in some sort immortal, De Repub. Lacedaem.
as Xenophon says. And then are Kingdoms well governed, and never else, when
he that gouernes, Greg. Mor. Isid. l. 9. de sum. bono.
does rather command vices then subjects. For Kings are called Reges, a recte
regendo: Kings, of well governing. Hence is it, that from the Prince, the
torrent of good and evil, as from a perpetual fountain, Tho. Morus lib. 1.
Vtop.
does flow. But Flauins Vopiscus, inquiring in his Aureliano, Flau. Vopis.
what things made Princes wicked; answers himself thus: That first, too
much licentiousness; Secondly, abundance of things; Thirdly, wicked friends;
Fourthly, detestable attendants; Fifthly, covetous Governors; Sixthly Detestable
and foolish Auliques and Courtiers; and Seventhly, the ignorance of
Republiques. Besides, Princes never want soothing, slavish Claw-backes, the
perpetual pests of Kings; whose assentation does more often ruin their riches
and Estates, then the Enemy. Thirdly, in the third rank, we may range the
military order, and the occurrences proceeding from the other subjects;
ingratitude and contempt of Princes who are very tolerable, which contempt God
will punish: Iun. 1. qu. 1.
as Iunius Lib. 1. Quaest. 1. Also the contumacie and froward disobedience of
the same subjects, if either by secret practice or open hostility they seek
the life of the Prince.

I am not ignorant, that Claudius Ptolomaeus in the beginning of his
Quadripartite, convinces strongly, that all changes and fatal punishments
upon Kingdoms, comes from the celestial influence: but the translation of
Empires, is not indeed principally and immediately to be referred to the
stars, nor yet to the will of God, but as remote causes. For the Sacred
Scriptures make these three the nearest causes of all mutations and alterations
in Kingdoms. First, (...), Impiety; Secondly, (...), Injustice; Thirdly,
(...), Luxury. Impiety troubles the Church; Injustice, the common society of
men; and Luxury, the family: yet so as the hurt and malice of every one of
these redounds upon all. Therefore if these three, or but one, reign amongst
us, no Army can resist our ruin, but the holy troops of our tears; much
less, if all be rife amongst us. But Aristotle will have the nearest cause of
all ruins, to be (...), Inequality. As the body is in good health, whilst
no humor does predominate: so that Common wealth, where equality of rewards
and punishments; is used; and none grow in riches and power so potent to
oppress another; is strong, durable, and vndiseased.

Antiquity, if we will look into it soberly, and believe it likewise, gives
us plain evidences, that the most part of the greatest Kingdoms have not
endured five hundred years. Some have fallen short, and few or none have gone
beyond, but have either then come to a period, or not long before or after. The
Kingdom of Judah, from Saul to the captivity, dured but five hundred years.
So after the Captivity, from Esdras to the Emperor Vespasian, who ruinated
Jerusalem, whereby the Jews were scattered over the face of the Earth, their
Polity being never perfectly restored, the like space is observed. Add to
these the Government of the Athenians; which beginning with Cecrops, was in the
space of four hundred and ninety years changed into a Democraty. About which
time also changed the state of the Lacedaemonians, under the Kings Heraclides,
till Alexanders time. And who knows not that the Roman Consuls governed five
hundred years from the time of Tarquinius Superbus, till Augustus? And
likewise since that time, the like is observed since Augustus till the fall of
Valentinian, the last Emperor of the West; the Empire then (as it were) dying,
and the Savage Vandals, Alaricus and others, sacking the Countries of Spain,
Italy, and Rome it self. And from the time that Constantine translated the
Italian and Western Empire unto Constantinople, till Charlemans time who
revived the Empire of the West, chasing the Lombards out of Italy, is observed
five hundred and ten years, Nor are stories barren of observations touching
the periods of Kingdoms, by other numbers as well as that of five hundred
years. For we find that diverse Commonwealths have not exceeded the half of
this number. The Kingdom of Persia from Cyrus to Darius flourished, but in the
end of Darius his Reign, which was two hundred fifty and eight years from
Cyrus, Alexander gave it a fatal stroke. Yea the same Kingdom of the Greeks
commencing with Alexander, continued but two hundred and fifty years, and
after was broken in pieces by the Roman power. Likewise the Antiquities of
France do tell us, that after Syagre, the last Roman Pro-consull was deposed,
till Pepi^ father to Charlemaine, and so after till Hugh Capet, were reckoned
two hundred and thirty seven years; which want not much of the said number of
two hundred and fifty.

Yet do not Histories here stay their observations, in respect of these
fatal numbers, but do discover unto us, that the number of seven hundred
years have brought no less famous mutations to States and Kingdoms, then the
former: The Carthaginian Commonwealth having (when Scipio wholly subverted it)
continued seven hundred years; The bloody war betwixt Caesar and Pompey,
which was the consumption of the Roman Empire, happening seven hundred years
after Romes foundation. At which time it is conceived, that two fatal periods
met in one; as well that of five hundred years from the first Consuls; as that
of seven hundred after Romes foundation. So may we say of Rome it self,
which, seven hundred years after the destruction of Carthage, was by Tot^^^
King of Goths spoiled, and the principal Lords carried captive: which thing
Scipio did with tears prognosticate, seven hundred years before, when
Carthage was destroyed. And did not the Moors so with Spain seven hundred
years after Christ, after they had been driven out by Ferd^^^^d^ of Aragon,
Grandfather by the mother to Charles the fifth? And what do later times
afford us in this respect? We may see, that it is about seven hundred
years, since Charles the great founded the Western Empire; and that period,
if we look into the present mutations, and weakness of the Empire, seems
not a little to foretell some ruin: albeit what is of such absolute
necessity, but that our mighty God can dispose of it, otherwise then seems
to us, even as best pleases him, and all for the best?

I know the Learned do in some sort quarrel the necessity of these periods of
times for the fatal ruins of Empires; seeing some do fall short of these
prefixed times, and some exceed them: But to clear this doubt, I am of
opinion, that the ground of this observation has no feebler warrant then the
infallible Word of God: seeing we find there in Daniels seventy weeks an
universal Map of the declining of Empires: which seventy weeks do contain
neere-hand five hundred years, from the restitution of the Temple, after the
return from the Babylonish captivity, until the coming of Christ in the
flesh. And albeit the said period be not universal and perpetual, seeing
many Kingdoms reach not to half that point; yet we shall find by historical
discourse, that this Period has not failed most Empires, as if by Gods
appointment their beginnings and endings had been written in the foreheads of
these times. Which thing not only the fore-alleaged examples, but many others
which learned Antiquaries have observed, do clearly justify. Nor is there
want of good grounds from the same sacred Word, to warrant the diuersenesse of
changes, in respect that some Kingdoms in their ruins fall short, and some
out-strippe, these limited and appointed points of times; seeing God swayeth
all scepters as pleases him, setting up one, and pulling down another. Psalm.
75. Eccl. 4.14.
One comes out of Prison to Reign, when he that is borne a King, is made
poor. Besides, the change of States happens not by chance, but is guided by
the al-seeing providence of God, who knowing the preceding causes of Kingdoms
ruins, so orders of Realms and States as his wisdom sees fit: giving to
such as he investeth with Kingly Government, not only protection and
authority, as a notable favor of God, but also all graces and necessaries
requisite, to accompany the same; Whereby that Kingdom, as by so many sure
pillars, is sustained and guarded in an happy Estate for a long time, and
often beyond the bounds of those forenamed periods of times: For Mercy and
Truth preserve the King, Pro. 20.28.
and by Clemency is his Throne established. But if a vicious and wicked King,
who has not that care of justice and piety which becomes him, do Reign,
drawing his subjects by his wicked example to exorbitances, and sensuality of
life, to carelessenesse of Religion, and contempt of piety, casting themselves
by the imitation of him into the infectious gulphe of Impiety, and Impuritie
of life; what then can be expected, but that Quicquid delirant Reges plectentur
Achiui, King and Subjects shall both smart for it? What other thing can be
hoped for, authority failing, virtues dying, reigning and raging, but the
hastening of Gods severe judgments, who usually plagueth King and people for
their sins, with no less censures then extermination, and ruin of the whole
Weale-publique? For we must not think that God is so bound to any limitations
of time, as that he cannot cancel, change and order the times, as best serves
for the setting forth of his glory. But such and so insearchable are the
riches of his wisdom, that he sees cause sufficient of subversion of
Kingdoms and States, where we (blind beetles) conceive a perpetuity; And
contrarily, where we deem by certain conjectures, that Kingdoms are not
long lasting, there he determines a longer continuation of them, for reasons
best known to his heavenly wisdom. And this is it which the wise King
witnesses, Pro. 28.2.
That for the transgression of the Land there are many Princes thereof; but by
a man of understanding and knowledge a Realm also endures long.

But what transgressions these are, and at what time it pleases him, by
ruinating of Kingdoms, to take vengeance of these sins; we must not
precisely and rashly determine: because the Cup of indignation is in the (...)
of the Lord, and he powers is out at his appointed ti^e. Nor it is for us to
know the times and seasons, Act. 1.7.
which the Father has put in his own power. But forasmuch as all the Learned
h^^e obser^ed, that there are three special sins in holy Scripture noted,
causing the ruins of Kingdoms: one, is Impiety, subuerting the Church;
another, is Injustice, subuerting the Polity and State; and the third,
Lechery, subuerting the Family and the house. The infection of every of which
teaches to another; even as the Pest, which infecting one, he infected does
also infect another; the poison dispersing it self, whilst there is any
subject to work upon. We may hence conclude, That where these sins, which
by the Divine Oracle are forerunners of Kingdoms changes and desolations, are
most regnant, predominant and rise, there will the ruin and destruction not
slowly follow. This I have noted before: as also that Aristotle, ascribing the
falls and ruins of Kingdoms to the sins of Kingdoms, collects them all
summarily into this one of Inequality; as if the vnproportioned distinction
and difference (...) degrees of honor and dignities, and the ad^^^cing of
unworthy persons to titles and places of Honor, others much more deserving,
neglected, and cast off, were a sin of all others most dangerous for the
rooting out of people, and r^^^^ting of Kingdoms. But how true (...) v^rtue
this is, I will not dispute. This is it that I dare constantly ^vow, that the
causes and occ^rences going before any notable change or ruin of a Kingdom,
are chiefly and alone confined and contained in the exorbitant manners, ungodly
corruptions, and sinful lives of Kings and people.

Therefore, that I may free my Conceit from this imputation of placing a fatal
necessity of Kingdoms ruins, in any fabulous or ungrounded far-fetcht
Almanacke of the Philosophers dreams, or conjectures of some latter Writers, I
will plainly show; That I do not, First, found any opinion herein upon the
divination, Responses, and Oracles of Devils, wherewith many Wise men have
been deluded: Secondly, nor do I bind them to any celestial influences, as
many Philosophers have done: nor Thirdly to Harmony, as was Plato's opinion;
nor Fourthly, to Augures, Southsayers, Astrologers, Witches, Chaldaeans, nor
that foolish and deuilish conceit of Iamblieus: who calculating to know the
name of the Emperor that should succeed Valens, caused the Greek Alphabet to
be written in the ground, putting upon every one of the letters a barleycorne,
and in the midst a Cock; so that the letters, where the Cock scraped the
barley, should signify his name he desired: Fifthly nor to dreams, either
natural, deuilish, or diuinatorie, by the virtue and influence of stars, who
moved with understanding of things to come, affect the Brain with impressions
and representations of future events: Sixthly, nor to the curious observation of
years and months, as Boain does; who affirms, that, if we observe, we
shall find the most notable changes of States, and deaths of great Princes,
for the most part to have fallen in the month of September: Seventhly, nor yet
absolutely and infallibly to the numbers of five hundred, seven hundred, and
two hundred and fifty, of which I have spoken: Eighthly, nor yet to Comets and
blazing stars, albeit strange and vn-accustomed events do often follow them.
In none of these I place any absolute necessity of deuining of Kingdoms
changes: yet do I not deny, but these and such like predictions have their
uses oftentimes, and particular applications, to the alterations of Kingdoms;
adding this, That not one of those predictions and rules, by which Antiquity
has presumed to judge of the falls of Kingdoms, is so necessary, as exactly
to conclude the point of ruin: howbeit God many times suffers Nature to have
her due course, and many strange events to succeed according to such
predictions, rules and observations, as are declared. From whence we must
learn, to take heed of presumption, upon such uncertain grounds to judge of
certain ruins of States; but rather with patience to expect such end, as God
in his most wise counsel has resolved, avoiding all such curious searchings
as our dull apprehensions cannot reach.

Yet is not our infirmity so far to dispriuiledge us, as that, because we
cannot diue into the secrets of such hidden predictions and causes, we should
utterly abandon all care of Gods terrible comminations, and holy fore-warnings,
whereby he seeks to acquaint us with future events and calamities, to the end
to disturne us from sin, that we may avoid the direful vengeance of his
wrath; and think them to be of that vn-resistable necessity, that God cannot
out of the greatest will work the greatest good: but rather to cast our eyes
upon his soueraign^ bounty, which is infinite, and vn^^luable in price, to all
such as in due time seek unto him by true repentance: From whence alone is the
most true level and av^^e of Kingdoms preseruations, and felicities, as from
the contrary, their ruins and infelicities, to be settled, judged, and
determined: knowing (as a learned Divine has concluded) that no future events
can of themselves be known of any understanding, Z^^^h. ^e op^r 6.2.
saving the Divine, to whom all things are present: and therefore, I conclude
that all false and devilish diuinations, which the Scripture forbids, ought to
be far from all good Christians, namely, 1. That of the observation of the
flying of fowls, Deuteronomy. 18.10
2. That of dreams, 3. That of forceceries or lots, 4. That of Pythonists,
Le^it. 19.
and diabolical inspiration, 5. That of illusions, 1. Sam. 21.
and fained apparitions of the devil. Thus if we will wisely consider of the
precedent discourse, we shall find many arguments, rules, and observations,
touching most probable conjectures of Kingdoms ruins and changes, and such,
as the wisest Antiquaries and Sages of all times have not lightly weighed, and
cast of the events of such things, in many pregnant and notable particulars
answering the ground of the same rules and observations, which are as lights to
guide our judgments, the better to conceive what shall fall out in the changes
of Kingdoms and ruins of States, though not to divine of things to come,
against Gods power and authority: and also spurs, to incite us to abandon
such things, as have ever brought with them the Countries ruins, where they
were committed; that we, seeing a f^rre off the rod of Gods anger shaken at us,
and his sword ready to be drawn, ^ay meet him by a repentance never to be
repented of.

And that we of this Nation, for whose good this task (slender as it is) was
undertaken, may take the profit that was intended by it; let us apply it to our
present times and dear countries wherein we live, and take such measure of our
selves and times thereby, as becomes honest and impartial Judges; and if we
be such as we should be, then must we be such as I wish with all my soul we
might be: and that is, that we may be but such as may justly contend with
Pagans and Heathens for sincerity, integrity, and piety: such as the seven
Ambassadors, commended in their several Commonwealthes unto King Ptolomie;
Plutar. lib. de Exili^.
every one vanting of the virtue of their State, by the comparison of three
excellent things.

1 The Ambassador of Romes commendations were, That their Temples were
honored; their Governors obeyed; their wicked punished. What honor is now
done to Temples with us, or to the souls of the Temples, God and his
Ministers, is so little, that if that little were not in some sincerity, it
were nothing: the obedience to the spiritual Governors so little, that none
but the little ones, and crawling contemptible worms do them any; albeit the
holy Ghost has given a charge to obey them that have the oversight of us, Heb.
13.17.
and submit to them, for they watch for our souls. The punishment of little
ones, and little sins is not omitted: but great men, and gross offenders who
dare touch?

2 The Ambassadors of Carthage vanted, that their Nobility was valiant to
fight; their Commonaltie, to take pains; their Philosophers to teach. I will
leave the application.

3 The Sicilian Ambassador his praises were, that their country executed
Justice; loved Truth; and commended Simplicity.

4 The Rhodian Ambassador said, that their old men were honest, their young
men, shamefast; and their women peaceable.

5 The Ambassador of Athens, That they consented not, that their rich should be
partial; their people should be idle; their governors should be ignorant.

6 The Lacedaemonian Ambassador, That with them there was no envy, for all
were equal; no covetousness, for all was in common; no idleness, for all did
labor.

7 The Ambassador of Sicyonia justly gloried in these, That they admitted no
Strangers, inuenters of new toys, that they wanted Physicians, to kill the
sick; and Advocates to make their pleas immortal.

I will not adventure to make the comparison, nor to lay my square to this
building, but will leave the particular application to each religious and
judicious conceit, concluding it with the blessed Apostle; 1. Cor. 10.15.
I speak as to them that have understanding, Judge you what I say.
Nevertheless, my hearts desire is, and my prayer evermore shall be, that
England might be such, as may truly glory, if not in these moral respects,
yet in that which is far better, even that as it has received from God
infinite and unspeakable benefits and deliverances, benefit upon benefit, and
deliverance upon deliverance, God having watched over it to do it good, Isa. 5.
not having more blessings to do for his Vine, but that he has done, saving
the continuance of the same mercies: so it might not only never forget such
admirable favors, but also in the sincere profession of the Gospel of
eternal peace, and holy conversation, such as becomes the glorious Gospel of
peace, it may out-strippe not only all Nations of the world, 1. Pet. 2.9.
but all times, future, present, and past, as a chosen generation, a royal
Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar people, to show forth the virtues of him,
that has called it out of darkness into this marvelous light.

That Conuersions and Ruins of Kingdom may be known before hand; not by
Apodicticall and demostratiue necessity, but by Topicall probability.
WHereof let this be the foundation: That there is ever a real relation of the
cause and the effect, insomuch that evermore sufficient causes being put, there
must follow the effect of necessity. Physicians deliver precepts of Art, by
which diseases against nature may be cured or eased. Why should not then a wise
Governor of the Re-publique foresee the Sunsetting of a Kingdom? why should
he not procure the good of it? Or if the fury of iniquity be so great, and
the stream of impiety so strong, that by no wisdom it can be withstood; yet
why should he not obtain so much as a skilful Physician does, who by the
decretorie days, and from the cause of the disease, does fore-iudge of the
death of a sick patient in what sort it shall be? And albeit that as touching
the secrets of the divine providence for the most part, they are insearchable;
(for who knows the mind of the Lord? which thing also Reason teaches us:)
yet in the mean time, by obscure tokens it sometimes shows his effects;
sometimes by prophetical answers foreshewing the translations of Empires; and
sometimes by miraculous ostents. So says, Iun. quast. pol. 5. Before the
destruction of Domitian, a Crow cried in the Capitol, (...), All things are
well. Suetonius. So Vultures, renting in pieces the young unfeathered Eagles,
portended death to Tarquinius Superbus. Alex. ab Alexandro. 5.12. So Snakes
showed the captivity of Croesus. Here. dot. 1. So in the City of Aurenge,
when the foundations of certain edifices were laid, a prophetical stone was
found, wherein was written, in four French verses, all the calamity which
arose after the destiny of Henry King of France. Tar. Bizarr. de Bello Pann.
So a brass ^^ble was found in the river by a boy playing, in which the misery
and calamity of the City of Swetssons, before it came to pass, was
described. Maieri. in Annal. fol. 275. But in these things great care is to be
used, that we pronounce not rashly of their interpretation. Natural and humane
causes show themselves by more manifest arguments, yet not demonstrable, nor of
necessity, but presumptiue. Liuie, that noble Historian does premonish us,
that no great City can long be in peace, if it want an enemy abroad, and will
find one at home: As strong bodies are safe from foreign and external causes,
yet are laden and ouercharged with their own strength, as Hippocrates. 1.
aphor. 3. says. And Seneca Epi, 114. That the luxury of banquets and garments
are the tokens of a sick City. Where it is lawful to do injury, and do
what men list, we may judge that City ready to fall into a bottomless pit.
Sophocles in Aiace. So in every Kingdom there are certain pulses, from whose
faint and languishing motions, we may divine fearful fates to hang over
them. Hence Polybius. As worms consume woods cankers Iron, and Mothes clothes;
so a natural malice adhers to every State. And as when we see a house, whose
walls are falling asunder, and principal timber rotten, the roof being open,
and rafters decayed, we judge aptly, that the same house will shortly ruin,
and fall on heaps: so when we behold a Kingdom, and State, wherein Religion
and Piety, the walls of Kingdoms, begin to start aside out of their proper
Regions and Stations, King and Prelate failing in their duties, and the zeal
of Gods glory the principal timber that sustaines states, turned to
rottennes, either of superstition or of dissimulation and hypocrisy; the roof
of the Kingdom, which is the practice of religious and holy works, decaying
and lying open to the tempest of Epicurisme, Atheism, and all-consuming
Sensuality and irreligion: the State of the kingdom paralleling the corrupt
state of a corrupt Court, where Omnia cum liceant non licet esse pium, where
all things are lawful, but the true practice of piety: we may well determine
that this Kingdom in such a waining and declining Hectique and consumption,
cannot fland many storms. Besides, the wise have observed, that there are
certain periodicall numbers appointed of the ruins of Kingdoms. And of
these, the chief place has the number of 500. years, and 700. of which God
himself has established the former, as an universal period, under the
seventy weeks in Daniel: and the same has he kept both with his own people,
and also out of his Church, albeit in this period as yet some years do want.
This number I say he kept with his own people, as from the going out of
Egypt to the building of the Temple 500. years, the government of the Dukes,
500. years; after them, from Saul to the captivity of Babylon, 500. years;
from the Captivity till the policy of the Jewish Nation was restored 500.
years.

The same order God kept without his Church: 500. years Kings reigned at
Athem: 500. years the Commonwealth of Lacedaemon lasted: from the Kings
exacted and abolished for the offense of Tarquinius Superbus, the Consuls
governed 500. years. The second place, has the number of 700 years. Carthage
stood 700 years, till ruined by Scipio Aemilius. Civil wars betwixt Caesar
and Pompey, fell in the year from the building of the City of Rome 705. But
sometimes the period does not attain the 500 or 700 years, by reason of our
sins which draw on the calamities sooner; and sometimes prolongs it, when we
run to the haven of Repentance, and reform our lives in the fear of God, the
only soul and lifebloud of Kingdoms perpetuities*

Besides, experience tells us, that the greater the Mathematical instrument
is, the more truly we judge of the greatness of the Sun and Stars, of
their distance and height from us, of the combustions, retrogradations,
eclypses, and ill affects of the Planets and Celestial bodies: So the greater
that the judgments of God are, which he sends upon our kingdom or any other,
the more truly may we disterne the greatness of his anger against us, the
distance of his mercy from us, the combustions and retrogradations that our
sins make amongst us, and the Eclipses of the graces which have shined, when
the Sun of righteousness ran his course in our firmament. From whence it
stands concluded, That the measure of Gods anger and fierce judgments for
sins, upon any people, is an infallible token of the change and period of
that Kingdom, if a serious change of life with great and small do not oppose
it self against Gods vengeance. The ship at Sea meeting with another ship,
which either has given her cause of offense, or passes by her without vailing
to her, uses to send out a warning-peece to make her veil; but if she budge
not at that, she discharges two or three great Ordnance against her, and
happily killes the Captain or Master, or some of the Commanders of the ship;
or wounds and hurts with a murdering piece diverse of the company: if for all
this she will not stoop and come under her Lee, she turns a broad side unto
her, one after another, and sinkes her and all that is in her: so may we
perceive that God will deal with that Nation, which he by many benefits hailes
to veil to his obedience. He sends out a warning piece of plague, famine, etc.
but if they veil not, he seconds out a murdering piece, killing their Kings
and Princes, and taking away the hopes of all their happiness: if that work
not, he leaves not till he sink and wrack the ship of that Commmonwealth,
and all that is in it.

Who knows not that old out-worne rithme of our English Merlin?

When Faith fails in Priests Sawes;
And Lords Hests are holden for Laws
When Robbery is holden purchase,
And Lechery for solace;
Then shall the Land of Albion
Be brought to great confusion.
I wish this Prophecy may not be fulfilled in our days, nor that our sins
may not iumpe with this Prophecy, but that God would open our eyes to see the
day-breake before the Sunshine, and dark night before it be cocke-crow.

Why men are so blind and senseless, that having such grievous regnant sins
amongst them, for which all Ages were scourged, yet they do not foresee their
own ruin and Gods wrath.
THere are many causes of Man's excecation and blindness, as also of his
procrastination and putting off his amendment to an after-deale. But we will
range them all within the circuit of five.

1 Where first we must observe, That as all sin has his rise supernaturally
from blindness, so all our blindness, and insensibilitie sensibilitie of
sin, and the danger thereof, arises from our sin^. For it is true of all our
sins, Greg. 11. Moral.
which Gregory writes of Luxury Coecitas Mentis est filia luxuriae: The
blindness of the mind is the daughter of Luxury. So that our sins are the
first cause why we see not our d^ager and Gods wrath.

Secondly, besides those seven deadly sins (as they call them) and others
arising from them, there is another cause of our blindness, and that is our
defect of credulity and belief. The eyes of our souls (as Bernard says) are
intellectus and affectus: Our understanding and affection. But those two eyes
are pulled out by Satan, the God of the world, who having blinded the minds of
Infidels, 2. Cor. 4.4.
that the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, which is the Image of
God, should not shine unto th^e, takes fr^o them all faith that they should
have in the promises and judgments of God. The time will come (says the
Apostle) and the time is (say I) when they will not suffer wholesome doctrine,
2. Tim. 1.3.4.
and shall turn their ears from the truth: they will not believe the truth:
and if they will not hear (and believe too) Moses and the Prophets, Luc. 16.31.
neither will they be persuaded albeit one rose from the dead again. And
indeed the sin of Infidelity is the root of all our cecitie, blindness, and
misery. For if we believed Moses and the Prophets, Jesus Christ, and his
Apostles, we could not but see a far off, as the Apostle says, 2. Pet. 1.9.5.
both Gods mercies to such as join all virtues to faith, also his judgments
against the wicked sinner, that walks on in the stubbornness of his own
heart. How much this Infidelity offends God, we may see in the example of
Moses and Aaron, Number. 20.12
Gods dear children, who because they did not believe him, to sanctify him
before the children of Israel, in the desert, he barred them from bringing the
Israelites into the Land of Promise: Even as our Savior deprived his own
country of his great works, Mat. 13.58
for their vnbeliefes sake. How much the more then will he be offended with us,
who stand not so highly in his favor as these men did? If one tell you of
fables, and narrations of many incredible things, you believe them; why will ye
not then believe the truth? 2. Tim. 4.4.


3 The third cause of our blindness, is the expectation of Gods long animity,
and patience: Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set in them to do evil.
This the Apostle calls a Despising of the riches of Gods bountifulness,
patience and long suffering, and a heaping unto our selves wrath against the
day of wrath, and declaration of the just judgment of God. Therefore Wise
Siracides disswades this; Sir. 5.6.
Say not the mercy of God is great, he will forgive my manifold sins; for
mercy and wrath come from him, and his indignation comes upon sinners: Nor
yet say, I have sinned, Sir. 5.4.
and what evil has come to me? For God is a patient Rewarder, and he will
not leave thee unpunished And as this presumption of Gods mercy blinds many;
so hope of long life does the same: As we may behold in the Rich man, whose
soul was taken from him, Luc. 12.20.
whilst he was building his barnes for his fruits. Let us remember what
Bernard says, Maledictus qui peccat in spe; Cursed is he that sins in hope.

4 Fourthly, Besides, the outward appearance of goodness, and the external
worship of God, makes many so hoodwinked, that they cannot see the danger of
their Estate. Most do think, that God is pleased with the outward work of
his service, praying, reading, hearing of Sermons; wherein they carry
themselves, as the Spirit speaks of the Church at Sardi, Apoc. 3.1.
Thou have a name that thou live, but thou art dead: they seem to have some
Religion and devotion, but it is but hypocrisy, for there are no fruits
worthy amendment of life. Of these you may say as the Prophet does Beauty
has deceived thee, Dan. 13.56.
so appearance of Religion has deceived and blinded them. Of this Bernard
speaks thus, Serpit super omne corpus putridalabes Hypocrisis, moribus vtique
damnabilis: the rotten and stinking blemish of Hypocrisy has dispersed it
self over the whole body of mankind, in manners verily damnable. Therefore
let not any think, that the outward works of the Law alone, are all that God
requires of us. For the end of the Commandment is, Love, out of a pure heart,
1. Tim. 1.5.
a good Conscience and Faith unfeigned.

5 The last, but not the least cause of our blindness, is abundance of
temporal blessings. For even as in the Moons Eclypse, which is the
interposition of the Earth betwixt the body of the Sun, and the Moon, the
Earth being a dark body detaines the beams that they cannot proceed, and so
the Moon is Eclypsed and loses her light; so in Man, the love of temporal
things, in the will, Eclypseth and hinders the beams of reason and
understanding, that they cannot inlighten the soul. Hence the Hebrews
affirm, that Covetousness so possessed Cain, that he believed not there was
any life after this, and for this cause slew his brother who believed a life to
come; a reward for the good, and punishment for the wicked: in which contention
Cain slew him.

Eight Aphorisms or Rules, containing the sum of an happy life and blessed
death.

1 WE rightly worship God with true faith, daily invocation, and lawful
obedience, in the Sacrifice and obedience of Christ imputed to us by faith.

2 We exhilarate our souls, and honorably spend our lives, by a learned
piety and exercise of virtues.

3 We cure the anguishes of the mind, and the doutbfull health of our bodies,
by the evacuation of cares, moderate labor, and sober temperance.

4 We increase and conserve our stock and substance, with honest diligence,
observed faithfulness, and liberal parsimonie and sparing.

5 We gain the godly favor of men, with wise and well seasoned language,
blameless life, and approved manners.

6 We get friendship with faithful benevolence, and mutual Offices of Love.

7 We gain our enemies with just susterance, pacifying words, and worthy
Offices.

8 This kind of life is most acceptable to God, To do good to all men, and yet
to sustain en^ie, hatred, and injuries of Devils and Men.

How to obtain eternal life, and avoid eternal death.

1 THat there be an earnest care of learning and reading the be auenly
Doctrine delivered in the sacred Scriptures, joined with a godly and lawful
use of the Sacraments, according to that in Saint Lukes Gospel, Luke 16.29.
They have Moses and the Prophets, Let them hear them.

2 Let us live in the fear of God, and employ our selves in the serious
exercises of true repentance, that in the acknowledgement of our sins we may
by says fly to the mercy of God, promised in his Son Christ, and address
all our whole lives after the rule of his holy Word; mindful of that
Commandment, Mat. 4.17.
Repent for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.

3 That we shun with a singular care all sins and scandals, which shall
according to the prediction of Christ, and his Apostles, in the end of the
world swarm most abundantly; namely Luxury, Drunkenness, Avarice, Carnal
Security, Epicurisme, Contempt of Gods judgments, and the like: Nor let us
(by the example of the greater number) suffer our selves to be seduced, and
carried away with the stream of wicked works, to pollute our selves with such
like wickedness and scandals. Luc. 21.34.
Take heed (says our Savior) least at any time your hearts be oppressed with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon
you unawares.

4 Let us with an ardent zeal embrace and exercise the contratie Virtues,
Temperance, Frugalitie, the Fear of God, Vigilancie, Sobriety, and constantly
set forewards in the course of true piety, according to that precept, Watch
always: and that also, Luc. 21.11. 2 Pet. 3.12.
What manner persons ought we to be in holy conversation and godliness,
looking for and hasting unto the coming of the Day of the Lord?

5 Let us daily call upon God to kindle in our hearts this care of virtues, and
desire of eternal life; in the course of piety to govern and confirm us
with his Holy Spirit; to mitigate the calamities of his Church, which go
before the end of the World, according to that, Watch and pray, Mat. 26.41.
that you enter not into temptation: Pray that you may be found worthy to
escape the things that are to come, Luc. 21.36.
and stand before the Son of man.

6 To conclude, Let us so live, that every moment we may expect the coming of
the Son of God to judgment; and may with a true faith and good conscience
appear joyfully before him, as we are commanded to live, soberly, godly, and
righteously, in this present World, looking for the blessed hope and appearing
of the mighti^ God: and also according to that of the Apostie give diligence,
Tit. 21.12.13. 2 Pet. 3.14.
that you may be found without spot and blameless before him in peace.

Two Rules, never to be forgotten.

1 THou must never forget that the Son of God died for thee. Secondly, That
thou thy self (though thou live long) art shortly to die. If thou should
live in the utmost parts of Ethiopia, where men for long life are called
Macrobians, yet die thou must, nor can thou know where, when, or how. Hence
it was that Hormisda answered the Emperor Constantine, demanding him of the
beauty of Rome, stately buildings, goodly statues, and sumptuous Temples, if
he thought that in all the World were any such City: Surely (said Hormisda)
there is indeed none comparable to it, yet has it one thing common to all
other Cities; Men die here as they die in other places. The death then of the
Son of God, who died to acquit thee, from eternal death; and thy own death
being so certain not to be far off; must be as two spurs of love, to
drive thy horse through the short race of this momentanie life, unto the goal
of eternal happiness. Remember then First, That the time we have to live, is
less then a Geometrical point. Secondly, How wicked the enemy is who
promises us the Kingdom of this World, that he might take from us the
Kingdom of Heaven. Thirdy, How false pleasures are, which embrace us to the
end to strangle us. Fourthly, How deceitful Honors are, which lift us up to
cast us down. Fifthly How deadly riches are, which the more they feed us, the
more they strangle us. Sixthly, How short, how uncertain, how wavering, how
false, how fantastique all that same thing is, which all these things (if we
had them all at out own desires) can perform unto us. Seventhly, How great,
precious, and invaluable things are promised and provided fro those, who
despising the present things, seek for that Country in the Heavens, whose
King is Deity; whose Law is Charity; whose manner is Eternity. With these
and such like cogitations we must occupy our minds, which will stir us up
from slumbering and sleeping in our sins; kindle our zeal, cooling in
Religion; confirm our weakness, staggering in opinions; and give us wings of
most godly love, lifting us up to the glory of Heaven.

The twelve weapons for the Spiritual battle, ever to be had in memory when
the desire of Sinning tempts man.
1 OF Sin; the pleasures short and small.

2 The Companions, Loathsomenesse and Anxietie.

3 The loss of a greater good, even God himself.

4 That life is but a sleep and shadow, a wind, a vapor, a bubble, and as a
tale that is told.

5 That death is at hand, and sudden, and comes like a These in the night.

6 The doubt and danger of impenitencie.

7 Eternal reward and happiness: and eternal torments.

8 The Dignity, Honor, and nature of man.

9 The peace of conscience, which is that peace of God which passes all
understanding; namely a full assurance, that God is (through Christ) at peace
with him remitting all his sins.

10 The benefits and graces of God, bestowed on him, both inwardly and
outwardly.

11 The Cross, Agony, Passion, and bloody sweat of Christ for his sins.

12 The testimony of Martyrs, and examples of Holy men, who overcame S^than,
and all his suggestions to sin, by the blood of the Lamb, and the word of
their testimony, for they loved not their lives unto the death.

The twelve conditions of a true lover, whereby to know in what degree of the
love of God we stand.
1 THE first degree of love is to love one only and to despise all other
things for him.

2 To think him unhappy, that is not with his beloved.

3 To suffer all things, yea death, to be with him.

4 To adorn, and deck himself with such things, as may please him.

5 To be with him in all sorts that we may; if not in body, yet (at the least)
in mind.

6 To love all things that please him; his counsels, his precepts, his
doctrine.

7 To seek his honor and praise, and not to suffer any to do him reproach and
dishonor.

8 To believe the best things of him evermore, and in all things desiring all
men so to believe.

9 To be willing to suffer any discommoditie for his sake; taking it in very
good part.

10 To shed tears for him often; either for grief if he be absent; or for
joy, if he be present.

11 To languish often, and often to be inflamed with his love.

12 To obey him in all things, never thinking of any reward or recompense.

Now this we are induced to do for three causes specially. First, when the
service is such, as of it self is to be desired. Secondly, when he whom we
obey is of himself so very good and amiable, that we even love and reverence
him for his virtues. Thirdly, when before we began to serve him, he bestowed
on us great benefits. And these three causes we find abundantly in God, for
which we should love and obey him. For First, there is no travail not pains
taken for his service, that is not good both for body and soul: for to love
and obey him, is but to direct our selves to him that is the chiefest good.
Secondly, He is also the comeliest, and best of all others, the wisest, the
richest, the mightiest, most amiable, sweet, lovely, and loving, of all
others, having all those conditions (and that in the highest degree) which do
accustomeably move us to love and obey freely. Thirdly, He has dealt most
honorably and beneficially with us; creating us of nothing; redeeming us from
Hell by the death of his Son when we were worse then nothing; preserving us
till this day from infinite perils of body and soul, when we deserved
nothing; and giving us a measure of sanctification, together with many
unspeakable blessings of soul and body; without which we had been redacted
to nothing. Hard hearts, and unsanctified affections have those that will not
love and obey this infinite goodness, according to the precedent Conditions of
a tine lover.

The twelve abuses of the World.
CYprian in his time, which was two hundred and forty years after Christ,
names these for the twelve abusions of the World. First, A wife man without
works. Secondly, An old man without Religion. Thirdly, A young man, without
obedience. Fourthly, A rich man, without alms. Fifthly, A woman, without shame
fastness. Sixely, A Lord, without virtue. Seventhly, A contentious Christian.
Eighthly, A poor man proud. Ninthly, An unjust King. Tenthly, A negligent
Bishop. Eleuenthly, A Multitude without discipline. Twelfthly, A people without
L^w.

And it seems that th^se Abusions grew on with the age of the World* for
Augustine reports that in his time, which was four hundred years almost after
Christ, the same were the abuses of that World wherein he lived. Nor do I
think that since those times any man can show me a World, wherein this World of
wicked a busions has not far and wide (like a world) stretched it self. To
which end we may call to mind that, Hugo de claustro ai mae. Anne Domini. 1130.
which a later writer affirms, concerning the abuses of one part of the world,
which should have been the best part of the world; namely, That in the
cloister, and amongst men professing Religion, there were these twelve abuses:
First, A negligent Prelate: Secondly, A disobedient Disc^ple: Thirdly, An idle
young man: Fourthly, An obstinate old man, Fifthly, A courting Monk: Sixthly, A
lawing Clerk. Seventhly, A precious and costly habit. Eighthly, Exquisite diet.
Ninthly, Rumor in the Cloister. Tenthly, Strife in the Chapter. Eleuenthly,
Irreuerence in the Office of the Altar. Twelfthly, dissoluteness, even in the
Quire. We may ad to this the complaint that Bernard made of the abuses of h^s
tim^s. Magna abusin, and nimis magna est. etc. It is a great abuse, and too too
great, Anno done. 1140.
that Sparing should be counted Avarice; Sobriety, Austerity, Silence, Folly:
On the other side, that Remission should be counted Discretion; Sorrow for our
sins, silliness; babbling, affability; laughter, pleasantnes, pride of clothes
and horses, honesty; and superfluity of bed-ornaments, cleanellnesse. But
what speak I of the abuses of the ancient world? Let us come nearer home, and
survey the abuses of our own world, Romans 7.13.
which (as Saint Paul says of sin, That it is out of measure sinful) so I
may truly say of our world, that it is out of measure worldly. And I could wish
that the world of our abuses might be restrained and bounded within this old
impannelled Jury of twelve. But fear if every of us descend seriously into
his own conscience, we shall not only find seven devils, with Magdalene, yet
to be cast out of most of us, Luc. 8.2. Luc. 8.30.
but a Legion of devils, a multitude of abuses: for they are many. First, Can
any man say, there is not a great abuse of our bodies, and that in many
respects, seeing we use them quite contrary to the will God, and altogether to
other ends, then for such as they were given us? Do we not deck the body
most richly, costly, diversely, in all kind of wanton and phantastique fashion?
And do we not leave the soul, either altogether neglected, or but slenderly
adorned with true virtues? Surely, our bodies were given us, 1. Cor. 6.20.
that therewith we might glorify God: and if we abuse them to the dishonor of
God, and hurt of our neighbors, is it not a great abuse. S^rely Bernard says,
That to cloth the body richly, and leave the soul naked, is an abuse, and
that a great one. Much more then is it an abuse, to make our members the
servants or uncleanness and iniquity. Romans 6.19.
Our bodies were not given us, as swine to be fed, Romans 6.19.
nor as garments to be consumed, nor as treasure to to be preserved, nor as
ships to traffic for merchandise, nor as howses to be dwelt in, nor as Tents
to be removed, nor as Castles to be defended, nor as Temples to be adorned, but
as Oxen to be labored, as Servants to be commanded, and as prisons to be
avoided; that so we might come to that happy estate, that we might love rather
to remove out of the body, and to dwell with the Lord; 2. Cor. 5.8.
but who does so that we might praise him? Do we not feed our bodies, as
Hogs? Do we not consume them in the ways of wickedness? Doc we not reserve
them from any imployme^t, that is not either for pleasure or profit, as
treasure is reserved? Do we not make them our ships to negotiate with all
foreign vices? Do we not make them our houses, in which we would dwell
perpetually? Do we not remove our bodies from one place of pleasure and sin
to another, as a Tent is removed? Do we not use all the munition that Physic
or dainty fare can provide, to defend them as Castles? And do we not adorn
them and embellish them as Temples? Is this to possess our vessels in
holiness and honor? and not rather in lust and concupiscence, 1. These. 4.4.5.
even as the Gentiles which know not God.

2 It we come to places, we shall find none free ^rm gross abuses: every man
of place laboring to make his place advance him into higher place. So that it
is too true: Vnde habeant cura est paucis, sed oportet haberi, Per scelus atque
nefas, pauper vbique iacet: whence things are had ^ew men regard, but had they
must be, by hook or crook, by wickedness, and impiety, the poor man does
every where perish. This is an error that proceeds from the face of him that
rules; not to put every man into a fit place, when folly is set in great
excellency, Eccl. 10.5.6.7.
and the rich and virtuous set in the low place; when servants are on horses,
and Princes walk like servants on the ground.

3 The abuse of times is no less then the others: for as Bernard says:
Tempore nihil pretiosius, and hodie nihil vilius inuenitur: Nothing is more
precious then time, yet there is nothing found more vile. He is counted a wise
man, that can vti foro, take the best opportunities to raise his fortunes,
albeit with the ruin of the Republique, and his own conscience: but he that
knows vti tempore, is the true wise man. For if we wa^ke circumspectly, not as
fools but as wise, redeeming the time, Ephesians. 5.15.16.
because the days are evil; then do we only make the true use of the time,
and shall never be untimely taken away. The abuse of all time, is, not to do
that work which the time requires. But our days being evil and few, we then
use the times aright, when we make their euilnesse serve us, as rises to
goodness, and their fewness serve us as steps to eternalnesse. Our days
are short in continuance: therefore the true use of them is, Job. 14.1
to do all our work that we have to do in this short season: for the night
follows, when none can work. Ioh. 9.4.
Now, all our work that we have to do, is, to make an end of our salvation
with fear and trembling. Phil. 2.12.
Therefore for our direction in wel-vsing our time, the wise King has given us
an excellent rule. Eccles. 9.10.
All that thine hand shall find to do, do it with all thy power: for there is
neither work nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave whither
thou go.

Now behold what abuse there is of time in all conditions of men. One third
part of every man's time is spent, before he knows what time is: a second part
is spent in sleep: a third part, our pleasures, our dogs, Hawks, our dinners,
suppers, trimming, and vntrimming, complement, and idle discourse, steal from
us: so that if there be any time of redeeming the time, and making an end of
our salvation left us, it is but that instant of intermission which our deadly
diseases do lend us, when we come to Lord have mercy upon us. How prodigal we
are of our short time; and yet would all of us be counted wise and judicious,
appears in this, that whereas every one accounts him a spend-thrift, a
fool, and unworthy person, that having but a small stock, plays it all at
one game at hazard, yet we never think amiss of him that loses all his
time. But such is the carnal conceit of all sorts of men, touching the expense
of time, that, as the Psalmist, speaking of profane men tells us, Psalm. 12.4.
they say their tongues are their own, who is Lord over them; so (say they)
Time is our own, and why should we not spend it as we please? Little do they
remember what Bernard speaks: Sicut non capillus de capite, sic nec momentum de
tempore. As God in his care over us suffers not a hair of our heads to perish,
so not a moment of time must escape, for which he will not requite an account.
Omne tempus (says the same Bernard) tibi impensum requiretur a te qualiter sit
expensum: Every piece of time that is lent us in this life, shall be required
of us in what sort it is spent. The truth is, as Augustine notes: Totum illud
tempus perdidisti, in quo de Dco non cogitasti: All that time is lost, in which
thou have not thought upon God.

4 It were well, if we could escape with these a buses, if we did not also
abuse our riches, and all the good blessings and creatures of God, given unto
us for our comfort, and the good of others. But who abuses not his riches,
either, First, by unjust acquisition, Luc. 16.1. Luc. 12.19.
as the unjust Steward: Secondly, or by covetous retention, as the rich man
that said to his soul, Thou have much goods laid up for many years. Luc.
15.30.
Third y, or by undue expension, as the Prodigal son, Luc. 18.22.
that wasted his substance with harlots. Fourthly, or by too ardent affection
toward them* as the young man that departed from Christ, when he bad him sell
all, and he should have treasures in heaven. Therefore if we will use riches
aright, we must know, as Chrysostom teaches us, we are not Domini, Lords of
his treasures, but Dispensatores, dispensers of his goods. 1 Cor. 4.2.
And it is required of the disposers, that every man be found faithful. And
that faithfulness our Savior tells us is, Luc. 16.9.10.11.12.
That we make us friends of the riches of iniquity, that when we want, those to
whom we have been faithful, may receive us into everlasting habitations. He
that is faithful in the least, is also faithful in much etc. He that uses
not his riches thus, abuses them to his own damnation. He that acquires them
unjustly, retains them greedily; miss-spends them vainly, loves them
ardently, abuses them vildly.

5 To abuse riches were not so much, if withal men did not abuse all the
creatures of God. But if ever all the creatures of God were extremly abused,
then surely it is in our times. Tim. 4.4.5.
The abuse of the creatures is, when they are taken and received without
thanksgiving, without being sactified unto us by the word of God and prayer.
Therefore when we take the use and benefit of any of Gods creatures, in any
such sort, as that we want the warrant of Gods word so to use th m: when also
we do not thank God from the heart for them, and pray to him that they may be
profitable to us, we horribly abuse them to our condemnation. For all creatures
are Gods, and therefore must serve him. If then we take any of them, Genesis 1.^4.
Psalm. 33.^. I^dith. 16.14.
and make them serve our lusts, our wantonness, our pride, and vainglory,
we assume a dominion over them which was never granted to us by God, and so are
proud usurpers against God, and cruel Tyrants against the creatures. For they
must all be used with all humility, reverence, and religion, as the good
creatures of God, to his glory, and our necessity, not our vanity. Hence is
that amasing speech of the Apostle: That Every creature groneth and trauelleth
in pain together unto this present. Romans 8.22.
Even as subjects that live under a godless and tyrannous King, who abuses
their wives, defloures their daughters, ransackes their substance, makes slaves
of their sons, turns all to hauock, making every thing that likes him serve
his lust; even so do we tyrannize the creatures, and make them groan and
travel in pain by our horrible abuse and servitude we put them to. Therefore
no marvel, if our tables be our snares, our beds our baines, and all the
creatures arm and bandie themselves against us, to be acquitted, or (at least)
revenged of this slauage. And I am abashed and afraid, least the Heavens melt
fire and and brimstone to consume us, and the earth open to swallow us up, for
the abuse of the creatures.

6 The abuse of all our outward senses is not to be forgotten. All our
knowledge begins, and is derived from them. Therefore if we will use them
aright, we must make them the instruments of the soul, to come to the
knowledge of those things, that appertain to our salvation: This is the
doctrine the Apostle teaches. Let the same mind be in you, Phil. 2.5.
which was even in Jesus* Christ. Where we see, that his sentire, and mind,
has directed us to four things, wherein we must be of the same mind; First,
as touching things beneath us, that we may avoid them, namely the pleasures of
the flesh which deceive us; the adversities of the world which afflict us death
and eternal damnation which shake and confound us. In these things we must be
as sharpe-sented as the Salmon, that perceiving the salt water returns to the
sweet; as the Bees, that feeling the ill savor of smoke or any other thing,
forsake the place; as the Ox, that smelling the blood of a beast lately
slain, roares and runs away. For if our senses be set upon pleasures, or
that we make not true use of afflictions, to be humbled by them, nor yet labor
to shun the way that leads to hell; we shall be like swine, who smell not
the foulest stink; as Bears that feel not the hardest stripes; and Asses that
stoop not at the heauiest burdens. Secondly, touching things within us: the
wounds of our souls: the sins of our lives, that they may be done away, for
that was his mind in all his life, suffering, and death. And nothing is more
within us then our sins, for they are in the midst of our hearts and souls.
He that feels not the pricking wounds they make there, is like a man sick of
a Pnrensie or Lethargy who never feels his infirmit^e, and therefore dies
sleeping or singing: such as they who cared not to know God, Romans 1.28.
so he gave them up into a reprobate sense. Thirdly, as touching things without
us: that is, the torments of the Cross, that they may be seen, these being
without us; but in Christ we must feel by compassion and devotion, in the very
heart. So the Apostie felt them; The world is crucified to me, and I to the
world. Gal. 6.14.
H that has not this sense of compassion and sorrow of Christ and his members,
is annovnted with the oil of Mandraques and Henb^ne, which makes men sleep so
fast, and so stupifies their members, that they feel no lancings, cuttings, or
wounds, if never so mortal. Fourthly, As touching things above us; that is,
heavenly comforts, that they may be obtained: but no comforts so great, as
salvation in Jesus Christ, which above all things is to be desired. Those that
are after the spirit, Romans 8.5.
savor the things of the spirit; as the Vulture sents her prey even from
beyond the sea: and the dog having once sented his game, leaves not till he
find it: so the Christian having once fixed his senses on the prey of eternal
life, never restes till he be assured of it in Christ, by the sanctification of
his life. Sap. 6.15.
To think upon this is perfect understanding: so that there is no perfect
knowledge, nor true use of out senses, but when that eternal life is their
principal object and aim. Wherein if we fail, we are like them, that having
eaten sweet meats loose the taste of the best wines; so neither the savor nor
smell of eternal life is perceived, if our senses be filled and taken up with
the sweetness of worldly things. For even the corruptible body is heavy to
the soul, Sap. 9.15.
and the earthly mansion keeps down the mind that is full of cares; so that
we cannot say as Isaac said of Jacobs garments; Genesis 27.27.
That the savor of eternal life is like the the savor of a field which God
has blessed.

7 I might say it is no small abuse wherewith we blemish the affections and the
will; in desiring and pursuing with great affection those things by God
prohibited; and neglecting and discarding the true good things, that lead us to
the land of the living. The true use of our affections and wills, is, to seek
those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God; Col.
3.1.2.
to set our affections on things that are above, and not on things which are on
the earth: that we might be able truly to say, Phil. 3.10.
Our couuersation is in heaven, from whence we also look for the Savior, even
the Lord Jesus Christ. How much our age abuses both will and affections, who
have no conversation in heaven, but on earth; who set their affections, not on
things about, but on the basest things; is more then demonstrable. Therefore is
all their life unto them no better then a Hell; even an entrance into eternal
perdition. For as Bernard says, Toll propriam voluntate^, and infernus non
erit tibi: Take away thy own proper will, that thou follow not it, and thou
shall never have hell: so, follow thy own will, and thou shall never be out of
hell.

8 The abuse of the understanding is also very great every where at this day.
The true use of the understanding, Romans 12.3.
is, sapere ad sobrietatem, to understand according to sobriety: which is, not
to arrogate to our seluts the gifts we have not, nor to boast of the gifts we
have, but to use them reverently, to Gods glory, and the good of others. But
now so carnal and conceited are most part of men grown, that they think they
know all things, and yet never knew the least part of themselves: they boast
themselves of those things they have not, and may be ashamed to boast of those
things which they have indeed, that is, plenty of ignorance. For who is so
bold as blind Baiard? whereas the wisest Socrates will modestly say, Hoc vnum
scio quod nihil scio: This one thing I know that I know nothing. So that he
that will be a man truly wise, must become a fool that he may be wise: for the
wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. 1. Cor. 3.18.19.


9 Our memories arc much abused, when they are not employed upon the necessary
provisions of the soul. The true use of the Memory the wise King teaches:
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Eccl. 12.1.
Horses, Dogs, and Camels are of great memory: for they remember well the
ways they have traveled, the men that do them good, and the Innes where they
lodged. And why should a Christian not ever remember the ways of his whole
life? how fowly he has sinned? and the benefits of God, so infinitely
bestowed? and the glory of Paradise, from whence by sin he is eiected? He
that will not abuse his Memory, must never forget three things touching God:
three touching himself, and three touching others. Touching God, the power of
the Creator; the mercy of the Redeemer; the justice of the Rewarder. Touching
himself, the vilitie of his condition, the prauitie of his conversation, the
grieuousnesse of death and damnation; Touching others, the excellency of those
holy men that went before him; the damnation of all the wicked that forget God;
the affection of all from whom he received any good.

10 The abuse of the inward senses, of all other is the most: for that when we
conceit most variable imaginations of the excellencies of Gods creatures, in
the beauty, goodness, and greatness of them, we never reflect upon God the
Creator and giver of them all; and contemplate, how much more excellent is God
himself, then all these; how much better to be one day in his Courts, then
1000. years elsewhere. Thus should we do when we hear sweet Music; eat
dainty meat; smell perfumes; or enjoy any of Gods blessings: else we abuse
the inward senses.

11 Our abuse of indifferent things, is great and dangerous: and that is
committed two ways, first, when we rashly make, or stiffly maintain a schism
for outward things in the Church, to the scandal of the weak, and disturbance
of peace, the soul of the Church: Secondly, when the delinquents in this kind
are more severely iusticed, then those who sin openly and impudently against
the commandments of God: Deuteronomy. 28.2.
for promensisra peccati erit and plagarum modus; According to the trespass,
Lect. 12.
so let the stripes be. Fides doceri, cogi non vult. Faith will be taught, but
not compelled, much less the use of indifferent things.

12 The last abuse, is of our power and authority, which is infinitely
committed, but chiefly in oppression, briberie, and injustice. For the true
use of all power, is, to reward and defend the good and to punish and cut off
the wicked. And all the true use of the spiritual power, Romans 13.3.4. 2. Cor.
15.10.
is, to edification, and not destruction. Therefore they who alter this course,
do greatly abuse their power. God in mercy grant, that when he shall come to
search our Kingdom with a candle, these abuses may not be found amongst us.
Once I remember, Religion and Virtue in this Kingdom were so eclipsed, Alani
de insulis Prophetia, Anglicana and Romana.
that the corrupt times, and dissolute reign of William Rufus, thus by
Antiquaries storied; That in his Kingdom and Court were found, Calamistratorum
ille cri^ium fluxus, vanissimus ille vestium luxus, illa laterum denudatio,
meretricia illa laciniarum astrictio, illa capillorum intricatio, illa
vestimentorum incisio, panni pliciti, calcei aculeis arcuati, mollitie corporis
certare cum foeminis, gressum frangeregestu soluto, and latere nudo incedere,
adolescentium specime^ erat: Comatuli inuenes and imberbes, emolliti and
mermes* quod nati fuera^t inuiti manebant, prius corrupti ab alijs, post, alios
corrumpentes, alienae pudicitiae proditores, prodigisuae. Sequebantur Curiam
Regis exoletorum greges, prostibula gane aru^. In English thus: Every where in
his Kingdume and Court were found, that loose, wide, long, unconstant
deliciousness, and lust, of crisped, frizzeled, curled locks and hair; that
most vain, riotous, rank, and sumptuous excess of apparel; that laying
naked and open of the breast; that whorish lacing, iagging, trimming, folding,
pleating, fringing, of the arms, bodies, head and feet; that twisting,
wrapping, enfolding of the hair; that cutting, pincking, printing of garments;
that embroidering of suits; and that pleasant, oyled, painted, complexionating
rag, that aculeated, sharpe-nosed, arcuated, vaulted, Rainbow-colored, and
strange-fashioned shoe and boot. There men do strive with women in tenderness,
nicen^s, woma^lines, wantonness; break their gate with a dissolute gesture; and
to go with open breasts was the show, example, trial, and glory of young men,
or lusty youths: boys with faire-bushed hair and vnbearded, soft, delicate,
unarmed, effeminate, which are unwilling to remain as they were borne, first
being corrupted by others, and afterward corrupting others, betrayers of
others chastity and shamefastnes, and prodigal of their own. There followed
the Court a flock of super-anuated, ouergrowne, stale, beastially-abused
creatures against and harlots. Now let me enquire of those that are either
traveled in the stories of times past, or countries and kingdoms far
distant, in what circle of the world they find this dissolute and godless
behavior here described, most paralleld. Where do they see and find that
loose and dissolute deliciousness of frizzeled, crisped, bodkind hair? where
that most vain, rank, and ungodly excess of apparel? where that nakedness
of the breasts? that whorish lacing, iagging, fringing of the whole body from
top to toe? that cutting, printing, pouncing of garments? that aculeated,
sharppointed, arched, Polonianized, ouer-turned, Rainbow colored,
strange-fashioned boot and shoe? where that twisting and enfolding of the
locks? that imbroidering and damasking of suits? that powdring of hair, and
complexioning of faces? where those neat, combed, bushed, vnbearded youths?
those soft, delicate, effeminated fellows, which are unwilling to be as they
were borne, but being first corrupted by others, do afterward play the
Proselytes, and corrupt others, betrayers of others chastity, and prodigal of
their own? where do men strive with women for softness of clothing, and
neatness of person, in womanish face, open breasts, dissolute gesture? I know,
the godly traveler, whose heart is touched with a feeling of these enormities,
will answer my enquiry with Cyprians tears, who complains of his time thus.
Do not all men study to increase their patrimony; and being forgetful what
the faithful did, either in the Apostles times before them, or what themselves
(as Christians) ought to do, lay themselves down in an insatiable heat of
enlarging their substances? There is no mercy in works; no Discipline in
manners. In Men, the heart is corrupted; in Women, the form is counterfeited;
crafty frauds to deceive the hearts of the simple; cunning wiles to
circumvent their brethren. They knit the bond of Matrimony with Infidels, and
prostitute the members of Christ unto Gentiles: they not only swear rashly;
but over and besides, they forswear themselves willingly: with proud swellings
they contemn their Governors, with venomous tongues speak ill of them; with
pertinacious and rebellious hatreds disagree amongst themselves. If good
Cyprian (...) plained of these things; who will blame us to complain of the
like, and much greater, and to fear the calamity which we do not labor to
avoid? Esaias. 14.
Let us take heed of Babylons woeful downfall, for (as Basil says) All those
things shall shortly come upon the soul, confounded with the darkness of
sins, and not one only prorogation of days shall go betwixt. But this is
our hope in these dangerous declining times, that as then, Henry the first
whose Emblem was, Rex illiteratus, Asinus coronatus, An unlearned King is a
crowned Ass, reformed those dangerous abuses and customs; so your Highness,
Charles the first, the suruiuing hope of our good, the glory of all the
foregoing Henry's of our Nation, you noble brother being untimely benighted,
will (in the present) in your own particular utterly distaste them, and (in
the future) for ever abandon them both Court and Country. This shall make you
more famous in the World, then Hannibals incursions through the Alps into
Italy, then Scipio's great conquests, Caesar's miraculous Victories, and
Alexanders sole Monarchy. Besides, as it shall magnify you on Earth^, so
shall it deifie you in Heaven: for as Augustine says truly, Qui non tumet
vento superbiae, non cremabitur igne gehennae: He that swells not with the puff
of pride, shall never be burnt with the fire of Hell. To conclude, Let the
judgments of God upon his own people, for these very sins, and abused
strange customs, so largely set forth by that worthy Court-preacher Isay, be
Englands Map, Esaias. 3.
wherein to beeholde her own desolation if she repent not for them.

Of Contemplation, what it is, wherein it consists, and how worthy a Work it
is for a Prince, and also for every good Christian.
Bernard sath that Contemplation is a lifting up of the mind, resting upon
God, and tasting the joys of eternal sweetness. And indeed it is nothing
else, but (as it were) a certain spiritual vision and sight of that Truth
which we know and approve, joined with the praises of God, with most high
admiration, pleasure of the spirit, and joy of heart. For as by the eye of the
body we see corporal things: so by the mind, which is the eye of the soul,
we contemplate heavenly things: Therefore Contemplation is nothing but the
vision and sight of the mind. This, if it be sober, makes us have our (...),
that is, Phil. 3.30.
our conversation, in Heaven; and so to find an Heaven upon Earth, and to be
sure of Heaven whilst we live on the Earth. Some conceive that this word
(Temple) is derived hence, because it is a place destinated to contemplation.
For as we ought in the Temple of God to recollect all our affections,
cogitately to meditate and think upon God, and his holy mysteries and
ordinances: so indeed this Contemplation, of which we speak, is nothing else
but a true and perfect collection of all our affections and powers of the soul
to know something with admiration and delight of mind concerning the nature of
God; namely touching his power, his wisdom, his goodness, his love, his
nobility and bounty etc. or touching the hidden judgments of God, or his most
holy will, or some other excellent object, by which we bend and direct our
selves to God.

Before we come to handle the members and parts of Contemplation, we will show,
First, the difference betwixt Contemplation, Meditation, and Cogitation.
Secondly, the inducements to Contemplation. Thirdly, the arguments and tokens
of true Contemplation. Fourthly, the impediments of contemplation. First, The
difference is, in that we shall find in Cogitation there is an evagation and
wandering of the mind; in Meditation, an investigation of the mind; but in
Contemplation, and Admiration of the mind. Cogitation is without labor, and
without fruit; Meditation is with labor, and with profit; Contemplation is
without labor and with profit. Greg. lib. 2. in Ezech. Hom. 17
Secondly, Those three degrees of which Gregory speaks, ought to induce us
to the Contemplation of God. First, That the soul collect it self to it
self. Secondly, That being collected, it may see what an one it is. Thirdly,
That it rise above it self, and do subject it self, intending to the
contemplation of the invisible Author of it self. But it cannot collect it
self to it self by no means, except first it learn to drive from the eye of
the mind, all fancies of Earthly or Heavenly forms; and to despise and tread
under foot whatsoever occurres the Cogitation, concerning the corporeal eye,
ear, smell, taste, or touch, in as much as he seeks himself to be such within,
as he is without these. For when he thinks of these things, he does within
himself (as it were) handle certain shadows of bodies. Therefore all these
by the hand of Discretion are to be driven from the eye of the mind as much
as may be, in as much as the soul considers it self to be such, as it was
created under God above the body. Besides, the ineffable sweetness which is
in contemplation perceived; the admirable perfection which is there learned;
and the beginning of nil happiness which is there found; ought to induce us
thereunto. For there the most high GOD, the fountain of all happiness, is
known; and that which is known, is beloned; and that which is beloved is
desired, and labored for; and that which is carefully labored for, is
acquired; and when it is at length acquired, Ber in Ser. 35. in Can.
it is with interminable and endless delight possessed: such delight, as that
Bernard says, That the soul which has once learned and received of God to
enter into it self, and in his very inwards to long for the presence of God,
and ever to seek his face; (for God is a spirit, and those that seek him, the
must walk in the spirit, and not hue after the flesh) such a soul (I say) I
know not whether it account it more horrible and painful to suffer Hell it
self for a time, then after the sweetness of this spiritual study once
tasted, to go out again to the pleasures, or rather the grieuances of flesh,
and to seek again the insatiable curiosity of the senses: Ecclesiastes
saying; Eccles. 1.8.
The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the Ear with hearing. Behold a man
well experienced; Thou art good (Oh Lord) to them that hope in thee, to the
soul that seeks thee. If any man labor to turn his soul from this good, I
suppose he will judge it no other, then if he saw himself thrust out of
Paradise, and from entrance into glory. This is the same David that answered
the Lord, bidding him seek his face, Thy face, Lord, will I seek. Therefore
nothing is so much to be feared of him, that has once received this benefit,
as that being relinquished of that grace, he be again enforced to go out to
the consolations of the flesh, nay rather the desolations, and again to suffer
the tumults of the carnal senses. In this Contemplation was Augustine, when he
said, That whatsoever he did in the World displeased him. Thirdly, The tokens
of true Contemplation, is, to loath any longer to live in the misery of this
World: Thobias 3.
with Thobias; It is better for me to die then live; with Job, My soul
loatheth my life: Job. 10.1. Romans
with Paul, Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death? also to thirst after the fountain of life with the Prophet, Psalm 41.
As the Heart desiros the water-brookes so my soul longs after thee o God:
with all the mind to retain the love of God and man; to cleave to the only
desire of his Maker; all cares trodden underfoot, burning in desire to see the
face of his Creator. Fourthly, The impediments of Contemplation. As in the eye
of the body three things do hinder the sight of if; so there are three which
do hinder the sight of the eye of the mind. The bodily eye may be sound, yet
if it want the outward light, it sees nothing. It may also have the light
present; and yet some blood or humor falling into it, it may hinder the sight
of it. It may also fall out, that neither of those, I say, neither light nor
health may be wanting; yet some dust may fall into the eye, that may dull the
sight. Therefore, these three, Darkness, Humor, and Dust, hinder the sight of
the body. These things are the same by which the inward sight is hindered; but
they borrow other names, For that which is here called Darkness, is there
called Sin; that which is here called a Humor, is there called the confluence
of the sweetness of sins, running into our me more, as into a certain sink;
and that which is here called Dust, is there called Care of Earthly things.
These three confound the eye of the understanding, and exclude it from the
Contemplation of the true Light: namely, the Darkness of sins, the pleasing
recordation of sins, and the care of Earthly business. With these three
diseases King David complained he was troubled. First, Psalm. 37. Psalm. 32.
The light of my eyes is not with me. Secondly, My bones consume through my
daily complaining. Thirdly, I eat ashes in stead of bread the ashes of Action
for the bread of Contemplation, as Hierome expounds it. Therefore whosoever
directs the eye of his mind to Divine Contemplation, he must labor to
acquit himself of these impediments. Against a threefolde disease, a
threefolde remedy must be had. The first is healed by repentance; the second
by prayer; the third by holy exercises, after the example of Marie, who chose
the one thing that was necessary, sitting at Jesus his feet and hearing his
preaching.

Now the parts of Contemplation may be reduced to these three considerations:
the first appertayning to God; the second to man; he third to the comparison of
visible things with invisible.

1 Of this part which appertains to God are four branches. The first of them
is the admiration of the Divine Majesty; that is to say, that God is one in
essence, and three in persons; that he is the Father begetting; the Son
begotten; and the Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Some; and that,
before all times, and from all eternity. For neither the Father beganue to
beget; nor the Son began to be borne; nor the Holy Ghost began to
proceed: but the Father begetting was from everlasting; and the Some begotten
was from everlasting; and the Holy Ghost proceeding was from everlasting: three
persons and one God. The Father, God alone; the Son, God alone; the Holy
Ghost, God alone: because in the Father is the whole essential perfection of
the Deity; and in the Son is the whole essential perfection of the Deity;
and in the Holy Ghost is the whole essential perfection of the Deity: not
mult^phed according to the number of the persons; but only one, and most
simply one, that is, one in number: else there should be three Gods, as there
are three Persons. In this Contemplation we must remember that we do nothing
except we keep within the limits of Gods Word: for he that searches after the
Majesty, Pro. 25.27.
shall be oppressed of the glory. Here we may comprehend with all Saints, what
is the length, breadth, height, and depth, whereof the Apostle speaks; Ephesians.
3.18.
those four unmeasurable comprehensions and incomprehensible mensurations:
First the length of God, that is, his eternity: Secondly, Bern de con. l. 5.
cap. 3.
the breadth of GOD, that is, his Charity. Thirdly. his height, that is his
power. Fourthly, his depth, that is his wisdom. His length, that has no limit
of place or time: his breadth, that has no bounds of men nor Creatures, Mat. 5
Ephesians. 3.19.
for he hates no thing that he made: He makes his Sun to rise en the good
and the bad; nay his love passes all knowledge: his height, that has nothing
above him; his depth that has nothing below him. So is he Length, for his
eternity; Breadth for his charity; Height, for his Maiestic; and Depth for
his wisdom. Oh most wise Majesty, and Maiesticall Wisdom! Oh most loving
Eternity, and Eternal Charity!

2 The second, is the consideration of the works of God, that is to say of the
Creation, Reparation, and Gubernation. In the Creation, his wisdom, power and
goodness is to be admired. In the Reparation, his Wisdom, Power, Justice,
and mercy. In the Gubernation, his truth, wisdom, justice, mercy, and power.

3 The third, is the admiration of the judgments of God; whereof some are
evident and some hidden. Those revealed, know, and by no means decline from
them. The hidden, because they are too deep, adore and reverence.

4 The fourth, is the recordation and calling to mind of the promised
happiness, and future life: and on the other side, of the endless punishments
of them that receive not Christ.

Of these parts the first will inuit us to the Reverence and Fear of God:
the second, to Love: the third, to Humility; and the fourth, to Faith, Hope,
Patience; and all of them together will inuit us to thanksgiving, by our Lord
Jesus Christ.

The second member of Contemplation, is, concerning Man himself: which that
most famous Apothegme and sentence commends to us, Nosce te ipsum, Know thy
self; which is the one half of all Divinity. Hence Augustine desired no more
of God, but Nouerim me, Nouerime te, That I may know my self, and know thee.
This part, in respect of diversity of States of men, must be distributed into
four orders or degrees. Of which the first, is the state of the first Man,
which is called the state of Innocence. Of this state it is inquired, of whom
thou art created? Of GOD. Where? in the Earthly Paradise. Whence? from the
sl^me of the Earth, and breath of God. What kind? desirous of rule,
reasonable, and of free will and power in himself. How? in the Image of God,
Just, Holy, True, joined to God. To what? to immortality. For what? to worship
God: of which thing the form of Man does admonish us; for thither is the mind
to be directed, whither the countenance is erected. The second, is the state of
the second Man, which is truly called the state of Misery. Adam having fallen
from God, begat such as himself was by his fall, that is to say, miserable,
impure, unjust, damned. Every one that is borne, as Augustine says, is borne
Adam, that is to say, damned, of one damned. The third, is the state of the
third Man; in which Man being fallen is lift up by the hand of God, that is, by
Christ, who being apprehended by faith, reformes, iustifies, and sanctifies
Man: and this is rightly called the state of grace. Of this state preaches the
Gospel of Christ. The fourth, is the state of the fourth Man, that is of
perfect happiness, in which we shall be like unto Christ for ever. Of these
parts, the first commends many things to be contemplated, but chiefly the
nobility and dignity of Man, created in the Image of God, that he might
worship and celebrate God. The second admonishes us of the misery of Man, to
be deplored, into which he fell by his own default and will. The third
commends t^ us the mercy of God, and unspeakable love of the Son of God, to
be meditated with faith and thanksgiving. The fourth stirs up a wonderful
gladness and comfort in the minds of the godly from the hope of promised
salvation, with thanksgiving, and care of godly living.

The third member, is of the comparison of things visible and invisible. And
how sweet this contemplation is, of comparing visible things to invisible,
Heavenly. and spiritual things, no man can sufficiently express. For so has
GOD that most wise Architect framed these visible things, that Man being put
as the Contemplator and beholder in the midst of them, he might lead him, as
by the hand, into the knowledge of things invisible, Heavenly, and spiritual.
In which thing, the most high wisdom, goodness, power, and Majesty of the
Almaker is with admiration beholden, and this to that end, that he might be
acknoledged, glorified, and worshipped of Man whom he created to happiness.
This Contemplation our LORD commends to us with diverse Parables in the History
of the Gospel, signifying not obscurely; That there is nothing visible created
of GOD, which has not some comparison to invisible things, namely, either to
frame aright the manners of men, or to contemplate Heavenly and Spiritual
things; insomuch that whatsoever sensible things are framed by God, are (as it
were) certain Symboles and resemblances of some things, that are not exposed
to our senses. To make this more plain: The fire which we see, is (as it
were) a Symbol and resemblance of the Holy Spirit. For as the fire burns,
insightens, and purges; so the Holy Spirit inflames the hearts, insightens
the mind with the true light, and purges vices. This glorious Sun; is it
not (as it were) the Symbol and representation, not only of the humane
nature, assumpted of the Son of God into an Hypostaticall Union, but also of
the presence of Christ, and his efficacy in the Church? Besides, the nature of
things it self is to us (as it were) a Schoolmaster, chiefly to the
understanding of the Mysteries of Holy Scriptures. What shall I say of the
Figures of the old Testament, by which the things of the new Testament are
shadowed? What means the prohibition of the eating of certain beasts? was
it not for the avoiding of certain properties of theirs, unto them good in
their order, but to us hurtful in the degree of our Dignity? What shall I say
of the Types of the old Covenant and Testament, by which Heavenly, Spiritual,
and eternal things, were signified, offered, and received? In the writings of
Moses, the Prophets, Apostles, and Fathers, many such things are recounted; so
that I need not waste time in giving you any further taste hereof; but conclude
this point with Senecas judgment: Quicquid vides, and quicquid non vides, Deus
est; Whatsoever thou see, and what o^uer thou see not, is God; that is, all
things visible and invisible do express unto thee a Deity, and lead thee, as
by the hand, to contemplate Heavenly, Spiritual, and Eternal things. Thus
then is it true that Divines affirm, That the most High Beatitude and
Felicity is apprehended by contemplation, but perfected by fruition. Whilst we
rise from Meditation to Contemplation, from Contemplation to Admiration, from
Admiration to Al^^nation of mind: by this Contemplation Man is instructed to
righteousness, and consummated to glory. For the grace of Contemplation, as
Bernard says, Bern. de inter. dom^. cap. (...).
does not only cleanse the heart from all mundane love, but sanctifies and
inflames the mind to the love of Heavenly things. He that by Divine
inspiration and revelation is promoted to the grace of Contemplation, has
received certain pledges of that future fullness, where he shall for ever
inherit and rest in eternal Contemplation. But he that would be at leisure
for Contemplation, he must of necessity learn, not only to rest from evil
works, but even from vain c^gitations: else it is, as Bernard says, vacare
corpore, but not vacare cord, to be at leisure in body, but not to be at
leisure in heart. Now as the joy of that multitude of supernall Spirits, is not
only of the Contemplation of the Creator, but in conte^plating the Creatures:
so must ours be, whilst we are under the beggarly rudiments of the World. For
whilst they find God in all his works wonderful, what marvel if every where
in admiring they reverence him, in reuerencing they admire his wonderful
things, whom they so love. Therefore they find not only in the incorporeall
Creatures, but also in the corporeal, whence they may admire, whence they may
worthily reverence the Creator of them. All these things they continually
contemplate, in contemplating admire, and admiring rejoice. They rejoice at the
Divine Contemplation; congratulate at the mutual vision; and admire at the
speculation of corporeal things. Let us learn, contemplating to admire, and
admiring to contemplate, how the Citisens of that Heavenly Kingdom, and
happiness, do without ceasing behold all things that are under them; do
comprehend and see from high the reason and order of all things; how
infinitely they rejoice at their mutual and indissoluble society, and
charity; how insatiably they are inflamed at the vision of Divine Glory and
Brightness. Nothing is more pleasant, nothing more profitable, then the grace
of Contemplation. By how much as thou art more delighted in Contemplation of
Heavenly things, and being delighted do admine; by so much do thou more
willingly stay, more diligently search, more profoundly thou art illuminated.
Ever shall thou find in those things t^ at which thou may admire, and whence
to be delighted. No where is there more plentiful matter of admiring, and no
where more profitable cause of delighting. Therefore in these things let thy
ad^^ration and delectation ever be; nor shall it be needful to seek other
things for these, and to run hither and thither by a vain wandering of
cogitations* for to know God, is the fullness of knowledge; and the fullness of
this knowledge is the fulness of glory, consummation of grace, and perpetuity
of life. To the fullness of this knowledge there is rather need of intimous
compunction, then profound inuestigation; of sighs, then of arguments; of
often lamentations then of copious augmentations; of tears, then of sentences;
of prayer, then of reading; of the grace of tears, then of the knowledge of
letters; rather of the contemplation of heavenly things, then of the occupation
of earthly things.

By this that has been said, it is most evident, how worthy of a Prince and
every good Christian, this divine work of contemplation is, seeing it
brings not only to the knowledge and fullness of all knowledge of God, but
also to the love, reverence, fear, service, and true worship of the true God;
whom to know in Jesus Christ, Io. 17.3.
is life eternal. Yet besides, it will not a little strengthen this conceit,
to consider, that as the most noble and notable creatures are in site, higher;
in light, clearer, in appeara^ce, beautifuller; which we find true in the Sun
and Stars: so those that sit aloft, and would have the name to excel others in
Nobility of virtues, and probitie of manners, ought to be more beautiful in
conversation, more clear in discretion, more high in contemplation. For seeing
all men were framed and created to this end, that they might possess a
perpetual Kingdom, and glory; and all are therefore tied in an equal
Obligation to virtues, which are as the way unto that Kingdom (contemplation
being as it were the life-bloud of all virtues) How can the Prince or great
person think contemplat on unfit for his degree, which only fits him to know,
serve, love God, converse with God, and make him happy.

It is well known that all Philosophers haued: fined true felicity to be no
other thing, then a perfect actio^ in a perfect life according to perfect
virtue. And the judgment of all wise men is, That this felicity consi^s in
contemplating and loving God: which thing indeed is the most excellent and
honorable action; such as is the understanding, of the most excellent and
honorable part of man; such as is the mind, about and concerning the most
excellent and honorable subject, and thing, such as is God himself. Thus
speak^s Aristotle in his Ethick^; and in his Metaphysics adds, That this
action in divine, not only because it wholly unites God to it self by
contemplating and loving him, but also because it does no other thing, but even
that which God himself does, who only does contemplate and love himself;
other thing; by himself; and the other divine minds, which in contemplating
and loving God do move the superior Orbs, that they may beget v^der heaven
that thing, which they see in God is to be begotten: so shall we be like unto
God and the heavenly creatures, if in contemplating and loving God we move our
own Orbs, that is, the powers of the mind, our inward and outward senses, our
members and bodies, to do those things which we do see to shine in God
contemplated and beloved. This is the form of humane felicity. For the mind of
man is like to a rased Table, in which any thing may be painted, ready to be
made all things, and to make all things; God being objected to it, to be
contemplated and loved, it contemplates and loves: and so makes us in some sort
to labor to conform our selves, and our actions, to those exemplarie virtues
we see in God, to whose example we ought to conform all our virtues: And
therefore evermore his example is to be set before us. Hence is that ancient
Proverb, as well of all the Latins as Greeks, celebrated of a good and
virtuous man, Homo homini Deus, Man ought to be God to Man. And therefore
Plutarch explicating this in his book against an unlearned Prince, denies,
That therefore the Saints are not called blessed, because they live most long,
but because they are the Princes of virtues: Which thing our Savior
confirming, has left us this precept: Be perfect as your heavenly Father is
perfect. This perfection, to whose example we ought to institute our selves,
must be, first, either in respect of God, secondly, or of our selves, thirdly,
or of others. First, In respect of God, we must refer all things to the
knowledge and love of him, in all things seeking a more full knowledge and love
of God, carrying him in our minds; and so we should breath, express, pour
out, and ingraue, Matthew. 5.
the Divinity in our minds, words, gest^res, and all our actions, and so are
we Gods to other men. Therefore we shall detest sin, even the least sin,
because God do h detest it, not enforced through fear of punishment, or
allured by any rewards, but inflamed with the love of God; nor shall be cast
down from the place of virtue, by the most bitter sufferings of any torments,
loving God, who of himself is most lovely, albeit he should confer upon us
no good things, but should crush our bodies to pieces by exquisite torments,
alienate all our friends from us, cast us out of house and home, and load us
with ignominies and all discomforts: and we shall make more account of the
least dram of the knowledge and love of God, then of all other good things
besides this, that can be imagined. Secondly, As concerning our selves, we
will strive to love God more then our selves, and so, where need is, we will
spend our lives and all we have, rather then any thing shall be done by us,
whereby any should think, speak, or do concerning him, otherwise then is
fit, albeit no good thing after death should remain unto us, but most hard and
cruel things were of us to be endured for ever. For so shall we be translated
into God, we shall live to God, and God shall live in us, and we shall be most
valiant, and most constant to perform all excellent things, and such and so
divine things, as the sharpness of no sight ever attained unto: And to
conclude, having gotten that worthy temperance, no excess shall rest in us,
which may either weaken the body through lust, or dissipate our substance, or
engender diseases. Thirdly, As touching others, we shall not be thieves,
injurious, envious, slanderers, unjust, such as do butcher and tear in pieces
themselves with their own sins. And seeing God is not so much beloved, as he
does love, seeing he does good, albeit he receive no good from us, 1. Cor. 4.
(for what have we that we have not received?) nay seeing his providence and
care over those that are contumelious and injurious to him: Mat. 5.
therefore the truly-wise man will do good to all, and will overcome evil men
with benefits, and strive to bring them to the knowledge and love of God; and
if they be stubborn, he w^ll not fear to desire God to lay their punishments
on himself, so that they may be brought to God; but if they be past hope, that
then he will smite them, as Peter did Ananias, and Saphira, and as Paul did
Elimas; Act. 5.
and as Simon Magus was at the Apostles prayers. Act. 13.
So then the knowledge and love of God is the rule and measure of all virtue.
This is the perfection and felicity, which contemplation and the love of God
engenders. If then contemplation be that most excellent action of the most
excellent part, the mind; and touching the most excellent subject, God
himself; How can it be but most fit for the most excellent persons, Kings and
Princes?

But amongst all virtues, illustrious persons, and such as are set in the
highest places in this world, seem to have a greater inclination to one more
generous and regal then the rest: and that is Magnanimity: whose nature is to
disdain to cast down himself to abject things, but to perform and procure
the greatest things; of which kind are true and great honors, which is the
proper work also of contemplation, whose labor is not for base and
contemptible things, but for true honors, the Kingdom of God, and the
unspeakable glory thereof. Whence it does manifestly follow, that seeing
nothing in this world is more abject then sin, nor any thing of more
excellency and magnanimity, then virtue; Princes and great ones are much to
be blamed, if they suffer themselves to be overcome of any sin, or do
depart from the more noble life of virtues and contemplation. Yet it is to be
observed, that this virtue of Magnanimity is in this world mightily obscured,
and trodden under foot, by the blindness of men. For albeit many are by nature
magnanimous, yet because they make great account of the prosperities and
honors of this world, forgetting the more sublime and excellent honor of
virtue it self, and chiefly of Fortitude, which consists in this, That a man
do vanquish himself: and also forgetting that most high reward, which in
heaven is prepared for them that give themselves to a spiritual life: Thus
whilst they magnify the things of this world, and are with all their hearts
and strength occupied in them, they disesteem that in which true Magnanimity
consists, namely Virtue, and the contemplation of heavenly things. And they
hence take a pretext and color of this their complacency and worldly
comportment, from the common use and practice of this kind of life, amongst
the most high and noble persons, who (for the most part) ire besotted with
these sublunarie, and base fooleries: nor in the mean time do they observe,
that the truly-wise do laugh them to scorn; even as those most high celestial
Princes, and all the Courtiers of his Court, the least of whom has a greater
regal pomp then all the Caesar's Courts of this brittle world, which only is
(as it were) but a little village, and yet does so delude their understandings.

From this will manifestly arise thus much: That in very deed they are most
abject and unworthy of honor, albeit they are held for great in this world,
who do not exercise all their powers in the spiritual life, and service of
the most high King and God, from whom only they may obtain those so excellent
benefits, which in heart they so much desire. It is also evident, that Princes
and great ones have a greater Obligation to this virtue of Magnanimity, and to
all that proceeds from the same: and therefore it may truly be said, that for
this Obligation and Magnanimity, all doctrine which concerns a spiritual
life, does more appertain to them then to others, whose pusillanimitie and
weakness of mind, does not lift up themselves to desire and procure so
difficult and great matters. Surely, if it be a base thing for Princes and
Great ones to be exercised in gatheting up the small crummes of Sugar, that
fall from the balance: much more abject and base it is to place the mind in
the vain sweetness of delights, and prosperities of this world, seeing hence
does follow not only oblivion, but also the perdition of the most high honor
and glory, for the which was given them that great and generous mind they
have, and that mighty power, and great place they hold. Of all these things,
that most glorious King of the universal, heavenly, and earthly Court, our
Lord Jesus Christ, has given a most, clear example, who offered his most
regal person to innumerable injuries and afflictions for those wonderful
things of heaven; who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross,
despised the shame, Heb. 12.2.
and is set at the right hand of the Throne of God; who also with a mind truly
great and glorious, Mat. 4.10.6.
despised the Kingdoms of this world, when they were offered him.

Surely, I know not by what title or right he will call himself an illustrious
Lord in this world, who spends his life in acquiring the honors of this world,
seeing he may behold his King to desire death, whereby to set him free from the
vaine^ love of mundane honors, and transfer him to heavenly honors. Again,
I know not how he dare number himself amongst great and excellent men, who
lets fall his heart upon things so abject and base, seeing in very truth that
abject things are far distant and unfit for sublime, great, and generous
spirits.

This Magnanimity ought singularly to induce Noble and Heroicke persons never
to commit sin, seeing sin is the most abject and vile thing in this world,
in respect that it is aduersant to the fidelity they owe to God, and vilifieth
them in the sight of God and all good men. Surely, no tongue nor hand of
another man can so affect us with any injury, as our own sins do defile
and shame us, which we daily commit before God, before whom we are ever
present. This Magnanimity also must have this effect in great ones; not to
feel any adversity, from whomsoever it come: seeing it cannot hurt a wise man
any further then he will in his mind estimate it. But a true and magnanimous
esteemer of things, does not reckon any thing for any great evil, which does
not concern the soul: for all the rest, where that is had, must be committed
to oblivion; and where that has past away, it must no more move us, then that
which for the vilitie of it deserves to be committed to forgetfulness. Unto
all these things which I have spoken, great men and Rulers ought to inuit and
move their subjects by all possible means; and that for many reasons: First,
for that the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, did so. Secondly, for that
chiefly, even for this cause, principality and power is given unto them in
the earth, seeing all good government is to this end disposed of God, unto
which good government they stand obliged. Thirdly, for that unto great men is
due a great and excellent society, which cannot be, unless their people be
godly and virtuous. Furthermore, amongst all men, virtue and good life is most
glorious: which things (of a surety) no Preacher can with so great facility,
and such felicity, plant in any Region or Kingdom, as those that govern it,
if they would mark and do the things we houe declared: and those that will
not so do, but think that the study of virtue, religion, and contemplation,
are unsuitable for Princes, and great persons, I may say as the blessed Apostle
says, That they are worse then Infidels. For as the soul and spiritual life
is by so much more lovely, by how much the whole world with the riches thereof
is to be preferred before a basket of dung, as our Lord taught us, who led a
life full of calamities, and died a death full of sorrows and ignominies;
teaching us to live a spiritual life, and little to esteem of this corporal:
so those that are greatest amongst men, ought to choose, and be exercised in,
the greatest and best things, that is, in consummating a spiritual and
heavenly life, contemning the vain glory of this world, as a thing most
unworthy of a generous and magnanimous spirit. If this be the difference
betwixt the two lives, Spiritual and Carnal, then God in mercy open the
understandings of all, both high and low, that they may see their errors, and
choose with Marie the better part, which shall not be taken from them.

23. The fruitful Admonition of Isocrates to Demonicus.
IN many things (Demonicus) we find the judgments of good men to differ
greatly from the nature of the wicked. But the greatest of all is in mutual
conversation, seeing these do reverence and esteem only their friends
present, but those love their friends far absent. Besides, the familiarity
of the wicked, is even in a short time dissolved; but the friendship of good
men, the whole course of an Age does not abolish. Therefore, I being persuaded
that it becomes those desirous of glory and aspiring to knowledge, not to
imitate the evil, but the good have sent unto thee this Oration, for a gift,
which may be an argument of the mutual friendship betwixt us, and a token of
the familiarity betwixt me and Hipponicus: for it becomes the children, as of
the substance, so of the Fathers friendship, to succeed as heirs. Besides, I
perceive also the condition of things to favor us, and also the present time:
for thou do exceedingly desire knowledge, and I bestow all my care in
teaching others; again thou art given to Philosophy, and I bring them on by a
right line, that are going toward it.

Therefore how many soever do write perswasiue Orations to their friends, do
surely endeavor an excellent thing, yet do not take in hand the most noble
part of Philosopie. But those which prescribe unto youth, not by what means to
polish that high kind of pleading, but that as much as belongs to Elegancie of
ma^ners, they may be well and liberally brought up: these by so much the more
do profit their hearers, by how much as those only provoke to the garnishing
of words; but these endue us also with good manners. Therefore we, not
preparing an exhortation, but writing an institution, advise thee what things
a young man is to follow, and what to fly, with whom to converse, and after
what manner the course of life is to be framed: for how many soever have holden
this course of life, those only at length have truly come to virtue, then
which there is no other possession either more honest or more durable: For
Beauty, either Age wears, or Sickness consumes: Riches are rather the
Ministers of vices, then of honesty; as the things which nourish sloth, and
stir up young men to the desire of pleasure. Strength, confirmed with
prudence, may profit without which it brings more discommoditie to him that
has it: and as it adornes the bodies of them exercised, so it casts a
darkness upon the industry of the mind. On the other side, the possession of
virtue, in whose minds soever it shall incorruptly grow up, does only wax
old, being both more worthy then riches, and more profitable then the
splendor of Birth; making such things easy, as others cannot attain;
stoutly sustaining things fearful to the multitude, accounting sloth for a
reproach, but labor for an high praise.

This thing it is easy to learn from the labors of Hercules, and gestes of
Theseus, to whose works that excellent virtue of manners added such an
illustrious note of glory, that not all the passages of Worlds shall ever be
able to obliterate their famous Acts.

For indeed, if thou call to mind thy Fathers endeavors, thou shall have a
domesticke and singular example of those things which I speak of: for so he
framed his life, that he made no small account of Virtue, nor waxed dull with
sloth, but both accustomed his body to labors, and tamed and overcame
dangers with his mind. The same did neither above measure love riches, but
enjoyed the present good things, as a mortal man; again, as not obnoxious to
the chance of Death, neglected not things gotten; nor led his life
sordidely, but was both Honorable and Magnificall, and also to his friends
exposed and enlarged. Those also that followed the study of Letters he more
admired and loved then those of kin unto him: supposing that to the
conjunction of minds Nature was more powerful then Law, manners then kindred,
the choice of life then necessity. And so, to number all his actions scarce
one whole life would suffice: of which yet in a more convenient time we will
resolve a more exact narration.

Now at the least we have delineated Hipponicus his nature howsoever, that
thou may have whereby to compose thy life, as after an example, whilst thou
have his manner instead of a Law, and shall labor to imitate and aemulate thy
Fathers Virtues. For it shall be a dishonest thing, when Painters take every
excellent beast to express to themselves, that young men in like manner should
not imitate their most excellent Parents. I would have thee persuade thy self,
that it nothing becomes Champions better, to prepare themselves against their
adversaries; then thou should take care, that in the same institute of life
with thy Father, thou labor with like praise.

But yet he cannot be so affected in his mind, who shall not be furnished
with various and those most excellent precepts. For as by moderate labor the
body increases; so by Nature it is also ordained, that the mind by speeches
of good profit, should grow up. Therefore I will endeavor to set before thy
eyes compendiously, by what way chiefly (in my opinion) thou must travail to
attain Virtue, and approve thy self unto other mortal men.

1 Therefore observe thou religiously the things that belong to God, as well in
sacrificing, as in keeping thy oath: That is a token of the abundance of thy
riches; this an argument of thy honesty of manners.

2 Do thou ever worship the Divine power; yet most chiefly, as often as the
City does worship: for so shall thou be judged both to please God, by
Sacrifice, and also to defend the Laws.

3 Show thy self such to thy Parents, as thou would have trial of thy
children toward thee.

4 Use exercises, not so much those that promote strength, as those that make
for thy health; which thou shall do if thou cease fom labor, whilst thou art
yet sufficient for labor.

5 Love not vehement laughter, nor give care to things spoken proudly: for
this is the part of a fool, and that, of a mad man.

6 Think that things filthy to be done, are not honest to be spoken.

7 Accustom thy self to show a composed and grave countenance, not sour and
unpleasant; this, will gain thee an opinion of obstinate fierceness; that of
Prudence.

8 Think chiefly, that cleanness, shame fastness, equity, and continency,
becomes thee: by all which the Nature of young men seems to be contained in
their duty.

9 Conceive that never any flagitious thing committed by thee, can be kept
secret: for howsoever it may be kept from others, yet thou shall carry with
thee in thy mind the conscience of that deed.

10 Fear God.

11 Honor thy Parents.

12 Reverence, and esteem thy friends.

13 Obey the Laws.

14 Follow pleasures joined with glory; for that is the most excellent pleasure
that is joined with honesty, without which it cannot want vice.

15 Fear criminations, albeit false: for the vulgar are not moved with any
certain reason, but only with opinion and fame.

16 Persuade thy self that whatsoever thou do, every man sees: for
howsoever thou continually hidest the business, yet hereafter it will come to
light.

17 Wonderfully shall thou be commended, if thou seem not to commit those
things, which thou condemnest in others commiting them.

18 Being greedy of learning thou shall easily know much.

19 The things thou know, conserve with frequent Meditation: the things
thou never learned swallow together with the sciences; for it is no less
offensive to reject a profitable speech, then to despise a gift offered by a
friend.

20 Whatsoever leisure thou shall have in thy life, bestow it in hearing of
precepts: for by this means thou shall not difficultly learn those things,
which with great labor have been excogitated and invented by others.

21 Conceive that many documents are more worth then great riches: for these
quickly waste, but those last for all times. For Wisdom only before other
possessions escapes mortality.

22 Doubt not to take, though a long journey, to Masters that profess to teach
any profitable thing: for where Merchants pass so many and vast Seas to
increase their little substance gotten; shall it not be a filthy thing, if a
young man neglect to travail an earthly journey, to the end to beautify his
mind?

23 Be gentle in manners, affable in words: It is the part of humanity, to
speak to those we meet; of affability, to use familiar speech with them.

24 Show thy self facile to all: yet use the best. So shall thou not be odious
unto them, and unto these thou shall be dear.

25 Have not often speech with the same men: nor prolixe speeches of the same
things; for there is a satietie of all things.

26 Of thine own accord take upon thee labors, that being enforced thou may
be sufficient to bear them.

27 Moderate all those affections, under which to lie men count it vicious;
namely Lucre, Anger, Pleasure, Sorrow: which thou shall do, if thou count it
gain whereby to promote thy estimation, not whereby to flow in wealth.

28 Exercise not Anger more sharply upon the delinquent, then as thou would
have others to assay against thy sins.

29 In time or prosperity know it is an uncomely thing to command servants,
and to be a servant to pleasures. In adversity, behold other men's calamities,
and call to mind thou art a man.

30 Keep more diligently thy word, then money left in thy custody: for it
becomes a good man to perform manners, more certainly then any oath.

31 I would thou should think it is no less consequent, to derogate faith
from the wicked, then to have faith to the good,

32 Reveal secrets to no man; except it be expedient, both to thee that art
the speaker, and to the hearer, that those things be published.

33 Take an oath offered thee, for two causes: either to acquit thy self of
of a filthy crime, or to defend thy friend in danger.

34 Swear not at all for moneys sake; no, not if thou should swear rightly
and justly, for to some thou shall seem to forswear, to others, to be sick
of the disease of Auatice.

35 Receive no man into the number of thy friends, before thou know how he
used his former friends. For think, he he will be such to thee, as he
showed himself to others.

36 Slowly contract friendship; but being once made a friend, defend it. For it
is alike vicious, often to change friends, as to have no friend at all.

37 Try not friendship by detriments and losses; nor yet be thou
unexperienced of their faith. This shall be done, if thou feignest thou have
need of their help, when thou have no need.

38 Communicate those things, which may be eliminated and cast abroad, as if
they were secrets: for if thou sail in thy opinion, thou shall find no
disco^moditie; Again, if the thing fall out as thou would, thou shall have
their manners more approved.

39 Try thy friends by the miseries that make incursion into thy life: and
from the constant society in dangers. For as Gold is tried in the fire, so are
friends known by adversity.

40 Most fitly and commodiously use thy friends; if at any time need require,
thou shall help them of thine own accord, not expecting their obtestation and
entreaty.

41 Think it equally flagitious, to overcome thy enemies with the Talion, and
like return of injuries, as to be overcome of thy friend with benefits.

42 Commend those friends, not only which are sorry for thy ill, but also
those that do not envy thy good: for many, albeit they condole their friends
affliction with adverse fortune; yet envy them that use a prosperous fortune.

43 Make mention of thy absent friends amongst thy present friends, that thou
may seem also to have care of those when they are absent.

44 Let thy habit be neat, not ouerrich, curious or costly. In neatness is
Magnificence: in elaborate work is too much curiosity.

45 Love not the supervacanuous possession of goods gotten, but the moderate
use.

46 Contemn those which are diligent to gather riches, but cannot use them:
for their condition is not much unlike his, that possesses a generous horse,
himself being an ill horseman.

41 Give diligence to get riches, partly to possess, partly to use; in using
they shall be to him that knows to enjoy; in possessing, to him that knows
to use.

48 For two causes make much of thy substance gotten; as well that thou may
acquit thy self of a great mulct, as also help thy virtuous friend in time
of calamity. In the rest of thy life love nothing exceedingly, and riches
moderately.

49 Embrace things present yet enquire after better things.

50 Vpbraid no man his misfortune: for chance is common, and the event of
future things is uncertain.

51 Do good unto the virtuous: for the names of grace and favor are a
beautiful treasure to a good man.

52 If you affect the wicked with benefits, expect the same thing that they
do, which give meat to strange dogs: for indifferently they bark at giuers,
as well as at strangers. So the wicked affect with injury, as well those of whom
they have received benefits, as those that hurt them.

53 Hate flatterers, as also impostors: for both of them are injurious to those
that believe them.

54 If thou assent not to thy friends gratifying thee in a nefarious thing and
of wicked example, thou shall never have them that will repugne thee, striving
to do honorable and worthy acts.

55 Be affable to such as come to thee, not sour: for even slaves and drudges
will scarce bear the superciliousnesse of the proud; but that gentleness of
manners, is to every one most acceptable. And thou shall be gentle, if thou be
neither litigious nor froward, nor a wrangler in any thing: if neither thou do
too sharply oppose thy self against the anger of them with whom thou have to
do, albeit they be angry without cause; but so far give place to the fierce
till their minds being composed and settled, thou shall chastise them.

56 Handle not serious occasions in ridiculous things, nor in serious things
follow sportes, for whatsoever is intempestiue, is every where vnsavourie.

57 Place not thy benefits beyond deserts, which chances unto the vulgar sort,
which that they may do, yet unwilling do help their friends.

58 Be not quarrellous; for it is a grievous thing; nor take a pleasure in
reproving, for this begets anger.

59 Chiefly shun the occasion of drinking: but if the time require it rise
before thou be drunk. Fore the mind oppressed with drunkenness, is not
unlike the Chariot that has cast her driuer: for as it is violently carried
headlong destitute of a guide; so the mind, when the power of reason is
corrupt, does often impinge and dash against the rock.

60 Express the condition of the immortal, by moderately enjoying things
gotten.

61 Think dexterity in doing things so much to excel unskillfulness, by how
much as all men, who follow other advantages and short courses, do wickedly;
but besides also run into loss, instituting any thing unluckily: for often,
whom they have in words offended, to them they do indeed pay punishment.

62 See thou think and speak Honorably, amongst such as are the messingers
betwixt you, of such as thou would make thy friends; for praise is a sign
of friendship; dispraise, of grudge.

63 When thou shall take counsel, make cases past the examples of future
things: for whatsoever is obscure, shall most spedily be known by that which
is manifest.

64 Slowly consult; but the things thou haft once determined, speedily execute.

65 Think that the greatest gift we have from God, is prosperity; and from
our selves, Prudence.

66 The things thou fear franckly to profess, and yet would communicate
them with some friend; see thou frame thy speech as of some other thing: for so
shall thou both know their opinion, and shall not openly bear thy self.

67 If thou will consult with any of things belonging to thy self, first
consider how he has managed his own affairs: for he that has not handled
his own business prudently, will scarce ever conceive well of other men's.

68 So shall thou be much inflamed to take counsel, if thou obseruest what
calamities Temeritie and Rashness bringes forth: So have we the chiefest care
of our health, as often as we call to mind the sorrows that sickness
brought us.

69 Imitate the manners of Kings, and follow their studies; for so shall thou
seem both to approve and aemulate them. In which respectt thou shall be
commended with the vulgar, and also obtain the more constant favor of Kings.

70 Obey the Laws made by Kings, whose manners are to be had in esteem for
most strong laws. For as he that lives in a popular State must observe the
people: so who lives under a Monarchy, ought to have the King in admiration.

71 Having obtained Magistracy, use no man that is of known improbitie, in
the administration of things: for whatsoever fault he commits shall be
ascribed to thee.

72 Depart from public offices, more glorious, not more rich: for to be
praised of the vulgar is more woth the^ great riches.

73 Neither thrust thy self into a wicked business, nor yet patronize it, for
thou shall be thought to commit such things thy self, as thou do favor
others committing them.

74 So behave thy self, that thou may receive more then just, yet content to
have born that is equal, that they may see thee follow justice, not because
thou can not, but because equity does so require.

75 Prefer just poverty before riches unjustly gotten: for justice does so
much excel riches, by how much as these only help the living, but that
begets glory, even to the dead. The use of these is common to the wicked; but
it is denied the wicked to come near that.

76 Imitate no man that uses ill acts, but rather embrace those that suffer
detriment in a just cause: for the just man, albeit in nothing else, yet in a
good life excels the unjust.

77 Be busily employed in the things that belong to the life of all men; yet
chiefly adorn thy wit by exercise: for in the least things, viz. in man's
little body, a good mind is the greatest thing.

78 Strive earnestly thus far; That thy body may be desirous of labor, and
thy mind of learning: that by this thou may execute what thou determinest,
and by that, foresee what is fitting.

79 Whatsoever thou will speak, ponder first with thy self: because many men's
tongues runs before their wits.

80 Think that no humane thing is perpetual or stable: so shall thou neither
be transported with joy in prosperity, nor cast down with sorrows, when
fortune plays the stepmother.

81 Propose unto thy self two times of speaking, the one of things well known
to thee; the other of necessary things. For in these only it is better to
speak then be silent; in others much better to have been silent, then to have
spoken.

82 If any good befall thee, it is lawful to rejoice; if evil things, thou
must moderately sorrow.

83 Take heed thou do not utter thy self to others, albeit in another man's
business; for it is absurd to keep thy treatures shut up at home, and in
public to have thy opinion disclosed.

84 Fear infamy more then danger: for ignorance ought to be no less
fearful to the good, th^^ death to the wicked.

85. Chiefly, choose to thyselfe a secure life: but if at any time thou be
brought into danger, demand thy safety from high, not with spotted fame, but
with excellent glory. Surely, fatal necessity has proposed to all men once
to die: but honestly to depart from this life is from Nature granted unto good
men by a certain privilege.

Nor ought it to seem strange to thee, if of these aforesaid, some do less
agree to thy present age (for I am not ignorant of that) seeing I had a purpose
in the same work, to draw forth counsels for thy present life, and to leave
documents for time to come. The use whereof as thou may easily learn, yet
thou shall hardly find such, as from the heart will so counsel thee.
Therefore least thou should desire the rest of some other men, but might
from hence as from a storehouse draw them; I have thought it my duty to omit
nothing, whereby I might give thee counsel. Surely I shall think I have
received a great favor from God, if I fail not of that opinion, I have
conceived of thee. For even as we see many more affected with dainties, then
wholesome meats: so there are that rather apply themselves to their friends,
infected with the same contagion of vices, then to such as do rightly admonish
them. In which things thou do plainly seem to me, to be affected after a
contrary manner, by an argument of thy industry which thou have adhibited in
the rest of thy institution. For he that prescribes to himself to do the best
things, it is very likely he will not despise those that exhort him to virtue.

And chiefly thou shall be enkindled to desire virtue and honesty, if thou
shall learn, that most truly at the length we have those pleasures which
these do bring forth. For in sloth, is desire of ingurgitation, and gluttony:
there is grief together joined with pleasure; but the labor and moderate
institution of life, that is placed in acquiring virtue, brings unto us sincere
and double permanent oblectation: and there we first feel the pleasure, and
after are sorry, but here even from the labor, we enjoy the sense of
pleasure. Besides, in every the sense of pleasure. Besides, in every thing we
are not so mindful of the beginning, as we are affected with the sense of the
end; for many things, that fall out in our lives, we take not in hand for the
things themselves, but for the fruit we hope from thence.

Call to mind the crew of the wicked, who are not wont to do but obliuious
things, and of no moment, as (forsooth) having chosen this kind of life to
themselves from the beginning. On the contrary, Virtue cannot be neglected of
good men, except they will incur the reprehensions of many. For all men do
no otherwise hate the openly delinquent, then those that do belie integrity
of life: in the mean time not differing from the vulgar; and not without
cause. For where we reject those that do but lie in their words, shall we not
confess them to be evil, that in their whole life are altogether aberra^t?
Surely, we will say, that such men by good right are not only delinquent
against themselves, but even traitors of their own fortune, as that which
has betrayed (as it were) in their hands, riches, estimation, and friends: and
themselves unworthy of their present felicity.

And if it be lawful for a mortal man to search into the mind of the Gods, I
suppose they would make plain in their own children, how they are affected
toward the wicked and the good. Jupiter, who begot Hercules and Tantalus (as
fables speak and is the constant opinion of all men) endued the one with
immortality for his virtues, and afflicted the other with most grievous
punishments for his sins. By which examples we ought to be inflamed to covet
honesty, and so not only to insist upon the things whereof we have spoken, but
also to learn all the best sentences of Poets, and to mark the sayings of
other wise men, if they have spoken any thing profitably. For as the Be sits
on all flowers (as we see) drawing profitable things from every one: so
whosoever affects learning, ought to be ignorant of nothing, but every where
gather that may profit him: for even scarce by this diligence shall he
overcome the errors of Nature.

The Institution and Description of a good Prince, from the Panegyricke of C.
Plinius to Traian the Emperor.
CHAP. I. Of a good Prince, and who he is.
1HE is a good Prince, under whom it is lawful (without danger) to inueigh
against wicked Princes.

2 Domination and Principality are diverse in natures; nor is a Prince more
acceptable or gracious to any others, then such as hate, and are aggrieued at
Lordship and Servitude.

3 There is no blessing of God toward mortal men more excellent and
beautiful, then a Prince that is chaste, holy, and most like unto God.

4 The true praise and fame of a Prince is not propagated by Images and
Statues, but by benefits and virtue.

5 This is the commodity of great Empires, in that more people may live in
peace under them: and the things that are in several Provinces most high and
profitable, may be perceived and inioyed of the other Provinces of the same
Kingdom; And to conclude, the scarcity of one Province may be helped by
another.

6 All kind of men rejoice when the Prince is good.

7 Neither can the felicity of a Commonwealth be without the felicity of a
good Prince: nor shall the happiness of this be ever stable, without the
commodity and happiness of the commonwealth.

8 It is more honorable for the memory to come, to be called a good Prince,
then a happy: for that is of virtue; but this of fortune.

9 A good Prince (that the people may honor him) must arm, and diligently
perform all the parts of his office; and despise no parts of it: for he that
disdains his own duty, makes himself contemptible, and will be thought to be
an Idol, and no Prince.

CHAP. 11. The manners of a good Prince.
1IN a good Prince there ought to be a heap of all virtues.

2 The Prince, as he must know himself to command men, so he must know that
himself also is a man: then the voices, titles and praises which are due only
to the divine power, he shall hate as most filthy assentations.

3 In a good Prince three virtues are chiefly commended: Pretty, Temperance,
and Mansuetude of mind.

4 Affability also is the greatest virtue of a Prince, and the best part of
mansuetude.

5 The liberality of the Prince toward the poor does much commend him.

6 Secret accusers, complainants, and picke-thankes, that do it publicly,
(the most pestilent and most insidious, false and dangerous kind of men) are
of a good Prince not only to be punished, but taken out of the way.

7. Such as the Prince is, such are the rest of the Citizens.

8 At the Tables of Princes, there must be seen sobriety in meat; sweetness
in speech; a gentle inuitation of guests; and honor of fludies: no petulancy,
obscenitie, sauciness, malapert impudency of words.

9 Also proceritie and hight of body, and dignity of speech, does much
commend the Prince with the vulgar.

10 No Courtiers are less to be believed of a good Prince, then those who
against the public fame secretly instill wicked whisperings into him of any
man: for one may safelier believe all men, than is, Fame; then several men,
that is, these.

11 He is the best Prince, that has the most holy, and piously instituted
family, and attendants: for not only the Prince himself ought to be holy;
but also his Retinue, Train, and Court ought to be such.

12 It is the chiefest work of a good Prince, to procure to himself good
friends, which he ought to cherish and hear: And therefore let him choose good
men.

CHAP. III. Election of a good Prince.
1IT is of much consequence, that a good Prince be lawfully, and with solemn
invocation of the Divine power, chosen or received: for that thing does
exceedingly commend him to the vulgar. It is the best praise of a Princes
predecessor, to have chosen or left a good successor.

2 The Prince receives with a good conscience, the government brought to him,
who goes to it, and performs it with a mind only of preserving the Citizens:
and whom the profit and voice of the Commonwealth, and not his own private
commodity calls and inuites.

3 So long ought the government and life it self to be dear unto a good
Prince, as by him the Commonwealth may be safe and sound.

4 The first entrance of the Prince into his Cities, ought to be joyful and
festival: and then a Congiarie, gift, and benefit to be given to the people.

CHAP IIII. His Actions in general.
1MEn do auspicate and enterprise nothing aright, nothing wisely, without the
help and counsel of the immortal God, therefore the beginning of all their
actions must arise from prayer.

2 That which being done does greatly please, did also please before it was
done. Therefore by this means, the mind and will of the Prince, before hid,
is discovered.

3 It is the part of a good Prince, as well to amend the things peccant in the
Tents, as at home in the Court.

4 Few are of that excellent disposition, that they measure not desire, or fly
from that which is unseemly and honest, according as it is profitable or
unprofitable for them. Whence it comes to pass, that in taking politic
counsels, as well public as private, profit is of great force. Yet we must
see and take he^d, that in them profit do not overcome true honesty.

5 The life of a good Prince, is the censure and Law of the Citizens; and that
perpetual: for all conform themselves to it.

6 It is the duty of a good Prince, most sincerely and most readily, to
determine right, betwixt his subjects, but chiefly amongst the Provinces
differing amongst themselves.

7 A good Prince ought to restore the dead studies of good letters, and to
affect the learned with rewards; and also to take care that the youth be in
them well instituted.

8 It is the duty of a good Prince, to have care, that the Iournies, Ports,
and Commercies, in the whole Kingdom be safe and free.

9 It is the duty of a good Prince to provide for victual; and if any Region
subject to him, be pressed with scarcity, to relieve it.

10 A good Prince must rather defend, and restore public works, then to
build his own private.

11 It is the duty of a good Prince to restore noble families collapsed, and
to cherish and increase those, that have or are well deserving of the
commonwealth.

12 A military Prince is to be chosen, that both his subjects, and forrainers
through the fear of him, may quietly be-contained in their duty.

13 There is the worst military State, where the care of Arms is translated
from the hands to the eyes: from labor to pleasure: and in military
exercises, not any of the Veterans and old seruitors to assist and govern, but
some Graeculous Master and smatterer.

14 That the Prince be Military, he must much and often be in dangers in the
wars, himself: for so shall he be most skillful in Military discipline.

15 It is the duty of a good Prince, so to give Arms to Soldiers, that they
may use them against himself, if he offend against the Commonwealth.

CHAP. V. The authority of a good Prince.
1 LEt not a good Prince permit himself to forbid that which the Senate
commands to be done.

2 God has not given power and government to the strongest, as amongst beasts,
so among men: therefore the authority of Kings is commended and established by
virtue and justice, not by violence and strength.

3 The innocence of the Prince and the goodwill of the subjects, are his most
faithful keepers and guard.

4 Even the greatest Prince is by his oath, as the obliged Officer of the
Commonwealth; and is less then the whole Commonwealth or Kingdom.

5 A good Prince is not above the Laws: but the Laws are above a good Prince.

CHAP. VI. The Exchequer of a good Prince.
1 LEt the Prince make an account with his Commonwealth, and render an account
to it, of his receipts and expenses.

2 Under good Princes it is neither lawful, by all means to increase the
public treasure, nor yet the exchequer of the Prince. But if the Exchequer
invade or occupy what is not his own, it must be granted to take a course
against it, by like right as against other Citizens.

3 The Exchequer is never poor, or never any evil cause thereof, but under a
good Prince: for many urge ever the commodities of the Exchequer, chiefly
under tyrannical Kings.

4 Those that are free, take it ill, if any of their Fathers inheritance be
drawn from them by the Exchequer, as a twentieth part: therefore that tribute,
or suchlike extraordinaries imposed, must be remitted.

5 When any thing is given by the Prince, whereof no evident reason can be
yielded; it is to be thought rather ambition, vanting, prodigality, and
wastfull riot, then the Princes liberality.

CHAP. VII. Under a good Prince, what kind of Counsailers.
1 IN him that is Counsailor to a Prince, are three things chiefly required:
Liberty, Faith, and Truth.

What kind of Government.

2 The Prince does ill provide for the Commonwealth, when he procures
impunitie to those Prefects of Provinces or other gowned or warlike
Magistrates, that through malignitie or negligence, do live ill in their
Offices: but to them that do uprightly discharge their Duties conferres no
reward: for by this means he makes those worse, and these more slow to do
well.

3 Then most truly may it be judged, whether a man have deserved his Honor,
or no, after he has gotten it. For Magistracy argues what a man is, yet are
those prudently to be judged and examined before, to whom Honors are to be
commended.

What care of the people.

4 A good Prince ought to converse with his Subjects, as with his own Children:

5 A good Prince does but in vain study to defend the Commonwealth, or hope
that he can, if he neglect the people: even as a Head, wanting a Body, is
ready presently to fall.

6 The Prince does chiefly experience his Subjects minds, and binds them unto
him by beneficence.

7 The Prince is never deceived of any, unless he first himself have
deceived others.

What kind of liberty of the people.

8 Under good Princes there are some rewards of Virtue, which are in liberty;
and it is profitable to be an honest man. But on the contrary, under ill
Princes, it is hurtful to be a good man, or to be so accounted.

9 Men do complain almost of no Prince less, then of him, of whom it is most
lawful; because the life of those Princes is wont to be most honest, which
grant that liberty to the people.

10 Under a good Prince, it is lawful for every man to retain, and safely to
keep their own things, albeit they be magnificall, opulent, and rich:

11 Under a good Prince, there is that aemulation of Prince and People,
amongst themselves, that they contend which shall love others most.

12 The Prince must not hold any man about him against his will: for a man's
liberty is more worth to every man, then power

13 That which is sufficient for the Prince cannot be but too much for private
men.

CHAP. VIII. Of a Tyrant: and who he is.
1 IT is the custom of Tyrants, to call the public businesses, of greater
moment, to themselves alone; but consult and detain the Senate or public
Council, accustomed to advise of these things, and who otherwise should
consult, in frivolous questions and things of no moment.

2 Tyrants, by how much more praised for their true virtues, by so much do
think their vices vpbraided, and therefore themselves scorned: whence they
grow angry.

3 It is the Tyrants custom to hate those, whom the people or Senate as well
deserving of him commends and loves.

4 It is more safe for every noble and great man, to have a Tyrant angry with
him, then flattering and propitious, viz. dissembling.

5 It is the Tyrants custom whatsoever any Subject has that is good,
excellent, and beautiful, whether it be in things of the soil or of his
own proper right, to occuple and retain to himself.

6 The only crime of treason, is the singular crime of them, without fault:
for by this pretext, even the best men are overthrown of their servants.

7 Even those that make wicked Princes, do themselves hate wicked Princes,

8 There is no time, no place, where the Ghostes of funestious, cruel and
detestable Princes, can rest from the curses of Subjects and Posterity.

9 In the things that are well done by an ill Prince, not the thing or deed,
but the Author of the fact displeases.

10 All the whole Age of proud Princes is but short, and subject to various
dangers.

Now to conclude all: who shall not take profit by the many sweet instructions
which this Book tendreth him, may justly with hearts grief Complain as every
vn-fortunate Courtier does. Whose sorrow I feelingly thus express.

Contriui misere miser Tot annos,
Gustando mala, gratias agendo;
Sperando; ingenueque seruiendo;
Tempus terendo, p^ssima ferendo.
Tantorum mihi praemium laborum
Sunt sero sapere and poenitere.
I wretched, wretchedly have spent thus many years in vain,
Receiving wrongs, and giving thanks, the hapless Courtiers baine;
Hoping yet still, and serving those ingenuously, I served;
Lossing my time, bearing much grief, for all my service starued.
Of all these labors, all reward is this; that I have gained
Late to be wise, and to repent that thus my soul was stained.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 22. read, shall, for so all. Page 58. servants for service. Page 69.
writings, for writing. Page 79. ingenious, for ingenuous. Page 83. Counsails,
for Counsailers. Page 109. (...), for (...). Page 122. off, is wanting. Page
128. and, for it. Page 166. foliati, for pliciti. Page 167. superannated, for
superanuated. Page 188. argumentations, for augmentations. Page 210. he, is too
much. Page 212. superuacaneous, for superuacanuous. Page 212. goods for Gods.
Page 216. what, too much. Page 221. obuious, for obliuious. Page 222. into, for
in. Page 222. shall make, is wanting in the second line. Page 227. baine, for
gain.


