GOODNESS; The blessed man's Badge: OR Gods Character stamped on man's Conscience.

In two Sermons before the most excellent Prince Charles.

By Richard Myddleton his Highness Chaplayne.

Psalm. 145.9. The Lord is good to all, and his mercies are over all his works.

Aug. It is the sum of all Religion, to imitate him thou do worship.

LONDON: Printed by Nicholas Oaks, 1619.

TO THE NOBLE and Virtuous Lady, the Lady Olyffe Stapylton, the continuance of
all graces here, and the fruition of eternal happiness in Heaven.
Right worthy Lady:
Give me leave, I beseech you, to present your better Worth with this low
addressement of my love. Little, I confess, is the value of paper presents,
and of so much the less account, by how much our age has made the number of
books to be the medicine or purgation of idle or distempered brains; and
medicine, I wish that truly I might have styled it.

But books, which should be as Apothecaries shoppes, and wise Physicians
storehouses, furnished with all manner of remedies for sick and diseased
Souls, are many times, banes to the Souls and pests to the bodies of the
readers, whilst the subjects handled in them, are fitter to be suppressed then
printed.

Mine, I dare not commend to be such as it should be, because it is maine: but
thus much I presume to warrant, that had the worthiness of the matter been so
happy to light in a hand, skillfull to discipher the true price and precious
value of that good man which is the ground of my discourse, I might rightly
have said of it, as the good king spoke of Goliahs sword, 2. Sam. 21.9.
there is none to that, give it me.

The least birds have ever the sweetest voices, and this small grain of
goodness, which is the All of man, thus hammered out into all the fair
wreaths of golden graces to adorn the Soul, will (I doubt not) find
acceptance with all sorts, who are not altogether auerse from goodness, loving
the foolish new fangled dressings of the vain world better, then the grave and
rich ornaments of a sanctified Soul.

To your Ladishippe is this labor due from me, who have been long acquainted
with as great a measure of goodness in you, as I shall ever hope again to
find in any. Your godly patience in great, and greatest extremities, your
sweet and discreet deportments, your virtuous disposition to all goodness,
your labor to perform that which is the Soul of all Religion, even
goodness, which is all that is desired of a man, has encouraged me to
dedicate this good Man, or man of goodness, to your goodness, as not thinking
it fit to divorce those so happily joined together.

Wherein forgive me Madam, I pray, this error in joining a dead and imaginary
man to a living and a gracious Lady, which I could not avoid, being
disappointed of such a living man for such a Woman. Yet doubt I not, such is
your noble disposition, but that which once had the gracious ear of a most
Godly, and excellent Prince to entertain it, shall gain the noble and loving
hand and heart of a virtuous Lady, to well-come it; and then have I my desire,
though the tooth of envy bite never so deep.

Howsoever it fall out, this I have adventured on for the common good, but
chiefly for the freeing of my self in part from the just imputation of
vnthankefullnesse, who owing so much respect to your Ladishippe, must crave to
have this little piece of Coin laid up in your Closet, as an
acknowledgement of a greater debt. In the mean time, I shall ever pray, that
your Ladyshippe may have the hope of the Saints who live, and the happiness of
the righteous diseased who rest from their labors; which with all Earthly
blessings conducing thereunto, our good God for his mercies sake in Christ
assure and multiply upon you, and yours to the full, a upon him who will ever
be

Your Ladyshippes true friend to command, Richard Myddleton.

GOODNESS, The blessed man's Badge.
PRO. 29.22. That, that is to be desired of a man is his goodness, or the
desire of a man is his kindness.


AS there are various and diverse rendrings of these words, so there are
diverse conclusions arising from them. For first, some read them thus, (...).2
as to do good from the heart: and what can be gathered hence, but that rich
and great men ought to be good men above all others? Secondly, Concupiscentia
hominis, misericordia eius; Gods mercy is man's desire; referring the Pronoune,
his, unto God, of whom Salomom had spoken before: man desiring nothing in the
world so much, as to have God to be merciful to him: and what can be gathered
hence, but that it is the Lords mercy we are not consumed? Lam. 3.22
Thirdly, some thus: Desiderium hominis est misericordia eius; The desire of
man is to have mercy on others: referring the Pronoune, his, unto man. For man
ought above all things to delight in mercy to man; Mat. 9.13
seeing our Savior says, I will have mercy, not sacrifice; and commands man
to be merciful, Luke 6, 36
as our heavenly Father is merciful. And very just it is, that those who have
received much mercy, show much unto others: and having an hundred thousand
talents forgiven them, (...) 8, 24
should forgive an hundred pence to others. And what can be gathered hence, but
that there is no good in him that is not merciful? Fourthly, Ierom and others
collect this sense; Dido, Non ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco, My own
wounds have taught me to consider others woes. And what can be gathered hence,
but that there is most true goodness, where are least goods? But the best
sense is, that goodness, that is to say, to live holily and godly, and to do
good to others, is the whole duty of man: Eccl. 12
as the wise Preacher has well expressed it, Fear God and keep his
commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.

Albeit I may seem at the first blush, to have laid my foundation in a barren
soil, since goodness has so little ground in this world; yet I will labor
to bring timber and materials out of my Text, to make the building, though not
very beautiful, yet (I am sure) very profitable, which is the scope of my
project in this little frame.

The structure of which little building stands upon four columns or pillars.
world desires of a man, is his goodness. For first, all that our good God for
all his goodness to us desires at our hands, is but goodness. Secondly, all
that the Angels desire of us, is but goodness. Thirdly, what all men desire of
us, is but goodness. Fourthly, what our selves desire of our selves, is but
goodness. Fifthly, what all the creatures of the world do desire of us, is but
goodness. The fourth pillar, is the reason, enforcing this most excellent
duty of goodness. And in the Text, I find six veins of persuasion full of
pregnant reason to enforce it. The 1. is, Facilitas officij, The facility of
the duty: in that it is but one duty, in which all other duties are performed.
The 2. is, Necessitas officiij, The necessity of the duty: the bond and
obligation whereby we are tied to do this duty unto all: namely, to God, to
the holy Angels, to all men, to our selves, and to the creatures; to all which
we are by many and many obligations bound, but unto God in an infinite
obligation: in that he says, that, that is to be desired of a man. The 3. is,
Modus officij, The manner of the seeking of this duty at our hands: it is
desired, besought, entreated, begged, by all sweet means sought for: whereas,
it might have been commanded. The 4. is, Tempus officij, The time when this
duty is to be performed. It is even now to be desired, whilst we live
here, whilst we are in health, whilst the voice of the Turtle is heard in
our Land, whilst we enjoy these many and unspeakable blessings of peace,
plenty, and the running over of our cup. The 5. is, Familiaritas offieij, The
familiarity and naturalnesse of the duty, seeing goodness is such, as that no
creature, (much more man) but has a particular goodness in it self. Lastly,
Excellentia officij, The dignity and excellency of the duty: in that he said,
quod, that, even that excellent duty of goodness, and nothing else but that,
not power, honor, riches, wisdom, knowledge, and the like, but goodness.

If I might be so happy to lead your worthy and prudent eyes to behold all the
rooms of this little frame at this time, I should rejoice: if not, I will
leave the rest to cast your gracious eyes upon, when you please to come this
way next.

The first column or pillar is the duty it self, Bonitas, and practiced of so
few. To which I will add a fourth quaere, An sit bonitas, Whether there be any
such thing as goodness, and where it is to be found.

The first is quid, Ber.
says, that it is Maximum in minimo, The greatest thing that can be, in the
least room that can be. For in the heart of a good man, which is a very little
thing, is found a good conscience, which is the greatest thing in the world.
And herein, it is contrary to the event of them that dig for precious mines
of gold and silver, for they find Minimum in maximo, a little gold or silver
in a great lump and mass of lead, or other met tall. But in the heart of a
good man, that is so little, it will not give a Kite his breake-fast, is
Maximum in minimo, The greatest thing that can be, in the least room that can
be; that is, a good conscience, goodness it self, that delights both God and
man. Therefore no marvel seeing goodness so great, if it hardly get into so
narrow a room as man's heart.

But I must tell you what this goodness is. We may say of goodness, as the
learned say of God: that he only can be known Per viam remotionis: namely,
that he is not the heaven, nor the earth, nor the Angels, nor the spirits, nor
any thing that we see: so goodness it is not Majesty and power, it is not
riches and pleasure, it is not birth or beauty, it is not prudence and
knowledge, nor is it any thing whereof we have most plenty, though it be more
worth then all these greatnesses: But we may say of it truly, Genesis 19, 20
as Lot said of Zoar, Is it it not a little one, and my soul shall live? I
will then adventure to say, that goodness is a virtue, whereby we communicate
to others, all the good things that are in us, or belong unto us, for their
good. This definition, I grant, is too narrow for goodness, for it deserves a
larger room then definitions afforde: yet if I should enlarge it never so
much, I should scarcely get any one within the ring of it.

Now this goodness does either respect the body, or the mind. Goodness
concerning the mind or soul of man, is to labor, partly by counsel, partly
by example of life, to gain the soul of our brother to god: and to this
goodness, are these actions required. 1. To admonish the unruly. 2. To comfort
the distressed. 3. To bear with them that are weak. 4. To be patient toward
all men. Of these four Saint Paul has given us these precepts. 5. 1. These.
5, 14
To chastise the obstinate. 6. To pray for all men of what condition soever.
According to that old verse; Consule, castiga, solare, remitte, fer, ora.
Goodness respecting the body, consists in many actions. Namely in those four
which our Savior commands, to feed the hungry, Mat. 25, 35, 36 2. Sam. 2 Deuteronomy.
15; 7, 8.
cloth the naked, lodge the stranger, visit those sick and in prison. 5. To
bury the dead. 6. To lend liberally and freely to the decayed and imprisoned.
All six duties included in this verse: Visito, poto, cibo, redimo, tego,
colligo, condo. So then we see what this goodness is, and in what and how
many actions it stands. First then, if you ask me wherein we must show this
goodness: I answer, in all the gifts and graces of body and mind, 1. Ioh. 3
in our temporal goods and lives also, if need so require. Secondly, if you
ask me, why we must show this goodness. I answer: because we are all
members of one body; and stand in need of mutual help and comforts, Ph. 4
without which, neither the body, nor members could continue in any perfect
health.

But I may go a degree or two higher, and do no injury unto goodness. And
then I may say, that it is fully contained and expressed in these two words:
Pietas, and Probitas, piety and honesty. That, is exercised in divine things:
this, in humane. These are the two golden pillars of all goodness. These are
the two glistering torches, that do light us to eternal happiness. Would
thou have the great God propitious unto thee? Viue pie, live a godly life.
Would thou have man beneuolent and loving unto thee? Viue probe, live
honestly. Would thou make them both thy friends? join them together in thy
whole life, so shall thou with one labor bind both God and man unto thee: the
one of these without the other will not serve thy turn. Piety without Probity
and honesty is nothing worth; probity and honesty without piety and godliness,
is less worth. Piety without probity is scandalous: probity without piety
superstitious, the one without the other, is altogether ruinous: but join them
both together in holy wedlock, and thou shall never make aberration from the
chiefest good. Hierocles
For the heathen man spoke truly, Finis virtutum charitas, principiumque
pietaes: The end of virtues, is charity, and the beginning is piety. And to the
same purpose another as well: Nulla est via alia qua ad felicitatem eatur, quam
pietas. Iamblicus
There is no other way to felicity, then piety. The divine truths approving the
same, 1. Tim. 4.
that godliness is profitable to all things, which has the promise of the
life present, 1. Tim. 4.8
and of that that is to come.

What made Socrates to be esteemed the best and most happy man of his time?
Was it not this only, that he consecrated himself to the love of piety, and
probity, godliness and honesty? Zenophen reports this of him: Erat adeo
religiosus, vt sine Dei consilio nihil ageret; adeo iustus, vt nemini ne exigua
quidem in re noceret, prodesset autem ijs maxim, qui ipso vterentur; adeo
continens, vt nunqua^ id quod incundius er at, meliori anteponeret. He was so
religious that he never did any thing without the counsel of God; so just,
that he never hurt any man, no not in the least thing, but helped them
exceedingly, who would use his means; so continent that he never preferred
that which was more pleasant, to that which was much better. Behold an
admirable pattern of goodness, behold what and how great study and care this
heathen man placed in the practice of these two worthy parts of goodness.
Behold what infamy this Gentile casts upon us Christians; nay what just
condemnation. Thus must we do, if ever we will do the duty of my text; if
ever we will be good men, if ever we will come in the presence of God. Plato
For so could the divine Philosopher advise: Let this, says he, be thy only
aim, Dei cultu and vitae puritate, by the worship and service of God, and
purity and cleanness of life, to obtain a wished and happy end at the last.
Now this piety, that you may the better know wherein it consists, does exercise
it self either in the outward worship of God, or in the outward and inward
worship of God, together. The inward worship of God alone, and by it self;
which consists only in the mind and inward man, is practiced in these two
duties; the first, is the knowledge of God, the second, is the fear of God: by
these two, as by two filuer conduits, do piety and religion flow into the
affections and minds of men.

First, for the knowledge of God, Io. 17.3.
our Savior witnesses, This is life eternal to know thee to be the only
very God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ the same does the Apostle: Romans
10.14
How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? And how shall they
believe in him, of whom they have not heard? This truth is so pregnant, that
the very heathens have acknowledged it: one of them saying, Deum colit, Sen.
qui nouit, He does worship and fear God, that knows God. And another of
them: Iambl.
Dei cognitio similem Angelis reddit, The knowledge of God, makes a man like
unto the Angels.

Secondly for the fear of God, is it not the beginning of al wisdom? Eccles.
12 13.
Fear God and keep his commandments, for that is Totum hominis, All the
whole duty of man: this was also acknowledged even by the heathen wise men. One
of them could say, Quis non timet omnia prouidentem, Cic.
cogitantem, and animaduertentem? Who is it, that does not fear the
all-prouident, all-seeing and all-punishing God? The glory of this duty, did
the heathen king Cyrus see, so much innobled in Zenophons History: who dying,
called his two Sons unto him, and left them this golden Legacy; Pertimescite
Deos, O Filij, vt nihil impij, nihil nefarij vel committatis, vel deliberetis.
O my Sons, I beseech you fear the Gods, that you never either commit, or
deliberate upon, any impious, nefarious or ungodly thing. O how wise was this
Father (if he had known the true God) to leave to his posterity such an
inestimable pearl by testament? And how happy those Sons, to whom such an
inheritance, more rich then all the Patrimonies of the world, was demised and
given? to whom Timor Dei; the fear of God was left as Legacy, in respect of
which, all other virtues, are but as Strepitus verborum, the sound of words
without matter. I will add to this a Legacy of the same nature, but better
directed, I think in the world not such another to parallel it: that of good
king David to Solomon his Son: 1. Chron. 28.9
And thou Solomon my Son know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with
a perfect heart, and with a willing mind: for the Lord searches all hearts,
and understands all the imaginations of thoughts: If thou seek him, he will
be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.

How many shall we find in our times, who will take it in great dudgeon and
derision, if you tell them, that they have none of this goodness in them, no
knowledge of God, no fear of God? And yet their whole lives shows them to
have no more of either indeed then Cyclops had, Eurip.
whose goodness in the Poet, is thus depainted, Non vlla numina expanesco
Coelitum, sed victimas veni deorum maximo ventri offero: Deos ignoro caeteros.
I fear no powers of Heaven, says Cyclops, but I offer Sacrifices to one of
the greatest of the Gods, my belly, other Gods I know none. Such are they that
consecrate more days and years to their pleasures and lusts, then hours or
minutes to the knowledge of God; such as that wicked judge, that neither fear
God, nor reverence man; Luc. 18
such as dedicate most of their golden time, to paint and varnish an ugly face,
to deck and dress a rotten, filthy, stinking carcass.

The internal, and external work and service of God together, being the
second part of piety, and consisting both in the inward affections of the
heart, and outward gestures and actions of the body, I reduce to these two
duties. The first is prayer, unto God; the second is, praise and thanksgiving
unto him, for his benefits. For as God is a most pure essence, so will he be
worshipped and served with a pure and vncorrupt mind and voice. The first of
these duties is prayer, which is so powerful with God, if it be put up with a
lively faith, a holy zeal, and a penitent heart, that as a learned Father
says, Aug.
Vincit inuincibilem, it ouercomes the most invincible God; and so acceptable a
messenger withal, Io. 16.23.
as that whatsoever we ask in faith, we shall obtain. This opens the gates of
Heaven at his pleasure, and shuts them: This ambassador preuailes, in what
message soever it be sent. Iac. 5.15.
The Oracle of Inpiter Hammon being consulted by the Ambassadors of Athons,
why the Gods until that time bad given victory to the Lacedaemonians, and not
to them, answered, That the cause was, for that the prayers of the
Lacedaemonians, were to them more pleasing, then all the Sacrifices of the
Graecians: showing what acceptance prayer had with God. Epictetus
Whence the wise and learned heathen was wont to say, that if we did rightly
invoke God, it would come to pass, that by his Angels he would admonish us
of the chiefest and best things.

Most high and wonderful privileges are these: but how may I a silly worm,
unworthy to appear in the presence of his majesty and goodness, frame my
petition and suite to the great majesty of God? I will tell thee. Learn of
that most heavenly Teacher saying unto thee: when thou prayest, say, Luc. 11.1
Our Father which art in Heaven. But if thou will not hear God himself
teaching thee to pray, learn of that heathen, first to desire of God that he
would grant unto thee, Zenophon
Vt sentias, loquaris, agas, quae ipsi gratissima sunt: That thou may
understand, speak and do the things that are to him most pleasing, and to thy
friends and commonwealth most glorious and profitable.

The second duty of the second part of piety is praise and thanksgiving unto
God for his benefits. Of which I remember what Philo the Jew writ: That a
certain Prophet being demanded of God if he desired any thing in this most
beautiful frame of the World, to the further perfection thereof, answered;
that all things were most full, perfect and excellent, yet one thing he
required more, Laudatorem horum sermonem: A voice to set forth the praises of
these things; which answer so much pleased the Father of this universe, that
not long after, there was heard a most musical sound and Harmony from that
only virgin of all divine powers, Memory.

This is a principal part of the work and service that God requires of us,
namely, that we remember and make known to the World, how great his power,
wisdom, and goodness is. And who are these musitions, these sweet singers,
that make such heavenly harmony in the ears of the Almighty, but we mortal
men, of whom he requires this worship, this service, this goodness? And what
is this for so many benefits, for so great goodness to us? Why are we so slow
and negligent in this duty, wherein the very birds of the air are so diligent?
Si luscinia essem, says the learned heathen, Epictetus.
Facerem quod luscinia; cum autem homo rationalis sim, quid faciam? Laudabo
Deum, nec cessabo vnqua^, vos vero, vt idem faciatis, hortor. If I were a
Nightingale, I would do as the Nightingale does; but seeing I am a reasonable
man, what shall I do? I will praise and magnify my God, nor will I ever cease
to do it; and my counsel is, that you should also do the same. For as Cyrus
said well, he does most easily obtain his suite at Gods hands, not who in
adversity flattereth him, but who in a prosperous estate remembers him. Yet all
these excellent duties of goodness and piety, as the knowledge, fear, prayer,
and praise of God, are but cadauera, dead bodies, (and so they were in the
hearts of all the Heathen, whom God did not further inlighten) except they be
animated by a lively faith, and tempered with the lively heat of the love of
God. But when these two do make way for the worship and service of God, and
duties of sanctification, then is our knowledge, fear, prayer, and praise,
full of life, then is our service acceptable unto him, and not else.

What then ought Kings and mighty men of the earth to do in this duty of
praise, but with king Agesilaus, if any prosperous thing befall them, not to
grow proud, and contemn any man in respect of themselves, but to give thanks
unto God, in whose hands are not only the hearts of Kings, but even all that
belongs unto them? What should the wise men of the world do, but with
Socrates, sacrifice unto God, even for the fruits of the earth? What should all
men do, Kings, and Council, and Common people, but with Cicero and the
Romans, supplicate our good God, and praise his blessed name, for that he
has delivered, Vrbem incendies, ciues caede, Italiam bello, The City from
burning, the citizens from slaughter, and Italy from wars, when Catiline was
vanquished? Thus should we be affected in every deliverance, yea in every
blessing: not to think it is our own wisdom or providence, our own bow and
sword, our own worth and virtue, that procures these good things unto us, and
preserues us from so many judgments: but the only goodness of God, and that
to provoke us unto this duty of goodness.

The second pillar of goodness is probity and honesty of life; which is as the
lamp and light by which we show our piety and goodness to the view of the
world. This is that grace, by which in the things of this life, we behave our
selves aright, as becomes the children of God: and this is of two sorts. For
first, it either respects our selves, and so these virtues belong unto it:
fortitude, temperance, magnanimity, patience, continency, sobriety, chastity,
parsimony. Wherein I pray you observe, what is written of Pomponius Atticus, one
of the richest of all the Romans: yet Nemo illo minus emax, nemo minus
aedificator, There was no man bought less, no man built less then he. And
withal take this caution with you of the wise Roman, That you doc evermore
Finem omniu^ rerum spectare, Sen.
and superuacua deuitare, Look upon the end of all things, and avoid all
superfluities. For oftentimes these outward things are but the glorious
monuments of inglorious and ungodly lives, of such as had nothing else to
commend them.

Or secondly, they are such parts of probity and honesty, as respect others:
and such are ciuility in speech, and composition of gestures, vibanity, fit and
commendable silence, shamefastness and gravity, modesty, gentleness,
humility, placability, charity, justice, liberality, friendship, innocence,
truth, faith, thankfulness. These are the ribs and bones, nay the very life
and soul of goodness; viz. the knowledge and fear of God, prayer to God, and
praise of God, joined with holiness of life and conversation toward our
selves, and all other. Hic selus sapit, ast alij velut vmbra feruntur: The man
that is thus accomplished with goodness, is the only wise man; but all others
pass away as does a shadow. This is the good desired of man in my Text: this
makes him acceptable to God and man, and makes him come near to the image of
God, Qui solus bonus, and ipsa bonitas, Who is only good, and goodness it self.

We have seen now what goodness is. The next inquiry must be, why goodness
is desired before greatness, power, honor, riches, understanding, wisdom,
knowledge, and the like: or rather why this, and not any of them all else.
makes all things like it self. It is the life of our graces: it puts spirit
into truth, that a man dare speak it in the face of the greatest: so into
knowledge, wisdom, honor, riches, all which are but cadauera, dead
carcasses, till goodness in-soule them. For none of these things are good,
till they be used to their proper ends for which they were given us: namely,
therewith to do good unto others. Secondly, Omnia rara chara, All rare things
are dear and much desired. Therefore goodness being such a stranger, being so
rare a diamond, is the more desired. Fourthly, Omnia appetunt bonum, All things
do desire that which is good: that is, their end and perfection, and so
consequently, all that conducteth thereunto, and that is goodness. Nitimur in
vetitum semper, cupimusque negata; We strive against the stream, and desire
things most that are denied us: but this duty of goodness is not limited at all,
and yet every man desires it, as if it were forbidden him. Sixthly, Phil. 2
Therefore works in us both the will and the deed, first the will, and then
the deed will follow. The reason is, for that Satan labors first, to get
and possess the will, and therefore proposed to the woman the principal good,
Genesis 3
even God, who is goodness it self: Eritis sicut dij, Ye shall be as Gods.
Therefore secing this persuasion wrought so much, the Lord labors here, by
sercing goodness before all other things, to give us that assuredly, which Satan
promised lyingly. If you perform goodness: Eritis sicut dij, You shall be as
Gods. Hence it is, that nothing can denominate a man according to his most
honorable title, viz. to be called and be a good man, nay a man, but only
goodness. For he is not a good man, that has a good understanding and great
knowledge and wisdom, nor he that is in great honor and respect, nor he
that has great riches and possessions, but only he that possesses goodness:
that is, he that imployes all these to the good of others. Nay, he is no man
that has all these, if he want this goodness of my Text.

For as the Heathen Epictetus tells us, we try a man as we try money. What
figure or stamp has this coin? Traianes? Then bring it. Neroes? Away with
is, it is adulterate, sophisticate, wicked. So is it in the trial of a man.
What figure and stamp do his purposes and practices carry? Is he merciful,
meek, humble, gentle, sociable, patient, a lover of all men? Bring him, I
allow him, I admit him, and him only for a man, and companion with God. But
see he have not Neroes characters, or Nebuchadnezzars, or Ahabs, or Ieroboams.
Is he dissolute, riotous, vain, luxarious an unclean person? Is he proud,
haughty, high-minded? Is he angry? Is he a pursuer of enmities? Is he
froward? Does he revenge himself of such as offend him, when he gets
opportunity? Is he an apparent impenitent wicked liver in any gross sin?
What then? Will thou say this is a man? Surely no. Quiduis potius quam homo; He
is rather any thing then a man: but a man he is not. Will thou say, that all
things are judged of by their forms? If that be so, then thou may call a
lump of wax or clay an apple, because it is round like an apple: thou may
say, it has the smell and taste of an apple. But the outward circumscription
and attendants are not sufficient; it is not a nose, or an eye, or the like,
that are sufficient to constitute a man: For humane purposes, and virtuous and
noble actions, are required to make a man. This man hears not wholesome
admonitions when he is reproved, he understands not the things that belong to
his peace, to his salvation: shall we say he is a man,? No, he is an ass:
his shamefastness and modesty is dead, he is unprofitable, he is any thing
rather then a man. Another there is, who seeks with whom he may quarrel,
whom he may spurn and contemn. Therefore is neither a sheep nor an ass.
What then? Fera bestia, A wild, brute, savage beast? It is not then the shape
and image of a man that makes a man, but the image of God in man, his virtuous
inclinations, and resolute executions of good purposes. If he have the stamp of
virtue and holiness, of mercy and goodness, he is a man; if not, he is so much
less then a man, as a good man is more then a beast. If this were truly
disgested, it would make thousands of such as only carry the names and shapes
of men, to be much ashamed of themselves. For what should make the profane and
godless persons of the world, who will not be acquainted with goodness at all,
to blush, if this do not? That whereas they think themselves to be the only
brave men of this world, they are in true account with God himself) who is
Optimus rerum aestimator, The best judge of all things) and also with all good
men, esteemed as the dung of the streets, and as salt that has lost his
saltness, which is good for nothing but to be trodden under foot.

The Prodigal is a true emblem of a voluptuous, impenitent man, turned out of
the nature of man into a swine and brute beast. For Christ tells us, he was set
to feed swine. And to feed is usually taken to recreate and delight: Oculos
pictura pascit inani, Virg.
He fed his eyes in beholding a vain picture. So that to feed swine, is as
much, Ambr.
as by the filthiness of sins to delight and feed devils: sin being
truly the devils food: Ierom.
drunkenness, uncleanness, luxury, and all other vices (in the opinion of the
learned) no better but the devils dainty dishes: Aug. Beda.
All of us so long feeding swine, as we do by our sins please the devil, or
do such things as the devil reioiceth at. For as the meat of Christ is to
do his Fathers will, Io. 4
so it is the devils meat, to do his will.

And therefore our Savior might well call the impenitent vicious ungodly man a
swine, Mat. 7
not fit to have pearls cast before him: for as from the swine comes no
good, neither milk as from the cow, nor wool as from the sheep, nor
faithful service as from the dog, nor obedience as from the horse, nor
bearing of burdens as from the ass, nor tillage as from the ox: as the swine
gives no co^tentment to him that feeds it, as the horse does by his pace, the
dog by his hunting, the hawke by his fowling: so the voluptuous carnal man
is good for nothing; neither has God, who filles his belly with his infinite
treasures daily, any pleasure in him, or service from him.

So that the wicked and ungodly sinner lying in his stinking pleasures, is
truly a swine wallowing in the filthy puddle, as a filthy as aswine, as
gluttonous as a swine, delighting in dirt as a swine, not smelling the stink
of his sin any more then the swine does the stink of the dirt it wallowes in.
And yet no dung stinks so much in our nostrels, as sin does in the nostrels
of God. And therefore the Scripture speaking of impenitent sinners, 2. King. 9
tells us that the carcass of Iezabel should be as dung on the ground; and
because they had sinned against the Lord, Zeph. 1
their flesh shall be as the dung: the wicked becoming as the dung of the
earth. Psa. 81
Whereby we understand, that no hot reeking dung, or filthy stinking carcass
cast out into the channel, is so odious to our sight and smell, as the
impenitent sinner is in the sight and nostrels of God and Angels. And so foul
is the stink of infull souls, Chrysostom.
as a godly Father observes, that therefore Christ at the last judgment shall
shake them off with that irreuocable, depart from me, as not being able to
endure their smell, no not so long as they shall be a judging. And as the
ungodly are swine in these respects, so as Swine are choked with the smell of
roses, as they chew not their meat, as they are vnrofitable for all services,
such are the voluptuous and carnal men for all the world; to hear or see any
good or godly thing does choke them, they never ruminate and consider the Law
of God, they are good for no work of piety or religion, having no more Soul
then swine have, Hor.
Corpus sine pectore, a Body without a Soul, following only the good things
that belong to the body, as swine do, being fed and fatted for Hell, as swine
for the shambles, Tibul.
Telluris inutile pondus, an unprofitable burden to the Earth,

And is not the judgment of all the learned Fathers the same concerning
impenitent sinners! Does not one say, Chrysostom.
that Christ speaks not in the Gospel of swine, when he says, Mat. 7.
Cast not pearls before Swine, but of men who are of swinish manners, who like
Swine wallow in the sink of sin? For as Swine are naturally unclean,
swallowing the most filthy things, seeking food for no other end, then to fill
their bellies, profitable for no one thing whilst they do live, so undoubtedly
are all filthy and unclean persons, all impenitent sinners, they wallow in the
filth of their own sins, swallow all the filthy dregs of iniquity, follow
only after the food that perishes, are profitable forno good work, nor have
any hope of a better life. Another says, Theoph.
What other thing are Christians, that are given to carnal and filthy
pleasures, but Swine? Are not all they Swine that wallow in the filth of their
vile natural delights as swine do in the mire? Can the eyes of swine look up
to Heauen-wards, being framed as they are, to look downwards? Therefore rightly
are all sinners, who with all their bodies, their mouths, their hearts, their
feet and hands are occupied in earthly things, no better then Swine, and
brute beasts. The very Hieroglyphick and representation of an unclean, and
dishonest man, Piernij
(amongst the Learned) was a swine wallowing in the dirt and mire, and
trampling sweet roses under his feet: wicked men delighting more in the sink
of their sensuality, then in the unspeakable joys of Heaven. Thus we see that
the impenitent sinner, of what kind soever, is no better then a Swine and
brute beast. From which ground two observations may fitly be inferred, 1.
That they are not all men, that carry the faces and shapes of men. 2. That in
all conditions of men, there are infinite who are very swine and brute beasts
in their present (...).


First, that al are not men, that by their faces, shapes and habits sceme so to
be, but for the most part, are by their sins become swine and brute beasts,
men in name and show, but not in deed and truth, is so pregnant a point, that
the very heathen do witness it. There are certain men, says Tully, not men
indeed, but only in name: borne men in-deede, but by their sins have made
themselves beasts: and Diogenes seeing an effeminate young man, said, it was a
shame for him to make himself worse then Nature had framed him, for Nature had
made him a man, but he had made himself a woman; but if he had seen our
times, he would rather have blamed men, for making themselves beasts. I would
but know this of any grave and sober man, whether I were to be reproved for
calling a proud, tyrannous, bloody man, a Lion? Pro. 28.
Does not the wise king call a wicked ruler over the poor people, a roaring
Lion, and hungry Bear? Sir. 4
Does not the wise man advise not to be a Lion in a man's own house, beating
his servants for his fantasy? Does he not say, Sir. 13.
that as the wild Ass is the Lions prey, so are poor men the meat of the
rich? And what if I should call a litigious and troublesome man, that is ever
biting and barking at other men's works, a Dog? Phil. 3
Does not the Apostle, call all evil workers Dogs? does not Saint John say,
that without, that is, in Hell are Dogs; that is, inchaunters, Apoc. 22.
whoremongers, murderers, Idolaters and whosoever loves or makes lies? Does
not Christ himself call Herod a Fox? Luc. 13.
Go and tell that Fox. And does he not command to take the Foxes, the little
Foxes that destroy the vines, namely, all dangerous Heretics, Can. 2
and debaushed livers that wound and rent and scandalize his Church?

And what if I call those slothful and dull in the ways of God, Asses? those
scornful and proud pecocks, borses, that neigh under every one that sits
on them? Sir. 33
Those wavering and inconstant, grasshoppers? Those that wallow in the filth of
their lusts, swine? How can we esteem him that is transformed with vices, Boet.
to be a man? If he do greatly thirst after riches, he is like the wolf: If
he be cruel, unquiet, he is like the Dog: if he be subtle and cunning, he
is like the Fox: If angry, like the Lion; If fearful, like the Heart: If slow
and heavy, like the Ass; if light and inconstant, like the birds; if drowned
in the unclean filth of his lusts, he is like a Swine wallowing in the mire.
Yea, even the Scripture (as some observes) calls some men by the name of
beasts, Chry.
because of their perturbations and vices. And how can we conclude otherwise
then that men are changed into Beasts, when forsaking reason, they take to
themselves unreasonable appetits, and desites? ser. 5.
are they not like horses every man neihing after his neighbors wife? Math. 3
Are they not generations of vipers, that are licenciously wicked and vicious?
Surely whosoever is overcome with beastly pleasures, is justly by the wise,
Aul. gell.
accounted in the number of beasts and savage creatures. Even this little
passion of love, Tere.
carnal love, will so change a man, Mant.
that one would scarce know him to be the same. Fit pecus omnis amans, says
the Christian Poet, Dum pro ratione ltbido,
Iudicium nutu temperat omne suo.
Quisquis enim viuit sine lumine mentis and vsu,
Fert hominis vultus, ingeniumque Ferae.


Whilst lust insteede of reason distempers his judgment, at his own beck;
every one that loves, becomes a beast. For, whosoever does live without the
light and use of his understanding, does carry the countenance of a Man, but
the nature of a savage beast. What other thing would Diogenes express, when at
noone day, he sought a man in the open market place before all the people
crying out, Hominem quaero, hominem quaere, Diog. Laert.
I seek a man, I seek a man. Or as another reports, that after he had often
in a public place cried, Heus homines, Hoe ye men, and many men coming to
him, he drove them away with his staff, saying, Hemines, non purgamenta
vocaui, I called for men, and not for dirty dunghills. What other thing, I say,
meant he, then to intimate that vicious persons were no men, albeit they
carried the shapes of men? For every thing is not the same it appears to be.
Mariners sails are not therefore black, because they seem so to them that
stand on the shore: Nor are the Oats broken or crooked because the one half
being in the water, and the other out, they seem so to be: Nor are Apples
therefore the greater, because looking on them in a glass obliquely, they
seem so: Nor yet is the Sun so small as it seems, nor so slow in his
motion, as to the eye it appears: So neither is all Gold that glisters, nor
every one a Man, that seems to be a Man.

Jacob was Jacob, and not Esau, albeit he was clothed with his garments, and
his neck lapt in a Goats skin. If every thing that carries the shape of a
thing, Pli.
were the same thing, then the beast of Aethiopia called Mantichora should be a
Man, because it has the face and cares of a Man, and speaks as a man. Then
Sirens, Satyrs, water Nimphs, and many fishes, and Faunes should be men and
women, seeing they carry the shapes of men. Then Harpyies should be called
Virgins, because they have Virgins faces; then a painted man, should be a very
Man, and the Crocodile should be a man, because it sheds tears as a Man; and
so an Ape which much resembles a man in nimblenesse and gestures, should be a
Man. But as the Poet speaks of Syre^s, Satyrs, Faunes, Nimphs and Lamiaes, Si
videas vultus, homines vidisse putabis: Mant.

Esse feras constat, si intuearis opus.


If you look on their countenance, you would judge them to be men: but if you
look on their works and action, they will appear to be very beasts. So say I
of all carnal, sensual, licentious persons; if ye behold their faces, and
persons, they are men in shape: but look into their lives and actions, you
shall find them very brute beasts. It is not form alone that will guide our
judgments. For then we may call any round apple of Gold, an Apple, and say it
has the smell and taste of an Apple, the outward appearance is not enough; to
have a nose and eyes, is not sufficient to the constitution of a Man, reason
and judgment, goodness and piety is also required. And as all ase not kings
that wear purple roabes, Scepters, and Diadems of kings; nor all daughters,
that represent the persons of daughters. (for Hercules spun in the company of
his Omphale in the habit of a Woman, and valiant Achilles conuersed in a
Virgins habit amongst the daughters of Lycamedon, and yet for all that were men
and no women,) so no more are all that carry the faces and habits of men, to be
accounted men, as all in sheeps clothing are not sheep. But a poor man is
still a poor man, albeit clad in princely roabes, and a woman is a woman
albeit in the habit of a Man; the wolf is still a wolf though in sheep
clothing. No more does the face and shape of a Man, make a Man, seeing our
bodies are nothing else, but the garments of the Soul, and the body makes not
a man, but the reasonable inward Soul: so that if he be a Man, he is a
reasonable Soul, and if he be a reasonable Soul, he is a Man; but if he have
a bestiall, and a sensual Soul, then is he but an apparition and shadow of a
Man, falsely carrying the Image and shape of that he is not (...): man is not
the thing that is seen, says divine Plato. We are one thing, says a Father,
and the things that are outs are another thing, Ambr.
and the things that are about us, and belong unto us, are another thing. We
are the Soul and understanding; and more we are not. So that whosoever is
drowned in the filthy puddles of this World, is no more participant of reason
then a brute beast, and rather a man in name then indoede.

Seeing then the dominion of sin does turn man into a beast, what is it that
will make one truly and indeed a Man? Is it reason? Surely no, unless it be
sanctified reason. Is it the faculty of speaking? no neither. For the Hyena, li.
and Mantichora can speak like a Man. What then? Surely, if that learned writer
may be believed, Lact.
it is only the understanding of the divinity, the knowledge of God, that
makes a man, and gives the true difference betwixt him and all other things:
for take away Religion, and then neither wisdom nor justice can be kept,
seeing the understanding of the divinity, whereby we differ from beasts, is
only found in Man. Plut.
So the heathen man could judge, that it was a wicked and strange thing, to
ascribe reason to those things; that wanted the knowledge of God. Therefore
where I find no spark of true reason, no words worthy to come from a Man, no
footsteps of Religion, piety, goodness, and the knowledge of God (the
necessary marks and badges of a Man.) If I shall deny him to be a man, I do
him no injury, seeing my text tells me that goodness is that which is required
of every man; neither does the definition of a man agree to him, and so he
cannot be a man.

Besides, if he that outwardly alone represents a man, be not a man, what
is he then? Whatsoever lives above a vegetative life, must either be a God, an
Angel, a man, or beast. But men that live wickedly are no Angels, much less
are they Gods. And seeing iniquity and sin has cast them down below the
condition of man, it must needs follow they are no men; but carrying about
with them bodies, without reasonable and religious souls, it necessarily
follows, that they are brute beasts. And so it comes to pass, Boet.
as one observes, that who forsaking probity and honesty, leaves off to be a
man, when he can by no means pass into the divine state and condition, he is
turned into a beast. And in this respect was it that the Prophet said, Is. 50
Wherefore came I, and there was no man? Why not a man? Because as one says on
this place, Ierom.
Every man for saking the image of God, makes himself like the beasts and
serpents. And who knows not, that for this cause the Prophet admired that
Jerusalem should be so populous, Lam. 1
and yet be alone and forsaken? How does the City remain solitary, that was
full of people? But what is this the Prophet speaks? Has sorrow swallowed up
his senses? If she be full of people, how is she alone? If alone, how is
she full of people? Yes, there were many faces and bodies of men, but not one
true man, not one reasonable man, not one godly man, Psalm. 14
not one religious man: All were gone out of the way, they were altogether
become abominable, there was none that did good, no not one. Thus was the
City full, and yet solitary, not one good man, or very few to be found in it.
If this be so, then furely the Prophet reputes wicked and vicious persons for
me^, no more then we do. And for the same cause, the holy Ghost in the
Scriptures styles some men foxes, some dogs, some swine, some wolves, some
lions, some serpents, and the like. Is. 11 Is. 59 Dan. 7 Luke 13 Can. 2 Acts 20
Apoc. 22
Thus is the proverb verified, Homo hominilupus, One man is a wolf to
another. Thus did the godly Martyr Ignatius sight with beasts from Syria unto
Rome, at Sea and Land; day and night was he bound with ten Leopards, that is,
with soldiers that kept him, to be tormented. May we not read that
Aristophanes called the Flagitious, Athenians, beasts and sheep? And that
Diogenes seeing a rich man one day walking in the market, called him a golden
sheep? Did not all the Platonists esteem that man to be a beast, who being
endued with reason, yet committed things repugnant to reason? And therefore
were they wonr to cry out, Hence beastly affections, hence, fly from me ye
capital enemies of mine, lest I should be compelled to become unruly and
besides my self. What do you here, ye robbers of my better part? you
thieves, that lay bolts and shackles on my soul, that ye might domineere over
that which was created to that end, that it might command the whole world?
Have you never read that golden sentence, that he seems more beastly then any
beast, who has reason and uses it not? Does not the reverend scholar cite
this out of Aristotle, Homo bestialiter viuens, Beda.
est centies millesies bestia peior? A man that lives beastly, is an hundred
thousand times worse then a beast? For it is true which the wise Philosopher
spoke, Arist.
Man inioying the law, is the best of all living creatures; but separate from
the law and rustice, is the worst of all others. Therefore the learned Father
affirms, Aug.
that if man were suffered to live as he list, he would fall into outrages
unspeakable. We may then safely out of all this evidence conclude, that all
are not men which carry the shapes and habites of men; and that all voluptuous,
carnal, impenitent sinners, are no men, but beasts in men's shape, because they
want the goodness in my Text.

Secondly, out of this, will the second observation plainly appear: namely,
That in all conditions of men, are infinite, who in their present estate, are
no better then swine and brute beasts, seeing they live in infidelity,
impenitency, and all kind of improbity. For if these testimonies of
Scriptures, Fathers, Philosophers, Historians, and Poets, be truc; how many
shall we find in every state and condition of men, that are swine, dogs,
wolves, lions, vipers and scrpents? The forest of Arden, nor the woods of
Mormatane, do afford acornes enough to give every swine one. And I know not
whether the Heavens have so many stars, the Sea so many grames of sand, the
Ocean so, many fishes, fishes so many sins, France so many grapes, the Alps
so many flakes of snow, or Hannony that Paradise so many flowers, as we shall
find every where men that are turned swine, wolves, dogs, vipers, serpents,
and brutt beasts.

For unto how many of all sorts may it truly be said, O curuae in terris
animae, and coelestium inanes? O crooked souls on earth, and void of heavenly
things? Psa. 17
To how many may we say, they turn their eye down to the ground? never
lifting up there eyes to heaven, from whence all good comes to them, but like
swine fee de on the Acornes, never lookking up to the tree that bare the? Now,
if you will take a list of them, and number them if you can; So many as I shall
see to be delighted with the filthy puddle of carnal pleasures, neither
perceiving, hearing, or doing any thing that belongs to piety and godliness,
but only to serve the time, so many must I judge to be swine. O how many swine
has this world in opulent Cities, and glorious Courts of Princes? Where men
should in great plenty be seen, even there they play they swine and brute
beasts. There is Circes turning men into swine. There is Epiourus that tame
unclean hog. There are all kind of beasts innumerable, small and great. As
many as we shall see having no more soul then a swine, Auimam pro sale, Only
a soul to keep the body from stinking and rotting as beasts have, who never
dream of another life, where so ules are immortal: but live as if there were
neither Heaven nor Hell, (as the Atheists of our times:) so many swine and
beasts we may say there are. O good God, how does the earth abound with such
kind of swine? The sow that farrowed thirty white pigges in the place Where
Aeneas founded and built his City Alba, had never such a plentiful litter, as
Atheism and impiety at this day has brought forth. Yea they are grown to
that height of all iniquity, that they will wallowe in the mire without all
controulment. Come, say they, Sap. 2
let us enjoy the pleasures that are present, for this is our lot, this is our
portion. And shall I not think them to be swine, that cramme themselves with
delicates, till it come up again? nothing commiserating the poor members of
Christ, which by want or losses are driven to extreme poverty; no man
remembering the afflictions of Joseph, nor ever either yielding them wool to
cloth them, or milk to feed them, more then swine do? But what talk I of
swine? These swine swim in all kind of superfluities, even unto surfeit; these
swine come not all to the shambles, nor do all of them accompany Ulysses a
shipboard. These feed not in the farms under the trees, they use not all one
common sty, but even famous Cities, goodly Countries, and glorious Courts of
Kings, are full fraught with such swine. That as Solomon said, Eccl. 12
there was no end in making books; so having in some sort viewed this heard of
swine, if we should take an account of the other brute beasts, to which the
holy Ghost fitly compares wicked, voluptuous, impenitent sinners; I should
rather weary you, then reckon them up, there would be no end in numbering
them. For as the Apostle said to his fellow laborers, Acts 20
that after his departure, grievous wolves would enter, not sparing the flock:
So I may say, not only that the Heathen, but that all manner of brute beasts,
worse then the heathen, are entered into the Lords inheritance, Psa. 79.
defiling his holy Tempie, and making havoc of all religion and goodness.
Psa. 22
The fat Bulls of Basan do enclose the godly on every side, the wild Bores out
of the wood do strive to root up that little vine of the godly, and the wild
beasts of the field devour it. Psa. 80 Psa. 22
Gods dearlings are in the power of dogs, and in the mouths of lions, they
lie lurking in their dens, Psa. 10 Ier. 9
and ravish the poor. The serpents and cocatrices that by corruption and
oppression sting the godly to death, and will not be charmed but with gifts,
are every where rife, Every one turns into this race, Ier. 8
as the horse into the battle. Like fed horses every one neigheth after his
neigbours wife. Like wanton and untamed calves, Ier. 31 Psa. 58
they keep no bounds. Like venomous serpents and deaf adders, they stop their
ears and will not be charmed, charm they never so wisely. As a cage is full
of birds, so are their houses full of deceit, Ier. 5
they are waxen fat and shining, they ouerpasse the deeds of the wicked; they
execute no judgment, Shall I not visit for these things, faith the Lord, shall
not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?

Here then I require two things to be observed. First, that we would keep
the method which God proposes in doing good: that is, that in every of our
actions, the goodness to be done to others be aimed at. Secondly, that we
labor to preserve goodness and good men, by taking away the worm that kills
them.

First, Augustine says, Bonum in ordine consist it, Good consists in order.
Now this is Gods order, 1. To aim at our good in all his actions. 2. As the
same Father says, Aug.
it is Gods order to make Modus species et ordo, generalia bona, Measure, form
and order, to be general good things in all his creatures. So that, Vbi haec
tria magna sunt, magna bona sunt; vbi parma, parua bona sunt; vbi nulla, nullum
bonum est; Where these three are great, there are great good things; where
little, little good things; where none, no good thing at all. Look then if the
end of all your actions be the good of others: look if you find these three
good things in your actions, which God has put in every creature: measure,
form, and order. Measure that temperately, form that decently, order that
discreetly all things be done. If so, then do you follow Gods method in
doing good. But alas we run contrary, and utterly destroy Gods order. For what
measure is it to pour water into sieues, or rent dishes, that spend it faster
then they receive it? What form is there to reward dogs for killing the
game, and not just and holy men for killing of vices? What comeliness is there
in our monstrousnes and excess of apparel? What form, to cast all honors and
preferments upon the undeserving, or in the lowest rank of service, and to
neglect the best and worthiest services? What order, what discretion, what
measure, to run greedily after the foolish vanities of this life, and never
labor to purchase any riches for the Soul? Is not this Christ's order, First
seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof? Math. 6
First thou should seek, as that good Father says, Aug.
Vt sis bonus, that thou may be good thy self; and then Vnde facias bonum,
the things whereby thou may do good to others.

Secondly, we must labor to preserve goodness and good men, by taking away
the Canker that corrupts them. So then a weeding must be used: that wise Roman
spoke most truly, Sen.
Bonis nocet, qui malis parcit, He does hurt the good that spares the quill.
Therefore the magistrate must over be worming of the Land; and in that great
work of purging the commonwealth, or reforming any house or Family, he must
ever have respect to these three considerations, first, to amend him he
punishes. Secondly, or that the punishment being exemplary, may make others
the better. Thirdly, or that the wicked being taken out of the way, the godly
may live the more securely. But he that will preserve goodness, must still be
lopping away the Canker boughs: For as that learned man says well, Lactan.
Bonorum salutem custodit, qui malos punit, He that punishes wicked men,
preserues the safety of good men. To which that of the divine Philosopher does
well agree, Malitiae medicamentum est poena; Plato.
punishment is the best Physic for malice and wickedness. Therefore hec that
would heal a sick commonwealth, or a fainting Family must minister David's
physic, Psalm. 101
a wicked person must not dwell in his house. So David cured his sick kingdom
and Court. Antisthenes
Hence the wise heathen resolved, that it was the greatest pest of a
commonwealth not to discern the good from the bad: that is, to observe and
advance the ungodly, and neglect the just and virtuous: For the goodness of
the subjects establishes the kingdom. And their improbity ruins and subuerts
it. And therefore that wise Roman concludes, Cic.
that neither house nor commonwealth can long stand, if rewards be not provided
for the good, and punishments for the wicked. We come into our gardens and
orchards, and seeing them grown over with nettles and such other trash,
presently we fall to weeding and pruning, and are offended with those that
should have the care of it, that it is not done, lest we should lose the
benefit of the fruit: and shall we not much more labor to keep the garden of
the Church and kingdom from the Nettles and weeds of impiety and wickedness,
which will at length choke the growth of all goodness in the Land? But alas,
what fruit can we expect, when not only briers and thistles are suffered to
grow up, but are more cherished then the good and wholesome herbs themselves?
What happiness may we look for, when the herbs are either plucked up by the
roots, or at least, so spite-blasted, and neglected, that they wither and dye
for want of plucking up the weeds of vices that ouertoppe them?

The third inquiry is: John took and cate, Apoc. 10
and it was in his mouth as sweet as honey, but made his belly bitter? So
goodness, is a sweet subject to be spoken of, but bitter to be practiced;
every man can relish it with his mouth, but few can digest it in their hearts,
and fewer practice it with their hands. Balaam would gladly die the death of
the righteous, and castaway Saul would be honored and reputed good before
the Prophet. But because they desire the name and not the thing, therefore they
are but in a dream, and embrace a shadow. Or thirdly, Tuta frequensque via
est, per amici fallere nomen: It is a safe and common course to deceive under
pretense of friendship. So under the cloak of goodness and Religion, is all
mischief palliated and vizarded. And it is one of the most dangerous enemies,
that goodness and good men have; Chrysostom.
for as that holy Father says Malum sub specie boni celatum, dune non
cognoscitur, non cauctur, When evil does mask under the vizard of good, being
not known, it cannot be prevented. Or fourthly, 1. Cor. 7
be as though they had none, those that weep as though they wept not, those
that rejoice as though they rejoiced not; those that buy, as though they
possessed not, those that use the world, as though they used it not, so that
now they become as zealous as in the primitive age, they have all things
common, and part to every man has need. And therefore because men do so
goodness to be an ill husband, Act. 2
and prodigal of her self and substance, after a little experience of her,
they shake her off, as not for their profit. Or lastly shall I say, it is,
because there are so few examples of goodness to provoke us? Surely even for
all these, is this happy duty of goodness so much desired of all, so little
practiced of any. For goodness is bitter, unsavory and distastefull to a
carnal man. Every man loves the glorious name of it, but cares not for the
thing it self: It is a good shadow and cloak for impiety: It diminishes our
substance and the things we love dear, and has few or no presidents to allure
us to it. No wonder then, if so few affect it in the practice.

So come we to examine the 4. An sit bonitas, whether there be any good nesse
left in the World, any such thing as goodness is, and where it may be found;
there is such bar nnes of goodness every where, that we may well say of it, as
the Lord did of Ieconiah: write this man childlesse, Ier. 22
a man that shall not prosper in his days. So we, that God has bidden write
our age destitute of goodness, not shall goodness prosper in our age: not for
that Ieeoniah had no Son, did God command thus to write, for he had Salathiel,
but because he had but one Son, and the kingdom and government was departed
from him. Nor do I say this, for that goodness shall have no issue, but because
she shall have very few children, and the kingdom and government is departed
from them: they shall have little or no honor, dignite or preferment in this
world.

The Prophet spoke it long before me, Psalm. 14
The Lord looked down from Heaven, to see if any would understand and seek
after God: but they were all gone but of the way, there was none that did good,
no not one. If he spoke this with grief of heart, I am sure, I speak it not
without sorrow. For what cause of sorrow can be greater, when as we may justly
complain with the good king, There is not one godly man left, Psalm. 12
the faithful are failed from the children of men?

In Noah's age all flesh had corrupted their ways, and then the flood came and
swept them away. In Abraham's time, there was no fear of God in the Land, and
then God sent fire and brimstone on Sodom and her three sisters. In the time of
the judges, when there was no king in Israel, Iud. 17
every man did what was good in his own eyes, and then the people did eat up
one another. In the time of Isaiah, the faithful City was become an harlot,
they had not so much understanding as the Ox and the Ass: then the Lord eased
him of his adversaries, and avenged him of his enemies. In Ieremies time, Ier. 5
there was not a man in Jerusalem that executed judgment, and sought the
truth. Therefore a Lion out of the Forest shall slay them, a Wolf out of the
wilderness destroy them, and a Leopard watch over their Cities. Psalm. 14
In David's time, there was none that did good, not one. Then came the wrath of
God upon the wealthiest of them, and struck; down the chosen men that were in
Israel. In Salomons time, Eccles 7.
but one man of a thousand, (A thousand to one we shall not find one now) and
then ten Tribes were rent from his kingdom. 1. King. 13
In Christ's time, many were called and few chosen, and then came the desolation
of that most famous Jerusalem, and utter subversion of the people of God, such
as was never read of in any age, that the chosen generation should be vagabonds
and runagates over the whole World to the end thereof. In Paul's time, not many
noble, not many wise according to the flesh were called; 1. Cor. 1.
nay, all sought their own, and not that which was Christ's, Phil. 2
and then the Church of God, was under gricuous persecution; and when Christ
comes, Luc. 18
shall he find faith on the earth? And why may not we speak all these things
of these our times, who have added to the iniquities of all times? Why may not
we fear the like judgments, for the want of that goodness, which want
procured these judgments? May not we say, there is not one that does good? All
flesh has corrupted his way? There is no fear of God in the Land? Every man
does that which is good in his own eyes? The faithful City is become an
Harlot. Not one good man of a thousand can be found. Surely, we have filled up
the measure of our fathers iniquities, and if we speedily repent not, God will
fill up the measure of his judgments upon us for it.

Here then I do briefly observe these two points. First, that all ages have
had in all places a penury and want of goodness, more or less. Secondly, that
no age ever escaped to be severely punished for that want. Let malorum poena,
be bonorum cautela; the punishment of the wicked, be the caution of the godly,
Et aliena pericula nostra adminicula; other men's harms and dangers, our
instructions and helps.

Goodness (I confess) is hard to be found in our age: the common practice is
according to the common proverb, Every man for himself, and God for us all.
It is now every man's study and care to gather riches, to grow great, to get
honors, dignities and favors for themselves and their posterity; whilst the
common good, nor yet any others good, but their own private, is aimed at. But
indeed, how can they use goodness that know not what it means? They are of
that kind of men of whom the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 49
Whilst thou do good to thy self, every man will speak good of thee. They
know not, that the nature of goodness is such, that the good man bestows
himself wholly, and what he has, to the good of others, and yet is himself
never the poorer. As a thousand candles may be lighted at one, and yet no
diminution of light: So the good man communicates to all, willingly that have
need of him, and yet has no want: his riches, his wisdom, his countenance,
his labor, and so can say, Omnibus omnia factus sum, 1. Cor. 9
I became all things to all men. Thus does he after the example of God: who is
therefore good, because he bestows on us that be his children, what himself
is, and what he has: therefore this is a true conclusion, That he cannot be a
good man, nor the child of God, of what place soever he be, that loves himself
and seeks his own particular alone. The rule of that learned Father is most
true; Aug.
Turpe est omnis pars quae suo toto noncongruit: That part which agrees not
with the whole, is a deformity to the whole. And seeing every man is part of
the kingdom wherein he lives, it is impossible he should be a good man, that
is not fashioned to the Common good. Nor can the whole stand, if the parts be
not well proportioned. Whence it is, that the Common good of a kingdom cannot
thrive, if the greatest part and namely, the greatest men be not good men, and
respective of the public good. Therefore if any kingdom come to ruin, it is
for want of this goodness, that men do not seek the Common good, in which
every man has his particular good.

What was the cause the Roman Empire flourished so long, and reigned as Queen
and sole Empress of the world, Val: Max:
but this (as the worthy Historian reports) that all studied the Common good,
and desired rather to be Pauperes in diuite imperto, quam diuites inpaupere
imperio; Poor in a rich Empire, then rich in a poor Empire? Thus came these
Heathen nearer that divine precept then we Christians, Let no man seek his
own, 1. Cor. 10
but every man another good. Good citizens must be like the Sun and Moon,
they must shine unto all. And thus is the Commonwealth made stable and lasting
for ever. For if as the earth stands immooueable, because every parttends ad
vnum, that is, to one point, which we call the Center; so is a kingdom
perdurable, when all seek the Common good, and have one Center and end in all
their actions.

But alas, I might easily be confined in speaking of goodness, either this that
is the preservation of kingdoms, or that which is the life and soul of
families: not only that there is so little goodness in our times, but also
for that the Scripture affords me so little descant upon the word: which to
me is an evident argument, that the spirit of God foresawe, that toward the
end of the world men would grow so carnal, that the practice of goodness
would be so precious and rare, as the name of it is seldom used in the
Scriptures. For in the whole Book of God, to my remembrance, as goodness is
ascribed to man, I only find it nine times recorded. Seven times in the old
Testament, and three in the new. Hezekiah, 2. Chr. 32
and it is say de that his goodness was written in the Chronicles of the Kings
of Judah. Josias, 2. Chr. 35
and of his goodness it is said, that it was written in the Chronicles too:
to intimate unto us, that the goodness of Kings is fit to be chronicled for
eternal memory, as a mytror to them that follow, because there are so few
examples of goodness amongst great ones. In so much that of all the three and
twenty Kings of Judah, only six were good, David, Asa, Iehosapbat, Ioas,
Hezekiah, and Josias: But of all the Kings of Israel, there was never a good.
Hence one said wittily, that the names of all good Kings might be written in a
ring. 3. Fac bonitatem, Psa. 37
Be doing of good: and there is a singular reward annexed to it; verily thou
shall be fed. 4. Psa. 38
they reward me evil for good, Eo quod secter bonitatem, Because I follow
goodness. Indeed goodness is like an Owl, all the birds fall upon her: so
if any man do profess goodness in any proportion beyond the common sort, they
are sure to be despised and reproached at every hand. In Poters time it was
true, who will harm you, if you seek that is good? 1. Pet. 3
but now, Who will not harm you? an argument that there is little goodness
amongst men. 5. Psalm. 16
says the good King, speaking of God: that is, thou receiuest no benefit from
me. If man of man and to man had spoken this, it had been most true in our
age, for the most part; for as God receives nothing from us, so nor man, but
what we cannot keep from him. Pro. 19
that who possesses understanding, loves goodness, therefore it seems that
our Age is a foolish Age, there is so little love of goodness. Pro. 20
7. The same King gives us a taste of every man's untoward disposition toward
goodness; Every man will boast of his own goodness, but who can find a
faithful man? Wherein we see the loveliness of this grace, drawing every man
to challenge her for his own, but no man craving to entertayne her. 8. Gal. 5
The Apostle names her amongst the fruits of the Spirit: but we shall have
much ado to find (...), goodness, in any spirit of our times. Lastly, the
same Apostle makes the fruit of the spirit to be in Omni bonitate; Ephe. 5
In all goodness: as if there were no fruit of the spirit of God in man,
where goodness does not show it self in a great measure.

And as it is in few places of the Scripture, so it is in few persons of the
world. I will not go to the great ones, Ier. 5
as the Lord does to look for this goodness, and found the yoke broken, and
the bonds burst: nor to the Priests and people, as the Prophet does, to look
for this goodness, Is. 24
and found like Priest, like people; like servant, like master; like maid, like
mistress; like buyer, like seller; like borrower, like lender; like giver,
like taker to usury: Ier. 8
no man repenting himself of his wickedness: saying, what have I done? but
every one turning to his race, as the Horse rusheth into the battle. I say, I
will not go thus far: yet If I should ask the Sea, it would say, goodness
is not in me: if the Land, it would say, goodness is not in me: if I should
ask the Country, it would say, goodness is not in me: if the Court, they
would all confess, that goodness is not in them. So that if I call for
goodness, it is dumb and speaks not: if I cry for it, it is deaf and hears
not: if I wish for it, it is lame and comes not: if I write of it, it is worn
out of the world with writing: if I speak of it, it is weary of it: if I
look for it amongst the dead, they will say, it is not yet borne: if amongst
the living, they will say, it died in its minority: if I look for it with the
old, they are past it: if with the young, they are not yet come to it; if with
the middle age, they will none of it: if with soldiers, it is against their
valors: if with Courtiers, it is against their pleasures: if with Lawyers, it
is against their profits. So that being banished from all sorts and societies
of men, it is to be feared, Apoc. 12
the fury of that great red Dragon has driven it into the wilderness with
the woman: that is, the poor persecuted Chur. of Christ, there to remain not
1260. days, but years: if some good folk keep it not out of the
wilderness, to be conversant amongst men, which for my part, I do much
despair of.

Yet will I not utterly despair to find some prints of goodness for all this
scarcity: but in the search of it, I am loath to spend any more time, seeing I
have bin so long time in the quest of it already. Let every man see what
proportion of goodness is in himself: but I fear, that a torch will scarce
find a good man, such as we have lim'd out, and such as the Prophet has
pictured: Psa. 15
and yet so good must he be that will ascend into the mountain of Heaven. If
then thou will gage thy goodness, this is the way; look how much thou
profitest after every Sermon thou hear, and so much as thou reformest thy
life, so much is thy goodness.

They say, that a vessel made of the Iuy tree, if water and wine be poured
into it together, the wine will leake out, and leave the water behind it. Most
men's hearts hold true resemblance with this wood; for receiving into them the
wine of Gods word, which should inebriate them with the love of God and
goodness, and also taking in the water of worldly apprehensions, they leake out
all the wine, and leave nothing behind but the pudled water of vanity, pride,
ambition, luxury, and such other pests of the soul. I must entreat pardon in
this my great liberty of speech: Inlibera ciuitate, said that noble Octauianus,
liberae debent esse linguae; In a free City every man's tongue should be free,
but much more in a free Church, and of a free man. For to speak truly of our
times, I cannot compare the men of it better then to a vessel full of
quickesiluer, where all mettalls save gold do swim, and that sinkes to the
bottom: So piety, religion, goodness, and those precious mettalls, without
which we can never attain to the author of goodness, do but float in the
brains, and swim in the understanding, they will not down with us Nothing
will sink into our hearts but gold, nothing but gains, and honor, and
pleasure, will down with us.

But some may object against this: that there must needs be plenty of
goodness, seeing it is so little spent, for few or none do use it. I answer;
that has been the bane and ruin of this golden mine of goodness. For
contrary to the nature of all other mettalls and matters, it grows and
increases by spending. The more prodigal man is of goodness, the richer he
grows: if then thou will have a treasure, which cannot be exhausted with
spending, but grows and increases the more, labor for goodness, and
practice it: be herein profuse and a spend thrift, and thou shall grow most
rich, most honorable. On the other side, spend it not, and thou art poor,
naked, beggarly, miserable, above all other men. A new found way to enrich and
ennoble you: but yet the true found way: without which, no man shall ever enjoy
that happy and ever blessed eternity of Gods presence. For the rule in Divinity
is most infallible: Heb. 12
Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see God:
so goodness and holiness must be followed, as a man follows his pleasure or
profit: and spent as a liberal, or rather as a prodigal man spends his
substance, or else there is no seeing of God. Therefore let us entertayne that
wise advice: Eccl. 11
Cast thy bread upon the waters; do good to others, even with the hazard not
only of the loss of the thing, but even with hazard and loss of thy self.

And surely so many examples and actions of Gods goodness to us, should move us
to this duty of goodness, in imitation of him. The earth is full of his
goodness to us. There is not a creature, but has bonitas, goodness, engraven
in great Characters upon it, to allure us to goodness: Behold, Valde bona:
Genesis 2
says God upon the reuiew of all his creatures; they were exceeding good.
Which could never have been, but by the goodness of God. But above all other
his goodnesses to us, being unspeakable, he has revealed to us the mystery
hid since the beginning of the world, the mystery of our salvation by Christ
Jesus: besides our peace, plenty, health, and many happy deliverances and
preseruations, both general and particular, has he heaped upon us. O that he
would be pleased to add one goodness more to these: that he would give us a
measure of goodness to make the true use of these his infinite goodnesses to
us, and to walk in some measure worthy of his goodness. Surely his goodness to
us calls for our goodness, seeing he makes all his creatures good to us, to draw
and allure us to goodness.

Now if we have not this goodness, to bestow all the benefits and blessings
of body and mind, wherewith God has enriched us, to his glory, and good of
others; then we are not only condemned of all the creatures, but also want the
true use of them; nay, they are but al bestowed upon us to our infinite hurt
and damage. For most true is that which the wise Roman concludes: Sen.
Nihil tibi bonum, sine te bono: There is nothing in the World can be good to
thee, except thou thy self be (...) good. Therefore (...) that great (...),
for every goodness of his bestowed on thee, shall be accounted for how it has
been employed to the good of others.

Thus come we to the second pillar of my Text, into eternal fire.

The Philosophers say, that Ens and bonum conuer tuntut: being and good, are
conuertible terms. So that there is nothing in the world but it is good: and
there is no good, but has a being; therefore if thou have a being, and be a
man, thou must have goodness, else thou loosest the name and being of a man:
but this good which they spoke of, is but a good of thy nature, not a good of
grace. And thou must labor if ever thou will have a being in Heaven, to get
this good of grace, this goodness of my text.

This text is such a body of divinity, that in the whole Scripture there can
scarce be any found to match it. For as goodness contains all our duties, to
God, to man, to our selves, to our neighbors, and to all the creatures, Pro. 12
(for a righteous man regards the life of his beast;) so it speaks to every
man in the world: for this duty is desired of every man; no man can say, it
appertains not to me, for it is said indefinitely, that, That is to be desired
of a man, is his goodness; not of this or that man; but of every man. So that
here I might examine and enforce this duty upon every particular man, and every
particular calling in the world, seeing none are freed from it.

There is no creature in the world that is so indigent and needy as man: For he
stands in need of the Sun, the fire, the water, the air, the earth, and all
the creatures to help him. Whence he should take examples to compassionate the
necessities of others, seeing all things since the creation never cease to
help our necessities. The learned do say, that Bonum est sui diffusiuum:
Dionis.
and summu^ bonum, sum communicatiuum: Good does ever diffuse and spread it
self abroad: and the chief good, which is God himself, does above other
things chiefly diffuse and communicate his goodness to others: and because
all the creatures are as so many goodnesses of God communicated to us,
therefore they all labor to help the necessities of others, as we see the
Heavens, the Sea, the Elements. Now seeing all of them do so much favor man, as
that without their goodness to him, he could not live, how much rather should
every man labor by all means to help man? Arist.
The Philosopher calls man the little world, the epitome and abridgement of the
world, in whom the epilogue and sum of all the world is contained, Therefore
seeing man has in him vertually all creatures, Sap. 1
let him from them take example to work as they do work. If he have the Sun
in him, let him do as the Sun: warm every man; help every man's necessity:
if he have the Earth in him; let him do as the Earth does, which nourishes
and sustayneth all living creatures. Let all the creatures be his
schoolmasters unto goodness. For all are made to do him good, and he is made
to do every man good. Hemo homini Deus, non daemo^: Man must be to man a God,
and not a devil: do him all good, but no harm. I should never have done in
this point, if I should enforce this duty upon every particular man, therefore I
will restrain my self, to these two observations. First, that every man must
know, there is a general duty of goodness required of him. Secondly, that
particular men have personal and particular duties of goodness to be expected
from them, according to their several functions and places. First, for the
general duty: the Prophet expresses it in four words: Mich. 6
He has showed thee O man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee:
surely to do justly, to love mercy, to humble thy self, and walk with thy
God. First the goodness of righteousness is required of every man to good
rightly, and justly to every man. He must be in all his ways as straight and
upright as the Fytre tree, that directly without any knot grows up toward
Heaven, without bowing a bayre from a most straight line. Job is commended for
such a just and upright man. Secondly, the goodness of mercy is required of
him. For Bonum est sui communicatinum: Good will disperse and communicate it
self. We see that trees do not bear fruit for themselves, but for the
benefit and good of others: and a good man out of the good treasure of his
heart, brings forth good things; so out of the good treasure of his hands, he
ministers to the necessities of others. He is merciful, liberal, and lends,
he has dispersed abroad, and the praise of him endures for ever. The
Samaritane in the Gospel, was such a merciful man. Thirdly, the goodness of
Humility is required of him: without which there is no entrance into joy. God
gives grace only to the humble. 1. Pet. 5
He must stoop that will come in at the low gate of Heaven; if he be never so
well furnished with other graces, and want this, his portion shall be with
hypocrites, and unbelievers. Fourthly, the goodness of obedience or diligence is
required. No Idle by comes to Heaven. He that will come there must ever be
walking the way that leads to it: it is a long journey, and cannot be
performed in less time then a man's whole life. And well may he walk to Heaven
who has God Socium itineris, to walk with him. If man will walk with God,
walk as he has walked, walk as he has taught him, and as he does guide him,
he shall never fail to come most happily to his iournies end.

Such a walking man was Enoch. By the continual motion of the Heavens, all
creatures are engendered and do live, without which motion, they could not
either increase or continue: So by our motion and walking with God all his
graces are beginner in us to (...) by that walking do live in us and bring us
to eternal life: without which walking with God, there is no hope, that we can
live with him for ever. This walking may be expressed in these 3. First that
there be a good and holy life. For Qualis vita, finis ita: such as is the life,
such will be the death. Secondly, a good fame, for that fattens the bones. Pro.
15
Thirdly, that there be a good Conscience, for that is a continual feast.

Secondly we observe, that particular men, must perform personal duties of
goodness: every man in his place and talling: as John Baptist teaches, when
the people came and demanded of him, Luc. 3
What shall we do, he answered, He that has two coats, let him part with him
that has none, and he that has meat, let him do likewise. Then the
Publicans asked, What shall we do? He said, Require no more, then that which is
appointed to you. Then the Soldiers demanded, What shall we do? he said, Do
violence to no man, neither accuse any man falsely, and be content with your
wages. So that of every man and woman of what degree or place soever they be,
there is a general and also a particular and personal duty of goodness
required: which in sum is no more, but to communicate to the benefit of
others all those graces and blessings of body and mind where with God has
trusted them.

3. The parties desiring this duty come to be considered in the next; place as
the third pillar of my text for it is not said, that, that this or that man
desires of a man: or that our friends desire of us, is our goodness. But that,
that is to be desired of a man, that is, that, that all the things of the world
desires of man, is his goodness. First then that which God desires of a man
is his goodness, as we saw before out of the Prophet, Saint Paul affirming
the same, Mich. 6
This is the will of God, 1 Thessalonians. 4
even your sanctification; and our Savior: Be you perfect, Math. 5.
as your heavenly Father is perfect. And how is that? He makes his Sun arise
upon the good and bad, and sends rain on the just and unjust. That God
looks for this duty of goodness at our hands, the parable of the Talents
makes it plain, for be that had lapt up his Talent in a napkin, was adjudged
to be cast into fire that cannot be quenched. Every man's Talents and graces
are given him of God, with this charge, Negotiamim donec veniam: Occupy till I
come: put my money, my graces of body and mind into the bank, that I may
receive my own with advantage, says the Lord.

The Parable of the wedding gatment shows the same, without which who appears
before God shall be bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness. The
unjust Steward that had wasted his Masters goods, was called to a red
rationem, a strickt Audit for all. And so shall all we be, for the goods and
graces God has put in our stewardships: it shall not avail us to plead that
of the Gospel in bar: When saw we thee in prison and did not visit thee?
Math. 25
or hungry and did not feed thee? or naked and did not cloth thee? For it
shall be answered, In as much as you did it not to the least of these, you did
it not to me: depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels.

The reason why God desires this goodness, is, for that in nothing come we so
near the divine and original goodness it self, which is God, as in true and
sincere goodness to others. Yea even to our enemies. For as the Prophet says,
Psalm. 78
though God did often deliner the Israelites, yet did they still rebel against
him. So infinite is the goodness of God, that by no ingratitude or rebellion
of man will he be overcome, until he be past cure. Even so a good man will
not upon every slight occasion withdraw his goodness, complaining of the
ingratitude and indignity of me^, but knows that God looks for goodness of
him, even such as himself shows to vile, unworthy, and rebellious sinners.
And here observe, that amongst all the rest of the parts of goodness that God
desires at our hands, this is not the least, that as it is his goodness to be
angry with sin, and to punish it in whomsoever he finds it, Heb. 12
and therefore chasteneth every son that he receives: so it is the true
mark of goodness in man, to be angry with sin, and to labor to check and kill
it. 1. Pet. 1
Saint Peter expresses this goodness thus: Be ye holy in all manner of
conversation for it is written, Be ye holy, because I am holy.

Secondly, the Angels desire this goodness of us. Hence it is, that our
Savior says. Luke 15
There is joy before the Angels for one sinner repenting. How can it the^ be,
but that they who greatly desire our goodness, seeing they so much joy when we
return from our wickedness: how can they but desire earnestly our goodness,
seeing that by it, the reparation of that great breach which Lucifer and his
fellows made, is fully made up? And so much do they desire our goodness, that
they are ministering spirits about us, sent forth for their sakes that are
heites of salvation: Heb. 1
And therefore cannot but desire that their service and ministry may take that
effect.

Thirdly, our neighbors, even all men, desire this goodness of us. being fellow
members of one body, without which he cannot any long time live. If the mouth
received not meat, the stomach disgested it, the liver transmitted the blood
to the heart, the heart sent it abroad to the rest of the members, and every
joint of the body did not his office, to the good of another; the whole body
could not live one hour. So it is in the body of the Church and Policy, if al
do not labor to the good of others, it will speedily grow diseased and dye.

The poor desire the goodness of our wealth and countenance: the rich the
goodness of our labors and pains: the King the goodness of our loyalty and
tribute: the Nobles, the goodness of our humility and service: the sick and
diseased, the goodness of our compassion and comfort the desperate, the goodness
of our counsel and care. And such is this duty of goodness, as that it is a
debt, we must ever owe one to another. Romans 13
Owe nothing to any man, but that you love one another. This Motto is written
on the forehead of every man in the world: Non solum nobis nati sumus, We are
not borne for our selves: and goodness cannot be so fast bound in the affections
of the heart, but it will break out, and stretch it self to all that have
need of it. Therefore truly it is said of that good Father: Aug.
Anima magis est vbi amat, quam vbi animat: The soul of man is more where it
loves, then where it lives.

Fourthly, Aug.
a good wife, a good house, good lands, nay, good hose and shoes; and do
thou not desire te bonant? to have thy self good? What a thing is this, that
thou should est desire to have all other things good, and not thy self good?
Surely thou do cross thy own desires, with thy own deeds. For the
righteous man, nay every man living, desires goodness of himself. But the
righteous desires nothing else but goodness. One thing have I desired, Psa. 2^
and that will I require, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple.
I counted all things but dung, Phil. 3
that I might be made conformable to Christ, says the Apostle. And so far
is the nature of man in love with goodness, that he glories in the title,
albeit he have no right in the thing, and storms if he be not counted a good
man. But the truly wise man knowing Nihl sibi bonum, Sen.
sine se bono: That nothing is good to a man, unless himself be also good,
desires above all other things, that be may be a good man indeed. For so has
he the benefit of all Gods creatures; so are they good and comfortable to him;
else are they but all to his greater condemnation.

One says, that the chief title which God in Scripture gives himself, is
Bonitas, Goodness. Dionis. de diui. nom. 2.1
Because it is the property of all good things to communicate and enlarge
themselves to others. Therefore most agreeable to God, who raines down all his
benefits upon us: and that therefore all other names of God, are but
expositions and commentaries upon this name. So the proper name of man is
Goodness, but in an infinite lower degree; and all his other titles and styles,
be they never so great and awefull, are but glosses and commentaries upon it.
And God is pleased to communicate this name with man, that he might learn,
that as God desires nothing in himself but goodness, nor nothing more to be
proclaimed of him then his goodness: so man should not love any thing in
himself, but goodness: nor ever think himself truly honored, but when
proclamation may be made of his goodness.

This I confess, is one of the greatest goodnesses that can be in us, to love
nothing in our selves but our goodness. Alexander having on a time many
Philosophers with him at a banquet, would needs have it disputed, what was the
greatest thing in the world. Some of them said, the bill Olympus, some the
Heavens, some the Sun, some the Earth: but one of them said, that surely the
heart of man must needs be the greatest: for that in a moment of time it did
pass through the whole world, Heaven, Earth, Sea and all. For Nihil mirabile
praeter animum, Greg.
cui magno, nihil est magnum; Nothing is wonderful but the mind of man, unto
which when it is great, nothing seems great. Therefore he that has so great a
mind and heart, that nothing but Heaven contaynes it (and such a heart has
every child of God,) will love nothing in himself but goodness, that may bring
him to the place where he would be. So by having this great thing which every
man has, (for every man has a heart) and adding but to it the least thing in
the world, which is goodness: he shall have that in himself that is worth
many worlds, and will make him love nothing in himself but his goodness.

Finally, goodness is all that all the creatures of God desires of man. Aug.
Coelum and terra, and quicquid in ijs est, vndique mihi dicunt vt te amem,
Domine, nec cessant hoc dicere omnibus vt sint inexcusabiles: The heaven and
earth, and all that is in them, speak unto me O Lord, that I should love thee;
nor do they at any time cease to speak the same to all men, that they might be
inexcusable. And what is this voice of nature, but that we should have this
goodness which proceeds from the love of God? Hence has the law ordained,
that if thy neighbors Ass fall into the dirch, thou should lift him up;
not only in respect of thy duty to thy neighbor, but also to the beast which
stands in need of thy help, of thy goodness. And it is also commanded, that
thy beast should rest the seventh day: it is a goodness thy beast desires of
thee. Besides, thou must not mouzel themouth of the Ox that treades out the
corn: that duty of goodness thy Ox desires of thee. And hence it is said, Pro.
12
that the righteous man regardes the life of his beast.

And because we do not perform this duty of goodness to the creatures,
therefore do they groan and sigh, Romans 8
as people under a cruel Tyrant, to be delivered from the bondag and cruelty
under which we hold them. And I marvel in my heart, when I seriously think
on it, we do not hear them sigh and groan. For surely they speak in their
language aloude: and if our horrible sins did not strangely deaf us, we
should hear them. For even for this cause, that we do not perform this duty
of goodness to them, but do miserably abuse and tyrannize them, do they rebel
against us: the heaven drowning the earth, the air infecting our bodies, the
earth denying her fruit, and all of them being up in arms against us, to be
revenged of us for want of goodness to them. For never was there any bloody or
merciless Tyrant in the world, that did so wickedly tyrannize over his people,
as we in this Age do tyrannize and abuse all the good creatures of God. Now
then, if thou have not this goodness to bestow all thou have or art, to the good
of others: thou art first injurious to God: secondly injurious to the Angels:
Thirdly injurious to Mankind: Fourthly injurious to thy own Soul: Fifthly
injurious to all the creatures. Most injurious art thou to God, because thou
rebellest against him; to the Angels; because thou grieuest them; to Man,
because thou do not love him: to thy self, because thou hate thy own
Soul: to the creatures, because thou abufest them.

Seeing then, all that God and Angels, Men and thy own Soul, the heavens, and
all the creatures desire of thee, is thy goodness: thou art taught hereby to
regulate and order thy affections and desires toward all men, according to the
same rule: namely, not to desire that they might be rich, honorable, learned,
beautiful or the like: but to desire that they might be good, godly, pious,
gracious, and in all manner of conversation godly.

And not only so, but withal, that they may grow in goodness; for that also
does God, Angels, men, our selves, and the creatures desire of us. Solus Deus
melior esse non vult, quia non valet, says that devout Father: Only God it is
that will not be better, Ber.
because he cannot be better; but with men, it must not be so. Minime pro certo
bonus es, si non vis esse melior, vbi incipis nolle esse melior, ibi desinis
esse bonus. For a truth thou art not good, if thou desire not to be better:
For where thou beginnest not to desire to be better, there thou leauest off to
be good at all. Therefore we must desire that al me^ may grow from says to
says, from grace to grace, Ephesians. 4
follow the truth in love, and grow up into him in all things, who is the head,
which is Christ. Even as the body from a small beginning, grows till it come to
a full stature and furniture of every part: so must christians grow. Phil. 3
This was the practice of all holy me^t I follow hard toward the mark for the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Step after step did this holy man
follow, till he came to the very top of holiness.

Thus are we come to the fourth and last column of this building, viz: the
reasons enforcing this duty of goodness. These I find in the Text to be six.
The First I called Facilitas officij, the facility of the duty. For it is but
one duty for all, only goodness. It was wont to be said, Tria sunt omnia:
Three things includes all things: But now it is said, Vnumest omnia, one thing
is all things. Goodness answers to all. At the first God gave man 10.
commandments, but because the number seemed tedious, our Savior contracted
them all into two, the love of God, and of our neighbors. But here for our
better help and memory, all are reduced (...) one, namely, Bonitas, Goodness.
Vnum necessarium: one thing is necessary.

And yet being but one, I know not how it grows heavy; but sure I am, that as
our Savior said, to that good young man, that had performed all the
Commandments from his youth up; yet one thing is wanting: so he may truly say
to us all, This one thing of goodness is awanting. What shame is it to neglect
one duty, so easy, because but one duty and no more? What shame not to do a
duty so easy as is goodness? the very name of it makes it easy: For we love the
name. And Omnia difficilia facit amor facilia: Love makes all difficult things,
to be of great facility. What is more easy, then to understand and do that
which is good? Is it not more easy then to do evil? Surely there is much more
difficulty in doing evil then in doing good. For as nothing is more difficult
then for birds to make wings against the storm, sloops to sail against the
wind and tide, Planets to move against the motion and course of the firmament;
so is nothing more difficult for man then to fly against the blast of the Holy
Ghost, to make head against the floods and storms of his own Conscience, and
to run against the firmament of Gods commandments: all which do mainely
resist the evil actions of sinful men, and assist the endeavors of Gods
children. Therefore it was said to Saul, Act. 9
It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. Hence the wicked themselves
confess, that they are wearied in the way of wickedness: but the godly find
no such lassitude and weariness in the way of godliness; but do with David,
run the way of Gods commandments, nay, they take more pleasure in them, then
in all manner of riches; they are the very joy of their hearts. Therefore if
goodness be not easy unto us, we are not yet in Christ; for unto his, the
commandments are not grievous, His yoke is easy. And albeit the Philosopher
says, that the object of virtue, is Bonum and difficile, a good, difficult and
hard to compass: Sen.
And the wise Roman: that Res difficilis est Virtus: Virtue is a difficult
point to obtain: yet that is only: First in respect of the natural man, 1.
Cor. 1
who perceiues not the things of the spirit of God, and therefore has great
reluctation in doing of good. Secondly, in that evil presents it self unto
him, in the habit of good, and so makes the commission of the act more facill.
Thirdly, in respect of the opposition that Satan makes by his manifold
temptations, making way for the commission of sin, casting blocks in the way
of virtue. But simply in respect of the nature of the thing it self, goodness
and virtue is much more facill to a man endued with the spirit of God, then
wickedness and vice. And therefore the Apostle said, I can do all things
through him that comforts me.

The second reason I said, Necessitas officij, the necessity of the duty, taken
from the bond, whereby we are tied to God, Angels, men, our selves, and the
creatures: to all which, but chiefly to God, we are by so many obligations
bound to perform this duty. All these do cry unto us; Bonum te fecit Deus,
and tu faceres bonitatem: God did therefore make thee good, that thou should
do that is good. Therefore if we have not this goodness, these four, God,
Angels, man, and the creatures, shall rise up in judgment against us.
Miserable men that we are, who shall have, Deum iratum, Conscientia^ mordentem,
amicos inim cos, and creaturas armatas: God angry with us, our Conscience
biting and gnawing us, our friends turned to be our enemies, and the creatures
armed against us, and condemn us for want of this goodness which they desire
of us, and we are tied to perform to them all. The wife do say, Sen.
that the Laws appoint no punishment against ingrate and unthankful men, but
in respect of immanity and greatness of the offense, leaves it unto God to
punish; whereas they discern and appoint punishments for thieves, murderers,
and other malefactors. Let us then take heed of Gods most severe judgments
for our monstrous ingratitude, who being bound unto him so infinitely for his
unspeakable goodness, have in us so little goodness, as that neither God,
Angels, Man, our selves, nor the creatures, can have any goodness of us, but
all vnthankefullnesse.

But if the necessity might not move us, yet, Modus officij, have commanded it.
To deny a duty to him, who lovingly desires and intreates the discharge of it,
and that without our hurt, nay to our eternal good: (as the Apostle speaks,
who desired a fruit that might further the Phillippians reckoning: Phil. 4
not a gift for himself, but a fruit of the spirit, even goodness, that
odor that smells sweet, a Sacrifice acceptable and pleasing to God:) to deny,
I say, a due debt so sweetly entreated, so profitable to them that pay it, as
that it inricheth them more and more, and the oftener they pay it, the more
they have, being like the treasures of Gods house, the more we taste them, the
more in-exhausted they are; to deny this debt so sweetly demanded, so
profitable being performed, is great inhumanity, and no less indiscretion.

Yet if the manner of demanding do not move us, Tempus officij, the time of
performing this duty which is the fourth motive, the Holy Ghost uses, stir
up this goodness in us. He does not say, that which shall be, or has been
desired, but that which is even now desired; whilst the beams of Gods
goodness by the preaching of the Gospel, and other infinite blessings bestowed
on us, do shine upon us. Even now let us show forth this fruit of the spirit,
this goodness, whilst we have time, let us do good. Gal. 6
Let us remember our creator in the days of our youth, Eccles. 12
before the days come, in which we will say, we have no pleasure in them. Let
us ever be doing some good. Non semper aestas fuerit, co^ponite nidos, the
summer will not last ever, let us make our nests against the sharp assaults of
winter. The day will not continue for ever, the night comes when no man can
work. Our time is but short and uncertain; one little nunc, one short now;
therefore wholly to be spent in goodness. To do good and distribute forget
not, for with such Satrifice God is, pleased. If we consider in what miserable
plight the foolish virgins are that took not their time, Math. 25.
or the rich glutton that abused his time, Luc. 16.
we will make more precious account of time then we do.

And because, there is none of Gods blessings greater then time, and yet none
more abused, I must not be slack in commending this argument of time unto you
something largely. For all of us spend our times too carelessly, either male
agendo, or nihil agendo, or aliud agendo; in doing wickedly, in doing nothing,
or in doing every thing rather then that we should do. Consider therefore, I
pray you, advisedly these few arguments to stir us up to the right use of our
time.

Consider first, Sir. 4
and eschew the thing that is evil. Give not thy years to the cruel: (...) 5
it is a very foolish and mad thing to give so precious a thing as is our time,
to so cruel an enemy as is Satan, spending it in his service. Redeem the
time: Ephe. 5
that is, purchase it back again out of morgage, at any rate. Whilst we
have time, let us do good. Gal. 6
Infinite are the passages of Scripture, where the holy Ghost insists purposely
upon this argument of preserving our time: the day of the Lord will come as a
thief in the night, as sorrow upon a woman in travel, as the lightning out of
the East into the West: Therefore watch, says our Savior, make use of this
present time.

Consider withal, Omnia tempus habent, There is a time for every thing under
the Sun.

Consider also, Job 14
they are but a spanne long, as David says: a thousand years with the Lord,
are but as yesterday that is past. Job 7 Sens
even as a weauers shuttle. Infinita est velocitas temporis, punctum est quod
viuimus, and puncto minus: says the wise Roman, Infinite is the swiftness of
our time, it is but a point or moment that we live, and less then a moment.

Let us then consider the pretiousnesse of time: Bern.
Heu tempore nihil pretiosius, at hodie nihil vilius inuenitur; Alas, there is
nothing more precious then time, and yet at this day, there is not found a
thing that men make viler account of: The pretiousnesse of time is set forth
vntows, in these three conceptions. First, had them: but can never obtain it.

Consider besides, of every one of us: our stock of time, is wonderful short:
for even now we are, and even now we are not: yet do we spend it, as if we
should never come to the bottom of our store. Bern.
O, says that good Father, Sicognouisses quam multa, and quam multis debeas,
videres quod nihil est, quod facis: If thou did deft but know how much and to
how many thou oweft thy time, thou would confess, that all thou do is
just nothing. 1. Recogitare omnes annos tuos, in amarioudine animae tuae: To
think upon all thy years past, in the bitterness of thy soul. 3. and all
that thou have for this? And yet when all is done, the sufferings of this life
are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed.

If we consider the account that must be made of our time, Bern.
Omne tempus tibi impensum, requiretur ate, qualiter sit expensum: Every hour
of time that God has bestowed on thee in this life, shall be required of
thee, in what sort it is spent. And it is most sure, that Sicut capillus (as
the same Father says) non peribit de capite, sic nec momentum de tempore: As
one hair of the head shall not perish, so one moment of time shall not pass
without being accounted for. O how strong and unanswerable an argument will the
benefit of time be against them that have abused it! and wholly bestowed it to
the dishonor of God, and satisfying of their own lusts!

But seeing most men make no reckoning of this account; Reliqua a nobis aliena
sunt, Sen.
tempus tantu^ nostrum est, All other things may be taken from us, but time is
such a thing as no Tyrant can take from us. Time does so adhere to our beings,
that if we lose time, we do in some sort lose our selves. So that he who
loses the one half of his time, loses half himself; he that loses all
his time, loses all himself; and look how much a man loses of his time, so
much he loses of himself. Therefore in this consideration, every man being
most dear unto himself, we should have great care of using our time well,
that we do not utterly lose our selves.

Yet happily none of these reasons being able to work out any respect for
times privilege, Sen.
Quis intelligit, says the learned Roman, se quotidie mori? Who is it that
understands how he does daily die? Quotidie morimur, quotidie demitur aliqua
pars vitae, et tunc cum crescimus, vita decrescit. We die daily, daily some
part of our life is taken from us, and whilst we increase and grow, our life
does decrease and fade. The hour glass which we hourly behold, and does now
measure out my speech unto you, is a perfect emblem, and resemblance of the
loss of our lives, by the hand of time: for as it does insensibly grow great
below, so does it waste and grow less and less above, until it be utterly
spent. Such is the spending and loss of man's life by time: every moment
depriues him of a little portion of life, and never leaves till it have
deprived him of all, and left him timelesse as the glass is sandlesse. These
considerations, would God might work in us some care to bestow our times
better then we have done, in piety and goodness which my text desires now of us.

THE SECOND Sermon.
PRO. 19.22. That that is desired of a man is his goodness, or, the desire of
a man is his kindness.


AS you have been graciously pleased to take a view of the front and outroomes
in the Palace of goodness, so lend me your patience, I beseech you, awhile,
till by this Perspectiue, I give you a full survey of the whole building.

The next room then that you see, affordes another argument out of the Text to
enforce this duty of goodness: which I call Familiaritas officij, The
familiarity and naturallnesse of the duty: being such, as that no creatute but
has a particular goodness, and all for our good, without which we could not
live an hour. Therefore one says, that Bonitas est id, Raymund.
ratione cuius bonum agit bonum: Goodness is that, by reason whereof, good
does that which is good. The creature is therefore naturally good, that it
might do us some good; if then we would enjoy the goodness of the creatures,
and not turn those excellent blessings into cursings, let us imitate them in
goodness, seeing we are Lords of the creatures. They have all their goodness
to the benefit of us, and one of another: Let us not be more dull then the
insensible creatures. There is written upon every creature these three
sentences; Accipe beneficium, read debitum, cave supplicium: Receive the
benefit of the creatures: do the duty of the creatures: take heed of the
punishment for abusing and not imitating the creatures. If the^ thou will take
the comforts of the creatures, and not do the duty of the creatures, be sure
thou shall not avoid the punishment: the benefit of them is, the supply of thy
wants: the duty is goodness and thankefulnes to God for that supply; Deuteronomy.
28.28
the punishment madness, for want of that duty.

The last but not the least argument to provoke this duty of goodness, I call
Excellentia officij, quod, is the force of this reason: as if he should have
said, That duty and none else: that particularly and alone, and none else but
that. Not wisdom, nor knowledge, nor honor, nor riches, nor strength, nor
beauty, not any other thing but that, even that goodness which answers to all.
Truly may that be spoken of goodness, which the wise King spoke of that
excellent woman; Pro. 31
many daughters have done virtue ously, but thou surmountest them all. Many
graces are commended, but goodness surpasses them all. There was never any
ship brought home any such merchandise; never any vineyard bore any such
grapes: never field any such fruit; never wool, any such cloth; never flax,
any such linen. For strength and honor are the clothing of goodness, and in
the latter day, goodness shall rejoice. To goodness it shall be said, Mat. 25
Behold good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful in little, I
will make thee ruler over much, enter into thy Masters joy.

Now the holy Ghost not without great cause has thus fortified and enforced
this duty of goodness with so many strong motives and reasons. Because Satan
impugnes nothing more then the progress and success of goodness. For 1.
whereas the holy Ghost commends the duty to us, from the facility of it, and
that in a double respect: First, because but one duty: Secondly, for that a
lovely duty, the duty of goodness: Satan labors to infringe this argument by
instilling this persuasion intows, that a good man's life is like a ring: the
beginning and ending, is without beginning and ending: like a husbandmans life,
ever plowing, or harrowing, or sowing, or dunging, or weeding, or reaping,
still in labor: from prayer to sermons: from sermons to prayer and meditation,
from that to reading and discoursing, from one holy exercise to another.
Therefore not so easy a matter, says he, as they would make it seem. And
besides, neither is it so lovely a duty, says he, for few of any fort can away
with the company of goodness. Thus spoke he in the Scribes and Pharisees against
our Savior Christ: Do any of the Rulers believe in him? 2. Pharaoh, Who is
the Lord that I should obey him? As in those wicked: Who is the Almighty that
we should serve him? Job 21
and what profit should we have, Sap. 2
Our time is short, come let us enjoy the good things that are present: let us
use the creatures as in youth, let us fill our selves with new wine, let us
anoint our selves with the best ointments, let not the flower of our time
pass away, let us crown our selves with rose buds; let none of us go without
his part of voluptuousness, let us leave some token of our pleasures every
where, for this is our portion, this our lot. This persuasion he used with the
rich man in the Gospel, whose sentence was, Hac nocte repetent animam tuam,
This night will they fetch away thy Soul, and then whose shall all these
things be?

Fifthly, care of our selves. Lastly where it is commended under the title of
excellency, Satan persuades that the most excellent things are, honors,
riches, carnal pleasures, fleshly delights, ease, greatness, and the like:
even as Jeroboam did with the Israelites touching the golden Calves: These are
thy Gods O Israel, that brought thee out of Egypt: and as he did to our
Savior, showing him all the kingdoms of the world, as the most excellent
things, and to be preferred before all goodness, all duties to God or man.
Therefore our good God knowing that Satan by might and maine opposes the
growth and thrift of goodness, does here thus strongly enforce it, by a six
fold cable: of reason.

But alas, for all this, so little do all these motives prevail, and so much
does Satan, that it may be said of the greatest part of men in our times as
truly, as one spoke truly and merrily of the Pope; that all his holiness was
in his heels, and for that cause men desired so much to kiss his foot: so
all our goodness is (at the best) in our lips, but for the most part in our
heels, and on our backs; and therefore we make so many kisses and applauses,
and services on our heels and backs; many mean men (God knows) carrying as
much cost about their heels, as our best noble men within this forty years
wore about their heads. And this is the greatest part of our times goodness.

But now that I am speaking of the excellency of this duty, I should do you
wrong to conceal any part of her beauty from you. Acquaint your selves
therefore, I pray you with these three considerations, to the end you may the
better be acquainted with the excellency of goodness. The first is, what kinds
of goodness there are. The Second, what rules of goodness are to be
observed. The third, what are the evidences and marks of goodness.

I find but three kinds. Barnabas, Acts. 11
who coming to Antioch, and seeing the grace of God that was given them,
confirmed them therein, exhorting that with purpose of heart they would cleave
to the Lord.

The Second is, Math. 5
Hence Christ calls peacemakers the children of God. For no son resembles
his father so much in any quality as those resemble God, that make peace. Psalm.
67
For God makes men to be of one mind in a house, and so will the children of
God also labor to do.

There is another kind of goodness, Romans 12.
And for spiritual things and blessings, 1. Pet. 4
as every man has received, so must he distribute. 1. Tim. 6
Herein we must be like Dorcas, Acts 9
who clothed the poor with garments she made at her own cost. Like the good
woman who opens the palm of her hand to the poor: Pro. 31
like good Job whom the loins of the poor blessed. Thirdly, Job. 31
we must be much in goodness: which is in communicating to others
abundantly the blessings wherewith God has stored us, not in loving only,
but in liberal supplying their wants also. As Obadiah did in spending his
living and ventring his life, 1. Reg. 12
to hide a thousand of the Lords Prophets from the rage of wicked Iezabell.
Luc. 21
then be wanting in the contribution of the Lords treasury; and therefore cast
into the Corban two mites, even all she had. So that we must relieve the wants
of others as we are able, and sometimes above that we are able, as Paul said
of the Corinthians, that to their power and beyond their power, 2. Cor. 8
they were willing to minister to the necessities of the brethren.

Now are we to know what are the rules to be observed in goodness, and those I
find to be 4. The first rule is, that we must do good only of that is our
own. No robbing of Peter to pay Paul. No dealing unjustly with any to do
good to others: Is. 61
such Sacrifice God abhorres. Hence David would not offer burnt Sacrifice of
that which cost him nothing, 1. Cron. 2^
which was not his own. Secondly, we must do good with alacrity and
cheerfulness: 2. Cor. 9
Therefore one says very aptly, Well doing must proceed from well wishing, Ambr.
for such as is the affection, such will be the action. Therefore we must give
freely, else it is no gift. In doing good we must not be hucksters, we must
not truck one for another, for even Publicans and sinners do the same.
Therefore one says truly, Danda sunt beneficia, non foeneranda: Lact.
Good turns and benefits are freely to be given, not couetously put to usury.
Thirdly, the next rule is, that we so give to others, that we disable not our
selves, from just maintenance of our selves. Act. 11
All sent succor to the brethren, but yet it was according to their ability:
but herein I need not spend much argument, for our age gives not a man of this
excess. The last rule is,

But here some may object unto me, God himself does not all the good he may
do, nor yet hinder all the evil he may; therefore neither are we bound to do
it.

For satisfaction hereof, Romans 3.
that good may come thereof: but God is not subject to any Law, no, not to his
own Law: besides, he has power to dispense with it; so have not we.
Secondly, is able to draw good out of evil, and light out of darkness, which
we cannot do. Thirdly, 2. Tim. 2.
Thirdly, those parts of the house that are destitute of goodness, as sinkes,
draughts, and such voyding places, (serving for base, yet necessary uses) are
ordained to the common good of the whole house, and so, as that it cannot want
them, without a great inconvenience. And therefore if the master builder (to
prevent these particular evils) should leave them our of his building, he
should prejudice and hurt the common good of his house, which cannot be
without them. So has our God provided in this goodly building of the World,
that every man should be good in his nature and kind: and that some should be
vessels of honor, better then the rest, and withal that the wicked and
impenitent, which are the sinks and draughts to keep the rest of the house
sweet, should for the common good, exercise, and service of the whole house,
be tolerated as necessary, though stinking and noy-some evils.

Next are we to consider the marks and evidences of goodness; that it may
be known of every man. It is so painted out in the holy Scriptures, and in
such broad characters, that even runners may read them. Therefore if you
would know where goodness is by the head, you must observe these four
enrollements, First, her witnesses. Secondly, her seals and assurances.
Thirdly, vshers. Fourthly, her attendants.

First, 2. Cor. 7.
Saint Paul has rankt them for you into a short but sweet sum. These
witnesses are without all exception; they will prove infallibly where goodness
is. Let us produce them. The first witness, is a care to come out of our
sins. The second is,

The seals and assurances of goodness, Peter, 2. Pet. 1
they are also seven in number. The first of them is a lively faith working by
love. God in Jesus Christ. The third is, Jesus Christ: These seals make our
calling and election sure, for if these things be in us, we shall never fall.
Let our labor be to get these seals of goodness, to seal unto us the
inheritance of Heaven.

But the better to know this noble Empress, For as Kings and noble Personages
are known by their vshers, even so is goodness. Now she has not only one, but
five several vshers; Gal. 5
no quarter waiters, they wait all at once.

In a word, ever know her by them. They are but three: Gal. 5
as Saint Paul accounts them; but they are worth all the glittering traynes of
Kings and Emperors of the world.

Thus goes goodness attended, you easily may know her by her train, no King in
the world is so nobly attended. For seldom do such servants as these get any
room to serve in with great personages. Only goodness gives them
entertaynement, else they might go a begging. For who will admit into his
service, such poor, base, bare, lean, hunger-bitten strangers, as faith,
meekness, and temperance; but I must make an end. Thus you see what a world
of excellent matter my theme offers me: even a whole body of Divinity, an
Ocean of learning. But I must now be contented to have brought you thus far
acquainted with goodness: in hope that Gods grace may so work the love of it
in your hearts, that you may be enamoured and ravished with the wonderful
beauty of it.

And that this beautiful Rahel may possess the love of your hearts, the only
way is, to put away that bleare eyde Leah, the love of the world; for the love
of goodness, and the love of this world can never stand in any league
together. The sick person though he change his bed and lodging never so
often, has never the better rest, because he carries his sickness with him,
the cause of his unrest. So though we lie never so soft, though we think never
so well of our selves, yea except we put away the love of our goods, which
does hinder evermore the love of goodness, we shall never become the children of
goodness, or heirs with God.

Temporal things, may well be compared to the tree that the Elephant leanes
unto, that being half cut through, deceiues him when he leanes unto it. Like
unto mandrage, which if duly taken, is good phificke, but if immoderatly, it
casts one asleep, congeales the spirits, and killes the natural faculties: So
do riches and the things of this life, if we love them immoderately; they cast
us into strange dreams, make us grow cold in devotion and religion,
congeales our affections, and in conclusion kills both soul and body. Like the
seeds of henbane, which kill all birds saving Sparrowes, Auicenna.
to whom they are nourishing food: and it kills not the^, as one says, because
their veins are so narrow, that the fumes of it cannot pass to the heart, to
kill it, as they do to other creatures. So temporal blessings do not hurt
the godly, as they do the wicked; because they have the narrow veins of
knowledge and pity, so that the deadly fumes of that henbane, the love of
worldly things, never pass to the heart: If riches increase, if honors
increase, they set not their hearts upon them. For as the Wise man says, Sir.
39
Omnia bonis in bonum, All things to the good and godly are turned to good. If
then we will give our own souls satisfaction, touching this excellent duty of
goodness, which is Totum hominis, All that can be desired of a man: let us not
lean to this false deceiuable tree of the world, that is cut thorough, and
deceiues and ruins all the Elephants and mighty men of the world, that lean
unto it: nor let us so greedily swallowe this Mandrage which stupifies our
understandings and reasons, congeales our devotion, and goodness, and casts us
into a dead sleep of security. Nor let us adventure upon this henbane, that so
soon kills the heart, except we be assured of our selves, that we are those
holy Sparrowes, that will not suffer the fumes of it: that is, the love of the
world to possess our hearts. For it is this goodness only, that is like unto
Salomons silver, Eccles. 10
and answers unto all. I know the world does like much better of Salomons
silver, then of Salomons goodness: but it is for want of that acquaintance
with goodness, that they have with silver. Cicero says, that in his time, Nihil
erat tam populare quam bonitas; There was nothing that the people of Rome
affected more then goodness; and what made goodness so popular, but the practice
of it, and the number of excellent persons, as Cato, Fabritius, and many more,
who loved and countenanced it? Such men are the very bars, gates, and brazen
walls of kingdoms. Therefore one said well, Chrysostom.
that in a kingdom well governed, the want of one good man was more, then the
famine of bread and wine. For we have seen God send a famine for the demerits
of one man, and after that, abundance for one good man's sake. What goodness has
a commonwealth, if it have no good men? And what wants it, if it want not good
men? To which purpose is that, Clem. in Ituer. lib. 1
one reports of Saint Peter, that he heard Saint Peter speak it: That if
Abraham had not interceded, when God burnt Sodom and her three sisters with
fire and brimstone, the whole world had been burnt, so wicked was the whole
world at that day: and yet at Abraham's prayer, the judgment fell only on
Sodom and her three sisters. And surely it seems, that the prayer of Lot
saved Zoar, albeit the Inhabitants were most flagitious and wicked men. And of
such value are good men, that a Father confesses, Aug.
whenever he heard a knell ring for the dying, his soul was sore perplexed,
whether he should pray for the good that die, that they might live longer, or
the wicked that live, that they might live better. For that there is as great
reason to weep for the life of the badde, as for the death of the good. All
this that I have said, is to show the invaluable worth of goodness and good men,
and what preservatives they are to that State wherein they live and are
cherished.

Now must I then conclude all I have to say, in these three observations out of
the Text.

The first is, that under this one vocable of Goodness, is comprised all the
substance and marrow of piety, religion and honesty; and under that word, Man,
every man living of what condition soever: whereby we may be put in mind of an
excellent grace, that should be amongst us: namely, unity. That we should be
all, Tanquam vir vnus, As one man in every thing that tends to the glory and
preservation of the Church and Policy; to be thus one, is to be all and more
then all: to be more or less then thus one, is in the end, to be none and
less then none.

Division is an ill companion to glory, perpetuity and safety: A house divided,
a Kingdom, a City, cannot stand. Truth that cannot lie, has spoken it, and
those divided shall surely feel it. One is the beginning of all numbers,
without which no number can be, into which all numbers are resolved, and by
addition of which, Acts 17
numbers are multiplied. So God has of one blood made all nations of men; nay,
we are all the of spring of God himself, who is simplicissima vnitas, The most
simple unity. And we cannot be of the number of his children, except we
begin, continue, and end in one; nay, resolve all as one man; and so by
addition of this one, shall we be multiplied as the stars of Heaven which
cannot be numbered.

All excellent things in nature are but one: one Frmament, one Sun, one Sea,
one Earth, one Fire, one Air, and every precious stone, is but vnio, an union
of many beauties and perfections in one body. All excellent things above nature
are but one: one God, one Faith, one Hope, one Charity; so in my Text, one man,
one goodness: therefore if we will be excellent any kind of way, in nature,
or in grace, we must be one. As many members make but one body, many branches
but one tree, many grains but one loaf, so many persons by faith and love,
make but one Church. My dove, Cant. 6
my undefiled is but one, says Christ. Ye are all one in Jesus Christ, says
Paul: Gal. 3
there is neither Jew nor Gentile, English not Scottish, bond nor free, male
nor female; but all are one. Genesis 45
What then? Then fall not out by the way, says Joseph to his brethren: Gal. 5
If you bite and devour one another, take heed ye be not consumed one of
another.

Charity and love is like the cement and mortar, that of many stones and those
different in nature, makes one wall, able to keep off the violence of many
storms. Like the seed Pistillij, that of sundry pieces of flesh in one pot,
makes not only good broth, but also one firm lump. For whersoeuer the seeds
of charity sown in the heart by the holy Ghost, do boil, they work a sound
conjunction of natures in themselves most divided. Wheresoever is bonitas,
goodness, there all me^ are but as one man: every one laboring the good of
another, as his own. The Poets feign, that the three Gorgons being three most
beautiful sisters, had all three but one eye, which they lent one to another
by turns: so must we lend not only all the eye of the heart, but even all
the good we have received to the good of others. For as there are many members
of the body, yet but one heart to impart life to them all: so all cit we are
many, yet must we have but one heart: the multitude of believers have but one
heart, Acts 2.
one soul. God will give them one heart, and put a new spirit into them. Shall
the wicked say, Ezekiel. 11
Marsupium sit vnvm, Pro. 1
let us have all one purse, and shall not we much rather say, Let us have one
heart? Behold how good and joyful a thing it is, for brethren to dwell in
unity? First, it is good. Secondly, pleasant. Sen.
Et nullius boni sine socio, iucunda possessio, Without a companion, there is
no pleasure in any possessions. Thirdly, it is dear; for brethren: and what
more dear then they? Fourthly, it is safe: for in vnum, they dwell in unity.
Many valiant soldiers are not easily overcome: many sticks in a bundle, many
small hayres in a lace are not easily broken, by the strongest man.

Consider, should masters of Families be in their wives and servants? How
blessed should the Church be in their magistrates and preachers?

What mischief the want of this direction works in all estates is well seen,
and lamentably felt. But especially if the servants of kings and Princes be not
advanced for their goodness. If the wife and servant know not God, fear him
not, lead not a godly and Christian life, they are ill chosen wives and
servants. If the magistrate and the preacher do not the like, and make a
Conscience of all their ways; they are but staynes to their places, and banes
to their own Souls. It is not wealth, nor wit, nor beauty and kindred in
wives: It is not sharpness of wit, excellency of shape, Learning, wisdom,
nor other excellent qualities in servants, that makes them fit, but only
goodness. It is not wit, and experience and skill in the Laws and policy,
not eloquence and profoundnesse in the magistrate and preacher that makes them
fit: but only goodness. For that is the whole dimension of an excellent
man, and what he wants of that, he wants of Man.

Lastly, wasting and wandering through the veins of this land. And after all
these, worse then all these, a deadly unrecoverable blow, which striking at the
root, lopt away the noblest, highest, and chiefest branch, the right eye of
this land, the glorious Sunrising of a happy succeeding age, the very joy of
our hearts took away, Pr. Hen.
I say suddenly, and for our finnes, for our pride, whoredom and other
monstrous impieties; for want of goodness, I say it again and again, for
want of goodness. Let us take heed that our sins provoke not God any more:
For as the wife Roman said well: Sen.
In illa die qua luserant nauigia, absorbentur: In the same day that the
ships seem to dally and play with the Ocean, in the same day are they
swallowed up. So was it with us then, and so now: we were under sail, top and
toppegallant: but suddenly a storm came, that not only made us strike sail,
but brake our maine mast close to the hatches. God grant it never be so any
more with us. The Israelites would not let David go out to battle, lest they
should extinguish the light of Israel: How much more ought our care to be, that
our ungodliness and impieties put not out the light of England? For our sins
are more like to do it to us, then David's battles to them. God in his greatest
mercy continue his goodness to us, that this blessed spark of our hope, Pr.
Char.
this glorious beam of our comforts, be never put out, be never eclipsed: but
that he may come to his grave in a full age, Job. 5
as a shock of corn comes in, in his season: that the stones of the field
may be at league with him, and the beasts of the field at peace with him; that
there may be peace in his Tabernacle all the days of his life, and in his
death, the peace of God, Amen.

FINIS.


LONDON: Printed by Nicholas Oaks, dwelling in Foster-lane, 1619.


