A civil nosgay wherein is contained not only the office and dewty of all
magestrates and Judges but also of of all subjects with a preface concerning
the lyberty of Justice in this our time newly collected and gethered out of
latin and so translated in to the Inglyshe tongue by.
I. G.

The preface.
COn^iderynge how in these our days GOD has wrought, and daily works
such wonderful and blyssed things, as by many many years before, the like
has not bensene, nor hard of, godith and pricketh me to rejoice and say with
that divine philosopher Plato. Tunc beatus et felix cencendus est totus orbis
terrarum cum sapientes efficuntur reges, aut reges efficuntur sapientes. Every
man he says ought then to Judge and think all the world to be blyssed and
happy when wise men be made Kings, ruelers, and gouernoures, or Kings,
ruelers, and gouernoures, be made wise. The Philosopher, Euripides says that
by the company of wise men Princes be made wise. The root of wisdom is to
fear god, and the branches thereof be of long life. No doubt a wise heart,
and that has understanding will abstain from ill deeds, and in works of
Justice his purpose shall prospere, was it not a wonderful act, the great
thraldom the intolerable charges and the miserable seruytude and bondage that
we be exoneratyd and delivered of, from the babylonicall strumpet, whereby the
fredome and lyberty of gods word so long sepulted and hydden from us to
now come to light. And yet wonderful was that most valiant and victorious
suc^umbynge of Frenshemen at Bullogne, and the wynnyng of the same imaculte and
maiden town, with sonderye overthrows of the Scotts. But most wonderful
thing of all is the restitucion out of bondage to liberty of so rare so
mighty so blyssed and Beautyfull a person, of all people so long optatyd,
wysshed and looked for, whose outward kepers and watchemen this many many
years has been, Mars, of the inward chamber lune, and of the very pryuye
chamber, Sol, Although the fre and benynge heart and stomach of the said most
gracious personage was always indeferent to rich and poor yet without great
oblacion and sacryfyce made and done to the said kepers, no man could obtain
any benefyt, who knows not? how that Amerous persons Justice has this many
years been detayned, kept, and locked from the people? who could enter in at
the streate gates (where she was) so fortely barred with iron and shet up with
strong locks without reward or brybe / who might come nere to the great
chamber, unless the custos of the door did feel a portion of silver. And as
about the preuy chamber, the attendau^tes and wayters upon the governor of
the said joyful and beautiful person Justice, were so ornated and ^pparelled
with chains, rings, outches, and pieces of Gold, that she by them was so
dysgysed, her syghte so dymmed, her countenance so sulphu^ated that in a
matter she was known ^o no body. The poor for lack of limnes help stood a
far of / The rich by the assystaunce of Sol, Alwaye^ came nere, labor and
frendshyppe of great persons passed all, sometime, affection governed Justice
and not Justice affection / And sometime by the dictes and sayings of the law
so craftily wrested, Justice bear no rule, but now, sense that the princes
and goue^nours came to the the knowledge of gods word, and the fear of God
before their ties, this blyssed person Justice is a little restored to here
pristin^ liberty, the branches of mars begin to slyp / The gates be now wide
open the gardens of the great chamber, cannot now a bide the breath of lune /
And all other attendaunces about the preuylodge of the said most joyful
parson, loves the splendaunt and flattering countenance of Sol, As they do
the detestable look of more Affection is exhyled. The poor with the rich be
hard a like / The bold steryng and supporting of great men is drowned. The
delays of lawers with trackynge of time in in at^ers be abholyshyd / The
words of god by his servant Moses, ^o hard and obeyed, here he says, Judge
that is right be he cytesyn or stranger there shall be no dystaunce of
persons, here as well the little ones as the great Judge the people by Just
Judgment declyne not to any part, nor ^^ke rewardce, for they ^xcecate and
^lynde the iyes of the righteous. Everlasting wo^ says I sayas shall be to
them that makes vnryghtwyse laws and do write against Justice / to the in^ent
that they will oppress poor me^^h Judgment, and violently subvert the cause
of the people / In the path of Justice says Salon on, is life the way that
tur^^eth there from, ledeth to death / The fundacion of perpetual praise and
renown, says Tully, is Justice without the which nothing is commendable /
The Ecclesiast. says the glory of a good man is to do Justice, according to
the Judge of the people, so is this offycere such as be rulers of a city,
such be the commons says Salamon / The fame of yt mighty Emperor Iustiniane
for well gouernynge the publyke well by his sage and temperate Iusticiars
Bellisarious and Narcites is imortall. The the banis to y^ perpetual praise of
Justice painted their king / Theba to sit in his kingly estate with in the
counseill house and on each side of him a senator having tronked hands / In
token that judges neither for rewards nor yet for favor of great men ought
to oppress veryte. David, Salamon, and Dainiell, for their judgments be
daily co^memorated in holy scripture / the one for gyuynge Judgment against
the rich man hauyn^ many sheep, and yet took from the poor man his only
sheep / The other for Iudgyng between.ii. harlottes contendyng for y^ child.
And the.iii. for delyueryng the virtuous Innocent Susanne out of the hands
of.ii. wicked priests, Judge true Judgment, says zacatie, use and occupye
marsie every one of you with an other, verytie and judgment of peace judge
you in your parts. etc. Christ says, as you do Judge, so shall you be
judged, and ^uen as you do measure to other, so shall it be measured to you.
That most famus King Henry the.viii. In his book called the doctrine of a
Christian man, upon the exposycion of the.vi. and.ix. commandment: teaches
and commands how Judges ought not to give sentence contrary to that which
they know to be true, and that in Judgment they do not hyde and suppress the
truth, and that no Judge seeing no suffycient matter or cause of death or upon
light trial without sufficient examinacion and dficussion give sentence of
death, or when the matter or cause of death is sufficient, and the trial good:
yet that he delight not in the death of ye person. At writers of worthy memory
have not forgotten to extole and setteforth the magnyfycensy of Justice: as the
well spryng is, so is the water, that is deryued and tunneth therfr^.

The chyfe Lords therefore and magestrates of the common well, not forgettyng
how that most merciful prince King henry the.viii. did conflytute them as a
light and spectacle to all other his magestrates and Iusticiares thoroughout
this his realm and dominions, have not ^mitted to do according to their
vocacion, and as to all persons it is at parant, so it is not forgotten, either
in their hearts or in their daily talk, much reioysynge that men of gods
knowelege be plasyd to r^mes judicial, whose godly and christian procedynge
therein, shall not only be to the high honor and glory of god, and to there
great laud and renown, but also a general comfort to al good christian
hearts, and a centynuall thankefulnes both of old and young, unto god.
Notwithstanding the floborne and styfenecked ye, dampnable rebellions, of a
certain of our own country. I therefore this.xxvi. years and more, to ssyng
and tumbelyng, both in the spiritual and temporal courts, there much notynge
as well the iustnes as the enormites of y^ magestrates and Judges, and of late,
having come in to my hands a book of Phyllyp Melanctons called. Epitome
Philippi Mela^ctonis, supe^ morali philosophia. Thought it not unprofitable to
collect and pycke out hear and there, and the same to translate in to the
Inglyshe tongue certain sayings very fruytfull and necessary for every
Christian magestrate and Judge which book I commit universally to the whole
congregation of magestrates, although I might worldly commend it to some by
name, there industry and payneful travel co^cernig Justice is so a pertely
declared but because I should not seem to be like the daily pyctha^kes, ye
dissimulers that does expiscate and vigilantly gapeth for preferment by
flatterye will that omit, prayng to the living god that all magestrates may so
minister in their calling as it may be to the hon^ure and glory of God, to
whom be all praise, now and ever. Amen.

Te contents of this book.
IN the first Chapter, what is fear and what is Justice.

In the.ii. the kinds of Justice and how offices should be given and
dystrybuted.

In the.iii. what is the law of nature, and the positive law.

In the.iiii. it is a deadlye sin to violate the civil laws that is to say
the dictes of civil magestrates.

In the.v. what is to take the sword.

In the.vi. what is the power or auctoryte of the magestrates.

In the.vii. what is the deuersyte between the rigore of the law and equite.

In the.viii. how equite and how a mean should be in our doings.

In the.ix. whether a Judge ought to judge according to equite or according to
the law written.

In the.x. when ygnoraunce excuses offense.

In the.xi. what be voluntary offenses and not voluntntary offenses.

In the.xii. whether it be leful for preuate persons to kill tyrans, that is to
say cruel officers.

In the.xiii. what is the temporal power and spiritual power.



What is fear, and what is Iustyte.
RElygion comprehendyth.ij. things Relygion.
the fere of God, and the trust of mercy promised for Christ whereof holly
letters does copynsly teach, and Philosophy nothing, but reason among all
persons does judge, there is a wise god, a good, a rightwise maker and
conseruator of things, and that pains be to be fearyd, whereby flagicious and
sinful deeds be ponysshed from above. This knowledge of the Law brings
forth and engenderyth fear, and therefore fear is called a Relygious thing.
Forasmoche therefore I do entende spedefully to speak of those virtues, whereof
the Philosophers chifely do dispute and which we use toward men, I must
therefore begin at the Queen of Justice.
virtues whose name is Justice, of whom truly Aristotile wryterh on this
manner. Another Hesperus nor Lucifier is more beautefull then Justice, for she
gouernyth al other virtues, and she is the chief bond of Ciuille society and
generally she signyfieth obedyence toward all laws, and conteyneth in her all
virtue, and when holy csripture speaks of Justice, obedyence toward all
laws ought to be understand. Secondely Justice signyfieth only that virtue
which in Judgments and co^tractes geuyth to every man his own Thyrdly
Justice in Paul's disputacions signyfieth imputacion of Justice, or a divine
acceptacio^, as when it is said, it is imputed to him for Justice. But of this
signyficacion the Philosophers do speak nothing, because diverse
signyficacions conteyne diverse kinds, and that there be no more
signyficacions then those three, there diuysion therefore in the beginning is
to be declared.

The diuysisson, or kinds of Justice be.ij.
THe first is vneuersall Vniuersalis Iusticis
Justice, which Aristotile describes breuely saying universal Justice is
obedyence toward all Laws, and complectyth in her all virtues, therefore the
name of Justice is transferyd generally to the whole quere of virtues, because
dew obedyence is rendered, either be Laws, or else be magestrates Partyculer
Justice is a virtue that Perticularis. Iusticis
gives to every man his own of which virtue, there be.ij. kinds
distributyne and co^munatine which kinds because we may rightfully
understand that the whole co^monwele and universal sociate of men ought to be
lokyd on in our mind in the vnyuer^all soc^ate of man's life, there be
only.ij. kinds or manners of co^munycacyon For either we do co^munycate, or
else we do commute things, or else we order persons, as that empyres,
Magistrates, degrees incyties in companyes and in famyles may be constytuted
and ordenyd here ^^o man does not s^ that all the sociate of life, be the
s^.ij. members be to be gouernyd things be co^muted and changed be
contractes, and when this co^municacion, which is made for cause of living
wandreth infinitlye, it is necessary that there be therein an equalite, that is
there be rendered or given equal for equal, for if any men should give their
things without price, they should peryshe by hunger, then there should be
nodayly co^municacion. for if there were not one thing given for another there
coud be no co^municatio^, Justice. distributyne.
Justice distributine is an ordenaunce of persons in every life public and
private according to a geometrical proporcion, as who says whereby degres of
offices and persons be ordained and made, and to apre and mete persons
functions of things be given as in the church the chife degree is the
Judgment and explycacion of doctrine. The second degree is thad ministracion
Degrs i the church.
of Judgments. The third is thad ministracion of ceremonies. The last and
lowest is the procuracion of rentes, bil^dinges, elemosynes, and such other to
every which manner of degres, apt and mete persons must be sought for, for
the judgment os lernyng the best learned, most wysest, and best men ought to be
elect and chose^. In the other, there is not somoch lernige to be required. In
y^ procurator of rentes and such other no doctrine is to be required* when this
proporcion is observed the ordenau^ce is just and ryghtous and tharmony of the
church salutarius and wholesome, but when the chife auctorite to judge doctrine
is at tributid to an vulerned Unlearned bishop.
and a wicked bishop, that conte^pneth the judgment of god, and because he may
establyshe his tyranny he defends wicked opynyons, and so the learned and the
Godly man worthy the first rome is detrudet and put to the lowest office, That
is to the procuracio^ of the rentes, marius.
whereto he is nothing apt, then is all tharmony of the church confounded.
Catulus.
Thus if Marious does govern at holme the comenwele and Catulus be sent to
war against the cymbrokes, the common well in both places shall be in
ioberdy, for Marius was a luckye warriar, but at holme he did troble the common
well, contrary wise, Catulus was apt and mete to retain and keep the
tranquilite and peace of the city. In feats of war he was nothing so
happy, So a prince, therome and the office of a chaunseler, will commit rather
to a wise man then to a young and imperite A famely.
and a folishe person or such other, so in a famyly is to be seen? what is
convenient for every person finally in every private and publyce life we ought
to understood ye degres of be synes and wits, and in every thing to
animaduert and take heed their peculyar virtue to consider the merytes, the
wits, the manners of other, that we may set every man in his degree and place
and much to be lamented that men unworthy would accept offices or romes of
the common well. This Justice is the chife conseruatrix of commen weles and
private customs. Therefore Plato right wisely saych, the Plato*
best state of the common well to be if it be constytute and ordained be a
proporcion geometrical, and truly he addity this proporcion in publyce
things to be the benefyt of god. Easily therefore may it be judged where justice
distributine has use, as who says every where. In ordeynynge degres of
persons, in choosing magestrates, in empieris, in exercitutis famelis (as it is
said) in every co^uersacion. Those knowleges be called laws, wherefore it is to
be sought what the law is The law is divided, in the law of nature, and the
law posityue. The law of nature.
The law of nature does properly signify natural knolege, ye first law of
nature shall be, ye men ought to know god and obey him, then according to
nature is procreacio^ and educacion Marriage.
of children. Therefore matrimony or marriages be to be co^tracted by certain
laws, and unlawful companyng with women, be forbidden, no man ought to be
hurt, they must be punished that do parturbe and trouble the common tranquilite
Magestrates must be ordained to defend the common tranquilite, it is therefore
necessary to obey the magestrates, Magestrates. to obey.
also yt tranquilite be kept, things must be divided, every man must have his
own, truth must be Magestrates.
worshypped and much made of, and bargens and couenauntes must be kept. This
must be added, these natural knowleges be gods law, because they be diuinly
indicted and given to men's minds, therefore Paul calls these laws Romansi. ye
law of God, herby easily may by judged what is the law of nature. The
posityue law is the sentence of the magestrate, that adds to Posytyue law
the law of nature some circumstaunce with a probable reason, as the law of
nature does teach theft to be punyshed, the^ the magestrate adds a spice or
a, kind as who says ye manner of pain in ordeynyng whereof he does fellow a
probable reason, fearce and cruel wits must be coersyd with hard bonds.
Therefore the law positive is properly a certain determynacion Posytyue law
of the law of nature to a suer and sertayne mean or manner for some
circumstaunces.

Whether it is a dedly sin to violate the laws civil, that is the edictes
of civil Magestrates.
First of all therefore, it is a dedly sin to vyolate the Civil laws, or the
edictes of civil Magestrates / though it be without the case of slander, for
Paul clearly says it is necessary to obey, not only for wrath but also for
conscience, that is we ought not to fere only the civil pain but also we
ought to know our conscience to be gylty, if we do not obey. Now it is ye
part of a good mind to consydre how much this kind of obedyence and
public tra^quiliteis, which To obey the laws,
god also does require that we obey the laws and Magestrates, and he says yt
he will be aue^geser if we do not obey, and truly for the same, god does punish
as well in this life as after this life, as the fourth precept of peyns does also
speak. etc. For that precept of obedience does Obedyence.
command that not only our parents, but all those who^ our Fathers or
parents do give auctorite to, that is to the magestrates we do obey. Therefore
also many other sentenses in scryptures do co^stionate of giving peynys in this
life, as. Prouer^ioru^, xxiiij. Fere god and the king, and with sedicius
persons keep no company, for shortly shall come their perishement, and Christ
says he that will take the sword, shall perish be the sword.

To take the sword.
TO take the sword do the sygnyfy to take ye sword not geuyn of the laws and
magestrates, that is to be sedicius and not to obey to the present magestrates,
and not only examples proponed in holyleters, but also thystores of altymes do
wytnes that from above be retarcted i^ this life to peynys for the most part
homycides, thefes, perjured persons unjust judges sedycius, and tyrannes, I
speak this because God rerequireth that with the fere of peynes, me^ should be
coercid, and this fere Fere of pains.
does norishe reverence to laws and makes in our minds a virtue, and makith
it accustomed to obedience, gods law does not deceive, which says honor thy
father and mother if y^ wilt be long living upon ye earth. This sentence of the
dictes of magestrates Edictes of Magestrates.
ought wiseli to be understood as who says of those edictes ye co^mau^dth not
to do against gods commandments, it is therefore profitable both to
discipline and to y^ tranquilite of ye co^me^wele, so to a custom our minds
yt also in small things we make much of ye auctorite of laws, furdre also we
must know that we do not live to our selfs but to ye co^me^wele, we ought
therefore take heed and beware yt our examples do not hurt in co^myn, y^ same
The best citesme.
very thing does plato speak right gravely of, in ye first delegibus, he to be
y^ best and chifest citesen yt takes the chife glory to be in the city, not
trifiphes, not any victories, but to overcome other by delige^ce in obeyng the
laws. A civil magestrate be divine au^torite has auctorite A civil
Magestrate.
to make honest and profitable laws for those things that to and for the
defense of corporally^e, and civil societe, do pertain, as of judgments, of
pains, of fautes, of co^tractes, of sucessions, and of like things. As
Salamo^ says by me kings does reign and do make laufull things. The second
reason, ye laws civil be bo^des of co^myn societe, wherefore Common traquillite.
in vi^lati^g of the^ always charity is hu^t, harmed or broken, because yt every
man ought to co^fer there obedience, there tributes, there worki^ges to ye
defense of common tranquil^te.

The power of magestrates.
THE power of magestrates is not infinite but inclused with suer and perfyt
lymyttes for Magestrates have not auctorytie to bide or command anythyng
contrary to the law of nature contrary to the commandment of god, and
contrary to the laws of his realm. The magestrate susteyneth his procuracion
of an other as who says commanded of god, he ought not therefore depart or go
fro gods commandment. As also the right good king Iosaphat the preacher
says ye exersice not ye judgment of man King Iosaphat.
but of god what so ever you shall judge, shall redound to your self, let the
fere of god be with you, secondarelye syens the magestrate is the The fear of
God to be with Judges
keeper of the first table which does pertayne to extreme discipline, he ought
to prohybytte and ponyshe blasphemes, ydollytryes, and false dogamtes or
learnynges, and to provide and se that Godly doctrine be propaged and
extended, and to defend them that teach ryghtly. All magestrates also ought
to obtemperate and obey the second precept of the decaloge and to be the
kepers thereof. The second precept does for bid and ponyshe blasphemes and false
doctrynes, then al magestrates ought to prohybyt and ponyshe blasphemes. The
second reason is su^pt of the chyfe fine of Magestrates. The chyfe fine of man's
societe is that of men some may teach the The chife fine of man's societe.
other of god, that ye notice of God may be propaged. The magestrate is the
chife custos and keeper of societe, the^ he ought also to be custos os this
fine, yt is yt gods knowledge may ryghtly be propaged and shewid abroad, y^
conseqent does follow of the rule y^ is every thing for y^ which it is such y^
is more sich, the magestrate does keep societe for the knowledge of god the^ ye
magestrat ought to keep the knolege of God somo^h as pertayneth to his office.
If to this image we do confer kings and princes, we shall find very few that
looks for this fine, and that will contend for it, many with great vehemensy
have don the contrary, who be al manner of mischif have co^taminated and decayed
religion, as though for there so doing they should have kingdoms, because they
did keep battle with god as the gian^ces did in fables. The holy kings of Jury
did abolishe ungodly Ungodly worshyppd^ge.
and wicked worshippynges, and therefore they be praised and garnysshid with great
rewards and gifts, and god says I will gloryfy the^ that glorify me. And the
law in deuthoromy commands that kings do hold and keep in their hand a book
of the law of god. These examples because they do pertain to ye decaloge our
magestrates also according to their calling ought to imitate and follow the^.
Nabygodonisor, and darius also do propone edictes, yt is, Nabygodonisor and
darius.
let noma^ sp^ke blasphemis against God of ye Israellites, but here many
things, many men, will obiecte, first faith in ye mind, a magestrate cannot
touch his mind, therefore y^ magestrat ought not to punish y^ errors of y^
mind, an answer, the magestrates does punish errors, only of the mind but
to the extreme and utter profession and blasphemes, for the magestrate ought to
defend extreme discipline and pedagogie, Secondarely it is obiectyd. The
magestrate cannot Judge but those things of the which he has laws, and he
has laws only of profane busynes therefore he cannot judge the contrauersys
of relygion, the minor is to be denied, for the magestrate has a law to
ponyshe blasphemes as the laws of all manner of people do punyshe periuries,
but because it is not always known what opynyons be blasphemous or impius,
therefore there ought to go before another Judgment, as who says a cong^icion
of doctrine.

This does not only pertayne Cognicion of doctrine
to a magestrate but to the church that is not only to Priests, but also to
lay persons apt and mete to iugde* as Paul says, if it shall b^ reueled^^ him
that sits, let ye former hold (...) peace. And christ will that the chife
Judgment b^ the judgment of the church when he says, say or tell it to the
church.

Deuersite betwne the rygore of the law, and Equite.
THey call that the rygore Rygore of the law.
of the law, when the laws be discretly / and sencerlye used / Equite.
without mitigacion of any circu^staunce / commonly they call it in laten,
strictumius, equite of the law is a mittigacion of the law in some
circu^staunce, nor yet does approve and allow. the trespass or offense, but
mekly sometime, because of some circu^stau^ce, it does ponish, as when a judge
mekly does ponish a man, yt has offended, which seems to be of an wholesome
and a good wit, equire does apere at large in every place or in terpretacio^ of
laws, for there is no law, which in all cases may be obs^rued and kept by equal
seuerite without e^te, therefore equite ought to be y^ interpretor of al laws,
that where need is, they may be bowed and turned to y^ ge^tler se^te^ce, and
therefore a rule is to be holden and kept, as often as diverse Laws so (...)
together, y^ they cannot be kept together, y^ supirior law is to be preferred,
as christ did touch the lipors on y^ saboth day, he thereby did violat y^
saboth day, because diverse laws did run together, he did both prefarre and
also teach the superior law to be prefarred for the superior law is that the
testimonies of Doctrine should be showed, and that love should be prefarred
before ceremonies, according to that saying, I will rather marry then
sacrifice. Therefore he do^teth not to touch the lepors, ye he helith the^ in
the saboth day. Thus the law does wisely forbid servile works, y^ is assiduus
labor taken or done for cause of lucre and not for cause of office, then it
forbids not ^ode^ offices necessary to save men, much les it forbids the
testimonies of gods word, and the miracles which be ye works of god, there be
judgments sufficient of examples of al times.

Maulius Torquatus did exercise Manlyus torquatus.
in his so^e the rygore and extremite of the law because he did fight contrary
to the emperors commandment, he did head him.

^ontrarywyse is equite or epiceia / papirius dictatour, who when Papirius.
he had accused Fabius, Marcus, Equitus, of treason. Yet the people entretynge
and making peticion for him, was forgyuen. In the digestes at pompius law of
parricides.

The Emperor Adryan, him, Pe^aci^es.
who had killed his Sone, because he had adulterated his Stepmothe, commanded
so to be brought forth, that with the extremyte of the Law the preuye
murder might the more hardely be avenged, but he did adhibit to the counseyll
a circu^staunce, as who says the very dolor and sorrow of his father. At
Gellius the.xiiij. Book and the.vii. Chapter, the Areopagytes Aropagites.
delivered a woman Smyrneam that had killed her Sone, and her Husband be
poysonyng, who had first killed the woman's Sone that was borne in the former
Marriage, gave sentence because the cause should be known again an hundredth
years after, that thus they neither do allow the creuell myschyfes did, and
yet they forgive the pain, because of the very dolor and sorrow of the
Mother, like Equite, the Gods be feigned to use in remyttynge. Mars and
Orestes, for they forgave the pain, for the very just and right dolor because
Mars had ve^ged the stupre of his daughter, and, Orestes his fathers death.
These Mitegacion of pain.
things wise men did feign, because it should be sygnyfyed, mitigacion does
please God, done for aprobable cause. Thus sometime ges do lose and rewyt them
that defend them selfs by violence against violence, although a little they
exced y^ measure of thrre blameles tutele and defense, And thus Cato did lose
milo by his sentence because clodius did begin y^ fygh tyng, hitherto of the
extremite of the law that begins noc of calumpnius interpretacion, but is
the very sentence of the law, as in the cause of Manlius or Milo, yet that very
law where circu^staunce requires mitigatio^, nor for cause of example has no
need of seuerite is made injury. Therefore it is said. Su^mum iussu^ma iniuria.
The extremite of the law is an extreme iniurye. There is an other certain
manner of mo^king or exacerbatyng Extre^ injury.
the law, as who says calu^nia, i. calu^ny which properly is not called the
rigore or extremite (...).
of the Law, but rather does fight with the law, it is interpretated a law
with some sopistitall cauillation, they call it a begilyng ordereyuyng of the
Law, as if a man takes peace for.xxx. days, and in the night distroyeth his
enemies fyldes. Also the legate of come that compacted with antio Anteo^hius.
thus, that the therde part of his naues should be left unto him, he did cut
al his ships in ye midst because he would spoil him of y^ whole nany, when
the tirans had dominion of.xxx. Athens, the law was Athens*
that none of them that were written in the cataloge should be killed, there was
in this nombre written Iheramenes. Collega Critias
Iheramenes Collega, when that critias had constytuted to kylle him, he
commanded his name to be put, of this manner of kinds not only hystoryes
gives to us examples but also daily life.

But in a manner there is more cal^mpniacion Calupniacion in the lernyng of
religion
in the lernyng of religion then in other busynes, dictes and and sayenges of
the Law be craftly wrested, and some be exaggerated without measure, and be
painted with a certtayne color, Some be abiected and deformed, and all these
be taken for the law^e and praise ofwyt.

How equite, and a mean should be had in our doings.
First of all therefore plain truth is to be loved, and the^ Equite.
equite is to be added to public justice, and that privately, where as probable
and honest reason does swade moderacion, and this moderacion does most
prevail in wicked and noughty persons.

As the equite of trasibulus did restore the Athens, who when he Trasibulus.
perceived that without new besines, the possession that was taken away coud
not be restored to there old masters, he made a law, that every man should
retain that he had and they which had sustained iniu^ye for the publyke
^ecyssake should depart frotheyr own right. This equite also is marvelous
necessary Deso^mer cederacte.
to retain concord in a private life.

Yea equite also does mitigate divine laws, so that it may be David.
not harishly done David did eat holy loves, he knew an epiceye to be
adhibite and given to ceremonies, because he knew the politycal Ceremonyalles.
manners to be institutid, not because they should justify before god, but
because y^ people should be coersed by that discpline, and therefore he iuged
those customs to give place to love in necessite, where, without slander and
parell of disciplyne, they cannot be violated, according to the sentence I will
rather, and more desire mercy then sacrifice.

There is a very apt example of Ezachias.
Epiceys in the story of Ezachias, when that in the celebracion of esterne many
were not first purged of there usual ceremonies, Ezech^ as for all that did not
command them to abstain from Esterne, but he prays for them lettyng, a
lone the ceremonis of purgacion, he understands prayer to be the Prayers.
chyfe purgacion and better then the ceremonyall.

The Machabeiis did fight on The Machae^iis. The sabothe day^.
the saboth day, when their enemies made a sawt on them, they kne we be the
law of the saboth day that boluntary besines where forbidden, but defense, for
the co^seruacion of the common well, of religion married persons, children and
such other, was not to be forbidden, for this is the chyfe office of Love.

Thus often times Epiceye is necessary to Christian people in the use of
ceremonyalles.

Pule says that he kept among the Iues the customs and fasshions of the Iues,
among the gentiles he used no Iues fasshions, and yet he adds a Super your
Law whereby he measure these offices, as who says, because he would wine them
all.

The superior law, is to give The supiriour Law.
our diligence, that the glory of the Euangelyst may be made gaye and
garuyshed, finally the Evangelist is y^ maruelus epicey of gods law, when he
approves obedience (although imperfect) because of christ.

Whether a judge ought to judge according to equite or according to the posytyue
law called the Law written.
IT is better, be the opinion of Aristotle in the third of the polytykes to
judge things or causes by the posytyue law, because that uncertain opinions
lightly brings forth, and enge^dreth discordes of cityzens, where as no
written The Law written.
Law is, there be uncertain opynyons or else contrary, for it may often
times fortune, that to other judges another thing may besemed and thought, also
the written law does good, because it coercyth the affeccions of Judges, he
that commands the Law to be above God, he geuyth also to the laws an
empyer, he yt commands a man to be prefarred, prefarreth best for
covetousness and anger, or dy^^ leisure depraueth also the best me^* The law is
amynd with out coeutousnes, what needs in so manyfolde a thing, many
arguments. There is no law pryncipally made of this case, if a man in great
necessite takes away mettes, or else be course of age does offend, sience,
this case is by some means not like that manner of kind, whereof principally
the law does s^eke / here now equite has place, so the law to put homicides
Homicides.
to death, is made principalli of murder, constituted and petulantly don.

Patroclus be chance in play killed Patr^clus.
his fellow, here the dissimilitud of cases requires some mitigacio^ of pain.
The constitucion of the The saboth day.
saboth day does principally forbid workings, that plucketh fro public
ceremonies. Then if labors be done, which do not abduce fro ceremonies, do
neither let nor hurt the example, the case is unlike therefore euqite judges
such doings not to be forbidden. Theclesiasticall tradicions were first
ordained and Tradicius.
made, principally that things should be don in order, since that puplically it
is couenient for the Church, therefore equite did Judge tradicions without
fawte or blame to be violated, where as Tradicius.
the publyke order was not dissipated. This distinciton does show where
equite has place / as who Equity has place.
says in a case whereof the Law written do not principally speak,

Therefore Arestotle says, that the auctoryte of Judges ought to Laws written
be given to laws that they may moderate them, as Physycions do moderate
Pharmacum. And pharmacum.
in the first of Etheces, he says that Laws be to be constitude of that
which most often chaunseth or happens, but if any any cyrcumstaunce lets
or changes whereof Laws ought to b^ mad^*
the cause, there is commanded Equite to be Counseylled with.

Therefore he says the Law is as lesbia, That is to Say, a leady or a heavy
Rule / which is to be Moderated / and apply^^^ fellows one or equal. and the
principal fine or co^clusio^ of the magestrat to be the consernuacion and
keeping of the law. etc. The magestrat The magestrat do punyshe heretykes.
which bears y^ sword ought to prohibit also hereses.i. wyeked and ungodly
techinges and punish heretykes, that is auctors of evil and wicked
tecahinges, but in obscure things the cognicion of the church goes before,
and thus properly the magestrat seruith the glory of god, and his fu^ction is
y^ worshyppinge of god when he studieth to defend to propage and ornate true
lernyng and contrary wese to prohibit wicked teachynges, who that does thus
does his principal office which properly pertains to the glory of God /
which properly deserves that title wherewith magestrates be to garnysshed in
the salme. I said ye be Gods, as who says because they have their office
deuinly constituted and ordenid. And they ought to give to men divine things,
relygyon, Justice, dyscyplyne peace and such other.

And for this cause they be called of Magestrat be Nurses to the church^.
Esaias? Nurses of the church because they ought to noryshe and to defend
Godly teachers.

And they ought not to exercise cruelnes on Christan men nor laws contrary to
divine or natural ought not to be observed.

The Ecclesiastical power / is The ecclesiastical power*
the divine commandment? in teaching the Gospel administra the Sacraments /
ordaynynge the mynysters of the Gospel annuncyatynge remyssyon of Sins to
Every body / or to many Constytutynge Iudgemedtes of doctrines here is my well
beloved so^e, here hi^. therefore crist, although he proponith diversity between
the^ ye kno and do not kno yt he does not utterly deliver the^ yt kno not, when
he says, he y^ knows ye will of his master and does it not, shall be ye mor
punished, yet he yt knows not, doing things wordy pa^^e shall be les punished
it is co^me^ly said, sa^ctarusticitas.i. holy rusticite as who says aplanema^
of y^ country, he thi^keth no hurt, be this ma^er of saying many excuses their
folly or folishnes, as who says it is a pity or a godliness not to knoth
aue^gelist, but erasmus truly and gravely rephe^deth yt saii^g, and says yt
noma^ Euangetyst.
ca^ be a christian man but y^ he kno mani things for y^ evangelist is a certain
excellent wisdom which no man with out great cure meditacio^, colacio^ of lerni^g
and co^municacio^ with learned me^, does optaine, and peter does co^mau^d and bid
us to be ready to render our acco^pte, seco^darly, nether ye affectated
ignorance of ma^s positive law, nor y^ ignorance of y^ deed does excuse,
Affectated ignorance, is of yt th^g Affectated ignorance.
which eueri man as well of ye law as of y^ deed is bound to, know this
Ygnorasice does aristotle elega^tly speak, of saying, ignorance which any man
willingly does accerse do not excuse, but is a puersite, and so is universal
Ygnoraunce.
ignorance yt is when we kno nothing at al of those things which we ought to
do and alitil after headdith yt a iug ought to punish ye ignorance, if a man
be to himself cause of ignorance, and thus ignorance of law does not excuse a
judge which is bound to kno be virtue of his office, nor affectatid ignorance
i^ a ma^s own, propper deed, as if a man being i^possessio^ of any thing do not
know, whether that thing be leyde to pledge to him, or given Alitigator or
asutor in the law, Ygnoraunce of law dono^ excuse, as s^enola said, it is a
stenola.
foul thing for anoble man and coming to his causes or to suyte, not to
know the law wherein he is tossed or suyde, but from this degree be wont to be
except, women and sogeris to whom the error of the law is pardoned. The third
is a probable Ygnoraunce of deed either of his owen, or of an other man's which
has an excusacion.

As the sister of Iacobes wife, was given to him, and he knew Sister of
Iacobes. Wife.
it not, such is the Ygnoraunce, whereof Paul does speak, he is forgotten that
knows not for he erreth excusably, because it is a curiosyte to interrogate
or ask those things that pertayne not to our purpose / it is therefore
excusable / where only ygnoraunce of the fault is the cause, but where not
ygnoraunce, but our couetousnesis the cause of the fawte there ygnoraunce does
not excuse, as dronken persons to offend. etc.

Voluntarye offenses.
VOluntarye offenses be tho, in the which both counseill is given and fre will,
not voluntary Not voluntary.
offenses be tho, when counseyll is not adhybyt or will by violence is
forbidden, or else is over thrown, and synneth in a thing impossible.

Not Voluntarye and vyolent, ought to be understand one thing which as are
stotle says has th^^ beginni^g extrinsecally or outwardely, will may cohybyt
affections and many hurtes purposed, will may prefar one before another for as
true virtue is then, when judgment and fre will be adhibit, so the chife degree
is of delictes or fautes when a man does offend both consultly and with fre
will. The Other degres be sometime more light, as when either will is impydited
or judgment is not given, and from hence does spring.v. deg^es, which i^ fautes
and injuries we must consider, the judge, deceyt, open, faut light offense,
lyghtest and soden chance. Dole or Dole or dec^yte.
deceit has no excuse open, faut or blame is neibour to deceit as when
affecrated ygnoraunce is delicted, for this is not vnwyllynge, but it is very
malis, as aristotle says a light faut and lightest has the more excuse, for
here will does not come to do a mysse and although deligence is desired, yet
there is none affectated neclygence in such fautes. Soden Soden chance Adrastus.
chance has an excuse for nether the mind neither the will, does truly
offend, as adrastus going to kill a wild bore, killed cresessone, or if a man
casts down fro the top of an house, a tile into a place where as no body is
wont to be ocupied or to walk, and by chance hurts or kylleth one. That is
therefore to be obseruyd, yt all these degres do spryng and come, either of the
error of judgment or by some impediment of the will, voluntarys be properly
called those, in the Voluntarys.
which do concure Counseyll, and fre will / many Questyons be her to be
sturted and moved whether a Christian man may laufully repel vyolence be
vyolence, and how he may do it / whether dyuysyon of things be laufull for
Christian men, whether it be laufull to make war or keep battle. The
Euangelyst do not abholitte, economyor polacy, but does greatly approve them,
wherefore the use of al things polyticall is granted to Christian men, with
the use of deuisyon of things, Judgments, battelles, and such other.

Whether it is lefull for private persons to kill tyrants, that is cruel
offecers.
IF a tyrane be a private man inuadyng the Empire by sedycion and rather, then
the Empire should be destroyed they whithe with laufull Magestrates do agree may
pryuatly kill him, as a thief, if he be taken in the fault ordede, that is
doing or workyng any thing, sturrynge the people or making assaute on any
persons. Thus any private parson laufully might kill Catylyne, sedycyon
Ca^^^^ne fuluius
ones sturred, even also as Fuluius did kill his sone taken again after he
fled away, and the laws do agree, that a man may kill his father, that has
committed against the common well. Secondarely if a tyrane be in a magestracy
auctorite or office, and Cruelly and notoriusly does injury to the subjects,
defense is granted to them / incontinently as well in private perell, as in a
besynes towchynge or pertaining to the common well, as Helue^ons.
in the hystorye of the Heluetions, magstrates commanded the citesyn to
producke his sone, and a darte to be directed to him of his father castyng it,
also the tribune of sogiers in the host of Caius Marius was killed of a young
man, to who^ the tribune was doing hurt and violence, and the laws in the
pandictes do agree to kill the consulle that was taken in adultery. And in like
case if any be made enemies, they be laufully excused although inco^tiue^tly,
they aueuge their notorius injuries, as harpagus accersed Cirius against
Astiagen / Harpagus Cirius.
who gave to him his Sone to beeaten.

Also when the Tyrane did command Vnicencias a Certain Cytyzen, that he
should send to Vnicencias.
him his Daughter / which to do after ye Citizen had refused, the tyrane
sends his Servant, who be violence brought here away in the morning being
ravished and deflowryd, he sends here again and cut in.ij.

The father after he had delyberate the matter with his friends sends the
dead body being so cut, to the senate venecius / and to him promises
dedicion of the cite, Dedicion.
thus the Tyrane is opressed, to this, Cytyzsen, in a natorius injury and so
cruel at all times is laufull for a man to be made an enemy to a tiraunt be
the law of the people. Thyrdly, if ye injury be not notorius ryghtly do the
learned me^ Not notorius.
in the law say, that the not doing of justice of y^ magestrates ought to be
tolerated and suffered, because the auctorite of things Judged may remain,
for private persons ought not to dyssolue the state of the co^menwele, nor to
invade empiers, according to that saying, he that resists a magestrat
resists Gods ordenau^ce, wherefore Caius Caesar is not laufully killed, who
Caius Cesa^
because I will not speak of the cause of battle, yet he occupied a
magestracie and that given to him be the laws and consent of the people,
neither he took away fro the common well laws nor judgments, he made no
slaughter in the city as other conquerours of Cyuill wars did, neither he did
any notoryus or cruel injuries to the Cytizins preuely or openly, but he
restored the enemies reuocated to there old and pristin dygnyte, wherefore it
was unlawful for him to be killed, for as I have said before, injuries not
notorius ought to be forgyuen to magestrates, as Jason Jason Phere*
Phereus says, that he which in a sum does look to Justice, do admit in the
mean while many unlawful things in lyghter matters, which ought to be
forgyuen to him, that defends the cheffest and chife part of the Empiere and
conserueth the form and shape of the commen well, Judgments and Laws.

FOr a magestrat is as the very law for the law does not command The
magestrate and the law be fellows
only of defencion of the body or things, but it commands first of the
glory of god and dyscyplyne, as Paul says the law is ordained to coa^cte a
ponyshe unjust persons and blasphemors.

Therefore we ought to think the magestrat and the law to be fellows one or
equal. and the principal fine or co^clusio^ of the magestrat to be the
consernuacion and keeping of the law. etc. The magestrat The magestrat do
punyshe he retykes.
which bears y^ sword ought to prohibit also hereses.i. wicked and ungodly
techinges and punish he retykes, that is auctors of evil and wicked
tecahinges, but in obscure things the cognicion of the church goes before,
and thus properly the magestrat seruith the glory of god, and his fu^ction is
y^ worshyppinge of god when he studieth to defend to propage and ornate true
lernyng and contrary wese to prohibit wicked teachynges, who that does thus
does his principal office which properly pertains to the glory of God /
which properly deserves that title wherewith magestrates be to garnysshed in
the salme. I said ye be Gods, as who says because they have their office
deuinly constituted and ordenid. And they ought to give to men divine things,
relygyon, Justice, dyscyplyne peace and such other.

And for this cause they be called Magestrat be Nurses to the church^.
of Esaias? Nurses of the church because they ought to noryshe and to defend
Godly teachers.

And they ought not to exercise cruelnes on Christan men nor laws contrary to
divine or natural ought not to be observed.

The Ecclesiastical power / is The ecclesiastical power.
the divine commandment? in teaching the Gospel administra the Sacraments /
ordaynynge the mynysters of the Gospel annuncyatynge remyssyon of Sins to
Every body / or to many Constytutynge Iudgemedtes of doctrynes. And those
that be conuersaunt in manifest delictes: to excomunicate by the word with out
corporal strength, here therefore briuely I do answer of Bonifacis
constitucion that be the divine The co^stitucio^ of bonefacis.
law the Apostels or their successors have not the sword, that is a right to
coract by corporal strength for they neither have right to occupy nor to
co^farre kingdoms of the world, many testimonies may be gathered hear of the
Euangelyst. Christ says my kingdom is not of this world, also the kings of
the gentyles have dominion of them, but you have not so, he diserneth hear.ij.
powers. He grants to kings that they bear the rule and dominion, he
grants not to the apostles that they have dominion or bear rule, that is
that they have dominion, or bece rule / The w^pone o^ the ecclesiastiall power.
that is / that they use corporal strength because of their Mynystery. And
Paul says the weapons of our warrynge be nor carnal. Chrysostom in the
second Oracion of the dygnyties of pristes dyscerneth Magestrates to be
Profane and Epystopall.

To the Profane Magestrates he Profane magestrates and epystopall.
gives right to coarcte by corporal strength. But he denies Bysshoppes to
have that power. But as to other Christians so also to Bysshoppes or Pastors of
the Church, is lefull to hold and keep their own riches, and other gifts,
because these things be polytycallye granted to Christians, so it is laufull
to Bysshoppes to hold and keep their iurisdiccion given in suer gooddes,
which is a Civil thing, nothing partaynyng to the proper office of a
Bishop. As the art of weuyng in Paul did nothing pertayne to the gift or
office of a Postle, and yet Paul might be both a Postle and a wener.

But let Bysshoppes take heed The church to keep there riches.
and se les because of their riches they be abduced from the office of
teaching and gouernynge the Church, and lokyng on the Doctrine of them one
whom they have Rule.

The Emperor did command Ambrose.
Ambrose that he should give his Temple to the Arrians, but Ambrose did not
obey, for it was not lefull to obey a commandment of wicked and ungodly
things, and the Emperor ought not to take away a laufull ordenaunce from
the Church, nor to make a wicked teacher to bear the rule of the Church.
Ambrose was laufully ordained / and did Laufull ordaynnaunce.
teach well.

For a laufull ordenaunte does contain a vocacion or eleccion which is made
of the people or of then to whom the people does commit that thing and the
approbacion of come Bysshoppes. Further to Bysshoppes does partayne to
constitute Judgments of learnynges, and to conuocate synodes as the old
constitucion was, that every Bishop, should twyse Bisshoppes to have twy^e
every year their synodes
every year, have synodes of their Churches, and the Apostles had their
synodes, and when Paul Samosathen did sow wicked and ungodly teachynges the
Bishops next adioynynge came together to Antioche, and the church of Antioche
adhybytyd they damned the Bishop.

But as it is said before in contrauersis of lernyng Bysshoppes ought not
only to Judge but mete The judgment ought to be of the church.
and apt men ought to be elect and chosen of the whole body of the Church,
because the chyfe Judgment ought to be of the Church, that is, not only of
Bysshoppes. Therefore for this very cause that the auethoryte of the Church is
the bygger, when Bisshoppes do not their office, ought Emperoures and Kings
conu^cate synodes, even also as constantyne Emperors and kings ought to
conuacate synodes.
did command certain synodes, and commands that those which would not
come to the synodes, should have taken from them their Bysshoppryckes.

Thus far I have spoken of the deuersite of either power.

And although we have dystynquid the powers yet it may be animaduerted y^ y^
civil power ought Every master of an house in a mynyster of y^ churchs.
to serve the church because of discipline, eue^ as every magestrate of an
house is a minister and anexecuture of the church in his famely, we ought all
obey the mynyster of the word, so the magestrate is the mynyster and executure
of the Church in the common well, and he also ought to obey the mynistery of
the word and that to worship as a deuyne thing, according to that saying
open you your gates you princes. etc.

Thus ends the Civil nosgaye.

Imprynted by me Robart Wire, for Ihon goodale.


