THE SIN OF BLASPHEMY AGAINST THE HOLY GHOST, Scholastically examined; the
reasons of the absolute Irremissibility thereof displayed; An admonition to all
Reuolting Apostataes annexed.

By JOHN MEREDYTH, Sub-Deane of Chichester.

Mark. 3. Verse. 29. He that Blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost, shall never
have forgiveness, but is culpable of Eternal damnation.

Heb. 10. Verse. 38. Now the Just shall live by Faith, but if any withdraw
himself, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him.

Aug. Lib. 2. de Trinit. Cap. 1. Magis amabo inspici a rectis, quam timebo
morderi a peruersis; Gratanter enim suscipit ofculum Columbinu^ pulcherrima and
castissima charitas, dentem vero caninum euitat cautissima humilitas, vel
retundit Solidi^^ima veritas; Magisque optabo, a quolibet reprehendi, quam sieve
ab Errante, sieve ab Adulante laudari.

LONDON. Printed for John Marriot, and are to be sold at his Shop in St.
Dunstons Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1622.

TO THE REVEREND, RIGHT LEARNED, and RELIGIOUS PRELATE, Doctor THORN, Deane of
Chichester.
IT was my natural Love, and affection to my native Country, (right worthy
Sir) and to the Church of CHRIST in these parts, which since the time of my
settled residence hereabouts, invited me in the performance of the work of my
Ministry, to strike at the chief adversary, who though he be branded even in
his forehead, Gal. 1. 8. 9. 1. Cor. 16.22,
with an Anathema yet does he still secretly seduce from us, and carry with him
to perdition no small number, and is like (unless your vigilance prevent it)
to prevail further. Serpit, and serpet hoc Cic. Epist. Tam.
malum longius.

It was your zealous authority which indulged my safe conduct to that sacred
place in your Cathedral Church, whence shortly after (but at several times) I
delivered this subsequent Treatise; the subject whereof is that dreadful Sin
against Mat. 12.31.32 Mark. 3.29. Luk 12 10. Heb. 6.4.5.6. Heb. 10.26.27 1.
Ioh. 5.16.
the holy Ghost, to terrify all such who are upon every beck of the Adversary
as ready to excurre, and run out from us, as he is to inueigle them to join
with him, and most virulently to blaspheme that truth, which eftsoone they
professed.

In regard of which premises, of Duty partly, partly of Presumption, I do
consecrate these my labors unto your Name, intruding (as it were) upon you for
Protection, to ensconce me against the vilification of all Hicke-scorners, that
having learned (...) assume the office of Guil. Budaeus praesat in Come^.
Momus unto them, taking it as a great grace (God wot) to disgrace those, whose
worth they may rather envy then imirate.

These are those Eyes (forsooth) and Ouer-seers of other, of whom Gods Church
may justly complain, Contenebrati sunt oculi mei, yea happy were he, were
she delivered of such Eyes, which as the Prophet speaks, Nihilrespiciunt
nisimalae. T^ren. 5. Habakkuk.


To whom then in this case should I break my self in these parts? but to your
self, which I do: Rumpantur vt ilia Coaro, Ask of Religion (faith Jesus
Virg. Bacol.
the son of Syrach) of him that has Religion; Ecclus. 37.11.
of a matter of Learning of him that has learning: as for any blind
Aristarchus or his buzzardly brood, who shall presumptuously smite the Law,
and diffame the Doctors thereof; and flaunder his Mothers own Sons, what have
I, or indeed, what has the Spirit of God to do with them?

They occasion the Adversaries of the Truth to perfist in Haeresie, yea through
their Judicial preuarication, some Citizens of Faith (as they seemed sometime)
with a Nolumus hunc regnare super nos, Luke 19.
cast off the yoke also.

If any friend them, I reckon them as did Clement in the number of those, Qui
exterminare volunt Ecclesiam Did. 93, Ca^* si (...).
Det, I for my part, I confidently prosesse, I pass not for them; yea I
proclaim my self a mortal enemy for Gods cause, unto such men; Semper
metales insequanter hosts.

Unto thee therefore (the Resplendent Star of Joh. (...), ad (...). Hebr.
Ep^a.
this Climate) do I fly for Patronage, as to a man for thine incomparable
skill in the Oriental sacred D. Pi^. ^^tr. ^. H. G^frey Po^t. O^. Joh. Dr. in
libr. praeterit. pr^f^^t. Vita and (...) Ioh. Dr. Abo^^ Cur^andro Authore.
tongues on this side; and beyond the Seas, by men unmatchable therein most
worthily famoused, as to a man, both in See his (...) or Behold the man to King
James.
Divine and Humane literature more profound (which shall I say) or eloquent. As
to a man for thy piety to God, thy Charity to men, and above all, thy most
provident feruentzeale, in preserving the Possessions, Immunities, and
Privileges of that little (...) 19.20.22
Segor (that Sea Church I mean) which thou do now illustrate condignly
renowned; In a word, to one for that His Tuilius or (...) to the Earl of
Pembrooke.
Ioh. 2^. 15. 16.17
Christ's triple Pasch well known to all, Virtus Vlyssis (I will usurp that of
Seneca) (...).
nota Donais est satis, Nimisque Phrigibus. To conclude, I subject this
Tractate to the Censure of the Church, and your worthy self; which I do not
publish (I protest) for any ostentation, much less for any purpose to detract
from the labors of other more learned Divines, (whom I cannot nevertheless
acquit from deficience, and error in this argument) nor do I obtrude it on the
world as a new Article of Faith, to oblige Consciences; for by experience in my
self, and observation in other, I find it to be most true, which that great
light of Physicians spoke of Archigenes his error, as elegantly as modestly,
Galen. lib. de Composit. Medicament. (...), 2o.
saying: (...) etc. It is a hard matter for him that is but a man, not to err
in many things, as being only sciolous in some, misprisioning other, and
writing also, and publishing some things incuriously.

But from the first birth of it I intended the public benefit of the Church
of Christ, that is; That Apostataes might be recalled, terrified, or
confounded, wavering or doubtful Christians might be confirmed or
reestablished, our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST might by his Gospel be
glorified, now and evermore. So be it.

So fare thee well, thou rich Ornament of Chichester poor Church.

To your Reverence, the most Devoted: JOHN MERIDTYH.

To the Indifferent Reader.
GOod Reader, as we are obliged by Christian modesty to Believe the principles
of Faith, before we presume to discuss them by reason; So I hold it
Negligence, if after our confirmation in the Faith, we study not to understand
the reason of that we believe. In which consideration, I (though the weakest
among thousands) am excited, to wade into these depthes, where (as Ad Leandr,
de Expositione libri Job.
Gregory says) Agnus peditet, and Elephas natet, the simple may find what to
learn, and the learned what to admire as In^omprehensible.

Wherein, if (by Gods assistance) I do happily find ought, whereof before I
was ignorant, I do willingly impart the same unto others; Apertae Musaru^
Ianuae.

The unstable dissoluteness of sundry deboshed Varlets, in this decrepit Age
of the world wherein we live, who halting between two opinions, spare not to
belch forth blasphemies against the Truth, whereof they are assured, has
moved me to search into that fearful Sin of Apostasy, that those who
repute it a small matter, to depart from the Truth of the Gospel, to the Tents
of Antechrist, may consider the danger, and retire, before they fall into that
Sin against the Holy Ghost, which is Irrecouerable.

Again the tender Consciences of other, who captiuated with a conceit of this
Sin, have been swallowed up in Despair. How necessary the Subject is, I
refer to thy Judgment; In the mean time I fear, that least as Painters,
who limb a satre creature in ugly form, deserve just rebuke: So I should
draw on my self deserved reproach, by clothing so wrothy a matter, in a rude
and unpolished style.

Tet this may not withold me; for I bind no man from more curious
performance hereof, whom my harsh phrase offends: But this I crave; If any
suppose that I have set abroath herein, any thing different from the Truth, let
him not presently condemnt me, as a presumptuous publisher of Novelties, or a
broacher of falsehood, until he has first consulted with the Authors herein
alleged.

Howsoever, if I have not attained my purpose herein, yet I rejoice in seeking
laboriously; though the length and difficulty of the way cause me to fail:

This I am sure, I may truly say; I have done my utmost: I have sought, if not
sound; I have called, if not received an answer.

Take it (gentle Reader) as it is, if it answer my desire, it cannot displease
thee; Howeuer, I publish it, to Gods glory, and thy good.

Thine in Christ Jesus, John Meredyth.

The Sin OF BLASPHEMY against the Holy Ghost, Scholastically examined; the
reasons of the absolute Irremissibility thereof displayed; An admonition to all
Reuolting Apostataes annexed.
HEB. CAP. 3. VER. 26. For if we Sin wilfully, after we have received the
knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin.
THis Scripture, is one of those places, whence certain of the Epipha. lib. z.
cont. haer. tom. 1. haeres. 59.
Ancient, took occasion to improve the authority of this Epistle.

Hence was it, that Nouatus the Catharist, labored to maintain that
merciless position, Cyprian. Epist. lib. 3. Epist. 23.
That whosoever had once after Baptism fallen into persecution, though
afterward he praesented himself before the throne of Gods grace, with
fountains of tears, yet had he the Gates of his mercy shut up against him
for ever.

Hence is that, which Mr. Institut. lib. 3. Cap. 3.21.
Calvin observed; that Quidam boni viri, hanc supposititiam Epistolam
crediderunt; That certain worthy men, (speaking of some of his own time)
being offended at the roughnes and austerity of this Doctrine, admitted not
this Epistle as Authentical, when as notwithstanding, the profound Mysteries,
and impregnable arguments therein contained, do maintain, Theophilact. in
expos. verse. 3 Cap. 1. ad Hebr.
Nullius alterius esse posse nisi Pauli; that it can be fathered upon none
other but St. Paul, in whom Christ himself spoke.

Wherefore that all occasion of doubt and obscurity may be removed, which
partly crept up by Abuse; partly for want and neglect of that due respect,
which ought to have been had, unto that dependency, which these words have on
the prcedent, (without which) they cannot be read unto any true sense in
themselves; I will display the scope and drift of the Author in this Epistle.

Whose general intention is, to set forth and declare unto us, the Dignity and
Excellency of our Savior Christ; the Sufficiency of the Gospel, and the
Insufficiency of the Law.

And to this end, he divides his Epistle into four parts; In the first, he
shows the Excellency of our Savior, by comparing him, (but (...)) by way of
prheminence and superiority; First with the Prophets; Secondly with the Angels;
Thirdly with Mos^s; Fourthly (by way of Allusion) unto the Leuiticall
Priesthood: and this, in the first seven Chapters of this Epistle.

Secondly, by way of recapitulation, of certain points premised in the former
Chapters; he does more at large express the Insufficiency of the Law, and
that by comparing it; First, with the New Testament; Secondly, by the figure of
the Tabernacle; Thirdly, by the conditions of the Legal Sacrifice; and this
from the beginning of the Eight Chapter, unto the nineteenth Verse of the tenth
Chapter.

Thirdly, out of the former Doctrine, he draws certain moral precepts,
which extend, unto the 18.th Verse of the last Chapter.

Wherein, first he exhorts them to embrace the Gospel; and to make his
Doctrine more effectual, and persuasiue, he declares the vtility redounding
to those who persist therein the 23. Verse of this Chapter.

Secondly, he propounds the dangerous and dreadful fall of those, who after
they have once believed it, and known it to be the Truth, become
notwithstanding of their own accord, backsliding Apostates, and malicious
Adversaries thereunto, and this in my Text. Wherein, I note the aggrauation of
this Sin of Apostasy by three Circumstances.

First, because it proceeds from a firm resolution, and malicious will, and
purpose, to Sin in this kind; In this word Wilfully.

Secondly, because it is against the Evangelical Truth, before believed and
known, In these words; After we have received the knowledge of the Truth.

Thirdly, because of the Inexpiability of it; In the last words; There
remains no more Sacrifice for Sin.

There is no one place, in the whole body of the Holy Scripture, which does so
evidently explain that dreadful Math. 12. Mark. 3. Luke 12.
Sin, spoken of by our Savior in the Gospel, (that Sin I mean against
the Holy Ghost) with the circumstances, and sequel thereof, as this brief
Text, if it were thoroughly examined, and exactly discussed.

I am (I confess) in every respect, unworthy to undertake a matter so holy, so
indifficult, so Divine, so far above the reach of my capacity, who am every
way unmeet to be named with those, who have labored before me, to unmask
the face of this obscurity.

But I do humbly beseech the true Lord and Master of us all, that he would
vouchsafe to instruct me herein, either by the Sacred Scriptures, or by the
writings of the holy Learned, and by the Assistance of his holy Spirit; that I
may so propound, so affirm; that in my assertions, I may always cleave unto the
Truth; So that what proceeds from me, may principally be acceptable in his
sight, and consequently accepted by the faithful.

To enter therefore into the handling of this obscure question; I observe these
points:

First, the distinct Species or kind of Sin, here mentianed, In the first
word; Sin.

Secondly, the Sub^^ct of this Sin: the Will, wilfully.

Thirdly, the Object, against which it is committed; the Truth.

Fourthly, the Circumstances wherewith it must be invested, Believed and
known; in these words, After we have received the knowledge of the Truth.

Lastly, the Sequel or Effect of it, Destitution of remedy: In these words,
There remains no more Sacrifice for Sin.

The distinct Species or kind of this Sin; If we Sin.
THE term Sin, is used in the Scriptures, and by Divines, in two Senses.

Sometime Generally; and so it expresses All, or any Sin, of what kind
soever, wherewith God is offended; as by our Savior it is used, Whosoever
commits Sin, is the Servant of Sin. Ioh. 8.


Sometime particularly, and for Distinction; and so it designeth Some one Sin,
In which sense also it is used by CHRIST, to specify to the Pharisees, their
wilful Incredulity; If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should not
Ioh. 35.
have had Sin; by which saying, he would have us understand, says the
Father; August. ibid.
Non omne peccatum, not every Sin, under a general term; but Magnum quoddam
peccatum, one certain great Sin; which was, Quia non crediderunt in eum;
their non credulity, Seeing CHRIST came to this end, that they should believe in
him.

And in this sense the word Sin is here used; viz. to denote a particular
Sin, namely; A total Desertion of the Faith of Christ, before received.

The occasion was the Instability of the Hebrews, who slid back from the
Gospel, which before they professed; And in these words, the danger of such
Apostasy is expressed by the Apostle, first laying before them the quality of
Apostasy, in the word, Sin.

As CHRIST came to call the world to follow him, proclaiming life Eternal to
all who believed in him; So he meant, that those who refused him, or having
received him, but after departed from him, should have no part in his promise.

For when he sent abroad his Disciples, with prdiction of the Cross for his
sake, he said, that those only; Who Math. 10,
continued faithful unto the end, in bearing Witness unto his Name, should be
saved; and contrarily be by so much more remote from Salvation, by how many
more degrees, they separated themselves from CHRIST.

But as three things necessarily concur to make a Christian;

First, Faith, whereby we believe in him, and assent to his Gospel.

Secondly, Confession of his Name, and profession of his Gospel.

Thirdly, Defense of his Name and Gospel, and that unto Death, if need so
require.

So there are three Degrees, by which a man falls away wholly from CHRIST, and
unrecoverably depriueth himself of Salvation:

First, by denying Christ or his Gospel, against his Belief and knowledge.

Secondly, by an universal Apostasy from Christ.

Thirdly, by Rebellion, and hate against Christ, accompanied with all manner
Impugning him, and his Gospel.

First, when Gods Truth shall manifestly appear unto thee, so that thou art
convicted in thy heart and Conscience, that the matter stands so, and cannot
be otherwise; yetnotwithstanding, thou dare Impiously deny this Truth,
affirming it not to be of God, but of the Devil, like the wicked Pharisees,
who against their Conscience, ascribed the manifest work of GOD, to Beelzebub;
when as notwithstanding, they daily perceived such things to have been done
by him, which no man could effect, except God had been with him.

This is, Non videre quod videas says a Pacian. Epist. 3. ad Sympron. No^at.
Romans 14.
Father; to shut thine eyes, least thou should see.

The Apostle says, that Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin, and that
Priuatiuely; and therefore the Pagans, notwithstanding their Ignorance, perish;
But whatsoever is done against Faith, and a good Conscience, Positiuely, is the
fury of Sin, which is Irremediable; and whosoever being fallen, is not raised
again by the Suggestion hereof, there is no hope of him; Seeing his Conscience,
which is Instar mill testium, as strong as a thousand witnesses, is seared and
senseless; for such are dead while they live; who seeing are blind, and do
not see; hearing are deaf, and hear not the 1 Timothy 4.
Spirit; and such renouncing CHRIST, who is the Life, shut up the way, by which
they should return unto him again.

Secondly a total Apostasy from Christ.
AS Sin does formally consist, in August. lib. de lib. arb.
auersione ab Incommutabili bono, in turning from the unchangeable Good; so
there is One Sin which seperateth a man wholly from God.

But as Man is Joined unto God, principally by Faith, Aquin. 22, 2. quest. 12.
art. 1.
so Infidelity taken contrary, for a contempt of the Faith, and Impugning the
same; or rather that, which Bonouenturae Contiloq. ^^. 1. Cap. 26.
calls Apostaciam perfidiae, a wilful turning from the Faith once received;
so that the party does Male de Deo sentire, think evil of God, Blaspemare
speak reproachfully of Comb. in compend. Theolog. lib. 3. Cap. 6.
him, and Sacramenta indigne tractare, scornfully abuse his Sacraments, this I
say, seperateth a man farthest from God; So that it consists not, in any Act
of Infirmity, or breach of the second Table.

But in an universal Defection, and reuolting of the Reprobate from the means
of his Salvation; Quod ex de'perato Ins^t. lib. 3. Cap. 3. 23.
furore profectum (says Mr. Calvin) the which proceeding from a desperate fury,
betokens the party to be possessed by the Devil.

Thirdly, which is the greatest Impiety of all; when the Soul is grown to
that Impudence, that it labors by all means possible to subvert CHRIST and
his Gospel; so that now Bernard. Ser. de 7. mrijs.
Eum paenitet adhaesiss^ Christo; he grieueth that ever he followed Christ;
and for all his sweet Mercies, in steed of thanks, he repayeth him with
contumely and persecution.

First, to this purpose, (as one Rich. de Scto vict. lib. 3. de crud.
Interho^inis Cap. 18.
notes) he does Abijcere, cast him of, with Nolumus hunc regnare, refusing to
be any longer called a Christian.

Secondly, Obijcere, mainely oppose himself against his honor.

Thirdly, Deijcere, labor to suppress his Dominion.

Fourthly, Subijcere, tyranize over him, and trample him under feet.

O how fearful a case is it, to impugn Christ, who is the Truth! Such a one
rides with the Devil, who is the Father of Lies; and therefore it may well
be a Sign of one Ioh. 8.
that posteth to Hell; those are they, who Sin against the Holy Ghost, which
never shall be forgiven.

The which Sin is extended by the Schoolmen unto three Degrees: Sometime it
is Conceitted in the Heart, and Heb. Cap. 10. Verse. 19.
there rests; as in those, Who account the Blood of the Testament as an
unholy thing.

Sometime it is attended with a Detestation of the affection, and breaks into
Words; and then with Blasphemous mouths they revile the Spirit of Grace.
Verse codem,


And at length as open Enemies to Christ, and his Truth; they manifest it in
Action, Treading the Son of God under Ibid,
their feet; says the Apostle.

And although the Sin against the Holy Ghost, be the Speaking of a word
against him; yet it causes no doubt in this point: For a man may speak
diversely; ( Caictan. in Co^. ad 2^.2. Aquin. quest. 13. Art. 1.
says one,) Optatiue, in heart; Enunciatiue, vocally; Imperative, wilfully;
compelling other to the like.

This appeared in Iultan the Apostata:

He Socrat. l^br. 3. Eccl. hist. cap. 1.
secretly detested CHRIST, and imitated the Religion of Libanius the Sophist,
and Maximus the Philosopher, his Masters, at Nicomedia.

Secondly, he usually termed Christ (in contempt) Galilaean; bellowing forth,
(even at his Death also) this Blasphemy; Theodo. lib. 3. Eccl. hist. cap. 25
Vicifti Galilaee, thou have vanquished me Galilaean.

And lastly being enraged by the Christians of Antiochiae, at the Russin. libr.
1. Eccles. hist. cap. 35.36.
fetching home from Daphne, the Corpse of Babilas the Martyr; (whose
propinquity silenced their Oracle) for that they sang with Joy and exultation;
Let all be confounded that worship carved Images. He resolved to imitate the
cruelty of Diocletian against the Christians, commanding Salustius his
President, in the mean time to torture those who did sing at that time; And
among other they afflicted Socrat. vbi su^ra cap. 16. and 17.
Theodorus a young man, with pains most cruel and of long continuance.

This is the condition of the persidious Apostata; for as when the life of the
Body is taken away, all the Members are deprived of their due disposition; So
when the life of the Soul (which is Faith, as the Apostle says) is
extinguished, there appears a disorder in all the powers, and faculties of
Romans 1.
the same, and the Members of the Body; In the Heart which conceiueth hate
against God; In the mouth which blasphemeth him; In the Motive Instruments
which persecute him; So that the words of Solomon are verified of him:
Proverb. 6.


Virnequam or Apostata (as the vulgar translation sounds it) ambulat peruerso
ore, etc.

The wicked Apostate, walks with a froward mouth; He makes a sign with his
eyes, h^e signifies with his fingers, leude things are in his heart, he
imagines Evil at all times, and raises up Contentions; and his Judgment is
annexed; Therefore shall his destruction come suddenly without recovery.

To deny him, were with the Greeks, to repute him foolishnes, and argues
damnable pride; To renounce him; whose service would yield thee a Kingdom
aeternall, were monstrous Ingratitude; But if farther, thou do calumniate
and revile him Opprobriously and falsely, either by unjust Detraction, or
imputation, or labor to ruinate his Kingdom by persecution, thou art a
Blasphemer, and Sinnest against the Holy Ghost.

The Subject of this Sin, The Will, Wilfully.
MAN being created by GOD, Benanent. Br^uilo^. pt. 3. Cap. 1.
Vt ageret opera sua a Deo, secundum Deum and propter Deum: to perform his
actions by the power of Gods might, according to the Direction of his wisdom,
and to the advancement of his Glory; had for the full and perfect execution
hereof, his Soul endowed with three principal faculties, termed by the
Schoolmen, Actuum humanorum principia. Aquin. 12. ^. qu^s^. 78. art. 1.
Compend. Th^ol^^. l^b. 2. Cap. 49.


The first, is Voluntas; the Will, by Albertus termed Imperu^ix potentia, the
commanding power; The Second, Intellectus; the understanding; termed
Consultrix potentia, the aduising or directing power; The Third, Appe^itus
sensitiuus the Appetite Sensitive, termed Affectiua potentia the desiring power.

The Will, was given as a powerful Potentate, to conform the whole Man to the
will of his Maker; But forasmuch, as this could not be effected, unless the
will of God, were first made known unto her; therefore the Understanding was
given, to enlighten with the manifest knowledge of the first Truth; and the
Virtue appetitiue, which could not be satisfied, but with the perfect love of
the chief Good.

But through Adams Sin, the powers of the Soul, were so perverted and
crazed; Even as an Instrument of Music, which when it is cracked and out of
Tune, in steed of sweet Melody, annoyeth the Ear with harsh sound.

Hence comes it to pass, that the Will, before so potent in her command, and
absolute in Dominion over Spiritual and Carnal concupiscence, finds in her
kingdom, so many Contradictions, Rebellions, Conflictations, Contrarieties,
and Oppositions. Briefly, herself to be infected with Malice, prone unto
evil, ouer-ruled by Sensuality, and thereby drawn unto Carnal desires.

The Understanding, which was so prudent an informing Counsailour unto the
will, is so blinded with Ignorance, that it cannot discern the Truth, but is
quickly deceived, and prone unto Error.

And the Appetite Sensitive, before, a provident and faithful Subject, is now
infected with Infirmity and concupiscence, rebellious against reason, and
inclining unto all manner of evil, kindling in us, an incessant desire to
Sin.

All, whatsoever Sins, proceed from a corruption in one of these principal
faculties;

Sometime, by default of the Virtue Appetitiue; when we fall into Sins
through Infirmity, and notwithstanding all our resistance, we cannot fully
avoid them; but with Humiliation we acknowledge them, and accuse our selves
for the Commission.

Sometime by default of understanding; when we incur sins through error,
and commit evil, because we think it to be good; being deceived by the veil
of a false opinion, which causes in us denial of those sins.

Sometime by default of the will; when we commit sins of mere iniquity;
knowing them, being able to resist them, and yet of purpose committing them;
with contumacie in the commission, contempt of God in the transgression, and
impudence in the factitation of them; Such are said to be sins of malice:

In which sense, the word wilfully, is used in my Text; and so much the Greek
Aduerbe sounds, (...) voluntarily, wittingly, and of set purpose, without any
compulsion;

And in this sense, Aquine expounds the Latin word voluntary in my Text, for
the deliberate malice of the will, distinguishing it from volens, which
signifies a seduction through passion, without obstinacy.

For a man may sin in blasphemy against God, by fear, compulsion, and
constraint, drawn unto it by the infirmity of the flesh, which declineth the
horror of torments; as did St. Tom. 1. council. conc. Synuessae.
Peter, and Marcellinus Bishop of Rome, and many other in the Primitive Church,
who notwithstanding did after repent, and became glorious Martyrs, of whom
says that glorious Martyr, and Cyprian. Ser. de Lapsis.
Bishop of Carthage, Non animus sed corpus in dolor defecit; the flesh
fainted, but their heart did not utterly fail under those tortures.

Or thus may a man sin of ignorance, as many of the Jews did, when they
passed by Christ, and nodded their Math. 27.
heads at him in derision, as he did hang on the Cross; and as St. Paul did,
who persecuted Christ, ignorantly, and through 1. Tim. 1.
unbelief.

Or thus may a man sin of malice and wilfully, of mere hate against Christ,
with a full purpose to sin in this kind, without any outward cause moving
thereunto, but ex industria, as the Schoolmen speak, with earnest desire to
perform it, and without all coaction; for seeing, that whatsoever is voluntary
is caused, either Bonauent. part. 3. Breuil. cap. 11.
per violentiam, or ignorantiam, by violence, or ignorance: The first for want
of power, the second by defect of knowledge; when the will is so corrupt, that
though it could resist, and likewise did know the sin, being not drawn unto
it, by any passion or infirmity in the appetite sensi^iue or error in reason,
or the understanding; but perform it Elicite a se, immediately from it self;
Ibi inest plen^ssima ratio peccati says Scotus super 2. Sent. did. 43.
one, It is the extremity of sin; this is, peccare ex certa malitia say the
Schoolmen, To sin of set malice.

To the farther understanding whereof; know, that malice in the will, has it is
degrees.

The first kind is simple malice, a taynt of original corruption, Bonauent
super 2. Sent. did. 43.
from which no man is wholly quit.

Sometime is joined hereunto, an actual peruersity of the will; and this is
termed certa malitia, set malice.

A man may sin of set malice, two ways. Aquin. secunda, secundae q. 13. art.


First, by the inclination of a vicious habit; and this is a general
condition of sin.

Secondly, when a man runs on to sin, sub ratione peccati, says Jac.
Almayn. moral cap. 27.
Aquine; because it is sin; and that, quia offensiuum Dei says another;
because it offends God: And this is the highest height of iniquity; which if
it be joined to Apostacy from Christ; the sinner does Aug. praefat. in Epist.
ad Romans Pro. 2.
sciens peccatum in Spiritum Sanctum committere; wittingly commit that sin
against the Holy Ghost; and such do, laetaeri cum malefecerint, rejoice and
take pleasure in doing it: so that malice is in the spirit of such, Bonauent.
vbi supra. Math. 12.
secundum se, subiectiuely, which our Savior terms (...), the blasphemy of
the Spirit; which words an ancient Divine expounding, says, it is, Affectus
and desiderium vituperationis diuinae; a strong Rich. de Sancts' vict. tract.
de Spi. blasp.
desire to diffame God; And Bucan.
another expounds it more familiarly, Blasphemia spiritus, in spiritum;
Actiuely and passiuely; the blasphemy of the spirit of man, against the Spirit
of God; and * Caietane accords; Maligna machinatio aduersus Deum; a malicious
intention against God. Ientac. 8, q. 1.


So that the malice of the will is the formal, distinguishing it from all
other sins.

A dreadful case, when a man is grown to that height of malice, that he
should take pleasure in disgracing God; and this is true blasphemy.

I believe the judgment of Richardus; Quid est blasphemia? nisi vituperatio
diuina; Blasphemy is naught else, but, Vbi supra.
a disprasing of God; the word sounds the same.

It may seem strange, and happily incredible to some, that any should be so
perverse; but let those who are so conceited, hear what Christ speaks of
such persons; New have Ioh. 15.
they hated me, and my father.

Hence it came to pass, that the blasphemous Pharisees, who were such persons,
would have falsely fastened on Christ this dishonor, that he had (...), an
unclean Mar. 3.
spirit.

I am of this opinion that no sin, be it never so heinous, is that sin
against the Holy Ghost, vnleast it proceed from the malice of the will, as
aforesaid.

And again, I suppose, that in whomsoever this malice of the will does
remain; in him also, is that evil and unfaithful Heb. 3.
heart, to depart away from the living God.

And therefore though one should baptize an Image, adore the devil, scorn the
blessed Sacrament, turn Turk, or commit other most horrible sins, either
for gain, or because he would know some secret from the devil, or through
madness or fear; so that it be not done of wilful malice against God, it
makes not guilty of this sin, though otherwise, it make him an heinous
sinner.

So that we may usurp the words of Lib. 1. retract. cap. 15.
Augustine for a conclusion of this point; That now the will, is principal (if
not total) Actorheerein; Vsque adeo peccatum est, vt sinon esset voluntarium,
non esset peccatum; It is so far forth a sin against the Holy Ghost, that
were it not maliciously wilful, it were not a sin of this kind; for this
malice directly impugneth the most appropriate effect of the Holy Ghost, which
is the love of God, which is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost;
without which love, no man can Romans 5. 1. Cor. 12. Tract. 74. super Joh.
say that Jesus is the Lord; Nemo fic dicit, nisi qui diligit, says Augustine.

The Object of this Sin; the Evangelical Truth.
THE holy Scriptures do often under the name of truth, express unto us
Christ; for he is Aquin. 2. 2. quaest. 1. art. 1.
veritas prima, say the Schoolmen, the first Truth, and the object of our
faith; in as much, as he is the word of his Father, as he has testified of
himself, and his Testimony is true; I am the Truth; and Ioh. 14.
thus is he that Truth that makes us all true, for he teaches us all Truth.

He is the most final and formal object of our knowledge leading us unto
knowledge, neither can any Truth be possibly known, but by the insplendencie
of this eternal Truth; whom the Spirit testifies to be the Truth; The Truth,
for that we have all the promises of truth performed, and exhibited in him.

In his body a Communion, in his Blood the expiation of all our sins, in his
Soul, the price of our Redemption, in his Spirit, August. apud Albert. Ratisp.
Sup. 6. cap. Ioh.
vivification, and a perfect restoration of our spiritual life, which was
once lost in his Deity and Godhead, the full perfection and complement of all
grace; But for as much as this Truth is made manifest unto us, in the old and
new Testaments, Therefore the Scriptures are termed that Truth, because Christ
is revealed unto us in them; and so our Savior styles them in his prayer to
his Father; Sermotuus veritas Ioh. 17.
est, thy word is thy Truth; And St. Paul distinctly terms them that Truth
that is (...) according to Tit. 1.
Godliness, consisting in understanding the Law, and the Prophets, and
believing the Gospel; for they express unto us that Truth whereby we must be
saved.

For what are the Scriptures? But Christ vayled; and what is Christ? but the
unmasking of the Scriptures:

The word of Truth is the word of Christ, and Christ is the Truth of this word.

The Law led us unto him; the Patriarchs foresaw him, the Prophets foretold
him, the Evangelists writ the whole History of his life; the Apostles preached
the Gospel of Christ.

The Gospel (I say) that is (says Chrysostom) the Joyful Praefat. a ^^uang
Math.
message of Salvation; wherein we are certified, that punishment is taken
away, that Sin is pardoned, that we are Sanctified, Justified, Redeemed,
Adopted to be the Sons of GOD, made heirs of Heaven, yea we who once were
the Enemies of God, and sat in darkness, and in the shadow of Death.

To the effecting whereof the only begotten Son of God, Veraciter factus est
homo, was truly made man; In Gregor.
the Sacrifice of our redemption, vouchsafed Mori vt vitulus, to dye as a
Calfe; By the power of his might, Surrexit vt Leo, did rise again like a Lion,
and ascending up into the Heavens; was Eleuatus vt Aquila, mounted like an
Aeagle; where he sits in Majesty and Glory, at the right hand of his
Father, until he shall return again, at the fulness of time to Judge the
world; and has delivered in the Interim to our custody, his precions treasure,
which he will exact again at our hands; Namely, the Law, and the Prophets,
the Gospel, the writings of his Apostles, his Sacraments, the grace of
Remission of Sins, and Justification, the Dignity and Honor of his glorious
Name, that we are, and so likewise called Christians; A people beloved of God,
Elect and peculiar.

He came into the world, to be unto the Jews, a finisher of the Law, and to
the Gentiles, A Light in the midst of their darkness, and a Rock of
Salvation to all that would 1. Pet. 2.
build on him.

And though he became unto the unhappy Jews, Petra scandali, and Lapis
offensionis, a Stone to stumble at, and a Rock of offense; and to the Impious
Gentile, In signum cui Luke 2.
contradicitur, for a Sign to be spoken against; yet unto us who believe in
him, he is Power, Wisdom, Righteousness, 1. Cor. 1.
and Redemption.

Out of the premises, I infer this Conclusion; That whosoever renounceth the
word of God contained in the old and new Testament, renounceth Christ also;
for the word is the Law of God, which in the Old and New Testament, was
delivered by Christ; So that he came into the world to the end to declare the
Truth, which lay hid in the old Law, and to bear witness thereunto.

And again, such a one makes GOD the Father a Liar, who in Jordan, and the
Mount Tabor testified of CHRIST; This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well
Math. 3. Mark. 3.
pleased.

For God as the Object, has a double reference to our Faith; as the Medium,
and Conclusion, the Form, and the Matter.

Lib. 3. Sent. did. 23.
Id quo creditur, and id quod creditur, says Lumbard, As the End and the
Means; he is both the Agent, the Object, the End, and the Rule of our Faith,
as he is Veritas prima revealed by himself in the Scriptures, because the
Scriptures, are the Ministerial reason of the Object of our Faith; for Faith
is Joined to this Object, by this Medium; for the Scriptures are Deus dicens
seipsum, says Caietan ad 22. 2. Aquin. q. 2.
a Divine, God declaring himself to Mankind.

Therefore, whosoever renounceth the Gospel, renounceth CHRIST also; And
again, whosoever abandoneth that Truth of Christian Religion, which is derived
thence, by necessary and Infallible consequence, termed by St. Chrysostom,
Dogmatafidei, the principles and Articles of Sup. verba. contextus.
Faith, forsakes CHRIST JESUS himself, and consequently relinquisheth the
whole means of Salvation, and must necessarily perish.

He that shall not in words confess, and in deed maintain, if need so
require, to the staking of his life thereon, the Honor of Christ his Savior;
is worse then an Infidel: for the Heathen themselves affirm, nothing to be so
Inhumane, so Beast-like, Quam committere, vt Beneficio victus esse videare; as
to be careless to requite a good turn to the full; And if the Christian
shall be silent in this, The very Math. 10.
Stones would cry out against him, If thou Deny him before Man, he will deny
thee before God; And better it is, that thou should be Chrysostom. apud Hug.
Sup. 10. Cap. Math.
Testis Christi, a witness to maintain the glory of thy Lord and Savior; then
that thou should hereafter find CHRIST Testem contrate; a witness to convict
thee of Infidelity.

It is the highest degree of Ingratitude, to repay Evil for Good, and to
scorn and disgrace a Benefactor.

Peremptoria res est Ingratitudo, says Ser. 5. 2.
Bernard; Ingratitude is a deadly thing, it slays the Soul, there is nothing
so displeasing to God, in the Children of Grace; and again he terms it Sup.
Cant.
Ventum vrentem, a burning wind, which dries up the fountain of Gods love,
the dew of his Mercy and floods of his Grace.

Such like Methridates (who hated the Antidote which preserved his life from
the danger of poison) renounce the means, whereby their Souls are saved from
Hell, Death, and Damnation.

And such are most like unto mad Dogs, who run chiefly with fury at their
Masters, from whom they received their breeding, and their feeding.

And this is the true Sin against the Holy Ghost; Impugning of Gods word, in
manner abouesaid, for that it proclaims the Majesty, Wisdom, and goodness of
God; and therefore he that opposes this Truth, opposes Gods honor, the
truth of Faith, which is the foundation of our Salvation.

This is the Object of this Sin; the Truth of Christian Faith, which
whosoever Impugneth, is said to resist the Holy Ghost, by whom it is revealed
and infused into Man, and therefore he is called Spiritus veritatis, because
he leads Ioh. 16.
into all Truth.

If any should grow to that Impudence to deny Truth, in respect of the Entity
thereof, he is convinced by the strength thereof; for it being the light of
the Soul, can never Set; for it casts her beams so strongly on the Soul,
that a man cannot imagine it, not to be; for if there be no truth, it is
true, that there is no truth, therefore something is true; and if something be
true, it is true, that there is Truth; therefore, if Truth be not, there is
truth; See how the Truth pruaileth above all things. I ^^iras.


God is the Fountain of all Truth, and from him has every truth his
Emanation, and more especially the Truth of Christian Faith, which is the power
of God unto Salvation, unto every one that believes, and that through the
Operation Romans 1.
of the Holy Ghost; and consequently he Sins against the Holy Ghost, who
does hate, persecute, or renounce the same.

St. Augustine, was once of Opinion, that No man's Conscience could hate GOD,
but afterward he retracted it: at the first he did not remember the saying of
the Holy Ghost; The presumption of them that hate thee increases ever more and
more. For there are many that hate God; whom because Psalm. 74.
they know to be an auenger of wickedness, they wish he had no Being, for
Qucm metui^ quisque periricupit; and so though that all men by Nature desire
the knowledge of the Truth; yet ratione adiuncti or effectus consequentis, he
may abhor it, and labor to do priudice thereunto; So a man may hate God for
his Justice, which punishes Sin, and his Truth which descryeth and reproves
the same.

The Circumstances, Belief in Christ, and knowledge of his Word going before,
and yet Christ repudiated.
NOw I come to the Circumstances, without which we cannot define this Sin;
for not every one, that believes not the Gospel in whole or part; is culpable
of this great Sin, yea though he Impugn it, and therefore we must
distinguish.

There are some, who as yet, have not received the Faith; as Native Indian
Idolaters, and other who never heard of it; Aquin. 2^. 2. quaest. 10. art. 1.
and these are termed Infidels, Negative.

Or they have once Believed, and after departed from it; and that either, a
part in aliquibus, in some particular Tho. Elys. 19. in Clypeo piorum. quest.
42. art. 1.
points by their understanding deceived, and such are termed Haretickes. Or a
tota totaliter, from the whole in general, by their Will and Affection
deprived, and these are termed Apostatates.

The first sort, are not censured in my Text, because they received it not; Nor
the second, because they knew it not; But the third, are directly pointed at,
who both received, and knew it.

For the Clearing whereof, you must know, that as in Natural Objects; there
must be first, a representation of them to the Senses; Secondly, a Judgment
of the things represented by the Mind, for Judgment is Completinum
cognitionis Aquin. 22.2. qu. 173.
the perfecting of knowledge.

So before a man be a perfect Christian, two things are requisite;

First, Vt sane capiat ea quae Creduntur; that he verily believe Aquin. 2. 2.
qu. 9. art. 1.
the Articles of Faith.

Secondly, Vt habeat rectum Iudicium de eis, discernendo credenda, a non
credendis; that he Judge rightly and soundly, what he ought to believe, what
to refuse; both which are intimated in these words; Believed and known, as
Anselme and Bruno, expound them.

The first Circumstance; After we have received.
To receive the Truth, is to believe it, and to believe in Christ as the Truth
teaches us; and thus the word is used by the Evangelist, where he says; That
unto as many as received Christ, he gave them power to be made the Sons Ioh.
1.
of God, and he manifests it in the words following, viz. To those who
believed in his Name; So Theophilact expounds it; and in this Sense, Divines
expound this word of my Text; Anselme, for inward Illumination; Bruno for
Believing the Gospel.

Nature being blind in Heavenly things, if it should overrule in Man, must
necessarily prevent his Salvation.

For that the Natural man Believes naught, but that he first apprehends by
knowledge; when Divinity, first does require our confident assent to that it
propounds, and after certifieth us of the Truth by Evidence.

Yea, we have an Inchoation of Blessedness in this life, by the assent of
Faith, which compriseth in her boundless Continet the end of our Hope; for in
this, we do hope to be blessed, because we shall see in open Vision that
Truth, unto which we do now cleave by Faith; for Faith makes these things
present in our heart, by the certainty of Belief, and therefore is defined to
be A substance of things hoped for; as if it gave a real possession of it to
the Believer. Heb. 11.


Without which Belief, reason shows, that Blessedness cannot be attained;
for though all men desire it, yet who will use means, if he despair to
attain; and therefore Hope is necessary; And again, who will desire to hope
for that, he does not Believe.

And therefore it is necessary, first to believe in Christ, and to believe
those things also, without which Christ cannot be loved, that by believing
them, he may shape his course toward him.

Therefore CHRIST the Eternal word of his Father, having according to his
promise of old; Assumed our Flesh, suffered Death for our Sins, risen up
again for our Justification, (which are incredible to the Natural man, that
either God should become Man, Dye as a man, and that man should rise from Death
like God; and all this for Man) ought to be entertained by Man, with great Joy
and confidence, because by him we are made the sons of God.

As he has performed these things for us, so he expects that we despise
not this Grace, but earnestly embrace it with thanksgiving, and build on him
only.

For God ( Ser. de fide. Spe, et Char.
says Chrysostom) would have Man prove toward him, as he has showed himself
toward Man, he cannot attaiue unto the reward, who will not profess him; Nec
accipere potest quod promittitur, nisi ante Impleuerit quod Iubetur, nor can
he receive the promise, who does not perform the condition, viz. Believes.

But he that believes not, is already Judged; therefore Ioh. 3.
our Savior said, that the Holy Ghost would reprove the world of Sin,
because they Believed not in him; and no wonder, Ioh. 16.
because August. ibi.
Hoe manente, caetera dimittuntur, as long as incredulity remained, all other
Sins abode, Original and Actual, but this being casseered, all were
forgiven; for faith in Christ, quitteth man of all, by apprehending the Merit
of his passion, whose Blood shed, washes us clean from all our Sins.

Hereupon, we renounce all things whatsoever, and our selves also, to follow
him as his Servants, Subjects, and Soldiers, and so to be reputed and termed;
Nazianz.
Inde Christianus vocaris, quia in Christum credis, Hence are we called
Christians, because we believe in Christ;

By which Name, we testify, that we build only on him, and acknowledge him
for our King, and Redeemer, we observe all his Commandments, and judge his
rule to be the perfection of life; Limiting our Belief to his (...), and we
do Huius iurare in verba Magistri, take an Oath of allegiance unto him in
Baptism, to confirm our fidelity; it being Basi'. lib. 3. cont. Eunom.
Sigillum fidei, the Seal of our faith; wherein we receive the Cross on our
forehead, which is the seat of shamefastness, in token, Aug. in Psalm. 130.
Ne Christi opprobrio Christianus erubescat, that we should never be ashamed to
confess Christ crucified, and to fight under his Banner, unto our lives end.

Well then, art thou Baptized? art thou signed with the Idem de Cataclysmate c.
9.
Kings Seal? beginnest thou to feed at the Table of thy King? Idem Epla. ad
Arment. et Paulin.
Noli esse Desertor; become not a flincher; Remember thy Covenant; * Quia iam
vouisti, iam te astrinxisti; the vow has bound thee; wretched art thou, if
thou break thy vow to God.

The Heathen never forsake their Gods; but fear, reverence, and mainly defend
them, lest by changing their rights, they should be taxed with error. Illi
perseuerant in falso, ti^ non perseu^ras in vero? Shall they persist in
falsehood, and Chrysostom. homil. de Ier^m. Prophet.
wilt not thou abide in the truth?

Socrates, though a Pagan, having denied sacrifice to Apollo, which was death
among the Athenians, being advised by Plato, to save his life by flight, said,
Bonauent. in Luminar. Ecclesiae, Sermon. 5.
Absit vt veritatem negem, quam asserui, far be it from me to deny that
truth, which before I professed; and therefore Plato having pondered with
himself the baseness of his Counsel, was ashamed thereof, and absented
himself from his death.

Who but a mad man would cast away the Anchor of his ship in a tempest? who but
a desperate wretch would reject his pardon, being before condemned to death? or
will any pity him, who knowing himself unrecoverably sick; yet would cast
off that Physician, who with his own life having purchased a sovereign
Alexetery, proffereth him certain recovery freely, if he will use it, and
trust unto him, whereas otherwise, except he believe, he must dye, because he
despises the sole means of his preservation?

Saint Homil. 25. in oper. Imperf. in Math.
Chrysostom expresses the state of such persons, in a familiar similitude. As
the house (says he) that has a firm foundation; suffers no great ruin, if
part of the wall or roof do fall, because it may be repaired again; but if
the foundation fall, then the ruin is great; because the whole tumbleth down:
So if a Christian commit fornication, adultery, or manslaughter, his fall is
not great and unrecoverable, because he may rise again by repentance, as
David did; But if the foundation of his faith fail, that he turn Pagan, and
become unbeliever, then his ruin is great and unrecoverable, for the whole
perishes.

And such sin more heinously, then those, who never knew him, or believed in
him; and Christ is more offended at them.

Truly spoke the * Poet; (...). Sophocles.


There can be no greater sore, then a false friend, whom a man can neither
fugere, neque fugare; shun nor banish; So Christ complains, that if an
enemy had dishonourea him, he Bern. Psalm. 55.
could have bare it; but his companion and familiar friend to betray him, made
it execrable.

He was grieved at the Infidels under the Law of Nature; but more at the Jews,
under the Law of Moses, because his love was greater unto them:

But most against Judas under the Law of Grace for betraying him; it appears
by the diversity of their punishments;

The first he drowned, which was an easy death: The second Genesis 7. Number. 15.
he stoned, which was a more grievous death.

But Judas the Traitor hung himself, which was a most shameful death, and
accursed; and the rather because he Math. 27.
was of the number of those, to whom he had said, ye are my Ioh. 15.
friends.

We do worthily detest Cains iniquity, Lamech his cruelty, Chams subsannation,
Ismaelsferity, Esaw his pertinacie, Absalon his malice, the peruersity of
Joseph his brethren, But all these are nothing to that incomparable villainy of
Judas, in betraying his Lord and Master, whom he believed to be the son of
the everliving God, and the Savior of mankind; this impiety was above all
other; of an Apostle, who should have bin one of the 12. Judges sitting in
glory to judge the 12. Tribes of Israel, to become a Traitor against him who
called him to this high dignity; and therefore because of his monstrous
ingratitude, the devil entered into his heart, and carried him headlong to the
acting of his Treason, and from thence despairing of pardon, to hang himself,
where he brast asunder; and his bowels gushed out; Surely Judas committed that
Sin against the Holy Ghost; for so great was his malice against Christ, that
if it had been possible, he would have had not his flesh only, but his soul,
and Divinity also to be destroyed; he betrayed him to death, whom he believed
to be the Lord of life: yet such was his most indurate malice, that nothing
could withhold him from his purpose; though Christ used many means and
admonitions unto him;

Love, in washing his feet; Ioh. 13.


Fear, when he said, woe unto him, by whom the Son Luc. 22.
of man is betrayed.

Sorrow, when he foretold his betraying. Ioh. 13. Math. 26.


Shame, when he said unto Judas, Thou have said.

Yea so great, that he seemed after a sort to do wrong unto his Justice, in
using so great mercy toward him; yet he would not be saved, and because he
would not, he was damned, (yea if a man may so speak) against Christ's will.

Their Sin (who having once given their names unto Christ, entertained the
truth of his Gospel, and resolved their consciences thereof, yet shall after
fall away from the same) is like unto that which Judas the Traitor committed;
for such Crucify to themselves again the Son of God, and make a mock of
him, and are said to despite the Spirit of Grace; which is the true sin
against the Holy Ghost. By faith we are made the sons of God, which faith is
wrought in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, and is called in this respect the
Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father: bearing Romans 8.
witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God; by this Spirit we
are sealed unto the day of Redemption; Ephesians. 4.
Some Translations have it in the day of Redemption: the Fathers expound it in
the day of Baptism, and the reading and exposition is good; for the Holy Ghost
seals us in Baptism by faith, and makes us to be de Regio grego, nor
suffers Theophylact.
us to stand among the guilty and damned, and has separated us to Redemption.
Noli ergo Signaculum illud dissoluere; If thou fall away from thy faith, thou
do despite the Holy Ghost who did work this in thee; thou had received
a Benefit, and reiectest it after; thou despisest the giver; he made thee the
Son of God, thou will be the Servant of the Devil; he came to save thy
Soul, and thou do thrust him out of doors, and seek to bring him to
confusion; thou do herein resist plainly, and persecute the Holy Ghost; and
like Judas art a Traitor unto him.

The Second Circumstance.
IT suffices not a Christian, to have Faith, to Believe, but he must have
Understanding and Knowledge, joined to his Faith, to Judge rightly of the
Articles of Religion; which Faith otherwise cannot do, because it has but
imperfectly participated of the Divine light.

For though there be an Irradiation from the Eternal Truth; yet is it not
Plenary; because as yet, Manet Speculum and aeuigma, the veil is not removed.
1. Cor. 13.


Therefore in this darkness, we must join the other Instrument, which God
has assigned, viz. the Understanding, which though it be, but as a Candle
(compared to Faith) joined to the Sun; yet it is certain, that a man sees
better by the light of a Candle, then of the Sun, if the same be ecclipsed.

Therefore, what Faith entertaineth, the Understanding admireth, examineth, and
often discovers and makes known; For there are some things, Lumbard. lib.
3. Sent. did. 24.
Que creduntur, and nunquam Intelliguntur, which are Believed, but never
understood; As the Mystery of the Trinity, and the Incarnation, and such like;
and those, Aquin. 2^. 2. quaest. 8. art. 2.
Direct cadunt sub fide, are apprehended by Faith only, but the understanding
cannot comprize them, and therefore admireth them.

And there are other, * Quae prius creduntur, and postea Intelliguntur; Lbmb.
vbi sap.
which are first believed, and after understood; as are some principles of
Faith, gotten by hearing, reading and meditation; And these belong unto Faith,
Aquin. vbi sup.
Vt ordinata ad fidem, as Instruments to build Faith in man; as the Contents of
holy Scripture.

Of the first, we cannot have, Bonauen. Sap. 3. S^nt. did. 24.
Cognitionem a part comprahensionis, a total and perfect knowledge, while we
are here in Via, Pilgrims, as God shall be known by us hereafter, In Patria,
in our heavenly Mansion.

But of the Second in many points, we may have such knowledge here, yea the
first, may Imperfecte intelligi, in part be understood, and that Aquin. vbi
supra.
Intellectu Negatiuo, as far forth, as the understanding finds no Obstacle
to impair Caictan in Co^. ad cundum locum.
the verity of them; yea both may be believed, and understood in some sort,
Manu ductione ratiocinationis by the Inuestigation Bonauent. vbi su ra. Romans 1.
of Natural reason, as the Heathen Philosophers thus knew God.

And an ancient Divine says; that to make the Faith manifest Rich. de Scto.
vict. lib. 1. de Trinit. cap. 4.
Non tantum possunt heberirationes probabiles, sed etiam necessariae, we may
find both probable, and necessary reasons also, though sometime we cannot
espy them.

Thus these holy Fathers, assembled in the Council of Nice, did by Natural
reasons seek to demonstrate unto Cyzicen. in com. Act. Conc. Nic. pt. 22.
Phaedo and other Philosophers, whom Arr^us had conducted thither to defend
his Blasphemy, the whole Mystery of the Trinity.

For suppose, one believing one GOD, and the same to be the universal
Creator, should after by necessary reasons begin to know the fame, he should
become never the more faithless; and therefore the School man says well,
that howsoever, Aquin. 2.2. qu. 2. art. 10.
Rations praecedentis fidem, do Minueremeritum fidei, yet Subsequentes
augent; Not to believe without reasons, does impair the worth of Faith; yet to
Illustrate the Faith, after we have already Believed with reasons, dignifieth
the same; for it makes a man more firmly and with greater delight, to clean
unto the Truth, and to teach and convict other.

But we use Reason only, * Admanifestationem fidei, to Idem pt. 12. q. 1.
art. 8. Bonauent super 3. Sent. did. 25. quest. vlt.
make the Faith known, that thereby it may receive a greater growth; * Non a
part veritatis dictantis, not in respect of the Divine Truth it self, but in
respect Intellectus assentientis, of the weakness of our understanding, which
is best led by the Senses.

Therefore the Schoolmen say, that Knowledge is more Idem. ibid. did. 23.
quest. 4.
certain then Faith, in respect of the certainty of Speculation, because a man
may know a thing so certainly by knowledge that he can by no means doubt of
it, disclaim it as false, or any way contradict it in his heart, as it
appears in the knowledge of first principles; though Faith be more certain
in regard of the firmity of Adhaesion, for Faith will maintain, what knowledge
cannot conceive.

And in this sense Lib. 14. de Tr. n. Cap. 1.
Augustine expounding these words of the Apostle; To another, is given the
word of knowledge; 1. Cor. 13.
ascribes to this knowledge, the Generation, Nutrition, maintenance, and
strengthening of Faith.

And for this cause, Hugo de Scto. lib. 1. de sacram pt. 8. cap. 1.
Hugo rightly placed these two differences in the Definition of Faith; viz.
that it is, A certainty of the Soul, placed Supraopinionem, and infra
Scientiam, above Opinion, and beneath Knowledge; Because the one is but a bare
estimation. Cum formidine oppositi, always uncertain of the Truth; Now Faith,
is a doubtless approbation, Aquin.
by way of assertion. But the access of knowledge, gives a Real possession
of the Truth; So that it is more profitable to man, in respect of attaining and
retaining the perfection of Truth; as it is more secure, to stand by Faith,
then to waver by Opinion, and to see a thing present, then to believe it absent.

Yea the Habit of Faith, cannot fully be had without knowledge, for the
understanding must be instructed in the Articles of Faith, before it can
consider them.

This is the Material part of Faith, Id quod creditur, (says Lib. 3. Sent.
did. 23.
Lumbard) the Articles of our Belief; and in this respect, Faith is rightly
said to be Acquisita, or suasa, gotten by outward means, because no man
knows how many, or what Hales pt. 1. quest 1. Memb. 10.
Articles of the Faith there are, until he has learned them by reading or
hearing, let him gape as long as he please after Anabaptisticall revelations:
and thus the Apostle says, Romans 10.
Fides ex audito, Faith comes by hearing.

And this Knowledge, is earnestly to be sought after; least it unhappily fall
out, Origin. lib. 8, in Epist. ad Romo cap. 10.
Vt in fide positi, frustremur a fide, that we having once believed, should
fall away from the Faith; for they who are careless to understand by knowledge,
the truth of that they Believe, they do (...) believe in vain, and may
Euanescere in fide, fall from the 1. Cor. 1. Orig. ibid.
Faith.

Hereupon the Apostles desired our Savior, to Increase their Faith, by
imparting knowledge unto them; for this Luke 17.
knowledge makes us to feel (as it were) with the Hand of Experience, the
Truth, and therefore makes us more confident to build on it, and more firmly
to adhaere unto it.

Therefore to make the Israelites more constantly to persist Deuteronomy. 6.
in his Service, God commanded them, To seek after the knowledge and
understanding of the Law, he commands them to learn it themselves, to teach
it to their Children, he enioyneth Meditation thereof in all places, and at
alltimes, at home, and abroad, lying down, and rising up, he commands to
make them the Object of their Senses, to bind them for a sign on their hands,
and as frontlets between their eyes, to write them on the poastes of their
Houses, and on their Gates; For those things which we have learned and taught
others, and do continually think of, and which are the daily object of our
Senses; as those things we have in our hand, of our feeling, and the things
we do behold with our eyes, of our Sight; or those places unto which we
have frequent recourse, as the doors of our House, cannot be forgotten by us.

Therefore in another place he says more manifestly; Forget not the things,
which thine eyes have seen, that they Deuteronomy. 4,
depart not from thine heart, as if he should have said; The Evidence of
knowledge should so persuade the heart, that it should never be moved from
it is resolution; So that he, who once has received the Faith of CHRIST, and
after by searching the Scriptures, finds certain testimony of the power, and
efficacy thereof unto Salvation to every One that Believes, having his
Understanding quit from Ignorance, his Judgment from Error, his Conscience,
and Affection Romans 1.
also persuaded of the truth hereof, and bearing witness thereunto; what
remains? but that such a one (if he notwithstanding all the prcedence)
renounce the Faith, and persecute it, spreta Conscientia, in despite of his
Conscience, is an Adversary to the Holy Ghost, because he resists his Grace;
viz. The Illumination of his Soul by Faith, the tasting Heb. 6.
of the Heavenly Gift, of remission of Sins by Hope, the partaking of the
Holy Ghost, in his Guiftes, by knowledge and understanding, the tasting of the
good word of God, by inward delectation conceived by hearing the Gospel
preached; and the tasting also of the powers of the world to come, as life
everlasting, by hope.

A fearful fall, and incredible to some, that a man should rise to that
height, and fall so far away again, and that against his knowledge and
Conscience.

Impossible, it is not; for Sin disordereth the Affection, not the
Understanding; The Holy Ghost enlightneth every Ioh. 1.
man that comes into the world; as well the wicked as the Godly, the
Reprobate as the Elect; revealing unto the Reprobate; not persuading their
Consciences, enlightening their understanding, not sanctifying their Affection;
like the Sun, which with her Beams, only enlightneth the Moon, but heateth
the Earth moreover unto fertility.

The Reprobate have him, Secundum infusionem, for a time infused into them,
after which, he departs from them; for Rich. de Sanct. vict. Ser. desper.
Sancto.
vadit, et venit; recedit et redit; He goes, and comes, departs, and
returns;

The wicked taste him, but relish not the sweetness, because of their distempered
pallat, or foul stomach, which makes them belch up the sweetness again, and
therefore it does not nourish them, though for a while it may delight them.

Therefore such are but (...), Temporary Believers; Math. 13. 1 Ioh. 2.
neither were they of Christ; for had they been of Christ, they had continued
with Christ.

Therefore Hom. 35. in Math. Sup. haec verba, Transeunt^s blas hemabant cum et
Anselm. Ibid.
Origin says, It is Opus praeter euntium, the property of unstable persons
only, to blaspheme Jesus; No constant man blasphemeth Jesus; for their feet
are placed on a Rock; But if they fall, or pass by him, they blaspheme him,
and those who nod the head at him, having no firm head; but such in Mind and
Affection are moveable to impiety.

Cyprian says, it is Summa Delicti, non agnoscere quod ignor Tract. de Idol.
van.
are non possis; The extremity of Sin, not to acknowledge that, whereof thou
can not be ignorant;

In what State is he then, who denies, what he believes, and knows to be
that Truth, by which he must be saved, and of Envy moreover disgracefully
reuileth it, and cruelly persecuteth it?

Such are perfect Blasphemers; and therefore Caietane rightly judged,
Blasphemos non esse Infidoles; that Infidels Ad quaest. 13. 2.2. art. 1.
could not commit this Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost; because Blasphemers
know they Sin in this kind against their Conscience, and are (...),
condemned by the verdict thereof; But the intention perfecteth it in the
Believer, Tit. 3.
and their Sin is more grievous; for it had been better ^. Pet. 3.
for them, never to have known the way of righteousness, then after they have
acknowledged it, to turn from the Holy commandment given unto them.

And therefore our Savior conuicteth the Pharisees of this Sin; because they
both heard him, saw him, and by his singular words and works, like unto which,
never man uttered or acted before; knew him to be the Son of God, and yet
they Ioh. 15.
hated him; and persecuted him even unto death.

Whereby they manifestly declared themselves to be guilty of that great Sin,
maliciously controling the operation of the Holy Ghost in their souls, who
could not be ignorant who Christ was, and whence he came.

What that Sin against the Holy Ghost should be; diverse Ages, have produced
diverse opinions.

St. Exampla. ^^ad. Marcell.
Hierom said, it was, Cum videas in virtutibus Deum, Beelzebub calumniari in
factis; to ascribe Gods manifest power to the Devil.

St. Sup. cap. 12. Luc.
Ambrose, to deny Christ's Divinity.

St. Ser. de vurbis domini.
Augustine said, it was final impenitence;

St. Can. 12. Sup. Math.
Hillary; Diuin^ virtutis potestatem negare.

To deny the power of Gods might.

Some say; it is to think amiss of the Holy Ghost, concerning his Essence or
Equality.

The Schoolmen for the most part; Abijcere per contemptum, Super. 2. Sent.
did. 43. et Summustae Sup. 2.2. Aquin. q. 14.
e^ per quaehomo retrahitur a peccando; to reject with disdain, those means,
by which a man is withheld from sinning; And they make six kinds hereof;
viz. 1. Despair; 2. Praesumption; 3. Envy of his Brothers Grace; 4. Impugning
of the known Truth; 5. Obstinacy, and final Impaenitence.

Some have said, it is Infidelity; other; Sin against a man's conscience; and
sundry other opinions, there have bin, which I purposely omit.

Being then compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses; what remains,
but that we look to JESUS, the Author and finisher of our Faith? and seeing
the Mystery of Heb. 12.
this question is great, let us with Augustine, seek for light, to expound it
from the Lord.

Our Savior CHRIST, having by his Divine power cured one who was blind and
Dumb, and cast out the Devil Math. 12.
where with he was possessed, was by the Phurises enuiously accused, to have
cast it out by the power of Beelzebub, the Prince of the Devils; Whereupon our
Savior having convicted them, shows their dangerous estate, and dreadful
Sin; which he terms Sin against the Holy Ghost; which consisted herein,
that they Blasphemed the Holy Ghost, and Blaspemy imports the intended
derogation of ones good Name.

St. Matthew, gives some light hereunto, and says it is to speak against the
Holy Ghost, And St. Mark specifieth it, for they said; He has an unclean
Spirit.

So that they did attribute to the Devil those Actions, Mark. 3.
which they knew to be proper unto God, as the Eiection of Devils.

Neither did they this Ignorantly, for Intelligentes Christum, principem
daemoniorum esse dicebant; though they knew him to be the Son of GOD, yet
they termed him Ierom.
Beelzebub; and our Savior said, They knew him and whence he was; Yea grant
they had been deceived by the veil Joh. 7.
of his Flesh, yet could they not have been Ignorant, that the casting out of
Devils, was the proper work of God.

But they did it of Malice, for though they knew him to be the Heir, yet they
conspired to slay him, And thus, they termed him a Samaritane, notwithstanding
they heard him Math. 22.
Dispute of the Resurrection, and the Judgment to come; Ioh. 8.
both which, the Samaritans deny.

So that they did (even against their knowledge and conscience) impugn the
grace of God, and kingdom of Christ, who came to the end, he might dissolve
the works of the Devil; and they beheld his effectual performance thereof,
in many his Miracles, all tending to the Glory of God, to the good of Man, and
to the downfall of Satan, the Spirit also testifying to their Spirit, that it
was the power of God; all which notwithstanding they blasphemed CHRIST.

Out of the premises; I deduce this Definition of Sin against the Holy Ghost.

Sin against the Holy Ghost, is: a to all Apostasy from Christ and his
Gospel; A rejecting, resisting, suppressing, blaspheming and persecuting in
thought, in word, in Act; causlesly, wilfully, maliciously, of the true
Christian Religion: the which religion; the party before embraced, and
professed, and in which Christ he verily believed and did farther know by
plain and infallible Evidence, the same Christ and his Religion, to be the
whole, true, and sole means of Salvation.

The which Sin, is termed by our Savior, Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost,
whether by the Holy Ghost, as by an essential Name, he would design unto us
the whole Antoxin. part. 2. tit. 8. Cap. 8.
Trinity; every person whereof is a Spirit and is Holy; and he who offends
one, offends every one; or else, (which I take to be more proper) the Third
person in the Trinity, by his personal Name, one of whose Attributes is; to
enlighten Ioh. 16. Ioh. 1. Epist. 5.
with the Truth, and to testify to the Truth.

So that I conclude this point; That as no man can say, that Jesus is the Lord,
but only by the Holy Ghost; So no 1. Cor. 12.
man speaking by the Holy Ghost, can say that Jesus is execrable; But such a
one resists the Holy Ghost, and speaks Romans 8.
a word against him, because the Spirit testifies to his Spirit, that Jesus is
the Lord, and such make the Holy Ghost a Liar; which is Blasphemy in the
highest degree. 1. Ioh. 5.


The Sequel or effect of this Sin, viz. Destitution of remedy; In these
words; There remains no more Sacrifice for Sin.
THe whole Gospel is a Song, either of Joy and Melody, or of Sorrow and
Lamentation; delivering either the glad tidings of Salvation, to inuit us to
seek after it; or the heavy Doom of everlasting Damnation, to deter and
affright us from Sin and Impiety.

In these words, those who have received the true Faith of Christ, and know
likewise, Salvation to consist therein, and yet wilfully renounce it, and
maliciously persecute it, are presented with their fearful estate, which is,
to be destitute, and deprived of that Benefit, which Christ imparted to all
constant Believers, viz. to be a sacrifice for their sins.

We know that Sacrifices in the old Law were ordained, one for to be a
Propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the people, to pacify the wrath of
God against those sins, and to wash them clean from their Iniquity.

The other, consisted in a kind of Latreia, or form of Service done unto God,
not that they in themselves, were effectual to reconcile man unto Gods grace
and favor, and to blot out his Sin, but that they might typically resemble
that true Sacrifice, which was after fully offered by Christ on the Altar of
the Cross.

In which one Oblation, and most perfect Sacrifice, we have perfectly,
whatsoever the law of Nature or Moses did either figure, or imperfectly
represent.

For by this, our Sins are blotted out; for he was delivered for our Sins;
By this we receive that grace whereby Romans 8.
we are saved; For Christ being consecrate, was made the Author of Eternal
Salvation for all that did obey him; Heb. 5.
By this we obtain the perfection of glory, for by the Blood of Jesus, we
may be bold to enter into the holy place. Heb. 10.


Oh (says a devout man) God has given us a lively, pure Gers. Sup. Magnisicat.
Sacrifice full of goodness, full of those effects, for which the Legal
Sacrifice was wont to be offered up; will thou have thy sins blotted out?
Behold the Lamb of God which takes Ioh. 1.
away the Sins of the world; will thou give thanks unto God? Christ gave it
unto his Father: will thou avoid evil? He heals thee and sets thee free,
for he took our Infirmities on himself: will thou obtain a speedy Esaias. 53.
good at his hand? Ask the Thief, and he will tell thee, What Christ
promised, and confirmed unto him, in his Evening Sacrifice; Verily I say unto
thee, this day shall thou be Luc. 23.
with me in Paradise.

In the Leuiticall Law, he was resembled by a Galfe, a Ram, a Goat, a
Lamb, which were to be offered; But neither the blood of Bulls and Goats,
nor the ashes of an Heyfer, nor the Flesh of Lambs and Goats, could pacific
the Heb. 9.
wrath of GOD against Sin; for he took no pleasure therein; But the Blood
of Christ, which through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without fault to
God, to purge our Consciences from dead works, and has obtained Eternal
redemption for us.

A Lamb he was called because of his Innocence; a Ram, because of his
power; a Goat because of his likeness Appearing in the similitude of sinful
Flesh.
to Sin; a Calfe because of the virtue of his Cross. Glos. ord. in 1. Cap.
Leuit.


Yea, all these signified the Flesh of Christ, which was a most perfect
Sacrifice, and that in four respects.

First, because the Flesh of man's Nature was fit to be offered for Man, who
had offended.

Secondly, because it was passible and Mortal, and therefore was fit for
Immolation.

Thirdly, because it was without Sin.

Fourthly, because it was the Flesh of him that offered it; it was therefore
acceptable unto God, because of his unspeakable Charity, that offered his own
Flesh.

Which Augustine observed; Quid tam Congruentur ab Lib. 4. de Tri^^. Cap. 14.
hominibus Sumeretur, quod pro eis offeretur, quam humana caro? What could be
taken so fitly by Men, to be offered up for men, as the Flesh of Man? and what
was so fit for Sacrifice as Mortal flesh? and what so clean to purify the
Sins of mortal Men, as Flesh void of the contagion of carnal
concupiscence, borne of the womb of a Virgin? and what could be so
thankefully offered and accepted, as the flesh of our Sacrifice, being made the
Flesh of our Priest.

He was that Priest, by whom we are reconciled; he was that Temple, in
which we are reconciled; he was that God unto whom we are reconciled.

Behold the man, who has given himself, an Offering, and Ephesians. 5.
a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto God for us.

This is that Sacrifice for Sin, with which God is pacified; God will not be
pacified without Christ, for without the shedding of Blood, there is no
Remission. Heb. 9.


By this means the Soul wrapped in Sin, must appear before God, firmly
believing that his Sins are purged by the Blood of Christ, in the multitude
of the mercies of God, as he himself has said; Though your Sins were as
red as Esaias. 1.
Scarlet, I will wash them as white as Snow.

All the waters of Jordan cannot cleanse our Leprosy, but the Blood of JESUS
only, has that abstersive faculty to purify our Souls of the foyles of
Sin.

Chrysostom. hom. 13. in Cap. 7. ad Heb.
Non est aliud Sacrificium, there is no other Sacrifice, this One has purged
us, if this fail Ignis and Gehenna; Hell fire follows.

Nullius Martyris sanguis, says Augustine; The blood of no Martyr was shed to
this end.

Miserable therefore is their case, who trust to the Supererogation of their
Saints, in their passions, exceeding their own Sins; whereas they are
taught by their own School-man, that the merits of the Saints, were Dom.
Soto. sup. 4. Sent. did. 19.
Vltra condignum remunerata a Deo, and exhausta, rewarded above their desert by
God, and exhaust on themselves.

But we are Sanctified, even by the Offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once
made, and with this one Offering has Heb. 10.
he Consecrated for ever, them that are sanctified.

Behold the virtue of Christ his Sacrifice; Haymo. in cap. 7. ad Heb.
Vnum enim fuit, and semel oblatum, and sufficit in sempiternum, ad tollenda
omnia peccata Credentium; This one Sacrifice, once offered, sufficed for ever,
to take away all the Sins of the faithful.

Wherefore, seeing that Isych. lib. 5. Sup. Leuit.
Perfectio and omnimoda nostra salus, etc. That the Son of God by Sacrificing
himself has fully accomplished our salvation, and that there can be no
satisfaction for Sin, Nisi in vertute passionis Christi, but only in the
virtue of Christ his Passion; It remains, that whosoever renounceth the same,
rejects the sole means of his Salvation, and must consequently perish
everlastingly.

This is that chief Corner stone, Elect and precious, In 1. Pet. 2.
which, whosoever Believes shall not be confounded; But unto the Disobedient,
he is a Stone whereat they stumble, and stumbling fall, and falling loose
their lives, and win Death, and purchase to themselves damnation.

Whosoever therefore cleaves unto Christ, with a firm Affection is quit from
all Sin, and fully reconciled unto God; but whosoever despises him finally,
perishes everlastingly, for the Wrath of God abides upon him for ever.

Hence it appears, that wilful and malicious Apostasy, from Christ and his
Gospel, before professed Zealously and according to knowledge; is that Sin
against the Holy Ghost, which our Savior says, shall never be forgiven, and
the reason of the Irremissibility thereof is made manifest, viz. Adesertion,
and malicious Impugning of the only means of Remission, the Sacrifice of our
Redemption, Christ Jesus our Savior, and his Gospel.

And here is the error of the No^atians made apparent, who Interpreted this
Scripture, of those who through fear of Death, or pains of torture, denied or
Blasphemed Christ.

How, or whither Sin against the Holy Ghost is Irremissible.
But let us without prsumption more curiously examine this point; which
hitherto by any Divine which I have read, has not been exactly discussed, nor
certainly determined; that it may be said of those, who have entered upon it;
Quot capita, tot sententiae.

St. Lib. 1. Retract. Cap.
Augustine says, we may not despair, of such a one while he lives.

Of the same opinion is St.* Ambrose. Sup. cap. 3. ad Gal.


St.* Hierome, seems to hold it Irremissible, for he says; That if Peter
had committed this Sin, he had not Epist. de trina. negat. Petri.
been forgiven.

St. Hillarie says, that CHRIST denies Blasphemiae Can. 17. Sup. Math.
spiritus Iudulgentiam, pardon to the Blasphemy of the Spirit.

Hugo de Sancto victore, says; that No man can give a Quest. 55. Sup. pist. ad
Romans
certain Definition of this Sin, yet this is known, Quod si quis sic
peccarit, number quam consequetur veniam, that if any man commit it; he shall
^eder be pardoned.

And expounding the 4. 5. and 6. Verses, of the sixth Chapter of the Epistle to
the Hebrews, he says; It seems to us that in this place, and in the Tenth
Chapter of this Epistle, the Author describes the Sin against the Holy
Ghost; In cuius barathbrum quiounque, semel inciderit Impossible est quod
paenitentiam consequatur aut Salutem; Into the Gulf whereof, whosoever once
falls, it is impossible, that he should ever attain Repentance or Salvation.

Richardus de Sancto victore, says; That if some be Eternally Tract. de Spir.
Blasphem.
guilty of a Temporal Sin, in regard of Gods Justice, we may believe, that
other may be Temporally guilty of an Eternal Sin, in regard of his Mercy.

The Schoolmen, for the most part say; Vix raro, difficulter Sup. 2. Sent.
did. 43. and Su^mistae Sup. Aquin. 2. 2. quest. 14. Ientac. 8. cap. 1.
remittitur, it is scarce, seldom, hardly forgiven, never read to have been
forgiven.

Caeietan says, that God has denied to such remission and repentance, and to
speak regularly; it is never forgiven.

Almayne says, it may be forgiven, because a man may repent of it before his
Death. Moral. cap. 28.


But Armachanus says, It is one of those heinous Sins, Lib. 9. de quest.
Armen. cap. 27.
for which a Man cannot obtain pardon, though he should repent never so
heartily.

These are the Opinions of Men incomparably Learned and Judicious in their
time, unto whom we ascribe due reverence, and glorify God for his Graces
bestowed on them to the Illumination of his Church.

But forasmuch as these forenamed worthyes, never desired, that their
Authority, Antiquity, or Learning, should praeiudice verity, as it appears by
their own Confessions, (for that were; to stop up the way which leads to
find the Truth) I am bold therefore to travail after them, in the
Inquisition of this Mystery, and assuming by the way, what they had found and
discovered before, I will annex there eunto, what I shall Judge to the farther
Illustration of the Obscurity, so far as God has enabled me, submitting the
whole to the Censure of the Church.

A Sin, may be said to be Irremissible, for one, or all of these respects
following.

Either Absolutely in its own Nature:

Or in respect of the Active Power of the forgiuer:

Or in respect of the Preparitine disposition of the offender.

In respect of the Sin it self; it has this common unto it, with all other
Sins; that it meriteth Eternal Death, but it has this proper unto it self,
that it is Irremediably mortal, perpetually punished, and Necessarily
Irremissible; and therefore it is termed by St. John, Peccatum ad mortem,
Inclusiue, 1 Ioh. 5. Caiet. vbi Sup.
for which he would not have us to pray.

For as in Bodily death, there are three things:

First, loss of Life.

Secondly, corruption of Disposition of the Body to receive Life.

Thirdly, Impossibility of reperation by Nature.

So in this Sin, there are three Circumstances which make the Offender
unrecoverable.

First, loss of the Souls life, by Apostasy; For every Branch that abides
not in Christ withers, and is cast into Ioh. 15.
the Fire.

Secondly, a general De-ordination or deprauation of the powers, and faculties
of the Soul, by malice and hatred against God; which rebukes the holy Spirit
of Discipline, Sap. 1.
when it comes, that Grace cannot enter into their wicked heart. For as
Augustine says; Aduer sus gratiam, qua reconciliatus Lib. 1. de Ser. Dom. in
Monte.
est Deo, inuidioe facibus agitatur, they rage with Envy, against that Grace,
whereby they should be reconciled unto God.

Thirdly, an Impossibility of restitution by Repentance; For their Heart is
waxed fat, and their Ears are dull of Esaias. 6.
hearing, and with their Eyes they wink; least they should see with their
Eyes, and heart with their Ears, or should understand with their Heart, and
should return, that God might heal them.

So that they had rather se nunquamsaluari, quam Christum Ansel. Sup. 9. Cap.
Math.
recipere, be eternally damned, then receive CHRIST; So that the Sin is
Impugnatiuum Medici and Remedij, Impugneth Compend. Theol. lib. 3. Cap. 29.
the Physician and his Medicine, Christ and his Sacrifice.

Secondly, a Sin may be said to be Irremissible; in respect of the power of
the forgiuer; There is no Sin so great and deadly, which God cannot forgive,
in respect of his power which is Absolute; but this Sin he cannot forgive,
in respect of his power which is Ordinate; because Deus nihil potest contrase
God can do nothing against himself, Ans^lm. Proso. log. cap. 7. 2. Tim. 2.
or his Truth. For the Apostle says; He cannot deny himself; upon which
words, Anselme alleges, Dionisias thus fitly reasoning to my purpose.

Suimet negatio, casus veritatis est, veritas autem (...) est, and veritatis
casus, non (...) etc. Dionis. Areopag.


The denial of himself, is the fall of the Truth; but the Truth is Existent,
or being, and the fall of the Truth is Non (...), not Being; If therefore the
Truth be (...), that is Existent, and the denial of the Truth Non (...), not
Existent; the fall of Existent, is to fall from Being; for God cannot fall,
and not be Non (...), not Existent; And therefore he cannot forgive this Sin,
without the Annihilation of himself, and his Kingdom.

And therefore Zanchius note is obseruable, saying; This Sup. 1. mandat.
Sin, does Ingulum Dei petere, intend the Ruin, and destruction of God.

And because there is no other Salvation then by the Death of Christ, therefore
also is this sin Irremissible.

Because Christ Death (in the opinion of a worthy Divine) Raymund. Seband. in
viola animae Dia'og. 6 Cap. 61.
which was consummated with such wicked hands, cannot blot out that Sin, by
which it is wrought; His reason is annexed, Cum ipsa circa hunc plus ^peratur
mal^ quam mors eius operetur Bonum. Seeing the slaying of Christ, was far
more heinous, then the saving of Man by Christ his Death, was precious; for
Christ his Death respects us only, who are nothing; but their sin tends
unto him, who is Infinite in Goodness and Majesty.

And this opinion, with the Reason of St. Anselme. Quoniam peccatum quod contra
personam illius fit, Incomparabiliter Lib. 2. Cur Deus homo. cap. 14.
superat omnia alia, que extra personam illius cogitari possunt; Because that
Sin, which is committed against Christ his person, does incomparably exceed
all those, which may be conceited without his person.

Thirdly, a Sin may be irremissible, in respect of the praeparatiue
Disposition of the offender. It is a true Saying of Augustine; Qui creauit te
sine te, non iustificabit te sine De verb. Domini.
te, He that made thee without thy help, will not justify thee without thy
consent; for vnleast thou turn to God by Repentance, God will not turn to
thee by forgiveness; for before Repentance, man is not Susceptible of Gods
Grace, by which Remission of Sins is wrought; But so foul is this Sin (as
Augustine says) vt deprecandi humilitatem Lib. 1. de Ser. dominim Monte
subire non possit; That the Offender cannot humble himself to crave pardon,
but they rather lift up their Horn against the Lord, and his Anointed, and
they have propositum non paenitendi, a resolute purpose never to repent;
Otherwise, Bona. in 2. Sent. did. 43.
could they repent, it were possible, which they cannot do, Quod scilicet
aeterna caecitate, etc. Because they are Calvin. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 3.
stricken with unrecoverable blindness for their Ingratitude, and at their best,
they prove but like Judas, Quem non paenitentia D^ poenit. did. 3. cap.
Sceleratior. ex Leone.
duxit ad Dominum, sed Desperatio traxit ad Laqueum; whom repentance drew not
back to the Lord, but Despair to the Halter; who sorrowed not, propter amorem
Dei, for the love he bare to God whom he betrayed; but propter enormitatem
rei, for the heinous treason he committed; and Ibi nulla Reniissio, vbi nulla
possit esse poenitentia, Gorrhan. Pet. Mart. lib. 3. loc.
there can be no pardon, where there can be no Repentance.

To be brief (as the Apostle says) It is impossible, that Cor. 8. Heb. 6.
they who were once lightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were
made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God, and
of the powers of the world to come, If they fall away, should be renewed again
by repentance, seeing they crucify again to themselves the Son of God, and
make a mock of him.

Upon which words Anselme writing says; that therefore it is impossible, that
such should be renewed; Quia nolunt renouari, because they will not be renewed;
So that, Non est excusatio Infirmitatis eorum, sed culpa voluntatis, They
cannot excuse themselves by pleading Infirmity, but condemn the perverseness
of their own will, who had rather abide as they are, then be renewed;

For so execrable an hatred do they carry against God, which (as the Apostle
says of Charity) (...), Never falls away; 1. Cor. 13.


Therefore one rightly expressed the Nature of this Sin, Ex vet. quodam Ma.
scrip. comment. Sup. Math. anonymo.
that it is, Sibi ipsi causa, et semper causa est, et semper est; It is caused
by the party himself, and this cause is perpetual, and the Sin which is the
effect, is perpetual also; So that their Malice continues against God, even
in death; and they that depart out of this life, with hatred toward God, Sub
^ich. de Sancto vict. tract. de ^pi, Blasphem.
eodem morbo in aeternum tabescunt, Everlastingly languish under the same
disease; and ever hating, never repent, and therefore he terms this Sin,
Aeternum Delictum, the everlasting Sin; and never repenting; he is
aternaliter reus eternidelicti, for ever culpable of the eternal Sin.

Hereupon the Ancients made final perseuering therein, to be complementum
huius peccati, the Consummation of this Sin; which is true if it be spoken,
by way of Necessary Hugo Card. Sup. 12. cap. Luc.
Concomitance not of casual event; for then every sin wherein a man
departs out of this life Impaericent, were irremissible, which is false;
Therefore in my Text, we find (...), in the praeter Imperfectence,
praesupposing a continual progress therein, as the Greek Scholiast has
Occumen in Enarrat. ad hunc locum.
observed before me.

Therefore Augustine judged this sin to be unpardonable, Non quia Blasphemia,
sed quia ex Maleuolentia, not Lib. quaest. de viroque test. mixed.
as it is simple Blasphemy; But because it proceeds from, and is always
accompanied with Malice against God, which never cease.

So that this sin, may be said to be unpardonable, Negative, Compend.
Theolog. lib. 3. ca. 29
as the Devils which never shall be forgiven;

Preuatiue, because there is no Congruence in this Sin to be forgiven.

Contrary because it has a Disposition resisting remission.

I will add the Judgment of Scotus for a Summary.

Ad peccatum in Spiritum Sanctum, requiruntur tria; Sup. 2. Sent. did. 43,
Three things must concur, to the constitution of that Sin against the Holy
Ghost;

First, set Malice.

Secondly, it must be against the Commandments of the first Table, (which
respects the whole duty of Man unto God.)

Thirdly, it must be attended with that, which most opposes Conversion unto
God, which is final Impenitence; not because a man dies without Repentance,
but because he has a purpose never to repent, which proceeds of Despair,
Lih. de side ad Petrum.
as it does appear says Augustine in Cayn, and Judas.

And let this suffice, to have been spoken of this fearful sin, according
to the capacity of my shallow understanding: If any one think otherwise, I
refuse not his opinion, if it may appear true.

Let every one, who wishcth well unto his own soul, look into himself; that
there be not found in him, an evil and unfaithful heart, to depart away from
the living Lord. Heb. 3.


Let every one prove himself, Whither he be in the faith, examine himself,
know himself, whither Jesus be in him, or 2. Cor. 13.
that he be a Reprobate; for if any one withdraw himself, my Heb. 10.
soul shall have no pleasure in him, says the Holy Ghost.

God forbid, that either Atheism should so blind us, or Mahumetisme alienate
us, or Iudiasme suspend us, or Hypocrifie poison us; or Papisme delude us; or
Epicurisme corrupt us; that we should either with Diagoras, Deum excludere
statly deny God; or with Protagoras, Deum in d^bium vocare, once doubt whither
there be a God or no. ^actant. 1. de falls. rei^g. cap. 2.


Or that with Mahumedes Sergius, and the Turks, we should deny Jesus to be
God, and affirm him to be the Son of Mary, Et non nisi nuncium Dei, and but
only an Ambassador of Gods, as other Prophets before him had been; Alchoran.
Azea^. 12.
and that Christians err, making him their God, Plusquam praedicauerit nobis,
more then he commanded or required at our hands, and that therefore we reap no
benefit by him.

Or that with the v^gabond Jews, we should renounce him, because he brought
not the whole world at his coming, under his subjection, and gathered not
their outcasts from all parts of the world together, built them not a new
Jerusalem, in Mount Syan, and gathered them not thither, to observe the whole
Law of Moses, in great peace, and prosperity, and made them not immortal, and
impassible therein; and that therefore we should expect another Messiah.

Or that with the superstitious Papists, we should by faigning false things of
Christ, not worship him but our own fictions, and ascribe the honor proper
unto him, to other, which is omnino non color, not to worship him at all.
^act. ^^b. 1. cap. 19.


Or that with the voluptuous Epicure, we should neglect his service, and live
to our selves only; as if he regarded not, what Man does on Earth, nor
respects the Honor man should give him.

Or that with the painted Hipocrite; we should be Christians but in show, like
some of the Courtiers of Constantius Chlorus, who chose rather to renounce
Christ, then the Pus^b. lib. 1. de vit. constable. cap. 11.
Emperors Service, whom he afterward worthily rejected; as Traitors to him who
would not be faithful to God;

Or but to serve their own turn, like the greedy Courtiers of Const^ntine the
great, who were Christians opinione Idem lib. 4. de vit. Constant. cap. 54.
tantum, in conceit only.

And therefore ready to turn with every blast of wind, like Ecebolius the
Sophist of Constantinople, who conformed Socrat. lib. 3. h^st. Eccles. cap. 11.
himself to the diverse Religions of sundry Emperors.

When Constantius Iuntor ruled, he seemed a zealous Christian: when the Empire
came unto Julian the Apostata, he as earnestly maintained Paganism, and when
Iouianus was Emperor, he embraced Christianity again; and casting himself on
his face, before the Church gate, cried out, Me quasi Salem insipidum pedibus
conculcate, tread me like vnfauourie Salt under your feet.

Into any of these may the Natural man fall, through Infirmity of the flesh,
or ignorance in the understanding; But that a Christian, who has once tasted
of the sweet Mercies of the Lord, embraced the Gospel, certified his
conscience thereof, and rejoiced therein, should notwithstanding, after despise
it, reject it, persecute it, in heart, in word, in act, not through infirmity,
nor by ignorance, but of mere malice against God, to censure such as I am not
able; Vincit officium linguae, sceleris magnitudo. It is a Sin unspeakable.

For seeing it is true of Christ; Pro omnibus quae tribuisti Chrysostom. apud
Bonau. lib. de grad. virt.
nobis O Christ, nihil aliud petis quam saluari, hoc ipsum tribuens, et
acci^ientibus gratias agens; for all the good things that thou have given us O
Christ, thou crauest at our hands, no other reward, then that we would
vouchsafe to be saved by thee, both giving us Salvation, and thanking us also,
that we will receive it.

Is not he then deservedly permitted to slaughter his own soul, who is cruel
to himself, yea Enemy to love himself, because he would have us saved?

The consideration whereof moved Policarpus, that holy Bishop of Smyrna, when
he was exhorted and commanded to blaspheme Christ, to disdain his own life,
and to answer the Proconsull in these tormes; Fourscore and six Eusebius. lib.
4. ^ccles. hist. cap. 15.
years have I served him and hitherto has he hurt me in nothing; and how can
I then, Maledicere Regime^ qui me seruabit. Blaspheme my King who saved me?

We live in a cold age, wherein the Souls of men are benumbed, having no
spark of Devotion, unstable, and Irreligious, as ready to fall down to Baall,
as to the true God of Israel, yea to forsake CHRIST, and to worship Antechrist.

How lightly do men esteem the Sin of Apostasy from the Gospel, it
appears by the multitude of those, who daily pass away from us to Popery,
and those not only of the base and Ignorant sort, who like the Jew in the
Historian pass from one Sect, to another, Vt multas corradant pecunias,
Socrat. lib. 7. Eccl. hist. 17.
In hope of gain to enrich themselves thereby? But of the Learned, and those
who know the Law of God; yea the Sons of Leui betray the Temple, they who
should present other unto Christ, fly themselves from Christ, and rail at the
Holy one of Israel.

But if their malice against Man, make them take Arms against GOD, their state
is damnable, like Tertullian, who at the first, overthrew the Blaspemies of
Heretics by his writings, Velut quibusdam fulminibus, as it were with so many
thunderbolts, yet in the end, to avenge himself of the V^ncent. Lyr. cont.
haer. cap. 24
Roman Clergy, he fell away from the Truth, to Montanisme.

Ambitious Spirits, impatient of the advancement of persons more worthy then
themselves, perfidiously fly to the Tents of Antechrist, where they may open
their mouths unto Blasphemy against God, to Blaspheme his Name, and Apocalips
13.
his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven.

Think you it a small matter, to make a mock of the Gospel, by Cauponizing
the Scriptures, to palliat your Cauterized Consciences; like Arrius that
wretch, who broached his pestilent Blasphemy against Christ, of mere malice,
because that good Alexander was worthily elected Theodor. lib. 1. hist. Eccl.
cap. 2.
Bishop of Alexandria before him?

The Church is happily delivered of such Monsters; and though she be Pia and
Misericors Matter, glad to receive her lost Children lovingly, yet such prove
for the most part unnatural, and despise her; and return not with a mind to
persist; like Ecebolius whom the Church had twice received, but as he was
light and unconstant at the first; Sic quoque postea permansit, so he
continued to the end, says the Socrat. vbi supra de codem.
History.

I say not, that such commit that Sin against the Holy Ghost; but this Christ
says; He that is not with me, is against me. And this I say; He that flies
to the Tents of Math. 12.
Antechrist and speaks and writes matters, against the suggestion of his
own Conscience, tending to the dishonor of Christ, and his Gospel;
persecuting that Truth in other, which they profess secretly in themselves,
such cannot be free from this Sinnc; yea this Sin in them is Inchoatum begun,
they being Haeretici scientes, witting Heretics, and O^kam. Dialog, lib. 4.
part. 1. Cap. 3.
are no better then their reprobate Father Balaam, who loving the reward of
Iniquity, gave council, how the people of Israel might be drawn no offend
God, forgetting what he Prophesied before, and what he had heard from Number. 22.
God, accounting all for nothing, that he might satisfy his own covetous
mind.

Wherefore should not the Apostates in this Age, receive the like Censure,
which the Church in her first, and second Primative, and all other estates,
inflicted upon base reuolters, and that with strict Severity? That is, that No
Clergy Did. So. cap. S^cer^los ex Augustino.
man of what estate soever, having once fled away to the Adversary, and
returned again to the Church, Ad Clericatum redeat, vel in Clero permaneat,
Should execute that holy Function, or not rather be degraded from the same.

This was St. Augustine his censure, for meaner crimes, provoked by the zeal
of Gods house, to this rigorous Discipline; But when presently after, he
censureth weightier offenses, under an Indefinite term; wherein he includes,
A temporary Apostasy of an ambitious mind, intending a seeming panitentiall
return, to the end, he might be congratulated by the Church with high
preferment, (as it appears by his words) He peremptorily says; Hoc sacri
Canones irrecuperabiliter deijoiunt; Such are degraded without any hope of
restoration to their Priestly Function; So that he severely determined, Vt
post actam paenitentiam de damnabili crimine, nemo sit Clericus,
Notwithstanding their Penance such was their crime, that they might not
regaine the use of their Priesthood.

This Censure, was stoutly executed against Arrius by Socrat. lib. 1. Eccl.
hist. Cap. 20.
that invincible Champion of Christ his Church, renowned Athanasius, that
undaunted Bishop of Alexandria, notwithstanding the menacing Letters of the
Emperors, directed unto him in the behalf of Arrius, for his restoration
into the Church; unto whom he would in no wise condescend; Signifying unto
Constantine likewise by Letters, that it could not be; Vt illi qui fidem
irritam fecissent, quibusque ab Ecclesia Anathema esset denunciatum, tanquam
post liminio redeuntes, gradum suum recuperarent; That they, who had once
renounced their Faith, and received an Anathema from the Church, should receive
their Degree again in the Church, returning home again as perfidious
Fugitives.

Nor was this severity newly then practiced in the Church; for Cyprian himself
that glorious Martyr, whose singular lenity appears, in his Impugning the
austerity of the Nouatians, (who would admit none into the Church who was once
fallen in persecution, though through infirmity) writes thus of the Admission
of reuolters, after the penitential reuersion: Satis est talibus reuertentibus
veniam dari, non tamen debet in domo fidei perfidia permanere. Lib. 2. Epist.
2. ^d St^ph.


Let it suffice those Apostates, that at their return, they receive pardon of
their offense; nor let them expect, to enjoy their former office of Priesthood
in the Church, because of their perfidious Excursion; For what shall we
reserve for the Good, Innocent, and those who have constantly persisted in the
Church, if we honor those, who have gone out from us, and rebelled against the
Church?

Of Trophinus the Priest, who fled but only to the Nouations, (who were rather
Schismatics then Heretics) this is his censure.

After Conference (says he) with other Bishops held, Trophimus was received,
but the rather, because many Brethren Lib. ^. Epist. 2. ad Anton.
who were gone out from us, returned again with him; yet so was he admitted,
Vt Laycus communicet, to converse in the Church as a Layman, Non quasi lo^um
and Sacerdotis vsurpet, and not to execute the Office of a Priest; yet would
he not assent that they should be so received, Ante Exomologesim publicam,
ante peractam public paenitentiam cum satisfactione, ante manum ab Episcopo,
and vniuerso Lib. 3. Epist. 1^
clero in paenitentiam lapsis impositam; Before public confession made,
before public penance done with satisfaction, before the Bishop and Clergy
had laid their hands on them, to receive them as penitents; He most eagerly
rebukes it, and most exactly prohibiteth, the Eucharist to be administered unto
such, or offered up for them.

Of such, says Constantinus Bishop of Cyprus, in the 1 quest. 7. cap.
conu^nientibus.
Council of Melda; Si quis sponte ad Haeriticos vadit, and accipit
ordinationem, non recipiatur.

If any one, who before was an Orthodoxall Christian, go out unto Heretics,
and receives Orders at their hands, let him not upon his penitential return
home again, be received into the Church as a Priest.

Tharasius the Patriarch accords in the next place; and the holy Synod
concludes, Hoc est iustum iudicium, this is just Judgment. Certain it is,
that Clergy and Laity, were liable in ancient times to a fourefold punishment,
viz. Archidiac. ex. Goff. in Sum. de haeret. punit.
To Excommunication, to Deposition from Orders or other Dignity, Confiscation
of their goods, and lastly to military Persecution, and to be delivered over,
to the Secular power.

No less, or greater Severity, was extended against Apostates, by the ancient
Decrees of Christian Emperors; They Cod. lib. 1. tit. 10 Si quis lege 3. Hi qui
Sanctam
confiscated their Goods, they were deprived of the ordinary civil Privileges
of Christians, they might not succeed in Inheritance, or be made heirs of the
Goods or Lands of their Parents, they were banished into most remote
Territories; they were never to return back, nor to recover their former
Privileges.

Nec flagitium horum obliter abitur paenitentia; nor shall their foul offense
be put away by their pnitence, or be smoothed over with any cunning shadow of
defense; for those who have fallen through infirmity or Error, they received
upon their repentance; but as for those wicked ones, Qui fid^m quam Deo
dedicauerint, polluerint, qui prodentes Vide glossani ib.
diuinum mysterium, in prophana migrauerint, qui sanctum Baptisma prophanarunt,
ijs nullo remedio penitentiae, (que solet alijs criminibus adess.) s^ccurritur;
For those, (I say) who have falsified their Faith before dedicated to God, who
betraying the Sacred mysteries of Christianity, have passed to profane
Heresy, who have profaned their holy Baptism, they can have no remedy by
repentance, as other kind of offenders receive.

They might not make a Will or Testament, they might neither sell or bequeath
ought, but their Goods were bestowed Apostatarum.
on the next of their kindred, that were Christians; and that by the Law.

If any Master should seduce unto Heresy any bond or Freeman, by compulsion or
persuasion; Cum dispendio fortunarum Eum quicunque
capite pumendem esse cens^mus they censured him Eos qui Cathol.
to forfeit his Goods and his Life; (which Law I do wish were in force among
us now also,) Clergymen and Moncks who forsook the Orthodoxall Faith, and
embraced the Heresy, and abominable opinions of Apollinaris or Eutiches, were
liable to all the forenamed punishments, and moreover were banished out the
Roman Territories.

In these prcedent Authorities, we hehold the practice of the Church in former
Ages, against Apostaticall Ministers; the effect whereof is as follows:

That what Priest soever, went out from the Church, and Joined himself with
Heretics; but after renouncing his Heresy, returned with a true penitent
Heart, (which God seldom grants unto such kind of persons) yet
notwithstanding he could not be admitted to the execution of his function in
the Church again; The which, were they in force in these days among us, Rom
should have little cause hereafter, to boast of the increase of her traiterous
Proselites; and the people who are like so many silly Sheep, would be less
scandalized, and more safe from the danger of these bloody Romish ravening
Wolves, who spare no cost or travail, to Inuit them to relinquish the charge
committed to their fidelity, that upon their departure, and in their absence,
they may enter upon the slocke, to scatter and devour it.

And because barking Dogs are most necessary for their prseruation; Therefore
the Wolf labors with all his craft, to enter league with the Dog, that he
may join with him, and cause him to reenter upon them, to their utter
destruction.

Such was the purpose of the Macedonian Prince, when he demanded ten of the
chief Orators of the A henians, of which number, Demosthenes should be one;
on which condition, he promised to raise his siedge.

It seemed but a small request, in respect of the prseruation of the whole
City; but Demosthenes the Prince of his profession, who well foresaw, what the
event would prove, discovered the damage, in this subsequent parable.

The Wolves said unto the Shepherds, the only cause of strife between you
and us, are the Dogs; therefore to end the Plutarch.
quarrel, give us your Dogs, and we will be friends; which being performed,
the Shepherds afterward being fallen a sleep; the Wolves rusht in securely,
and devoured cruelly, and in great abundance.

And no marvel, seeing the Dog, which should have given warning of their
approach, by barking, and have repelled or destroyed them by biting, was at
that time absent, and out of the way.

So if the Ministers, whom the holy Scriptures in this respect, resembles unto
Dogs, depart from the people committed to their charge; The adversary has free
Ingresse left unto them, to devour without control; This was the politic
practice of that detestable Arrius, who that he might make clearer passage for
his blasphemous Heresy, labored mainly, and at length wrought the Banishment
of Arhanasius, Socrat. lib. 1. Eccl. h^st. Cap. 23.
and of certain of the stoutest and most learned Bishops who resisted him; But
if they go out to Join with the Priests of Baal, and like Balaam be drawn
by reward, to curse Gods people, whom he has blessed, they become more
dangerous, and noisome then the Enemy.

And because they betray the Gospel of CHRIST sitting in Heaven, they are
little better in this, then their Father Judas the Traitor, who betrayed his
person to his enemies the Jews, when he lived upon Earth; and their Sin
being alike, their censure should not be different, but the same; Therefore,
let their dwelling be Desert, and let other take Act. 1.
their Office, and that without retractation.

For thy cruelty against thy Brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou
shall be cut off for ever, (says God of Abdias.
Edom.)

Whereby in an Allegory he shows that Haeretickes ought to be cut off, for
their cruelty against the Church, by corrupting the true Faith thereof, by
renting the coat of the Spouse, by laboring to destroy the Vineyard of the
Lord of Sabbath, by persecuting, banishing, circumuenting the Ministers
thereof; by corrupting many of them, either by violence, or deceit, or reward
and promotion.

O let the Children of Edom be remembered in the day of Jerusalem, how they
said; Down with it, down with it, even Psalm. 137.
to the ground: O Daughter of Babylon wasted with misery; yea happy shall he
be, that rewards thee, as thou have served us; Blessed shall be be that
takes thy Children, and throws them against the stones.

For why should not we be as forward, to avenge the Truth against those who
Sin of malicious wickedness against the same; As those traiterous Apostates
are earnest to impugn the same, with the proud violence of the engines of
falsehood; Therefore let their travail come on their own head, and their
wickedness fall on their own pa^e.

And such is their end for the most part; for as Judas, after he had betrayed
his Master with a kiss, hanged himself, and thereby prevented his true
repentance; So those Iudascall Apostates, take away away hope of repentance
from themselves, by Sinning directly against the known truth and their end is
often despair, or confounding self-will, obstinacy, and perish out of the
Church, as it has been observed in all ages; yea it should seem, that God
has immediately by his own hand (according to their desert) intercepted them.

Obscrus Arrius that Monster his filthy death, most fir for so wretched a
Miscreant; as he served his body, his bowels Ruff^^. lib. 1. hist. Eccl. cap. 13
gushed out.

M^ntanus began well, (as did Judas) their end was not Eusebius. hb. 5. cap. 14.
much different, he strangled himself, and Maximilla his Trull with a Halter;
and Theodotus that begat this haeresie in them was so besotted, that he
persuaded himself, he should be exalted, and assumed into Heaven, but in his
Exaltation into the air perished miserably.

Nestorius his tongue was eaten up by the worms, his Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 23.
seigned recantation espied, procured his deserved deprivation and exile,
whereas he dyed out of the Church.

Though Marcion did publicly repent at Rome; yet was he received into the
Church, but on condition, that is; if he Tertul. lib. de pr^script. aduersus
har.
restored and brought back again into the Church, those whom he had before
seduced; He was prevented by death, and not performing the condition, forfaited
his peace.

I could exemplify the like in this last age, and that in many both domestic
and foreign, since the Church has bin reformed; but I list not to pluck
dead men by the beard; I have only annexed the History of Francis Spiera, by
way of an Appendix to this tractate; to restifie this truth in stead of the
rest.

What? must all then perish, the ignorant, as the learned? the weak as the
strong?

I wish only, that the Bondwoman were cast out with her Bastard;

Far be it from me, to murmr at the Church her Maternall clemency, toward
my brother who was once lost, but has returned again: unjust indignation were
that, which should grow from my brothers joyful reconciliation; I mourn for
their departure, and pray for their return, who have gone out from us by
Haereticall feduction, or have bin seduced by a surreptitious error; or have
been occasionally carried away, by Terror and violent compuision; Let their
unfeigned penitence, with true humiliation, procure them indulgence, so they
may truly plead for themselves, Simple ignorance and dreading infirmity.

Against those only, let it be an irreuocable Canon, and indispensable decree,
who have gone out from us (...), Conc. Nio. Can. 11. Ioh 15.
, not through subtle seduction, or violent constraint, but of their own
perverse will; Let them be cast out as dead branches, let them wither, let men
gather them, and cast them into the fire, and there let them burn with the
first Apostata.

Let no man object the lenity of the Council of Nice to voluntary Reuolters;
they held them (...), Vbi supra.
unworthy of any favor or humanity to be extended toward them; they enjoined
them a threefold pennanet, to be performed for the space of twelve years,
without any mention of restoration to their holy function.

Conceit it notwithstanding, by way of implication; thou can not so shake off
the bands.

The Church tempered her Decrees, according to the necessity of the Time; But
hear what the Canon says;

Quod pro remedio ac necessitate temporis institutum fuit, constat at primitus
non fuisse; quod ergo necessitas pro remedio 1. q. 7. cap. quod pro romed.
reperit, cessante vtique necessitate, debet cessare pariter quod vrgebat, etc.
A dispensation enforced by the necessity of the time, may not be observed as a
common law that cannot be altered; for the cause which urged being ceased, the
dispensation likewise must be void; for a lawful order is one thing, and an
enforced usurpation is another.

Who did ever read any ancient Canon, which received such kind of Apostates,
who went out for some temporal commodity, or for advancement to high dignity?
Sure I am, I may use Augustine his words truly, of most of our perfidious
Apostates;

Expertus credo multorum fict as poenitentias, per affectatas Did. 50. cap.
Sacerdos.
honorum potentias;

Experience makes me confident to auerre, that many went out, in hope, they
should upon their false repentance, be entertained into the Church, with some
high preferment to an honorable office therein.

They deceive themselves; The Church means nothing less; They may flatter
themselves with a vain hope, to clime up to the Pinnacle of the Temple; But
let the remembrance of the end of Simon Magus quell their presumption.

Thanks be unto God, the Religious laws of this land has so provided for
them; let them therefore beware, least aiming at the one unadvisedly, they be
caught up by the other deservedly, yea ineuitably; for, Quod non capit
Christus, rapit fiscus.

I advise them to be content with their entertainment at Rome, in the Temple of
Dea Cloacina, whither (being dispelled by our Church) tanquam faeces et
stercara, they have betaken themselves, even to their vltimum refugium; A fit
Cage, for such unclean Birds.

You expect a Reward for your pride, (for your pride I say) which begat in you
Apostacy; for had you been wise unto Sobriety, and thought that of your
selves which was meet, as your Brethren did; you had never forsaken us; you
know what that Truth (whom you have forsaken) says; That His Spirit shall
rest, Super humilem et quietum, et tremeniem Esaias 66.
Sermones eius; Even upon him that is poor in Spirit, and of a contrite heart,
and that trembles at his words; So that the Spirit of verity dwells in the
humble mind; but he forsakes the Truth (of necessity) that despises humility.

What will thou then say, that this severity is injury? remember also what thou
have done against Christ; and thou shall find thy punishment far more light
then thy offense; Let St. Cyprian expostulate the matter with thee.

Quod maius potest esse delictum, aut quae macula deformior, quam aduerseis
Christum stetisse? Lib. 2. Epist. 1.


What greater offense can there be, or what fouler crime, then to take arms
against Christ? then to ruinate his Church, which he has purchased and built
with his own blood? then to forget the peace, and love of the Gospel, and to
make war with furious hostility, against the quiet, loving, and peaceful
people of God? In which respect the Canonist said well; Non debemus dimittere
in vltum opprobrium illius, qui probra nostra deleuit; We must not leave his
disgrace unpunished, Host. Sum. de Haeret. cap. qua poe^a feriatur.
who blotted out our shame.

Remember what thou have done against his Church, which he so tendereth, that
he reputeth that injury which is done unto it, as committed against himself.

It is crimen publicum; a public offense against all, for that which is
committed against the Truth of the Gospel of Cod. Tit. Man. chaeos.
Christ, in omnium fertur iniuriam, is an offense against all Christ his
Members.

Remember (I say) what thou have done against Christ his people, who being
scandalized by thy departure, have gone out after thee, being seduced by thee,
and being prevented by death, have happily dyed out of the Church, without the
communication and peace of the same; whose Souls shall be required in the day
of Indgement at thy hands, who have been Author and cause of their destruction.

In consideration of which praemisses, I may infer this conclusion, with
Augustine in the like case;

Qua propter, Iniquum put are noli, si perpetuo reijciaris; Initio Statim. lib.
de vtilit. credendi.
Wherefore do not think thy self unjustly oppressed; if thou be rejected for
ever, from the execution of that sacred function.

But suppose the Church should open the bosom of her Piety to cherish thee;
would thou not like the ungrateful Serpent, power forth thy poison into her
bowels to her destruction?

Pardon my Iealoussy in this case; for it is not causlesse, I may well usurp
the saying of the great Father, in the same case, of his time; Quotidie
cernimus, and rebus probamus, Jeroni. in princip. cap. 3. and in five cap. 12.
Ierem.
quod ideo Haeretici fidei simulent veritatem, vt simplices quosque decipiant,
and non ipsi conuertantur ad fidem, sed fideles trahant adinfidelitatem.

We see daily, and prove it true by experience, that Hretickes dissemble their
return to the true Faith, but only that they may deceive the simple credulous
people; they come not as true Conuerts themselves, but only to draw the
faithful to Infidelity; And there is no man so silly, but will confess with
Bernard, That a counterfeit close Hreticke, is far more pestilent, then a
professed Hreticke.

Mine own observation in sundry of this sort, makes me bold to urge that
rule of the Law in this case; Semel malus, semper praesumitur esse malus; he
that has once played the traitor with Christ and his Church, will never be
true.

I have often grieved, to see the clemency of the Church abused by them, and
now I can contain my felfe in silence no longer, but that I must cry out with
Cyprian;

Illud mirandum est imo indignandum potius and dolendum, Lib. 1. Epist. 6.
Christianos Antichristis assistere. It is a strong, yea a hateful rather and
lamentable case, that Christians should assist Antechrist, and that those who
decline from the Faith, and are traitors to the Church, should in the Church,
stand up against the Church.

For the pruention of which mischief, which might ensue upon such Diabolical
treachery; the rule of St. Basil, was in ancient times practiced in the
Church upon such persons In Latinis, ea est Epist. 72.
as follows:

(...).

Let them declare their penitence under the handwriting and that they abhor
Heretics, and that they are truly separated from them; The like course also
was used, and continued in succeeding Ages as is apparent in the Decrees
collected by Gratian. 1. quest. 7.


Let Cyprian determine this point;

We Decree (says he) by consent, and common Authority, that if any Priest or
Deacon, who before received Sacred Lib. 2. Epist. 1.
Orders in the Catholic Church, and after stand out as Traitors and Rebels
against the Church, or receive profane Ordination among Heretics, from false
Bishops and Antechrists, contrary to the Order set down by Christ; and there
offer up false and sacrilegious Sacrifices; If they return home again, let
them be received on this Condition, Vt communicent Laici, to live in the
Church as Laymen; and let them think themselves lovingly dealt withal; that
they are admitted to the peace of the Church, who before were enemies of Peace;
nor ought they at their return, retain those ensigns of Priesthood and
honor among us, with which they have rebelled against us.

But if the Religion and Doctrine of the Romanists be Blasphemy; the Sin of
those who embrace the same seems to be little less then having before
professed the Truth; and been secured thereof, is Blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost, nor can they excuse it, by saying they believe in the Creed and profess
Christ, their case you shall see resembled in an authentical History.

Mauia Queen of the Sarazens, invaded and destroyed certain Towns of
Palestine and Arabia, in the Territories Secrat. lib. 4. Eccl. hist. cap. 29.
of the Roman Empire, nor would condescend to Peace, unless that Moses a
Sarazen (who led a Monastical life in the Desert) a man greatly renowned, for
his singular Piety, constant Faith, and strange Miracles, were designed Bishop
of her Country. Unto which the Roman Captains gladly assented, and gave
charge it should be done with speed; At length he was conveyed to Alexandria
to receive Sacred Orders; unto whom when Lucius their Bishop, an Arrian and
cruel persecutor of the Orthodoxall Christians repaired to confer them;
Moses in the presence of the Captains and people, who compelled him thereunto,
said; I think my self unworthy of the Order of Priesthood, yet if it be
thought Conducible to the Commonwealth; Tu Luci, manus mihi nunquam impones,
Thou O Lucins shall never impose thy hands on me, which are full of the
slaughter and blood of the Saints; Lucius said, he ought not to charge him
with such shameful deeds, but rather learn the principles of Religion of
him, or as Ruffinus writes, first Lib. 2. cap. 6. hist. Eccl.
Hear his Parth, and then Censure him accordingly.

Moses answered, we stand not now on the Articles of Religion; but your
practices against your Brethren, Plane conuincunt, te vera Christianae fidei
dogmata non habere; Do certify that thou art destitute of the true Faith; for
that strikes not Christians, does not slay them, fights not against them,
for the servant of the Lord ought not to fight.

But thy deeds, which thou have done against them, whom thou have banished,
cast unto wild Beasts, to be devoured, whom thou have burned; As so many
voices cry out against thee, and things seen with our eyes are more certain,
then those we hear with our ears; I assure my self, that he who believes
aright in Christ, would never do such things.

So I say unto all those Apostates, who fly from the true Religion now
professed in England and else where, to the Synagogue of Rome; that howsoever
they make an external and general profession of the Faith of Christ; yet it
manifestly appears by their particular Articles of Religion, that they
worship not Christ, but their own fictions, wherewith they highly Blaspheme
him; For they are ravening Wolves in Sheep clothing, and the abomination of
Desolation standing in the Holy place. They persuade men that they believe in
Christ, and yet they labor to subvert the Faith, with the Engines of their
Sophistry; they wrest the Scriptures to their practice, and Invent new Articles
of Faith, and proclaim themselves to have the Truth in their Bosom, that in
Imitation of Judas, they may betray him with a kiss.

But you shall know them better by their fruits; for the deeds which they
have done against the Saints, and servants of God, whom they have banished,
Imprisoned, burned, hanged, tormented with strange and unheard Tortures, to
make themselves drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the
Martyrs of JESUS, (that some of their own Writers have affirmed, that the Pope
by reason of his cruelty, seemed rather to succeed Nero then Peter) These
deeds (I say) as so many voices cry out at the Blasphemy of them, who say they
are Jews, and are not; for if they were Abraham's sons, they would do the
works of Abraham; Apocalips 2.
Therefore they are the Synagogue of Satan, for their works bear witness of
them. Ioh. 8.


Consider this all ye, who worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his
mark on your forehead, or on your hand; Come out of her, that ye be not
partaker of her Sins, Apocal. 14.
least ye receive also of her Plagues; For the Lord has said, That such shall
Drink of the Wine of his Wrath, yea of the Cap. 18.
pure Wine, which is powered into the Cup of his wrath, and he shall be
tormented in Fire and Brimstone, before the Holy 14.
Angels, and before the Lamb; And the smoke of the torment shall ascend
evermore, and they shall have no rest, day nor night, which Worship the Beast
and his Image. And whosoever receives the print of his Name.

Rememember thou Apostata, Whosoever withdraws Heb. 10.
himself from CHRIST, Gods Spirit has no pleasure in him.

O be not ungrateful to Christ; he has given himself for you; If any one
shall maliciously defy JESUS, and persist therein, he has Sinned against the
Holy Ghost.

If he worthily esteem not of his Passion, he that seeks another means of
Salvation; says, that the Blood of CHRIST, the Blood of the new Testament, the
Blood whereby he is Sanctified, is polluted; Such a one reuileth the Holy
Ghost.

I say unto you, that he deserves far greater torments; who despises the
Son of God now glorified; sublimated above all Dignity of Superrstiall
essences, and placed in the Seat of his Fathers Majesty; then the Jews, who
thorough Ignorance Crucified him, while he was yet mortal; we now know the
Truth, therefore shall we be inexcusable, if we despise so great Salvation.

Of such persons says Job; What hope has the Hipocrite, Cap. 17.
when he has heaped up his Riches, If God take away his Soul? Will God hear
his cry, when trouble comes upon him? Will he set his delight upon the
Almighty? Will he call upon God at all times?

As if he should say; The Hypocrite, whose Religion consists in the Service
of Mammon; shall not be able to stand in the Judgment, nor will God hear
him, when he cries in distress, nor can he have confidence in the Lord;
because he is destitute of Faith, whereby we have peace with God, for which
cause also, he cannot call upon him by Prayer, and consequently falls into
despair; for such commonly is the end of all Newters, and Dissemblers in case
of Religion.

The which I will exemplify in one History of certain truth, among many which
I do purposely omit, viz. of Francis Spiera an Italian, who to save his Life
and goods, fell from the Truth of the reformed Religion, which before he had
professed; and therefore was so far forsaken by God, that he fell into
desperation, blaspemed God, and (as the Story says) hated him, and in that
state, departed out of this life; to the terror of all such, who to purchase
the Riches and Dignity of this world, forsake the Truth whereof they are
assured, and profess Popery, which is Doctrine of Devils, to attain promotion.

For if this Italian, was so dreadfully punished for that offense, whereinto
he fell, through the infirmity of the Flesh, for the prseruation of his life,
(which otherwise should have perished) beside his Possessions which were large;
and the care of his Wife, and his Childten, who were many; (all which were
strong Motives to flesh and blood) yet God would not bear the mock in this
case.

How much soarer punishment (think you) will he inflict on those, who, not by
Compulsion, or fear of torments, forsake the Truth of the Gospel, but only
like Demas, to enjoy the pleasures of this present world?

The History is recorded by a Learned man, as follows in the next Leaf,
which for breuity I have somewhat abridged in this Translation of it.

THE HISTORY FOLLOWING IS RELATED OVT OF THE EPISTLE OF THAT FAMOVS DOCTOR
MATTHEW GRIBALDVS, Professor of the Laws, in the University of Padua, who
himself was a Spectator of this lamentable accident. 1548.
THere is in the Territories of Venice, near unto Padua, a place called
Citadella; wherein dwelt a Lawyer of good Judgment; and great experience,
named Francis Spiera, about fifty years of age; married unto a virtuous wife,
by whom he had eleven children, a man famous for his wealth and dignity.

This man, began to embrace the Doctrine of the reformed Church, with
incredible zeal; acknowledging Jesus Christ to be the only Redeemer of
mankind, and professed publicly with great constancy, that righteousness
and Salvation was purchased by him alone, and that all man's works, and
Merits, (were in that respect) vain and unprofitable.

For which cause he was accused to the Popes Legate at Venice; by whom he was
cited to make his appearance before him, and menaced with death, and the
confiscation of his substance (which was great) wherewith he was so terrified;
that he renounced that truth, which he had professed, and abiured it also;
promising moreover, that he would make public Recantation thereof, as soon as
he returned home; and so was dismissed by the Legate.

In his journey homeward, he was overwhelmed with a grievous perturbation of
mind, whither he should embrace the Truth again, or persist in his denial;
yea, he often confessed, that in his journey, he felt the Holy Ghost urge him,
to profess the truth constantly; But the flesh, riches, and vain pomp of
this world ouerswayed him.

The day before he was to make his Recantation, a Popish Priest, brought the
form thereof unto him; wherein he should publicly, in the open audience of
the people, renounce and condemn the Doctrine of the Protestants.

That whole night, this wretched man spent without sleep; The morning
following being Sunday, after Mass, in the presence of his friends, of the
Magistrates of the Town, and in the assembly of the people, who were in number
about 2000. He publicly renounced that truth, which he had before openly
taught, and was fined 30. Ducats, which he presently paid down.

But suddenly after, he felt the dreadful Judgment of God in his heart; he
was deprived of all the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, Christ departed from him; His
heart was enflamed with mere hatred, envy, and Blasphemy against God; The
Devil, Death, and eternal despair seized on him.

After he had been thus tormented by the space of six Months; he removed
with his Wife and Children to Padua, where his misery increased; He kept his
bed being not sick; his reason and understanding alike as before his fall, he
consumed in his whole body, and all his Members (beside his tongue) languished.
He would admit no food, but what was enforced; he kindly admitted all those,
who came to visit him, and conferred very prudently with them; he affirmed,
that he was damned by the just judgment of God; That he was already in Hell,
and was tormented with perpetual pains; that he had sinned against the Holy
Ghost that his sin could never be forgiven; he said that Christ his Merits,
and Gods mercy, was for ever shut up from him, and that this dreadful end was
brought upon him, by the just judgment of GOD, to be an Example to all the
Elect.

At length diverse learned, and grave Divines repaired unto him, propounding all
means of Consolation, especially the greatness of Gods Mercy.

And though (said he) I believe all that you have rehearsed, yet but as the
Devils, who believe and tremble; He said, his Sin was unpardonable, that God
secluded his mercy from him, that all faith was taken from him, that though he
uttered the Lords prayer after them, yet his heart was full of hatred,
malediction, and blasphemy against God; for he knew how execrable he was with
God, and that he had taken away all his graces from him.

The next day, they found his misery augmented, and demanding how long his
Conscience had been so tortured; he readily answered; That, gnawing worm, and
unquenchable fire, was sent by GOD into his heart, since that day whereon he
recanted the truth of the Gospel, which before he professed; So that now, his
condition, was far worse then Cayns or Judas, and that he had rather die and
be damned, then to be tormented in this life, with such anguishes; adding
farther, that he was already haunted with dreadful apparitions, and hellish
visions.

Renewing their Consolations, they entreated him to call upon God in the Lords
Prayer; which he performed with such abundance of tears, with such sighs,
and so great devotion of mind, that he moved the whole presence to weep;
upon which sight, Doctor Gribaldus told him, that his tears argued, no total
desertion by God.

He answered, that he had not that faith, and trust in God, which they
supposed; for such was the gift of God, whereof he was destitute;

Oh (said he) that GOD would vouchsafe me this one gift, that I might feel
in my heart, but the least hope of his mercy, which is as impossible, as to
unlade all the water in the Ocean, with a Spoone.

This I certainly know, that never mortal creature on the earth, felt the
wrath of God, more manifestly then I do; Oh that I might supply the room of
some other damned creature whatsoever.

So that all their comforts were vain; They enforced Broathes into his mouth,
to preserve his life, his only desire was to die, and to be carried into Hell.

Three days after; when among other learned men, Antonius Fontanine, the
Pryest of Citadell, (who bare him company to Venice, when he went up to make
his appearance before the Popes Legate) came to visit him, and asked him,
whether he knew him; presently upon the remembrance thereof, with redoubled
sighs, and groones, he cried out; Oh execrable day; oh cursed day; I wish I
had never seen Venice, or that I had dyed, when I first intended my journey
thither.

Then they commended the Merits of Christ unto him; He said, he never truly
acknowledged the benefits of Christ, but abused them, and trusted too much to
his carnal faith; (and turning to the Students) he said;

Oh my Sons; I will not detract from the Gospel, I acknowledge it to be the
Truth; but take heed, ye ascribe not too much unto faith, and neglect works
beseeming faithful Christians; Faith requires this of us, that we be not
Christians in word only. Give credit unto me, as unto him; who has truly
tried the matter.

Upon this, he commended the Epistle of St. Peter, wherein he admonishes the
faithful, to Plety, Chastity and Sanctity; upon which occasion, they who were
present, disputed comfortably out of Gods word, and he listened as attentively.

He was demanded, whither he received any comfort, by that godly conference; he
answered, that he was damned to everlasting death, neither was there any hope
of Redemption left for him; Oh (said he) that I could put the least hope and
trust, in the mercy of God, and it would not be grievous unto me, to be
tormented in the pit of Hell many Millions of years, so that I might have any
hope of deliverance.

Whereupon, Doctor Gribaldus said; Oh Francis, I am not desperate of thy
deliverance; Happily it pleases God, to make thee feel his wrath in this
life, and in the life to come to show thee his mercy.

He answered, I do certainly know that I am a Reprobate.

Gribaldus asked him, whither he would kill himself, if a knife were delivered
unto him, seeing he desired so earnestly to die; he said; lend me one, and you
shall see what I will do; Notso (said Gribaldus) but declare thy mind wholly
unto us; He answered, I know not the reason of my will or mind. Vergerius the
Bishop spent much labor in vain to comfort him, and could hardly draw him to
call upon God in the Lords prayer; wherein though at length he assented unto
him, yet it was not done, with the like earnest zeal as before; but he
confessed that his mind was so alienated from God, that he could not call him
Father.

He entreated all that were present, that they would no longer spend their
labor in vain, in comforting him; for that all hope of obtaining Faith and
Mercy at Gods hands, was cut off; So that it was more likely, that a Craine of
Mustardseed should fill up the whole world, then that God should give him Faith
and Grace.

As he was carried into a Horselitter to be transported to Citadell, casting
about his eyes in a furious manner, by chance he espied a knife, whereon he
laid hold, and had slain himself therewith; had not two of his Sons who
were about him, wrested it perforce out of his hands.

Soon after, he died at Citadella.

This is the fearful History of Francis Spiera, which I present to the
consideration of all such, who think it a small matter, to dally with Religion.

I do not say that he was damned, neither do I say that he was saved;
howsoever; he stands or has fallen to his Romans 14.
own Master; I will not presume, to judge another man's servant; But I will
take heed to my self, and advise all my brethren to the same, least that
while we think that we stand, we should fall; Let us not be high minded, but
fear; 1. Cor. 11. Romans 11.
If he perished through unbelief, was he broken off? Tu autem fide sta; Stand
thou fast by faith; if thou do stand fast, it is Gods mercy, not thy merit;
for thou bear not the root, but the root thee.

Lastly I will conclude, with a consolation to all such tender consciences, who
are rapt into despair, by giving overmuch ear, to the Soul slaughtering
Doctrine of the austere Nouatians, and furious brainsicke Anabaptists of our
time.

Who would persuade that Repentance is not available to those, who fall into
any notorious Sin after Baptism, Aepin. Sup. Psalm. 9.
and hearty conversion unto GOD? as if he would by no means pardon the
Repentant Soul; when as the Scriptures confirm in Doctrine, and examples, the
contrary:

As is manifest in David, notwithstanding his Adultery 1. Sam. 12. Math. 9.
Luke 19. Gal. 1. Math. 26. 2. Chron. 33.
and Murder, in Matthew and Zacheus, though Usurers and Extortioners; In St.
Paul, though he persecuted the Church; In St. Peter, though he denied Christ,
with Imprecations and Oaths; and above all in Manasses, though he fell away
from God, and followed all the abominations of the Heathen, and used Witchcraft
and Charming, and Sorcerie, and familiar Spirits, and Southsayers; Yet when he
humbled himself, and prayed unto the Lord: The Lord was entreated by him, and
heard his prayer, and forgave him his sin.

Hear the Lord himself; As I live (says he) I desire not the death of the
wicked, but that he turn from his way, Ezech. 33.
and live.

If thy Sin be Great, his Mercy and Goodness is Greater; If thy Sins be
Many, according to the Multitude of Psalm. 51.
his mercies, he will do away thine affences.

Were thy Sin more weighty the^ the heaven, the^ the earth, then the Sea, he
who created these, can peize thy Sin, and Romans 5.
where Sin has abounded, cause grace much more to abound.

Though thou fall back never so often, through infirmity; yet he is Almighty,
and both can, and will raise thee up again, if thou put thy trust in him; For
who so puts his trust in the Lord, mercy embraces him on every side. Psalm.
31.


Excellently spoke Chrysostom, against the Nouatians; Apud Chytr. Sup cap. 2.
Apccalyps.
(...),

Though thou fall back never so often, through Infirmity, yet upon hearty
Repentance, thou shall be received; and no less comfortably St. Augustine;
Toties apparet opus Dei Ibid.
miserentis, quoties fit confessio poenitentis; God does as often take
compassion, as the penitent Sinner makes his confession; Magnitudinem morbi
vides, Medici potentiam non vides; If thou art terrified by the greatness of
thy Sin, yet August. Sup. Psalm. 55.
be comforted by the power of the Physician.

When thou art in greatest despair, Grata superueriet quae Psalm. 68.
non sperabitur hora, God will come unto thee in an hour, when thou look
not for him, he will bring thee from the deep of the Sea.

He calls as well in the last hour as in the first; I will judge no man, I
will despair of no man, I will pray for all men; while Gods patience in this
life leads them to repentance.

A man (says Augustine) may be a Pagan to day, an unbelieving Jew to day, an
Haereticke to day; a Schismaticke to day; Quid si cras amplectatur Catholicam
fidem? etc. What if the next day, he does embrace the Catholic faith, Aug.
apud Lumb. 1. Sent. did. 43.
and follow the Catholic truth? What if so be those whom thou do see,
tainted with any kind of Error, and do condemn them as most desperate
fellows, should repent before they end this life, and find true rest, and
life in the world to come?

Judge no man before the time therefore.

I know not why any man should despair, seeing God is loving, true, and
powerful; but that we may be confident in him (with the holy Father) because
of the Truth of his promise, Bernard.
the love of his Adoption, and the Ability of his performance;

Pater eligit, filius diligit, Spiritus Sanctus coniungit et unit; The Father
has chosen us, the Son loves us, the Cyprian. Ser. de Baptisma Christi.
tom. 2.
Holy Ghost joins and knitteth us unto God; who then shall be able to
separate us from the love of Christ? I am persuaded that neither death, nor
life, nor Angels, nor principalities, Romans 8.
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord.

I conclude the whole, with the words of our Savior.

All sins shall be forgiven unto the children of men, and Blasphemies
wherewith they blaspheme; But he that blasphemeth Mark. 3.
against the Holy Ghost, shall never have forgiveness, but is culpable of
eternal damnation; from the which Sin, God keep us in Jesus Christ, our
only Lord and Savior; To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be
ascribed praise, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power,
and might, for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

