A Pleasant Dialogue, concerning Physic and Physicians.



Imprinted at London, by John Charlewood. 1580.

A Delectable Dialogue. Wherein is contained a Pleasant Disputation between
two Spanish Gentlemen, concerning Physic and Physicians, with sentence of a
learned Master given upon their argument.

Translated out of the Castlin tongue. By T. N.

To the woorshipfull Master Thomas Fowler Esquire. T. N. Wishes hearts
desire.
THe Christians, (VVoorshypfull Sir) which use to travail toward Jerusalem.
And also the Mahomettes, which wander toward their holy place Mecha, which is
the buryall plotte of their Advocate and false Prophet Mahomet: Use to carry
with them Scrips for their provision of victualles, and other furniture. And
where those Pilgrymes carry severally but one: in my Perigrination, I carried
two, the one for my victuals, and the other to keep such books as were given
me b^ ^he way for charity.

And now of late I chanced to turn over my Papers, among the which I found
this little Dialogue, concerning Physic and Physicians, written in the Castlyn
tongue by a learned Gentleman, called Pedro Mexia, who sometime was Chronicler
to the late Emperor Charles the fifth. And then calling to memory the variety
of man's inclynacion, how some are inclined and have delight to refresh
werinesse, in reading and conferring with notable writers, other some have
great pleasure in comfortable Music, and others in the conversation of
faithful and loving friends.

And where I am certain that your recreation is often times among books, and
especially in reading of trauailers woorks, as well by land as Sea. Yea and
your own person, having passed the Occean Sea. I may boldly say with no great
pleasure: yet your Woorshippe does not repent you thereof.

I therefore am now the more bolder to offer this little pamphlet unto you.
Praying your woorship to accept the small gift, and to remember the poor old
woman who offered two mites* her gift was small, but yet with an exceeding good
heart and will, and the Almighty grant your gentle hearts desire.

Your Woorships to command. T. N.

The Argument of the Dialogue.
TWo learned men Gentlemen, met by chance, the one of them speaks much evil
of Physicians: and holds opinion, that neither Physician, nor Art of
medicine ought to be, but yt men should be cured with use and experience. The
other does commend also and defend, both Medicine and Physicians. And last of
all, the matter is decided by a learned man, called Master Velasques, very
notably.

FINIS.
Interlocutores. Jasper, Bernardo, Don Nunio, Master Velasques. Jasper. IT
should seem, that we espied the one the other, by our coming out, and meeting
at one season.


Bernardo. Now truly you say well. But whether wander you.


Jasper. If you command not other ways: I was determined to go visit Don
Nunio, and to keep him company for one hour, for as yet he is weak of his
infirmity past, and goes not out of his doors.


Bernardo. By my froth, and I came from home with the same intent.


Jasper. Many times it does so happen, the will of two men to move unto one
thing, being a sunder in diverse places, yea and the one to remember the other,
at one instant in such wise: that it should seem the minds to understand
each other.


Bernardo. By the spiritual parts, it is no marvel though in some thing we
are like Angels: who understand without speaking, and communicate their
conceytes the one with the other.


Jasper. How so ever it be, since God moved us both at one time to meet, in a
good hour be it, and let us go together to make our visilation.


Bernardo. Let us go through the next street for this is pestered, with the
Merchants works.


Jasper. You say well, but look what a fair front he has buylt to his
house, certainly of late the building in this City of Civil is greatly mended,
for within these ten years, their buildings are most bewtifull toward the
street, with many fair wyndowes of diverse fashions.


Bernardo. Troth it is, ye and many ancient houses are reedified, and
although every one can not do as he would: yet truly ye amendment is great.
But in one thing I see it not, and that is, in their low buildings, for very
few build higher then one story, whereupon the houses remain moist and of
small majesty. And therefore strangers which come from Barselona, and other
Cities where their buildings are of three stories high: can not away with
ours, nor yet the buyldings of this City content them.


Bernardo. You say troth, but it were not wisdom to comply with bewty and
bravery, and to commit notorious hurt, both to health and life, in this
country it is not convenient to build high, and it has been both advise, and
discretion, not to do so, for naturally the situation of this City is hot and
moist, and to resist ye heat is a principal remedy, the air is fresh, which
ordinarily runs in the Summer, it is therefore needful that ye houses be
open, and not very high, to be visited with the air, and for this cause our
ancestors used this building, for certainly the high buildings are more hotter
than the low, and more unwholesome in Summer season for want of air, as we know
some that are troubled with this defect, also it is necessary in this place,
the Edifices to be low, for remedy of the great moisture, that both streets
and houses may be visited of the sun and the air, so that if the houses and
Edifices here in this City were high: they should be more cold and moist in
winter, and more hotter in Summer. By mean whereof very unwholesome, for the
moisture is so great that always we must procure that the sun have
entrance into all places of our houses, if it were possible al day long, the
which could not be if the houses and lodgings were high. And also the cold here
is not so great to consume the moisture, as it is in Castillia and other
parts, and where great cold is: yet the heat of the sun is necessary,
although in Summer it be great, to consume the over much moisture. And
therefore I believe that our forefathers used to this end, to make the
streets broad, as now the most are, yea and in our days, shades and
penthouses were commanded to be taken away for that purpose, where by a
notorious commodity and health has followed:


Bernardo. Truly your reason is certain and natural, and although some times
I have mused thereon, yet I was never so well satisfied as now I am: and I
think hitherto, the same respect has been, and if it had not, it is just that
it be hereafter. But it seems unto me, that high Cha^bers are not good
lodging, nor yet needful for this place in the winter, which is not cold, and
the heat of Summer exceeding hot. As for experience, noble men which have
high houses, do seldom dwell in them, for those causes alleged: but rather
keep them to lay corn in, and for lodging of their servants, rather then
for other purpose, although in Castillia such high buyldings are most wholesome:
so yt our houses being low: the cause was not for want of knowledge: but
rather came of a good foresight. Let us now see how Don Nunio will build his
house, which has a good beginning, and here I see much stuff prepared for
the work.


Jasper. Let us understand what he does before we alight from our Moyles: for
sick persons may not be visited at all seasons.


Bernardo. No but yet it seems by yonder Moile that Master Velasques is with
him: therefore let us alight, and I will lead the way.


Jasper. God give your Woorship health. Entrance of the gentlemen.



Don Numo. I kiss your Maistershippes hand, and am very glad that ye are comen
at such time, to find Master Docter Velasques here, for if ye two will
speak Latin he will understand ye, or else if ye will argue any matter (as ye
were wont to do) ye have a good and present Judge.


Bernardo. No sir, for now we come very conformable like good neighbors, and
we have not whereupon to Dispute, if you throw not in a bone as you were wont
to do.


Master. Senor Don Nunio, Does not evil therein. For always good fruit
proproceedes out of a good discord.


Bernardo. At the least sir you have small need thereof: for it is evident
that you teach us all. But notwithstanding our talk, sir, how do you feel
your self.


Don Nunio. Truly as yet I am very weak, for my disease principally has
been of a long continuance, and also I was letten blood three times, therefore
I cannot so soon recover strength, and I have also an exceeding drines,
remaining in my mouth so that I cannot abstain from drinking, and thinking my
self never satisfied, and surely I believe that the Physicians has not
understood the secrets of my disease, to cure it accordingly


Bernardo. Sir believe me I know a man that would not be offended with the
drines you speak of, for on a time the same man having an exceeding burning
fever and drynes. The Phisission would have given him certain things to
myttigate the heat and drought: unto whom he answered very gravely. A pretty
example.
Master Doctor, I pray you do what you can to ease my extreme heat. But as
for my thyrstinesse, I would be contented to remain with all.


Don Nunio. Yea, but I am not so great a friend of drink: for when I am in
health, I flee from the things that should cause thyrstinesse. But truly the
extreme dryness which I have now, came of a Purgation that was given me.


Jasper. Yea, and therefore I defy Physicians, for I promise you, if you had
not purged your self: you had been sooner whole, and not now so weak,


Master. Why sir, the Physicians know no better way to cure.


Jasper. Mary sir, and that way, I would they knew not, for it is not
convenient to be used.


Don Nunio. If ye had seen what a disputation here was, about what should be
given to purge me with all, and about the letting of me blood, ye would have
said somewhat.


Jasper. Sir, I needed not to see the thing, for I have other causes more
sufficient, to approve that which I mean to speak of: Long agone I knew
how the Physicians very seldom agree in their opinions, yea, and I was about
to say, that fewer times they happen to do ye patient good.


Bernardo. Then must I say also, that you have for a custom, seldom times to
speak well, either of Advocates or Physicians. But say what you list, you
shall, will or nill, trust the one with your life, and the A pretty conclusion.
other with your goods.


Jasper. Then accursed be I, if I do so, at the least, to put my life in the
Physicians hands, for in all my life time hitherto, I was never let blood, nor
yet have had any Physicians counsel, as long as I have gone abroad in the
world. And I find my self better in health, and more sounder then you, who
always has to do with such kind of men.


Bernardo. Yea and therefore you brag, but I promise you, if any disease should
take you vehemently: you would then cry out for the Physicians.


Jasper. It might so be, that ye infirmity might be such to deprive me^ of my
wit, and so to demand help of Physicians, but as long as my memory
serves, fear not that I commit any such madness: for since God be praised
I have lived 45. years without them, yea, and have been helped of some
infirmities, with holsom diet and good regiment: I mean not now to prove new
inventions.


Dun Nunio. Now truly Signor Master, this fire begins to kindle, for these
Gentlemen are armed for the purpose.


Bernardo. I am not disposed to contend. But yet I will always defend the
truth.


Jasper. And the same shall never want unto me, therefore if you have any thing
to say, begin when you list, for I am ready to answer.


Bernardo. Truly Signor Jasper, it seems a merry toy, to call medicine a new
inuencio^, being as you know the most ancient Art in the world, approved and
admitted by God himself, and by men. Have you not read in Ecclesiastes, that
God created medicine of the earth, and that the Wise man should not slay from
it, for the medicine does exalt and honor the Physician, and for medicine he
shall be praised in presence of kings and mighty men. Also our Aucthors and
humane woorks, makes no less accoumpt of medicine, although they differ in
whom was the inuenter thereof, yet all agrees to reverence and honor all
such. Some say and hold opinion, that Mercury was the first, others say Apis,
other affirm Aposto, and some Aesculapius: Homero was also honored for a God,
and fountain of good writers, in many places, he I say commends medicine: yea,
and did not let to show; and name medicinal herbs, and how medicin has been
esteemed of Emperors and kings, you know better then I. You have also read what
reward Alexander the great gave unto Aristouolus Phisitio^: and king Ptolome to
Erasistrato. Yea, and the incredible stipend and fees which they had in yt time
of Emperors in Rome, whereof Pliny and others make mention: In conclusion,
look what a treasure health is, which passes all worldly joys, the felicity
of the soul excepted: yea, and contrary wise, how bitter is infirmity. So
that these things considered, you may see what honor is due to medicine, that
conserueth us in the one, and keeps us from the other.


Master. Although it has not been much which Signor Bernardo has spoken, yet
his study has not been small, as appears by his explication.


Jasper. You have played the good Retorician, and since you have taken the
pain, I will do the like. But I would first you should understand, that I
co^dempne not the good Medicine: for I told you that I had cured my self with
only good diet, and regunent, yea, and also with some herbs, and other
things whereof I have experience. But I condemn the evil Physicians, who
long agone made both Art and Merchandise, inuenting and seeking strange and
violent medicaments, fylling and darkning, with their opinions and Cawtelles,
the faculties which most clear and simply ought to be, and of himself is and
was in his beginning, when men cured one another for charity, and not for
interest, and then they cured with herbs and virtuous symples experimented,
and not with venomous compositions that now are used, which you know not what
they be, nor from whence they come, nor to what use they serve, nor yet how
many they be, because they are so many that they are out of number.

The Medicine which is commended in Ecclesiastes, is the same that was used in
those good days. But the Medicine invented by those which you say were holden
for Gods, because they discovered the virtue and property of herbs, stones
fruits, and other things applied them, to the Passions, sores, and
infirmities, without making them Arts, rules, and precepts, as afterward
malice and covetousness of men brought to pass, so that before that time, we
found nothing written of medicine. Hipocrates by aucthority of Marcus Varro,
according unto Pliny affirms: was the first that wrote the precepts of
medicine. The space of, 600. years, the Romans defended them selves from
Physicians, and would in no wise suffer them in Rome: since which time they
never lived so sound. True it is, that in the time when Enullius, and Marcus
Libio were Consuls, which was after the foundation of Rome. 535 years: I know
not by whom persuaded, they admitted a Greek Physician Pelotones, called
Archagatus, unto whom they gave a house and public stipend, and as a new
thing at the beginning, he pleased some men. But after they had experience of
his letting blood, and his Cauteries, with strange inuencions of curing: both
he and others that were newlye come, were banished, by the authority and
counsel of the great Cato Censorinus, who lived, 85. years, because you may
consider what want he had of Archagatus, or of any other. After Cato his death,
the time running with covetousness, ambicion, and other vices, then entered
Physicians into Rome.

So that it plainly appears, before that time the Romans had, diet,
medicines, and a way to cure with all, according to experience, without using
any tyranny, for each neighbor showed unto other, the things that he had
proved: in those days I say, love and charity cured, and not covetousness
and poison.

The Romans only used not this good order, but also the Babilonians, who were
learned. Estrabo, and Herodotus, write that, they had not known Physicians,
and therefore they used (when any happened to be sick) to bring him forth
into the open street, because his neighbors and friends (who had any
experience in such diseases) should give their council and advise.

The self same order was used among the Egiptians and Portyngalles, after
those golden days, Signor Bernardo, Physicians crepte into the houses of
Emperors and Kings, among whom, some were famous, as Hipocrates, who was the
fountain and father of them all, and after him came Aristogenes into service
with king Antigonus of Macedonia, and Asclepiades his familliar, who was froend
of great Pompetus. Antonius Muga was entertained of the Emperor Octauianus.
Also both the Appollodors, of whom Pliny writes: Cornelio Celso the
Roman: the famous Erasistratus who by his singular knowledge, understood
how the disease of Antiochus was indecent love, with his Mother in Law. Also
Galenus, who now is honored, and called Prince of Physicians, with many other
which now I will not name. But this I know, notwithstanding, that after
Physicians began to multiply, man's life began to shorten. And in those days
the ancient Romans, lived in more health then all these Princes, who
entertained the Physicians with wages, and other excessive rewards: And if you
will not believe me, let Alexander the great, who you brought for an example,
say his opinion, for he lived not full forty years. Let also the old gray
bearded men of the Mountains and Uillages, which never knew Physicians,
speak their mind. And let the young men of the City, declare also their
opinions.

But do you know what was the cause to admit Physicians in Rome, the great
disorder whereof I spoke, because men would not temper, and cure them selves
according to ye rule of their Ancestors, they would needs give the charge of
their health to them that knew it not. Whereupon, as Pliny affyrmeth, great
hurt followed to the health of man: for why, they left the care of them selves,
and gave credit to Physicians for their health: and the Phisitio^s for their
part, cared no more but for the interest and profit, exalting their Art, and
making there of Merchandise, yea, and to give a more comely visage to their new
Science, that none might know the secrets thereof: they began to flee from
common and true renredies, and to use compoundes, mixtures, fruits, roots,
herbs, never before seen nor heard of, to deceive and bewitch the people,
with the names and hydden properties, and for the common remedies, they sought
strange, casting clean aside the true way, and sticked fast to their new
devises. Here also began the distylling of Waters, both of clean and filthy
things. Here began Syrrups, both sweet and sower, some clear, some darcke,
made of such conceytes, that the Devil himself would scarcely imagine what
thing it were.

An other devise also, is to cause us to eat gold, stones, yea, and iron,
like unto Oystrages against all nature. Here also began your Mytradate, and
compound Treacle, made of above 54. things and some of them rank poison: if
every of them were good of himself, the incomportable company of the one with
the other, makes an horrible poison.

The which Pliny almost 1800. years past, says, was made by ostentation and
apparaunce of his Art, for it is impossible Nature to be seen, nor experience
known, nor the temper and concordaunces of so many things dyscordant, no it
can not be. So that of these things and other like, they have made experience
in man's body, with such audacitie, and at all adventures. So that in lieu of
giving health: they happen many-tymes to kill the patient, yea, and in
recompense thereof, to have his money for their labor: and that which wurst
is, there is no punishment for them. Tell me I pray you, what Physician have
you seen chastened, either for the death, or laming of any man?

Finally, Signor Bernardo, the malice of man has spoiled the best thing in
the world, which is in making the thing natural, an obscure Artificer:
charity an interest, mercy, covetousness, darckening reason so much, as
though none could cure but Physicians.

Jesting at common experience, and extolling with persuasion their Art, or
Mystery, yea, even to the names of things, giving them new barbarous and
strange terms, saying, both the Greek and Latin names are well known.

Also in their writing they have invented Carraters and Signs, not to be
understood, but of whom they deal withal for their Drugges: so that they
procured by all means to darcken the thing which ought to be common, and
known of all men.

Then what shall I say of the diversity of their doctrine and opinions. The
Alarbes differ from the Greeks, so that among them selves, they are not
conformable, neither the one nor the other. The order and manner of curing
their Auicena, differs from Galenus, and those of antiquity, even so much
that it seems an other thing: nor yet those of our time cure like Auicena,
nor like the other, for now all consists in inuencio^s and opinions. Yea, if
you call two or three together, you shall find each to be singular in his
judgment. But when they agree, iwis it is to the great peril of the Patient:
if you hear each of them by himself it is a miracle to find them
conformable, yea, and their receytes shall be diverse and con^trarie each to
other: It shall not need that I make any further recytall thereof, for daily
you see it before your eyes, therefore^ I will not weary my self in the
rehearsal.


Master Velasques. It should seem that these Gentlemen ^ame purposely to
debate this matter, and herein to show their learning and knowledge, because
I see them so earnest: therefore we may do well to cut of, and abreuiate their
communication.


Don Nunio. No Sir, that were not just, that Physicians should thus remain,
without defense. Yea, and for my part, I do greatly rejoice to hear this
talk. Therefore let the conclusion be, that since each of them has had his
turn, although Signor Jasper; has been somewhat long in his discourse, let
each of them have another course, and no more, which shall be as one that
writes his mind, and an other that replyeth in our judgment court. And then
I am to desire you Signor Master, to give sentence, who has the right.


Jasper. I for my part am content, reserving the benefit of appellation, if
the sentence be not given in my favor.


Bernardo. And I for my part am also agreeed having so great a confidence in my
Justice, and also in the judgment of Signor Master, by mean whereof I bind
myself to his judgment and sentence.


Master Velasques. A hard matter is commended unto me. But notwithstanding, I
will say what God shall give me to understand, to make an end of your
contencion, seauing liberty to each of you to do what ye please.


Don Nunio. Me thinks Signor Bernardo, is ready for the purpose: begin on
Gods name.


Here follows the answer of Signor Bernardo.
Bernardo. AT the beginning of our talk, I thought Signor Jasper that you
iested. But when I heard you touch in Doctrine and Histories: then I knew that
your argument was in earnest. And therefore will I answer accordingly: that
which I understand of the things which you have spoken, is in conclusion, that
you think there should be no Phisions in the world: at the least, such as
were known to be, and live of that vocation.

But rather you would have us all to be Physicians, and to cure one an other:
also you would not have medicine by Art confounded, in Science nor Philosophy:
But only to follow experience and conference, and the voice of the people,
as though we should live in the Mountains where no policy nor discretion
should be used.

These two principal points I mean to overthrow, as a beginning to the
process, and then to answer some of the other mallices which you have spoken.
In the first point touching Physicians, it is a clear case that you have no
reason, for the name of a Physician is holy and amyable, and ought not to be
odious unto you: seeing Christ our redeemer did not despise both to be called
and holden for a Physician, when he was speaking of himself: says he then,
for the whole folk needs not the Physician. And again, when he cured the
eyes with clay and spyttle: and when he appointed for medicine of the
Samaritan^ Oil and Wine, yea, he let not to cure and heal infinite
infirmities: and the like commanded his Disciples, for S. Paul Doctor of the
people, took both person and office of a Physician, when he wrote to
Timothens, willing him to drink Wine to comfort his stomach. Saint Luke the
Evangelist did name himself a Physician, and let not to give this Office
unto the Apostles. The Angel Raphaell would also use this Office, when he
gave a receyt unto Tobias, wherewith he should cure and recover the sight of his
eyes. So that in this point you have no way to contend, because the name of a
Physician is profitable in the world. And if there have been some Physicians
both false and covetous, and also have used of such things whereof you have
enlarged, and I thereof ignorant, you ought not judge nor believe them. But
notwithstanding, the wise and good ought not to be cast of, it is a meet thing
that there should be particular and appointed persons of so high an Office and
mystery, and not rather, as you would to have all men Physicians, and so to
walk in confusion and inconstancy, with ignorance of the people. Truly this
way is not only unprofitable, but also a thing impossible.

The example also of the Romans, wherewith you help your self, who were.
600. years without Physicians: I say with you, that it is true. But yet
through simplicity and want of knowledge, as they were at that time ignorant
of learning, and other Arts, so were they wanting of Medicine. But after they
understood what Doctrine and Science was: and had received the same of the
Greeks, they then embraced also medicine, as one of the most necessary
things. And likewise the Masters, who had sight therein: and even so did the
other Nations of whom you spoke of. And where in the second point, you will
not that we follow or observe precepts, nor yet to have Art nor foundation of
Science, nor you will us not to follow reason and cause, but only experience
which you allow: and therefore you judge evil of the form and order which is
observed in medicines and their compound, whereof I do not little marvel.

First, you know how naked experience is in Science holden for doubtful, and
consideration and judgment does change in years, with complexion, with time,
place, and many other things. And therefore it is necessary for him that will
cure, to know these differences, the secret cause and discovery of the
infirmity: for it is a thing impossible the knowledge of curing unto him that
knows not whereof, and where the disease did spring. It is therefore
needful that he understand the composture and complexcions of humayne
bodies, their humors, and which of them bears rule, and what disease thereof
may grow. For, without doubt, the cure must otherwise be handled, if you
prevent the infirmyties of all four humors, as many Wise men affirm. And
contrariwise, if the cause be in only moisture, as Eropilus holds opinion:
according to the writing of Cornelius Celsor and others, or in the spirits, as
Hipocrates thought.

Yea, and also otherwise, if it be as Erasistratus judged, yt the blood turning
backwardes, to the arteries or veins of the spirits cause inflammation, and the
inflamatio^ causes the moving which we see in the Fever. So that he shall
know how to cure, which reaches to the original and true cause. And therefore
you may consider, whether Art and study of Philosophy, be requisite or no: so
that of necessity, the causes of infirmities ought to be known. And also to
understand the quality and property of metals, stones, trees, fruits, herbs,
roots, and also of beasts, and all other things which may serve to ye use of
medicine, to avoid error in their application. I do not deny, but rather
affirm yt experience is profitable. But I presume and am bold to justify,
that there can be no experience without some reason or cause: nor yet I think
yt our Ancestors did use their simples at all adventures, without
consideration. But rather I judge that by speculations and foresight in things
convenient, they made their experience, the which first they coniectured to be
good. Therefore honor in this case ought not to be given to experience, but
rather to wisdom and counsel, which was the cheifest part. Nowbeit, daily are
discovered diverse kinds of infirmities, unto whom experience and use ca^ not
serve, because there can be no experience of a thing not known. So that of
necessity it is needful to know by Art and doctrine the obscure causes of
the vice and corruption, which the humors and members may suffer in a man,
besides these that are plain and open, as cold, heat, hunger, replexion, and
other like.

He also that will be a Physician, should understand what thing is actions, or
natural operations, and what are those by the which we give and take the
spirit of breath, we eat and drink, the place of disgestion: and how the
substance of our food is divided to give strength to our bodies in all places.
Also it is needful to be understood, why our Pulses have continual moving,
and what is the reason and cause of sleep and watching: without knowledge
whereof, it seems that he should not know how to preserve and cure
infirmities. Besides this, men suffer great pains and passions in the inward
parts and members of the body, which is a thing needful to be known, and to
have seen Anothomyes of some dead bodies, to have marked and considered the
cullor, the figure, the bigness, the order, and the hardness and softness of
them all. Also the variety and division of the same members, among themselves,
which do join together, or how they give place and receive: As we read that
Erophilus and Erafistratus did, requiring for the same purpose, men that were
condemned to death, to prove experience. For it is a plain case, that when
any grief or interior hurt happens, and not known, how or where it is, nor
yet to apply outward medicine, for the uncertainty of the inward grief, nor
the nature and reason thereof. And finally, for avoiding of (...), I say that
there are many necessary things appertayning to a good Physician, yea, and to
declare them only* it is requisite that such a one be a learned Philosopher. How
much more to know how to put them in ure, insomuch, that Hipocrates says, that
a good Physician ought to know the disease past, and to understand the cure
present: and also to pro^osticate the thing to come. So that Signor lasper, if
you have harkened well unto me, you will not let to confess that it is a thing
necessary for Physicians, to have both rules and precepts, and that they be
grounded on Sciences and Arts. And as this is a thing, that can not be common:
it is therefore necessary to have particular men Physicians, who ought to be
honored and esteemed as always they have been. And it is not sufficient that
you allege, that vices and disorders brought Physicians to Rome, for although
it had so been, it seemed a special gift of God, who having sent them
diseases, did also send them remedy: And again, contend and say what you list,
the Physicians does not counsel any to distemper them selves: but when any
happens to be dystempered, then the strange is their own proper and true
names from their origin, which is not vulgarly understood. And where you
speak of their Letters and receypt, it may be accoumpted a jest, and a thing
not worthy of answer: because you know that such breuiations are used to
avoid perplexity, for every Science has his terms, and breuiations in
writing.

And again, where you touched their variety in judgment, the discharge is
evident, considering the wits and judgments of men are diverse, so yt with a
good and whole intencio^, they may be contrary in their sentence, and with
small peril in medicine: considering that one disease may be cured by diverse
ways. And by this means Physicians may varry, and by sundry ways come to one
end, which is the cure and health of the Patient. Now in this order, your
evil suspicion and opinion is dashed and broken in pieces, by the sufficient
reasons which I have declared. And I think without any more contencion, you
ought to cease and leave of your ar guing, and because I hope you will so do: I
will not now proceed any further, although I have matter enough.


Dun Nunio. By my faith Signor Master, although I understand little, yet me
thinks that Signor Bernardo has showed himself a valliant Drator, so that I
am now on the Physicians side, I know not what Signor Jasper judges.


Master Velasques. What he thinks he will say: for as yet I ought not to
speak, because ye have made me Judge, his turn abides for him, he has also
wit and years to answer for himself.


The second part of the Dialogue of Physicians, wherein the matter is concluded
and ended.
Jasper. I Am clean contrary to the opinion of Signor Bernardo, and will not
consent to any of his allegations: nay rather, I swear by my conscience, that
his own reason has confirmed me more in my Physician remedieth the same.

And where you murmr, of the inuencion of Syrruppes and distylled waters, and
of the compoundes of medicines, you are the more to be blamed. For rather the
wit and advice of the inuentor is to be praised, and to receive the same as a
good gift, and mercy of God, who daily gives us new remedies and medicines.

And if in old time they wanted knowledge to make Syrrups, and distyll wholesome
waters, both sweet and pleasant, as now are used: I say therein, the
advantage is ours, and are therefore more bound to be thankful to Physicians,
for so profitable and sweet a thing: and because it is a new inuencion, it is
not therefore to be despised. For likewise in old time they knew not was Amber
Musk, nor Siuitte, which are most sweet and excellent Odors: And also the
Mytridate and compound Treacle, which you reprehend. The reason is, because you
understand not, neither the composition, nor the virtue of the things whereof it
is made, nor yet the effects thereof.

And where you say that Phisitio^s ought to be punished as mankyllers, you are
therefore worthy of great reprehension, to presume that they of malice would
kill any, ne yet through ignorance they cannot do it. But for their straight
examination I do not mistike: but rather hold it for a thing convenient,
notwithstanding, the Physician using well his office in the observing of Rule
and Art, and the Patient should happen to die: he ought not to be punished for
his death. And of the same opinion was Plato, appearing in the ninth Dialogue
of his Laws.

And also where Physicians procure to be paid for their pains, they ought not
therefore to be reprehended, since that by the Law of God and man, the laborer
ought to have his hyre. God also commands, that the Ox that freadeth out
the Corn, be not mustod. Moreover, I may say, that of too much sharpnes of
wit, nay rather of malice, where you presume that of industry they darcken
their Art, with strange names of things: for why, if you understood them:
you would say that those names which seemed unto you strange opinion. And
before I had heard him speak: I was not so great an enemy of Physicians, as
now I am. But whether I have reason or no, by mine answer ye shall hear.

First, I say you have well understood my desire, wherein I would have no
office of Physicians, in a common weal, at the least, such as should cure for
money. But that we should one counsel and cure an other. And also we shall
know and use such remedies, which are already known and proved by ancient
men of experience, and to stick unto the same. If this thing might so be,
although there were some inconveniences: yet truly, they should be much less
the^ those which proceed from the good and evil Physicians. By means of
their purges and repurges, bleedings and rebleedings: yea, and you should have
as small a diffyculty therein, if determynatly we should begin to dyspute, as to
speak one language, and to have one custom which are ancient in our
Country, yea, and the great use of old time, should be as easy to cure the
diseased, as in these our days.

So that here is proof and argument to see, that for the one part of
medicine, which according to their own opinion is the principal, which they
call ^suall: that is to say, to know of what the Patient ought to feed, how,
and what it should be, more or less, the experience, use and counsel which
they have among them selves, and now so common to men: whereby without either
counsel or receypt of the Physician, men know what to eat, how and in what
quantity. And such rule wisemen dare use and observe. I speak not of such, who
will voluntarily be disordred. Why alas, if in this, which is the cheifest
point, we can live without tutors? why should we not then bring to pass, ye
use of curing should be as well known among us? for why, the difficulty or
peril should be no greater, as I will show, after that I have made answer to
your argument.

And therefore will I change the form of aunswering, because we are contrary
in opinion. You mean to defend the Physicians; of time present, saying: that
Christ our redeemer, did compare himself to Physicians, and that truly is as
much, as to defend the cruelty of the Lions, because they are also called
Lions. Besides this, your argument is very weak, because your comparison of
Christ to a Physician does not so well fit your purpose. So that I say, you
may make them more particular: yet you shall see ye Christ does rather
approve my opinion then yours, for he did not appoint among his Disciples, one
nor two to heal and cure: but generally, commanded them all unto whom he
gave especial grace, to cure and make whole, as you your self affirm: so
that this allegation makes for me. And where you speak of the Angel
Raphaell, and S. Paul: truly those holy Persons, sent not the sick folk to
the Physicians of the City to be cured: but rather they themselves took ye
cure in hand, being none of that vocation: and how I pray you? iwis not with
Purgations, nor blood letting, nor with your Diacatulicions, nor Skamonea: but
the one with a little Wine, whereof he had experience, and the other with the
virtue of a Fish, which God gave him for that purpose. And therefore, Master
mine, since that this Office is common to Angels and to men: it is not just
that two or three should ingrate the same, like tyrants in the Town: because
forsoothe they are learned men as you say, as I would to God they were: But if
they be, in good time be it, for I say not that learning hurts any. But I say
that for the use of curing, it is not needful, for I hold not such things
necessary, but only for the knowledge of clear and evident things. For why,
it is not greatly material to know the first and secret origin of a disease,
but rather to know what does help: But the inquisition and intelligence of
secret and hydden causes, and the knowledge of their natural operations, and
ye rest which you say is necessary to be known, I hold for a vain thing, and
also impossible.

For besides, that the secrets of nature are incomprehensible, it is plain
that this is so, for why, those that presume to know this matter, are
Physicians and Philosophers, who are diverse and contrary in their opinions, and
can give no certain rule nor resolution.

For how would you that the Physician should know the radical cause, and first
origin of all infirmyties, their opinions being so variable, as you your self
have declared.

And why should I more believe Hipocrates (who affyrmeth the substance of the
matter to be in the spirits:) then Erasistratus, who attrybuteth it to the
turning backward of the blood to the arteries? And why should I credit more
these, then others, who assygned other prynciples? And how will you know how
disguestion is made in the stomach. Truly, I for my part, dare no more credit
the one, then the other. Seeing there are so many opinions, upon the case, for
some say yt the food boyleth with heat, others say that it rotteth by way of
attrycion and grynding, others denies them both, and each gives such
reasons, as seem true: so yt following the opinion of any of them, the cure
shall be particular and clean contrary the one to the other. So that seeing the
causes and origin so diffycult, ye certeynty seems impossible, and I see no
cause for a man to weary himself therein. But only to content and serve our
selves with the remedy that experience has taught us. And considering that it
imports not to know what caused the infirmity, but only the way to cure the
same: Nor yet I will not trouble my self to know how disgestio^ is made, but
chiefly to know what meat is soonest disgested, and what is good to help the
same. Without vering my self to know the cause why: nor yet I pass not to
know what is the cause of shortness of breath, but rather ye way to remedy it
without pain: I will neither know, who moves, nor how the artyres move: but
only understand what signifies the disordered moving. And also it makes not
for your purpose, that you allege for new diseases that may happen, for when
any such thing do happen, he that cures, ought not to imagine what ye origin
was, seeing that of common things he is ignorant, as before I have declared.
For it is sufficient to consider how the like infirmity has been cured, and
without medicine, and so by experience, we may hit on the certeynty. As for
example, the disease of the Pox, how ignorant were Physicians in the cure, as
long as they went by Science and Art? But after experience had taught us ye
use of the wood, called Lignum Vite, or Lignu^ Sanctum: How notoriously were
the diseases cured? without the knowledge of the origin of the disease, nor yet
the cause why the said medicine does help?

It seems also unto you a necessary thing, the Anathomy of dead bodies: and
in my judgment, it is a thing of small effect, yea, and I rather hold it for
a kind of cruelty. For true it is, in such an Anathomy, there remains
neither the proper cullor, softnes or hardness, or any other lively thing, which
you say was in the members of the dead and wounded bodies, which are abiding in
the live and sound bodies: for if there be in a whole and lively man, cold,
fear, wearines, or any other mean affect, or alteration, which make exterior,
and notorious chau^ges in the cullor and posture of the face: it is much more
like the interior members, which are more delycate to change and alter with a
strange air.

And truly I hold it for a mere madness to believe that the Armony and consert
which is in ye live body of a man, is to be found in one that lies a dying, or
is already dead. Now if the Anathomy were of any effect, or could give any
light for the health of man, there daily chances men to be slain in the
wars, and by other mischaunces: where without cruelty, but rather to cure
their wounds, they might make experience without the spoiling and breaking up
of man's flesh, by him that has professed rather to heal it.

And where you say that such men experimented, are Fallares, because they
change with age and time: I say that experience found out those chau^ges and
not Art, so that to experience all is due, and by the same, all is obtained.
Moreover, the aunsweres which you make to my reasons are so weak, that they
need no reply at all. And where you say that Physicians are not the cause of
vices and diseases, because they counsel none to distemper them selves, but
rather cure their hurt, received by distemperance. But I say, because some men
have such confidence in them, they encorrage them selves to be gluttons, and
dysordered persons, yea, and some times they give them such counsel.

But since that Signor Master, is here present, mark what Saint Ambrose
says, upon the. Cviij. Psalm, which is. The precepts of Medicine are
contrary to the divine counselles, because they forbid fasting, and permit no
Uigilles, yea, they will compel men in such sort, that he who gives himself
there unto, shall utterly deny himself.

And where again, you would defend Physicians from punishment, by the Laws of
Plato I answer: that it is first needful that you bring the approbation of
those Laws from the Emperor, for without that, your Laws are of small
effect: but although they were, Plato does not salve, but only he that
cures well, by whom if any mischance happen, he is faultlesse. But I spoke
unto you only of such as know not what they do, which is the cause that they
err in that which they take in hand, and where there is on the earth no
punishment for such: I beseech God to chasten them, for it is a hard case that
only Physicians are never ignorant of any thing. But if you go to an Advocate
or Counselor in the Law, with any hard question, he will answer, that be will
study the cause. If you go to a Divine, he will oftentimes make their
answer, and so will men of other faculties. But the Physician will
incontinent make answer to a thousand diseased solke, if they demand any
thing. Yea, they judge it a lesser fault to err, then to confess that they
know not. Likewise their errors and evil success, they will not let to lay on
some body, either the disorder of the Patient, or the malice of the humor, and
whether I say true or no, I put you for witness.

And where you say, that I understand not ye properties and virtues of
medicines, co^pounds: I answer that you say true, and I affirm the same, and
say, that neither the Physicians, nor yet their Auicena, understood them: nor
yet is it possible to understand the Armony and temper of. 300. things
together, and therefore they are abominable. And for my part I will yield no
thanks for the inuencion of them, as you command.

Neither yet hold I for profitable, the Musk, Siuit, and Amber, although they
are of delectable sweetness in Odor, for we might well be without them: for they
profit not so much the health of the body, but in as many times they are
hurtful to the soul: And since you are so wholly judging, that those names
and dark receypts are not made by industry and malice, I pray you be a mean
hereafter, to keep me from occasion of sin: to induce them to Physicians,
to make their receyptes with a fair plain letter in our language, and then I
will judge as you do. So that now Signor Bernardo, seeing that your arguments
and aunsweres unto mine, are of no efficacy or strength, you ought to put them
clean from your opinion, and that you disturb not medicine to be commonly
known, and let us not permytte to be subject to two or three: Whereof Pliny
complayneth because we will not know what is good for us, and so we go upon
other men's seete, we eat with other men's appetite, whereupon our life and health
is an arbitrament. Be not so curious in this matter, as to spend in learning,
to study in the University all your life time, by mean of which pains, you
may get more disease, then by your study you might learn to cure. So to
conclude, it is sufficient what I have said, to approve, that Experience,
diet, and good regiment, suffices principally for our health. Therefore, let
us not seek rational experience: but embrace the experimental. And think
not that medicine was found before reason, for the good Husbandman and the
Mariner, by use and practice, came to be Masters, and not by study and
learning to know the quallities of the heavens, nor the course of Planets and
Stars, nor yet the books of heaven, and world of Aristotle: for why, we
daily fall among natural infirmyties, with our children, servant, and
neighbors, therefore we ought not to be careless, for the use and disease do
make us Artistes, we have now no need of foundations: for the ancient and
common opinion, which experience we hold for Masters, without buying the same
for money: how much more men ought not to be inferior to the Fowls of the
air, and Beasts of the Wilderness, among whom there are many that have
knowledge in medicine, necessary for their use: As the Heart knows how to
draw out the arrowe wherewith he is wounded, with an herb called Ditamo. The
Swallow gives sight to her young ones, with the herb Chilidonia: the wild
Boore cures with Organy. And many others likewise, of whom Pliny, and other
writers make relation.

Then it should not seem much for man to do the like: and think not, yt it
should be a thing unmeet to live in such uniformity, although you think we
should err for want of Physicians: Howbeit, the greatest error is, in having
too many of them, and their medicines. Nature has a care to heal the sick,
with very little help: for the Physicians them selves, say, that Nature is he
that woorketh and cures, and that they be but mynisters.

In this sort lived the Romans, the time yt I have declared, and all the
world accordinglye, before Physicians were known, and the like at this day
among the people which dwell in the Mountains and barren Countries, who live
longer and more in health, then the Citizens, where medicine and Physicians
abou^deth.

Those men I say, would never suffer Physicians to come among them: but only
cure them selves with good regyment, herbs and experience, among whom I
could name some notable persons. But one will be sufficient for all the rest,
who is the light, and honor of Spain, for his incomparable doctrine and
learning, he is called the Comendator, Hernam Nunes, master of Rethorike, and
other Arts, in the famous Uniuersity of Salamanca, who as yet would never put
his health in the hands of any Physician, and has conserved ye same above,
70. years without their help.

You know also that in yt time of great Pompeius was the top of the Mountain
is for power: and dellycate Roman wits, as Pliny writes, and other
Authors. How Aesclepiades the famous Physician, condemned the Rules and
preceps of all others, and cured only with diet and rule, in eating, drinking,
and rubbing the joints and members, so that with these things of great
experience, he condemned utterly Purgations, Uomyts and such like: the fruit
of his curing did so much profit, that he only was praised and admytted, and
infinite people came unto him.

The same Pliny says in his. 35. Chapter, that he happened to cure one that
was thought to be dead, and carried to burying, or to be burned, as the^ the use
was: so that Aesclepiades said, that his medicine was certain, which he
affirmed of himself, because his regiment kept them from sickness, or else he
required not to be taken for a Physician: and truly, be emplyed the thing which
he affyrmed, for he himself was never known to be at any time sick until
his death, although he lived very long, and with the fall from a Ladder, he
ended his life.

So that it appears manifestly by mine allegations and proofs, that my
opinion is not new, or singular, but common and of great antiquity, both
certain and true: and for such you ought to embrace it, and so I heartily pray
you. Wherewith all I conclude, although I leave much behind to avoid
prolixitie.


Don Nunio. Truly Signor Jasper, you have said well, and I for my part am so
tender of condition, that every one having ended his tale, carries me with
him. But yet now I will stay a while to hear the determination of the Signor
Master.


Bernardo. If you will give me leave, I promise that my answer shall not
want. But since the Signor Master has to give sentence in Justice so
manifest, being so just and wise a Judge: there needs no farther information.


The Judgment and determination of the Master.
Master Velasques. TRuly Signor Dun Nunio, I would gladly be free from my
bond, because I see each of these Gentlemen so earnest in their opinions, yea,
and the cause so well treated and defended, that I take the Plea for doubtful:
But since the matter consists not in any Article of the faith: I may speak
what I think, and they shall have what they paid.


Don Nunio. Yet sir I pray you proceed, although they are so bent to their
opinions, they refer the determynation to your learned judgment, so that
they cannot choose but humble themselves thereunto, whereas reason demands the
same.


Bernardo. That which Signor Don Nunio says, is true, and therein we will both
receive courtesy, at the least I for my part exceeding great.


Jasper. And I much greater, for I believe assuredly, his woorshippe will
approve my opinion.


Master Velasques. Because I hold it for a good exercise, I will fulfill your
requests, and give my vow in the matter, for I have no jurisdiction to
pronounce sentence, nor yet your maistershippes bound to pass or accept the
same. But if I speak any thing to purpose, each may accept what he please, for
I mean not to argue or dispute, but breefly in few words, I will speak what
I think. Your contencion principally consists in two points, and all the
rest is accessory thereunto.

The first is, that the one says, that for to cure human infirmities,
neither Art nor Science, is needful, but only suffiseth use and experience.

The other says, that Art and Rules are most needful, and he that should
cure, ought to be a Master, learned, both in Art and Science, and to have
great foundation in learning, as largely the matter has been communicated.

The second point which seems to come from the first, is, that Signor Jasper,
who holds the part of only experience, would yt there should be no known
Physician: but that generally all me^ ought to cure. And Signor Bernardo,
defe^deth the cause and says, that it is convenient to have them.

The troth is, that the first and principal question is not new, nor yet you
the first that have moved and disputed the same: but rather it is very
ancient in medicine and among Physicians. And we say that always have been
the like discord, for some do follow only experience, and therefore they were
called Experts. And other desirous to know the reason and causes, and
therefore they were named Rationalles. Cornelius Celso, and other Authors do
write thereof at large, and both the one and the other, has had great
favorers, so yt of these two first extremes ^f of force the one must be
accepted, and the other to have remedy.

The last peril and most reasonable, is to follow the first, as Aristotle
says, that those of experience are most fit, and able to cure, then the
learned without experience. And speaking perticulerly, Plato of Physicians, in
his books of common weal, affyrmeth that a good Physician needs to
communicate both with sick and whole men, yea, and that he himself have been
also sick, finally, the ought to be experimented: and also there is no doubt,
but that medicine and Art thereof had his origin of experience, and no
otherwise. So that in this case Signor Bernardo has no reason to deny the
same, for certainly the experie^ces being known, men as amazed began thereby
to enter into Philosophy, and thereby to seek out both reasons and causes,
and so is this true in other acts, as well as in medicine, whereof is aucthor
Aristotle in his books of high Philosophy, and also Marcus Manillius, and
Virgill, do testify the same, saying: by vatiable cases experience made Art.
And because I do not remember which of these Ge^tlemen alleged Saint Ambrose.

I do remember now that favoring and holding part with Medicine, he does
say and affirm in the same, I will therefore declare his words, because his
aucthority is great, which are these. Where says he, had Medicine origin, but
only of infirmity. And where in the first age, men would teach their
successors, and Decendentes, what things had done them good, and wherewith
they cured their diseases, whereby use made Art, and infirmity made
maisterie, and that is the first and sufficient medicine, which experience
made, and not the conjecture, and therefore they were called Expert, so that
out of this sort sprung the other, and from thence took his use and force, so
that word for word, S. Ambrose affyrmes the same.

But to avoid weariness, I allege not other reasons and aucthorities, for
therein is no doubt at all: but that experience was origin to medicine, and
totally necessary. But yet notwithstanding, those that were named expert,
remain not victors, who will not allow any other thing but only experience,
nor yet are overcome. The Rationalles, which follows Art, because betwixt
these two opinions there is a third, and a mean which ought to be observed,
and that is. That although experience was, and is the origin, and without the
same we can not well crave this faculty: yet notwithstanding, after the
expected precepts, Art was profitable, and not only profitable, but also
necessary, as well for the inconstancy and chaunges which are in experience,
as by reasons. Here has been touched, as well to choose and know the best,
which without learning were impossible to do. For it is a plain case, that
without learning and doctrine you can not make an intiere judgment and
election.

And if this thing should not be reduced to Rules and Art: all should be
confusion, and forgetfulness, and discord would confound all: so that if only
experience should be admytted. Yet Art and Rules thereof, should be needful
to know and learn, how and at what times, in what places, at what ages, in
what dispositions, to what infirmities, and to what occations the^ ^^ofit to
some, and what unto others, and hereof perforce we can not be without Rules
and means, and this is the Art which may not be wanting: for although
experience has been the origin, and knows how to find, but not to keep.

But Art does keep and conserve: also you have no leisure, every day to
make experience, nor all men can not make every proof, nor yet to carry in
mind the things that has been done without Rule and artifice thereof. And for
proof of a thing so notorious, it shall not need many reasons, nor
aucthorities, for the experience we have before our eyes, that there is no
work nor occupation so base, which is not guyded by Art and reason.

The Husbandman, and the Mariner of whom Signor Jasper spoke, saying, use
makes maisterie. Although the same were so, yet they can not want their
Regimentes, grounded upon experience, whereby they were guyded, and learned
their Art, to be a light to teach others the things, whereof experience never
wanted unto them.

The like does the Mason, the Carpenter and other Artificers, who jointly with
use and experience, have their foundation and Rules. And sithence medecin has
a more precious and higher suiect: it is no reason that it should by them be
deminished, how much more many of the other causes, and knowledge of other
things, which already has been argued, and although same will say that to know
such things: should not notoriously be necessary. Yet at the least they cannot
deny, but that it is profitable, and also although the same should not make a
Physician more perfect: yet he should be made more discreet and advised, all
which things can not be brought to pass without the learning of Art and
Rules, and if these things are difficult and many, they are not therefore to be
refused nor yet the knowledge of them, as Signor Jasper affyrmeth: we know well
that Art is long, but yet continual labor and goodwill overcomes And also
if all may not be known yet pass with the possible, and most necessary: and
though there be variety in oppinions, yet also their are determinations, and
resolucions, there are also Physicians and Counsel for all, whereof the good
Physician, ought to be replenished, more then an other, of this opinion are the
most of the wise and learned Aucthors. But cheefely Plato in his book of
Rethorick, says, for this cause is Art the medecyn, for why: it is a faculty
that does consider and know the nature of him that cures, and the cause of
the thing that works, and can of those things give a sufficient reason. And
that which is alleged is not to be understood only necessary to cure the
infirmytie, but also, a way to sustain the health: for although Signor Jasper
say that we know how to eat and drink without counsel of the Physician, or
other Art by only experience: true it is, but he that so does using
temperaunce: does follow counsels and Rules, and also aduises given by
Physicians and wise men, and not so doing commonly is caused infyrmitye.

And even so the most Sapient Cicero in his second book of Offices, affyrmeth
that for to govern and sustain health, is needful for a man to know his
own complexion, and to abstain from such things that offend him, and to
use of other things which agree, and are profitable for him, and to follow
the counsel and Art of them who know the same, meaning the Physicians. So
that to conclude, for with men so grave and wise, I need not to enlarge.

The resolucion and my vow is touching the first point, which was if only
experience were sufficient, or else if Art and learning were needful of
which two wants in a Physician: The want of learning is more to be suffered
than the want of experience, but also that the perfect Physician ought to be
expert and learned, so that the Medecin must appear on both sides, that is
as well in the experimented as rationales, and ought to have Art, precepts, and
foundation jointly with experience.

Now let us preceede to the second point, which is whether it be needful to
have particular Physicians, appointed and ordained or no. I say that of my
former words does follow the true conclusion: that it is necessary to have
Physicians and known masters, and that generally all men may not be of that
vocation for although that only experience were necessary: it were not possible
that all men should be experymented. How much more we have approved, and hold
for certain that Art, Rules, and variable doctrines are needful, the which
cannot be commen. And sithence of all other Arts, and mecanycall Artifices,
there are workmen, and known Masters: Medecin ought not to be of less
condition and to have learned me therein, both to study and dispute if need
require: then coning to be experimented, may use and cure with holly medecin:
And it is not to hold for comparison, that Christ did command all the
Apostles to cure and heal infirmities, for that purpose was only to lay
foundation of our holy faith, and not principally for corporal health whereof
we now treat: how much more, both for the one, and for the other, he chose
and appointed several persons, and gave no power without distinction and
election, the office and names of ordained Physicians, Signor Jasper, are of
more antiquity, then as yet we have spoken, no nor yet your profaine writers
make thereof no proof, for before Aesculapius, or Ipocrates, above 500.
years, were Physicians in the world, we read Genesis chap. 50. that Joseph
commanded his Phisitio^s in Egypt, to anoint the dead body of Jacob his
father, and in Exo. chap. 21. among the laws that God gave unto Moses for his
people is one, that he who hurts his neighbor shall pay, what be loses in
his work, for the time spent, and also the cost and hyer of the Physician
where manifestly appears the wages and reward of the Physician is just and of
great antiquity, and in other places of holy Scripture, we find that
Physicians were ordained and known, as appears in Peralipomenon 2. Chap. 16.
where king Assa was reprehended because he called not on God in his sickness,
trusting more in the Art of the Physicians, in which place it is plainly
called Art and not experience, which place makes for our purpose, and even so
are there many other more. The History and example of Asclepiades, which you
aledge, who was in ye time of great Pompeus, is true. And in that time began
the sect, and manner of curing. But it was a plain and a manifest deceit that
he intended, because he knew not how to cure by Science, as Plyny himself
affyrmeth: for he was an Orator, and because he gained little by that office,
he determined to make himself a Physician, and there spronge that heresy in
Medecin, as other has done in other Arts, but as a thing without
foundation, it endured but a while, how much more Esclepiades made not
medecyne common: but his meaning was to invent a new Art, and to make himself
Master thereof.

So that Gentlemen, let us understand that experience made the Art of
Medecin, and that it is necessary to have particular expert and learned
Physicians, and also I say another thing which as yet has not been touched,
and is the most necessariest of all, which is that such men ought not only to
be learned, but virtuous faithful Christians, and fearful of God without the
which no good Art can be ministered, and for the abuses and defects which
Signor Jasper has touched, I know well that some do pass in the world, and
I truly desire the remedy of them. But I say not what such Physicians are, but
I declare what they all ought to be. I also say and know some that synneth not
in their opinion in manifesting them of their dealing, as well in their malice
as in their medecynes, but the good Physician will cure Christianlye and
plainly, and apply according to wisdom the Medecines convenient, he also
knows what is needful, either in Medecin simple or compound, which is the
cheifest thing that Signor Jasper has impugned, but not with reason, for
although the simples are excellent and do profit to mix one with another: I
say it is not hurtful, for some virtues and properties do help and temper
others and that which one force could not do: two or three do finish, for
seldom, one humor offends the pacient, therefore it is to provide for a whole
and compound infirmitye, and thereto to apply compound medecin, and even as we
are compou^de of sundry complexions and elements, even so we stand in need of
compounde medecines, as well as of simples as in all things we see plainly, in
hot Countries, we myxe strong wine with water, we compound things to make
them more profitable for us, we also join and mix our meats, to make them
more sauery and medicinal, to Vinegar we put oil, and to Hunny, Sugar, all
things do join, temper and resist, the which certainly is most necessary in
medicine, and is of great effect and profit. But if in these things and others
there be any indiscreete Physicians or evil woorkemen: we should not therefore
reprove ye good, nor yet the Art, which of itself is good, holy and
profitable: but rather to procure that every one be such as is convenient, and
to desire of God the same, unto whom this City of Civil in my judgment ought
to give most hearty thanks, for the plenty of good and learned Physicians,
which dwell in the same, of who^ truly I presume. But particulerly I have had
familiar conversation in my diseases with four or five of them, and assuredly
in them does conteyne ye qualities of excellent men, both of experience,
learning and goodness, and I have the same opinion of many of the others, and
although Signor Jasper is not contented with only literature and precepts: let
him therefore love, and procure jointly with them experience, and also Signor
Jasper, condemn not the doctrine in Physicians, and trust not so little unto
them that you let to cure your self, when you are sick. But my meaning here is
not of such Phisitio^s as the Iester told ye Marquess Ferrara, of whom
Pontanus writes. But now here is no place to tell that tale, although it is not
evil to declare, for such as heretofore has not hard thereof. But sithe^ce it
is now late, I conclude for this day, the thing I was required to do: and the
rest shall remain for another day.


Don Nunio. Signor Master, I swear unto God, that I believe there is no more
to be said, sithence you have so singulerly well determined the cause, and at
the least I for my part, am fully satisfied, and should finally profit in any
further disputation of these Gentlemen, to change me from your sentence,
howbeit I believe that now they are of your judgment, for always troth is of
great force being also helped by your authority and eloquence.


Bernardo. I for my part do hold myself satisfied, and do consent in the
determination of Signor Master, and I think Signor Jasper will do the like,
and so we may depart as we came.


Jasper. I cannot choose but keep silence to the thing that Signor Master has
said, and the same ought to be most certain, sithence he has so pronounced:
but yet in my judgment I think it not convenient to cure with Physicians, but
rather take diet and good Regiment to be sufficient, yea and I have heard them
their selves say, that to cure therewith is a most happy cure, so that still I
will follow experience and counsel and you not able to condemn me, and for
the other matters, let them pass in good time, as Signor Master has
declared: and so we may depart, and God give unto your Worship entire health,
that you never need any Physician, but only that you may dye of age.


Don Nunio. Patience is good for aduersytie, but yet I will not that ye depart
until Signor Master has told his tale, touching the Physicians of Ferrara.
And with his tale Disputation shall cease for this day, for it is not late,
and time there is for all.


Master Velasques. Because, Signor Jasper shall pacify his anger, I will
recite the tale, although he has read the same as well as I: the History is.
That on a time, Nicholaus Marquess of Ferrara, sporting and jesting with his
Iester, he enquired of him of what Science or occupation were most number in
Ferrara? the Iester answered, saying sir, the most in number of any one trade
are Physicians, the Marquess hearing this answer, laughed him to scorn,
saying, thou idiot see you not that of yt faculty there is not in the City
above five or sire, and I am sure there is above 300. Shoomakers, and as many
of many other Occupacions? The Iester answered, sir, where your Lordship is
occupied in great matters you have no particular recknings, nor yet you know
what number of Massailes you have, but believe me sir I have told you troth, yt
of the Art of medecin is the greatest number in Ferrara, and I dare lay 200.
Ducats that you shall find it so.

The Marquess began to laugh again and to deny his opinion, and in conclusion
the wager was laid, although he judged it for simplicity and madness, and so he
soon forgot what he had laid. But the Iester who had great desire of the money
that was laid, having well considered the matter: The next day in the morning
he arose, being Sunday, and wrapped clouts about his head, and Towe and Wool
bound to his cheeks, fayning that he was wonderfully vexed with the
tootheache, and in this order he sat him down at the door of the Cathedral
Church of the City, and had sitting by him a boy who was his son, that had
good skill in writing, this lad had his Pen, Inkehorne, and Paper, now the
Iester being a man so commonly known in the City, the people that entered
and came out of the Church asked of him the cause of his sickness, and he made
answer to every one that he had a marvelous pain in his teeth and Gummes,
desiring them for Gods sake to give him some remedy for the same, and where we
generally use to give counsel to those whom we see suffer any pain: as many as
passed by told him what to take, although some one thing, and some another. So
that his boy forth with wrote every man's name that had given any remedy, and
having abode there the time convenient, and his copy of names and medcines
full, and in the pickle that he sat at the Church door: he went to the
Marquess Palace, who had clean forgotten his wager, and as the Marquess
espied him, he as other had done, enquired the cause of his grief, and being
answered as the others were, he of gentleness told him of remedy wherewith he
should be whole. The Iester said sir and kiss your Honors hands, and after
a while that he had abode there, he went his way home to his house, and caused
all his process to be written fair, which amounted to near 500. persons, who
were all Physicians, and the Lord Marquis was placed for the first and
principallist in the copy, and every man's medecin joined with his name, the
next day he came to ye Lord Marquess Palace without his rags about his head,
as a whole man, saying, right Honorable sir, now I am whole, and I thank God
cured by the most honourablest Physician of all Italy, which is you, for with
your good counsel I obtained my health. Therefore I pray you command to pay
the wager: for assuredly for my disease I found all these Physicians in
Ferrara, that are here contained in this memorial, and if I would have fought
for more, iwis I had found more. The Marquess beholding the roll of names and
medecines, and seeing himself the first man, and many other principal persons
of the Cittye, he laughed, and confessed that he had lost his wager, and
commanded the same to be paid forth with, which truly was a merry jest. So
that if Signor Jasper be contented with such Physicians: I say he has reason,
and shall find abundance.


Don Nunio. By my trothe the tale is pretty, and to be laughed at with reason.
I will therefore stay you no longer, depart on Gods name.


Jasper. The Iester was pleasant, but I promise you on my faith, that if he
had the tootheache in deed, he might have been cured with the counsels given
unto him. And I would rather trust the 500. Physicians contained in the
memorial, then the five or six, which the Lord Marquess spoke of. And with
this conclusion Signor Bernardo let us depart, for although we have been
earnest in our Disputation, yet we will depart as good friends as we came
hither.


FINIS.
T. N.


