THEORIQVE AND PRACTICE OF WAR.

Written to Don Philip Prince of Castil, by Don BERNARDINO de Mendoza.

Translated out of the Castilian tongue into English, by Sr. EDWARD HOBY
Knight.

Directed to Sr. GEORGE CAREW Knight.

1597.

Al muy Illtre y discreto Cauallero Don Iorge Carew, Lugarteniente general de
la Artilleria, porsu Sacra Cesarea Catholica, Real Magd. Donna ELIZABETH
nuestra Senora, en todos sus Reynos, Prouincias, y Estados.
Senor,
BOluiendo de Cadiz el estio passado en la felicissima y inuictissima Armada de
su SCCRM. nuestra Senora, despues de aver ganado la victoria en ta^ senalada
empreza contra los herejes, enemigos, Vassallos del Rey de Castilla, en la
piedra angular de su Reyno, debaxo de los muy poderosos Generales, Don Roberto
Conde de Essex, y Don Carlos Howard gran Almirante, comence a estudiar la
lengua Castellana, de la qual como save V. S. antes no tenia gusto. Siendo
ayudado con la diligencia y discrecion de Don Payo Patino Arcedeano de Cadiz,
hombre muy honrrado, que posaua comigo en la Capitana, y despues en la co^pania
de Alonco de Baeca, Tesorero de los Almojarisfazgos del Rey, el qual he tenido
en mi casa para este efecto: Ambos de los Rehenes del Catiuerio Espanol:
facilitandola con el muy discreto y raro Dicionario, que compuso Richardo
Perciual, por lo qual cierto los aficionados a esta milicia le deuemos muchas
gracias y loores, Ocasion con que he enganado el tiempo con el curso de hablar
y leer libros Espanoles, hora de guerras, hora de plazeres. Enter los quales he
hallado vno que compuso Don Bernardino de Mendoza, en tiempos passados
embaxador en esta Corte, llamado Theorica y practica de guerra. El qual aun que
a la primera parecia muy difficultoso por las palabras estranas, estratagemas y
ardides de guerras, Todauia por exercicio he passado algun tiempo en traduzille
en nuestra lengua vulgar; por este medio mejorando me en la perfecion de la
lengua Castellana: y con todo mi trabajo no quiero yo persuadir a V. S. que es
possible yr tan perfecto palabra por palabra como en el mismo original: ni tan
poco no se deue V. S. marauillar, Si en nuestro Romance emprestamos muchas
palabras de las otras naciones, pues los Castellanos mismos (gente tan
Catholica) las empresta, no solamente de los Italianos, Franceses, Flamencos,
que son Christianos, pero de los Moros, Africanos, Alarabes, Barboros, Iudios,
y Infieles. Iuntamente es de aduertir, que las materias y instrumentos de las
milicias, por ser enter todas las naciones differentes, segun lo que acostumbra
cada nation al pelear, es impossib-le con puntualidad exprimir las en otra
lengua, sin mezelar la propia donde fueron primeramente inuentadas. Por manera
que es menester que cada nation empreste poco o mucho de la vezindad de las
otras. Assi mismo se vee cada dia trocar la forma de hazer guerra y con esto
forcosamente la manera y nombres de las Armas, ensangrentandose los Principes,
los unos con los otros, mouidos con la ceguedad de la ambicion. De lo qual no
puede aver testigo mas cierto, que el Author mismo, pues a platicado contra
tantos principes, y en ninguna cosa hecho moyor dano a su Rey, despues muchos
defafueros y agrauios hechos indignos a Cauallero de Aue Maria, que fue siendo
embaxador con mucha confianca en esta Corte, buscar y platicar la destrucion de
la serenissima persona de su SCCRM. neustra Senora, por lo qual con mucha
uerguenca lo mando desterrar fuera de este Reyno. Cosa digna de exemplar
castigo si no lo mitigara su mucha bondad y clemencia tan acostumbrada tanto a
los estranos como a sus vassallos. Mas el Dios muy poderoso que tienne su
Iuizio aparejado para castigar los pecadores, a tomado esta causa a su cargo,
comencandole a pagar su debito con un rayo de su yra, en el miembro de la
vista, (de que se escusa en su carta a el Principe estar priuado) que era el
que mas le ayudaua a pecar: conform a un Cauallero, que V. S. conoscio, que a
la hora de la muerte dixo con muchas lagrimas: In qua part maxim peccaui, in
ea maxim stringor miser. Y aun que el Author secretamente descubre su malicioso
coracon y flaqueza dando a entender en muchas parts a qual reyno pone el
blanco, (que es a el a quien los cielos hasta agora son propicios, contra la
ambicion, y insolencia, y cobdicia de los Castellanos, que primieramente
comencaron los danos de toda la Christianidad.) Todauia es digno de ser alabado
en otras particularidades', que le disculpan de muchos yerros, de que ningun
author puede ser perfecto: y principalmente los de la nation que nunca precio
otra en sus brabatas, y siempre son menores en los hechos, pero en ninguna mas,
que adonde alaba el que acomete, y menosprecia el que espera. Yo por mi part
no dexare de hazelle compania en sus rogatiuas, ahincadamente todos los dias
suplicando a nuestro Senor, con muchas veras, que disponga los coracones de los
Principes (pues estan en su mano) en tal manera que bueluan el filo de su
espada contra los infieles, dexando las puntualidades que vnos contra otros
tienen, y que vea yo una paz enter Ynglaterra y Castilla, como en el buen
tiempo que mi Tio Don Fesipe Hoby fue embaxador de la part de Don Henrico
Octauo, de pia, y sancta, y felicissima memoria, padre de su SCCRM. en la Corte
de Don Carlos quinto Emperador: los dos acote de la ambicion y tirania Papal,
como lo muestran las hazanas de Don Henrico en libertar su imperio del yugo y
seruidumbre pontifical, y Coronicas de Don Carlos, quando debaxo de los Duques
de Borbon, y de Alua por dos vezes mando sitiar y saquear Roma. Mas por no
alargarme, cesso remitiendome a la traducion, aun que es Opus laboris non
ingenij, como todas lo son: Pero persuadido de muchos amigos me parescio bien
contentallos, y sacarlo a lumbre por el prouecho y entretenimiento de aquellos
que no alcancaron la lengua Castellana, que V. S. me incito estudiasse: y pues
a su Ruego la he aprendido me atreuo a dedicarle este mi trabajo poniendole en
sus manos para que me ampare y defienda de las calumnias y desdenes del comun.
De que no tengo duda considerando su gran valor y discrecion, no solo por aver
descendido de la Illustrissima y antiquissima casa del Marquese de Corcke,
Vicecondes Durseys, y Varones de Odrone y de Carew, pero por los senalados
seruicios hechos a su SCCRM. en Irlandia, donde fue Consejero y General de la
Artilleria tantos anos, y continuando el mismo officio en la vltima victoria de
Cadiz.

Nuestro Senor guarde a V. S. Del Castillo Real de Queenborowe, vltimo de
Marco, y de mil y quinientos y nouenta y sieta anos. EDWARD HOBY.

The Autors epistle to Don Philip Prince of Castill.
My Lord.
IF the old Castilian proverb do affirm, That by a nail is lost a shoe:
and by a shoe, a horse: and by a horse a Cauallero: and by a Cauallero a
Cornet: and by a Cornet an Host: and by an Host a Battle: and by the
Battle a Kingdom: and not only the succession of Kings therein, but many
times religion: a loss inestimable: you may well judge, how much more
speedlie, many other inco^ueniences may bring like losses, which by
carelessness, and small heed taking, may succeed in war, if that, which to
look too is of so small moment, may come to be cause thereof. The
consideration of which has moved me to write unto Your Highness a brief
Theorique and practice of War, refreshing thereby the memory with what I
have read and experimented in thirty and so many years, which I have followed,
serving in that, and Embassages, the King our Sovereign, father to Y.H. since
that my ouertymelie blindness has kept me from being able to occupy any
room fit to serve Y.H. in, but only as a dumme Councellor, the office of
books and paper, because they speak not but when they are sought, nor reply
upon ought they have reported: which ought to bind Princes to spend some
part of their time in good letters: since besides tillinge of their wits
with them, and opening their eyes, to order things present by example and
warninge of the passed, (which makes able to foresee things to come): Books
and writings deliver unto Princes many truths, which they that are living dare
not presume to do. And although many will hold it for a hard matter to make
a Theorique of knowledge, which consists entierly in practice, as the
exercise of war, experience being the principal foundation thereof, Physic
holds the same quality, by seeing in men's bodies, after the same manner as
in war, so diverse and unlooked for euentes: A particular which causes
experimented Physicians to be of more estimation, then those that are only
Theoricall. This has not bin any cause why the most learned in science should
forget the Theorique which is in all, applying practice with it. Neither in the
Mathematiques, and Geometry, does it leave to be of much profit, since that,
except the reason and composition of lines and figures had bin first known,
Architectistes could hardly have traced out edifices, for the building whereof
this is not sufficient alone, except the master workmen know what the nature
of the deapth of the soil is: by long use and experience the quality of the
stuff for the building: what sort of stones endure longest the injury of the
weather, and if it incorporate it self better with mortar and plaster. In the
game of Chesse the lively pattern of war, which consists really in use,
those books leave not to be very fruitful, which are written of the
Theorique thereof, aduantaging such as read them, greatly in their play.
Likewise it may seem to some, that I have written many things, which such as
are soldiors already know, and some which are to be found in sundry
books. To satisfy the first, if reason of offending and defending had not
been from the first creation of the world until now the very same, the
disposition of the people only varying in the difference of weapons, engines,
and instruments, which have bin invented for to obtain, which soever of the
two effects, I might be able to tell novelties, the matter it self ministering
me occasion: and God giving to all men the powers of understanding, memory and
will, wherewith to dispose the discourse and reasoning, no wonder is it, if for
all this, sundry wits do meet in one thought, when to do it is grounding
them selves on one self same cause. The which does not hinder that some
understandings may not surpass more then others in finding the reasons and
effects of it, nor breed in me any discontent, when mine shall go after
others, who have passed before better then my self. To the second, although
Bees do not frame or make the flowers, yet the liquor that they draw from
them, does not leave to be profitable, and the coppwebbes abhorred,
notwithstanding they are wouen of their proper substance. Now, if Y.H.
vouchsafe to look upon these my papers, rather like a be, then a spider: I
shall think the labor I have spent in them, well bestowed, for the desire I
have to accomplish that duty, wherein God has placed me, making me your
subject: and to offer in reknowledging of this, the little might that is left
me: In which Y.H. is more to respect the carrectes of the affection in
presentinge it, then of the talent.

Our Lord preserve your Highness. From Madrid, the last of August. 1594. Don
BERNARDINO de Mendoza.

THE ORICQVE AND PRACTICE OF WAR.
GOD having made your Highness heir apparent to the multitude of Crowns,
Estates and Countries, which the K. our sovereign Lord Y.H. father possesses,
so diversely occupying a good part in Europe, and so mighty in America, East
Indies, the new world, it is very likely, and forceable in man's reason, that
Y.H. shall enter into many Wars by sea and land, either in conquering,
Guiltilio foreseen, most being in deed unjustly usurped, and all
tyrannically ouerruled.
or defending. Together with which, the successes and chances of the world
breeding differences, which ordinarily falls out beetwene Kings, Common
wealths, and Catholic Potentates, must needs lie awakened: And albeit your
quality may require to appease them with arms, yet is Y.H. carefully to look
that you make no use of them, before you stand desperate of any other means
of negotiation or agreement, in respect of the great damage which in imbrewing
your sword in blood among Christian Kings may redound to the A Christian
consideration, if you mean it as the Apostle does, Romans 1. ver. 8.
Roman Apostolic Church, hindering thereby the increase of our Catholicque
faith, besides giving occasion to infidells and hereticques, by not seeing the
Catholicque forces united, to invade their kingdoms and territories.

This consideration is accompanied with another fit for Kings, Princes and
Governors, A consideration for Kings.
often to lay before their eyes, which is that our Lord cannot be better
served then in time of peace, nor contrariwise more offended then in war. A
matter which with my self oftentimes meditating, has made me to know how
artificially the devil has practiced to make Kings believe, that it best
beseems their greatness and power to make war upon credit, persuading them
how easily by that course they may undertake many, whereby increases sins
and offenses when the soldier is left unpaid. A point which spoyleth
Generals and Heads of Armies, causing them clean to losen the rain of
obedience and good discipline, in yielding liberty to extortions, robberies,
forces, and mutines, which is to multiply sins besides those which a war
necessarily draws with it, through the freedom, which they give to such as
follow them.

In case that such differences among Kings and catholic Potentates shall fall
out between any Princes about whom Y.H. shall hold any resident Ambassador, A
point to be observed by Ambassadors.
he is to observe, acquainting himself with the demaundes and answers the
treaties, if the Ambassador run not only a course for manage of his affairs,
but be besides a souldior of courage: for that question being of matters out
of which breach of arms is likely to arise, it is very convenient they should
pass through the hands of such, as will not be moved with ambiguous speches,
which Princes and their ministers use in like occasions to advantage their
party and negotiation, nor yet with the demonstrations which they make of the
leauies of men, to countenance themselves with, esteeming it the surest
foundation they have. And likewise if he have followed the wars, that he be
able to balance matters in such a manner, as he may advise Y.H. at an inch, of
all such preuentions as are fit to be used, and not to abridge him in the end
of his instructions, without sending speedily unto him, which only serves to
leauie men to your expense and hinderance. Neither must he yield credit too
much to the fair words given him (when by works they are not confirmed)
least Y.H. grow careless, and at such time as necessity shall require stand
unprovided: In respect whereof Y.H. is to give order (your Ambassador not being
such a one as has followed the wars) that some such as has, may be sent in
his company, to assist him jointly in this his negotiation, seeking if it
shal-bee necessary, otherwise to color him, whereof there will never be cause
wanting among Kings, nor to withdraw an Ambassador, when matters shall afford
to be handled, but in the hands of one, all such as by conjecture are to
entreat of their affairs well having to understand, that by no means they
bind their King, or make show of his power and force, if it be not that
occasion require it, whereby they preserve reputation, whose foundation is
works not words, with which is very small maintenance. Quality incident to
kings.
And for that it is a quality incident to Kings, that they cannot be forced
either to affect or dislike, and so not to suffer themselves oftentimes to be
persuaded to that which is convenient for them, thereby running headlong into
all sorts of miseries which may be seen, Y.H. must lend ears of obedience
to the Surely men of rare judgment, and profitable to the k. service, if their
manor and success of councels be looked into
Divines, who are to approve whether your cause be just or no, so that they
be such personages for their much learning and example of life, as Y.H. is to
choose for the resolution of a matter of so great moment, it being one of the
greatest pledges of a Kings wisdom to be able to know such among his vassalls
and servants as may be fittest for him to harken to their judgment and
opinion, according to such matters as they know, and profession which they
have made therein.

Y.H. is in like sort to give hearing, void of passion to your Councillors
of Cape and sword, when they shall represent unto you, that for the defense of
your Kingdoms (an estimation of greatness and reputation) it is requisite to
take arms, without leaving only to your own opinion, carried with the heat of
age and greatness of mind, which is to be thought God gave unto Kings the day
when he sent them into the world with like vocation, for that the only term
of their bringing up could not be sufficient to enlarge them, or to make them
confidently embrace some glorious enterprise or other, notwitsta^ding that it
carry multitudes of difficulties therewith.

Y.H. standing fully assured by the Divines, that your demand is just,
according to the law of God and man, and that it is wisdom to mainteyne it
by arms and strong hand, may then under those two points hope for a good
succor and victory, and evil in any other sort. But say that God has
granted victory to many, which have unjustly fought, it has bin through his
secret judgments, and as far as man's reason may co^ceyue, to serve himself of
them, as of a scourge, chastning those which forget to serve him, and to
glorify him, in paiement of benefits received, such as to bestow the light
of faith, knowledge of his invincible verity, and promise of the greatness of
rewards, which may be expected of his bountiful and powerful hand, to all
those which keep his commandments, How much more are you which know this,
and do contrary, to be beaten etc.
which for no cause in the earth ought to be broke, how much more then to be
observed in war, being a flashe of lightning of our Lords wrath, and the
charge not able to be expressed, which a King takes upon himself if he make
it for any other motive or end, then the pure honor and glory of God, What
obligation Kings do enter into.
defense of his Kingdoms, and conservation in them of our holy Catholicque
faith, fulfillinge in this the obligation which God has laid upon them, that
those souls should not be lost, over whom he has made them (Caudillo) your
self by this acknowledges the Supremacy which Kings under God hold in the
church.
Captains on the earth, and administrators of his Justice, which is not enough,
although they have all they can desire in the world, to make Kings know when a
war shall end, though they stand sure of the beginning thereof. I do not
leave to know that I have bin tedious in the points which I have touched, but
the greatness of the profit which may be taken out thereof, will make me
blameles with Y. H. Christian piety being as great a pledge and assurance of
our actions in this life, as is in buildinges the firmenes of a sure foundation.

Y.H. standing resolved to take arms, making wars by land or sea, it must
of force be offensive or defensive, Two manors of war
being the two blankes for all warlicke eyes to aim at, leaving the one for
the other, as occasions and successes of times, which draw with them the
inconstancy of matters of this life, shall afoord. The first thing which Y.H.
is to look unto, is to command your Councellers and officers of your
excheker, that they certify you the estate thereof, what ready money you
have, and the places where your rentes be to be paid, to know if it be
possible (necessity so requiring it) how you may take them up A Councelor at
wars in Spain, and an Ambassador of sundry employmentes, settinge this down
for advise to his Prince, belike believes not over much in the Indian treasure.
before hand: consigning them to Merchants: the means which may be to raise a
greater sum, without greeuing your subjects, so as the Countries be able with
their substance, and they with their wealth, to do greater service to their
Prince then ordinary; for which Y.H. is to yield many thanks to our Lord,
holding yours so affectionate, and your kingdoms and estates so More barenes
then in the kingdo^s which the k. of Castill does hold by right, ca^ hardly
be found in Europe, or few or soldados de pecho at his own home.
fruitful, and powerful, as that you need not stand in fear of what other
kings do, in respect of the barenes and poverty of their lands, who comfort
them selves, that they are only able to defend at home their own houses if
they be sought out, and live in the same scantnes, in which they were first
nourished, Belike somewhat sticks in your mawe, since you solemnly gave
thanks to our Lady and saint Christo in nostre Dame church in Paris, for a
mistaken victory 1588. and shameless untruth told by you to the late worthy
K. H. 3. who bid you return again the next day, without yielding any credit
to the report,
babtizing it for a greatness, if they can hold a title to have preserved them
selves a while.

Of all the means and expedients which Princes have to furnish themselves with
money, I find none in my judgment of more efficacy, or mildness, then to have
held before a form of gouuernement in such sort, as for pure honor, and
opinion thereof, the vassals may be brought to spend their wealth in the
service of their prince, and not altogether upon their own profit. Because
men, to attain to that, will naturally pluck out their own bowels, and will
not adve^ture themselves in the other, except they may see a present gain
before their eyes, for that honor stirs them up to a kind of envy, and
Competitorship one against an other, who shall attain to it, and so does
little or nothing at all profit. This will be compassed with greater facility,
if you do but mark that the care is not less which men take in getting of
wealth, then it is in studying to employ it as soon as it is gotten. In
respect of which it were to be wished, the old custom might be kept, a
matter of great estimation, that subjects in their provinces should be drawn to
employe the substance of their wealth, in that which might prove geatest
service to the Prince, and benefit of the public weal of the Realm, as that
such as have where with, should find armor, men, and horse: accustoming them
selves in the exercise thereof, out of which there redoundeth a greater
interest to the co^seruation of the state, then out of rich furniture, and
movables.

A Princes greatness, to have their subjects trained and furnished for the wars.
Albeit sundry are of opinion, that it may breed much inconvenience to
Princes, to train their vassalls in readiness of war: I answer, that if
they be loyal, it is a much more greatness and power in Princes, to command
over such subjects, other Princes and Potentates standing in fear of the like
quality, and when God shall withdraw his hand, and blind them for their
sins, not to become such, yet traitors leave not to be powerful, albeit they
be not armed, able to force if altogether agree in the same attempt, A right
Spanish similie, out of their theorique and practice derived.
As in a monastery where are thirty Friars, and one Warden or Prior, albeit
they have not Harquebuzes, Caliuers, or pykes, yet as often as they will join
together, or the mayor part of them, to force their superior, that he bind
them not to go to matynes, or deliver the^ the key of the gate, they will be
able to execute it, without being any impediment at all unto them their being
unarmed. But if kings administer justice to their vassalls, preserving them in
reast and quiet, Security of Princes, and liberty of vassalls.
this is the greatest security that can arise to princes, and liberty to
vassalls, whereby no change can be occasioned among the well disposed, the
contrary being ordinarily coueted by all the rest, which are not contented
with their own estate.

Whereas I have touched arms and horses, Consideration for augmentation of
things, according to the quality of the kingdom.
I mean it not as a general rule in all provinces, for that in each one the
quality thereof is to be considered, and what the inclination of the people
and common wealth requires most, and in this sort it shall be fit in some one
to increase nauigatio^, if they be provinces bordering on the sea cost,
occupation, traficke, and trade of merchandise in other: and in other
husbandry and herds of cattle. Whereby the prince may be able to keep his
ordinary garrisons and men of war, with the pay and entertaynement, arising
out of the rentes thereof. And the people of the province thorough their
occupations in being set aworke in some of these things, shall thereby augment
their substance in particular, which is to mainteyne a public and general,
besides that thereby redoundeth a great riches unto princes when their
vassalls be thus possessed. Point of government.
Of whom if they be to require extraordinary services, they must look that
they raise it out of that which each city or province has in most abundance:
because not feelinge the want thereof so much as of other things, it will be
granted with much more will and readiness.

Y.H. is to take great heed, How much ready money imports.
that you be well assured of a good bank of money, being that which gives
moving to arms and feats of war, as sinowes do to living bodies: whereby
such as hold much brawne and flesh, are accounted sluggie, and slothful, and
contrariewise the sinewie ones most light and nimble, whereupon the old
auncientes were wont to say, Why money is called the sinewe of war.
El dinero el nieruo de la guerra, which continual experience proves: as
albeit we see at home multitudes of people which joined together, will make the
body of an army, yet when of force they must be divided to use them abroad, in
a moment they dissolve, except there be money ready, without being possible to
unite them again together, their force otherwise being only in appearance,
and in effect nothing. This makes me say, that the last crown will always be
the co^queror, because he which has money to pay, will always be able to hold
together his Army: his soldiers being in such sort thereby relieved, is that
only which so easily brings to pass good succes, and enterprises, how
soever the undertaking of them out of season may breed difficulty. A point
which binds to frame your forces according to your money, as often as you
shall have occasion to war with them, and to think that kings in theirs are
limited, how powerful so ever they be, and God only without.

Y.H. holding your provision of money assuredly in readiness to pay your men,
which I think will be sufficient, having ever one years levy (in which time a
princes force in wars may very well be perceived) must join thereunto your
General, Captains, and Councelours, such as may be soldiers, Who are to
manage matters of war.
without suffering this matter to be managed by any other, then such as has
followed the wars, moved with this reason, which is, that how considerate,
skillful, or wise soever a man be, if he would have a pair of hose made him of
Karsey, he will not go about to cut it, until the Tailor come and brings
his sheres, because it is his office to cut out the stuff with least wast: so
as well in war, for want of some little matter of money, there may depend a no
less consequence thereof a kingdom, men, honor, and life of all.

And albeit that most persons will talk of war, although they never practiced
it, I find no better reason so fit to excuse them, as that the exercise of it
is only proper to me^, who think they degenerate out of their kind, except
they be able to discourse thereof: which first occasioned the proverb, how
Arms bred Nobility, as peace sciences, Arms bred nobility.
remembering the mariadge between Jupiter Savior, Mariadg of Jupiter Savior.
and Pitarchia, which signifies obedience, out of which match Felicity was
borne, as out of the mother of Mars, were Ignorance, Famine, and Pestilence,
which were given to him for sisters.

For that it is requisite in all things, The councelors are to be made
acquainted with the motive of the war.
first to set down the principal end, and afterward the means which makes
it feazable to be attained, which can hardly be done without the knowledge
thereof, first, Y.H. is to signify unto those personages, which I have
mocioned, the disseyne which you purpose, for your taking arms by sea or
land: commanding them to advise of the number of your ships, artillery,
munition, foot and horse, which you are to press out of your aids and
garrisons, or to leauy a new for the co^positio^ of your Army: which before
they frame or lodge, they are to set down in common the considerations, which
they suppose necessary (according to the manner of the wars) to do it with
more exquisitnes, being able with them, as general rules, to come more
distinctly to entreat of what is fit particularly to be handled, as cause
shall be offered, and the present time require.

Y.H. going about to conquer General considerations for to move war.
a kingdom, state, country, or part of any such, which is the Better teach
him by clemency and piety to recover such his graundfathers territories as
his father has lost, before he ouerbusie himself with other.
most secure war for Princes, being voluntary, and not of force as a
defensive is, Especially where treasure is still exhasted upon false alaromes,
which proves only action and charge to defendants to prevent what was never
meant, of which none can have greater proof then her sacred Maje. whose
powerful generals found 6000. of your Galla^ts at your own home but Galinas.
giving respite for your provisions to be made in time, and laid in at the best
season, is to be held a natural matter in all sort of men, how much more, in
kings the desire of a conquest, which a Prince undertaking, is worthy of much
commendation, though not to be reprehended, if he attempt not like enterprises,
for many reasons which they ordinarily have, wherewith to be able to excuse
them selves: when a conquest is undertaken without convenient force to perform
it, not only the people blames him, but he commits besides sundry errors
which causes great inconveniences, As to your cost your experience of 1588.
tried: when the council of Pedro de Valdes was of more credit, then the
Marquise of Santacruz.
and who so cou^celleth him thereto under color to make him more powerful,
procures his ruin, and that counsel is a prince to hold suspicious, where
the conquest is not accommodated to the proportion of his forces, which although
he hold great, such as the season and time may think convenient for the
entreprise, yet is it to be considered, whether it be fitter to move war to
another king, or to stay until he break first, comparing the enemies forces
with his own, and whether it be better to have many join in league with him
in making of the war, or to undertake it alone. Provided that Kings always
carry them selves in like occasions, without being ouerled with their own
liking and passion, which seldom times counselors can temper, besides that
when for their own sake they will not tell any lies unto their prince, yet
will they all shun to discontent him, every one moved with care of him self,
which causes many truths to be kept silent. Moreover they must consider the
quality of the kingdom which you attempt, what is the temperature, climate,
and distance thereof, whether mountaynous or plain, dry or many rivers and
woods, fertile, abundant, well peopled, or not: any store of towns, or Cities:
whether those they have be compassed about with any better defense then
ordinary walls, which they call Casamuros, what Of sundry English subjects
(before they knew you of good worth and virtue) have you ben cause of cast
away, thorough your exquisitnes of traitorous espials and practices whose blood
will one day lie heavy on your soul, when no mortuary nor dirge shall or can
help you.
entries or havens they have able to land an host or army, with great
exquisitenes still searchinge out the disposition thereof: and whether they be
fortified: in what manner, whether only the crabbednes of the stite bread,
difficulty, or sterilitie of the country about (a means which some have used
to stopp invasions into their kingdoms and Provinces, not manuring the
frontieres thereof, but making them lie wast) whether it be a nation given to
war, able to endure all kind of labor, or lovers of their own ease and
quiet, which many times the composition of their bodies may occasion, for the
small vigor is in them, enclining of them selves to ease, other through their
evil education living in ydelnes: whether they hold military form in
general, or some garrisons and ordinary bands, of more power in cauallerie or
fanterie, or contrariwise. Likewise, whether they have any quantity of Ships
ready armed for defense thereof: if it be an Yland, or border much along the
sea cost: whether the government thereof be carried in form of a Democracie,
which is, Definicion of Democracie. Aristocracie
when all the people in common, or the mayor part of them hold souueraingtie
and command, or Aristocracie, when a lesser part of the people hold of one
body within it self empire, and power, giving laws to the more sort of the
rest in general, or particular: or Monarchy, which they term Royal Senorie,
the Prince having justly conquered it, Monarchy.
beco^ming Lord of their persons and goods, under which he may be able to
govern them with equity, and yielding unto them liberty, with putting them
in possession and propriety of their goods, from an absolute Lord
establishes then to him self the gouuernement of a Royal Monarchy: whether
the Monarch or king be elective, and if his authority consiste more in the
body and voice of his Prelates, Nobles, and cities of the kingdom, then of his
royal person, not being able to use discipline, enacte laws, or impose
tributes or fynes, without consent of the members of his kingdom, remaining in
the Court: whether it come to him by succession, or gained by mariadge, or
right of inheritance: what the age of the king is in possession: what talent
and parts God has given unto him: how he uses them: what heirs he has,
and whether he bring them up, alowing them a hand in government, or far
from him for suspicion: of what quality his officers be, which he retayneth
about his person to assist him in gouuernement, and how far he yields unto
them: whether he accounte of Soldiers and men of war, for affection he
bears thereunto, or only for necessity, having among them any personages of
experience and valor: whether he be more beloved or feared of his vassalls, in
what sort his rentes arises, the sum and quantity thereof: whether he be
able to augment them more, if he hold them free or charged with such
assignations as he shall have given or sold upon them: if he be governed by
any Tutor or protector, through the minority of his age, or want of
understanding: whether there be any Governor, either through the kings being
taken prisoner, or for distancie from the state, where the Prince, Governor, or
Captain general resideth: whether that Kingdom or Country be from before
time with other fallen unto him, or since the King or Prince enjoyed it:
whether the leagues he holds be only personal or successiue, to his heirs:
finally, whether the disposition of that kingdom or state be of such a sort,
as draws the bordering Princes, albeit they are not confederate with it, not
to suffer that any more powerful shall enjoy it, for the difficulty and fear
of greatness, looking the more narrowly thereinto, A natural born Prince
always better beloved then a stranger.
for the conservation of their own estate.

Out of these considerations which I have set down, Y. H. may be able to serve
your turn, in co^passing such forces as your army shall need: marking that
always a natural Prince holds a greater pledge of being beloved, then a
stranger, if his extremity of vice do not cause his vassalls to abhor him.
Therefore in the continuance of a long gouuernement, many occasions and causes
of novelty are withdrawn and removed, which the chance of an Empire draws
with it: the one opening the door to the other, as one building the frame and
workmanship of an other: for this cause a conquest is seldom times effected,
without having some intelligence with them of the kingdom or state, being an
enterprise of greatest danger, to enter war within a country, of which you
shall hold no further knowledge then what you must be feign to take by force
and arms: the which extreemely delayeth the proceeding thereof, a matter which
can not be avoided, until you find your self so far within the Country,
as the people for love of their own houses, and impossibility which they see
in maintayning of their wifes and children without them, constrayne them selves
to suffer the yoke, in seeking to please those, which impose it upon the^. And
likewise, the most ordinary way is to entertayne speech before with some who^
you may perceive discontented with the Prince, Causes breeding disco^te^t
toward Kings and Princes.
through his want of understanding, vicious customs, evil gouuernement,
naughty administration of justice, and choice of ministers, which engendereth
partialities: loss of wealth, or covetousness in procuring of it: oppressions
and greeuances without reason, which makes honorable hearts to grow
desperate, resenting more an injury then death, except the fear of God, The
loyalty of subjects admits, of no conditions.
and obligation of a subject (which is not in any wise to admit of any
condition to make him faltar in the loyalty which he owes) restrain them: or
that Kings refrain their appetites and passions, considering it is with their
own subjects.

Besides this, another cause many times stirs up subjects to intend
novelties, You put a good and a fit case for their own home to be instance:
where to your usurped estates a right heir can not be: and to your hereditarie
Su Alteza may not think to run so clear away with that: priests dispensations
being but a mockery to contradict the direct ordinance of Iehoua, according to
your own ce^sure page your Princes like Conies still incestuously
counterlyuinge, with their nearest of tribe and consanguinitie.
and that is when their Prince has no heir, and there be diverse pretendours
to the succession, which some will aspire, making great show of the
sufficiency of their party to obtain it: and other more ambitious, founding
them selves upon the authority and train they carry assay the aid of
neighbor Princes, to be able to possess them selves of the command, under
such profits or Towns as they can offer unto them: diverse likewise are the
readier, finding them selves in necessity, having prodigally wasted their
substance, imagining that through want thereof, they must needs decay in their
credit and opinion, and then necessity so moving them, cover their ambition,
under the title of liberty, under color to remedy the public weal, their
owen particular being their principal end, and to destroy the general, that
with change they may bring their purpose about. Sometimes in like manner it
falls out, that there is either an estate or cities adjoining unto the place
attempted, which albeit they depend not thereon, the evil entreatie they have
received, may make them wish that other might occupy the room, offering
themselves to their aid, which is eftsoons also occasioned through fear, and
a forced good will, for that they are not able to give any impediment
thereunto.

Those persons which Y.H. is to use in this negotiation, for the causes
rehearsed, or any other that may occur, ought to be men of understanding, and
soldiers, albeit they carry no such show, Of What quality persons ought to
be that are employed in conquestes.
to be able to view in the entries and salies of the kingdom, the quality
and commodity of the country, and what for the better assurance of foraine
forces may be found therein, and that they be not to light in believing their
offers, with whom they practice, which commonly brag more then is cause, of
their power, kindred, and account they hold in the kingdom, despising and
setting their own princes at naught: with which they make them believe, to the
end the Prince, by whom they seek to be relieved, should more fervently
embrace the matter, that his desseine may be easily compassed, through the ill
satisfaction of the subjects in general, wherein great difference is to be
made between men desperate, and male content. The first whotly pursue the
ruin of the Prince, endangering to bring it to pass, Difference between
desperate, and malcontent
both substance and life: the other wish innovations, but without hazarding
their own, more satisfying themselves with the present mischief known, then
the future good that is doubtful. In such sort, as both the one, and the
other, serve as tynder for the fire of a civil war, which to the desperate
brings revenge, and increase, and to the malcontents, comoditie and ease,
which quickly makes them to agree with the Prince, when soever he will but
vouchsafe and yield any authority unto them. Notwithstanding that they have
before taken arms, which hardly can be nourished in a kingdom, or a civil
war mainteyned, without great succors of money, and foreign aid, by reason
that you may by negotiation corrupt a kingdom, but not maintain a war
within it, without force of arms, and much celeritie, for that the natural
Prince will with time ever gain to be better followed, strengthening him self
by his own authority and party. It is likewise to be noted in this matter of
malcontents, that they are to be found in all Kingdoms, Provinces, and
Courts of Princes, it being annexed to humane nature, that men are never
satisfied with those things, which our Lord ordayneth, and with the
gouuernement wherewith he guides. And also it is not to be marueyled at, that
they be ordinarily discontented, with what contentement Kings and Princes
carry, being men, albeit in some actions wise and confident, which is occasioned
by the conceit that every one has of him self, bringing him to imagine that
he could gouuerne better then he that is in place, and under this to condemn
the proceeding of any other. And there is another sort of male contents, in not
seeing themselves advanced, and promoted to rule: which though they be many in
a kingdom, and of the principal sort, yet very seldom can they alone be
able to make a sufficient party, for to stir up a civil war therein, with
a foundation, and in manner that it may endure, notwithstanding that another
Prince yield them assistance therein, except the commons and people, as well
estraunge their affection from the Prince, for some cause which may move all
to a general distaste, which is the surest foundation to frame a civil war
upon, and then not only the principal men and great personages, but any one
whosoever that has valor or hardines, may be fit to serve as Aulaquida.
sulfer for the nourishing of a fire of war with facility, through the
disposition of the matter, and detestations which the commons and people
conceive, desirous of Novelties, whereby to better their own estate: with which
it comes to be mainteyned, and to take root in like manner, as storms do in
gulfes, every wind altering them, for being so prone to move them selves,
which is not seen on the land, though they be very boisterous, and furious
for the hardness thereof, and on the sea, in that it is a licquide body, a
small blast swells, and puffs it up, taking a motion in it self, thorough
the quality of the disposition thereof, which being once conceived, the fury
lasts for a long time, albeit the first moouer cease, and the rebellions of
kingdoms in like manner, when they shall be nourished by commons, and the people,
will last many years, though the heads which began them, may happen to fall
and fail. A reason which byndeth very diligently to consider, of what quality
the coffeehouse of a Kingdom or Province may be, whereby a civil war may
the better be mainteyned therein, whether it be occasioned by any matter which
breeds a general offense or no.

In all the provisions or levies of men, Preparations of war are to be
colored always with some contrary end to the true meaning.
which are made for any manner of war, by sea or land, it is ordinarily to
be understood, that they be colored with some different motive, from what is
meant, whereby no time may be given to the enemy to perceive it, by preventing
disseins with the contrary. An advise very necessary, especially in
conquestes, for many respects, not being the least, that albeit that kings
love not to be unsavory to their subjects, thinking that they hold all sorts
of money to content them with, when they please, yet at the very hour that
they discover their disposition to take arms, there is no means nor
negotiatio^, which they will leave vnpractized to reduce them to their train
and affection, the thought hereof, being able to bind them to be more liberal
then grateful, for their victories and services done: A means which brings
them to be reconciled with those, whom before they feared, and to make the
other leave off their treaties with foreign Princes, which before they had,
declaring them selves enemies to them, and assured to their own.

A matter which is fit to be avoided by concealing the causes of suspicion,
What humor ordinarily reigns in the blood royal of Princes.
and that other Kings and Potentates may not link themselves to assist him
which assayleth, carried with an humor, which naturally a Royal blood is
co^pounded of, in waxing fierce against any other King who^ they see grow in
power and force, imagining that that his greatness will ouerwaye the balance,
for that the one came not up without the going down of the other. And by
reason that it is as easy a matter to Princes, to deceive men by their devises
and negotiations which pass by paper, as it is hard in matters of public
actions, It is fit to cover their disseins and preparations, by seeking out of
some notable apparent reasons, and as much as may lie in them to remove such
shadows as are settled in their judgment, which think them selves of greatest
reach, and most pearcing understanding.

Means for Princes to disguise their intended conquestes.
By no better means may this be effected, then in sending upon such occasions
Ambassadors to those Kings, who are most suspected would oppose themselves to
your disseins, plotting with them treatises of new friendships, and good
correspondencie, according to the humor and disposition, in which they shall
find them, lulling them a sleep with such offers as may hold in suspense,
and at the gaze, the more part of the potentates.

I have thought good to signify the premises unto Y. H. for that the desire
of sparing is natural, not only to all sort of people, but to very Princes
and Kings, having most times reasons to lead them thereunto: but Y.H. can
not have a greater vigor, and surer foundation, then to stand continually
prepared, since that in not being so many greater mischiefs, and
inconveniences may ensewe, then by the expense you should be at, and that with
discretion you may suspecte double dealings, though Y.H. for nothing in the
earth would your self mind the same, holding it for a most sure maxim, that
who has weapons and soldiers, preserves friends, and despises him he sees
unarmed, and by consequent, who stands with his sword in his hand, will take
no great liking to content him, whom he sees without, remaining thereby with
great suspecte, and very small security.

Point of gouuernement.
When Y.H. shall have entertained the Princes, and made your provisions and
leauies of men in readiness, and in so good estate, as no time may be given to
the enemy to arm him self further, it shall be fit that speedily among Y.H.
vassalls, in as short time as may be, you resolve of the enterprise you mean
to execute, especially if it be against the infidells, barbarians, people or
nation of the quality as they are at enimitie withal, because that being of
them selves enclyned there unto, they grow enflamed in that sort, as they
embrace the very day it is published with great content and rejoicing, whereby
two things are gained: first, that they stand encouraged thereby to perform
some extraordinary service to Y.H. in hope of the profit and succes shall
ensewe thereof; secondly, most Princes and Potentates shall perceive the
affection which Y.H. vassals carry toward you, with what applause they
perform the service: Notwithstanding that it be done with excessive expense of
Y.H. rentes, and they willing to supply part thereof by diminution of their
own.

When any Prince shall attempt the kingdoms or estates of Y.H. the war is
defensive, Defensive war.
and then the motive is to be respected, for which cause it is moved, if it be
to recover any right, injury, or agreuance, which they think they have
received, or for a common enmities sake, which the infidells and barbarians
hold against all christian Princes, causes which they call extrinsecall, or
outward, for the destruction of a kingdom: intrinsecall, or inward be such as
I have described, whereof there is no marvel, though some shall happen in any
of Y.H. estates, through fault of your gouuernours, being men as Princes are,
and holdinge comoditie to condescend to their appetites and lusts, thorough
the power of the place, which they occupy: and sometimes, when to give
contentment to their Prince, requiring of them some sum of money, or
assistance of other provisions, they over excessiuely charge the people,
bringing them thorough this oppression, to mutiny, without aduertising the
Prince, what inconvenience may fall unto him, moved thereunto by the pleasure
which they think they do him therein, and imagining more advancement and
greatness to grow unto their own persons thereby.

Three manner of ways to defend.
To defend may be done three manner of ways, in salying to receive the enemy
without the kingdom, or to attend him upon the confines thereof, manuing the
frontiers as the roughnes or straightnes of the ways and difficulty of
passing the Rivers will yield commodity. The third may be likewise in two
fashions, Division of the third manor of defense.
furnishinge with good store of soldiers and munition one or two frontieres
or more, when they may be places well fortified, having within their view all
the rest of the army lodged to be ready upon any good occasion: and the
other, if the frontiers be weak, villages round about, and the field open, is
to choose such a sciete to lodge your army in, as may cherish the frontires, and
renforce with people where you shall fear the enemy, will seek to inuest him
self by the demonstration already declared.

Considerations upon the first manner of defense.
In going forth to seek the enemy, may well be noted a greater courage and
gallantnes in him which attempteth, then which attends, and that ordinarily
the successes of war favor more the inuador then the defendor: being to be
considered in this, that to assail requires more forces, then to be assailed,
or at least, in reason they ought to be equal, having like consideration
between the qualing of a conqueror, and seeing him self come to be sought
out, the one of force constrained to come to hands if he will seek to enter
an others house, and the other to arm in his own defense, as the service
shall require: and in this many are of opinion, that the souldior fights
with greater courage out of his own Country then at home, loosing the
confidence of any other means to escape by, then the valor of his own hands:
Jointly they say, that as the good householder does not take so much care in
ridding them that are vitiouslie given from his house, as in preventing that
they come not at all, nor him to be a wise politician, which only chasteneth
thieves in the common wealth, except he govern in such manner, as they come not
in, so never did wise Prince give place to the enemy to set foot upon his
land. If he had any means to hinder it, or convenient forces to break him
before his entry in.

On the contrary part, it is held a dangerous resolution to go to seek out
the enemy, Reasons for not fighting out of their own country.
except it be holding a sure place of retreat, or an other army upon the
Confines or Frontiers, with which you may be ready to fight the second time:
for that in doing otherwise, it were to endau^ger a whole estate in one
battle, especially when they go not with superior forces, or at the least
equal. Having to consider upon any such occasion, whether the Captain be of
valor and experience to whom the army for the first journey is commended, and
that the Soldiers and men of war be well trained, and such as love the
Captain which guides the^, for that this failing, they will never perform
any matter of worth, nor the Captain, what fashion so ever he carry, except he
hold a confidence and assurance in his Soldiers, for their much obedience,
promising to him self, that they will be as ready to obey what he shall
command, as they likewise stand persuaded of his sufficiency to be able to
gouuerne. Likewise if the person of the Prince remain with a second army
upon the Frontiers with a body of people ready to relieve it, if it should
retire, or to gather up the relics thereof, if there have bin any loss,
turning face to the enemy, which seldom times although he gain a victory,
or route leaves to be broken in his own force, and strength, if the fight
have bin against old soldiers.

In the second manner you are to consider, Consideratio^s for the second manner
of defense.
whether to keep the passages and entries, may be done with few people,
through the strength of the scituatio^, or with so many as it must ask a
principal part of the army, for then comes it to be divided, and
consequently the first forces by the inferioritie hereof remaining broken, and
the passage being lost, it is impossible to fight with the second, or to be
able in a long time to succor the Frontiers or Cities, when the enemy shall
give upon them, maistering the field, and if he chance to seek out that part
of the rest of the army which has remained entiere, there is no other help
left then to stick close to some Town or strong place, to defend it self,
attending succor, if there be any hope thereof, so as the room and place
which they occupy be able to receive it, and to hold victuals, for otherwise
they shall find them selves but in hard estate.

Considerations for the third manor of defense.
The third manner is of a greater security by giving time to time with it,
which is the foundation to preserve, enioyinge the benefit thereof, and may
always be held for such when they suffer not much, causing then no less
damage. Besides that seldom times is any kingdom or estate attempted, which
holds all the entries thereof in such wise as the very scituatio^ by nature
makes the^ hard, but that when they are such, always some intelligence is had
in them, or hope to gain them by some cunning stratageme: and if it be to
invade by Sea, ever to seek out a port or landinge place, where the artillery
of Castells and plotformes may not reach the shipping at the landing of the men
on shore.

Consideratio^s for the first form of the third manner of defense.
It shall be very convenient in the first form of the third manner of defense to
consider, whether the fortification of the places or any of the^ be so well
understood, as that probably they may hope to defend it some months: what
number of people such frontire is capable of, holding munitions and victuals
for it, for that the muchnes of soldiors is that which mainteyneth places for
many days, albeit they be weak of them selves, and by consequent will
prolonge the defense of a fourth months, if there be a head of valor and
courage to mainteyne it, and Soldiers that conceive the same opinion of him:
with which undoubtedly the enemy must needs spend and weaken his forces,
albeit the besieged consume them not, either in salies, trenches, or bateries,
the time being the greatest enemy that may be to those, which besiege, to whom
in his degree it offreth no less difficulties, prolonging the^ from fight,
then to be besieged, besides thorough pestilence, want of victual, munition,
pay, foul weather, and other successes, he which besieges comes very often
to diminish his forces, the contrary part resting with equality to succor
the place, albeit they before held them selves inferior in number, not
hazarding in consideration hereof, the whole for a part, which ordinarily
falls out when they will succor a place within their own estate, with the
body of an army, a reason which binds to provide in this sort of defense,
for the frontires and towns of soldiors, as if they should not need any after
succors, and yet still to provide a new, as if they were not already provided
for, at the instant that any occasion should be offered.

In the second form of the third manner of defense, Considerat^ons for the 2.
form of the third manor of defense.
it is to be considered wether the situation where the army lies for the
defense of the places and frontires, be in such a disposition, as that one
town may be at hand to releaue an other, and that garrison be put with
co^modite of well knowing the country, and every sort of ways and passages,
with which the enemy may not be so well acquainted, whereby he shall no sooner
give upon the place, then find it furnished with soldiers, and an army at
hand, which may be able to put him to his trompes, and cut off victuals,
causing for the prevention thereof every one to retire into the main, to
break down mills, and bridges over rivers, and to cut down quantities of
trees: acrosse the ways of the woods, to stop them: preuentions which cause
much toil to an army, for that there is few, or none, as it is used now a
days which can carry all necessary commodities with it self, not presupposing
to find some within the Country, and when they shall prevent them but for a
few days, by reason of the barrenes or depopulation of the place, many must
find them selves much annoyed. By this form of defense, and dispersing of the
army alongest the towns and frontires, which is almost all one, whilst that
the enemy consumes himself thorough want of victuals, and other
disco^modities, although he be Master of the field, which causes great
travail to his army, not holding inhabitation wherewith to refreshe it, you
are to consider, that if the Prince which defends himself hold not on his
part the affection of his vassalls, this kind of defense will never come to
any good, for that he shall not be able to place within the towns so many
soldiors, as may command the neighbors, who will be ready to give passage to
the enemy to free them of their oppression, yielding the^ selves as soon as
they shall see him near their Towns: which is to confirm footing to the
Conqueror, an inconvenience which can not be remedied without showing a boldness
with it to resolve to fight, and to lodge so near the enemy, as that the very
thought thereof, may make him not to let go much of his people from their
lodging, looking to fight, and the countries to stand in suspense, without
daring to declare the^ selves, until they see the end of the journey. In
lodging so near, you must always choose out a strong situation: when you can
not, you must by art cause such a one, especially if you be fewer in
cauallerie, or fanterie, the^ the enemy to be able to equal the inferioritie
thereof, with the advantage which a good lodging and situation may yield to
fight, for which there needs no less travail, then the business requires,
which is so hard a matter to emcampe, nor less experience in the general,
being one of the greatest acts that are in war, and which seldom has been
seen.

Y.H. may in like sort, prepare your men in readiness to defend your self, by
preventing such King or common wealth, as you may have war with, or any
suspicion of his breaking with you, and on that part where Y.H. imagines he
may most annoye you, using in this case the mean of diuersion: the enterprise
which you are to execute by sea or land, must be handled with great secrecy
and speed, Considerations in war by way of diuersion.
lest the enemy prevent by gayning the hand: you must in this, respect the
quality of the action, and whether it require more cauallerie then infanterie,
or light foot, which must assure footing where you mean to hinder the enemy,
or upon any service done, to retire them selves.

As well may Y.H. leauie men in assistance of some Prince, Consideration for
making War to assiste a confederate Prince.
with whom you stand confederate: by reason of such league as you hold with
him, which ought to be kept with all precisenes. Y.H. and all Princes being
engaged to keep their faith and word, and contractes made upon trust
thereof, for two considerations: first for that by the law of nature
contractes are to be mainteyned: and secondly, a Prince is to keep his faith
and word, for that it ought to stand as a pledge and inviolable gage, as well
toward subjects as all other manner of persons, well carrying in remembrance
what God signified by the mouth of the Psalmist, saying: Et quae procedunt ex
labijs meis, Psalm. 88.
non faciam irrita. In this nothing more rests to be considered, when the
number of men shall stand limited in the capitulation, then whether such aids
shall be drawn out of the old soldiors and ordinary garrisons of Y.H. or of
men which are to be leauied of new, under experimented Captains.

Y.H. may in like sort imploye your forces for the conservation of any Prince,
or common weal which you hold under your protection, Consideration for making
war being a protector.
albeit the quality of a Protector comprehends not any subjection of his
inferior under him, nor gives any right at all to command, but only a
certain honor and reverence which they owe unto him, which put them selves
under his protection. A matter nothing at all diminishing thereby any authority
of their Soueraintie, not yielding power to the Protector to ouerrule: whereby
it may be gathered, that the Prince which puts him self under protection,
is of less authority, then he which yields tribute: for that in paying
tribute he rests free and exempt, but he which is under protection, has ever
need to be defended: which binds the^ to take greater security on their
part, then the Protector shall need, by reason they are inferior unto him,
and a dangerous matter to admit a protector, except for want thereof he shall be
forced to fall into his enemies hands. In which is to be considered, that a
protector must hold some interest in defending such as fly unto him, and that
for the conservation of his own estate, because in any other sort such
protection will be but of small durance, and many times it falls out, that when
one has yielded him self in protection as to a souerane, he may for some
other particular acknowledge the subjection of a vassal, asking in such case
aid of his Protector, he is bound in double obligation, to defend him:
especially if his person be interessed in the quarrel, honor, and goods, How
still you conclude with your own error, acknowledging hereby the great
injustice you have done her Majesty by having norished and given pencion to so
many English tray terous subjects.
all Ciuilians agreeing, that a Prince can not in reason take into his
protection, any vassal against his Lord, except he have just occasion of
quarrel against him: which requires a good consideration to be had of such as
they take into their protection, for that it draws many inconuenients with
it. If the protection be not just, because all protections and leagues made
with a powerful Prince, carries with it self an obligacion to take arms in
their defense, running the same fortune which they do, except a neutralitie be
specified in the contract, the honor and profit of what is conquered,
remayninge only to the protector a form of capitulation, which is not used in
these times, except it be when the conqueror will give what law he list to
the conquered.

Y.H. may in like manner take arms for the assistance of some Prince, with
whom you do not stand confederate, Consideration for making war in the defense
of the oppressed.
nor hold in your protection, moved only thereunto thorough the injustice
which is don him, and being convenient that he which assayleth so much without
reason, should not make himself more powerful, neighboring to Y.H. estates,
in which is to be respected the quality of the Prince, and his forces, which
defends himself in comparison of him which assayleth, and if there be more
need of caualery or fantery, munitio^ or artillery: if you aid him with men,
they must go well paid, and disciplined, so as they may be able to serve for a
salve to his soar, and not to fester with the insolences and agreeuances
which they shall commit under color of necessity, which causes them no less
hate among the country people where they war, then they bear to their
proclaimed enemies.

No less is it fit that Y.H. arm your self in being prepared to preserve
your vassalls, Consideration for to arm standing neutrall.
having war between two Princes whose kingedomes and estates border upon Y.H.
showing your self neutrall, and that you stand not unfurnished of forces
thorough the suspicion yielded in seeing them two arm, it being a no less
conuenience to prevent an injury, then having received it necessary to
revenge, and this to perform without engaging your self in their wars,
giving assistance to neither, holding for a sure ground that if you do, the
loss will be general, and the fruit of the victory his only who mainteyneth
the quarrel, and your self enforced to proclayme enmity to such a Prince as
never offended you standing neutrall there are ever found occasions and means
to work a peace between the^, gayning honor and thanks of each, besides
preserving your own estate with the ones ruining of the other, for that among
the best judgments it is held that the greatness of a Prince is the
destruction of his neigbours, and his power not able to grow greater the^ by
the weakness of the other Kings, and common wealths, founding their security
by equalling their forces one with the other: And albeit some hold it for good,
that not withstanding they show them selves neutrall, yet secretly to kindle
the fire of a war, in steed of quenching it, as the means to preserve their
own estate, to have the other two Princes by the ears together, it is a
matter which can hardly lie covered, and once being understood, in the end the
two parties, as persons which approved themselves, come to agree to spend
their forces upon the third, whereby he stands most secure, which holds
himself neutrall, mainteyning his own estate, without intermedling in any
sort with the war of his neighbors.

Consideration for making war upon the rebellion of their own subjects.
Occasions may also fall out, upon which Y.H. shall stand in need to levy men,
enabling your self thereby and with taking arms to chastise some sedition or
rebellion of your subjects in which no jot of time is to be lost for many
reasons, not being the weakest, that such Princes, as suffer risings of
Co^munalties, Cities, or Provinces, give example to other to follow the like,
when they see them not armed to punish the^, which if they be, it is a means
to draw those unto their Prince, with better will, which have not declared the^
selves against him, seeing him followed with men, and that he will not suffer
himself to be trodden under: standing assured that he holds more certain
means to reward, then rebels, upon whose party, larger promises do ever
pass, then can be obtained, as well through the violence, with which those
that rise are enforced to proceed in the beginning of their rebellions, as for
the novelties which they must necessarily execute, with much extorsion:
agreeuances which pleases many voluntarily to hear of, when they see
security of arms on their Princes part: jointly the authority of an empire
and rule is more strenghtned by the vigor of forces, which is very dangerous
for you to employe against your own subjects, except in humane reason there
appear a certentie that you shall come to an end by punishing of them, least
you arm the Lion with claws, to hurt his gouuernour, and fight with
disadvantage, with a rouer or pirate, who augme^teth and reenforceth himself
with the damage of the contrary, and gayning of his shipping: sufficient
considerations to move a Prince not to embrue his sword in the blood of his
vassalls, if it be not done with much security, differring it with such secret
means of negotiatio^s, as may be offered to reduce some of the principal heads
of the insurrection, by treaties of grace and pardon, as may move them,
enjoying the benefit of time without suffering things to run so raw, as
that another should thrust himself in, whereby he should be enforced to grant
it, and so find himself neither in state to maintain an offensive war
against the^, nor to come to a peace, without much disadvantage, through the
wrongs received, causing the wound to ulcer by the assistance with other
Princes shall give to mainteyne the rebellion, and by that means weaken the
Princes force, of whose greatness and power they stood in fear, which (how
troublesome it would grow to a Prince) a holy Doctor foreseeing, writes:
Plerumque Rex iustus etiam malorum errores dissimulare nouit, Saint I^do^ lib.
3. Sen^. Cap. 5.
non quod iniquitati eoru^ consentiat, sed quod aptum tempus correctionis
expectet, in quo eorum vitia emendare valeat, vel punire: which ought to be put
in execution after the gayning of a victory, not otherwise: so as the
punishment may seem to be done for a good example and not revenge: albeit the
Barbarians hold it the better part of a victory, to refrain the just fury
of shedding blood, and anger of men, when it falls out between those which
before loved together, although occasion have bin given to the contrary. A
passion which can hardly be cooled in a Prince, except he consider the taste
of revenge to last but few days, and the joy of piety eternally, and so to
accompany justice with clemency, that it be no cruelty, and clemency with
justice, that him self run not into contempt. This binds in the
insurrections of Cities and Provinces, or mutineys of men of war, to punish
such as make the beginning, or first motion, being authors thereof,
pardoning the most part in general, since it is not possible to punish a
multitude. The reasons which I have propounded may be occasion to take arms as
well on Y.H. part as of any other Prince or Potentate. So may there be other
which I write not for being to tedious, and that they are sufficiently
comprehended in the before mentioned, the considerations set down being able
to serve for a rule as well to the one as the other, in resolving what foot or
horse, artillery, or munition is fit to be levied for the compounding of an
army, or fleet of ships, Opinions in forming an army of one only nation
or diverse.
if the service be by Sea: many are of opinion that it were much better to
compounde it of one only nation, then of diverse, in respect of the diversity
of language, and customs, which partly causes confusion upon many
occasions, not only in lodgings, but in fight, whereby arises diversity of
complaints, infecting them selves in such sort as has causes the very loss
of whole armies, and for that ordinarily among those of that quality, are
soldiers which serve only for such pay and pillage, as in particular may
fall out in the war, with either of which wanting, they lay aside the
reputation, good and greatness of the Prince (owing no further fidelity to him
then their service) for their private interest to whom their very Leaders give
assistance, moved with the gain they have in pays and musters, in which they
are greatly interessed, always making such regimentes and leauies of men,
more for respect of profitt, then any affection they carry the Prince. Hence it
does rise that they have often refused to sight, at the very time of
necessity, and gone and served the contrary part, without resenting any whit
at all to have failed in their fidelity not being paid: whereby the enemy
comes to be strengthened, the contrary part remaining more weak.

Likewise seldom times do Kings and general Captains understand so many
languages as to be able to speak to every one in his own: a matter which
naturally makes them affectionate, and wins them to obey with more
readiness, and sooner stirs them up to fight.

On the other side experience has proved great Captains to have combated and
warred years enough with armies of different nations, Reason on the other side.
without ever having had any mutinies or sedition among them, and gained many
victories, and that one nation can hardly accommodate it self without a very
large and continual experience in teaching the ma^nage of such diversity of
arms, as is necessary for soldiers to use at this day in the armies. In this
respect and consideration men of ancient time were of opinion, that those
instruments of war were of much credit and estimation among the most part of
people, as might serve them without any exercise at all before had of them,
and so we see one nation more fit for the readiness of the Harquebus, and other
for the stand and firmenes of the Pike, and better able to endure to go and
march armed: and so by consequent as well in the Cauallerie, better
accommodating them selves with the demi-lance and armor, or Kinds of Buckleres
made in Chyna much used in Italy.
with Tablachinas, and other with very long ones of two headdes, without any
Iackes of mayle or corselettes, and some carrying light horse staves, leading
staves, and Targuettes, and other with Pistolls, or long Petrionells: which
difference of arms is as well required to be considered, as the horses may be
able to bear out therewith in combat best. The very reason which at the first
moved men to invent them, proportioning them according to the fitness of such
horse, as the Province or Climate did breed, affirming jointly, that it is a
very hard matter at this time, to be able to frame an army of one entiere
nation, when it is not for the defense of the same kingdom, upon the invasion
of any stranger, for the diversity of considerations which may therein be
offered. And in particular, whether the Province be so well peopled, as that it
may yield so great a number of men, as is necessary for the maintenance of a
war abroad, the which every day consumes men, and to breed soldiers, it is
necessary to employ youths which have passed sixteen years at the least:
and in case so much people may be drawn out of the Country, The best
composition of one entire nation, if it may be.
and so many men trained among them as is fit for the diversity of arms,
undoubtedly an army of one entiere nation, is much more to be esteemed, which
conform them selves in customs, and language, then of diverse: which ought to
bear part, and all to depend of one self same cause, thereby to be the more
united in their conservation, and by consequent their force of greater vigor.
Of this there are not only probable reasons, but effects, consideringe that
the greatest Empires which have been, have augmented and preserved them selves,
by warring with the Soldiers of their own nation only, with whom they made
an entier body of their army, lodging such of other nations as came to their
aid a part, thereby giving to understand that they depended not of them.

In this case has our Lord made Y.H. so powerful a Prince, as that you
possess kingdoms, and many Provinces, out of which you may form great armies
of one entiere nation or diverse, being all your vassalls, or such countries
assisting you, where you have Coronells in pay for the same effect: and so
may Y.H. choose the party most convenient, according as your general Captains
shall be of opinion, and the form of war may require which you undertake,
and in what Province or state: particularities which will give light to the
resolution of your leauies and places of musters which are to be assigned,
according to their order and security.

Some are of opinion that in those Counsels which Princes hold, for giving of
order to leauie men, Consideration for the not naming of a general
it should be very convenient, the Princes person not being in place present,
not to name any general at all, until all provisions were at an end:
presupposing that there would be found so many persons fit for the same
charge, as that the findinge of any one to be named, would be an occasion for
the more part to backward the service, increasing the other inconveniences
which might be found therein, moved by the competitorshipp which is
naturally found among men of one profession. I will assure Y.H. that this is
a consideration of much moment, and not able to be kept with puntilio, for many
occasions which offer the^ selves, wherein necessarily a Captain must be
declared before the leuies, being the best means for the easy dispatche of
them and the enterprise: and that which is most troublesome to a souldior is,
that the circumstance of every particular case is of that importance, that he
is bound to hold such rules as in general, he may find to guide him by,
worthying him self herein by his own estimation, as the principal part
which a souldior is to observe.

Quality of a General.
All your leuies and preparations being once in a readiness, Y.H. may, if it be
not already done, nominate the general of the enterprise, and the most headdes
of the army, which ought to be soldiors, considering that many have courage
enough to fight, which want wisdom to be able to command, and combat in
the field, it being the greatest matter of importance to be required at a
gouuernours hands, and in particular the Camp master general ought to have
good skill in soulderie, Quality of Campe-maister general.
for that the execution of his office is no ways permissiue to any other
person then a soldior of many years and experience, being the lively voice and
spirit of the general, which he participateth to the army, if he be a
souldior: and in case he be not one, the actions of the Camp master general,
in respect he is so necessary, gives spirit and life to the Generals, in
such sort as he comes to be held a souldior, though in deed he be none. The
which has made me, discoursing upon this matter, to affirm sundry times,
that men may be borne generals, but not Camp masters generals, which is the
second person of the army, since that the General thereof failing, how great
personages so ever carry any other charge, it apperteyneth to the Campe-maister
general to give the word, and likewise to administer civil and criminal
justice throughout the army, in the name of the Prince or his Lieuetenant
general: and to this effect, he holds about him men of learning, and the
great Provost. I speak not of a Camp master general, where there is a
Conestable in an army, that being no office now in use, with like
preheminences as they were wont to have in former times, being more or less in
one Province the^ in an other, Office of Constable.
but in deed the charge of a Constable is a Lieutenant of the Kings person in
peace or war, and in all matters depending thereon within the kingdom.

Men in old time esteemed it sufficient for the war, to have some good
parts in those which commanded, as to guide and order armies, to vanquishe the
enemy, which they perferred before most moral virtues, which ought to be
wished in a Captain to be able with his wisdom, and sharpnes of wit, to
compass such matters, by the help of some natural gifts, as courage,
quicknes, affability, endurance of travailles, and like qualities which hold
affinity with moral virtues, though they be none, and very necessary in the
exercise of war.

I have handled with like precisenes, of what condition the person of the Camp
master general ought to be, by having sundry times considered, that there
seldom happens a general, which is a souldior of experience, albeit that
wisdom and excellent parts, are in no charge more to be desired then in
persons which are to gouuerne armies, for that the matters are innumerable
which they are to provide for, and to command, carrying withal a wavering
common wealth of men upon their shoulders, besides a multitude of accidents,
presenting them selves every moment and variety of cases, upon which they are
to resolve with quicknes and determination. And albeit in all estates,
benefits and graces undeserved, fall out to be prejudicial to those which
receive them, in the charges of wars, it is groaped at with more certainty
then in any other, for the mischief which falls out every moment, when such
a one occupies a charge as knows not what it means, imagining that they
are able to discharge it only through the confidence which they have of
themselves A matter easily confirmed, if you do but consider how great
enterprises many Princes have atcheeued without ever having followed the war,
by means of recommending them, and their armies to such as were soldiors.

If Y.H. disire to hold within your Kingedomes many persons to be able to
serve you, as well for Generals as in other charges of war, Means to make
soldiers.
there cannot be a better means then that which is used in universities to
preserve sciences, and to cause rare men of learning among them: which is, that
notwithstanding the greatest nobility in blood, favor of kindred, riches, or
show of ability, which he can hold that is willing to follow in the
university, the profession of any science, yet can none of these things
pointed out by them selves, or all joined together, be able to make him a
graduate, hastening the courses which are necessary for it, except him self
has held them, and so when he resenteth him self most of his fortune, it is
in bewayling that he studied not years sooner, to be able to enjoy the reward,
and not in that other hold it with less gage and courses then him self, a
matter apparent every day in the soulderie and warrfare which Y.H. holds,
many by favor, and intercession of friends occupying charges which they never
deserved by their experience in the army, or for any service done, causing
such as have to grow desperate in seeing those preferred, and them selves left
out. In such sort as the hope which before served them for reward, imagining
that passing so many years in following an army, they should come to be
capable of the reward, whereof they see them selves defrauded, now fails
them, thorough the favor and negotiation which other hold, and this kind of
singularity being once used, straight follows corruption, which marreth all:
which breeds a hatred in the army, discouraging them in such sort, as the
military discipline comes to be confounded altogether, by altering the
conservation and soundnes thereof: a matter which would breed the like
inconvenience in learning, were it not for the inviolable order of years which
they must needs spend in study, and such courses, since whether they be of
ability or no, to have never so good pledge, they can not be admitted to
degree, before their dew exercises and course be performed. A reason which
might move Y.H. to ordain, that none should be Cabo de Esquadra. There is no
place of Liuetenant in the Spanish Discipline but the ancient direction of the
king is, A nuestors Capitanes y Cabos de esquaedra.
Corporal, before he had served some years under colores, and more for a
Seriant, and by consequent of an Alferez, an Ancient.
Alferes, or Captain, rising from his degree to be a Camp master, Alcayde, A
Captain of a Fort.
Alcayde, or Castillane, with time set down, inviolablie observing the same
order in your warrfare, which Y.H. holds in your estates of foot and horse
of all nations. By this means there will be found many soldiers worthy to
receive charge, being capable of them: since that the Turk by observing this
course, finds them, over whose armies and Provinces we see none put to
command, that has not experience to enable him thereunto. Neither does Y.H.
want subjects of learning within your Kingdoms, for the exercise of such
charges and dignities as are to be administered with them, all men animating
themselves to take pains thorough a certain hope of reward, and since that
virtue accompanied with learning without needing any other manner of gage
rewards it self, in the ecclesiastical state and law, wherein in all ages
their are found very singular men, let Y. H likewise reward valor and
experience in war, and there will never be want of excellent Captains, to
preserve, and augment your Kingdoms and estates, nor of courageous soldiers,
God having given unto Y.H. Provinces in which men of great strenght are bred,
and so great disciplines to make them skillful and obedient.

My meaning is not in writing that these orders are to be observed in warlike
discipline, to set it down with such precisenes, as that I imagined Y.H.
should not be able to dispense as occasions and succes of time should require,
being a thing annexed to the authority of a law giver to be able to alter the
same always, as the common good should require, which is that which first
caused it to be established: but to be done seldom times and that for
service of so great consideration, as the people may come to allow thereof, in
such wise as they may hold it for a good law not to observe the former: Like
unto this was Scipio his answer to the people of Rome, murmuring that
charges, and triumphs were yielded unto him, before he was of years, Tit.
Liu. li. 8 4. Decad. vel lib. 38.
and age sufficient for them: Si vos aetatem meam honoribus vestris anteistis,
and ego honores vestros rebus agendis praecessi.

Means that they steal no pays.
And to the end the Captains of Y H. ordinary companies may not steal pays,
which causes great inconvenience, and when so many do arise as can not be
amplified, the loss of your money being the least to be reckoned among them:
let Y.H. command the pay of your Captains, Officers, and Soldiors to be
increased, in such sort as they may be able to mainteyne themselves, and to
serve you well armed, according to their charge: And this to be done by way of
reward, advantage, or otherwise, framing the increase of pay, according as the
quality of the Province where they reside, the climat thereof, plenty or want
of victuals shall require, making it stand for an honor not to steal pays:
which if they once grow to esteem, not to blot their life in the least point,
they will make less account of wealth, having pay to mainteyne them selves,
and that Captain and Officer to remain diffamed for ever, which shall auow to
have more soldiors then such as in deed follow his colores, a punishment which
will bridle them, and make them loathe to be deseruers of it: and let Y.H. hold
them in estimation, giving honor unto them, without dispising arms, which
doing is the cause of loosing states, as the maintenance thereof is to perserue
them, and the only means to conquer other, according as great Empires have
been, when they have been found unfurnished of arms, ships and soldiors,
like unto great buildings when their propps fail which were many years in
framing, but by like defects marred themselves, and fallen in few months.

And let not Y.H. suffer your self to be persuaded that you shall be able to
make war although you have no experimented Captains, in respect that you are
a most rich Prince, and Lord of so great Kingdoms, in which all sort of
arms and instruments of war can be forged without help from else where, two
things being most certain, as the Castillian proverb goes, El comendado
H(...)nan Nunes en el lib. de lo^ ^a A
Armas y dineros buenas manos quieren: both which require to be put into their
hands which know how to manage them, and hold experience how to exercise them
both to good purpose.

Y.H. having named the general and heads of the army, is to advise with him
and the rest in what manner you are to make your war, in which you are to
harken to, and follow their opinion which offer to execute the counsels more,
then theirs which give them, not being themselves to put any hand thereto, (in
case the resolution be not ouerrash, nor any evident peril therein) since
that both honor and life in their own opinion lying on it, they will look
into it with more open eyes the^ others, with greater affection and will,
putting that in execution which themselves first counceled.

Likewise Y.H. having your leuies and provisions in a readiness, and your army
compounded, is to consider, When instructions ar to be given.
calling in like manner unto you the heads thereof, and the other of your
Council, what proclamations and instructions are fittest to be published, as
well to hold the people in good discipline, as in respect of the publicque
good: and when as the heads of the nations which are in the army have not been
at such your counsels, being better that they were present, you are to
communicate them unto the^, whereby they approving them, may with greater care
procure the accomplishing thereof. This being done, and resolution taken upon
them, Y.H. shall command them to be ordained, and that they be given to the
Prouoste general, that he may cause them to be published in their time, and
that to be done in so many languages, as there are nations in the army, to the
end none may plead ignorance, imposing convenient punishments for those which
break them, commanding them to be executed with all precisenes without the
request or intercession of any hindering it, since that otherwise you shall
never have obedience in war, because that in the heads of armies, softness
and mildness without consideration is more hurtful, then sharpness and rigor
in punishing, and therefore a forbidding or prohibition in matter of laws and
statutes is altogether unprofitable, except a penalty be annexed, and a
penalty but a scarcrow, except it be put in execution: and albeit that the
discipline of war ought to be more severe then the civil or politicque, for
that ordinarily the penalties are loss of hand or life, yet are they not to be
imposed to so many things, as that the rigor of them should come to a bloody
cruelty, but a means whereby the soldiors may stand in awe of the severity
of their Captain, without abhorring him for his cruelty.

When Y.H. shall have in readiness your cauallerie and infantery, munitions,
artillery and necessaries fit for them, and that you have caused them to be
raised for the enterprise, and preciselie known the whole number of the men,
by the musters which have been taken in diverse places, not ouercharging one
country with the whole, Y.H. may in the same respect order their march,
causing it to be done by sundry ways alongest the frontires and confines of
the Kingdom to the place where Y.H. shall hold it most convenient to join
your camp together: provided that you choose the situation thereof in good
ground, Qualities of the first lodging.
with commodity of wood, water, and forage to lodge the army, not being a
matter necessary as then to look into such other particularities as I will
hereafter handle, which are to be required in their lodgings, and that this be
done only with an end to join the army in one body, so as the disposing of
the market place, quarters, and fortification of the whole army, may be able
to serve for view and pattern in these general matters of the rest of the
lodgings, which must be accommodated according to the quality of the
situation, demonstration of the enemy, and manner which you hold in war, the
circular form in lodging, not being of any importance, nor the quadrangle,
triangle, or in length, which is most ordinarily used.

And here you must choose such a Plaza de armas.
market place, as may be large enough to co^teyne all your men in battle,
upon any alarom by day or night, in such sort, as a distance be left between
one squadron and an other, as well of fanterie as cauallerie, that men may
pass commodiouslie, if occasion require, being able with facility to close
one within another, as shall be necessary: near unto the market place, the
quarters are to be appointed, every one setting out their colors in front,
whereby the me^ may with more readiness, gathering them selves together, come
out upon the alarom to form the esquadrons.

Some allow to every colors tenn pace to lodge in frunt, and in depth thirty
or more, according as the companies are of greatness, and of distance from the
front of the colors to the place where they are to stand in squadro^, the
space of thirty or forty paces, and from the front of the squadrons to the
fortificatio^ of the trenches, between fifteen and twenty: considering that
when men come to fight, and close, they occupy far less space and place of
ground, then when the esquadron stands stretched forth: measures which serve
in manner of compass, that the marketplace be not disproportioned, wherein
there is to be considered that when the men shall stand in battle, a
convenient place be left. If necessity require, for any squadron what soever
of Cauallerie or infanterie to pass, between the back of the squadrons and
the front of the quarters, without disordering them selves, entering by the
quarters, nor to cause shunning this inconvenience the rest of the squadrons to
break their own: and likewise that at the front of the squadrons, there be a
space left for a squadro^ of cauallerie or fanterie to pass without altering
the order of the rest, or salying forth of the trenches, and that it be not
so great, as to have thereby the harquebusrie, and pieces of the field to
remain unfurnished, or other which are placed in the trenches or their
trauesses.

Place for the cordegarde.
In this market place where none ought to come to trouble it, the guarde is to
be placed with an ordinary fire some four score paces more or less from the
colors, and in some places I have my self served, where they were feign to
pitche tents to defend the soldiors from terrible coldes and storms, and in
other, from the excessive reflection and heat of the sun.

Quarter for the Princes Tents and battle.
In the midst of the quarters and front of the companies, Y.H. is to piche
your own tents and quarter of your Cordeguarde, which the battle shall
follow, when so ever the bodies of the squadrons shall be assigned for it,
having in the quarter between the passages and pauilions, spacious streates for
the men to repair to the markett place without trouble: and at Y.H. Tents,
there ought to be a toil of canuas round about, in manner of a wall breast
high, and a little diche cast at the foot thereof, which may serve to keep
common passage from near Y.H. Tents, holding the respect that is dew without
appearance of fortification, for that otherwise that would show either fear of
the enemy, or distrust of your own army.

On the one side Y.H. is to lodge the Campe-maister general, and the officers
which follow him, Quarter-maister, Quarter for the Camp-maister general and
vangarde.
as much to say, as the Master which is to assign out the quarters, (who
ought to be a man skillful) Captain of the guydes of spialls, and likewise
other which they call chieftaines of the watch, which signifies the headdes
or principalls of the guardes, and Sentinels of the Camp, who serve to visit
them by day and night, and the whole circuit of the lodging, to report the
state thereof to the Campe-maister general, for that it is impossible for the
Quarter-maister to take so great toil, to whose office the care thereof
apperteyneth, and he to make relation to the Maister-generall, as also to the
great Provost or Captain of the field, to report unto him what is done in
the market of victuals or vivanders. And although it does concern, the
Seriantes, Alferes, Captains and Seriant Mayor, as also sometime the
Campe-maister to ouerlooke at sundry hours of the night, the guardes and
centinells in the part where the colores stand: yet they are not to pass so
far as the Tierces or Regiments of different nations: but to appoint when the
armies are great, the headds of the guardes and Sentinels for that purpose, to
make a round about the circuit of the whole camp, presupposing that they are
able to understand the languages of the nations which are therein, and
diligently to look that guarde be kept. Likewise are the Seriant Majors and
officers to show the place, which the Campe-maister general has assigned for
the Corpse de guardes in the night, not being him self in place to do it,
which is sometimes by putting up a mark, as sticking into the ground some
stake. On that part where the Campe-maister general is lodged, the quarter of
the vauntguarde and Captain is ever wont to follow.

Not far from this quarter, in place most convenient, is the general of the
Artillery to be placed, with the powder, Quarter for the artillery
shot, and other munitions, and the furniture apperteyning, the Captains and
officers of his carge, and the Coronel and Captains of the gastadors or
pioners, which are to be lodged in the same quarter.

Market of victuals.
On the other side of Y.H. Tents, a space is to be left for the markett of
victuals, vivanders, and merchandise, lodging the gran-Provoste in the end
thereof, with the horse and officers that follow him, whose tents is to serve
for a prison: and here ought a place to be raised on high, where justice and
punishment of offenders is to be executed, Quarter for the great Provost.
preventing by the standing thereof so near Y.H. Tents, and with the
assistance of the Provost, that no disorder be committed in the buyings and
sellings, nor force offered to the Vivanders, which is a matter of very great
moment for the conservation of a camp, and to be wary of the concourse of
people, which repair thither from all quarters.

Quarter for the Reregarde.
Next unto the gran Provost his tents, is the Captain of the rereguarde to be
lodged, if any men be appointed for it. I have set down unto Y.H. this
disposing of quarters, in case that the men be divided into vanguarde,
battle, and reregard, and with headdes appointed of purpose to march and
combatt with them, because in reason of war the vantgarde ought to be most
skillful and exercised, and consequently is of force to be the right horn in
stand, or fight. And if they have not been appointed, and that there be
different nations in the army, it is to be considered, that the quarter next
unto Y.H. Tents, is to be given to those whom Y.H. has commanded to take
charge of your person, and the rest to be dispersed, considering that if there
be so many colors of one nation, as that another alone will not by much be
able to equal the^ in number, It shall be good to dispose the quarters in such
sort, as the colores of two nations joined together, may come to equal that
which was superior to every one by it self: whereby they shall stand more
united, and keep the stronger from doing any force to them, which of them
selves are not able to resist: and sometime not having a sufficient number of
colors of one nation, and being willing to mingle them with another to form a
body of a squadro^, they use to lodge them jointly in one quarter, whereby
they may come to know the soldiors, and by a brotherhood the sooner to join
to fight.

Likewise it is very convenient to lodge in several quarters not only the
light horsemen at arms, and Herreruelos.
swart rutters, but the Regiments and Tierces distinctlie, avoiding the
confusion which grows when they stand mingled together.

The quarters of Y.H. being generally appointed of cauallerie, infanterie,
Fortificatio^ of the lodging.
and artellerie which the Quarter-maister is to dispose of, the Camp-maister
general is to view the circuit of the lodging, together with the general of
the artillery, to give order for such fortificatio^ as is necessary, which
many times is done, by putting wagons round about the quarters within the
diches which are made, by raising trenches, where the situation does not
yield easines of breach, high banks, hollow or deep ways which may serve for
defense: a matter which concerns the general of the artillery, with the
gastadors, which in reason should give order to fortify his quarter with a
good dich, leaving convenient places to issue out the wagons, and this to be
done after all the munitions and furniture of artillery is gathered together,
over which an ordinary guard is to be set: provided that the centinells be
Pikes, which are to stand about the wagons of powder, and not harquebusiers:
for the danger which might happen by the fire of the maches to the powder:
which guarde may not permit any person once to come within the quarter, except
he be very well known, nor that any come near the carts of munition,
especially of powder, avoiding the mischief which might chance by the enemies
sending some men in difguised habits, not only to view, but to fire the powder
as some times it has fallen out.

The fortification of the camp, ought to be especially in the entries thereof,
well provided, and in such manner as the men may salie speedlie in ranks, if
occasion require it, and the way by which they fett their water to be very
broad, if their be none within the lodging, assigning some to keep the waters
which they are to drink from being troubled, a particular which is to be
accounted of, as in the cleanlines and neatnes of a camp, especially if they
be to tarry days in one lodging, and that the scituatio^ be not durtie, by
the fall of rayne-water, and to appoint a convenient place in every quarter for
the vivanders which follow it.

Whom the gardes of day and night concerns.
The Serieants Mayor, Commissaries of the light horse, and the rest of the
Officers whom it concerns to know the number of men, which are to keep
watch every one within his charge, ought to come to the Camp master general,
to take order for the colors and standars which are to enterguard that might,
and for the places where they are to set their Corps-de-guarde being men at
arms, swart ruyters, and companies of pykes for the night, and light horse and
harquebusiers by day, to whom apperteyneth the scowts, when it is not so
dangerous to be enforced to reenforce them with pykes, men at arms and swart
rutters. And for the guards of like lodginges, having no suspicion of the
enemy, Y.H. must command that your men travail no more then is fit, to
exercise them in guardes, continuing in the custom thereof: considering that
with ouertyring the men, An army a most tender body.
horses and the rest of the members which an army is co^pounded of, there is
no one body so tender as that is, being formed of such a fashion, as a corrupt
air will soon throw it down, four days hunger, or foul weather,
dissoluinge it, without the enemy ever vsinge sword, which they fear most,
which have not had experience of the rest. And likewise heed is to be taken,
that the armies and men of war be not wearied in their guards and march, more
then necessity requires, to preserve them, and to hold them in exercise. This
division of the guards in the form set down will serve for the lists which
shall be made of the colors, and standarts of the army, dividing the^ into four
parts, whereof one is every night to keep the guarde, and so three still to
rest, which is no great trauail, and exercise sufficient to accustom them to
the field. The guardes are to be set at twielight, Hour of setting the guardes.
withdrawing those which stood all day, to the end no place be given to the
enemy to view the stands of the guardes and centinells, which ordinarily in
these fortified lodgings, requires the distance of a Corp-de-guard to be
thirty paces from the trenches, the centinells being so set as the one may see
the other, not being necessary, except the enemy be at hand to double the^.
The corp-de-gards of the Cauallerie must be without the trenches and
fortification of the camp, and the centinells disposed alongest the ways, and
placed in such manner as none shall be able to pass to the camp without being
perceived, and as well to the sentinels of horse as foot the word is not to be
given until they be set in their stands, whereby none may pass, When the
word is to be given to the sentinels.
enter or go out of the Camp, without order from Y.H. or the word given.

I will not be tedious to handle the manner which the Seriants Mayor and
officers of the Cauallerie must hold in apointing such standers and colors as
are to serve that night for the guard, which are to have warning from the
morning before, because it is a matter which in particular teaches the^,
following the form of a discipline which every nation uses in changing the
centinells, either with sound of drum or without, and to make rounds and
counter-rounds: nor likewise what care the Captains, Lieuetenants and Alpheres
of cauallerie are to take in viewing, as soon as the standarts are lodged, the
way which is from their quarter to the market place, that upon any alarom by
day or night, they may repair readily thither, every souldior to the standard
which is to guide him.

Publishing of orders.
In this lodging Y.H. is to command that those orders which you shall have set
down be published, which is to be done by the gran Provost, Kings at arms,
Trompets, drums, and Atabales, made of brass like a round kettel, without a
hail, with two ha^dles, the ancientest kind of instrument which Spain uses
and is used in solemn feasts as we do Hoboies.
instruments, and that throughout the places most convenient as the market
place and victuallers, and distinctlie in all the quarters.

Jointly Y.H. is to command your council to debate whether it be fit to
take a general muster of the army, or a particular in every regiment,
standard or nation: a matter to be resolved of if it be well considered,
whether it be necessary to make aparance and demonstration of the army, or to
cover the number of your men, and power though it be very great.

They are likewise to consulte in what form the battle is to be set, guyding
themselves in this by the lystes of the musters of cauallerie and fanterie,
Consideration of the number of squadrons which are to be formed.
to form the squadrons which are to serve for the right horn or left,
battle or guarde of the artillery: a matter in which you can not further
particularise (when the case and occasions are not present) then in considering
the quality of the cornets of cauallerie, and with what sort of arms they
fight, and in the fantarie the number of pykes and harquebusiers: accommodating
to this the squadrons, which shall be well to be framed according to the
situation and disposition which the enemy shall show: which ought to be
considered whether it must be a square of people or ground, of great front, or
in length, with much depth, or of other fashion: A thing which is to be ordered
according to the stand and custom which every nation uses in fight, more in
one sort of squadron and battle formed then in another, the Serieants being
perfect in framing the^, which observe certain measure to make them hold
great front or depth, and that the depth be not more the^ three parts the
number of soldiors which the front of the squadron holds, and those in the
great front the third part of the flank: so as if three score be in front,
twenty ought to be in flank: and if three score in depth, at least twenty in
front, rules by which they shall stand proportioned, and garnishe the flanks
of the shot: and if they draw one or two wings out of it, which is according
as every nation is accustomed to fight, and the situation permits, it is to
be considered, that when you would have a squadron to be in all parts
reenforced with equal proportion, you must form a square of men; if you will
reenforce the front or rereguarde by putting more soldiers to fight, you must
make a square of ground, and to this end they make the squadrons large in
front and little in flank, coveting to have most men fight in front, holding
confidence in their dexterity, and when there is made a great depth, it is to
the end that the same weight of the squadron might effect a breaking in upon
the enemy, the light horse fighting in troops, men at arms and swart rutters
in ranks, and the Gynettes, which albeit they keep in ranks, yet joined with
the foot upon the charge in gross: the men and squadrons for a battle,
being to be disposed, Correspondencie between an army and man's body.
with like correspondencie, as the members in the body of a man proportion the
arms which are at this day used in armies like unto them, the feet and hands
being the harquebusiers on horse, the legs and arms the light horse, the
thighs the men at arms, the squadrons of infanterie the breasts, the head,
the Prince or general, and the belly the bagage. And if you would set forth
the body of a man to most show, the ground being well looked into where his
feet stand, the members may be so disposed as he shall seem greater: By
consequent, if one man come to fight with an other, he will first set his right
foot forward, stretching out his right arm, turning sidelong his body to
cover the rest of his members, showing less mark to be hitt, but if he be
disposed to wrastell with an other, he then seeks to help him self with all
his members equally, being to graple with the enemy, and to serve his turn
by them, uniting in that standing his whole force, to labor at one instant: The
like is to be done in setting an army in battle, and if it be for
representation to give it form according to the situation, and to the
squadrons, so as they may seem greater, but if it be to attempt the enemy,
then to do it with harquebuzes on horseback, light horse, foot men, and
some slight horse, beginning the skirmish with discretion, that when they come
with greater liuelines to join, they do not so hastily charge as to be feign
to come to close with the rest of the squadrons, which if they be forced to
do, and to give battle, then to dispose it so, as all may fight at once, and
every man graple with an other of the enemy, when the battle serves for it.

The circumstances above written are to give law unto Y.H. for the forming of
those squadrons, of which the battle is compounded, and having lances and
argoletiers in the army, it is a very good way to mingle them, to put in the
left flank of the lances, a Cornet of swart Rutters, which comes to serve as
a winge: the which is to join a little before the lances, Form of fight in
company of swart rutters.
that their company may serve for some profit and purpose, and that the
pistoliers do as much, giving their voley, as they use to charge when they are
in form of a half moon.

It is held as well for a good order of battle, to draw to the right side
of the squadrons, Manner of fight upon a day of battle.
a troop of pykes and lances, containing a fifth part of the squadron to set
upon the flank of the enemy at the time of close: who if he turn front to
the troop, leaves the flank to the squadron, and if he front with it,
forcibly he must discover his side to the troop. A practice which hitherto I
have not known used in the fight of the infanterie, and which my self have
done upon a day of service in the cauallerie, disposing the squadrons of light
horse which were under my charge in this manner, and found it by experience of
much effect for that which these troops performed, when not being five and
twenty horse at the chocke with the enemies squadrons, it pleased God that we
brake them, giving the victory to the King our Lord, Y.H. father. Jointly we
find by experience in this occasion, of how much more worth lances are in
fight, Form of fightinge with ^war^^ rutters.
then pistoleteres, and the manner with which they are to combat with swarte
ruyters: The squadrons of lances may not exceed one hundred, or one hundred
and twenty at the most, albeit they be to set upon a squadron of four or
five hundred argoleteres, and of this number to make many, dividing the
lances, and to charge with fury, which is that which soonest puts the
swarte Rutters to flight, in that the pistolls be but of very small service
mingled with them. So they use to have one or two squadrons volante, Squadron
volante.
and that to uphold a skirmishe in gross, mainteyning it with purpose to
allure the enemy to fight, and to prevent any charge shall be made with
multitude of horse, being superior to them in shot and cauallerie which
accompany them, able with a squadron volante to succor with such dexterity
as shall never need to put in danger the rest of the battle.

When Y.H. holds the squadrons divided and plotted out by those of your
council, in one, two, or more forms in which they may be set in battle,
standing therewith prepared to compound it according to the demonstration of
the enemy, and situation, with greater readiness and facility, you must
command them to advise in what sort they will divide the army to march, and
the manner in which the war is to be made, whether according to the motive of
Y.H. and end of the journey it be to be done in resting in a place, or
encamping.

Of these and other things noted, Y.H. is to command that in way of
conversation they treat of them, with some particular headdes of the army,
which be personages of experience and discourse, and charge them to do the
like with the old soldiors, of whose judgment and reasoning they may hold
some satisfaction, for that they know what they speak: because many times
matters of importance come to be moved, on which councillors do not putt
their eyes, being clogged with businesses, which does not give them leave to
think thoroughlie of matters, nor to be able thereby to direct them, not being
possible for a man to consider all things which is required for the guyding of
one well, and that it greatly furthereth, though it be much considered of, to
hear the opinions of many, to resolve of what is best: a point which binds
Kings to hold Counselors about them, affirming to those which are most
confident, that Princes in their particulars of war, are to hear all, and
resolve with few.

That Y.H. may take resolution in marching and lodging as may fall out, notice
must generally be had from the information of the natural men of the
Country, or those which have lived in it, or by descriptions of Cards and
Mappes, which is fit Kings should have, although it cost them much money: and
albeit upon entering into the country, some defectes may be found in them, yet
are they profitable for many considerations. The light which is to be taken
out of these things, is not of that sort as that Y.H. should put so great
confidence in them, as not to send before men practiced to view the lodging,
ways, and quality of the Country. Advise for those which go to discover the
lodging.
And in case that for want of carrying sufficient number with them, the enemy
should charge them, without giving them respit to discover or view far within
the Country, yet they are to go with carrying such an eye, as to consider in
the little or nothing which they pass, whether there be any place fit for to
lodge in, or no.

In conquestes you must always have a care to get some town, assuring thereby
your setting foot within the Province, and to be able to have a secure place
to draw together the sick and hurt men, and others cumbers of munition, which
can hardly be done in the spaciousnes of a field, which consumes multitudes
of horse, and disturb any succors which come to reenforce the army.

To these considerations may be added the reputation which is gained by taking
of a town, weakening thereby the enemy and his train, who stands as much
endamaged as the contrary part profited, all which requires that in
endeavoring a conquest, you first seek out, and be able to seat your self in
some place which may be of profit, when there is no capital town within the
Province, upon the giving up of which you may with reason promise the rendering
of the rest, or else to combat with the enemies army: particularities which
ought to be looked into with the first, leaving the rest to be regarded after:
when there are few me^, Form of dividing an army for their march
the army is in their march to be divided into two parts, to wit, the
vantguarde and rereguard, and ordinarily if there be a number of squadrons
into three, forming a battle with part, which may hold equal proportion
with the vantguarde and rereguarde, whereby it comes to be a mean without
participating of the two extremes, and a proportioned body thorough the
equality which every one caryeth by himself to be joined together. In which
Y.H. is to mark, that to divide an army into these parts, ought to be meant
only of the infanterie, which in deed is the very strength of the field, The
infanterie the strength of an army.
in respect that the force stands more united in the footmen then in the
horse, because that they move by reason, and horses by the spurrs, and held
back by the bridle, and both the one and the other can not be alike in all,
as in men which have discretion.

The pike in the infanterie, and lau^ce in the cauallerie of greatest
estimation.
And albeit that in old time the cauallerie was of more estimation for their
fury and redines then the infanterie, experience comes to discover the
contrary, and to put the ground of a war in the squadrons of fanterie, which
serve with pykes, to which the first place is to be yielded in arms as to the
lance in horsemen: albeit some soldiors of late years would prefer
pistoliers, which grew thorough the impossibility of carrying lances which
they saw in those against whom they were enforced to mainteyne war, To cover
this relying upon the sharpenes of their wits, they persuaded with apparent
reasons that pistolls were of most advantage for the soldiers, who were
easily carried away with the belief thereof, in that they found the lance a
weapon of much trouble and charge, and the pistol not so much. Among other
their reasons, that of greatest force is, that pistolls may do greater hurt,
and further of then lances, upon a first charge carrying one in the right
hand, and a sword drawn with the hilte fastened to the thumb in the left,
which holds the rain, ready to use upon the discharge of the pistol, being
put in the case, except it be fit to pull out the other, which is in that
form, which those of this opinion would have the cauallerie to fight in, and
to be armed at the proof: whereby they do affirm, that they come more
securely to mingle with the enemy, and to annoye him more, carrying swords in
their hands: for these reasons they may be satisfied, that in the first
charge, lances are mingled with harquebusiers on horse, which annoyeth further
off then the pistol, and in coming to the shocke, the lance hurts with a
more certeintie then it following after wards the fury of the horse which
runs the^ over and over, and seldom times do they fail two encounters
with the lance, although it be brook in the first, and many times thrice, not
being the worst that which is left of the great end of the staff, or
truncheon, since with an encounter therewith a man may be vnhorste and thrown
down, in such sort as it may well abide two encounters, if not three. These
encounters being made, the pistol still remains with the light horse, which
most carry at the saddle pummell, in steed of a mace or fawchion which they
were wont to hang thereat, and the tucke or sword at the girdle, which is no
less ready then if it were in the rain hand, where it must needs be a
trouble for him which gouuerneth the horse. Besides a pistol can not be shot
off face to face without hurting a man's own horse, and to discharge it
behind, is to hit by chance, which if you will be sure to do, you must leuel
on your right side or left: whereby undoubtedly you give upon the flank of
the enemy, which is no small advantage. I signify this opinion unto Y.H. for
that by no manner of means you must permit your horse to leave lances, since,
if no other reason were to persuade it, the very custom which all nations
have used many ages to make their horsemen carry them, and continued it ever
since the inve^tion of powder has bin found, and made good proof of their
violence, is a sufficient demonstration, that it is the best arms of horsemen,
for this cause the squadrons of Cauallerie, are divided in such manner as a
proportion be kept therein, the men at arms being the strength, and the
squadrons in such sort as they may be able to renforce with them the
vantgarde, or any other part of the army, and to divide them likewise into
three parts, to renforce every part by it self, with the cauallerie and
infanterie.

The handling of conquestes, leads me to signify unto Y.H. before I proceed
to the marching with the army, how earnestly you are to wish, the
undertaking thereof upon the infidells, since finding your self busied with
other wars for the conservation of your kingdoms, you ought every day
instantly to beseech our Lord to ryd you out of the trouble of them, whereby
you may employe the greatness of those forces, which it has pleased him to give
unto you, with so many Crowns, against the enemies of our holy catholic
faith, settinge at liberty the multitude of slaves, which the infidells hold
in hard oppression and captivity: An enterprise worthy of Y.H. and of the
Kings of Spain to busy them selves in, as always your ancestors have done,
increasing (by serving our Lord in this) great proffites to their Crowns: A
matter which moves me jointly to handle the manner which I am acquainted
with, In what manner they ought to march. which undertake conquests upon the
infidels, or in country unpeopled.
how they are to lodge and martch in conquestes upon the infidells. The
Country being unpeopled, in respect of the drienesse thereof, and want of
rivers, will ask that Y.H. bring store of Cauallerie, especially if the
enemies force of his warrfare consist therein, as the Kings of Africa, and
other parts, the better to assure the lodgings, and to fetch water, and to be
able to cover the bagage, munitions, droues, or cariadge of victualles, which
necessarily are to be carried: and when this may not be possible, and that you
are forced to execute the enterprise, it will be fit to make little iourneys,
occupyinge the lodging in no further distance, then that it may find water,
the squadrons well formed, to martche by little and little, in such sort as they
may be at hand one of another: the which will cherishe the small number of
Cauallerie, which is carried, assisted with the wings of the harquebuses and
muskettes, the body of the Army covering the munitions and baggag, which
ought to go close together within it: and in case that the troops of the
enemies cauallerie, set upon the^, with the heat of his harquebusiers on
horseback, they may fray them away with field pieces and instruments,
whereof four may be carried in a wagon, and muskett shot, which will be the
most certain, being able to discharge their voleis more speedily, and with more
nimblenes then the artillery, a muskett reaching much further off then a
harquebus on horseback, although the petronells be never so long which they
carry, coming to loose them selves hereby, without their shot serving to any
effect.

Jointly it is to be noted, warring in Barbary, Form in which the Alarabos
and Africanes fight.
that the Africanes, Alarabes, and Barbarians keep no order in their fight:
only running in troops huddle together for the execution thereof, but we
keep order in defending the enemies on set, and disorder our selves at the
close: the which requires, that no voley of shot be bestowed on them, until
you see them joined together, and to entertayne them in skirmishes with shot of
the artillery, and some muskett, for they are almost all lost, in respect that
these nations do very much scatter them selves in skirmishe, and not to charge
them without a body of formed squadrons. By marching in this form, you shall
have time to fortify the lodging by day, standing with greater security in
the nights, whereby the enemies Cauallerie can hardly break in upon you, and
be able to enlarge your self much, to repose with ease, for that it is not
possible being always on horseback, to be master of the field. This will
give time to put in order at a good hour, the army and baggage to martche
without any impediment of the enemy, standing within view in battle, being
of necessity, except he hold some walled Towns near hand enforced to come
from far of.

In Barbary you must be forced to lodge in such situation as the nature of
the Country affords, near unto the water, without being able to choose any
other more strong: an inconvenience which sometimes our forefathers prevented,
carrying empty sackes, which they filled with sand to fortify the lodgings
withal. Engines to fortify lodgings with.
And because this may fall out in such iourneys as the King our Lord may make
into those parts and provinces, I presented, in the year One thousand five
hundred eighty and four, when I returned from my embassage or rather for your
practices banished.
in England, a form of engine of timber, and certain vices, with which they
might arm in very short space, a caualier of the height of thirty
geometrical feet, and more, and broad of three score foot square, upon
which might stand store of muskett shot, wherewith to defend the lodging,
placing four of these caualeres at the corners thereof: the which will come to
serve as trauesses to keep the entry thereof, and platformes for the field,
being framed of little pieces of timber, which may well be carried upon a beast,
and be not of much cumber and trouble in arming and disarming them, which is
that which makes engines and instruments to be of greatest profit. Of these
tymbers there might be likewise made an other engine, of fifty foot high or
more, which a man might easily go up and down by, discovering the field as
far as the height of the place will give leave, serving as a watch tower to
give the alarom, in case any men come near, perceiving them from far off.

New manner of pieces of artillery.
Jointly I presented to his Majesty, for the effect of the same iourneys, a
sort of pieces of artillery of metal which might cost some forty crowns,
and weigh thirty pou^ds, shooting a bullett of one pound with that fury,
that it would peierce through a brick wall of two foot geometrical thick,
notwithstanding the small weight of the body of the piece, and in respect
thereof the greatness of the diameter of the bullet, and not being heated very
soon, which is as well of moment, being able to put them aborde ships
although they be small, and shooting like slings for their little weight, which
are qualities of very good service.

Likewise I presented to his Majesty, Bridges to pass over rivers
a form of bridges of little pieces of timber, to pass over rivers withal,
which are very easily made up, being strong, and every piece by it self of
that bigness, that it might be carried upon any beast: and the truncheons of
the model being not longer then half a foot geometrical of the bigness of
ones little finger, and three broad, the bridge being five geometrical feet in
depth, a man may very securily pass over it for the strength thereof: whereby
you may imagine what might be done by increasing the proportion of the
Truncheons.

When you find a Country craggie and mountainous the cauallerie will be of
small avail, and the infanterie more profitable, especially if there be good
Harquebusieres among the^, which serve best to fight in a field of the
foresaid conditions, finding in most parts a defense, to be able to discharge
with security.

The most days that Y.H. shall stand in this first lodging, you are to go
out and walk, Fit that the Prince show him self many times to the soldiers.
that the people may of ordinary see you, increasing love in vassalls, when
they shall many times behold the face of their King: and in soldiors a
liuelines, gallantnes and affection, with the sight of their Captain, whose
person and parts every one admireth according to the caractes of his
understanding, and the most his pomp and train: from whence it rises, that
by seeing Kings with that majesty and greatness which they show them selves
withal in public, and composition then of their actions, every vassal
accompteth of him self, moved thereto in that God has given him a king so
powerful, promising to him self to govern and guide his very secret actions
with like discretion and consideration as his public. This makes all men in
common to be able to see things, but very few to have understanding to vnripp
the reason of them: the which causes outward demonstrations to be of greatest
effect when magnificence, and garb gives help unto them.

Y.H. is to go abroad, a little before the guardes be set, to view the
lodging, Much experience in matter of scituations, is gained by seeing of the
guardes enter.
and see them enter in, an hour in which Y.H. may gain much experience in the
knowledge of the scituations, by the reasons which the Campe-maister general,
and headdes of experience shall deliver, which accompany Your Honor in
placing the Corpse de guarde, and the Centinelles more in one part then in an
other, and what is necessary to be marked in the chusinge of them.

And if Your Honor will be a famous Captain, a quality of so great estimation
for any the most powerful Monarche, you must know how to emcampe well,
whence ensues to be able to combatt in season, the head corner stone of a
General for that to fight alone there is none so base as does it not. How to
advantage your self in encamping, Your Ho. shall learn much by being
sometimes present at the choosing out of the lodgings, in hearing upon such
occasion as shall fall out before your own eyes, the opinions of the Camp
master general, and the rest of the Councelours, upon the disposing of them,
what part will serve best for the Cauallerie and fanterie, and the difficulties
which other offer in being fit to change them or no, and to occupy an other
situation.

A matter of which Y.H. albeit you be not present at the instant in the field
with an army, may be able to take a general notice, The end Which is to be
held in hawking and hunting.
by commanding such as accompany you in hawkeninges and huntings, to make
report unto you (if they be soldiers) of the quality of the country, where
it may serve your best turn to assure the infanterie, as also for the
cauallerie to fight, where the artillery may be situated, and the markett
place appointed, discoursing in this manner of the rest of the particularities,
considering that in your recreation of hawking and hunting it be done, to the
end to take knowledge of the field, situation of the stands, and to
preserve in good estate the health of the army, that for any other end then
these two, it is not fit that Kings should consume their time in a matter,
whence there is no more honor to begotten, then that he which guydeth him self
with reason, shall have deceived or hurt a poor beast which is void thereof.
And likewise it is convenient that where Kings take their recreation, it be
done in such things as some profit may arise thereby, for to exercise the
ministry, in which God has placed them, reducing all their actions to this
end.

From this first lodging Yaur Honor is not to depart, before you have joined
together all your men, artillery, munitions, and victuals, being necessary
for the journey: and if it be a conquest, to command that forces be prepared
of new, for to succor the army, since that obteyning good success, you may
fend them away in case it be not necessary to reenforce it, least otherwise
you consume occasions and time, which is a great enemy to armies, and which
finisheth all matters in the world: preventing hereby, if disgrace succeed
that you stand prepared, so as no occasion be given to other Princes, to
invade Y.H. estates, by seeing your forces putt to route, and disarmed, whilst
that the enemy remains gallante, and victorious, which causes reputation to
be lost, and the liuelines and courage of the soldiors to abate, cooling
thereby the faith and affection of the rest of friends and confederates,
whereby most times thorough the spoil made in war, rentes come to be
diminished, things which breed ill success, and loss of reputation.

The day being set down in which Y.H. purposes to dislodge, Order in
dislodging.
you must command that warning be given ouernight to depart: whereby all may
prepare them selves except it be necessary to watch the night, and cover your
departure: giving order then by mouth, must be done without the infanteries
stricking up of any drum, and the Cauallerie sounding their Trumpetts, with a
suddeine Y.H. must command to sound a boat sela, when your men are geathered
together at the morning watch, and then to sound A Cauallo: at which time
there ought to be present in the market place the ca^pe master general,
Quarter master, Captains of guides, and officers of their train. In old
time, the Ca^pe master general, when the army marched, was wont to carry an
ensign, differing in form from the Princes, and the Quarter master a square
ba^ner, to make so many persons the more easily find him out as are to seek
him, and to the Quarter masters banner, the Princes harbengers repair,
personages, and Caualiroes of his Court, and those of the rest of the
Regimentes, and Companies of horse, which they call Furriers. The like is done
now, although without banner, and when there is no suspicion of the enemy,
there is a troop of soldiors given to the Quarter master, to keep the
furriers from runninge abroad to commit disorder.

The Camp master general has for many years since carried no guidon, and in
some armies Princes have allowed him a company of horse, to the end he should
have men still at hand to accompany him, without losing time in sending for
the Cauallerie from their quarters, and to have the infanterie at a moment when
he should require them.

As soon as the greater part of the army is come together within the market
place, the camp master is to give order for the playning of the trenches, and
fortification of the lodging, whereby the men may salie out in squadron with
greater commodity and readiness: and even so do armies use to plane the
trenches when they go to combat with the enemy, giving to understand by like
demonstration, how they contemn the strength of their defenses, in regard of
the valor of their armies. The fortification being explayned, the Campemaister
causes the vangarde to stand from the trenches such a distance as he thinks
fit, making way thereby for the battle and reregarde to march, and for to set
in order the carriage of the artillery, munitions and bagage, a company or
companies of the vangarde salying before, to whom they give guides of the
field, dismissing the curriers which serve to discover, and as a guarde until
they march.

In this time the General of the artillery should go to place it in order,
and the carriage of his train, In what place the artillery is to march.
according to the breadth of the way, helping him self with the gastadors, if
it should be necessary to make planesse: and the grand Provost is to order
likewise the wagons of the victuals and baggage, who is to carry a little
banner for his better guiding, and then the Captains and Barrachiles be
Corporalls of the field.
Corporalls of the Regiments of the field, Terces, and cauallerie, are to
hold their baggage withdrawn by them selves, to salie forth of the lodging.
All the wagons of the train or suite of the artillery ought to be the
first, the vastadors marching with them, without any other being mingled among
those of the munition which ordinarily go in this form, that is to carry
the first carte laden with spades and mattockes, the which What with false
printing and unusual words some trauail is offered to the translat. here he
does use the word A fuste twice in two sundry significations, in which I must
confess mine own ignorance, as also of as many as I could confer with among
the Spaniards themselves: but submitting my self I take the sense to be truly
observed.
pyoners follow, serving to mark out the tracks of the way which they are to
pass, and next the light pieces, and after them the greater, in the block
cariages, being more easily able to be carried so, then in proper carriages,
in which they are enforced to march withal when there is likelihoode of
combatt time being gained thereby, which would be lost in the removing of them
from the block to their wheel cariages. The pieces of artillery are followed
by the Carpenters and smithes carts, and then by those of the powder and
lead, and after with the match: such carts coming after these, as carry
Pikes and Lances: and after, those which carry shot, at whose heels march
the wagons of the General and officers of the artillery, and after them all
the rest of the munitions appertayning to the train of the artillery: and
last of all the wagons of victuals and hospital: and by and by those of Y.H.
with which begins the baguage carrying before Y.H. wagons the ba^ners of the
grand Provost whom the rest are to follow. And when it is necessary to
advance any pieces, for being in suspicion, or doubting a fight, they carry
with them such wagons of shot and powder as is necessary to serve their turn
with.

The artillery and baggage being set in order, and the vangarde, battle, and
reregarde pointed out (which Y.H. is to give warning for over night) the
Sergeant Majors and Commissaries general of the Cauallerie, having taken order
for such place as the men are to hold which are under their charge, dividing
therein such as are to go in vangarde, or rereguarde by their lists, because
none should be agreeued, nor one trauaill more then another, the Campe-maister
general must march with the vangarde, sending corriers before: which are ever
to keep within sight of the vanguarde, gayning the highest places to discover,
and such as are likely for any ambushes, aduertising continually what they
view, being likewise the custom to carry in the vangarde some pieces of
artillery, which must go renforced with more or less cauallerie or
infanterie, according to the quality of the Country, narownes of the ways,
largenes of the field, or suspect which may be had of the enemy on the
vanguarde, rereguarde, or upon the flank: A consideration which causes the
orders to be so diverse which are given for marching, and of those I will write
to Y.H. in common, what I understand is to be noted in general, for that it
is not possible for a soldier to be able to touch all particularities,
although he should write great volumes.

At this time Y.H. must be already on horseback, who are to march with your
guidon and Besides the standart I take that he means such a pensil as the
Deputies of Yrland when they are in the field use to have carried by a Page with
their arms painted thereon,
pensill, which is the standarde, whether all the grandes, Lords and
Caualleries, which serve Y.H. in the battle, are to repair, being their
stand in the armies of Princes and generals, in that it is the place whether
from all parts they are to resort. And albeit this be the fashion of the
war, yet I have been my self in camp where the General has been resolved
to change it, and to march in the vangarde with the vastadors (which was a
strange place to them) which he did in being enforced to go joined to the
enemy, to starve him up, and keep him from possessing any place: And in case
the enemy would seek him out for to fight, thorough his so near
neighborhood, yet was it not possible for him, although he defended him with
an army inferior in number, besides saving much pains and travail thereby:
The Generals place upon a day^ of battle.
an occasion that he would loose no time by remaining in the midst of the
army, from whence he was to part upon any news of the enemies seeking of him
out, to make choice of some convenient place for to fight: the which he
remedied by being in the vangarde, and held by this, and the first
intelligence of the enemies approach, the field well vewed, and situation
where to fight, which he instantly commanded to be fortified, and so his
army had no more to do, then as they came to the stand, to set them selves
in battle, being by this means superior in situation, always to fight with
advantage.

Form to march in an open country.
If the field be large to be able to go from one lodging to an other in
battle, and that the enemy be on such part as you can not be able to
present it unto him for that day, it shall be greater commodity for every
squadron to march by them selves, being able to join together with ease, and
the artillery and baggage upon the flank of the army, where least fear may
be of the enemy, the carriage covering the squadrons which are to go in eight
or ten ranks in front, that they may be with the least, and march with less
trouble, provided that the artillery go on the side of the squadrons, and
some field pieces before, for that in case it should be necessary to better
them, it might be done without annoyance of the rest of the cariages, a
matter which is fit to be prevented by the general thereof.

Such leader as shall be in the vanguarde, must leave behind all, a company of
lances, or harquebusiers on horse, with an experimented Captain, who is to
draw out curriers, which are to march far from his company, or rereguarde,
but not so far as to loose sight thereof, and this to be done in case the
country be plain: and if hilly, then are the curriers to get up to the
highest places, and mountains, to the end the enemy occupy them not: and
from thence to discover the order of the march, retyring them selves in this
sort from mountain to mountain. In case that the enemies follow the army
with a greater troop of men, then the company of curriers and vanguarde, and
that they be enforced to retire them selves more then the situation where they
march requires, or is fit for to discover, the^ the Leader of the rereguarde
shall enforce them to maintain their stands, giving order that they charge
not with greater fury then is necessary, to conserve them without loss of
the march, nor to suffer the watchworde or Alarom to pass, except there be
occasion for it, giving every moment intelligence unto Y.H. how things pass.
And if the enemies strain upon the curriers with such gallantnes and force, as
that they must be constrained to retire as far home as the rereguarde, then
is he to sustain them by turning face, with making a halte, of which he must
advertise Y.H. to the end you may renforce or succor them as necessity shall
require: since it may be so great as putting them selves in battle, they may
come to hande-stroakes, a matter which they are to forbear, except they be
forced thereunto, attending to follow the Camp, which ought to be their end.

When armies march thorough an open country, the enemy (being a Captain of
experience) is wont to send a troop of loose cauallery to mark the order
which they carry, viewing the number of the men by the body of their
squadrons. To attain to this, as soon as they discover the curriers in
vanguarde or rereguarde, they charge the^ with resolution, who must be enforced
being so much inferior to retire them selves, and the enemies horse thereby
approach near the army to take the fuller view thereof. On this occasion if
Y.H. carry a purpose to occupy forcibly any lodging, or passage which may
be of much importance, and not to loose time in marching, you must entertayne
them, by putting squadrons of cauallerie in front, which may skirmish coldlie
with them: whereby the army shall be able to march without annoyance, Y.H. not
holding any particular purpose, and being willing to break upon the horse,
which after the manner of war carry no more succors behind them, then are
discovered being loose men, must command the Cauallerie, which shall stand
nearest hand unto them to close resolutelie, mingling them selves among them:
a matter which you are to give in charge to the captain of those whom they
term Horsemen about the Prince, so called.
Despepitados, because by this means they shall be enforced to entertayne them,
giving time to charge upon them with the rest of the squadrons, which shall
come to better their party, and the enemies horse having none to retire
themselves too, when they shall have done: a matter which the cauallerie does
at pleasure through their much dexterity, though very little time be given unto
them.

To close up the first horse, can not be done without danger, a mischief which
must be reco^pensed with what the enemies undoubtedly may receive, by
entertayning time to mingle with them always when it may be done with readiness
and determination, which is that which Y.H. must order upon like occasions.

Likewise at other times they send some horse to discover, who for not being
of any great number, are to occupy some high place, or mountain, showing
them selves thereon with great front, and so they make a greater appearance of
men then they are in deed, whereby they can not be readily discovered: Advise
to discover horsemen.
A case in which is to be noted, that such as are sent to discover, must look
well to the horse feet, if they can clearelie discern them, for that thereby
may be perceived whether the front be of any thicknes or no, or have any
troop of horse, notwithstanding any show they make. The better to understand
the certain number of horse or fanterie which a squadron may hold more or
less, you must cause them to mark from on high downward, for the^ the form
is discovered of all parts, not making more appearance thereof then is in
deed. Manner of marching through a straight contry.


In marching thorough a straight of any Country, the vanguard must go
renforced with the infanterie, and that according as you hold any suspision
of the enemy in that part, accompanying it with some field pieces, if the
way permit: And in case the enemy be able to charge, you shall as well
reenforce the vanguarde, dividing the battle in such sort, as the Artillery
and baggage be placed in the midst, since it is not of any effect, carrying
in the vanguard and rereguarde field pieces and harquebusiers on horse, or
lances, such as the disposition of the Country shall be capable of, if the way
be so straigth that the cariadge must be feign to go so much in rank, as
hardly the rereguarde can succor the vanguarde, troops of infanterie must
march on the two sides of the baggage, in such sort as they may give hand
one to another, making by this order an easy way for to repair to that part
where most need requires.

It is as well to be considered in this disposition of the Countries, and
straightnes of ways, that other cross the valleys and breaches, where (for
that the enemy may come out of them) for a gulpe of infanterie to make halte,
to assure them until all the bagage and cauallerie may be passed, the
infanterie retiring them selves then with the rereguarde.

Being of necessity to march thorough woods which may be great, In what
manner to march thorough woods.
Y.H. must command to put a golpe of harquebuserie in order, with which they
must take the wood, and this harquebuserie is to march along the sides of the
way which the Army is to pass, serving as wings to cover it, with spredding
them selves upon the flanks of their own Army, and when there be found
any planes in such woods, as sometimes it falls out, the cauallerie is in
the^ to make a halte, the better to assure the way, the baggage following
as soon as they have passed the plane, and at the tail thereof the infanterie,
which necessarily is to rest with the rereguard, and at the coming forth of
the wood, if the field be open, the harquebuserie is to stand, at the skirte
of the same wood, making halte until the Cauallerie gain the field with
their squadrons, or the high places, being a hilly country. And for that
commonly in camping you may be enforced to pass rivers by ford or bridge,
Passing of Rivers.
in which there is for the most part much danger by the advantage which is
given to the enemy by the ableness of assayling a passage, or defending it:
it is fit that Y. H. have good consideration thereof, first understanding
whether the enemy hold it fortified or no, and in what manner, serving him
self with Artillery for defense thereof: because then I would not council
Y.H. to attempt it, since necessarily the Army is to be divided in the
passage, and co^sequentlie the forces, which is to make the enemies greater,
when as the co^seruation of the whole army stands not upon it, being
otherwise a most dangerous course: and albeit that some have putt it in
execution, it has been more thorough the cowardice of such as kept like
passages, then for any reason which could be alleged for the gayning of
them, which must be attempted with so great danger and inequality, as falls
in that manner of fight, and so it shall be fit for the avoiding of this
inconvenience, that Y.H. use great diligence and secrecy in passing of the
rivers, serving your turn with all sorts of stratagemes and devises, to the
end the enemy may not prevent you, by before occupying the passage. In all
actions of war, that is held for best and most secure, which the enemy
least suspecteth: and in passing of rivers it is of greater importance then in
any other, for the danger wherewith it is performed.

When there is found in the river any forde with much water, or his current
carrying great violence, you are to be informed by the natural country men,
in what part the fordes lie, how deep they are, and in what season of the
year it may be past with less or more facility, giving light thereunto: if
the River bears ordinarily much water, or holds great quantity of
land-waters swellinge with raines, and melting of snowes from of the
mountains, which causes much fury to the rivers; whether the landing places
at the forde be a plane, with trees, or rough and uneasy: upon these qualities
Y.H. may take resolution with your Council, touching the forde by which you
determine to pass, whether your cauallerie is to come before it grow morning,
and with them a golpe of musketeers and harquebusiers, which the infanterie is
to follow, carrying in vanguard four or six demye Canons, whereby they may
possess the brinckes of the river, so as the vanguarde may begin to pass, the
harquebusiers on horse following such guydes and persons as have already
sounded the forde, and straight the light horse and men at arms, every soldior
carrying on the buttock of his horse a harquebusier, or musketier, which may
alight as soon as they are passed over, occupying the most convenient stands,
and the Cauallerie theirs, if the field permit it, when they are not to
return, leaving the harquebuserie assured, and the infanterie to pass on the
horse buttockes, renforcing the first, if the enemy be discovered, which
shall be hardly able already to hinder the passage.

If the depth of the River and water be in that manner, A new invention to
pass artillery over Rivers.
as carts may pass, they use to frame of them a kind of bridges upon which
the rest of the infanterie may pass, wetting them selves very little, which is
a great commodity to the army. Upon like occasions the carriadge is wont to
pass the forde, and the artillery when it is not much, I have seen passed
over, dismounting them with raftes, martinets, and other instruments which they
carry to that end to the other side of the water, where a great gable is
fastened, which crosses the River, stiff drawn, and upon that they hang
strong cords, which they fasten to the ears of the piece, the which going
between two waters, is easily moved, the great cord running alongest the
cable, upon which the piece is hanged, and hereby the cable is able to bear
it, when the cord is made in form of a slyding knot, that it may be wide
enough to slip, and one other great cord which is tied to the slyding knot,
and another to the ha^dles of the piece, the which pull it to the other side of
the River, by giving it motion, which is easily done, by reason in this manner,
for that the very water by natural reason lightneth the weight of the
Artillery, a ^^ng which is palpable by experience. In this manner they use to
land in little rivers the artillery on the other side, when the forde for the
owse does not serve to pass it in carts, nor the Bridge strong enough to
bear the weight thereof.

I have signified this particularitie to Y.H. for that it is an invention of my
time, and very profitable upon some occasions.

When they encampe within Provinces where great and deep Rivers are, the
Armies ordinarily carry bridges of Barks with them, that the whole army may
the more securely pass, being very easy to be framed up: and albeit that
at other times they make them upon barrills, cables, and plankes of timber, it
is but to supply necessity, when they can not carry boats whereby the Canon
may securely pass.

In case it be necessary that Y.H. make a bridge of boats, or of any other
form, Manner how to cast a Bridge of boats over a River.
you must command that the whole Artillery may be placed, which you would
have passed, upon the brincke or shore of the River, marking it out for such
places as you would use it in.

The which being done, they must put the boats a cross the water, forming a
Bridge, upon the plankes whereof they shall place some harquebusiers and
musketeers, the better to assure the other side of the river, if the enemy
chance to discover that you mind to pass it. And as soon as ever the bridge
is made, Y.H. shall command that some harquebusiers on horse pass over with a
golpe of harquebuserie, and some lances, if the field yield commodity
thereunto, and four or six field pieces, some carts and vastadors immediately
following, wherewith the soldiers may fottifie the guard of the bridge, which
very well may keep five hundredth men fortified, without indangering any
greater number at the beginning, being sufficient for that effect: especially
the rest of the Army and bagage being to follow, Provided that if Y.H. have
any suspicion that the enemy may come to give upon the rereguarde, that the
entry of the bridge on the other side be well fortified, in such sort, as the
very last of the soldiors which are to retire, may do it with security: and
the Pikes which are among them, are wont to carry them in their retraite,
trayling the heads along the bridge to the enemy wards, to have them the
readier in hand, if it be needful to serve with them, with but turning their
faces, leaving the bridge afterward, if it shall be necessary. In case that
Y.H. perceive that the enemy renforceth him self for to charge them, you must
command that some pieces of artillery be planted, as soon as they have
passed over the river to play upon the enemy.

The whole Army being passed, Y.H. may march with it according to the quality
of the country in one of the forms which I have set down, and according to
the show which the enemy shall make, and before you come to the place where
Y.H. purposes to lodge, you must send the Camp master general before for
to view it, and to make out the lodging, in which is to be considerd, Quality
of lodgings.
besides those parts which I noted of water, wood, soil, and wholesome air,
whether it be fit to have it on a hill, for that ordinarily in such
scituations there is want of water and pastures, and coming to seek for it
below the hill, besides the disco^moditie and toil in clamering up with the
victuals, the enemy may easily hinder both, and besiege the me^ if the
mou^tain be high, where likewise the artillery ca^serue to no great purpose,
except it hold a proportion to shoot from an high downwards.

In lodging upon the side of an hill, they commonly point out the market place
in the highest part thereof, provided that the distance from the quarters
thereunto, be not so great as that the soldiers must be feign to bring their
Arms breathles with clambring for to fight, which is a great inconvenience,
and no small one to be feign to hold the Corpse de guard well renforced to
entertain play with the enemy, while the men come together to set them
selves in battle: if you descend from the side of the hill and quarters down
to the markett place in a plane, it is done likewise with great disadvantage,
for that the whole power comes to be discovered, which the enemy lying close
may with great certainty play upon.

These be the inconveniences which soldiers put in like lodgings, and so are
they esteemed for best in a plain, when they are not near any mountain or
hill from whence the enemy by occupying it, may offend with his Artillery the
market place or quarters, for these causes are lodginges best on the plane, not
holding any enemy near, especially if there be any wood behind their
shoulders or flanks, or that there be any lakes, breaches or river whereby to
guard the flanckes or sholders: provided that the quarters be not so placed, as
that if the river swell, it may be able to do any hurt with coming in, nor
the enemy by getting any Arm thereof, to drown them, nor yet to furnish the
lodging by putting them selves in front at the entry thereof, when there is no
other way for them which occupy it to get forth.

Jointly when there is any eminency of situation, and that you must be
enforced to lodge near unto it, let it be kept by placing men, on the top,
least the enemy possess him self thereof, so as it be no further distant
the^ you may be well able to succor it, for that otherwise it would be a
greater mischief by loosing your people: And I do not council (as some are
of opinion) that it is fit to turn back to gain again the mountain, since
that in matter of stands and lodgings, nothing is to be held for good which
may be bettered, neither is it fit to occupy it to any other end, the^ still
to maintain it, without thinking to recover it again

These aduertisements which I have signified unto Y.H. hold in general as
concerning the election of lodginges, which are to be proportioned with the
circumstances of the case, motive of war, forces of the enemy, and place in
which they stand, holding always a consideration before their eyes, which is
of greater importance then all the rest for lodgings, and that is, to choose
them in such sort as may hold a very evil acces for the enemy unto them,
Quality of greatest importance in lodgings.
and a good salie for them which occupy them: A quality which is not possible
to be particularised unto Y.H. except it be with the present occasion, and
much experience, which teaches of what moment an ill approach is for him which
is to fight, and a good salie for those which would do it, or dislodge. This
may be said to be it, which men in ancient time denied, when they desired that
the frontieres of their common wealths, which they builded in rough and raggie
places, might hold a good assent on their part, and an uneasy on the enemies,
which sometimes comes to give impediment to him to lodge, and then the
election of the situation being made, he places all his Cauallerie in front,
standing in squadrons to cover the fortifying, so as it can not be discovered
before it be fully finished.

In countries which are much peopled, they use to disperse the cauallerie from
the infanterie, to give commodity of houses, and forage, which is done in
such manner, as the Cauallerie covers the infanterie, when they are not sent
out, and the infanterie severed, to keep watch a nights, the Camp master
general ordayning it, and that victuals be brought if it be necessary.

When as the lodgings be fortified, and that there be houses round about, Y.H.
may not permit your me^ to go and lodge in them, for that they serve to no
other end then to give occasion to the enemy to cut their throats in the
night by standing without guarde.

The Campe-maister general having divided the quarters, and market place, in
such manner as I signified to Y.H. in the first lodging, the Quarter master is
in particular to tickett them out to the harbengers and furriers: which done,
he may go to rest, and the Captains of the skoutes and Sentinels, Who are
first to be lodged.
which are those that are to be first lodged by reason of being weary a
nights, and the company of the Campemaister generals horse, if he have any,
and this to be done while the vangarde stands in squadron, and the battle
be come, which is then to go to lodge, the battle remaining in squadro^
until the artillery, munition, bagage and rereguard have entered into the
lodging.

In this time the Camp master general, shall view the most convenient
situation where to place the day guarde on what part the enemy is likely to
come, and the Captain which shall have charge thereof, shall draw out the
Centinells to their stands, without dispersinge them so as they should loose
the sight of the Corpse de guard, provided that if there be any valleys or
woods, by which the enemy should be able to cut them off, more centinells be
placed to discover, in such sort as the corpse de guarde may see them, who are
ordinarily to advertise Y.H. of such men as the sentinels discover, be they
more or less, which must by no means depart from their stands without
order, nor the corpse de guarde to charge the enemy, although he be superior
unto him, with whom he may skirmishe to entertain time, still aduertising Y.H.
who are to give order for what shall be most convenient, and in case the enemy
renforce them selves, and that no succor come, then are they to retire in good
order, so as still they intertaine them, giving time and advise to Y.H.

In some lodgings it is not enough for discovery to place one Cordeguarde, a
matter which the Camp master general is to foresee, be they two or more,
according to the quality of the situation, and that the guardes of horse, the
days being long and whot, may be changed at noone, whereby they may not over
travel.

The situation for one cordeguard or more being choosen out, the Camp master
general with the general of the Artillery, and other heads of the army must
view the lodging round about, appointing the stands which the Cordeguardes
are to be placed in by night, and such fortificatio^ as he ordains, the
rereguarde being always in squadron; if there be any suspect held of the
enemy, until the lodging be fortified: A matter which is done more or less,
according as the time serves, and as they think to occupy the situation.

This being done, and that the day-guard which is to make it, stand in their
places, the squadrons of the rereguard, and corryers which come behind go to
be lodged, the guard of the field remaining entierlie where they are set.

It is fit that Y.H. come to lodge in a good hour, as well for the greater
ease of your men, as that you may have time to fortify your self, if it be
necessary, thorough the enemies being at hand, things which are very ill
performed in the night: and the better to assure the forragers, you are to
consider the enemy being able to do hurt, that horse be sent to discover,
and make skoute if occasion require it, preventing that the Army miscarrie
not, and your men be lost, who albeit they be not armed, yet is it a
reputation to preserve them, and a benefitt of the field.

Guardes to be renforced when you are near the enemy.
When the enemy draws near to the situation which is already possessed,
they use to renforce the guarde more then in other stands, and this by
dividing the Army into three parts, that one may keep guarde a nights while
the other two reast, and in case the suspicion increase, that then they put
half of the army to guarde, considering that it is a less inconvenience to
stand ready prepared, although they toil for it, the^ to be careless: this
makes officers to answer soldiors, if they complain of their ever often
guarding, that the K. pays for the guardes, not for the fight: The particular
of ones self depending on the one, and the common security of the Army on
the other.

They use as well to putt between the principal corpse de guarde, and the
double Centinells, other small cordegardes of such number of soldiors, as may
serve to change the sentinels; the which careful Seriants Majors will of the^
selves look unto, as well for that it may be done with greater facility, as
also for that one single centinell giving warning to the double, and by that
which they see, they are more assured whether it be certain or no, then by
report of others: and if it be necessary for him to retire, he does it to the
double Centinells, which are three soldiers, and they to the lesser
Cordeguarde.

The same order may be held among the guardes of cauallerie, which they set
without the fortification, if much suspicion be had: and the Captains and
Lieuetenants of horse, in reason as men experienced, shall place men in such
parts and ways, as the enemy is to pass, the guardes of horse being that
which assures the camp most, and likewise the garrisons which must of force
be scattered from it: hereby time is gained with discovering the enemy to
prevent him, standing ready prepared for him, the better to be able, to
provide for any hurt before it falls out.

Jointly there is another way of prevention in time of suspect, the enemy
being near, or if you be desirous to know whether he send any men forth of his
Camp by night, or dislodge, which is to place centinells a foot and on horse
so near his Camp, as that for danger thereof they may not have the word
given them, and are named forlorn, Forlorn sentinels
carrying other marks whereby they may be known of the centinells, in case
they return to bring any news. Besides the care which must be had to seek
out good spies, a matter of so great importance in the war, it is a very
good means to hold day and night upon the enemy, one, two, or more troops of
horse, which may go by diverse ways, with good guydes, fifteen or twenty in
a number, and with every one an officer which may be experienced, and carry a
soundnes of judgment to view, without making any hurly burly.

These troops salying out of the Camp by night, carry not the word but
their leader gives one among them selves when they are abroad, by which they
may know one another, being that if any of them should be lost, the enemy
should not come by it: and being to return with any intelligence by night,
the officer which goes with them, has order to send before a soldier, who
is to give warning to the Centinell, that they take not the alarom upon seeing
of the troop, and that he declare to his Captain, how such an officer of the
Corriors is come, and then the Centinell shall advertise him thereof, willing
the soldier to retire, who shall make the same known to Y.H. or the Camp
master general, who must give order for what shall be most convenient, and in
case that he come into the camp that then an officer of the Cordeguarde go
forth which knows the word, to give order that the Centinells suffer him to
pass after having well taken knowledge of him.

The same course is held when any troops of infanterie or cauallerie have
gone to keep skoute, or upon any other service, to send if it be at the
hours that Sentinels are set, to give warning by some soldior which shall go
before, that they make no stir, or raise any alarm upon the sight of them:
The which must be prevented, and Y.H. or the Camp master general must have
warning before they discover them, who are to march slowly: and in case that
any come to enter within the Camp, and carry the word, for that the general
gave it unto him, and would speak with him at any hour without loosing time,
the single Centinell on foot or horse, is to bring him as far as the double,
and one of them to carry him to his Captain at the Cordegarde, who is to
deliver him to the principal officer, that he may advertise the Camp master
general thereof, if the news be not of so great moment, as to deserve to be
presently carried to Y.H.

Preue^tions for fighting by night.
Some use in like sort when the enemy is much superior in Cauallerie, and that
they fear he will assail the lodgings in the night, to make great fieres
before the markett place, which discovers whosoever comes, and dazeleth
them, not to be able to see again who there attends: other prepare
themselves by making diches before the market place, in manner of pitfalls for
to annoye the horse, and skatter some pricks of iron, and in this conformity
every one applies what he thinks most to purpose for his own defense,
according to the occasion which is offered and suspicion had.

I have signified to Y.H. all these forms of wars, for that it was never
hurtful to any man, though he were far from the enemy, much less near, to
stand upon his guarde, and that with great warienesse, though some say that
Y.H. in so doing, does but give reputation to the enemy, and show a fear
of him, for that in war such as are reachles, are every moment paid home,
and never did a circumspect souldior receive hurt, nor an obstinate good, an
enemy being to be contemned at the time of fight, but always to be esteemed
for point of war; for this cause the errors of a Superior in matters of
government and policy, may be compared to lingering infirmities, which give
leisure to think in matters of remedy, but those of war to sharp ones,
whose beginning is the end of the patient.

The alarm being taken by night, Order upon alarm.
which ought to be upon good ground, those officers being to look unto it that
take charge of visiting the Centinells at diverse hours, that they may stand
in readiness, the single Sentinels are to retire to the double, upon the enemies
charge, and the double to the small corpse de guard, which join them selves
with the principal, wherewith they make a squadron, and whether all the arms,
banners and standarts are to repair.

Such companies as serve for guard unto Y.H. are placed in squadron without
moving from their stands, and so are those which guarde the Artillery, and
sometimes in the lodgings some other colors stand for guarde, in such parts
as they are appointed to make a squadron in the same place, for the
inconvenience which might follow in case it should be abandoned, being lost
time in going to the general markett place, as they must do by day, for that
then being able to know which way the enemy directes, the Commander has time
to send men to withstand him, being ready in the market place, whether all
make their appearance: a matter which upon alarm by night can not be done.

Those officers whose Centinells first began, are to inform Y.H. from what
part they come, and upon what occasion, giving warning to the cordeguarde next
hand, that they retire their Centinells, the fury of the alorum continuing,
and that no trumpet sound upon pain of loosing a hand, until Y.H. own have
done, which ought to be the best and most skilfulliest in that art.

The like order is to be kept by the dromes, when they do sound alarm, those
which stand on Y.H. guarde beginning, when they may be heard, being in reason
that they are better able to know upon what ground the Alarom rises, where
Y.H. person rests, and before any other part: and many times the voice of
Arm happens to come within the very camp, before any centinells have
cried it, who are not to retire from their stands without the enemy force
them, or that their officer come to him upon the alarom, and then Y.H. must
give a new word in returning to place again, and the men go to lodge, for
fear least the enemy should get the word by having taken any centinell, nor
that any spy, if he have entered that night upon the rumor of Alarom, should
escape forth until it were day: when the Sergiants Majors, being of experience,
and other officers come to ask the word of Y.H. after having put the men in
squadron, and ordered them to lodge, you must know whether the Centinells be
retired or no.

Y.H. encamping with intent to invade any land, the motive which is held in
war so requiring it, Consideration in plantinge of a sieg against a place.
to cause the enemy to leave any strong hold, or to come to fight for the
succor thereof, to get victuals, or set foot within the Province, must in
reason before hand have relation and knowledge of the site and fortification
which it holds, the number of men which are to defend it, and whether they be
soldiors or no, and with what head: and not to learn this only from the
natural persons of the country, but from spies, or such other as under color
of negotiations, treaties, or prisoners have been sent to view any such place,
and the ways thereof.

Y.H. must signify unto your Counselors the relation of any such information
as persons of experience, or the natural men of that country shall deliver,
for to take the last resolution in what manner the siege must be laid, following
with much precisenes their liking and opinion, for that to besiege a place is
one of the matters in war, which asks much consideration, weighing the
enterprise, for that hastines is an enemy of good council, and delaie never
good but to repress anger and displeasure, for which cause resolutions are to
be taken with valor of the mind, for that they otherwise be ambiguous, which
neither come to help those which take them, nor endemnifie the enemy, and
from whence great mischiefs have redounded to Princes, as often as they have
intended stages without it, and in particular if they have not held quantity
of artillery, with boundance of munitions, wherewith to oppen a sufficient
Battery, making the soldiers and Corporalls which follow them, the more
easily to show thereby their courage, when they come to hand-strokes with the
enemy, which is that which in the end gayneth the places, the honor thereof
being dew to them, and to the general the blocking up of the passages,
whereby to hinder succors, placing the battery in the best part thereof

The first matter which Y.H. is to debate of, is whether they must make one or
two lodginges or more before that you come to lay siege discouertlie,
enquiring whether there be no towns round about, making show as though you
meant to besiege one of them, and not that which you pretend in deed, to find
it thereby the less provided: for this cause the Army must be divided and
march on diverse parts, and in the night with great diligence troops of
soldiers must be sent to take the passages and places whereby men may come to
enter within the country.

Being able to besiege with making one lodging only, is the better, because
of putting the greater fear in those which are within, seeing them selves
suddenly enclosed, preue^ting with speedines that they do not hinder the
taking of the lodging, and burn the suburbs and houses about, which is of
great moment, nor to have ready their Artillery, and other things which in
this conformity may be had by dallying the time of the siege, if those which
stand upon their defense come to suspect it, for this they use when the
Country holds three or four passages or sails, to send by day or night
men, if the situation permit, that at one instante they may occupy the
passagages thereof, making great diligence in fortifying them, with trenches,
ditches, and trauesses, whereby they stopp any succor from them, and let them
within from saling forth, being so near, having many means to be able to
offend them, if they entende any salie with greater security.

To execute this enterprise, the Army is to march according as the country
serves, in one of the manners which I have set down, and in the vandguarde
the Camp master general to be so well renforced with Cauallerie and
infanterie, as that he may be superior to those within, being able thereby, if
they make any salie to charge them with determination, and readiness, so as he
make them turn tail, without loosing any time upon the occasion which may be
offered, according to the disposition of the place and borders about, happening
some times upon the like charges, to slaye or take some of the leaders which
salie out to guide the besieged, of whom intelligence may be taken: a matter
which greatly quayleth them, and in particular if they receive much hurt upon
the first brunt, which brings them to bethink them selves of yielding.

It has likewise fallen out that they have so mingled themselves with the
enemy, as that they have gained the place, entering pele mele one with another
into it, by reason of disordring them selves upon the retreat, and not holdinge
the guard of the gates fortified with Baricados, and other things, which they
use in like places where they live circumspectly and with good guarde.

And albeit these effects sometimes happen, to charge the enime with
determination, is to get to approach the walls, assalting the enemy, and to
view the manner of them, the diches, loopeholes, and trauesses, marking with
the eye whether the fortification be changed or no, from the relation which
before you had, and new defenses made, and by this means gain time to
straighten them, which is the end which the besieger is to work for, as to
enlarge him self is his which defends, the most which may be possible for
him, from his neighborhood.

In this charge the Ca^pe master general is to mark that the squadrons of
the Cauallerie be not placed in such sort as that the artillery from the
plattformes and caualiers of earth may much annoy them, Advise how to present
men at a siege.
viewing if he be a soldior the places as well in the ways as other stands,
where the enemy may in reason aim with his pieces: a particular which may be
known with the eye, and experience of a souldior, as soon as he sees the
field, and discovers the country.

The enemy being dulled within the place, the Campe-maister general is to
mark out the lodging, assigninge the quarters as near as may be unto it, and
that without being subject to the Canon: and albeit that the bullettes light
from the place besieged upon some of the quarters, giving to the pieces as much
charge as they can hold, it is no great inconvenience: The quarters ought to be
disposed in such sort as that the Town be enclosed round about, that none may
escape out, nor be able to relieve those which are besieged, with either men
or victuals, being to no purpose to undertake any such enterprise, without a
most strong lodging: neither can a Town in deed be said to be besieged,
Consideration in disposing of quarters.
except it be environed on all parts, and when any suspision arises, that the
enemy is like to come with a maine Army to succor it, the^ do they fortify
the lodging as well toward the walls as the fields, which they must have a
great care over, preue^ting the approches which the enemy may make for to put
in succor, or give upon the lodging, which is to be fortified as shall be
thought fittest, making trauesses, Baricados, or trenches, if occasion require,
and by Y.H. standing ready prepared after such manner as you are to dispose
your Army in battle to attend him according to the scituatio^, and that
after such a fashion as may defend the whole body of the lodging, being
assailed on diverse parts or one alone, one quarter giving hand to another, in
the case the enemy attempt any one with greater fury then the rest; orders
which are better executed by being before hand forethought of and prepared,
then just upon the enemies discovery

If any river run by the Town, the Camp must needs be divided into two or
three parts for to besiege it, which asks that they be well fortified, so as
every one may of it self defend it self, with such leader as Y.H. shall
place in every stand, and to succor from one quarter to another.

I do not lay down to Y.H. such manner of bridges and engines as I have seen
made, for to work all these effects, for that I would not be to tedious, and
that it is necessary a man govern him self in these enterprises according to
the preparations which are to be made for such a siege, and as the quality of
such a river is, and fury of the current which it holds, which is to give
law, whether it be better to frame the bridge making it above the town or
below, or both, so as those within may not be able to serve their turn with
the current for to undo it, by putting down of barks upon the ebb with men,
and artificial fires for to break and burn it, if the current serve for it,
and consequently if the bridge stand below the Town, that the enemy come
not up assisted with wind and tide to spoil it, and succor the besieged, and
so whether it shall be convenient or no to fortify the entries of the bridges
with any rauelin, or defense, keeping a renforced guarde, for that it stands
joined to the quarters.

The Army being lodged, and the town viewed, as well by the general of the
artillery, as other leaders and soldiers of experience, Y.H. must take
resolution on what part you will plant your battery, or batteries,
Consideration in pla^ting of battery.
considering that ordinarily in cold countries the walls which stand to the
North, and which lie subject to the Septentrionall winds, are weaker then the
other, and in warm, those which stand on the South: A quality which is to be
marked, and what rampire they hold, and the thicknes thereof, and whether the
wall be builded of new, in being more easy to batter it: whether there be
space where you batter between one tower or bulwark and another, so as you
may make your battery for eight or nine soldiers to be able to enter in
front, which distance is held for a great Battery, and allowed for good in
case they be not able to assail in front. Jointly it is to be considered
whether the wall yield commodity by any angle or corner to be able to cross
the battery, for that then they within can hardly defend it, and to make two
batteries when it may be by assalting the town in two places at once, is much
better then a single, those which stand at one battery still fearing least
they enter by the other, and hereby stand upon their defense very ielous of
their own destruction, and there is no noise of woomen or children heard, how
small soever it be, which gives them not some care looking back what it
means: a particular which sundry times causes places to be the sooner
gained, and in this respect they attempt other by assalting in su^drie parts,
making show of carrying ladders and other provisions, where they never purpose
to enter, only with intent to divert the enemy, puttinge him with the
suspicion thereof in great fear, seeing him self ready to be assalted, which
every thing increases, augmenting a distrust, unless the resolution of
honorable Breasts despise it; matters which must be resolved on without
loosing time, and in some place they plant pieces on the plain ground without
gabions or trenches, when as the town which they would take, holds no
defense, nor that it is necessary to use any greater diligence, then to
batter a gate, or open a Portal. In this you must proceed according to the men
which are within, and quality of the walls and ditches, if there be any,
because when they within may be able to hold time without yeeldinge, it is not
good to go about to batter, without covering of the artillery, and making of
trenches, for that without these two things is but to venture and put in hazard
many men, and give greater courage to those within, when they shall see the
loss which is without.

In making the approach, as they term it, as much to say as to come near to
the walls and ditches, the Artillery and munitions being ready, they use,
the enemy being retired within the walls, and the place where they are to
batter well viewed by the general of the artillery and other heads of the
Army, to march with great Culuerings, and pointing them, to such parapetts,
platformes and Caualiers, as they may best serve in, to begin to quitte some
defenses, drawing while the Coluerins play, the Cannon as near as they can, to
quitte the loopeholes and defenses, in such sort as they may not discover the
Coluerines, or descrie them near hand, being places where the ehimie may do
mischief, the demie Cannons, Coluerines, and quarter Cannons following the
Cannon as near as can be, and shoting where the Coluerines and Cannons have
battered, throwing down the defenses the best that they can, and that with
speed and diligence, causing the enemy in one, two days or more, to quitte
the Canonries and trauesses: which being done, or continuing to procure it, it
gives a beginning that no loss of time be to work more easily in the night,
and with greater security upon the trenches, the enemy having no secure place
whence to discharge a piece for his own defense, the great cannons being then
able to better their place where the battery is to be made, and to begin or
continue the trenches if they be in hand alredie, which in such place as much
sand is, they raise with stones, Manner of trenches.
which are very daungerons trenches for hurting much people with their own
stones, as often as a bullett lights, and when the soil is waterie, some
help it with chestes of wood, filling it with earth, other with gabions, with
which co^monlie they cover the artillery, allowing them eight foot of
diameter, which is large enough for a defense: and in Barbary where there is
so great abundance of sand, little earth and want of trees, they have been
wont to make their gabions by putting stakes into the ground, fastening the^
with ropes of bentes, in steed of boughs, weauing them so close together, as
that they may fill them with sand: It is a matter impossible to deliver to
Y.H. at what place the trenches are to begin, nor whether they should be long
or short, nor whether for the better covering of the artillery with which
they batter, they must bring it as far as the brincke of the diche, or come
to disemboke within it, nor to go with trauesses through the same ditch
forwards, if the quality thereof permit it, nor if it stand brim full of
water, with the more ease to be able to make bridges within it, upon which
after the battery made, the assalt may be given, or to be able to come in
barks or boats to the very battery and walls, particulars which I can not
resolve, except I were present upon the very ground, and as occasion
presents governing ones self in this, and in the guardes of the trenches and
other things according to the resistance which the enemy makes, and
progress in prolonging or shortning the siege.

The chiefest point to be considered is, that the trenches be wrought with much
heed and consideration, What is to be considered in working of trenches.
taking care to guide them with the bulwarks, towers, and flanckes of the
walls, making the windings in such sort as no piece of the enemy may be able
to emboke them, nor to batter by direct line any bow or windings of them,
being so much the better, by how much they are deeper, broader, and higher, and
approach nearest unto the quarters: and in case that the principal heads of
the Army be enforced ordinarily to go unto them, it is very fit when there
is a quantity of vastadors, to assure the entry, Y.H. not hazarding those
personages which are about you, by reason that the want of any leader may
prove very prejudicial.

Albeit that trenches are commonly made after the manner which I have set
down unto Y.H. yet I have my self been in place, where they wrought them
straight, with flankers on high, which seemed very strange to those soldiers
which saw it, and to very good purpose by gayning of time in not making
windings: wherein is to be considered, the disposition of the ground, serving
to be able to work a streigth trenche, that bows be made out from one part
to another to renforce them with men, for that a straight one is not able to
receive many, and it is very necessary to hold them well renforced with
soldiors, and provided of budge-barills, that the harquebuserie may shoot with
more security, to whom order is to be given, that by no means they talk to
them within, avoiding thereby any advertisement which might under hand be
given, as sometimes it has fallen out of what has not benefitt to be
discovered.

Concerning the trenches, the place ought to be before hand well viewed and
assured whence they are to batter: What it required in places whe^s to make
battery.
In which six points are to be considered: First, that it be strong by
nature, or capable to be made so by art. Secondly, that the soldiers may be
able to furnishe and combat within it with commodity and defense. Thirdly,
to be able to retire the artillery easily from the place, if necessity
should so require. Fourthlie, that the situation be capable to plant pieces
within it, in such sort as they may be able to hitt point blancke upon such
part or parts as they mind to batter. Fiftlie, that there be a place
prepared ready for the soldiers to give the assalt after the battery made,
which will be to small purpose, if the approach unto it be inaccessible.
Sixtlie, that the battery stand not to near the walls, least the enemy
chance to annoy many men with his harquebusiers, nor consequently that to
avoid this inconvenience, it be too far of, where the fury thereof shall be
able to work but small effect.

Some hold that Battery for the best, when the pieces may be four score or
one hundredth paces from the wall, What distance is best in planting of a
battery
their fury being nothing so great, when they stand one hundredth and fifty
or two hundredth of: upon which is inferred that at three hundred, or how much
soever more, the pieces be planted, they batter with less force. For which
cause other are of opinion, that the pieces were best to be placed, if it were
possible, upon the very brym of the diche, whereby they signify that
according to their opinion they should be drawn to batter as near as might be
to the walls: upon this when the place which is besieged holds a number of
men within, it falls out a great inconvenience, if they be soldiors, besides
being able to hurt many in being so near, which is to give occasion to those
within to make brave salies, under hope to clow some piece by lying so near,
and to be able to be defended by their harquebuserie and musketrie from of the
walls: a particular much to be regarded, considering the commodity of doors
or close casaments, which the besieged may hold, to salie out upon the
artillery, or trenches, and whether before they come near unto them, they
must of force be descried a far of or no, to the end that if they be
discovered before they enter skirmishe, there may be space to renforce the
guard of the Artillery with soldiors and arms, for which time serves not, if
sodenlie they be able to give upon them and the trenches.

It was held in old time a complete Battery to batter with six Cannons, two
Coluerines, and four demie Coluerines, and twelve Sakers or Falconets, a thing
which hardly can be delivered to Y.H. by any certain rule, for that the
number of the pieces and battery is to be considered according to the quality
of the place or fortress which you would batter with them: Those pieces which
carry bullett between forty and three score pound, they now commo^lie call
Canno^s of battery, and those which pass three score, Basiliscoes,
notwithstanding this, such Cannons as commonly are founded for battery, be of
eight and thirty, forty, and four and forty pound of Calibre, from the
word we took first the name of caliuer, which is of a higher bore then the
harquebuse, and there is an instrument like to a pair of co^passes, with the
which the weight and height of bulletts are measured: we call that in English
a Calaber.
weight, and the demie Cannons of four and twenty, being found by experience
not to be pieces of much wast, doing sufficient effect for battery, and with
greater facility to be maneaged then any other sort of pieces, as well to
encampe with all, as for a siege, and when a war is broken out between two
Princes, one attempting upon another, they use to give more or less weight to
the bulletts of their Ca^non of battery, then the contrary part uses,
whereby ones bullet may not serve another, in sort as if the bullet on one
side weighe two and forty pound, the other shallbe of eight and thirty, or
six and forty, somewhat more or less: jointly they accompany these pieces
in the batteries as I have set down with demie Coluerines, quarter Cannons,
demie sacres, and field pieces, which commonly they carry when commodity
serves for it, great Armies bringing with them of all sorts of Artillery to
every purpose placing the small pieces, on such parts and ground, as may best
conveniently stop the salies of the besieged, and other passages, by which
the enemy might come to succor.

These pieces being planted with their beds, which are made of timber
planckes or hurdles, they cover them with gabions and diches, as well for the
security of the Pyoners (which assiste to retire them with the gunners, and
do other necessaries) as the guard of the artillery, fortifying the
situation thereof, in such sort as when the enemy drives the men from their
trenches which they have to cover them, and pass forward either to gain or
clowe the Artillery, the soldiors which stand at the guard, may hold
sufficient strength to defend it. To batter the walls when they are only a
casamure without rampire of earth, you must plant your pieces in such sort as
they may batter the walls a slante, for that then they break them worse then
shooting by direct line, by which they only pearce thorough the wall with much
fury, without shaking it. The approach being made, driving the trenches as
near the town as may be, the battery is to be planted, which is to begin in
this order, that is to shoot of those pieces with which you batter
determinablie by voleyes one after another, being of greater effect so, Manner
how to batter.
then if they should be discharged every one by it self, and then after a
voley passed, shooting off those pieces which stand at the defenses, to the
end the enemy may not discover while they be charged a new, and put in there
place: and the like is to be done by the harquebuserie and musketrie from the
trenches, keeping the enemy from showing him self until they return to give
another voley, which is the manner whereby a battery is continued, serving
them selves with the greater pieces to shake the wall, breaking it a pieces,
and with the lesser to cut it after, and to make the greater ruin by the
falling of that which was shaken, in any wise hastening the battery with all
the diligence that may be, and to plie it so (if it be possible) as so many
voleys as should serve turn, might be shot in one day rather then two,
diligence in batteries being of great moment, and for many respects to be
used: a business which will give them that are besieged to think on, when they
see them selves furiously battered. For this purpose, besides the diligence
which the general of the artillery, his Lieuetenants and officers are to use,
the gunners finding that they gain particularly by every voley which they
discharge, are to give cartages and budgebarrels, to charge more easily, and
speedily: and by this means I have been present at a siege where there has been discharged in the end of August when the days are not very long, fouer
score and on tire in one day, the battery being of six and thirty pieces. It
is true that in respect it was in a cold country, they cooled not their
Cannons as they must be forced to do in whot, and thereby loose much time.

At night when the last tire is shot of and the pieces charged, they place them
as if presently they were to be discharged, to hinder them which are besieged
from repayring any breach which is done by shooting of every piece by it self
in the night at such hour as is convenient.

In this time if the diche be dry, may be viewed the Canoniries, and casamates
which are within it, and the damage which the ruin of the battery has
wrought, and if it hold water, they to devise to let it out if the ground
will serve for it, or to drain it with engines for the purpose, or to stopp it
up with Fagotts, or fill it with earth, as I have seen it in a siege, Form of
bridges,
and to make ready if it hold any depthe, bridges, which are to be thrown in
for the assalte made of Barrelles, Barks, and ship-mastes: the throwing of
them in being a matter of sufficient peril, and great danger for a general to
command an assalt to be given before he have well viewed the battery, and
the trauesses quited, using all diligence in this: albeit it is true that the
trauesses where the harquebuserie and musketerie may be set in such places as
are fortified, can hardly be quitted by the enemy, and in case the
disposition of the place be of such sort, as he must be feign to loose them,
at the instant he will treat of the delivery of them up, knowing if he be a
souldior, that without them he can not be able to defend the entry.

It is likewise to be considered that when the diches where the battery is
made, hold much water, it is not only very perilous to throw in the
bridges, but most dangerous to give the assalte on that part, because that
the depth of the diche swalloweth up the ruin of the battery, in such sort
as the head of the bridge can have no fastening, or give any commodity at all
by this for the soldiors at the assalte to be able to find any place in the
breach, where they may join together to fight against the^ within, whereby it
is a very hard matter to be able to run up skattered, or to enter first in,
if they within have any courage at all to defend them selves, because that the
breadth of the bridges which are cast in, are not capable above five soldiers
to march in front, and so few of the first come to fight, except they hold a
place in the breach, for those which follow them to do as much: and so those
which stand upon their defense within become more superior, and hold greater
advantage, by the place which they occupy, and the soldiors which are to give
the assalte, go close together on the bridge, being thick upon the bancke of
the diche, serving only as a mark for those upon the walls to shoot at
without being able to give the^ any annoyance by fighting. Inconveniences
which were very fit to be looked into before the putting in of the bridges
for the assalte, or planting the battery on that part, Y.H. entering into
consideration thereof according to the intelligence and information which
shall be given unto you of the depth of the diche.

The battery being well viewed, Order for to give an assalte.
and Y.H. resolved to have the assalte given, you are to give order to such
nation, Captains, and Camp master as must be of the vanguarde, In which is
to be considered, that it be recommended to such leaders and soldiers as have
a desire to fight, showing their determination and courage, willing to enter
into any danger: to who^ particular order must be given, that in clyming up to
the high of the breach, they run up the wall, if the disposition of the
place will permit it, which is that, that most assures the entry, and so
likewise the rest which are to follow the vanguard, all standing armed in
readiness within the trenches.

In some assaltes the soldiers have been necessarily feign to use ladders,
which is a sign that the battery is not good, and the general enforced (cost
what cost might) to take the town, or retire him self from it, the which he
must be constrained to do, attempting it with so great danger for to avoid
a greater inconvenience, a matter which Y.H. must by all means seek to shun.

To withdraw the men into the trenches, Y.H. is to command that the rest of
the Army, as well cauallerie as fanterie, put them selves into battle, and
squadrons within the markett place, with whom the Camp master general is to
be ready prepared, if the enemy should come to combatt the quarters, which
ought to stand well fortified, to stop him, and give impediment to his
attempt, and likewise to renforce the men, that by one or two ways they may
give upon him, and to refresh them, if it be necessary with some tierce,
regiment, or colors, giving them charge to attempt a fresh: and in case that
the besieged putt back the men from the assault, if they retire, it is easily
to be believed, that it will be done with disorder and scattering, for that it
is not possible they should do it otherwise, and if they within the town with
a new heart of grace, should make any salie out of the same breach, as has
been sometimes seen, you may not think to gather those again together which
are retired to turn back to charge them, but to do it with those squadrons
and men that remain in the markett place: things which are prevented by
keeping the rest of the Army in battle.

Besides, it is to be considered, that when the soldiers come to stand pike
to pike, and at hand strokes with the enemy, it may fall out that they can
not enter, and so it is meet to hold the harquebuserie and musketerie in
readiness, wherewith to furnishe a new the trenches, to the end that they may
shoot liuelelie from thence, in case the men be commanded to retire from the
assalte, and in such manor as the enemy do not only not take upon him to
charge them, but that he be not so hardy as to discover him self.

Y.H. having these things in readiness, and your men withdrawn in such sort
home to their trenches, and the rest set in battle, the general and
officers of the artillery are to advertise Y.H. every moment of the estate of
the breach, and which shall be their last tire, which the gunners term cleaning
and sweeping of the breach, and what defenses the enemy may have made, to the
end that Y.H. who are to be on horse back, and in such a place, if it be
possible, as you may discover both batteries, should make a sign at the
instant when the last Cannon should be shot of, as Y.H. to hold up the same
handquerchef at your arms end, and when that can not be, then some tro^pet to
sound which is well known.

For to assalt the men go in troops, every one using diligence according to
such valor, boldness, and experience of assaltes as he has, and while they be
coming to clyme the breach, the small pieces are to play if there be any,
and the harquebuserie hastily from the trenches, occupying the enemy so, as
he discover them not until they come pyke to pyke with him, and the soldiers
to hand strokes, and then to cease shooting, and the general of the
Artillery to keep his pieces still charged and appointed for what soever may
fall out, shooting off if it be necessary some times a thwarte in case the
enemy in time of the assalte, chance to discover him self, which sometimes
falls out having kept him self close before, and being very requisite to
shoot at the breach whereby the enemy upon the soldiers retreat, not being
able to enter, may not discover it self.

It falls out while an assalte is in giving, that not only trauesses be
therein discovered, but fire given to some mine or mines, whereby the entry is
made difficult, and the breach repaired in such wise as though it appeared
good, yet it is not. By this occasion the soldiers are wont sometime to find
what has endemnified them, and battering anew to give the second and third
assalt: at other times they get place in the breach walls or towers where to
defend them selves covertly, going before with In all mines at the end of that
there must be a place made either round or square where the barels of powder
must be laid. In English we have no other name for them then ouens.
Hornilloes, and mines, if the ground by not holding water yield commodity for
it, a matter which is to be wrought with great industry, taking first
preciselie the distance from whence they begin the mine, to the place where
they would come out, guyding by a compass which point they are to follow, and
to have great quantity of posts to propp them up, doing it with great
security, that the enemies may not perceive them, nor find whether they come
to rest: Because otherwise they will remedy it by cou^termines, being very
necessary when the mine goes far forward, to hold so much better guard
within it, that the enemies may not come to encounter the^, and if they find a
small guarde or resistance within it, they will easily gain it, and then will
it be a matter almost impossible for them without to recover it, loosing all
the time that they were a myning. And for that I will not be tedious I touch
no further particularities in the manner of working them, be it up hill or down
hill, or in a plane, nor in what sort they are to take measures, and mine a
Wall or Tower which stands on a rock: If with the mines they run so far,
as to come to fight in them, it shall be fit that Y.H. recommend the doing and
guard thereof to soldiors of courage, for that it is one of the most dangerous
fights which can be in a siege. Manner how to sap walls.


In like sort they sapp the walls, when they have come with tre^ches or
trauesses within the diche, or by some other means to the foot of them, the
soldiers covering themselves with blinders when they work, which they cover
with leather on the out side, thereby keeping them from burning, being made of
wood, if the besieged chance to cast any fire upon them. Some other times
they put posts, digging under the foundations, and when they see that they
only supporte the wall, they anoint them with tallow, and piche, that they
may burn the better, putting powder about them, and a quantity of straw and
wood, to which they putt fire, when the men are ready to assalt upon the
falling of the wall, and so do they give order for putting fire to some mine
or hornilloe, not to loose occasion.

So do they use when as the rampires of the Bulwarks, Caualiers, and
Platformes, for the small firmenes of earth within them are made with timber,
to pull out such timbers which they draw from a far off with capstones, tying
gables unto them, or other instruments which they call perpetual windels,
which will hale up any never so great weight, with which the earth will moulder
away, when the proppe is gone, and after this manner there are many engines too
tedious for me to recite to Y.H. which they use in sieges, applying the use of
them according as the state of matters and quality of the work shall require,
and sometimes it has been, that they have raised platformes and caualiers
without, whereby to domnere over the walls and them within, getting by this
means the places to be yielded up, and at other times they have battered with
balls of artificial fieres, that entering within the fortification, they
might set all on fire being builded of timber and fagotts.

While the assalte or assaltes is in giving, Y.H. is always to be on
horsbacke, looking upon all that is done, to give order for what shall be
necessary for those which assalte, according as occasion is offered, and if the
town be entered by force then to give the sack thereof to all the infanterie,
reserving if they be christians, the Churches, Monasteries and things hallowed,
and in some wartes the men are held for the best booty, and in other their
goods, and not their persons, which must be put in execution according as Y.H.
shall ordain, whom it concerns to give law in this, which they term
Castrense, and so to the general when Y.H. is not in place by representing
your person, the like authority is given of lawgiuer.

The Caualerie not having had any order to light for to assalt, is to have no
part in the sack, and so no booty at all to fall to a horse man's share,
although he do assalte a foot, except he do it with leave, which sometimes is
granted to those which want horses, having had their horse slain under them in
the siege, which is so ordained because they should not leave their standarts
in the market place, moved thereunto thorough the covetousness of the sack.

As soon as the town stands assured, Y.H. is to enter within it accompanied
with your guarde and corte, or to send some heads of your Army to keep them
from robbing of Churches, Monasteries, nor things hallowed, and from offering
any force to those which are within them, for that the house of God is always
to be frank and free, executing with all precisenes, and exemplarie punishment
such ordonnances as shall be made upon it: and as soon as Y.H. shall be entered
within the town, you are to go to the principal Church to give thanks unto
our Lo for the victory.

This done, the Camp master general viewed the town to give order for the
lodging of the men, which Y.H. is to command to enter in, when the days and
hours of sack are ended, in which is to be considered, that one nation enfect
not them selves with an other, coming to blows in respect of pendences, and
questions, which may arise between one soldior and another about their
booties: And such as have showed them selves remarqueable in the assault, as
well soldiers as Alferezes, by putting first the colors upon the wall, you
are to give thanks unto, advauncing them in the Acknowledgement of their
valor, and that the rest may see them preferred for it, then for such pieces
of Artillery, sorts of engines, fires, and quality of arms as they which
were besieged held, they are to be bestowed upon those which first lights
upon them.

The Town, such Artillery as is mounted, and the munitions, is to appertain
only to Y.H. such as are vnmounted, in some Provinces, to the general of the
Artillery, and them that are broken by battery, to the gunners, and the
victuals which shall be found in store, to such general as Y.H. has appointed
for the enterprise.

Y.H. lodging of the army within the town after it is gained, Considerations
for the raising of a siege.
ought to be according to the greatness and commodity thereof, and such end as
is held in the war, being the best if the enemy be not so puissant, as to
be able to come to co^bat the quarters, to conserve them, putting garrison
within the town.

In case any occasion should be to raise the siege, thorough mutiny of the
soldiors, want of pay, unseasonable weather, which undoes an army, or
thorough suspicion of the enemies being renforced, and their own fortes
diminished, or other considerations which may induce it, it is to be
understood, that it be first done in retiring the artillery and munitions,
marching with that and the baggage according to such news as may be learned
from the enemy, and this to be done by leaving the rereguard renforced, to
stop any salie that the besieged should make to charge them, and in such manner
as they dislodge not with confusion and disorder, making their retreat seem a
flight: and in all other things which they are to do, it is to be noted, that
there be always left to the front of the enemy in the rereguard squadrons of
cauallerie and fanterie, giving hand one to the other if the field permit it,
because it there should be only left either cauallerie or fanterie, the enemy
which comes with both to fight against them, has greater advantage, and more
easily breaks them, then when they find cauallerie to oppose against theirs,
and by consequence the infanterie marching in such sort as I have rehearsed,
according to the quality of the country, in one of those manners above written.

I have not prescribed unto Y.H. in case the enemy come with a powerful army
to raise the siege, Considerations upon the enemies coming for raising of an
army.
in what manner Y. H. is to govern your self, for that it is necessary to do
it, as the Captains and councelors which Y.H. holds about you shall think
most convenient, and according to the number of men in your army, and state in
which it stands, choosing upon the consideration of these things, whether it
be better to attend him in the quarters, or leaving the^ and the lodging to go
to co^bat him with the whole army or part thereof, the rest tarying upon the
guard of the trenches, artillery, and quarters, or to resolve to raise the
siege altogether. Upon this occasion it is to be considered, if the enemy be
able to take lodging, whereby to hinder the victuals, or be so well aduantaged
near his own, as that he may batter the market place and squadrons, for that
upon any such chance, it is not fit to maintain the siege, atte^ding him in
the quarters, nor yet to divide the army to fight with him, leaving part
thereof for the guard, for that it is much better to seek him out with the
whole army, before he shall be able to work any of both effects, either to
hinder the victuals, or batter the squadrons. Then gayning the battle the
town is gotten, and if it be lost that part of the army which is left upon the
tre^ches and quarters standing divided, runs the same fortune, and when the
whole army shall be found ready to fight, the victory may very well be gained
thereby.

When Y.H. is resolved to go to encampe with the enemy, seeking him out, and
to give the battle, I wrote in common of such considerations as are to be had
in forming of the squadrons, and putting them in battle, and seldom times
men come to fight without having before made themselves lodgings, and viewed
the armies: of which news is gotten by spies, and other intelligences, besides
those which are sent to learn, wherewith the Princes and general Capteines
adva^tage themselves, procuring to stand certified whether their camp be
greater then the enemies, standing superior in cauallerie, or infanterie, or
both, or contrariwise if there be an equality in both camps, and in the
trayning of the soldiers, acquainting them selves precisely with this, for
that it is a very hard matter to overcome any Captain, who well knows both
his own forces and his enemies: particulars upon which they are to found the^
selves before they join together, and give battle, ruling them selves
according as necessity binds, to salve a greater inconvenience, considering
when they stand upon defense that a kingdom is not to be adventured upon one
battle, except it be upon great advantage of place, and in tarying until the
enemy come to seek you out, of which it is good to stand suspicious, as a wise
and watchful soldior, which way he may do damage, to prevent him, looking
circumspectly into all, but not with so great an assurance, as that though the
contrary Captain hold like parts, he could not err, and choose the worse of
the two parts, esteming it for the best: a thing which he would never do if
he were as certainly acquainted with the state of the enemies army as his
own. Upon this runs the Castilian proverb, Si sispiesse la hueste, que haze
la hueste, Hernan Nuna^ en el lib. de los refr. l^^. S.
mal para la hueste.

When they encampe, they send ordinarily, and in particular when they stand
somewhat far distant, What order is held in encamping.
great troops of cauallerie to view from one field to another, recomme^ding
the service to men of courage and valor, and hereupon they come to make
skirmishes, which they term Rencounters: In which the leader is to carry him
self when he meets with the enemy according to the country and men which
he discovers, and his own which he brings, and to mark whether a large
retreat may be made or no, in case the enemy charge with fury, the corriers
having on both sides descried one another at an instant, and when the one has
any news before hand or discovers the other, they are wont to make ambushes,
serving their turn for this by villages, woods, and brakes, or other
convenient places, in which the curriers are to go very circumspectly, and to
take great heed not passing by any place of which any suspision may be had
without viewing it, sending two or three soldiers to that purpose. Advise for
canvisadoes
When the Camps draw near together, and that there is place to view the
lodgings, vigilant generals do seek to annoy the enemy by giving him
canvisadoes: an action wherein Y.H. is to give care to the old Capteynes,
enjoying readily the occasion if it offer it self, that it may not be lost by
the enemies preventing of the mischief, which he may do in like actions by
renforcing the guardes, fortifying the quarters or bettering the lodging,
matters which soldiors of experience will foresee, and the danger which is in a
canvisadoe, which the younger sort thorough the greedy coil they make to
fight, never dream of, reco^mending the execution thereof to some soldior of
experience, able to execute, and of great carefulnes, and of whom such as go
with him to execute, may hold a good opinion, for that the good report, What
parts are to be in the leader of a Can^isadoe,
and fortune of a Leader is that which most quickneth and animateth soldiers,
being fit to have like parts in him, for that being an action to be done by
night, it is seldom times precisely lighted on, and they shall ever err,
except the soldiers hold good satisfaction of him which guydeth them.

Jointly it is to be considered that no canvisadoe be made on that part where
the enemy holds his markett place, because upon any alarm given within his
quarters, all his men do necessarily repair thither: and thereby keep all
help from those which give the canvisadoe upon their retreat, the enemies
squadrons standing in the place where they entered, and for to salie out by any
other part, the heads which lead the^, had need be very well acquainted with
the situation, and to hold the quarters well viewed (which can hardly be
done) where the men are to enter, for that the harquebuserie and holbardes are
to be divided in troops, particular leaders guiding them, that they may
disperse themselves among the quarters, keeping with them the head of the
canvisadoe, trumpet or drum, wherewith they are to give sign of the retreat,
to the end that all hearing it, may repair to the place appointed, where they
are to salie out, in which they ought to find supply and help to succor
them, repressing the enemy if he charge them in gross, having before showed
the scituatio^ in what part those men are to stand which come for the relief of
those of the ca^visadoe.

Armies were wont to neighbor together in lodgings very near, for the desire
which both parties had to fight, or by the ones procuring to cut of victuals
from the other, or hindering him by being so near that he undertake not to
give upon any place, which he might take in few days, setting foot within the
Province, the country yielding commodity for him to do it, and to get new
supplies. In lodging in this neighborhood, by that which I have written, or
some other occasions, it is to be noted, that as often as two armies stand very
near encamped together, Consideration in the near neighborhood of armies.
that which dislodgeth first does it with great disadvantage, for the advantage
which he gives to the enemy, removing with the trouble of his whole army,
and the contrary able to fight with him without any at all, and for this cause
diverse Capteins have used, seeing them selves so near neighbors to the
enemy, and that of force they must be feign to dislodge, great stratagemes and
deuizes to do it without their perceiving thereof: the which shows the peril
that is, and how much it is to be considered that they be not to near
neighbors to the enemy, except they be sure of victuals, and of the
situation, and understand that the enemy holds it for better to leave his
aduenturing the danger of dislodging, then to fight with the contrary.

Considerations for a day of battle.
The day of battle presenting it self, which must be as Y. H. perceives the
stomach and gallantnes of your army for to fight, and when not to excuse it,
for that it is not to be given, except necessity press it, or good occasion
call for it. Y.H. is to note, that many leaders of the armies seek by their
good wills to fight only to advantage them selves, but Y.H. must procure the
gayning thereof, without leaving them to be carried with their own
imaginations, when they hold no stronger a foundation of discretion and
wisdom, then only a little foolehardines.

It is likewise to be considered upon like days, whither the country be open
where they are to fight, field champion, or full of valleys and mountains,
what men the enemy brings, and number of squadrons, which the curriers have
discovered, and composition of the battle, whether in one front or in form
of a half moon, or with a vanguarde bataile or rereguarde, or if the first of
squadrons be followed with another equal unto it, to succor it. And when the
camps are equal, Y.H. must divide your squadrons into iumpe as many, as the
enemies, the old soldiors which have been most exercised in the war fronting
the enemies, and strong men as well on horse as foot: whereof advise is to be
taken according to reason, and the number of the enemies squadrons, by the
spies, and such intelligences as may be gotten by roades and skirmishes, which
are to be done with this intent only, and that the quality of those men which
the enemy most accompteth of, and relyeth upon for supplye may be discovered:
and so the confidence of his army, entertainment of pays, and victuals, to
be able to mainteyne it, and the situation which he occupies, whether he
purposes to fight in that, or come out and seek the other: aduertisements
which will give great light, if question be of having a day of battle, to the
differring or not of the journey, and to show in what time it will be most
convenient to offer it.

At the day that battle is presented, the weather is to be considered, and at
what hour the fight begins, and whether it be helping them selves with
their artillery, drawing it into a good place, the number of troops and
squadrons which muster, and whether they be so many as may embrace the enemies
battle by girding it in whether the sun and wind be in their faces,
matters which me^ in old time highly regarded upon a day of battle, for that
the sun offended the sight, and likewise the air if it came with whisking
blusters or duste, and when not to give them breath to fight: Particulars which
are not of so great moment at this day in land battles, but very much in
getting the wind for those at sea: and albeit that the sun comes sometime,
by shining on the harquebuse barrel, to dazell the taking of leuel, yet with a
little spitle and powder rubbed over it, it will keep it from by reflexing, to
annoy the sight.

The reason why men of old time made so great account of the wind and sun,
Why men in old time made so great account of the sun upon days of battle.
was for that their battles endured long, and stood upon the strenght of
their arms, but at this day, of very short durance, thorough the violence and
dexterity of the cauallerie, vivacitie of the harquebuserie, and helped with
the fury of the artillery.

As well is it to be considered in what manner the enemy begins to fight,
whether it be by hastening to much his charges for to come to the chock, or
prolo^ging the skirmish for to seek a good occasion, according to the motive
he has, if in seeing his men timorous, he may renforce them, engrossing the
skirmish over much, that he suffer not his me^ to loose courage, or after a
charge retire back through the confidence of the help of his squadrons, in
such sort as he may execute (if it be done with agilitie and good order) his
purpose, and keep those which he charged, from turninge back again, if being
inferior in cauallerie, he putt them in such place as they may fly, running
away upon the enemies charge, and aftewards to fight equally infanterie with
infanterie.

General notes for like days of battle in which it is impossible for a
soldior to describe unto Y.H. all the circumstances as a player at chesse,
albeit the sorts of draughtes be very many, can not answer any that shall
ask him for to learn, which is the best, further then to give the mate, and
not being able to do that, to take the fierce, or some other peace, and
finally to keep the gain with good advantage, but putting the boorde with the
chesse-me^ set before him, in disposing them he may play many good draughts,
when in the end with only putting forward of one pawn he shall mar all. The
like falls out in war, and the best is to win, and when a squadron or part
of the army can not be broken, then to stand to be superior, or with
advantage knowing the situation, and which way the rather to proffit himself
according to the demonstration of the enemy, to ordeine a squadron to
advantage it self, with cauallerie or infanterie, or wings of harquebuserie,
to seek out the flank of another, or to get some high bank, or ditch, or
piece of a wood, places by which the enemy may be made to loose what he
holds, giving occasion to charge them, or break them: a part which a
general ca^ hardly play by imagination, except the presence of the occasion
present it self, as in many other things, neither am I able to signify unto
Y.H. more then some in common, and those of most moment.

Among other in my judgment, is the fury of the powder to be considered to be
so great at this day, Considerations of importance in fight.
helped with the instruments of artillery, muskets and harquebuses, as not
only it comes to break, as in times past did, throwing weapons, This is
derived from Phalanae, a Macedonian legio^, or company of 8 co. as Caterua is
used for a legion among the old Gauls: and legio is a company of chosen
soldiers, the number varied in times.
fallanges and legions, before coming to handstrokes, but disordereth and
opens squadrons and battallons, defeating them, and so the greatest part of
victories which is gained at this time, is by having obtained them with
artillery or readiness of harquebuserie by their lively voleyes, disorderinge
the squadrons of the enemy in such manner as they put them in rowte, and
defeating them, without ever seeing or afronting them, except seldome-times the
squadrons of pikes.

For this cause it is a matter much grown in disputation, in what place the
artillery should be carried upon a day of journey, one being of opinion that it
go before all the squadrons, to offend the enemy far of, discharging
stronger, Opinions where the artillery is to be placed upon a day of battle.
and by this means the squadro^s to be in no danger remaining behind, which
are still to open and shut as the artillery passes, where cannot be any
profit at all. Some are of opinion that the best place to put the artillery is
in the void places of the squadrons, without tying them to open at the chock,
a matter which is the beginning of disordering themselves, although they know
what they must do.

Those that are of other opinion, hold for the best place to carry it at the
sides of the army, and squadrons, fortifying by this manner of defense the
flankers, or placing it on the right or left side, as shall give most
advantage being the most convenient that may be to choose a most aduantageous
situation for the artillery, and so eminent, as it may be able to discharge
as soon as they discover the squadrons of the enemy, disposing the
harquebuserie and musketerie of the wings in places where they may play with
most security, by the quality of them, or defense of the cauallerie and
squadrons, where by they come to obtain a great effect, which is to be able to
judge, almost with a continual motion, if the harquebuserie be skillful,
offending the enemy.

Small wings of harquebusry, more commodious in fight the^ great.
These wings of harquebuserie or musketerie, although it is the custom to
compou^d them of three hundred soldiers, I hold better to divide into smaller
bodies, for that they may be able if occasion require the uniting of themselves
in one, to do it always with facility, and when they are small by standing
divided, they be much better able to fight with them, Captains of experience
guyding them: especially if the soldiers be exercised in such manner, as if
occasion require the first ranks may kneel upon the ground to shoot off,
discovering thereby a blanke to those which stand behind to make a good mark
discharging their voley at one instant.

In making the wings little, another effect is gotten, which is when they
entertayne a skirmish with them, mainteyning it with the end to see the enemies
disposition, that then the harquebuses wax whot, and many times the soldiors
powder is done, and not being able to choose with their swords they are
enforced to beg more with great gabling, and not fit that the enemy should
understand it, and by being few they retire easily to fetch it, refreshing
them with other, without any confusion at all in dividing it out of the
barrells, which many times through the haste which is made, are set on fire and
so the soldiors left clean without powder, which the enemy perceiving is the
more animated to the cloze, and I have been my self in a skirmish upon a day of
battle, when it has been very avaylable to know this, by the fire and
crake which the barrel gave.

Advise of impottance
Jointly there must be a special care taken in viewing by experience, and the
eye of a soldior, the situation which the enemy occupyeth, and on what part
by reason he is likeliest to plant his artillery, for that it is not fit to
set the squadrons of cauallerie upon any ground subject to be battered, nor to
be hurt with the fury of the enemies harquebuserie or musketerie: because
albeit in war artillery slays fewest, yet the fury thereof frighteth most,
and seldomtimes can a squadron of cauallerie keep his situation, if golpes of
artillery light thick within it, or that the enemies harquebuserie assalt it,
causing it this mischief, to be feign to take one of the two parties, which is
to retire themselves, a demonstration which upon like days puts great
courage into the enemy, causing great confusion among their own, and though
such a squadron does not charge without time, nor order, moved thereunto by
being ill able to resist their blows, and esteeming it for less
inconvenience to mingle themselves amongst those which give them, yet comes
it ordinarily to be done with great disadvantage: and notwithstanding that it
has sometimes fallen out to be no impediment at all to the gayning of the
victory, yet grew it more by chance, then reason, through the rashness of the
soldiors, and not wisdom of the general: who is to seek to forbear it, and
likewise not to fight with men tired, unable to carry them with speed unto
it, which wax breathles, the pikes not being able then to be held with
strength, nor the harquebuserie to shoot with assurance, nor the cauallery to
move with force and dexterity, and all for want of breath.

It is likewise to be considered, that if necessity do not force unto it, the
fight be not begone by engaging all the squadrons, in such manner as when the
victory is gotten, they cannot enjoy the fruit thereof, for the great loss of
many men: which binds a man to seek to give battle with a foot of led,
discovering the intent of his enemy, and demonstration which he makes to
follow one motive from another, opening the door for a new and different
success: and in any matter else what soever Y.H. and he which governs, is to
show a soundnes, which the physicians say that good complectioned bodies
hold, no whit altering themselves for overmuch cold or heat: the very same
being fit to be in the mind of a soldior, not to disorder himself upon any
good success, nor yet to grow coward upon any evil, but that his courage
appear in the very midst of his adversity.

I have set no place down for Y.H. guydon, and squadron of your corte, to
stand in upon a day of bataile, because that must fall out, as the reason of
war causes Y.H. to fight, not being possible to appoint it, without knowing
the scituatio^ where the fight is made, and form of battle in which the
army is to be put, wherein you must resolve to appoint such place as may be
most convenient for such a squadron, provided that in the chose thereof, it be
done in such part, as Y.H. may commau^d and govern with most ease the whole
body of the army, and parts thereof, without engaging to fight with your
own standart, except it be upon the last brunt, because if you should
otherwise do, it were impossible for you to govern, which is that which
touches a Prince: And albeit this which I wright, is the manner of war, many
Princes and generals, after having appointed out a place for the squadro^ of
their court, setting their standart therein, have notwithstanding left it,
going to view the rest of the squadrons, to see if they kept well the orders
set down, and determination which the soldiers and heads of squadrons
held, speaking unto them, and providing likewise other new, if necessity
should so require, which is that which gives law, not only in matters of
war, but in all the rest of this life, and has made Princes and Generals
to fight in their own person, upon such ground as they least thought of, not to
loose opportunity, and according to other considerations which are wont to
occur, as the motive which the enemy, and your own army makes, which is
impossible to put in writing, except a man were present to see the occasion.

If the enemy have such store or men, as that he thinks with them to be able
to guirde in the battle of his contrary, Form of fight when there is fear
that the enemy may girde in the battle.
and that the situation be upon a plane, where nature does not fortify it,
without some flank of the army or squadrons, it is to be looked into, whether
the enemies infanterie be so many in number as to be able to do it, or only the
multitude of horse brasing in of the army. In respect of these two things it
is very good advise to garnish the flanks of the camp with the carts of
bagage, if there be any, which may serve for tre^ches, and when there is none,
nor place of advantage, that may be picked out, the artillery must be putt
alongest the flanks of the squadrons, to the end they may play a slante upon
the enemy, with more hurt, making a greater front, to be able to better
themselves with their own squadrons, binding the enemy by this means when he
carries an intent to compass in the battle of the contrary part, to
spredd him self very much to effect it: and to come near to the close, he
must be feign to go streightning in by little and little the squadrons, and
drawing the front close together. Whereby time may be taken to give more voleys
of artillery and musketrie upon the enemy, before clozing and coming to hand
strokes, which is that only, which an army that stands in a troublesome
state, is able to help himself with to advantage his own strength, being
otherwise with so great an inequality less in number.

Upon days of battle, when there be men of diverse nations in the army, and
not of the same fashion of garments, by being free and serving sundry Princes,
besides a commandment of carrying skarfes of diverse colors to be known by (a
matter which is not done with precisenes) to prevent that friends offend not
one another, at the time of the skirmish, a word is to be given in public to
all the squadrons, by which they may be able to distinguish themselves from the
enemy, and know one another.

If the enemy waxing weak in the skirmishe, ye perceive that in any of his
squadrons they depart from the harquebuserie with which they were fortified,
Demonstrations which squadrons are wont to make upon a day of battle.
or empty the depth, by the soldiers retiring from the last ranks, the pykes
to cross one another, and the colors to move with disorder, and that such a
squadron of cauallerie or fanterie go on such part, as it can not be able to
yield any help to the rest, or be relieved by them, albeit that every one of
these demonstrations show the small strength and courage they have to keep
the place, giving occasion thereby to charge them, yet must you do it with the
loose men that go in the skirmishe, assisted with some good squadro^ of
cauallerie, the rest bettering themselves at the same instant: a motive which
will discover the enemy and his weakness with the demonstration before said:
which although it put him in route, yet is it not to be followed by any way,
disordering the principal squadrons of the battle, for that were to venture
it, not having bodies ready formed to follow the pursuit in such manner as
the enemy might be kept from renewing him self therein. For that an army
cannot be said to be vanquished and defeated, until all the squadrons come to
be disordered, least forming them selves of new, they may come to hold their
former vigor. Which binds not to undo your own squadrons, upon any
demo^stration of good success, the heads which take charge thereof using great
diligence, and care therein, and upon any appearance of harm, all the strength
they can, that they disorder not them selves, opening the way to be put in
route: a point in which the safety of courage and soundnes of a General is of
great importance, considering thereby the proceeding of the enemy without ever
altering in charging of him, or drawing together to resist him, ordeyning that
the squadrons of the fanterie, bettering of them selves, be done with a leaden
foot, and the cauallerie charge them with the raynes in hand, for that in no
one thing of this life, is there seen a greater change of fortune then in
matters of war, where a commandment ill understood, or ordinance ill
executed, a rashenes without order, a light voice, or a false fancy, may cause
those to recover the victory, which were before held for lost.

Y.H. having gained the battle, What a Prince is to do after a battle
gained.
is instantly to give thanks to our Lord, for such a benefit received, and to
honor such as live, who have served you therein with their strength and
stoutnes, and those that are dead with their boldness and valor, whom you are to
bury with all honor and solemnity, rewarding their sons, and heirs,
according to the quality of their service done, showing a feeling that Y.H.
has had a loss, by the miscarrying of any head of the army, when he was a
person of valor, and experience, for that it is one of the greatest losses
that can fall to a King or Prince, to whom GOD has given means to be able to
make men ritche, and to be followed, but not to be wise and experienced in
war, except he have framed the course of his life to follow it, and had the
fortune to see many fashions in it, which is the thing of greatest advantage
for a man to better him self by in an army.

Men in ancient time, never esteemed battayles after they were summoned to be
gained, except the conqueror held him self three days in the lodging, giving
thereby to understand that the field remained for them, and that the enemy was
overcome: a matter not greatly regarded now, holding it for a battle when
all the enemies squadrons are broken, and that no one remains entire, gayning
therein the artillery and colors, and when any squadron is left entyre,
although some artillery and ensigns be gotten, it is called a route, a name
which is used this day, as well when they kill and break any great number of
men, although they carry no artillery nor many colors or ensigns. The
artillery and munitions which are gotten, must be to Y.H. and the colors and
ensigns, the Generals, giving ten crowns to the soldier that got it,
when he brings it.

According to man's judgment, it can not be probably thought, that ever Y.H.
will come to be besieged, being a Prince so powerful, for that it is a
chastisement to those which are, wherewith our Lord afflicts Kings, when by
his secret judgments he will wrap them in all sorts of miseries, but it may
so fall out as some general of Y.H. may loose a battle, and by gathering
together the relics thereof, which is that which must be done as soon as
they see the principal squadrons routed, to save one, and when not, to geather
the more part of the soldiers routed, making one body, wherewith to be able to
defend the rest which come in from slying, and to hinder the enemy by this
means, that he do not follow the pursuit at his pleasure.

Causes which may enforce a man to defend a place.
Even so may it fall out that he may receive so great a route, as that he be
enforced, through the loss thereof, to quitt the field, putting in one or two
places such forces as are left him, to keep the enemy from being master of
the field, or making a free progress through the Kingdom or Province as he
lists, bynding him not to leave them behind him, and in case he would have
them rendered, to resolve to besiege them, by this means when the mischief
exceeds the forces, gayning of time the whilste, that matters may change
therewith.

It may likewise be that some Prince or Potentate, may break into a war
against Y.H. so sodenlie, finding him self armed, as that he will give no time
to compounde an army, or to war with him, serving your turn upon any such
occasion best, by well furnishing of places, in such sort, as they may be able
to endure a siege, giving them in this time matter enough to occupy them
selves, until you may be armed, and make front against the enemy.

Upon these considerations, and such as the chang of humane things does
commonly carry with it, it is very probable that Y.H. Capteins are to defend
many places, and therefore I am in reason to write among other actions in the
wars, after what manner a place is to be defended, being that which refineth a
soldier, and serves as a touchstone showing the quintecence of his valor and
industry, when he holds the parts of wisdom and sufferaunce in those
travails which daily pass in a siege or enclosed straight, caryinge them
with ioyfulnes and content, which animateth the soldiers which are with him, to
make them seem not to be great, and causes the fearfuller sort to hold them
for less then the chastisement of death, if they should show their cowardice,
much soundnes, and resolution being very necessary for this purpose. Besides
the head considers better then any other those inconveniences, which are to
be prevented by feeling them, and the weight which he carries upon his own
shoulders. Particulars which naturally would cause men to be discouraged in
defending, by reason that they find ordinarily many necessary things to want
in sieges and enclosed places, which should maintain them, if the honor of
their own person, and loyalty sworn to the service or their Prince, and to
God, did not cause them to esteem little their own life, rather then their
honor should be spotted in saving thereof.

By this which I have set down Y.H. may judge what persons you are to choose
to recommend the keeping of such places unto, What is to be required in him
which is to take charge of a place besieged.
as are to endure a siege not apperteyning to Y.H. nor to a Prince to mainteyne
any and very seldom to a Captain general, but only to furnish them with
heads that are soldiers, and other necessaries to defend themselves withal,
being free to be able to be still succored, and to oppose the enemy,
according to such state, as they shall find him in.

The Captain or head to whose hands Y.H. shall commit the keeping or defense
of any place, ought to be courageous, Consideration for the furnishing of a
place with soldiors expectinge a siege.
wise, and a soldier of experience, and having never before been in a place
besieged, it is meet that he have with him some leaders, or particular
soldiors which have been: Jointly it is to be considered, of what quality the
soldiers be which are in the place, and with whom it is fit to furnish it, in
case it be necessary to have it renforced, and that they may not be bysognes,
and easy to mutiny. In this respect those nations which serve Y.H. are to be
thought upon, and what proof any has made in co^seruing of places, whether
they be your own vassalls or no, and whether there be within the place any
ordinary soldiers of the same Province, strangers or other being all
vassalls, what King he is, Prince or Potentate, or enemy whom suspicion is had
of, will besiege the place, particulars which being nicelie digested, will
quickly cause Y.H. to resolve, whether the soldiors of the same Province ought
to be all of one nation, or different, following the opinion and judgment of
such Capteins and cou^sellours as Y.H. shall hold about you, whose experience
ought to know, what head or soldiors upon the present occasion should be most
auailable for the defense of the place, imagining that they may come to be
besieged, if the enemy fight with gallantnes.

Consideration for the fortifying of places.
It is likewise to be marked whether the place be fortified already being a
frontire, or had need to be fortified anewe, and after what manner that must
be, carrying themselves in this according as the enemy gives time for it, with
ingenors and persons which know what fortification means, for that it
falls out many times when one would fortify a place, strengthening it by
rauelin, cauallere and pincer or spurr, they make it weaker, because they
understand not their business, and so comes it to serve for no defense, but
rather to help the enemy to offend more. In this it must always be provided
to have a place kept, where you may fight in squadron, and trauesses, which is
that by which batteries are best defended: for which cause in old time they
invented round towers for it, and in these days, to shun the inconvenience of
a circular form, being notwithstanding a means to keep them from being
offended by direct line, from the flancks and trauesses where the artillery
plays, they have formed great bulwarks to cover them in angular form, giving
proportion from one bulwark to an other, and that the trauesse may come to
fasten (as the ingenors term it,) which is to have the bullets light upon the
front of the bulwark, or part most convenient, while the enemy does batter,
for that at this day they use not to batter the cortine between the two
travesses, but only the fro^t of the bulwark, holding it for a more easy
battery, to quite one traues or casamate, then both, especially if there be
any place or rome in them for a piece to batter, against which do trauesses
hardly resist, although they go by the diche, and for to preserve these
pieces (which while they are in being, and the trauesses in life, makes a good
defense) they use to make the corners of their bulwarks so thick.

Jointly it is to be considered, that it is a most sure rule in matter of
fortificatio^, that whatsoever is seen the defendant loses, by shooting of
the artillery in direct line as the sight goes, and if there must be four
men required to carry one dead man out of his house, how much more reason is
it that there be as great a number or more to drive him being alive from
thence. Whereby it cannot be imagined, that any will lay a siege, without
being sure to have equal forces to them within, and likewise artillery, and
when the place serves for it, and carries means, thorough many bulwarks,
caualiers, and platformes, to put two or three counterbatteries to that which
is planted, it may not be presupposed that they can be able to keep the^, since
that he which besieges, will not in reason attempt the enterprise, except he
hold forces proportionable to finish it, for that otherwise he should enter
into an assured mischief without hope of any profit: It is likewise to be
looked unto, that the fronts of the bulwarks may not lie subject to be battered
by the corteyne of any mountain, or emine^t place of scituatio^, where the
enemy may plant his artillery, the men not being able then to stand upon any
defense and that the parapets may in no wise be broader the^ a pike can cover.

These which I have touched unto Y.H. are the foundations, and principal
points to fortify by, being no part of my meaning to handle herewith the
fashion of the works, or manner of the rampires, which be the better, nor other
particularities, for that I should run out too far, and it were fit to show
the manner of fortification, ever with a compass in the hand, and composition
of lines, which is no work for a blind man, albeit for the time which I have
lived, I have spent enough in learning the Theorique of fortification by the
Mathematicques, to ascerteine thereby, and with other grounds, what the
experience in war, and manage of the artillery brought me to learn, knowing
the reason for founding it, and fitnes of fashion for the stocks, and
carriges, the better to assure the hitting of the mark.

It is likewise to be considered, whether the place be little or great, or
have many neighbors near it, accustoming to carry arms or to make guardes,
or no, and what confidence you may have of them to leave it unto them.

Being a frontire town, or fortified, it ought in reason to have soldiors to
keep it, and to have out of those offices of the artillery which Y.H. shall
hold in that Province or Kingedome, a list made of the arms that are in it,
quality of pieces, and stocks, and carriges for them, bullets, powder, mache,
lead, hanspikes, timbers, mattocks, spades, and other munitions and furniture,
apperteyning to the officers of the state of the artillery to have a list
always of them, whereby may be seen what is wanting, and necessary to be
provided, and with what diligence

Diversity of victuals.
In such like cases of frontire and castells, where garrisons and ordinary
bands reside, there are to be houses of munitions, and victuals: as powdered
flesh, fish, meal, salt, grane, as pease, lentils, wine, vinegar, oil, and
other provisions which are always to be kept in store for many respects, and
at their times to be sold and renewed, that they may not be marred without
proffit. And with like consideration must salpeter be kept, brimstone and cole,
to make powder and refine it, as also artificial fieres, and wood, which in
Castells, and little places when they are besieged, there is great want of, not
being so soon felt in great towns, for that upon necessity they pull down
houses, for to burn their timber.

Being a place, What a head is to do at his first entrance into a place of
defense.
where no ordinary garrison has been usually kept, it is meet that the head
at his entrance in, together with the men that are to guard, go view the
whole circuit thereof both within and without, whether the diche be dry, or
hold water in some part or all, what fashion the walls be of, for appointing
of the stands where the cordeguardes be to be set, and sentinels by day and
night, placing a cordegarde, two, or the most principal in the midst of the
town or market place, to succor the rest, to appoint his rounds, overrounds,
and conterrounds, increasing and diminishing the^, as ieolousie and suspicion
shall grow of the enemy, without pointinge out to any nation, or colors, if
it be possible to refrain it, especially at the walls and gates where no
soldior is to know on what place he shall become ce^tinel, until his officer
place him in his stand. And to this purpose, the colors when the watch is
ready to be set, use to cast lotts, every night when any fear is, for such
place as they must stand in, without being assured of any one, giving order
that the cordeguardes, through which the colors must pass, hold a good place,
and little watc'houses, casamates, and salies along the dich, being dry, or
with water, where boats stand ready for the^, thereby preserve We have no
other word in English but as we borowe of the Italian^ strada coperta, which
is a close or covert walk to defend men with a parapet, when they sa^e out of
a town to fight with the enemy, it is made upon the top of the cou^tersca^pe,
and is in good fortificatio^. 20. foot broad at the least: the like counter
scarpe have I seen in the citadel of Anwarpe.
the estrada cubierta on the brim of the diche, and where dubble sentinels are
to be placed, and where single, and whether in making the rounds it be
necessary to carry lanternes or no.

The cordegards being appointed, and stands for the centinells in places most
convenient, you must with great consideration proportion out those men that are
to do it by day and night, helping your selves with assistaunce of the
neighbors if you may repose any trust in them. And for this purpose must a
list be always had in readiness, of the number of the men, and persons able to
bear arms. Likewise they do shut some gates, walling them up for the better
assurance of the place, pulling down such towers, walls, and other buildings,
as cannot be defended, preventing that the enemy occupy them not with the
siege for the same respect, when they fear that the battery of any buyldinge,
or tower will make any great ruin upon the diche, by giving any commodity to
the enemies purpose thereby, they blow it up with powder, or put proppes,
digging under the foundations, where they would have it to fall, a matter
effected with great facility, putting fire to the timbers, and in these
fortifications, as also in raising of caualiers and rampires, the Governor of
the place ought to be the first that takes a basket in his hand, that by the
ensample which he gives, in seeing himself labor, the rest of the soldiers
and neighbors of the place may do it with a better will.

Besides they must pull down the suburbs, and spoil the gardens round about,
least the enemy reap any commodity thereby in finding them, and yet sometimes
those of the country have been found so affectionate to the service of their
Prince, as it has been a means to keep the^ from receiving this mischief,
leaving unto them their houses entire. And in case they stand about the diche,
if the enemy chance to sease of them, by making loopholes in them, he will be
able to keep his ground almost as well, as they shall do upon the walls,
without ever spending time in working of trenches, the houses by boring through
the walls, serving him to pass from one to another, which is done with great
readiness, and with the same they hang blinders of canuas, alongest the ends of
the streets, that the besieged may not discern any mark to shoot at while
they fortify themselves with diches and trauesses, to hinder the salies out of
the gates upon the quarters: which they within are to adventure to stop, if
there be men enough for it, burning the blinders, by putting after the
harquebuses are charged, scowring sticks within the barrel, and upon the
ramer, toe, and pyche, to which fire is to be given, discharging the harquebuse
straight upon the blinders, which the stick, so that it be no great distaunce,
will set on fire, and burn it: an effect which has been wrought with crosbowes
and which I have seen tried, being present at a time when such a remedy
served to very necessary purpose.

In case that any suspicion grow of the natural borne of the country, fearing
their small fidelity, Form of fortif^ing gates.
it is a good means to have the men of war with ordinary soldiors to sease
upon the towers of the gates, which serve most commodious for it, and to
fortify them the best they can aginst those of the country, putting some
victuals and some munitions in them, and in this you must proceed with more or
less circumspectio^, according as the soldiors are that keep it, and quality
of me^ of the country, and disposition of the gate.

Likewise when you see small store of victuals to be in a place, and that you
are enforced to maintain it, you must prevent it in time, by putting out all
such as are unprofitable people in a siege, as impotent men that are not able
to bear arms, weomen, and children. Upon like occasions, fearing a siege, so
many people may come to beg leave to depart, and go away with their goods,
as it is meet to be considered of, whether it be to be granted or no, or to
leave them and persons of mark in the place, to fill up the guarde with them,
if the neighbors use to do it, matters which are to be ordained as occasion
serves, foreseeing that the place be not dispeopled by so many, as that the
rest shall be thereby discouraged, who not knowing how to dispose of them selves
elsewhere, are content to tarry within. The colors in places of garrisons, do
ever enter guard, When the watch is to be set in garrisons.
if necessity force no other matter, an hour before sun set, and until
the gates be shut, which ought to be done in a good hour, the soldiers may
not be permitted to disarme, in which their Captain, and Alferez are to give
good ensample unto them.

About the guarde of the keys of the gates, are diverse customs, Advise
touching the kepinge of the keys of gates.
the Governors, Capteins, Justices, or other persons, whom it concerns
keeping them, and some times the cordeguards themselves hold them, the
Captain taking charge thereof, not able to take them to go open the gates
without making the whole cordeguarde privy, and so no precise order can be
kept: As Well when necessity requires it, and that there is great cause of
suspicion, two or three persons pretending to keep the keys of the gates by
their pre-eminence to do it, it is held for the best, to put so many locks
upon the gates, as there are pretenders, and that these locks be strengthened
with a great bolte, or bar, which shall bolte them, with another lock and
keye unto that, which the principal head it to keep, and to be the first at
the opening thereof: the rest using the pre-eminence of their keys after him,
and this to be observed for great gates, and posternes: and when it is feared
that the men will attempt shamefullie to go to kill the head, or force him to
deliver up his principal keye, the best way in such a case is, to give it
every night secretly to diverse persons, where by they can not resolve
determinatelie to procure it, because they know not who has it.

Much suspicion being had of the enemy, if the town be weak, almost all the
men are to keep guard anights, sleeping upon the walls, especially if they
fear any scale or surprise, and having any cauallerie of garrison within it
they appoint the^ to make round on horseback a nights, and between the two
gates or percullises are those soldiors horses, which are to be put without the
town for centinells, if the ways be fit for it, having made barriers, that in
case any noise be heard, they may retire with security, giving intelligence
thereof, and when not, they put some of the foot bands for forlorn sentinels
without the gates, to who^ they give, as I wrote before a different word, very
much thereby assuring the guard of places in the night, and in Barbary they
keep dogs without their fortresses, which winding any men, bark in such sort,
as the sentinels upon the walls must needs hear it.

The forlorn centinell hearing any noise, Form of guarde in some places
is to bring news thereof, to such as stand upon the gate or raueline next
unto it, for to give alarome to the rest, and that the Governor or Captain
may understand how things pass. In many frontires or Castles where straight
watch is kept, they use to hang a bell over the gates, which ringing out upon
any advertisement, is answered by the greater bell of the principal
cordeguard, which having commodity to do it, is to be hanged on the highest
tower, the which the rest of the gates follow. Upon this greater bell every
man is to arm, and as often as that ringeth, all the rest are to answer, that
they may be seen to stand watchful upon the ward, and if any bell chance not
to answer, straight the head of the principal cordeguard, is to send to know
the cause why it does not, and when the bell of any gate ringeth, the Captain
which stands at the guarde, knows by that, on what part the centinells
find the noise, for that all the bells are not to be touched one aunswering
another, except that of the principal cordeguarde have first runge out: the
which it is to do at sundry hours of the night, by giving ear unto the
rest, two ce^tinels standing always at this bell. In this manner the night
watch is continewed until day, without retyring the centinells, Form of
openinge gates.
until they which stand upon the highest tower make three toles upon the
bell, which is the token to show that the daylight serves to descrie from
far of, round about the town, and the guard withdraw from of the walls, and
the rest to, sending the keys of the posternes, to take in the centinells of
the raueines and casemates, turning to shut them, and to open the principal
gates, but if any suburbs be near unto it, cave, hole or place, where any men
might lie hid, then they use to send sentinels out at the posternes to view
it, and standing assured of no danger, they return to give intelligence to the
Captain, that he may open all the gates, the soldiers standinge in order with
their weapons in their hands, commanding the men of the town to go forth
without noise about their work, and necessaries, and such as come in from
without, to do the like.

Those sentinels of the tower, and principal cordeguard, which stand by day,
ought to give so many toles upon the bell, as they descrie horssemen, and
passinge the number of fifteen, if any suspicion be of the enemy, or that
they see many men, although on foot, they take the alarome, putting up a small
ensign in that tower, that by that it may be known on what part of the town
they are discovered: with which they shut fast the gates, that stand at the
guarde thereof.

This warning is in some places given by a trompet, and works the same
effect, and so they make the sentinels which stand upon the gates, to
understand that men are discovered from far, and they as they perceive them
from their stand, sound the number of the horse that go by the way with as
many more blastes to warn them that stand at the bars, and ward of the
gates. In some place they shut them at dinner time, This discipline was scarce
grown Spanishe when Bredah was won by a Turfe boat: you do well to take
example thereby.
the sentinels resting in their sta^des, and seeing any carts come into the
town, which carry any great lading, wherein men may lie, they are to be well
viewed before any enter in, and when any rivers or channels of water pass along
the town, by which barks may come in from without, the grates or gates are not
to be opened before some soldier have searched them: and being lade^ with hay,
straw, wood, or any such like things, or timber laid in order, they are to
sound it with half pikes, to be sure whether any men be therein or no, and
not open the gates until that be done.

In this manner is the guard to be continewed in garrisons of towns where they
live with suspect, giving it in writing to the Serieants majors, that they may
do the like in their colors, and know the names of the gates, caualiers,
stands, and cordeguards, where they are to be kept, whereby after lots cast,
every one may go to his own room.

Orders being set down for the guardes, the Governor or Captain of the place
is to take a view of all sorts of victuals, that are within it, distrusting a
siege, as wheat, grain, salt-meates, wine, meal, salt, and to count
according to number of men and soldiers within the town, how many days they
may be able to maintain with them: aduertising Y.H. thereof, and what
artillery and arms are there, to the end that according to the listes you may
command they may be furnished, with what is convenient, artillery being one
of the most necessary things, with preparation and store of carriges and
stocks, wheels, and workmen to make new, for them which are spent in a
siege, repayring the touch-holes with time, if they be marred, and provision of
some small pieces, and muskets, with rests, which is a necessary weapen to
defend towns withal, for the easienes, with which they may be shot of, and
hurt which they do, holding convenient munitions for all, as quantity of
pikes, harquebuses, and other arms, and medicines for to cure weak, and hurt
men.

I do not write unto Y.H. in particular, of the sorts of arms, and
munitions, nor of the victuals, setting only down the strongest for the
sustentation of man's life, for that it is impossible for any soldier how
experienced so ever he be, to be able to mention all things that are necessary
for the maintenance of a siege, and albeit it be an ordinary fashion among
soldiers to amplify what they think fit to defend withal, yet cannot the
greatest soldior that is upon earth, tell, though his King say unto him, that
he must defend such a place, and that he stand satisfied with the fortificatio^
thereof, asking what number of men for guard himself lists, artillery,
munition, victuals, and all other things, which shall be esteemed necessary, but
when all is granted unto him, within three days being besieged, he shall
find want of many things, wherein he will blame himself for not having asked
them, not being in his power to be able to divine all: which arises from
hence, that no man can determinatlie imagine in what manner his enemy means
to offend him, nor what men, instruments, engines, and artillery he will bring
with him for it, and therefore it is impossible to foresee all things, whereby to
be able to resist him, the which is confirmed, but with considering how
momentarilie a town used to have provisions every day brough to it, feels
the want of them, if upon unseasonable weather, or any other respect, they
leave to come for two or three days, the people co^playning of the travail
they endure, being many times for things, which they least thought, they should
stand in need of.

What necessity causes to invent.
This inconvenience comes many times to be remedied, very necessity
sharpening wits, by practicing things for some effects, and inuenting of other
which were never before imaginable: a particular which confirms such
inventions as men have helped themselves withal in sieges, when they find
themselves straightened, and in one of the three in which my self was present,
coming in the end to be hardly straightened, and to suffer great hunger, all
means failing us to send any men out to deliver our estate to the Kings
ministers, our Sovereign, for that the enemy had so seized the diches and
gates, as none could go forth without falling into their hands, we devised a
river running cross the town to send men in a bark a swimming, who passed
alongest to the very outmost parts of the enemy, making semblance of coming
out for to swim, having given unto them, a little pellet of lead, in which
was a ticket of paper written in cifer, carrying the intelligence, and soldered
close up, about the bigness of a pill: the which they swallowed, passing freely
with the same through the enemies, who did not only search their apparel and
shirtes, to see if they could find any letter in them, or any thing written
in the linen, but washed their shoulders, when they came a shore, to discover
whether any thing were written on them, a matter which sometime falls out:
and in this manner we both gave and received intelligence, by the care which the
men them selves took of the pills which they had swalowed: a piece of work
which seemed impossible unto us, before such time as necessity had made it
easy. This same, and hunger causes men to eat such things, as would
astonishe a man to hear them but named.

Before that the enemy discover him self in planting his siege, or enclosing
a Town, Consideration to cause the besieged to saly forth
they ought to mark well all the pieces thereof, and on what part in all
reason he is to present him self with his squadrons of cauallerie, playing upon
them, using for this purpose, whole and demi Coluerines, in the platformes and
caualiers, being pieces which reach and carry furthest: and albeit they tear
not so much as a cannon or demie cannon, yet are they very profitable to
defend places withal, and so are many light pieces, for that they are easily
carried to all parts, and brought back as well when they have discharged:
holding the places besides well viewed, where to place the harquebuserie out of
the estrada cubierta, if there be any upon the bank of the diche, for to help
the cauallerie, which shall be in the town, which is to salie out to view the
enemy, and the leaders to advertise the head, of the siege with what courage
the enemy marches, and what quantity of me^ shall be needful to be sent in
those salies and other, for that the end of him which is besieged is, to hinder
any neighboring upon him, entertayning him as far of as he can, for that he
which comes to besiege, is more powerful, and to defer this, there need
not be so many soldiers ve^tured in the salies, as that they shall come to
want for the defense of the walls, which is that, where the last valor is to
be used, and whether in the end all the besieged come, a far inferior number
being able to fight with greater advantage, and to hold many men, is to
conserve a place, for that a wall of men is held for the best wall, and which
is able to defend such fortified places, as of them selves are not able to hold
out, prolonging hereby time in defense: which comes to be an occasion, by
that which many times falls out in armies, and among Princes whose they are,
that the place is still mainteyned for him which first possessed it.

Consideration in prolonging the defense of a town.
It is to be understood, that a man should keep a place, as long as possibly
he may, and that not only for days and hours to do it, is a matter of
greatest importance, but for the least moment: being well known that when any
King or Prince shall command a town or forte to be yielded up, which any
Captain or Castellane has in charge, appointing him to do it by a day,
giving him a countersigne if he have any, that such Captain or Castellane is
to delay it even to the last of the four and twenty hours of the day, which
is preciselie set down unto him, accomplishing in this sort both his
obedience toward his Prince, and his loyalty unspotted, not yielding the
place up one iott, before he be bound to do it, nor falter one moment of time
in his fidelity of maintayning it, while it remains under his charge.

You must have likewise set at the loope-holes harquebuses a crocke and great
muskettes for restes, full level against the place where the enemy makes
demonstration to plant his battery, and to follow the trenches, which are to
be discharged upon sight of the light of the lanternes, with which they
sometimes work, and at other times at a venture, upon the hearing of any
noise, the fire of the harquebuses, and pieces giving light.

Advise how to stop mutinies.
When men besieged come once to be narrowly straightened, it falls out that
some will show cowardice, which least thought thereof: These give out speches
among the soldiors, relating the state of the siege, and small means of the
defense thereof: for which they hold it a far better way to take a
composition then to perish. To avoid any such prating, the best means the
head of a siege can use, is to have some soldiors of whose valor and
proceeding he has before made trial, and to disperse them into the
cordeguardes and companies of the rest, that by seeing their resolution and
constancy, and how they are the first in putting hand to all perils and
labors, the other may be animated to do the like: and if any soldior will
shame him self, still continuing such pratlinge, let them be speedily cut of,
without suffering them to proceed further: and the better to animate the men
within, the chieftaine him self must ordinarily visit the cordeguardes and
Centinells, showing him self affable toward all the soldiors, and giving them
good example, being him self the first at the fortifying of all defenses,
which will cause the soldiers to do the rest with much more will and
readiness: and in case any soldior be so much past shame, as that cowardice will
make him utter unseemly words, tending to the rendering up of the place, or
entising and leading others to join with him to ask the same, he is to be
punished exemplarily, and that readily, without giving time to have the voice
run further.

At the enemies working of his trenches, and planting of his battery, it
cannot be delivered unto Y.H. in what manner they must annoy him for that,
besides what I write of, that is to be done according as the disposition of the
diches, walls, and defenses are, shooting ordinarily from them at the
Trenches, with harquebuses and musketts, and great vigilance to be used in
discovering how the trenches run, whether hasteninge the salies or no,
carrying them selves according to the men they have, and hope of having it
succored. In some salies they use to plant the artillery on that part where
the quarters are to charge, for to drive them which are besieged back into the
town, annoying them worse thereby.

When the battery is once begun, there must be very good watch both day and
night kept on that part, Advise at the beginning of a battery
renforcing it according to such effect, as the enemies artillery has
wrought, and with order that none speak to any without, except he be
commmanded. with the same circumspection must no clock sound, nor bell after
that the town is once besieged, and at nights those that are besieged, stick
in the battery a pole of the length of half a pyke, and an iron, cross barred
at the end thereof, where they hang These we term by the name of cresset
lights.
rundells of ropes, sodde^ with pitch and tar, which burns giving a very
great flame, and serves sticking the pole without, to discover whether they be
come to the ditch, and view what hurt the battery has donn, and to be able to
hit the^ without, without the light causing any hurt to those within in
continuing of their reparations. And in towns where they fear any scale, by
reason there be few soldiers, and no great confidence held of the place, it is
a very good way still to keep these fires on the towers of the walls, for to
discover the diches, which I have tried upon like occasion.

The diches being dry, if the battery continewe long, they go out alonge the
casamats thereof to view what ruin and damage it has done, making it clean:
other times they scatter pricks of iron in it before the assalt, and at other
times for to hinder it, they lay wood setting it afterward on fire: Things
which tyeth him that besieges, to hasten the working of his trenches, until
he desemboke out of the ditch, and quit the casamats, and if it hold water to
assure himself of the bank, that no barks pass by him, being very deep.

Which way to discover mines.
Jointly they make mines to give fire when the enemy assalteth them by the
battery, making it thereby the more hard, and those without coming to work,
they put the rimme of dromes on the top of the defenses, or in the countermines
with little hawks, bells, or beans which sturr upon the skin of the rimme, by
the trembling of the earth when the Pioners dig, whereby it is known which way
they take.

The same effect is wrought by hanging at a rope, hard stretched needles, and
putting under every needle a Barbers basin, that by their stirringe of the
earth, which mine, the needle may found in the basin, and sometimes they fill
basins and little dishes full of water, and by the moving thereof know which way
they go. It serves eue^ as well to make a little hole in the earth and
stouping down, you shall find the noise by your ear.

When they which besiege come to go with the mattocke, Remedy when they dig
the walls.
digging the fou^dations of the walls or towers, the remedy is to set a good
guard there, and to go digging as well to seek them out, to drive them from
their ground, and always to repair the battery by the best means that you
can. For this purpose sackes of wool (if there be any) serve very well, and
flock beds, as also chestes of wood filled with earth, or pipes, with wet
straw or hay mingled with earth, casting featherbeddes into the one and the
other, being a compounde which incorporateth very well, treadding down the
earth, Manner of reparations
and when it is clammie, and not dry, the straw and hay is wrethed like
halters, more then two handfulls broad, and they fasten them into the earth
with yrons, as a man pla^teth trees one near unto another. Wherewith they
greatly fortify rampires, so that it be wrought sometime before the battery.

These things be the common defenses used, but when there is no matter to make
them of, then must they be feign to do as necessity requires, and inventeth,
taking such to serve their turn, as they can find. Likewise they do lay
tables thick wrought with pikes of iron, like harrowes in the breach, against
the assault, and they let them down for that purpose with engines made with
wheels, at such time as the enemy assaulteth, having cheynes made of wood,
which are fastened, at the same instant, and at ease may be put to and taken
away. Some use them of iron alone, on the topp of the breach, and at the time
of their assalte raise them up with pulleys, and other engines, helping them
selves with garlands and balls of wildefire, molten lead, scaulding oil, and
such like: and in the end they must be feign to defend them selves,
notwithstanding that these and many other engines annoy the enemy much with the
trauesses and strength of the pikes, on whom the foundation is to be builded,
and to procure that the wall be always mainteyned, (without giving place to
fear, who is a powerful Lord, as often as he finds way given unto him) for
to form behind that new ditches, defenses, or half moons, which seldom
times will be able to defend a town, if the wall thereof be lost.

Aduertisements for to prevent throwinge of brigges into the diche.
The state of the battery being viewed, and demo^strations which the centinells
discover them without to make, for to give the assault, by drawing together
more colors, the^ they were wont, to the trenches, being no hour of watch,
nor out of order as they were wont to do when they would renforce the^, to
enjoy th'occasio^ of some mine, or tower, which they are desirous to hold, the
chief of the siege standing in the ditch, or some other place, is to mark
whither the enemy, not being able to come to the breach without a bridge, have
the night before thrown it in, or that it be to do. Because that if it be
made of barks, and that it betokens good store of water in the ditch, he
must procure sending some soldiors along the casamates and salies, that they
swimming, may sink them, making tronell holes in them, and being to be
thrown in before the assault, made of barrells, boats, or any other light
stuff, and with invention that the bridge hold a door drawn up, to serve for
a defense to those which throw it in, letting it afterward fall down, to make
it the larger, the^ must he have in readiness, good store of fireworkes, which
may flame in the very water, and burn it, and in case that the bridge be
covered with hides, therein they must help them selves with pieces from the
trauesses, if they have been able to preserve them, for to break the bridge
withal. And if they have lost them, then to put one, if it be possible, in the
front, wherewith to do the deed, and the bridge coming to the very breach,
to see if by casting of great stones or pipes of them, lightning round about
it, they may be able to split and break the bridge. Jointly they are to
furnishe the breach, beside the ordinary guarde, with a number of soldiors and
ensigns, which are to be picked out for the same purpose, renforcing the
weakest part thereof with soldiors, of whose courage and resolution good proof
has been made, the whole putting them selves with such weapons as they are to
fight withal, into a squadron, and upon some occasion they lay pikes
alongest the ground for such as brought none, to be able to serve with them,
necessity binding them thereunto, as a weapon which is to be used even to the
very last, against the^ which assault.

This done, he must furnish the rest of the cordeguardes in such manner as he
held them before ordered, according to the quality of the town, appointing a
particular leader to every one, in such sort, as they may be at hand to help
one another, and succor the^ selves, going, if it be possible, with their men
in good order: and in the principal cordegarde of the market place, the men
must be put into a squadro^, as in all the rest, where the head is to stand to
provide for what should be most convenient, and if the Town be great, to be on
horseback: visiting the battery, walls, and cordeguard, to animate them more,
to do their business with greater readiness, executing in his own person, what
is convenient, and in case that the defense of the place bind him to do it,
he shall do well to take a pyke him self, and stand in the breach.

Likewise he is to dispose of the weomen and men of the town, which do not
bear arms, as well near unto the cordeguardes, as the breach, that they may
cast with ladles, and other instruments, scalding water, oil, molte^ lead,
wildfires, and such like, when their be any to do it, and when not, then to
give them to the soldiers, casting down great quantity of stones, which if
there be many in the town, and do it with dexterity is not the worst defense,
and in this, that the troops of men and weomen may have particular leaders to
govern the^, so as no confusion be made, in their service, nor disorder.

Jointly the town being little, and in danger of fire, for that the houses are
all builded of timber, they are to have caudro^s in readiness at the gates, and
pipes full of water, and men appointed of purpose for to quench it, foreseing
that the enemy by intelligence had, nor any cowarde set them on fire at the
time of the assault.

When they that are besieged come to be narrowly straightened, it is a very
hard case for the^ which are within, to give any intelligence of their estate,
or of the quality of succors, which is to be required. For this cause they
prevent it in the beginning thereof, by agreeing upon signs with fires in the
night, and smoke in the day, or ensigns of sundry colors, and fashions, to
show what they stand most in want of, or succor they desire: and they get from
out of the country, swallows, doves, and dogs, which naturally return to
the place where they first bred, putting under the wings of the birds, or
tying to their feet, aduises, and in the collers of dogs put up in a pellet
of wax, and in like sort they have advertised again by these means and
preuentions, those within, at what time they should be succored, encouraging
them to abide it out, using like means and industries.

For the most part towns come to be lost thorough want of men, powder,
artillery, munition, and victuals, and if they which are besieged make
instance for any of these things, Considerations in yelding supplies.
when they come to want, assuring that the enemy must needs enter, if they be
not succored, Y.H. is to consider in assisting of them, that the succor of
men is the most easy, for that in marching they can defend themselves, but
powder alone can not, and there must be men to carry that in wallets upon
their sholders, or upon the horse buttockes, when it is most secure to carry
any cauallerie. The succors of artillery, munitions and victuals be very
cumbersome, if they go not by water (being then carried with ease) and of great
danger thorough the toil and trouble about them, being things of so great
bulk, and when the supply marches by land, they are enforced to have a great
quantity of carts, and horse to carry it, and much force and men to attend
it: whereby when you are desirous to supply any town with victual, you must
be feign to make a whole journey of it.

The armies being retired for to winter, the hardness of the time not yelding
commodity for to encampe, they put such men as they dismiss not, into holds,
and garrisons upon the frontiers, as well to make them rest from the wearines
of the field, and refresh themselves, as that they may war near unto the
towns, wherein the Governors are not only to content themselves in keeping of
them for a defensive war, but to procure the endemnifying of the enemy, by
as much as may be possible for them, weakening of his forces.

To this end they must be fame to help themselves with such manner of spies as
according to the quality of the Province or country or peopling thereof, What
is to be considered in the matter of spies.
they shall judge to be most convenient, entertayning them, within the enemies
towns and countries, to be able to advertise his desseine, if he assemble
together his men, what store he has upon the frontires, the estate of his
fortification, what manner of guarde he keeps both by day and night, whether
they go out ordinarily a freeboating or no, and such other occurrents as they
desire to be resolved of by spies, according as occasions fall out, whom they
must pay very well, giving unto them all satisfaction, as long as no dubble
dealing is discovered in them, or treachery suspected, and in small time they
shall be able to judge of those which are faithfullest, and of best understanding.

To look deeply into this, besides that they are to have diverse spies
co^paring their intelligences together, they must mark with great heed, in the
circumstances which they deliver in telling their news, how they have come to
understand them, and if they have been able, conformable to the quality of
their estate, to communicate with such persons as they give out to have heard
the^ of, whether they be matters likely to pass thorough many hands or no, or
whether understood by private conference. Either your spies were not well paid,
or failed you in Cadiz action.
Because that in war, by the outward preparations of men, artillery, munition
and victuals, such as are soldiers will most commonly discover the end of the
enterprise. And albeit that in frontires and places of moment they use to give
order unto sentinels, that they suffer no strangers to walk upon the walls, nor
ditches, nether within nor without, yet whosoever will but set his mind to be
informed of like fortifications, although he never before thought thereof,
shall always find means paying those well that make him know what he
desires, for that money is the thing, which can do most in general with
mankind.

Likewise they do suffer men upon the frontires, to whom they give no other
pay then leave to freeboate, and to live in the town, bringing their booties to
sell thither, and these be commonly men naturally borne of the same province,
and by knowing the ways and passages, annoy the enemy greatly, taking
prisoners by whom they come to understand many things: to this kind of people
they are to give leave to freeboote according to the quality of the war, and
proffit which may be reaped by their service.

Upon some occasions they spoil and destroy the villages round about the town,
When a country is to be dispeopled.
if the inhabitants be not well affected, to bind them, by having no houses of
their own, to fly unto the frontirs of their neighbors, and so the enemy
finds himself ouercharged by giving victuals to them, their wives and
children. But when laborours and husbandmen of the country round about, cannot
be dispeopled for some reasons, and are contented to victual the towns with
the fruits of their labors, it is to be considered that all contentment be
given unto them, and that the soldiors when they salie a freebooting out of the
town, do not misuse them, for that by this they will be able to give good
intelligence, and to pry with great care into the enemies actions, imagining
that by his endemnifying their own profit will arise.

For to know and view the field round about, the enemies frontires, ordinarily
they send soldiors to freebote upon the^, for the first days carrying good
guides alongest with them, whereby they come to be well practiced in the ways
and passages, and to consider the estate of the field, to see, if coming
nearer unto the town, taking men and cattle, they within will salie forth to
defend, or recover them, and what ambushes may be laid, according to the men
which salie out, and in what manner they govern them selves.

In going out a freebooting, it must be kept very secret, Form of going a
freeboting.
the men them selves not knowing at what hour they are to salie, but only to
stand prepared, assembling them together after the shutting of the gates, and
if it be necessary, to sound a trumpet for it, as they use to do at the
guardes, or a sordine, that it may not be understood although there be spies in
the town, when they salie forth, but the best of all is to warn them to be
ready by mouth.

The men and guides being geathered together with the greatest secrecy that
may be, the Captain or Leader which goes a freeboting with them, shall name
unto them two or three places whither he would go, to see whither they know the
ways, and to be sure they be perfect in them. This done, they shall open the
gates, and at their salie out of the town, shall send an officer, or soldior
that is well practiced with six or eight soldiors, to who^ they shall deliver
a guide, that they may go before the freeboters, willing them to carry the^
the closest way he can from the high ways, and villages, until they be a good
way from the town, and being by day, the Captain shall march with another
guide, and the greater troop of the men in the sight of the carriers, but at
night nearer, because they are to serve to go a discovering, and he shall
leave another practiced soldior with six or eight soldiors more in the
rereguarde, and a guide with them: the which are to march in sight of the
greater troop, serving (if occasion require) when they chance to discover any
enemies on that part, in stead of corriers: provided that at the opening of the
gate, if it be by night, or in the day time, no other person salie out, then
those which go to freebote, that no intelligence may be given to the enemy
thereof, and in case that the freeboters carry but one guide alongest with
them, when they light upon two ways, if the night be dark, the first troop
is to leave a soldior there, to teach the second which way they are to take,
and the second to leave another for the third to follow, and not to lose
their way.

Likewise when there go me^ of diverse garrisons, or troops, at different
hours, upon a piece of service, and that all are to pass by a cross way,
the^ they take order, as every one passes by that way, to leave a mark or
token behind them, as to pitch up some stone, cut of bows, or somewhat else,
that they may understand, the troops are gone before, and this is to be done
when it is not fit to leave any of them selves behind.

In this order they are to march, and the Captain must send some soldiors of
his troop ever and anon, to see what the vanguard says, and if they march
carefully. And in case they be to pass by any way where the enemy may annoy
them before their return back, by spying the print of their horses feet, if
the weather be dry, it is a good way to putt it out, by the troop which
tarrieth behind, carrying of great boughs, and trayling them after them.

When there is an intent to have any ambushes, or lay men in stealth, they are
to use the same means of boughs to blot out the print of their footsteps,
Advise for ambushes.
and that they may not be perceived to have trod there, looking as near as is
possible to the horses that they neigh not, whereby many times they come to be
discovered, the best remedy being when the horses are not many, to sever those
that most are given to ney.

Being come to the stand of the ambushe, they are to view well the salies
thereof, to choose the best for their purpose, as well to charge upon the enemy,
as to retire themselves if he be the stronger. This being viewed, they are to
cause a soldiour to clyme up into a tree, whence he may descrie furthest, and
to give them notice of what they see, another soldiour standing on horseback
at the foot of the tree, to carry word to the head of the ambushe, what he
in the tree says, and in case they be not able to discover enough from one
place alone, then are they to set me^ up in two or three trees, that they may
serve as a watch tower, soldiors on horseback standing at the foot of every
one, and the like may be done in villages upon the topps of towers and high
houses. In this manner they may continue the ambush, and refresh their horses,
if need require, so as the watchmen discover far of, for that then they shall
have time to bridle them. This ambush being laid near unto any frontire, with
intent to do any damage to the people thereof, it must be provided that the
ambush come near before it grow day, and as many men as they meet, to keep
with them until two or three hours of the day be past, then is the leader of
the ambushe to send an expert soldiour with such as he shall think fit, by a
differing way about the country, taking as many cattle as they can, and to
retire themselves by the same way where the ambush lies, in such manner as by
the have which they make, they may make the enemy believe that they fear they
shall not be able to bring it home, who will follow them with the more fury,
and the ambush is not to salie out upon them, until they be clear passed
them, and then they may be able to charge upon their backs, without giving
means unto the^ to be able to return, which they are to do, salying in good
order, and to hasten or no the charg, by trot, or gallop, according to the
matter they would execute, holding it for good, they are to put the booty and
prisoners before, the Captain with troop remaining in the rereguard, and
corriers behind him, making good speed until they get themselves out of the
enemies country, and put themselves in safety, considering, that, by the
standing of the soldiers busied about the guard of the prisoners, and
wearisomnes having travailed all night, and the horses not so lusty to combat
withal, the troop can not be so strong as when they came forth.

Diverse manners of dividing booties.
The booty being safely brought home, it is to be divided according to the
custom which the place carries, and as every nation uses: Because in some
places the fifte is given to the Prince, the General, or Governor taking a
piece, dividing the rest among the whole, proportionable to their pays: in
such sort as an equal part may fall to the Captain, officer and soldior,
which tarried at home upon the guard, as well as to them that went abroad.
Among other nations the Captains take the tenth out of the booties which the
soldiers get, albeit they be not present at it, and at other times they divide
the companies and they send so many soldiers a freebooting at one time, and
afterward other differing from them, running over all the companies to salie
by course, that they may travail equally, and the^ the booty which every
troop gets, is divided among the soldiers of their own company, without
any of the rest having share therein.

Besides the freebootings which they use and damage growing to the enemy
thereby, trade is to be endeavored to be had within his country, which is a
thing most to be practiced with great warines and consideration, and for the
most part with persons whose chief foundation must grow by falsifying their
faith toward those whom they serve: whereby small assurance can be given to
what they offer, except the same cause and occasion set them at liberty from
their first faith, by which they may hold some more security of the second
which they vow, weighing all circumstances, as who he is you treat with, for
what cause, and in what manner, and whether he that has charge of the place be
a soldiour or no, because being one, it may be himself peradventure which
sends to treat with you to discover to what end you mean to make your
salie, and when, that the damage may grow greater and double thereby, and
sometimes to the end that the greater part of the garrison may be drawn to
salie out of the town, for the execution of the plott which is offered, and
then may he with much more ease execute what he list him self in the same
place, by reason of the intelligence he has had, or in any other, which he
would never have durst to have conceived otherwise, for the many guardes and
soldiers, a matter easily brought about by such a stratageme or devise.

They surprise towns in like sort by scale: Consideration for surprises.
And to that end they must send soldiors of experience and trust to view the
ways unto them, the breadth and depth of the diches, and how far it is to the
water, the height of the walls, quality of the ward which the enemy
keeps, disposition of the Centinells, with what circumspection they stand in
the places, what distance is between one another, whether one may be able to
discover the whole wall over or no, at what hour the roundes use to pass, and
whether they tarry long before they meet one with the other, in such sort as
one may be able by gayning or killing of the Centinell, to stand assured of
the wall or tower before the round come to it.

As well do men endeavor to gain towns by channels of water, which run
thorough them, What hurt patardes do to gates.
low casamates in the ditches or secret gates, vsinge patardes to break, and
blow them open, which is a kind of artillery, which has bin inverted few
years since in these parts, which in a moment works great effect, in
throwing down of gates, if a man may come to fasten the patarde in it, and the
stronger they be, with the more violence does the patarde work, ouerthrowinge
one, or two gates at once, albeit there be a distance between one and other,
and a valte in the middst, except they be builded in such manner, as the patarde
shall loose his force, having a vente by which the violence of the powder does
euaporate.

The particularities set down being known, which are to be looked into,
comparing one with the other, with great consideration, and the number of men,
thought upon, wherewith the scaladoe is to be given, they are to assemble
together after the gates be shutt, if they go all forth of one town, if not
to appoint a place and hour where to meet, and this, according to that in
which you are to effect it, whether it must be at the hour of ce^tinell, which
they term Modorra, or before, Midnight.
or at the Diana, being very fit that the day peep by that time you come
within the place, putting the troops or companies of men in order which are to
be divided into vanguarde, battle and rereguarde, with a particular leader to
each one, that may be a soldiour of resolution, for that this is an action
which requires no less courage and valor then the canvisadoes, not only in
the heads thereof, but in the soldiers which are to execute, who of force how
valiant soever they be, can not but bethink within themselves whether they
go sold or not, or there be any treachery, or the entry have been well
viewed, or the going up good, or fortified since: stumbling blocks which the
obedience of commandment, and resolution of their own courage must be feign to
make plain and even: And for that in many places it is not only necessary to
carry scaling ladders for such enterprises, but bridges of pieces of timber to
frame them of, and boats for any arm of the water or ditch, I will write in
what manner it is good to proceed, being forced to carry all three alongest with
them.

The ladders for such a purpose are to be only of the height of the walls,
because that if they be longer, Measure of scaling ladders.
it is an easy matter for them above, catching at the upper stepps to turn
them over with as many as are upon them, and if they be shorter, then can they
not clime up to the top by them: To remedy this there must be great care
taken, many towns having missed being won, by reason their ladders were to
short, having taken measure to the just height of the wall, but not from that
part of the ground where the ladders were feign to stand. The vanguarde of
your men must be divided into four parts, and the first rancks are to be
laden with the scaling ladders, dividing them according to their bigness and
number, in the second part of the same vanguarde must the timbers of the
bridge be carried, and in the third the boats, the fowerth part consisting
of those which are to clime up first, as the least weary among them, and by
the reason of war so required: which notwithstanding, there is no soldior of
puntilloe, who if he come to set up the ladder, will suffer any other to clime
up before him, except it be such as have helped to carry it, or his Captain or
Officer: the boats are made sometime of leather, that they may be light, Manner
of boats.
and other of timber parted into four quarters or more, joining them
afterward together, with vices of iron, which some anoint with oil, to keep
them from taking ruste, although they lie many days in the water, closing the
pieces in such order together with the vices, as the boat remains tyte,
calking with speed the joints thereof

The leaders being set down, order is to be given for their march, and for
those rancks which are first to set up the ladders, or cast the boats or
timbers of the bridge into the water, that they make no confusion or noise in
doing it, being among all the rest of the orders which are to be made, most
preciselie enjoined, that when they shall have gotten the walls, no soldior be
so hardy as to go to sack, until they be assured of the town, because then
they shall have time enough. This being done, they are to send corriers out of
the town, who are to go discovering before, the carts or moyles following
with the ladders and boats, in case the way be so far, as that it is not good
for the soldiers to carry them, who are to march according to such order as
their heads shall enjoin them, ever carrying the ladders and boats before.

Being arrived near unto the town, which they are to scale, they shall unlade
the ladders, barks and bridges in such places as no noise may be heard, he
that is appointed giving order for every thing, and they which carry the barks
shall put them into the water, taking halters and ropes to draw the tymbers of
the bridge for to frame it, which are to be cast into the water by such as
carry them. The bridge being framed, the leader of those which hold the
ladders (who should be he which had viewed all, or to have him in his company
which had done it) is to go before to assure himself of the entry, and if it
be arising, to carry with him a small ladder of cords with a staff or half
pike to fasten them to, and then to clime up on high to view whether they are
perceived or no, and finding not, they shall set up the ladders in the securest
place against the wall, clyminge up by them, so as it may be done with
greatest diligence and facility, and least noise. The walls being gained, they
shall go to the next gate to the place where they first gave the scaladoe,
carrying with them pincers, files, hammers, crows of iron, and other
instruments to open the gates with: a business which is to be done with
diligence, that the cauallerie or fanterie may enter into the town, which for
this purpose tarried in the rereguard of all, and stood in squadron in the
field, that upon any ill success, they might be able to help the soldiers
running back, who continually must follow on without loosing rank, to get up
by the ladders: and in case there be any Citadell or Castle within the town,
they must repair to that place, stopping that none of their men retire
themselves in, and when there is no Castle in the town or place appointed to
join themselves together in cordeguards, becoming entirely Lords of the town,
then are they to give it to sack, and to fortify it, placing a good garrison:
and when the Castle or Catadell, if there be any has not yielded, then to
preuente that no succor enter in at those gates, unto them, which Castles
commonly have toward the country for that purpose, placing good watch at the
entrance of the streets which lead thither, fortifying them with trauesses, and
other things convenient, as to make loopholes out of houses, rampyring if it
necessare, to defend the shot of the artillery, whereby they of the Castle
will grow clean out of the heart from thinking to be able to recover the
town again, and by that distrust will hold it a far better course to yield
themselves.

Those co^quests which Kings and Princes attempt by sea happen at such time as
they have ships, Consideration touching sea service.
mariners and other necessary things for it, much more easy then by land,
for the commodity which they have in carrying in a small time great number of
soldiers, munitions and artillery from sundry countries and far distant. By
this means our Lord God does open the way to such Kingdoms and states, as
possesses any sea coasts to expect their greatness and increase, which in our
times has been sufficiently proved, by that the Crowns of Castile and
Portingall has done, which the K. our Sovereign Lord father unto Y.H.
possesses, spredding out his empire and rule through the East and West Indies,
with such a multitude of conquests though there were no more examples of the
time past: a matter which the Castilian proverb amed at, saing Reyno sin
puerto, chimenea sin fuego: A consideration, which binds Y.H. to favor and
honor the sea soldiers, Hernan Nunez lib. de refr. L. C
rewarding them and the Pilotts and mariners, and to entertain great Armies in
ordinary, proportioning the forces of them with those of the land, How much
it imports to maintain armies by sea.
which is that by which conservation of Empires stands assured, being Lords
of the sea, and the foundation (according to man's reason) of their greatness
enduring, thorough the necessity which most Provinces hold to respect them,
for maintenance of their trades and traficques, and facility with which he
that is powerful on the sea may offend in sundry parts at one instant. And
albeit this in general will not bind Y.H. yet the monarchy which you are to
possess, and quality of your Crowns and estates requires for their
scituatio^ sake to hold Arms by sea, whereby to succor them upon any distres
and offend the enemy, since of their very selves, every one holds by him
self forces sufficient to hold out attending succor: which is one of the
reasons that causes many to judge Empires divided into sundry Provinces to be
more firm, then in one body, where corruption once entering causes a far
greater ruin, then in the divided, and distant, being seldom times all
infected at once with one morion, as it may fall out where they stand united.

The preparation of your Y.H. fleet in the number of ships, soldiors and
artillery, is to be according to the enterprise you purpose to undertake, and
to consider therein the season, the power of the enemy, what co^federates he
may have, and the rest of the considerations which I have set down in common
to be observed in forming of arms by land, the which will tell you of what
burden ships will be most convenient for navigations, whether they are to use
Gallyes or Boats of ores only, or carrying likewise of higher caruing, if they
be to carry cauallerie, which will require convenient ships for this
purpose, and by consequence for the carriadg of munitio^s victuals and the rest
of the provisions. Provided that when it is an army of round ships, and that
the wind which serves you to sail, will bring with it, as mariners term
it, grown seas, the navigations when the army is great must needs be much
longer then with an other wind, which makes fair weather, or that there were
but a few ships which binds you to consider that albeit light Pinishes may
in so many days perform the voyage, a great army must be fain with the very
same wind to spend many more therein, in which care must be given to mariners
which are of experience, and practice in the same trade, following their
opinion, for the time which shall be best to sail, and in particular the Office
of Admiral it is as well taken for a chief co^maunder upon the land, and
therefore from ancient time there has been an Admiral in Castilla, though the
Kingedome be without any port, far distant from the sea.
Admiralls, who is Y.H. Lieuetenant at the sea: An office which holds more or
less pre-eminence in some provinces, then in an other, according unto the
authority which it has pleaced Princes to give unto them. And when he does
not exercise his office, Y.H. is to name a general at the sea, and sometimes
he is the same which is on land, and at other times no, whose office is to
join together and compound the army, and to fit the ships with artillery,
arming them with Raretas, which they use in stead of our cariges with trucks,
their wheles like field cariages.
carriges and other preparations, according to the burden, and men which are
to fight in them, and form which every nation caryeth, acco^modating things
more carefully in that, then in an other. Furnishing likewise with victuals,
placing in the office of a general victuler, a person of trust, much
diligence, and little covetousness considering that by stinking victuals
fleets and armies have many times received more loss, the^ they needed to have
feared by tempests or enemies, and the covetousness of officers have bin the
only cause, who looking only into their own profit, have procured unto their
Princes the destruction of their armies and men of war.

Your ships and men standing ready for the enterprise, a few days before
their departure, Y.H. is to command that your Standart be arboled, which some
I can not blame you, you had so good succes^ with your standart hallowed at
Lasbone in presence of the Cardinal. 1588,
Prelate is before to have for to hallow, and at the doing of it, order is to
be given to all the ships, in what manner they shall give the Salve, at the
a^boling of it, which ordinarily is, that it may make the more show, to
discharg the harquebuserie, the musketerie following, and then the small pieces,
and after in proportion the greater. I will not be tedious to set down in what
manner the shipp is to be dressed up in which Y.H. person goes, nor what
fashion of streamers or flagges it is to carry, being to be more or less and
according to the ostentation and magnifice^ce which Y.H. means to use in the
journey: particulars which Their use at sea is different from ours, for what we
call Admiral in which the General goes, they term Capitana, and the Admiral
with them is Vice admiral with us.
Admiralls and Generals are to look unto, according to the pleasure and
motive of the Prince, whether him self be present or no in the enterprise,
which causes to add or diminish, from the relations which are made of other
Armies, in respect of this, and of the manner, how the Prince is to be saluted,
embarking him self or no, or going to visit the army, and at his departure
from the Port, if he go him self in person.

The Captana is to carry besides the The standert is used to stand always in
the poop near the general.
Royal Standart, an other flagg on the top of the maine maste, and the
Admiral an other in the top of the foremaste, flaggs which no other ship may
carry, and before they go out of harbor, the squadrons must be divided, to
the end they may be known: the Army being great, the ships of every squadron
are to carry a streamer of such color as his squadron carries, and that is to
be hanged on the maine yard Arm of the Starbord side.

Likewise an order of fight must be agreed upon, that every ship may know his
place, giving the same to all the Captains of the ships in writing, showing in
what manner they are to govern themselves, as things fall out, and to be able
to understand by such signs as the Capitana shall make, what they are to do,
in which I will write down the most principal points.

General orders for saylinge.
When Y.H. would have the Army, weather serving for it to be put in battle,
there shall be hung out in such a place of the Capitana as has been appointed
before, a flagge of such color: And if you would have the Captains of the
ships to come abord you, the^ another flagge is hanged upon some maste of a
different color, upon which they will lanch their Skiffes, and come to the
Capitana, bringing along with them the Pillotes and Mariners of most experience.

In case a schip of the army should discrie another, they are wont to put up
a flagg hanging it on that side of the ship on which he discovers her to lie,
and being more then one, two flagges, the one higher then the other, by which
it shall give notice not only to the Capitana, but to the rest of the fleet.
At other times with this sign they are wont to shoot of a piece when the
army is very great, and that they can hardly perceive the flags, by the
distance that they make in sailing.

If any small Barks, sent out at any time by the Capitana to discover, make
show that they have discried some, and that you would have them to pass
onwards to view them better, they are wont to put a colored flagg on the
forecastle, by which means they shall understand what they are commanded to
do: and if Y.H. pleasure be that all the ships shall make way and do their
best, a square flag is wont to be hanged between the main top and the foretop,
and at other times the same flag is put on the top of the foretopmast that it
may be seen further, being an army of many ships and that all may decerne it,
although they be far a sunder, whereby they shall know that they are to make
way, and to use all diligence.

Likewise the first ship which discry the land, ought to put on that side of
his ship which he sees it a square flagg upon the main topmast, enclining it
alitle toward that part, where he saw the land, and to discharge a great shot
or two.

If any ship be in danger of splitting, by running a ground or knocked upon any
rock, or other misfortune, she shall discharge three great shot one after an
other, and cause a man to go up to the main top and to go round about with a
flagg in his hand, by which they may understand she is in danger, and
demands succor. And if any shipp of the enemies should fortune to come among
the great armadas to view them, and that they are willing to see whether it be
one or no, the Capitana uses to hang up a flag of a different color, in some
part of the ship, and then all the rest of the army do the like, whereby the
enemy is discovered.

For sailing by night, they likewise give instruction, for whatsoever should
happen, the Capitana carrying one la^terne alone, and if the Admiral carry any
the^ is the Capitana to carry two, that she may be known: and if the weather
wax boisterous in such sort as it may prove dangerous that any fire should
chance to light out of the lantern upon the poope, they change it to the
foremast, and any storm growing, the Capitana lights two or three, which
served for a sign that every ship should light his, and especially if they be
Galleys or ships of ores, preventing that they do not grow foul one of
another by the darkness and hausines of the weather: and any tempest growing
upon the storm, the Capitana is to discharg one or to cannon shot, to give
warning that every Gallie shift the best she can for her self, without
following of her, having instruction in writing (if the journey be resolutelie
appointed) in what place or hight they are to return to join, in case that by
storms the ships should come to be severed and dispersed.

The Capitana making another board in the night, or changing her course, they
use to hang a lantern in the shroudes, and shake of her bonets, or take in her
topsayles: and when she takes in all her sails and means to hull, they put
in the shrowds tree lanternes, and in case a leake be in any ship of the army,
or that a maste or yard be sprung, they use to discharge a great shot, and
being in great extremity, three.

In discovering any ship of the enemies, they fling fire into the sea, or set
up a lantern in such part of the ship as it may be well discerned, discharging
some great shot: and if there be many ships, he shall shoot of four or
five times together, setting up three lanternes upon the poope, and an other
upon the forecastle.

If one ship alone happen to discrie land in the night, and not the rest, they
use to shoot of one or two pieces, and setting up a lantern tackes into the
sea, with small sail whereby the rest of the ships follow, plying up and
down in this manner until morning.

If you would have the ships come together in the night, the Capitana must
shoot of a piece, putting up two lanternes upon the corners of the highest
part of the Poope, and another upon the mysine mast, a sign whereby they will
draw together, these being the principal points for which instructions be to
be given in writing upon any accasion that may fall out by day or by night in
navigations, with such tokens as are thought most convenient, these which I have
set down being but to serve as a pattern to make other by.

Jointly order must be given to every Captain in what manner he is to arm his
ship, if he have cause to fight, General orders for fight.
and that he execute it with precisenes, appointing the leaders and soldiers
which are to fight expressly their places, so disposing the men which he caryeth
in his ship as that they may serve both the decks, the poope, galleries,
maintop and forecastle, appertayning to the head of the ship to stand upon the
poope with some particular soldiers, of who^ he holds a good conceit,
allotting the principal places set down to such officers as are in the
companies, giving order to such soldiers as he has, that they obey them in
their places as if it were his own person, and give hand one to help another,
or come whether necessity shall require, and that in every one of these
stands they have two dozen of half pikes, which are to have the third part of
them talowed over, toward the head, that the enemy catching at them may
fasten no hold, and that he cause such persons as are there to fight to take
pikes, not knowing how to manage a harquebuse, because otherwise they should
serve with them first, and take pikes after, and that there be me^ in time of
bording appointed to the place of Arms, which is to be between the maine
mast and the prowe.

Likewise Y.H. is to command, that among such persons as are known and have
skill to use them, may be bestowed the artificial fires, and tronkes and balls
of wild fire, and such like, for the danger which may ensewe if they should not
know to use them as they ought.

Jointly you must command that such a one may be put in charge with the powder,
as will look unto it with great care and circumspection, that by no means any
touch it or come near that caryeth any fire, and that two or three trusty
persons may be appointed to assist him which has charge of the powder.

Likewise it must be ordained that when they come to fight, the Clarks and
Religious men, Physicians, Surgions, and the rest whose turn is not to fight,
may be stowed in hold under water, who are to have a head to govern them, and
sheets of lead, hammers, nails, skuppers, hides, pluckes of wood, and other
necessaries, that in case they should receive any shot, they may quickly
remedy it, and caucke it, employing all diligence in this, which a matter of
so great peril imports.

Also that they command all empty caske to be sawed a sunder in the midste,
and in fight fill them with salt water, and all the rest of the caske which
has been emptied in the ship, putting them in places where the soldiers fight,
providing by this means to be able to quench the fire, and to have buckets to
carry the water, and all other things which the artillery shall stand in
need of, appointing a leader to take count of these things, and persons to
help him. The topps of the maine and foremastes of the great ships are to be
coyled with old cables without, and within with beds for the defense of those
which are to fight in the^, whether they are to carry up stones, pieces of
iron, or lead, to fling down at time of fight: things which Y.H. is to
command that every Captain be provided of by himself in his ship, in such
sort as he shall not stand in need thereof at the very instant.

At sun set the whole fleet comes to hayle the Capitana under her lee,
and vayleth their sails, and she answers them again, giving them the word
for that night: when by occasion of weather that cannot be done, they have a
word in writing set down for every day in the week, whereby they know one an
other, and the Admiral tarieth last in the rereguard to gather the Fleet up
together. When night comes, and that they have song the Used at the setting
of the wache as we do clearing of the glass.
Salve in the ships, they putt out all the candells, leaving none stirringe
but such as must needs, which shall be lamps of oil for the danger of fire, or
candels within lanternes, whereby they may set nothing on fire, which done,
the men withdraw them selves to bed, all save the watch, and sentinels
abiding in their stands.

At morning by break of day, the trumpets sound the dawning, and all the
Fleet comes alee, and haileth the Capitana: whereby it is known if any be
missing out of the fleet, and in case she be not perceived, some light Pinnish
which attends a stern, is sent out to look her, following the course or
point of the compass which was given for sailing, and the Capitana continuing
hers, the rest of the Army sail a stern of her, and with such distance, as
they may not loose sight.

Offering to give battle, which is the most dangerous matter of all whatsoever
does concern the wars, as well for the facility with which the ships are
set on fire, as that of necessity he which will subdewe his enemy, must
enter him: and when he has not done it by force of Artillery, he then comes
to fight with so much disadvantage, as having grappeled the ships, to leap
upon the shrowdes, maystering the poope, forecastle, and both the deckes: A
peril to which an other not the least is added, fighting upon the Sea, which
is the greatest enemy of all, sparing none that falls into her, which is not
so upon the land.

In setting the ships in battle, when they do not fight in Channels, Form
of battle for round ships.
and streams of sholes and shelffes, where of necessity they must dispose the
fleet according as the room will afforde, making vanguarde battle, and
rereguarde, all mariners are of opinion that fighting with round ships, the
best form of battle is to make one Front, putting the Capitana in the
midst, and of each side of her (when there are but few ships) the greatest
and of most bulcke, one lying as near the other as may be. Provided that they
come not so to meet together, as to wax foul with their shrowdes, as it
sometimes happens, and causes very much trouble.

And the Army being great, others compounde the battle of one front, the
ships of every squadron following their head, dividing them as they judge
most convenient, according to the quality of the ships, and at other times
for this consideration and the greatness of the ships, without caring to have
them of any squadron, in sailing they mingle one with another, appointing them
what place they are to hold when they come to fight: and this considering that
the Army being great, and by co^sequent the front great, which is to be made
upon putting them selves in battle, it is necessary the Capitana being in
the midst, to disperse those persons which carry the greatest ships,
through the whole battle and front, garnishing the horn to windeward, with
the greatest and strongest, to the end they may defend the smaller ships which
are to fight on the lee on the contrary horn, and be able hereby to animate
the rest, and guide them to board, for that the Capitana by reason of the great
distaunce which a great Army must of necessity occupy, can not attend at
such a time upon all, with such readiness as is to be required.

In one of these forms they sail in the best order that can be, without any
one shipp going before an other, And if the weather will suffer it, so far a
sunder as two or three ships may be able to go between every one. For which
cause those which are best of sail do fit their sails in striking the^
lower, whereby they come to make no more way; the sluggie seeking to gain the
wind on both sides to fight, and to come in order of battles before written,
to board, which is that which most imports at sea, he which has gotten the
wind being able to give a greater thrust at bording, and to cast the smoke of
his artillery upon the contrary shipp, and to help him with more advantage
by the fires, anoying the other thereby, and in case he list to shoot at the
enemy before bording; he may commodiouslie do it, by reason of the wind,
discharging both his broad sides at the time of his bordinge, which is where
the ships carry most pieces: and to prevent this he which finds him self
able in the burden of his ships and number of men to board, goes as soon as
ever he has gotten the wind, with the greatest speed he can in a front to
do it, and if he be desirous to shun bording, by reason his ships be
lower, he entertayneth time shooting of still his Tyres by making Bordes, which
is to annoy the enemy, without aduenturing to come to hand strokes with him,
for the disadvantage which he knows he shall get by it, not having so high
ships, nor multitude of soldiers, whose hands and force upon bording
gets the victory, because they discharge no other artillery then Cannons
periall and small pieces in their upper works where they use not already
slinges, shooting of all the artillery he can at such time as he is ready to
board, when bullets work most effect, and almost none at all before, the rest
being but short into the air, of which great consideration is to be had. For
this cause some are of opinion, if the wind serve, that the Capitana should
delay bording him self, until the rest of the ships had done, and in the
mean time to be able to succor, where need should most require, governing him
self therein, as they do upon the land in days of battle, where the
Generals squadron is the last which comes to shocke. A particular in which a
great inconvenience ceasseth not to offer it self, and that is, that at sea
every ship is to fight by it self, and to be a matter of greatest moment for
obtaining of the victory to get some one of the enemies in as short time as may
be, for which of force they are to gage their greatest and strongest ships at
first, to come to hand strokes, and to seek out the Capitanas, which by
reason ought to be the best ships on both sides; and in ships it is not the
heart of the Captain, which goes in them that governs them, but the Master
or Pilote takes many times occasion thorough their own cowardice to put of
the Capitana from bording, with that resolution which the General desires:
And likewise that which is most convenient, is, to have the Capitana of the
first ships to board the Capitana of the enemies army, appointing some
other to succor her, if need should be. In the judgment of the greatest
Mariners and soldiers at sea, when there is an inequality in the number of
ships, they esteem it a matter over dangerous to fight with them, groundinge
them selves upon this, that one ship is but to fight with another, and the
advantage in number does easily make them to fight two against one, and if
they chance to yield, yet she must be feign to come to help the rest, and
therefore they never blame any that shall refuse to fight with like
disadua^tage, and if one do it, and win, yet do they hold him for
oueruenturous, and of no great government, when the quality of his ships and
men be not answerable to the number of the rest. These the mariners affirm to
be the considerations of greatest importance in giving of battle, disposing
it so, as one ship may board another without pusling two against one, except
they be more in number, looking into the quality of the pieces of artillery
which the enemy carries, and whether his ships be builded to be able to
serve with it or no, with two or three tyres on the sides, according to the
burden of such ships, and whether they be of brass or the greater part of
cast iron, which reaches nothing so far, This is very doubtful and I think
he is deceived.
and is sooner heated.

In time past they kept a great sturr in arming the topps for the mischief
which was done to the enemy thereby, and now they do not hold it to be of so
great moment, since musketerie is grown in use, against which they which
stand in the tops can hardly defend themselfes, and as men which stand naked
are hurt easelie. For this cause they fit them selves better by placing
blinders to cover their men, save such only as are necessary for the
government of the ship, and the rest to abide in their places, preserving
them selves as long as they can before they come to the push of the pike. This
same, and to procure that the poope and prowe may be reared for to combat and
defend the entry, has made to heythen them with bords on both sides, making
them hollow, a little less then a geometrical foot, filling up the hollow with
old netts of fishermen, that may serve to be of muskett prooffe, without
clogging the ship much with carging, and when ships have a long time grapeled,
seeing themselves run a ground, and not able to enter to make her yield, by
reason that her poope is so high, they use to cast out of them upon the other
ship, ashes, scalding oil, and molten lead, to anoy those which stand
defending upon the deck, and running thorough the shrowdes to offend the rest.

They likewise defend with woolbeds and bolsters, or wolsackes, if there be
any, those places in the ships which are most convenient at such time as
they go to fight, ordayning after that the men stand bestowed in the four
principal places, that they fight in order, and not running them selves out of
breath: for that it has fallen out after grapeling, that ships have fought
without being able to judge which was likeliest to have the victory, a whole
day and a night, and more time too, and served their turn with wildefire upon
good occasion, because if one have not the wind, it is a most dangerous
mischief to fling fire into his enemy, his own ship being likely to take
it, and very hardly able to lose him self.

It may sometime fall out to be in an harbor, and that a more powerful enemy
comes to fight, in this case it falls into consideration, according as the
harbor is, in which he finds you, whether it be friend or enemy. Being
enemy they must in reason ancker where they are likeliest to receive least
annoyance from the land, and make them selves ready to fight at sea, one
shipp coming as near to the other as is possible to be joined together, by
this means standing prepared to defend them selves on all parts, keeping a
shipp or pynnes at sea for watch, to give notice of such as they should
descrie: if it be friend, then do they put the poopes of their ships as
near shore as they can, and as close one by another, the weather serving for
it, because by doing thus, the enemy shall not dare to come near them, for
fear least their ships run a ground, for that they can not be able to
stay them coming under sail so near the shore without striking or casting
Anchor, and the disposition of the place so serving, they draw Artillery a
shore to defend the ships withal, from whence it reaches further and with
better mark, Being a calm, if the ships can stand very close together,
they put bridges over one another to succor them selves by, and lanche their
squiffes and barks into the sea to stopp that no enemy come to cut the
cables of their anchors, nor to set their ships on fire, and when the tide and
wind serves, to keep any from sending ships with artificial fires, and
mines wrought in them, which when the fire comes to the mines should blow up
huge stones, and other like things put upon the topp of the work thereof:
with which it does not only great annoyance, but burning it self, sets all
the rest on fire that comes near. These boats are to carry artillery, and
some bring blinders to fight the better with them, and to keep away ships of
such fyres and inventions, where no body goes in them, they carry in their
boats long ropes, and at the end of them pieces of iron chains with great
graples to fasten to the ship of fires, which, after the iron graples have
taken hold on, they may easily toe, whether they list.

So does an Army of ships fall out to sail, Means to join round ships
together in time of calm.
standing in fear, least the enemy set upon them in time of calm with a
number of galleys; then the best means they can use, if with the calm they be
distant one from another, is to lanche out the squiffes, and long boats into
the water, and giving a towe with them to bring the ships together, putting
them in the best order they can, and the galleys coming to shoot at them, they
serve their turn with the Artillery, one helping another by standing near
together, procuring in this manner to equal the advantage which the galleys
have in shooting low, and almost level with the water, by discharging so
great store of pieces, as the galleys must be enforced to loofe of, not able to
come to close.

The army being all of galleys and ships of oars, they use to place their
wast bordes to fight with them, garnishing well the We have not the use of
galleys, and therefore we can not properly english their words of art.
rombadas, and to repair with trauesses, bolsters, and beds the boat and
mast, for that in case the enemy should gain the foreparte, yet he should
find fightes able to turn him out again, the poope being well renforced with
men, and the ladders pulled up where they putt some little pieces, the Captain
of the gallie standing at the standeroll, which is his place to govern, the
soldiers keeping their balesteras with their harquebuses, and in the spaces
between the banks they are wont to putt trunkes or balls of fire, lighted, to
use them, if occasion require, and pikes, targetts, and halbardes upon the
Cruzia for the same purpose, the men which are not to fight, standing in hold,
and the Surgions to cure those that are hurt, and the Carpenters with their
instruments, to remedy any hurt, which might happen on that part by the
fall of any shot.

Form of ordayning battayles with ships of ores.
To order Battayles of ships of ores, is done, in a front, or in form of a
half moon, The Capitana standinge in the midst, garnishing the horns or
wings (as they term the^) with some galleys of the most strength. In this
manner they go, having gotten the weather by ores in the hands, one as near
unto another as they can be permitted for to sail with, hastening way
according to the motive which the enemy discovers, and when there are a
great number of galleys, they leave squadrons at the stern of the Capitana,
and so at the galleys of most strength others, wherewith to be able to succor
them. In case the enemy should board them with more galleys, and carry as
they term it, the wind in his hands by the ores, there can not be a matter
of greater moment to annoy him, the^ to blind him with the smoke of the
Artillery, all the while it lasts, and to help them selves with fires, if
occasion serve to board, a matter which round ships do as they can, but those
with ores when they list: and he which refuses it must of force receive the
chase, puttinge him self in flight, with which they come to board one another,
and if there be a disequalitie in number, two against one.

In shooting of the Artillery before bording, it is to be considered that it
be at such a distance, as to be able to charge the second time, because that
discharging the Artillery after bording, it does not only come to hurt with
more certeintie, but with a far greater loss, for that a blow is of great
force at full, a matter which the very reason of shooting proves, through the
motion which the violence of powder gives to the bullet, a manner in which
the artillery is mounted in the galleys: And if in assaults by land they
stay shooting any piece out of the trauesses, until the men be clambered
unto the top of the breach, that they may do the more hurt by the certeintie
of the shot, two galleys being borded, which is to come to assalte one
another, without all doubt she shall have most advantage which in that season
and instance is able to help her self with her full Artillery: a particular
of which great consideration is to be had, and to be esteemed of great moment
at that instant to use artillery, then before with shooting off great shot,
which come all to be lost, and none of that force they are when they come to
board.

If the Army be compounded of galliasses, Advertisement for to fight, the
army being co^pounded both of round ships and ships of ores.
and high round ships, you must frame the battle according to the
disposition which the enemy carries. Provided that the galiasses, and round
ships, in case the weather serve them, shoot first off their Artillery,
because necessarily it must do much hurt, and when they shall come to board
such ships with their galleys, it shall tend much to their advantage, by the
nature of the boording, and likewise the same occasion is to give law, in what
manner the battle shall be disposed, and without doubt the ships of high
building will put the enemies to flight, if some galleys or rowing vessels go
in the vanguarde, and when not, it provoke the enemy to board them.

The Army being arrived in harbor, Form of landinge men.
or place where you would land your men, the Capitana is to give order to all
the ships, that as soon as they see a flagge put forth of such a color,
they lanche their squiffes and long boats, and embarque such men in them as
the General shall appointe: in which consideration is to be had of the
quality of the country, whether it ask a great quantity of harquebuserie,
and fewer pikes, or more of them, a squadron being presently to be made, for
fear of the enemies cauallerie, or a golpe of men joined together, the number
being cast which every skiffe can carry a shore, then is it to be ordered,
that in every squiffe or long boat, a third part of pykes, and two of
harquebusiers, in such sort as being ten pikes, there may be twenty
harquebusiers, The Capitana lanching her own squiffe or long boat, and
therein such soldiers putt as are to go, an ensign is to be carried in the
prowe of that squiffe only, which all the rest are to follow, and coming
near unto the shore, they hold water turning their poopes unto it, to use
such little pieces as go in them, shooting them off if need be, giving a tire
upon the enemy to make him stand further from the sea side, and when he will
not, then to thrust them a shore, where a squadron is instantly to be made,
the harquebuserie gayning the most convenient stand, and with this order the
squiffes return again to sea to fetch the rest which are to desembarke, an
effect which he that is on land cannot withstand, the inuador being the more
powerful, when he holds no place fortified, or furnished with artillery nor
that it be inaccessible, for that he which comes to land carries little
pieces, and they on land being to remove theirs from one place to another,
cannot weilde them with that readiness that they are carried upon the water: and
when their is a place fortified where the men must needs land, then do they
arm their boats with blinders, which covers the fore part and served for a
defense, and then letting it to fall when they come to land, it serves for a
bridge, helping them selves with this, and such other manner of barks, which
they defend with sundry sorts of instruments.

Epiloge, referring him self to better judgments.
Albeit that I have made no profession of a Mariner, the having been a soldiour
in some voyages by sea, and present where I have seen armies enough join,
sundry sorts of ships having been prepared for them, shall excuse me for
entreating of the government thereof, and manner of fight, without writing more
at large of marinershippe, for that it is not my profession, referring my self
as well in this, as in that of the land service to those, whose judgment is
better, and know more thorough their great experience, of which I for those
years I followed the war in, have signified unto Y.H. in service of land and
sea, my judgment, to be most convenient for a Prince like Y.H. to have the
Theorique and practice thereof, and to advantage more by this the experience,
which occasions may bring, the which has been my end in scribbling of these
papers, led with the desire I hold, that not only your soldiers should
admire in Y.H. your wisdom, and consideration in undertaking enterprises,
liuelines and diligence, in executing of them, dexterity in camping, and form
of governing your Armies and forces, but that it may be an example to the rest
of the Princes and Kings, for to come to be called renowned Captains of war,
which Y.H. will attain unto, and many other things worthy of so great a
Prince, if you will fix the end of your Actions, in the service of our Lord
God, What ought to be the last end of our actions.
offering unto him the greatness of forces who has put them into your hands
for the augme^tation of his glory and honor, and maintenance of peace and
Justice within your Kingdoms, with which he will be least offended, and most
praised. A blanke on which all men are to look, every one following the
vocation of his estate.

Laus Deo.
Vni soli and semper.
Censure.
BY order from the Lords of the Royal Council, I have seen this book,
entitled, Theorique and practice of war, directed to the Prince our Lord,
composed by Don Bernardino de Mendoza: And by the experience which I have of
two and thirty years which I have served the K. our Sovereign in the wars,
Captain of light horse, and Infanterie, and Campemaister, and Campemaister
general, and having read all whatsoever with the best diligence I could gather
written thereof, antique or modern in that profession, and such histories as
set down the reasons of their loss or victory, which have had the command
or rule over armies, which is the height of the art militar, holding
experience to understand them, I say that this work is very worthy of His
Highness, because first he proposes such principal aduertisements, as are to
be considered, and understood in the managing of a war, preventing in the
beginning excuses for taking arms, as one that has had experience, how
uncertain the euentes are, and laying down the matter of state with much
christian zeal, in which he shows well the much Theorique and practice
which he has: and after having done great and worthy services to the K. our
Sovereign, it is not the least, to have made such a book, for the profitt
which as well the Prince our Lo. may draw out thereof, as the generals of his
army, and leaders, and soldiors, which are to follow them, Therefore is it fit
that it be printed, so great profit redounding thereby. At Madrid, the 12. of
May, 1595.

Don Francisco Arias de Bobadilla.


